Title
Review for Disturbing Behavior (1998)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Scott Renshaw
     A message to all you aspiring screenwriters:  know your genre.
Don't misunderstand, I'm not suggesting a writer should limit him or
herself to only one genre, or that film script formulas couldn't stand a
little innovation.  However, there are good reasons why you shouldn't
write a farce the same way you write a biographical drama.  It's about
pacing, about knowing your audience, about delivering the emotions the
genre promises to deliver.  Scott Rosenberg has made a decent career for
himself writing primarily comedies (BEAUTIFUL GIRLS) and action films (CON
AIR, uncredited contribution to ARMAGEDDON).  His chosen style is arch
dialogue and lots of it, which works out just fine when you're writing a
comedy or an action film.  A dark thriller is another cinematic beastie
entirely.  In the case of DISTURBING BEHAVIOR, that critter is a great big
turkey.
     It didn't necessarily have to be so foul a fowl.  The premise is a 45
degree spin on Ira Levin's THE STEPFORD WIVES, the tale of a troubled teen
named Steve Clark (James Marsden) trying to adjust to his new home of
Cradle Bay, Washington after a family tragedy.  But there's something
strange going on among the teens of Cradle Bay, something stoner Gavin
Strick (Nick Stahl) tries to warn Steve about: a group of frighteningly
civic-minded students called the Blue Ribbons.  You see, when they're not
holding bake sales, they're breaking the necks of their girlfriends and
recruiting other students into a state of lobotomized pleasantness.
     It's a nifty idea to create a creepshow out of the recognition that
a teenager who's acting "normal" probably isn't.  DISTURBING BEHAVIOR,
however, isn't really a creepshow.  Instead, it's a frantic and unfocused
teen-sploitation in which the re-programmed adolescents get violent when
they get horny, which, being teenagers, they do with some regularity.
"X-Files" and "Millennium" veteran David Nutter drags out plenty of
familiar tricks (point-of-view camera tricks, bobbing flashlights in the
woods, even a score by Mark Snow), but his efforts to create mood can't
get past who-cares characterizations and unexplained motivations.  There's
nothing frightening about the mastermind behind the plot, since he's just
another one of the malicious or oblivious adults who populate films of
this kind.  The notable exception is the wacky janitor (William Sadler)
who hangs out in the high school basement killing rats.  Score one for the
parents of Cradle Bay for being more concerned with rebellious attire than
with a rodent-obsessed lunatic working in their children's school.
     Ultimately, DISTURBING BEHAVIOR crashes on the failure of Rosenberg's
script.  Leave aside for a moment the perfunctory romantic interest (Katie
Holmes), the forced dialogue like "Self-mutilate this, Fluid Boy," or the
pointless extended riff in which Gavin hips Steve to the startling
revelation that -- gasp! -- high school students form cliques.  DISTURBING
BEHAVIOR is simply a miserable thriller, because Rosenberg rarely bothers
to build any tension into his scenes.  Sure, he has people jump out to go
booga-booga every once in a while.  That doesn't add up to a second of
genuine suspense, even when our heroes find themselves the next candidates
for CLOCKWORK ORANGE style "treatment."  The film merely tears along from
start to finish in a brisk 80 minutes, and when it's all said and done the
only thing you'll remember is how ridiculous it all is.
     DISTURBING BEHAVIOR isn't a lousy thriller because it tries to be
funny.  "The X-Files" has successfully paired satire and scares, as have
the two SCREAM films.  It helps, however, if the humor supports character
development, or perhaps elicits a laugh once in a while (all right, the
Blue Ribbons' Olivia Newton-John-playing yogurt shop hangout is worth a
chuckle).  No, DISTURBING BEHAVIOR is a lousy thriller because it never
tries to be thrilling.  It's just a big dumb goof, cynically pitched at
youth with sex, violence, loud music and a story that doesn't make a shred
of sense.  Having made two recent films with Michael Bay, Rosenberg's
mistake is understandable.  But if you're going to write an action film,
you'd better not try to make it a suspense film.  The idea of Scott
Rosenberg's next thriller if he doesn't learn a few new tricks...now
_that's_ scary.

Author
Jamie Peck
DISTURBING BEHAVIOR
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
In this greatest-hits mesh of "The Stepford Wives," "Village of the 
Damned," "Invasion of the Body Snatchers" and (oh, why not?) "A 
Clockwork Orange," a sinister force is at work in the nice little 
community of Cradle Bay, turning a large percentage of the young adult 
populace into ideal, zombie-like preppies whose primary concerns include 
the honor roll and bake sale strategies. New-kid-in-town Steve (James 
Marsden) makes friends with Cradle Bay outcasts Gavin (Nick Stahl) and 
Rachel (Katie Holmes); together they become increasingly suspect of 
their classmates' unnaturally perfect existence, and begin to uncover a 
conspiracy involving their peers' own parents. 
Even though the story plays its silly scares with a straight face, 
"Disturbing Behavior" isn't a complete bust -- it's just nowhere near 
the clever, frightening post-Scream thriller it so aspires to be. The 
wannabe-trendy dialogue is chuckle-worthy for all the wrong reasons, and 
with lines like "Self-mutilate this, fluid boy" and "Who put the acid in 
my Spam?", it's no wonder. Late in the film, when Steve and Rachel find 
unsettling surprises in a dark, dreary asylum, the scene plays like 
"Awakenings" on crank. Since what's really missing here is running audio 
commentary from the "Mystery Science Theater 3000" gang, you might be 
enticed to create your own. 
Holmes, of "Dawson's Creek" fame, survives her howler-heavy part with 
her fresh reputation in tact, although this is one film her precocious 
television buddies would definitely pass judgement on. Stahl and Marsden 
make the most out of their roles as well, but the latter is saddled with 
a head-scratcher subplot involving a sibling who committed suicide. In 
the movie's most frenzied performance, William Sadler (the Grim Reaper 
from "Bill and Ted's Bogus Journey"), as a wild-and-crazy janitor, chows 
on the scenery, coughs it back up and devours it again. It's called 
"unsubtle foreshadowing" when he uses a high-pitched radio frequency to 
cure his boiler room of a rat problem. 
Those seeking gobs of blood and guts are better off checking out "Saving 
Private Ryan" this weekend -- the most violent scene here includes just 
a forced nosering removal. The film itself is also a pretty painless 
sit, thanks to a running time that barely constitutes 80 minutes -- and 
that includes the several seconds devoted to a completely unnecessary 
breast shot. At least you can't accuse "Disturbing Behavior" of wearing 
out its wack-job welcome, even if it does squander its potentially 
intriguing subject material in favor of something hip, fast, flashy and 
filled with enough good-looking teens to make a whole new Aaron Spelling 
series. Mark my words: This flick is a midnight movie in the making.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The men of Stepford, Connecticut (remember?) are
delighted with their new, subservient wives in Bryan Forbes's
dynamite sci-fi picture, "The Stepford Wives."  What's more
the wives themselves are ccstatic.  That sounded like a
win-win situation until Ross and Prentiss deciphered a
dastardly conspiracy. .  
   When 43-year-old Peggy Sue goes back to her high-school
class in Francis Coppola's "Peggy Sue Got Married," she is
disgusted that her classmates are such goody-goodies that
they would not even accept a note she tries to pass to them. 
   What's so bad about being nice, even perfect?  Director
David Nutter explains in "Disturbing Behavior," a sci-fi film
which, like "Stepford" and "Peggy Sue" sends up conformity
and suburban bliss and champions individualism and, by
implication, urban living.
    While "Disturbing Behavior" is demographically directed to
a high-school and college market, the parents of teenagers
are the ones who should see it.  So should doctors who
prescribe Ritalin and even Prozac for kids who are diagnosed
as depressives but who really cannot--and perhaps should
not--fit in with others who are intolerant of those who are not
already members of their clique or, in the case of this picture,
their cult.
   To make his point about the harmful effects of mindless
conformity, first-time feature film director David Nutter--
previously known for TV episodes like "The Commish,"
"Booker," "21 Jump Street" and "ER"-- promotes a witty,
sharp-talking student named Gavin (Nick Stahl), a kid who
does not fit into any group in school and stands outside all as
a kind of Greek chorus commenting on the social structure of
the institution situated in the small town of Cradle Bay. 
Honing in on the new kid in town who also appears unwilling
to make new friends, he deconstructs the lunchroom by
pointing out the social design in the movie's keenest speech. 
He points to the "motorheads" on one side of the room whose
drug of choice is beer; the nerds, who turn on to Apple PCs
and whose drug of choice is Saturday night Jasmine tea;the
skaters who imbibe ecstasy; and the elite Blue Ribbons, a
clean-living lot whose excitement comes from donating car
wash services and arranging cake sales.  Now these Blue
Ribbons appear the ideal teens except for a couple of
difficulties: they cannot tolerate, much less socialize with,
those who are beneath them (in one scene one of their
number kicks over the janitor's pail and calls the custodian a
retard); and when certain forbidden, all-too-human desires
(read: lust) struggle to rise to the surface, they go ballistic. 
One guy gives in to his passion and kills the girl who excites
him.  Nor are the young women exempt: one such lovely in
the throes of lust bangs her head against the mirror and
bloodies herself up real good.
   Like the characters in Eugene Ionesco's "Rhinocerus," all
but one of whom eventually turns into a beast, a single lad in
this picture struggles to keep his individuality.  Steve (James
Marsden), whose parents unwisely moved him and his sister
out of Chicago into the sticks of Cradle Bay after the suicide
death of their brother, is determined to get to the bottom of
the mystery of the adaptive youth. Together with another rebel
Rachel (Katie Holmes), he discovers the conspiracy to
tame rebellious kids and suppress their natural, adolescent
aches.  Scripter Scott Rosenberg is no Ionesco, however.       
   Some of the scenes are gripping, particularly those
involving chases and a visit to an institution for psychotic
children who apparently failed to turn into Blue Ribbons.  The
film, however, takes quite a bit of time to get to the core of
the town's condition, instead hitting us with a series of choppy
vignettes that are simply confusing.  One scene involving
surgical implants is remarkably uninvolving and, given the
factor that this sort of business has been done quite a bit
before, "Disturbing Behavior" fails to do an original take on
the theme of compulsive compliance with group norms. 
Perhaps, though, its young audience will not have been
through the mill with stories of this nature, especially if they
never got to pore over what was once required reading,
"Catcher in the Rye."  For such an audience, there are
valuable lessons, and there are guides as well for the moms
and dads.  If you're a kid and your folks say time and again
"We want only what's best for you," watch out: they may really
mean that they want what's best for them.

Author
James Sanford
         Back in the heyday of drive-ins, "Disturbing Behavior" would
have made a great second feature behind something like "Massacre at
Central High" or "Rock N Roll High School." Or even "The Stepford
Wives," which this often droll little chiller frequently recalls. Put
together by some of the production team responsible for "The X Files,"
"Behavior" frequently captures the same weird/wacky atmosphere found in
some of that series' more lighthearted episodes.
 Scott Rosenberg's screenplay mixes together equal parts of
"Stepford" and the 1987 cult classic "The Lost Boys" into a surprisingly
amusing little chiller full of quirky dialogue and slightly warped
stereotypes, such as its hero Steve (James Marsden), a troubled teen
whose well-meaning parents transplant the family to Cradle Bay, a hamlet
that initially seems to live up to its snoozy-sounding name.
 But before long, Cradle Bay begins to look as if it has
something in common with Twin Peaks. Steve is introduced to the members
of the Blue Ribbon Club, a bunch of squeaky-clean jocks and preps whose
brilliant sugar-frosted smiles can't quite camouflage the odd twinkle in
their eyes. Uneasy with the in-crowd, Steve hooks up with stoner Gavin
(Nick Stahl) and his friend Rachel (Katie Holmes, in a marked about-face
from her docile "Dawson's Creek" character), a slacker dream-girl in
black leather and charcoal eyeliner. While Gavin and Rachel try to
hustle beers in a supermarket parking lot, the Blue Ribbon set is
holding court at the local yogurt shop and grooving to Olivia
Newton-John's "Have You Never Been Mellow." Indeed, the Ribbons are a
mellow bunch -- until those pesky adolescent hormones begin to bubble
and cause them to get physical in a way Olivia never would have
imagined.
 Though the storyline is a bit herky-jerky (perhaps the result
of extensive last-minute editing; the DVD version offers numerous
excised scenes and an alternate ending), director David Nutter's film is
carried along by its agreeably twisted sense of humor. For example, when
a troubled kid is sentenced to be lobotomized and a nurse voices her
objections to the procedure, a doctor steps forward to assure her it's
the only sure-fire way "to cut the bruises of the banana," and when one
of the Ribbons goes berserk in public, Rachel writes it off as "toxic
jock syndrome." The movie is underscored by a well-chosen soundtrack of
gloomy alt-rock anthems, including Harvey Danger's "Flagpole Sitta"
("paranoia, paranoia, everybody's comin' to me") and the Flys' splendid
"Got You Where I Want You." Rosenberg even caps the story with a sly and
all-too-appropriate nod to Pink Floyd's "The Wall."

Author
Aaron Michaels
Directed by David Nutter. Written by Scott Rosenberg. Running time: 83
minutes. Rated R (for strong violence, sexuality, language, and drug
content).
Disturbing Behavior is the newest teen horror film that desperately
tries to milk a little more money from the crowd that liked Scream and I
Know What You Did Last Summer. Disturbing Behavior doesn't hold a candle
to any of these films which in comparison deserve to be studied
thoroughly by film historians and placed on the AFI list.
The plot of Disturbing Behavior is so disgusting it's almost unbearable
to write it in the review. Steve Clark (James Marsden) and his family
move from Chicago to get away from the personal demons of an older son
who had committed suicide which we see in quick flashbacks. These quick
flashbacks
have absolutely no point and are only inserted to add gasoline to the
fire that will be created later in Steve's mind.
The family moves to a little fishing town called Cradle Bay which is
very reminiscent of the little fishing town the characters where
terrorized in I Know What You Did Last Summer. Of course we must go
through the 'I'm new here' scenes where Steve feels out of place. First
day of school rolls along and Steve is introduced to the gothic, stoned
teenagers Gavin Strick (Nick Stahl) and Rachel Wagner (Katie Holmes of
WB's "Dawson Creek") who he becomes friends with.
Gavin has a theory that something's up with the popular kids at Cradle
Bay High. They call themselves the Blue Ribbons. They are the jocks and
cheerleaders who have bake sales and blood drives annually. Gavin
witnesses a murder in an earlier scene and this starts his mind running.
He believes that
teachers and parents are mindwashing bad students to make everyone
perfect. None of his goth friends believe his story and claim he was
just "high". Could these parents be purifying the world? Who will be
there next victim? You can only guess. You won't need to think hard.
Well the next 40 minutes is devoted to chases and body counts. Each
scene is shot very dark with gloomy images and whispers everywhere. Blue
Ribbon members mutilate people in large populated areas and are not
noticed whatsoever.
Is this movie an entire lost cause. Almost. There is one character I
liked quite a bit. William Sadler does a good job as the school's
janitor who is looked on as the village idiot. Could he be more?
Probably. He seems to be having a good time and plays his part very
excited.
This horror film breaks a lot of the horror film rules that were defined
by the modern day classics like "Halloween" and "Scream". They think
that just showing a person being murdered is scary. What the above films
do well is play with your mind. They don't believe the gorier the
better.
"Hey! Producers! Leave us critics alone!"

Author
Greg King
In this mildly diverting thriller, a group of troublesome
teens are tamed through brainwashing techniques developed by Cradle
Bay High School psychiatrist Dr Caldicott (Bruce Greenwood, from The
Sweet Hereafter, etc).  He has created a group of well behaved,
diligent students, known as the Blue Ribbons, who pursue excellence
both at school and within the community.  However, there is a fatal
flaw in his technique.  Every time one of these seemingly perfect
adolescents develops sexual urges, they go ballistic, erupting into
erratic and violent behaviour.  The town's sheriff covers up most of
the damage, while Caldicott soothes anxious parents with lots of
psycho-babble.
Steve Clark (James Marsden, from the mini-series Bella Mafia,
etc), the new kid in town, becomes suspicious of their unnervingly
docile behaviour and sets out to expose Caldicott's sinister
experiment.  He receives help from some fellow misfits, including the
paranoid geek Gavin Strick (Nick Stahl), the pigmentally challenged UV
(Chad E Donella), and the tomboyish Rachel (Katie Holmes, from the
popular tv soap Dawson's Creek).
Disturbing Behaviour's simple plot reads like an adolescent
version of Ira Levin's 70's thriller The Stepford Wives, with
judicious borrowings from other, far superior films (A Clockwork
Orange, Village Of the Damned, etc) thrown in for good measure.
Actually, it also reads like something from a novel by John Saul, a
best selling American horror writer whose unsettling, but formulaic,
thrillers are set in small, picturesque towns like Cradle Bay, and
primarily deal with troubled teens threatened by strange and sinister
events.
Screen writer Scott Rosenberg (Beautiful Girls and Things To
Do In Denver When You're Dead, etc) makes little attempt to disguise
his influences, but he lacks the flair and reverential, knowing style
that gun writer Kevin Williamson would have brought to the material.
The film obliquely raises the question of which is the more disturbing
behaviour - that of the teens, rebelling against authority and
struggling to establish their own identity, or the sinister
machinations of Caldicott to produce mindless robots, lacking any
sense of individuality, who systematically conform to an imposed code
of discipline?
First time feature director David Nutter hails from a
background on spooky tv series (The X Files, Millennium, etc), but he
fails to bring much tension or sense of unease to this film.  Nutter
brings virtually every cliché of the genre into play here, and the
film displays precious little originality or imagination, even down to
the soundtrack.  Even the obligatory sting in the tale reeks of
desperation, and lacks credibility.  The contemporary teen horror film
genre, which largely began with Scream, seems to have run its course
if this inferior, feeble effort is any indication.
The film will hold a modicum of appeal for its targeted
teenage audience, most of whom will be drawn by the presence of
Holmes.  Disturbing Behaviour features a cast of hunky new comers, who
work well within the limitations of a horribly clichéd script.
However, performances are not of great importance here.  Worst of all
is William Sadler (Die Hard 2, etc), whose horribly cheesy performance
as the school's janitor, who is not quite as simple as he seems, is
reminiscent of Billy Bob Thornton.
Disturbing Behaviour is mercifully brief, and, at a brisk 83
minutes, doesn't outstay its welcome.  Nonetheless, audiences would be
better off waiting for the far superior and more sophisticated teen
drama Cruel Intentions.  Catch this one on video if you must!
   
**
greg king
http://www.netau.com.au/gregking

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Disturbing Behavior (1998) 
James Marsden, Katie Holmes, Nick Stahl, Ethan Embry, Bruce Greenwood, 
William Sadler, Steve Railsback, Melanie Angel, David Benton. Written by 
Scott Rosenberg. Directed by David Nutter. 83 minutes.
Rated R, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Think "Dawson's Creek" meets "The Stepford Wives." Think "Beverly Hills 
90210" meets "A Clockwork Orange." Better yet, think about going to see 
anything other than "Disturbing Behavior."
A spoiler alert. Generally I avoid revealing significant plot points 
about movies, but I'm making an exception here because I simply don't 
care.  
"Disturbing Behavior" is a painfully derivative, hapless little thriller 
about small town authority figures who use computer implants and 
brainwashing techniques to turn unruly young people into Republicans. 
Unfortunately, when the Stepford teens get angry or sexually aroused, 
they become homicidal maniacs. Oh sure, this may sound like the Bob 
Dornan story, but it's really just another hack horror flick aimed at the 
"I Know What You Did Last Summer" crowd.
The film suffers from post-Kevin Williamson-syndrome, where writers 
desperately try to crank out the kind of pop-culture riddled, ironic 
dialogue that helped Williamson strike gold with his "Scream" movies. In 
a script packed with unconvincing slang and snarky dialogue, writer Scott 
Rosenberg comes up with only one decent line, when sarcastic teen 
outsider Gavin watches the male and female leads eyeing one another and 
says, "Wow, appropriate sparks are flying. Cue the power ballad." 
Apparently, Rosenberg knew he hit pay-dirt with the quip, because he 
actually uses it twice in the film. 
The story, such as it is, goes like this. New kid in town Steve (James 
Marsden) moves to Cradle Bay and hooks up with the annoying Gavin (Nick 
Stahl) and sultry Rachel ("Dawson Creek's" Katie Holmes). Gavin fills 
Steve in on the town's secret of success. Rebellious teens are taken away 
for "motivational weekends" with the "Blue Ribbon Club." They return as 
well-groomed All-American archetypes, with the aforementioned ultra-
violent programming glitch. 
Soon enough, our heroes learn that they are next on the list for 
involuntary "Blue Ribbon" membership. Oh, what to do! As the kids wring 
their hands over their pending entry into the Christian right, they 
stumble onto a handy fact. The sonic rat repellent machines the whacked-
out school janitor keeps in the basement just happen to emit a frequency 
that short circuits the Aryan youths' brains. From there on...well, you 
do the math.
Even material this trite could have worked in the proper hands, but these 
filmmakers just don't have a clue. David Nutter, who directed a number of 
"X-Files" episodes, relies on every stock teen horror flick cliché in the 
book, while a standard-issue rock soundtrack grinds away in the 
background. The notion of remote-controlled jocks is amusing, but 
Rosenberg wastes the satiric potential with his limp script. The cast 
doesn't help matters. Marsden and Holmes look like pouty Gap models, and 
Stahl is so irritating that in his case, the implants don't seem like 
that bad an idea.
With "Disturbing Behavior," it appears the dregs of summer have arrived a 
few weeks early. Incidentally, please forgive this shorter-than-usual 
article. Throwaway flicks like "Disturbing Behavior" don't warrant a 
lengthy review and besides, I have better things to do. I'm going to 
surround the next Promise Keepers convention with sonic rat repellents 
and turn them all on at once, just in case...

Author
J.K. Salisbury
I should learn to be a bit more leary, and a bit less curious when it comes
to my cinematic choices.  When I was looking through the paper, to see the
movie times for Disturbing Behavior, a disturbing fact came to light.  The
running time of the movie was a paltry 84 minutes.  Barely longer than an
episode of the X-Files.  Knowing the basic plot for this movie, I was a bit
curious as to how they could develop characters, and a plot, and then give
sufficient supporting story, and an effective conclusion.  But being open
minded, and full of wonder, I proceeded ahead.        I should've heeded the signs.
While this is not the worst movie that I've seen this summer (Godzilla and
Armageddon are still "Kings of the Summer" in that category)..this movie does
have it's problems.  It was directed by David Nutter, heretofore, an X-Files
episode director, and the plot rings of a decent, but not totally compelling
episode of the show.  The recipe ingredients start with a mysteriously zombie
like group of "perfect teens" in a small town. Add in the token outsider,
token love interest/rebel/pretty face, a token chilly bad guy,token
mysterious figure, introduced only to fit the conclusion together and a
cliché-filled predictable story. (the sight of feet walking, to build
suspense and mystery only works, when the result is a shock, it never is
here, yet the filmmakers feel the need to drill this premise into the ground,
after a while, I begin saying, to myself, who it was, trying to gain some fun
from this),  blend in some hip, pop culture references (the best of these
being the visualization of Pink Floyd's rebellious cry from Another Brick In
The Wall), Sprinkle in a hip, alternative filled soundtrack and teenage eye
candy, to draw in the adolescent viewers (the obvious desired demographic
here) and In a nutshell, that's the movie.  You see everything that's coming,
you are compelled to watch, trudging through a slow, tension building
development, given hints of deeper meanings, which are never delved on any
further, or even explained, and then, like a TV series, given a quick,
predictable, clean, conclusion, with a tease to "Tune in next week".
It is too bad that this movie doesn't work.  The premise was truly
interesting.  The 1975 cult classic Stepford Wives, was ripe for retouching,
with the right 90s flair.  Mind control, desired perfection, in the right
hands, this could've been a chilling social commentary on parental, and peer
pressure for perfection.  Instead, this is a rushed, forced, predictable
mess.  The movie starts with promise, in an introspective, interesting and
compelling opening scene, the newcomer Marsden, is given a social "tour" of
the school by Gavin (The Man Without A Face's Nick Stahl).  This scene shows
the movie's potential, a struggle to make the perfect class, and the pool of
"others" from whom there is to choose.        The pace and presentation of the
movie are compelling, and intruiging enough to keep you watching (admittedly,
I was not bored, and did keep watching with interest, I liked about the first
10-20 minutes of this).  But once the hand is tipped, like that *snap*, it's
gone. All wrapped up in a nice, sensible, predictable, very sloppily and
hastily delivered finale.  The performances are faceless, nameless even. 
Marsden and Katie Dawson, both adolescent eye candy, are sure to raise the
hormone levels of their respective age-groups.        However, they serve as no
more than puppeteered window dressing.        Bruce Greenwood (an Atom Egoyan
favorite) serves only to create tension, and an evil, chilling presence (want
a better view of this aspect of him, see The Sweet Hereafter).        William
Sadler is usually a watchably maniacally character actor, here, he also seems
only to be filling a position, and never really flexes his known ability
although he, and Stahl do give the movie at least some watchability.  Each
character has a purpose, but is underdeveloped, we don't understand them, and
really don't care.
I felt very cheated by this movie.  The ads showed so much promise, the
beginning teased and hinted of so much more, and then, wham, bam, nothing.  I
sat and stared at the screen, along with a few others, in disbelief of what
had just been done to us.  We all wanted more.        David Nutter must be an
effective television director, to get this chance to make this movie. 
Someone needs to tell him that his chances, and possibilities, increase
proportionally, as the size of the viewing screen does.  Wait for this one on
late night cable. ________________________________________________ See more
of my reviews at http://www.angelfire.com/ks/nearside/comingatt.html
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring James Marsden; Katie Holmes; Nich Stahl; Ethan Embry & Natassia
Maltke
Disturbing Behavior is your typical teen oriented horror flick. It's
certainly not going down as one of the classics in the genre. To be
perfectly honest, probably the only reason it will be remembered is because
of the presence of Katie Holmes. While her performance isn't quite as good
as fan's of her TV show Dawson's Creek might have come to expect from her,
she does make the most of the material that she has to work with. As do the
rest of the fairly talented, if not exceptional, young cast.
Steve Clark (James Marsden) and his family move to a small Pacific Northwest
community where something seems just a little to good to be true about some
of the local high school students. They are high over achievers and very
community oriented. They also have the tendency to become homicidal on
occasion (nobody's perfect). Like every school, this one also has its less
than perfect students. They are the leather clad, drinking and smoking (not
necessarily cigarettes) bunch, who aren't exactly on the honor role. Their
numbers seem to be diminishing slowly as many of them are joining the ranks
of the preppy elite in the school. This is all due to the influence of the
school guidance counselor who is doing a little experimenting on his
students. The basis of this movie is how Marsden and his new friend the
leather- clad Katie Holmes run head on into the preppies.
First, I should start by saying that Katie Holmes in leather is more than an
adequate reason for me to recommend this movie. If that isn't enough for you
(and I can't see why it wouldn't be), I'll give the movie a couple of more
points in the win column. As I've already alluded to, the acting is solid,
and is certainly better than most films of this genre, although not quite up
to films such as Scream and I Know What You Did Last Summer. This is a good
looking film, very well photographed, and the Pacific Northwest scenery is
used to full advantage. At least to the extent that it looks god in the
daylight shots. Which, as horror fans know, are few and far between in
horror flicks.
The basic premise of the movie is a pretty tired one. The population slowly
being converted into something else has been done more times than I care to
imagine. There are really not a great deal of new twists that make it
considerably different from other films of this type. Even though it's not
particularly original, it does add enough twists to keep your interest
through the whole movie. Not exactly ringing endorsements, but considering
the horror films of just a few years ago (pre Scream), this could almost be
considered a masterpiece.
If taken for what it is, a formula horror flick, Disturbing Behavior isn't
half bad. My guess is 10 years from now the only reason that anyone will
remember this is for the fact that it was one of the very talented Katie
Holmes' first starring roles.

Author
James Brundage
     To be or not to be?  That is the question.  Or, at least, that is
supposed to be the question.  In the care of Disturbing Behavior, the
question is rather what to be.  One on hand, you have a fairly gripping
psychological thriller.  On the other, you have a teen moneymaking vehicle.
     One may ask, why can't it be both?  It can't be both because you just
can't be a psychological thriller and a horror film.  Sure, people have
tried, but I haven't seen it yet, and dollars to doughnuts, I've probably
seen more films than you.  Unfortunately, the writer and director of
Disturbing Behavior didn't quite get this.
     At least it focused mainly on being a teen vehicle.  In Disturbing
Behavior, instead of good kids going bad, bad kids are going good.  Of
course, having all seen our share of films with this plot, we know that
they're being brainwashed.
     Like all horror films, there really isn't any mystery or surprise to
the film.  Point A can figure Point B.  You have your basic secluded
setting: nice, suburban, and, of course, on an island only accessible by
ferry.
     Well, basically, the movie grudges along, trying to be good.  That's
fine.  It tries to be funny and basically succeeds in that part.  It tries
to surprise and trick us, but basically fails in that respect.  It has a
hell of a soundtrack.
     The thing that bugged me about the film was that, instead of accepting
that it was a popcorn movie, it tried to be intelligent.  For that, you may
blame "X-Files" vets David Nutter and Scott Michael Rosenburg.  It tries to
be surreal, it tries to be intelligent, and it makes references that pass
way over the heads of its target audience.
     This basically puts a stake in the heart of the movie, killing what
could have been a good teen flick, which still was, according to the
majority of teens, a cool movie.  This yet again proves Cynical Hollywood
Thesis #132: "If you slap a good-looking girl, a teen-idol guy, and a good
soundtrack on a film, and it will make up its incredibly meager budget."
The soundtrack on this one is mostly punk metal, but includes some
interesting additions, such as the 50s song "Accentuate the Positive."  It
also gives us the gift of Harvey Dangerfield's "Flagpole Sitta," the song of
the 1998 summer that is basically gone but not forgotten.
     The kicks I got in the film mostly came in the form of inside jokes.
For instance, I was the only one in the theatre who noticed that Bruce
Greenwood, the bad guy, was in the exact opposite position in the cult TV
show "Nowhere Man" a few years back.  Or the million references it put in to
The Stepford Wives.  Or the homage it pays to "The X-Files."
     The performances are better than the average horror film, but the
script isn't: cliches dot the movie and basically get on my nerves.  The
director tries to do film noir, but forgot how to somewhere along the line.
Nick Stahl and Bruce Greenwood are the standouts of the film, although
Holmes hones her natural talent to some degree.
     This isn't all to say that Disturbing Behavior wasn't fun: it was.  I
enjoyed watching it, making fun of it, watching Katie Holmes not have to be
the all-American girl with the SAT-level vocabulary she plays on "Dawson's
Creek" (nipple and nose ring and all), but the film basically disappointed
me.  I wanted a paranoid thriller.  I got Wes Craven.

Author
Greg King
In this mildly diverting thriller, a group of troublesome
teens are tamed through brainwashing techniques developed by Cradle
Bay High School psychiatrist Dr Caldicott (Bruce Greenwood, from The
Sweet Hereafter, etc).  He has created a group of well behaved,
diligent students, known as the Blue Ribbons, who pursue excellence
both at school and within the community.  However, there is a fatal
flaw in his technique.  Every time one of these seemingly perfect
adolescents develops sexual urges, they go ballistic, erupting into
erratic and violent behaviour.  The town's sheriff covers up most of
the damage, while Caldicott soothes anxious parents with lots of
psycho-babble.
Steve Clark (James Marsden, from the mini-series Bella Mafia,
etc), the new kid in town, becomes suspicious of their unnervingly
docile behaviour and sets out to expose Caldicott's sinister
experiment.  He receives help from some fellow misfits, including the
paranoid geek Gavin Strick (Nick Stahl), the pigmentally challenged UV
(Chad E Donella), and the tomboyish Rachel (Katie Holmes, from the
popular tv soap Dawson's Creek).
Disturbing Behaviour's simple plot reads like an adolescent
version of Ira Levin's 70's thriller The Stepford Wives, with
judicious borrowings from other, far superior films (A Clockwork
Orange, Village Of the Damned, etc) thrown in for good measure.
Actually, it also reads like something from a novel by John Saul, a
best selling American horror writer whose unsettling, but formulaic,
thrillers are set in small, picturesque towns like Cradle Bay, and
primarily deal with troubled teens threatened by strange and sinister
events.
Screen writer Scott Rosenberg (Beautiful Girls and Things To
Do In Denver When You're Dead, etc) makes little attempt to disguise
his influences, but he lacks the flair and reverential, knowing style
that gun writer Kevin Williamson would have brought to the material.
The film obliquely raises the question of which is the more disturbing
behaviour - that of the teens, rebelling against authority and
struggling to establish their own identity, or the sinister
machinations of Caldicott to produce mindless robots, lacking any
sense of individuality, who systematically conform to an imposed code
of discipline?
First time feature director David Nutter hails from a
background on spooky tv series (The X Files, Millennium, etc), but he
fails to bring much tension or sense of unease to this film.  Nutter
brings virtually every cliché of the genre into play here, and the
film displays precious little originality or imagination, even down to
the soundtrack.  Even the obligatory sting in the tale reeks of
desperation, and lacks credibility.  The contemporary teen horror film
genre, which largely began with Scream, seems to have run its course
if this inferior, feeble effort is any indication.
The film will hold a modicum of appeal for its targeted
teenage audience, most of whom will be drawn by the presence of
Holmes.  Disturbing Behaviour features a cast of hunky new comers, who
work well within the limitations of a horribly clichéd script.
However, performances are not of great importance here.  Worst of all
is William Sadler (Die Hard 2, etc), whose horribly cheesy performance
as the school's janitor, who is not quite as simple as he seems, is
reminiscent of Billy Bob Thornton.
Disturbing Behaviour is mercifully brief, and, at a brisk 83
minutes, doesn't outstay its welcome.  Nonetheless, audiences would be
better off waiting for the far superior and more sophisticated teen
drama Cruel Intentions.  Catch this one on video if you must!
   
**
greg king
http://www.netau.com.au/gregking

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: David Nutter
Writer: Scott Rosenberg
Starring: Jimmy Marsden, Katie Holmes, Nick Stahl, Bruce Greenwood, William
Sadler, Steve Railsback, Chad Donella, Katherine Isabelle, Ethan Embry
I'm not sure who the genius is who came up with the idea of comparing
"Disturbing Behavior" with "Scream."  Maybe it's because they're both
horror films (kinda), both have hot young stars, both have an annoying
alternative soundtrack, and both are aimed at the teenage crowd, which I
guess includes me.  But this is not the next in line with the "Scream"
flicks as well as the "I Know What You Did Last Summer" soon to be flicks. 
It owes less to "Halloween" and more to Kafka and Orwell, which, in my
book, makes for a more interesting feature.
And it should have been.  This is basically a rehash of "The Stepford
Wives," the great 70s film I never saw starring Katherine Ross and dealing,
as I've been told, with a bunch of women who are programmed to be perfect
housewives.  Or something like that.  "Behavior," starring Katie Holmes of
"Dawson's Creek," deals with a bunch of teenagers, deep in angst, who are
being programmed to be perfect teenagers.  Suck-ups.  Preppies.  It
actually, at least to me, sounds like it would work, and with Scott
Rosenberg, that witty penmen who has written stuff like "Beautiful Girls"
and "Things to Do In Denver When You're Dead" (as well as "Con Air"), it
actually sounds like it may be pulled off with the right amount of frights
and satiric wit.
Alas, it's not, and it plumets into that little group of movies known as
"The Movies With Potential That Blow It."  I remember a film called "White
Man's Burden" which dealt with a reversal of Blacks and Whites in society
that did nothing with it's potentially brilliant premise.  Here's another
one.  It could be a brilliant satire on how teenagers NEED to go through
teen angst in order to find themselves.  It's a stage, and this film does
in fact realize that.  It gets its message across and it does it
effortlessly.  Now it just needs to work as a film.
Which it doesn't.  It's too sloppy and too contrived.  It paints a bleak
portrait of high school life...then lets it lie.  It brings us a bunch of
scary monsters who are all a bunch of disgustingly icky kiss-ups who do
food drives and hang out at a 50s diner drinking milk shakes...then gives
it a cheap twist: when they get horny, they become homicidal.  Isn't it
scary enough that they're like this, and can't the real terror in the town
be that you could be next to be just like them - not that you could be next
to die?
The film introduces us two three different characters who, in the
beginning, are considered outsiders because they're not (yet) part of this
clique: the new kid, Steve (James Marsden - dull dull dull dull), who's
having trouble at home because he hasn't gotten over his brother's (Ethan
Embry, in quick flashes so you don't recognize him - I did) suicide; the
renegade girl, Rachel (Katie Holmes, from "Dawson's Creek"), who's chief
personality trait is her prominent nose ring; and by far the most
interesting kid, Gavin (Nick Stahl, the kid from "The Man Without a Face"),
who's the most interesting because he's the only character who's given some
dimension.  In the film's best scene, he introduces Steve to every single
clique, nailing each one's fetishes and hang-ups, and it's the best scene
in the movie because it's witty, satirical, and interesting - something the
rest of this film isn't.
Gavin suspects there's something awry with the preppie kids, known as The
Blue Ribbons, and in the tradition of all conspirators, and even when he
actually shows hard pure evidence to Steve, he's only treated as a typical
raving conspiracy buff.  Here, we have another case of "The Idiot Plot,"
where not only could Steve had done something about Gavin and what happens
to him, but he may have saved this film from being the dreary, dull film
that it is without Gavin, who gives it life and humor.  The only other
half-interesting character is the school janitor, played by William Sadler
as a retarded, scary guy who may not be what he seems to be...but really,
we don't care anyway.
I probably shouldn't mention that this was directed by David Nutter, who's
works for "The X-Files," because that would probably tarnish his
reputation.  Like the show, he's good at setting up weird conspiracies, and
creating a general creepy feel.  Most of this film is shot at night and
with dark eerie shadows for the maximum creepy effect, and some of it
works.  But what this film is not so good at is coming out with a good
payoff.  He keeps too much inside, so much that when the characters journey
to a Mental Institution in the Third Act, you wonder why they just don't
get the hell out of there.  I think what happens to Gavin is proof enough
that there's something rotten in the state of teen angstdom.
What this film needs to be is a lot longer, a lot more colorful, and a lot
creepier.  If the best villain they can come up with is a guidance
counselor (played by Bruce Greenwood, an Atom Egoyan regular obviously just
trying to pay the rent) who still thinks he can get away with it even when
most is revealed, then they need to come up with a tougher, smarter
villain.  If he's so villainous, then why could two dense teenagers who
couldn't figure out there was something going on until it was way too late
find information on him in a couple minutes?  The film, which runs about 80
or so minutes, just needs to work on these things, and become a lot less
sloppy.  At such a short running time and with such lame, boring characters
as these, it's pretty much obvious that leaving this film leaves a horribly
unsatisfied taste in one's mouth, especially mine.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: July 24, 1998
Starring: Jimmy Marsden, Katie Holmes, Nick Stahl, Steve Railsback,
Bruce Greenwood, Ethan Embry,
Katharine Isabelle
Directed by: David Nutter
Distributed by: Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
MPAA Rating: R (terror, violence, brief language)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/disturbing.htm 
Since late in 1996, with the release of the ever-popular thriller SCREAM
and the revival of the horror genre into pop culture, there have been
five thriller pics that were specifically made for the teenage
demographic. Sequentially, each has gotten more campy, more absurd, less
believable, and less fun. The low point was 1997's SCREAM 2, which
lacked all of the elements that made its predecessor so much fun.
DISTURBING BEHAVIOR, the latest entry from veteran TV director David
Nutter, may not be an original, but it had its moments. 
Jimmy Marsden (TV's SECOND NOAH) and Katie Holmes (TV's DAWSON'S CREEK)
head up a cast of actors of similar pedigrees. In fact, almost everyone
involved with the production here has a filmography that is nine-tenths
television. And why not? The guaranteed way to attract a good percentage
of the Oxy-10 crowd, most of which spends several hours in front of the
tube each day, is to pick actors they know and like. Above all, though,
they weren't chosen for their acting ability. Marsden is a Tom Cruise
look-alike, and Holmes wears chest-hugging sweatshirts; both are there
to simply fill the role and get oogled by members of the opposite sex.
In fact, the only one of appreciative talent here is Nick Stahl, whose
performance as the drugged-up, burned-out Gavin Strick is quite dynamic
and believable. 
Marsden is the lead as Steve Clark, a troubled but mostly put-together
young lad who is moving with his family to the picturesque town of
Cradle Bay after suffering a death in the family. Like any kid, Steve's
a bit nervous about his first day at his new school, and when he gets
there everything seems normal enough. That is, until he meets Gavin, who
introduces him to both the inner workings of the school and his friend
Rachel Wagner (Holmes). Gavin has an avid hatred of the Blue Ribbon
Club, a group of A-plus students that do philanthropic work. However,
these students are also strangely prone to overloaded sex drives (no
joke, really) that often result in violence. So Steve, with the help of
Rachel, learns that there's a sinister hand behind all of this, and the
only question the movie doesn't answer is how deep it runs. 
The acting may not be top-quality, but writer Scott Rosenberg (CON AIR)
manages to include some amount of genuine thrillerism. His premise reeks
of campiness in the "Twilight Zone" sense, but it does lend itself to
scenes which are tense and exciting to watch. Most of the movie is
filmed in dark and ominous settings, and a good deal of the time that
builds atmosphere to the point where everything is watchable. Still, the
film's main detractor is its inability to grasp anything solid,
worthwhile, or even realistic, and the viewer will be plagued by that
realization once it comes. At its best, this is passing entertainment,
and at its worst, this is good comedy. Hopefully, it falls in between.
FINAL AWARD FOR "DISTURBING BEHAVIOR": 2.0 stars - a fair movie

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  David Nutter
Cast:  Jimmy Marsden, Katie Holmes, Nick Stahl, Chad E. Donella, Bruce
Greenwood, William Sadler
Screenplay:  Scott Rosenberg
Producers:  Armyan Bernstein, Jonathan Shestack
Runtime:  83 min.
US Distribution:  MGM
Rated R:  violence, sex, profanity
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Sometimes, when I decide to write a short story or a poem, I think of a
title first, and then think of a subject to go with it.  It seems that
the makers of Disturbing Behavior had a similar train of thought when it
came to the title sequence.  I wouldn't be surprised if a couple of guys
got together and created the opening credits, and then someone saw it
and made up a story to go along with it.  The title sequence is so good,
so ominous and original, that it had me engrossed before the picture
even began.
Of course, my attention dwindled shortly into the film.  Disturbing
Behavior, like so many thrillers, starts off interesting and ends up
laughably ridiculous.  It's a teen horror film with no interesting
violence or sex.  It's a suspense film with no suspense.  It's an Evil
Small Town story with no story to speak of.  It's a disaster, a listless
and uninspired disaster, that just barely misses one-stardom because of
a few good sequences, a mercifully short running time, and one terrific
set of opening credits.  
Our main man is a fellow named Steve Clark, blandly played by Jimmy
Marsden.  He moves to a small town with his family after, tragically,
his brother shoots himself.  Steve is very upset about the untimely
death of his brother; we learn this through strange home-video like
nightmares that he has occasionally.  The big trial for Steve is, of
course, to fit in at school and make new friends.  Marsden looks like
your stereotypical jock down to the last detail, so he seems a poor
casting choice for a social reject.  
As a social reject, he falls in with some pretentious dope-smoking
philosophers, Gavin (Nick Stahl) and Rachel (Katie Holmes).  Gavin
informs Steve that the local group of jocks, known as the Blue
Ribboners, are actually a bunch of zombies, assimilating new members
into their group, while sporadically killing innocent people.  So, it's
up to our group of mismatched protagonists to 1) solve the mystery, and
2) do something about it.  By the end of it all, something has happened
and things have been explained, but the film still doesn't make any
sense.
Disturbing Behavior was written by Scott Rosenberg.  I've seen his name
around recently (he was one of the toucher-uppers on the Armageddon
script), and I imagine that, for the most part, he knows what he's doing
when it comes to screenwriting.  He did, however, have a complete lapse
in judgement when he got the idea for this film, and then decided to
actually take the time to write it out.  Evil Small Town films are
pretty common (the last one, Phantoms, is also a dismal failure), but it
takes a lot of skill to make the formula work.  Rosenberg's script is a
complete mess, lacking in even the most basic attempts at
characterization. 
And it makes no sense, nor is their any purpose when things are finally
"explained."  There is supposed to be an element of surprise when we see
what is happening to the jocks, but the film never explains exactly what
*is* happening.  They get strapped to chairs, a microchip is inserted
into their eyes, and -- poof -- they become sex-crazed, superviolent,
machine-like creatures.  The doctor responsible for all this, Dr.
Caldicott (Bruce Greenwood), must be pretty nuts for thinking that this
kind of behavior is a step up from the way high school jocks actually
behave (or, perhaps, this is the only realistic element in the film).
Much of the writing is simply bad, and Rosenberg has no intuition when
it comes to the way high school kids act.  In one terrible scene, Gavin
explains to Steve all of the high school cliques, while pointing them
out in the cafeteria.  Up front, I should say that, in four years of
high school, I did not eat in the cafeteria even once.  That aside, the
various social groups he points out are general, uninteresting, and
poorly-shown.  For instance, he points to the "nerds," who are all
wearing glasses and playing with their laptops.  It's such an obvious
cliche that I can't believe Rosenberg even bothered.  Most of the
dialogue is forced (no one says, "Bite me!" anymore), and none of the
scenes have any degree of wit.
This picture is not inspired, and most scenes flop from one to the
other, with no sense of momentum or energy.  The blame for this can be
placed on director David Nutter, who apparently likes his films dry. 
Horror films should at least exploit violence, but this one is
shockingly timid.  There are a few good scenes, though, such as an
interesting trip through an insane asylum (this is, however, the most
forced scene in the film, for how our heroes get there or why they
bother are things we never learn).  I also liked the school janitor
character, played by William Sadler.  He has a few lines that are
surprisingly thought-provoking.
The acting is largely a waste of talent.  Marsden is, as I said, bland
(thought not particularly bad).  Bruce Greenwood is shamelessly wasted. 
Stahl and Holmes both show they have talent, but the direction isn't
good enough to hone in on their skills (Stahl's performance seems more
like a parody of high school potheads).  None of these characters expand
beyond their one dimension, and, frankly, watching cardboard cut-outs of
human beings run down hallways while screaming just isn't all that
cool.  
Disturbing Behavior is a wreck of a film, and it started out a wreck
before shooting even began.  I'm surprised there were producers who read
this script and thought that it would make a good film, or that it would
make a lot of money at the box office.  It's not boring, or even
blatantly awful, but it's an uninspired lump of a film.  It sure starts
off nicely, but the regression into total absurdity is so consistent
that the very last scene is outright laughable.  So, if you go to see
this film, take my advice:  appreciate the credit sequence, and pray it
never ends.

Author
Matt Williams
There's a nugget of a good thriller hidden deep inside Disturbing
Behavior, just waiting to get out.  Unfortunately, it never gets a
chance, and is instead buried in pseudo-thrilling moments mostly
borrowed from bad horror films.
Retreating from troublesome family issues, the Clark family moves to the
seemingly peaceful town of Cradle Bay.  There, eldest son Steve (James
Mardsen) is expected to fit in with his classmates in high school.
However, there's something strange going on under the surface.
Even though he doesn't seem to fit in with them, Steve is immediately
initiated by the paranoid druggies.  His tour guide is Gavin Strick
(Nick Stahl), who, along with his albino buddy U.V. (Chad E. Donella),
is convinced that the preponderance of "perfect" students in the school
is the result of some sort of conspiracy.
You see, the letter-jacket wearing "popular" crowd are all part of a
program called the "blue-ribbons".  It's a goody-two-shoes study group,
in which the members gather at the local yogurt shoppe, listen to a
little Wayne Newton, and study for those Straight-As.  Oh yes, if that
weren't unnatural enough, they are occasionally beset by "toxic jock
syndrome", wherein they suddenly fly into an unexpected homicidal rage.
The strange thing is, most of the "blue-ribbons" were once perfectly
normal misfits, just like Gavin.
Steve isn't quite convinced, nor is token girlfriend Rachel (Katie
Holmes), whose role it is to look rebellious, but fall head over heels
for Steve anyway. However, to add further suspicions, Steve also has
encounters with the  overly slick school psychiatrist Dr. Caldicott
(Bruce Greenwood) and the delightfully mad janitor Newberry (William
Sadler).
Disturbing Behavior is at its best when analyzing the differences
between the various archetypical high school social groups, but at its
worst when it devolves into an oh-so-typical horror yarn.  A more
interesting movie would have played up the paranoia inherent between
school cliques, and possibly eliminated the homicidal angle altogether.
What if we weren't so sure from the first moments of the film that there
is a conspiracy at work here?  Well, we'll never know, as the film takes
the easy way out, by extinguishing intriguing ideas with a douse of
nonsensical horror blather.
Many of the "shocks" in the film aren't really shocking at all, when you
stop and think about them.  However, the film does have a suitably
creepy atmosphere going for it.  Even if there are no true thrills, it
feels as if one may be lurking around the corner.  Too bad it never
comes.
James Mardsen seems, well, too "blue-ribbon" to fill the role of the
outsider. Nick Stahl does a much better job, and should have been given
the lead here. Katie Holmes is spunky enough in a punk-goth way, despite
the fact she doesn't have much of a character.
Disturbing Behavior isn't as bad as it could have been, but it wastes
plenty of potential as well.  Creepy, but never scary (unless you count
some horrid dialogue snippets), the film just doesn't leave a lasting
impression.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A group of high school kids suspect the grade's sharpest students, known as
the Blue Ribbons, to be controlled or programmed from another source other
than themselves. And as more and more students join the unique group, a
couple of rebellious kids take on the task of getting to the bottom of this
strange mystery.
CRITIQUE:
Creepy, escapist thrill-show, this movie takes elements from the STEPFORD
WIVES and CLOCKWORK ORANGE (9/10), mixes in some hip, young stars, a rockin'
soundtrack, and an interesting enough premise to fill its overly short 80
minute runtime. I haven't found myself thinking this much of late, but this
is one film that could've used another 20 minutes of so, to further develop
its interesting premise, and add onto its simple conclusion. It might've
turned the movie into something more than what it is now, which is a decent
thrill-ride, entertaining enough to enjoy, but shallow enough not to take
too seriously. Do you have 80 minutes to give up in your life, to watch a
dark, moody presentation shown over an alternative soundtrack, and Katie
Holmes in many a tight top? If you do, then check this puppy out, otherwise,
see one of the originals which I compared it to before, or better yet, check
into another one of screenwriter Scott Rosenberg's creations via THINGS TO
DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD (7/10) or BEAUTIFUL GIRLS (8.5/10). Nick
Stahl's performance as the paranoid pothead with the overly literate tongue
was the only one to stick out in my mind (He went on to a bit part in
Terrence Malick's THE THIN RED LINE (6.5/10).
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Screenwriter Scott Rosenberg has a pen for the unique genres, as his first
three screenplays comprised of a quirky crime flick a la THING TO DO IN
DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD, a romantic coming-of-adult-age drama, BEAUTIFUL
GIRLS (8.5/10) and the summer action blockbuster, CONAIR (6.5/10),
respectively.
The actor who plays the janitor in this film also played the role of the
Grim Reaper in 1991's BILLS AND TED'S BOGUS JOURNEY. His name is William
Sadler.


Author
Michael Dequina
Disturbing Behavior (R) no stars (out of ****)
To borrow one of David Spade's quips on his old "Hollywood Minute" segment
on _Saturday_Night_Live_, I liked this movie better the first time I saw
it... when it was called _The_Stepford_Wives_.  In
_The_Cradle_Bay_Teens_--er, _Disturbing_Behavior_, a seemingly idyllic
Washington town hides a dark secret: in an effort to make their teens reach
their maximum potential, parents and a unscrupulous high school counselor
(Bruce Greenwood, a long way from Atom Egoyan's films) conspire in a
strange program that turns rebellious adolescents into robotic
do-gooders--"Blue Ribbons," as they are called.
There isn't an original moment in Scott Rosenberg's derivative screenplay.
 When the _Stepford_ allusions tap out, he turns to _A_Clockwork_Orange_
for a climactic "conversion" sequence.  It is also incredibly predictable;
plot turns are telegraphed with all the subtlety of a sledgehammer.  He
even botches the de regueur "twist" ending, which is neither surprising nor
shocking nor of any real consequence.  It's hard to fathom what in the
script exactly attracted the involvement of a few _X-Files_ vets--director
David Nutter, composer Mark Snow (who wrote a terrifically eerie score that
the film doesn't deserve), and, in small roles, _X_ guest star Steve
Railsback (Duane Barry, the guy who kidnapped Scully) and recurrent Chris
Owens (Agent Jeffrey Spender, Cigarette-Smoking Man's son).  As Steve, the
hero with the requisite damaged past (he is haunted by the suicide of his
older brother), James Marsden has blue eyes and clean-cut looks tailor-made
for a _Bop_ pinup--and all the emotional depth and acting range of the page
it would be printed on.  Katie Holmes, the standout cast member of TV's
_Dawson's_Creek_, is wated as the token tattooed, body-pierced love
interest.  To paraphrase the theme of her hit show, you don't want to wait
for this film to be over.  Just leave.  Better yet, just don't go in the
first place.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
