Title
Review for Chasing Amy (1997)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) There is something about Kevin Smith's style that I just
don't like. I enjoyed Chasing Amy while I was watching it, but
afterwards I was glad it was over. In that sense it was like Pulp
Fiction. Both are fun to watch, but I was relieved to come out of the
theater and see that reality isn't like what was on screen.
To chase Amy is to regret having ruined your once-in-a-lifetime
relationship, as Holden (Ben Affleck) learns the hard way.
Holden lives with Banky (Jason Lee), and the two of them collaborate on
the comic book "Chronic and Bluntman." After a comic book convention,
they join two friends, Hooper and Alyssa (Dwight Ewell and Joey Lauren
Adams) for drinks.
While Banky and Hooper argue over the sexual orientation of the
characters in Archie comics, Holden and Alyssa get to know each other.
Alyssa invites Holden to a night club the next day and they hit it off
well. Holden is just starting to see the beginnings of a relationship
when Alyssa runs into her girlfriend and starts making out with her.
Naturally, Holden is disappointed and shocked. Later, while Alyssa and
Banky compare cunnilingus-related injuries, Holden moves from
disappointment to disgust and despair.
A few days later, Alyssa shows up to make amends with Holden. She
doesn't want their friendship to end. They become very good friends,
but Holden still wants more.
It turns out that Alyssa loves Holden enough to allow the relationship
to grow beyond friendship and all is well until Holden learns of her
sexual history with men.  This is too much for him and he calls the
relationship off. There is much soul-searching by all of the characters
before the movie reaches its logical conclusion.
The story is a refreshing twist on the standard romantic comedy, but
something about Kevin Smith's style leaves me feeling a little dirty.
First of all, this movie (like Clerks, his debut) is very
sex-centered.  His characters talk a lot about sex, which makes for
interesting, honest, and funny dialog, but the sum of the movie, then,
feels -- well, dirty. It seems that these characters live in a
mystical land far away from this reality -- another world where
everybody has sex with ten different partners by high school
graduation, then talks about it at length with strangers and
acquaintances.
Also, this movie has a very heterosexual male point of view. One might
say it borders on prejudice. Holden is okay with Alyssa's promiscuity
as a lesbian, but he can't accept the idea of her promiscuity with men.
Also, Alyssa's homosexuality is "cured" when she meets the right man.
The movie does handle this issue sensitively and carefully -- it is
within Alyssa's character to choose Holden -- but the whole idea seems
heterosexist. Imagine a counterexample: two friends, both male, one
gay. Imagine the gay friend falling hopelessly in love with the
straight friend. The straight friend is not likely to be swayed, no
matter how persistent the gay friend is. In fact, the awkwardness of
the situation might ruin their friendship.  But we accept the situation
when a charming heterosexual man wins over a sexually confused
lesbian.
Still, Chasing Amy has good characters, good dialog, and a good
screenplay.
Alyssa is a well developed character. She is not merely the object of
another character's desire, as is too often the case in romantic
comedies.  Hooper is a minor comic character but his wisdom adds a
rational voice to the movie. He is funny as the flaming homosexual
cartoonist whose plays the angry African-American in order to sell more
copies of his comic, "Cracker-Hatin' Coon." (This is another instance
of Smith the screenwriter walking a fine line between creating
interesting autonomous characters and furthering stereotypes.)
Banky and Holden share some good dialog. They disagree enough that
their discussions are always interesting, exposing all sorts of
different layers within different topics. When Holden and Alyssa talk,
they reveal their hearts to each other with a bare honesty uncommon in
most movies.
The story is simple enough, but Holden introduces an interesting twist
near the end which itself would have made for a clever ending. Smith
carries the story just a little further to explore the consequences of
that twist.
As repellent as I sometimes find Kevin Smith, I must admit that he is a
talented filmmaker. Chasing Amy appears to have been made on a
shoestring (albeit a bigger one than Clerks). Smith realizes that he
doesn't need special effects, slick lighting, or expensive sets to make
a good move. A good script, a few friends, and a promise to thank all
of his backers in the credits is all he needs.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes

Author
Michael R. Thompson
(SHORT) 
A movie about falling in love.  Specifically, dealing with the brave
and daring things people are willing to do to fall into love, and the
cowardly and stupid things the same people can do to bollix it up.
It treats these subjects with a GREAT deal of HUMOR and poignancy. 
The characters include gays, and the humor is VERY RAUNCHY, so if 
these things offend you stay away.  The only part of the movie I 
disliked was the ending, where I felt the characters lost their 
way.
(ONLY A LITTLE LONGER)
Two single men, Buds, if you will and business partners are moving
somewhat aimlessly through life living in New Jersey.  They both 
like girls, although they can't seem to get enough, and they're (comic
book) geeks, but successful geeks.  Then, one of them goes and falls 
in love.  Never mind that this girl doesn't like guys, we know that 
love will prevail, ... or will it. Further, what's going to  happen to
the friendship between the two guys?
This movie asked a ton of questions in a very funny way, and I really
enjoyed this aspect of the film.
Several of the questions addressed include, in no particular order:
is love bigger than sexuality (can a lesbian go straight, if she 
has found her soulmate), are all great friendships truly plutonic or is
there always some hint of sexuality (or is three just a crowd), is oral
sex a dangerous habit, can we really love someone who is different or do
we need a metaphorical mirror of ourselves.
Getting all of these issues out on the table took up the first three
quarters of the film, and it was very funny and intelligent.  Of course,
being an artiste and needing to have an ending, Kevin Smith had to try
to answer these questions for us, and that is where I started to dislike
the film.  In fact, I just didn't believe what the primary characters
did to deal with any of these issues, especially based upon their
introduction and development.Still based on the fact I was laughing my
head off for the first hour, I heartily recommend the film.

Author
Ben Hoffman
This is the third in a trilogy written and directed by Kevin Smith.
The previous two films were the offbeat and very entertaining CLERKS
and MALLRATS. In this third film, Smith digs deeply into relationships
as we come close to the end of a millennium.  Men and women are as
ridiculous in their relationships as they were a few decades ago.
Two cartoonist partners, Holden (Ben Affleck) and Banky (Jason Lee) are
prospering with their cult comic books.  When they meet Alyssa (Joey
Lauren Adams) who is also a comic book artist, Holden is instantly
attracted to her.  He is at least momentarily unnerved when he sees her
with her girlfriend in a passionate kiss but he is so taken with her
that he is willing to settle for just a relationship as friends even if
his partner, Banky, says Holden is not the type to have women as mere
friends.
Apparently, Alyssa, a gorgeous blonde with a sweet, lovable face, just
THINKS she is a Lesbian.  How else explain her attraction to Holden?
Lesbians do not turn into heteros just because they meet a man to whom
they are attracted.  Alyssa has been a free spirit doing sexually
whatever she wanted when she was younger, experimenting in every way.
The question is whether Holden, a man of today, is able to handle what
his adored Alyssa did ten or more years ago.
As in all three of his films, Smith's writing is exceptional so the
dialog flows smoothly.  That is true of his directing, as well.  Off
the beaten track of most of today's films, Smith cuts to the heart of
what is troubling the young people of today who are still, in many
cases, unsure of where they stand and where they are going or want to
go.  Profound, witty and entertaining,.
Nevertheless, I had looked for a different ending to the film.  I could
be wrong.  Perhaps Smith's is the better option.

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Clerks" remains one of my favorite comedies of all time - it is lewd, crude,
off-the-wall, hilarious fun from start to finish. Kevin Smith followed his
mini-masterpiece with the abominable "Mallrats," a lewd, crude, off-the-wall
and desperately unfunny comedy with the worst casting in years - Marvel Comics
creator Stan Lee as himself, and actor Michael Rooker, both of whom couldn't
elicit a smile from my lips if they tried. I thought New Jersey native director
Kevin Smith had a fluke success and had nothing more up his sleeve to share
with the rest of us. What a surprise it is then to see Kevin Smith bounce back
with another lewd, crude, off-the-wall comedy called "Chasing Amy," and not
only is it funny, it is a real movie with tears, laughs, truth and emotions.
"Chasing Amy" is the third film in Smith's New Jersey trilogy, and he ends it
with a comic bang. 
Ben Affleck and Jason Lee star as two comic-book artists, Holden and Banky, who
struggle to get noticed at a comic-book convention with their amiable comic
"Bluntman and Chronic." Holden is immediately entranced by a blonde,
squeaky-voiced female cartoonist, Alyssa Jones (Joey Lauren Adams). She asks
him out to the Meow Mix club, and when Holden meets her, he discovers she is
a...lesbian. Naturally, Holden is upset by this but Banky starts asking stupid
questions when he sees Alyssa necking with another female: "When are we going
to get a chance to see this shit live?" Despite their obviously different
sexual preferences, Holden decides to become friendly with Alyssa, and in a
poignantly emotional scene, Holden confesses that he's in love with her and
wants more than friendship. Alyssa bursts out and starts screaming at him for
denying her her sexual nature and, of course, they kiss in the rainy night.
What's amazing about this sequence is how much emotional truth there is despite
some overacting from Adams - she makes the scene her own and it is gripping. 
"Chasing Amy" never steps wrong from scene to scene in establishing these three
principal characters because the characterizations are balanced seamlessly
between comedy, drama and truth. Ben Affleck makes an affable hero as the
goateed Holden, and if his acting is minimalist at best, he makes the character
naive and obtuse enough to render some sympathy for his misconceptions about
Alyssa. Jason Lee works better in a supporting role than a lead role as the
comic foil, and he is bitingly funny to watch as he grows more and more
contempt towards Holden's relationship with Alyssa. Joey Lauren Adams has the
more difficult role (You try and play a lesbian who has to mend her ways in
order to please a heterosexual.) and she pulls it off beautifully because she
makes Alyssa real, funny and tender without ever resorting to cliches or
needless stereotype posturing. Her voice might be a turnoff (not quite like
Melanie Griffith's) but her character is not - she is the most vividly real
human being we have seen in Kevin Smith's ouevre by far. My favorite scene is
when Alyssa explains to Holden that penetration of the vagina doesn't occur
only with a penis - she goes through a laundry list of different methods and
then she explains what sex between two women entails. It is a classic Smith
scene and Adams plays it with just the right note. 
There is able support from Dwight Ewell as a gay cartoonist who tries to
explain to Banky that the comic character Archie is in fact "gay." And let's
not leave out the return of Jay and Silent Bob (both played by Jason Mewes and
Kevin Smith who appeared in "Clerks" and "Mallrats") as they try to understand
what Holden is going through - Silent Bob gives his theory when he explains
what "chasing amy" signifies. 
"Chasing Amy" is a surprisingly great movie and better than what I expected,
even from Smith. It is thoughful, honest, superbly funny and heartbreaking.
Smith may not have a visual style yet but he knows how to write characters with
panache and humor. Kudos for making us forget the imbecility of "Mallrats," and
for making us remember the comic brilliance of "Clerks." 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 3/28/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:55
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, frank sexual discussion)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
     Well, I didn't exactly hate MALLRATS, but I thought it was a 
comedown for Kevin Smith, the talented writer/director who debuted 
strongly with 1994's CLERKS.  CHASING AMY is the third film in Smith's 
so-called "New Jersey Trilogy" (a series that may end up having more 
than three entries), so named because most of the action takes place in 
the Garden State.  Like CLERKS, but unlike MALLRATS, principal 
photography took place in Smith's home town, as well as across the river 
in Manhattan.
     CHASING AMY fits in nicely with the director's previous two films.  
As in CLERKS and MALLRATS, there are numerous references to pop culture 
(the ubiquitous STAR WARS films, comic books, the Archie comic strip, TV 
shows ALICE and STAR TREK, and even a few in-jokes related to CLERKS).  
Smith's brand of bawdy humor is also very much in evidence, although it 
should be noted that CHASING AMY isn't as hilarious as CLERKS.  In fact, 
it could be argued that this film isn't even as funny as MALLRATS.  
Instead, CHASING AMY finds other ways to satisfy its audience, and the 
result is the most complete and mature film of Smith's short career.
     With CHASING AMY, it's easy to anticipate a certain degree of 
inventive humor, but what's a bit unexpected is the solid drama, 
effective romance, and strong characters.  CLERKS worked because the 
dialogue sparkled, but Smith has honed his screenwriting and film making 
skills since then.  While CHASING AMY boasts the same keen interplay, 
that quality, along with first-rate character development, acts as a 
supplement to the smart, surprisingly original plot.  The movie starts 
out as light as a feather, but it doesn't take long for us to realize 
that CHASING AMY isn't just another lark for Smith.  This movie is about 
something, and the deeper we get into it, the more we realize how 
emotionally on-target the script is.
     Holden McNeil (Ben Affleck) and Banky Edwards (Jason Lee) are comic 
book authors.  Their BLUNTMAN & CHRONIC magazine is a big-seller, and, 
when they attend a comic book convention in New York, they attract long 
lines for autograph signings.  At that convention, Holden meets fellow 
comic writer/artist Alyssa Jones (Joey Lauren Adams).  Alyssa's project 
is the less testosterone-oriented IDIOSYNCRATIC ROUTINE.  She and Holden 
hit it off almost immediately.  They go out for a few drinks and play 
darts.  Later, when talking to best friend Banky, he claims that he and 
Alyssa "shared a moment" and confesses that he has fallen for her.  But, 
whether or not it's really love, Holden is in for a big surprise because 
Alyssa is a lesbian.  So, while she wants to be friends and pal around 
with him, Holden finds himself helplessly, hopelessly smitten.
     Smith clearly has his hand on the pulse of his generation ("X" 
marks the spot).  His observations about comic books, video games, and 
other aspects of life in the '90s are as insightful as they often are 
scathing.  But this is nothing new -- it was evident in both CLERKS and 
MALLRATS.  What's different here is that Smith has crafted a touching, 
nuanced romance which may be the most memorable screen love affair since 
BEFORE SUNRISE.  There are real human feelings and problems involved in 
Holden and Alyssa's relationship, and, every time the storyline 
threatens to devolve into a cliche, it somehow avoids the trap.  There's 
also a rich subtext pertaining to the difficulty that many individuals 
face in attaining a level of comfort with their sexual identity.
     The best scenes are those that explore the evolving relationship 
between Holden and Alyssa.  There's a wonderful montage that depicts 
them doing all the kinds of things that friends do.  Ben Affleck and 
Joey Lauren Adams, both veterans of Smith films, develop an effective 
chemistry.  Adams, who looks a little like Cameron Diaz and sounds a 
little like Jennifer Tilley, displays surprising dramatic range and 
ability.  She's someone to watch.
     Affleck and Adams aren't the only familiar faces to appear in 
CHASING AMY.  Jason Lee, who played one of the leads in MALLRATS, is 
back, albeit in a different role.  Brian O'Halloran, CLERKS' Dante, has 
a cameo as a TV producer who wants to develop BLUNTMAN & CHRONIC into a 
Saturday morning show.  And, of course, Jay (Jason Mewes) and Silent Bob 
(Smith) are on hand, dispensing advice as only they can.  The end 
credits once again promise their return (in the long-awaited, often-
delayed DOGMA, which was originally supposed to be the follow-up to 
CLERKS).  
     Ever wondered exactly what lesbians do when they're together?  Or 
how they define "virginity"?  Banky does, and he's not shy about asking.  
This leads to a graphically funny sequence that results in Alyssa and 
Banky comparing "war wounds" gathered from past sexual encounters.  Like 
CLERKS, CHASING AMY doesn't shy away from profane conversations.  
There's even an instance when oral sex is compared to (of all things) 
THE WEATHER CHANNEL and CNN (you'll have to see the movie to understand 
why).  In fact, I can't print any of CHASING AMY's best lines here -- 
they're all R-rated.
     CHASING AMY is entertainment of the best sort.  For nearly two 
hours, it keeps the audience enraptured.  There aren't many missteps, 
and, those few that exist are minor and easily forgiven.  CHASING AMY is 
touching, funny, sweet, and most important of all, real -- a welcome 
breath of fresh air.  You can't ask for more than that from any motion 
picture, and you'll be hard-pressed to find a movie in theaters these 
days that offers anything more appealing, revealing, or enjoyable than 
Kevin Smith's third feature.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Jason Overbeck
Chasing Amy is the last and best of the Jersey Trilogy, it is also one
of the years very best movies.  This is a love story between real fleshed
out people, and in a year where Titanic ruled our Box Office Chasing Amy
rules my heart.  It demands comparisons to Broadcast News (which was one
of the best films in the eighties) and is almost as great as that film.
Holden (Ben Affleck - you probably saw him in Good Will Hunting)and
Bankie (Jason Lee) are longtime friends, and very serious about the
comic book Bluntman and Chronic, which has released cult status.  At a
comic book convention, they meet Alyssa Jones a beautiful comic book
artist who seems to be a quick witted match to Holden.  During a long
game of darts in a bar he falls in love with her.  He takes unnecasary
long glances at her as they talk about love, his begining macho facade
turns into putty in her hands.
Later she invites him to a bar through a mutual friend in Hooper (Dwight
Ewell - very funny).  There he finds out she grew up close to where he
did.  Then we have the revelation that she is a lesbian.  This is met by
shock from Holden, who's hurt you can see very clearly.  
She notices his problem with this revelation and this is eased by a
conversation.  This conversation leads to others and scenes of them
doing things boys and girls would do when they play with love, in search
of the boundaries of their friendship.  
Holden is also getting heat from Banky, who doesn't understand the
relationship with Alyssa (You have no chance of getting her into bed!)
and thinks it may be inmposing on their friendship.  Is this just
jealousy or is there something more with this relationship.
Later plot twists are discovered as the film gets better and better.  As
Chasing Amy slowly (and wisly) drifts from very funny to serious, with
scattered laughs.  Yet it never missteps, the twist towards serious is
real and honest, driven by the characters.  It is refreshing to see a
film driven by the characters and able to drift with the characters (and
their emotions) where every they may fall.
The only thing attacked in this film by the critics is Smith's
direction.  It is simple,... and perfect for the film.  Artistic camera
angles may not be Smith's speciality but it would have detracted from
the film and it's impact.  Not all films need to look like they were out
of the pages of Scorsese or Paul Thomas Anderson.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     (WARNING: This film is structured so that it is nearly impossible
to discuss the themes of the film without revealing aspects of the plot
that are left as plot twists.  I will spoil nothing that is not spoiled
by the trailer for the film.)
     CHASING AMY is the third film form writer/director Kevin Smith and
is set in his native central New Jersey.  While his first two were
nearly purely comedies, this time around he mixes in some serious
themes with his raunchy brand of comedy.  It is about how fallible is
the procedure of finding the right relationship and how delicate that
relationship can be once it is found.  Holden McNeil (played by Ben
Affleck) and Banky Edwards (Jason Lee) are two Red Bank, New Jersey
comic artists who create the popular comic book BLUNTMAN AND CHRONIC.
At a comic convention in New York a friend introduces them to Alyssa
(Joey Lauren Adams).  Alyssa is cute, bright, and funny and Holden
immediately feels they have a mutual attraction and are perfect for
each other.  It even turns out she comes from Middletown, a neighboring
town to his.  He tells the incredulous Banky that he and Alyssa "shared
a moment."  Anxious to share more than just a moment he goes to a club
where his friend tells him he can find Alyssa only to discover in an
embarrassing moment that Alyssa is a lesbian.  In spite of knowing that
his relationship cannot become mutually romantic, he continues his
friendship with Alyssa, hoping to somehow convince her somehow to be
interested in him.  He hopes to win her in spite of her orientation.
The story becomes an odd sort of a love triangle with Banky afraid of
losing the friendship, now also a professional relationship, he has had
since childhood with Holden.  Banky finds Holden's love is even
starting to affect their professional relationship.  The other vertex
of the triangle is the free-thinking Alyssa with her own history.  In
the end, Kevin's story has returned to a theme he covered, albeit more
lightly, in CLERKS.
     All three of the main characters are veterans of other roles in
MALLRATS and of course writer/director Kevin Smith has played the wise
Silent Bob in all three of his films.  Ben Affleck as Holden is a bit
confused by it all and at the same time nicely witty.  There may be a
bit of Albert Brooks in his role and of Jason Lee's Banky.  But the
actor who shines the most is Joey Lauren Adams who does a terrific job
going through a wide gamut of emotions and always comes up genuine.
Smith has a good ear for dialogue and the words seem to come out very
naturally from the actors' mouths.  The one problem that perhaps could
have been better handled in a higher budget production is that they do
not enunciate so that their dialogue is distinct.
     Kevin Smith has a sense of humor to match better-known comic
filmmakers like Woody Allen and Albert Brooks.  He fills his script
with some hilarious send-ups of popular films.  Early on the film he
give us a militant African-American appraisal of STAR WARS that is as
funny as anything I have seen in a film in the last twelve months.
Later he has a terrific send-up of a familiar scene from JAWS.  And at
the same time Smith treads the boundary near political incorrectness by
implying that sexual orientation is really a matter of choice.
Alyssa's has logical reasons for being lesbian rather than having her
orientation come from an internal compulsion.  It seems like a small
thing, but it is a fairly radical departure from what we have seen
before in films.
     CHASING AMY is well-acted and directed and proves to be a very
moving and personal film.  After the critical misfire of MALLRATS, it
looks like Kevin Smith is back on target.  I give it a +2 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     The honeymoon is a short one for young American film-makers, a
distressing fact of life Kevin Smith had to learn the hard way.  In 1994,
Smith was the wunderkind behind CLERKS, a low-budget, day-in-the-life
twentysomething comedy which became a critical darling.  Only a year
later, Smith made a studio-financed follow-up called MALLRATS, a film so
widely reviled that Smith publicly apologized for it, announcing "I don't
know what I was thinking."  Smith was thinking much more clearly when he
returned to a sub-seven figure budget for CHASING AMY, but more
significantly, he was thinking more maturely.  Though he sometimes
explores his themes with more earnestness than clarity, Smith gives
CHASING AMY both a wicked sense of humor and a genuine sensitivity about
the complications of sexual politics.
     Smith's trademark pair of Jersey-bred buddies are Holden McNeil (Ben
Affleck) and Banky Edwards (Jason Lee), childhood friends who have
co-created a popular alternative comic book called "Bluntman and Chronic."
At a comic book convention, Holden meets a fellow artist named Alyssa
Jones (Joey Lauren Adams), with whom he is instantly smitten.  There is a
small impediment to his adoration, however:  Alyssa happens to be a
lesbian.  Holden's love appears destined to be unrequited -- a fact about
which Banky actually seems to be pleased -- until his relationship with
Alyssa begins to take some unpredictable turns.  As Holden struggles to
deal with all the complications of being with a woman like Alyssa, cracks
begin to develop in his relationships with both Alyssa and Banky.
     For the first half-hour of CHASING AMY, Kevin Smith concentrates on
churning out the laughs with his often-crude, usually pop-culture-heavy
dialogue.  He shows an admirable willingness to take on potentially thorny
topics like gay stereotypes -- there's a great sequence involving a gay
black comic book writer (Dwight Ewell) who is forced to keep up a public
image as a militant Afro-centrist -- and a conversation about Archie and
Jughead as gay lovers works despite its forced Tarantino-as-a-slacker
quality.  Smith even pulls off a riff on Jaws in which Banky and Alyssa
compare wounds from oral sex horror stories like an emotionally immature
Richard Dreyfuss and a lesbian Robert Shaw (though the flashback
literalization of those stories is ill-advised).  While the jokes are
rarely profound, they are usually effective and delivered with zing by
the actors.
     Smith _does_ try to get profound as he focuses on the relationship
between Holden and Alyssa, and it is there that CHASING AMY gets clumsy.
When there is a point to be made in CHASING AMY, it generally gets made by
people making speeches -- Holden as he confesses his love to Alyssa,
Alyssa as she responds to Holden's jealousy about her past, even Smith
himself in his recurring role as taciturn layabout-cum-philosopher Silent
Bob (the film's title comes from Silent Bob's story about an ill-fated
romance).  Smith is still a writer first and a director second, and
CHASING AMY gets awfully sluggish as he lets conversations drag into
exchanges of soul-baring testimonials.  It doesn't help that two of the
longer speeches are delivered by Joey Lauren Adams, a talented actress but
one whose Jennifer Tilly voice becomes grating when emotional scenes force
her to wail for several minutes at a time.  Smith clearly wants to stretch
himself beyond satiric comedy, but he never quite finds a pace which gives
the more serious moments in CHASING AMY a spark to match their sincerity.
     It's a shame Smith's romantic observations never quite click as
drama, because his ideas are far more intriguing than most of what is
served up in contemporary romantic comedies.  CHASING AMY is really about
male sexual hang-ups, and Smith digs deep into the insecurities of his
characters to find out why guys dwell on the sexual histories of their
partners.  There is an impressive lack of judgmental posturing in the way
Smith develops his characters, and he shows keen insight into how
different people respond to societal norms about sexual behavior.  It's
simply clear that Smith is still a guy who writes like people sitting
around talking, and that style works much better with comedy than with
drama.  When it is at its funniest, CHASING AMY reminds you why everyone
was so high on Kevin Smith in the wake of CLERKS.  And even when it
falters as a drama, it proves that Smith isn't content with making CLERKS
over and over.  Or, perhaps more important, that he won't make MALLRATS
over and over.  Anyone for a second honeymoon?

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
More often than not, romantic comedies oversimplify romance. The writers 
whip up one big problem for the star-crossed lovers, milk it for its 
comic possibilities, then have one of the lead characters make an 
impassioned speech after which the couple kisses passionately and lives 
happily ever after. "Chasing Amy" is a romantic comedy that doesn't 
oversimplify. This extremely funny, well-written film tells the story of 
a very complicated romance with many revelations, but no easy answers.
Holden (Ben Affleck) and Banky (Jason Lee) are best friends and creators 
of a thriving comic book. At a comic convention, Holden meets fellow 
artist Alyssa (Joey Lauren Adams) and the two hit it off immediately. In 
short order, Holden falls in love with Alyssa and begins charting their 
future, failing to notice that Alyssa is a lesbian. When he finds out, he 
pursues her anyway, as his best friend stares in frustration and 
disbelief.
"Chasing Amy" was written and directed by Kevin Smith, who also made 
"Clerks" and "Mallrats." Smith has a real gift for creating dialogue that 
dazzles, but still rings true. "Chasing Amy" discusses sexuality in far 
more explicit terms than any film in recent memory, but the words never 
seem cheap or contrived. Smith uses the extremely frank dialogue to paint 
a detailed portrait of the politics of love and sex. In the process, he 
creates some memorable characters.
Ben Affleck, who stars in the upcoming "Going All The Way," is compelling 
as Holden, an artist who fancies himself a radical, but possesses a 
staunchly traditional value system that undermines his attempts at 
extremism. Jason Lee, playing Holden's partner and devoted best friend, 
steals scenes with his sharp tongue, smoldering anger and sexy eyes. As 
Alyssa, Joey Lauren Adams has the film's most complex character. Alyssa 
isn't the kind of cookie-cutter lesbian you generally see in movies. Over 
the course of the story, more and more layers of her personal and sexual 
history are revealed, and we get a sense of the true strength of this 
young artist's character. Adams, in a performance reminiscent of Renee 
Zellweger's in "Jerry Maguire," shows us a woman who initially appears to 
be a bubbly lightweight, but in fact has a much more realized sense of 
self than any of the other characters.
"Chasing Amy" is the funniest film I've seen so far this year, and easily 
the most touching. The explicit dialogue may leave you feeling a bit 
squirmy from time to time, and that's a good thing. Romantic comedies 
rarely even flirt with truth. "Chasing Amy" deals with truths you may not 
wish to consider, opening doors that some feel are better left closed. 
The film is funny, romantic, and a bit challenging. Go see it.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CHASING AMY (director/writer: Kevin Smith; cinematographer: David Klein;
cast: Ben Affleck (Holden), Joey Lauren Adams (Alyssa), Jason Lee
(Banky), Dwight Ewell (Hooper), 1997)
This romantic comedy about the love life of comic book writers feels
like a sitcom because that is what it basically is, not withstanding,
that it pushes the envelope further out by having characters in it who
are more sexually active than the usual sitcom. Its story is also a bit
more arresting. Its strongest asset being the quick-witted and acidy
dialogue it brings to the table by its capable cast who are most able to
deliver those punch lines.
At a comic book fair in NYC, comic book writers and longtime friends,
Holden (Ben) and Banky (Jason), are signing autographs for their hit
comic "Bluntman and Chronic." In this scene we get a good dose of the
ambiance of the comic book world and we get a chance to see what their
readers are like and of how serious the writers are about the work they
do. We learn that they want to be looked upon as artists and not to be
taken for intellectual lightweights just because they work in the comic
book business.
A comic book writer, Alyssa (Joey) is introduced to them by another
comic book writer, Hooper (Dwight), who poses as a black militant,
hiding from his comic book audience that he is gay. It turns out that
Holden falls for Alyssa, and he also thinks they have much in common
since they both come from the same town in the New Jersey suburbs, but
what he doesn't realize, at first, is that she is a lesbian who is
unwilling to get into a relationship with a man. Their first meeting,
over a game of darts, gives Holden, what he calls a "shared moment."
Banky has a blast with this explanation.
The would-be lovers must take risks to make their relationship work.
Holden is the first to feel that he must be with Alyssa. He has led a
sheltered, somewhat nerdy life till now, still living in the Jersey
suburbs, while Alyssa is wild and alluring. She is very sexy, having a
deep-throaty voice and an open manner that makes it easy to talk to her.
But, having led a very active sexual life, experimenting with all sorts
of sexual encounters, she comes with a checkered past. Holden is able to
face up to her lesbian affairs but has difficulty in reconciling her
reckless sex with multiple male partners whom she does not even care
about. And it disturbs him that he has to find this out through gossip
and not from her; especially, when she seems to make such a big thing
about honesty in a relationship. Smith does an excellent job in showing
the doubts men have about being with a loose woman who they are smitten
with. Our hero is not a liberated hero, but it is his flaws that give
him credibility.
The twist in this story comes about in the part his wise-guy partner
plays in trying to destroy their relationship, out of jealousy. The film
gives this a surprising psychological meaning.The relationship between
the three of them becomes an unsmooth one, as they all battle the
mundane worries most people have in regards to love affairs,
friendships, and how it will affect them and their careers.
CHASING AMY is a moral fable. The title of the film derives from the
story the director himself tells to Holden, as he portrays a character
called Silent Bob. He tells them a story about a girl named Amy. She is
the girl who ran away from him because he didn't know how to handle the
situation he was in and he ended up losing the girl he loved. This scene
was not needed, as the story itself was simple enough to follow. We did
not need a ready made explanation of the film from the director.
Not everything worked or made sense, but the characters and their
problems seemed real. And, the dialogue hit the mark more often than
not. This is Smith's third film about the travails of young people
growing up in New Jersey and influenced by "pop" culture. What I didn't
like about the film, is that despite its attempts not to be viewed as a
sitcom, that is what this film is, even if its mature story line adds
more weight to it. Sitcoms are just not the way I like to see drama
unfolding, as it always leaves me thinking that things are still being
dumbed down, that even though, these are characters we usually do not
see on the screen and it is refreshing to see them; we are,
nevertheless, not going any deeper psychologically with this story and
with character portrayal than other sitcoms go.
Smith's film does give us a real sense of a relationship and the
struggle it takes to make it work, but there is still an air of
superficiality about its presentation.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1997, R, 105 minutes [1 hour, 45 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Ben Affleck (Holden McNeil), Joey Lauren Adams (Alyssa Jones),
Jason Lee (Banky Edwards), Dwight Ewell (Hooper), produced by Scott Mosier,
written and directed by Kevin Smith.
Relationships and sexuality are issues that are very difficult to deal with
intelligently in the movies. Any movie can be a "romance," but what sets
apart "Chasing Amy" is the fact it is able to deal with these issues in a
funny manner and still be sympathetic. It's a bit bland on the surface, and
the subject matter is risque (but certainly original), the only problem is it
doesn't maximize its potential.
The film opens at a comic book convention in New York City where we meet our
main characters, Holden McNeil (Affleck) and Banky Edwards (Lee), creators of
the hit comic "Bluntman & Chronic." Much like Dante and Randal ("Clerks"),
and T.S. and Brodie ("Mallrats"), Holden is the smart, straight man while
Banky is the apathetic wiseass always ready with one-liners. 
Right from the get-go, Smith's uncanny dialogue about mundane topics crops
up as an argument about what exactly an inker is becomes violent! Another
offbeat scene involves the two heckling a black militant artist named Hooper
(Ewell), who explains, with complete logic, that the "Star Wars" trilogy is
really about "how the black man is oppressed, even 'in a galaxy far, far
away.'" 
Hooper's attitude turns out to be just an act. He's actually gay, but
figures this is the only way he can make it in the business. He introduces
Holden and Banky to Alyssa Jones (Adams), a fellow comic scribe who is cute
and hip, and there appears to be an attraction between her and Holden.
Smith's grasp of reality is impressive, no one is able to capture the feel of
"hanging out" as well as he can. When the two talk while playing darts in a
bar, both their dialogue and the atmosphere compliment each other. Because
they are not glamorous movie stars, it is their down-to-Earth attitudes and
overall plainness that makes the story so sympathetic.
And then just when we think this will become another romantic comedy, the
bomb drops - Alyssa is a lesbian.
Of course Holden is shocked and hurt, but eventually he is able to deal with
it and the two become good friends. This leads to some very insightful
conversations about human nature and sexuality. They discuss why they are
attracted to girls, and although it can become shocking at times, it really
is the truth. 
Unfortunately, as soon as the first montage of the two together occurs, it's
a very obvious where the film is going as Holden falls in love with Alyssa.
I've never doubted Smith's characterization before, but it seems a too
convenient that they fall for each other so quickly.
Banky becomes jealous of Holden and Alyssa's relationship and starts digging
up dirt on her. Holden learns of Alyssa's promiscuous past and doesn't know
how to deal with it, which causes much tension between the three main
characters. Then there are argument scenes that are melodramatic but have
elements of truth to them. Fortunately, as serious as the film becomes, humor
is used to keep the mood light and realistic - even Jay and Silent Bob (Jason
Mewes, Kevin Smith) make an appearance and give Holden words of wisdom.
Smith uses his characters, their relationships, and their problems to
symbolize the complexity of dating and sexuality in the 90s. People are not
as monogamous anymore, and everyone wants to experience as many things as
they can, but just don't want their partner to be as experienced as
themselves. There are also interesting observations, such as the fact that
being a lesbian is much more acceptable than a gay man.
The ending itself is probably the most unique and surprising element to the
film. I didn't find it believable, but I appreciated the originality.
"Chasing Amy" could have been just an offbeat romantic comedy or a
realistic-but-complex love story, but it becomes a bit jumbled when it tries
to be both. Still, its overall sense of originality is a more than welcome
change of pace. (5/20/97) [see also: "Clerks," "Mallrats"]

Author
Michael Dequina
If making a convincing love story between a heterosexual male and a
lesbian sounds like an impossible task, then writer-director Kevin Smith has
accomplished the impossible with the final installment of his New Jersey
trilogy, Chasing Amy.  A funny, raunchy comedy with both intelligence and
heart to spare, Clerks wunderkind Smith has rebounded in a big way from the
creative meltdown that was 1995's Mallrats.
The dark shadow of that unsatisfying sophomore effort hangs over the
opening moments of Amy.  We see the credits roll over comic book panels and
covers of the comic publications Wizard, Comic Shop News, and Comic Buyer's
Guide, which is more than a little reminiscent of the parade of comic book
covers that opened Mallrats.  One of the biggest miscalculations in Mallrats
was not so much its large use of comic-related humor and references but its
use of references that only comic fans (such as myself) would understand,
and for a moment I thought Smith was repeating his previous mistake--I was
familiar with these publications; I got the reference, but did everyone
else?  Immediately following the credit roll is a sequence taking place in a
New York comic convention, and, ironically enough, here is where my fears
were put to rest.  While the comic-related references and humor are abound,
the jokes are accessible to anyone who has never picked up a comic book in
his or her life.  It's as if Smith is righting the wrong he committed in
Mallrats.
With the atonement for that sin behind him, Smith wastes no time in
plunging deep into fresh new territory.  It is at this convention that New
Jersey comic creator Holden McNeil (Ben Affleck) meets fellow writer/artist
Alyssa Jones (Joey Lauren Adams), and there is an instant chemistry and, as
Holden sees it, an attraction.  As it turns out, however, Alyssa is a
lesbian, and despite Holden's initial reservations--and his very strong
sexual feelings for her--the two become very close (but platonic) friends,
sparking the chaste (or is it?) jealousy of Holden's best friend and
collaborator, Banky Edwards (Jason Lee).
The story already sounds pretty complicated, but Smith's terrific
script has many more twists in store, not to mention laughs.  Viewers like
myself who loved the no-budget riot Clerks but were left cold by Mallrats
will be happy to know that Smith has indeed recaptured his comedic touch.
But, most importantly, the frank (and, for some, maybe too frank), often
foul-mouthed dialogue is not only funny but sounds convincing.  The laugh
lines sound anything but scripted, capturing the spontaneity of actual
conversation; the same can be said of the more serious passages, which are
astoundingly full of truth and honest emotion.
There is also more to Smith's writing than the dialogue.  The
characters are fascinating in just how true-to-life they are.  For example,
Holden fancies himself a liberal thinker, but, of course, he's quite as
liberal as he believes himself to be.  Late in the picture, Holden is
disturbed by details of Alyssa's past, which naturally puts a crimp in their
relationship.  Looking plainly from a moviegoer's standpoint, Holden's
treatment of Alyssa seems off-base, but his actions are completely in line
with how a real person would react in a similar situation.  Like many other
films, there's a big scene where our protagonist offers a solution to all
that ails him and his friends, but Smith does not serve up the convention
where a character gains greater maturity, understanding, and insight
overnight as he or she only can in the movies.  Smith doesn't forget who
Holden is, and as such he respects the viewers' intelligence.
Of course, the actors deserve a lot of credit for making the people
and situations in Chasing Amy so involving.  The likable Affleck does a good
job of capturing Holden's insecurities with himself and others.   Adams, who
can be described as what you get when you blend Cameron Diaz, Renee
Zellweger, Ellen Barkin, and the voice of Jennifer Tilly, takes longer to
warm up to, mainly because of her squeaky, Tilly-esque voice.  In the end,
though, she pulls off the difficult role of Alyssa--the heart of the film,
if you will--without a hitch, displaying a comic flair as well as an
emotional depth never hinted at in her heretofore most visible work: a guest
spot on Fox's Married...with Children and regular gigs on the short-lived
Married... spinoffs Top of the Heap and Vinnie and Bobby.  Lee, who was the
best thing about Mallrats, brings more of his hilarious smart-aleck charm to
the brash Banky.  Dwight Ewell has some choice moments as Hooper, a gay
black comic creator who acts like a black militant for better publicity; and
Jason Mewes and Smith himself contribute a memorable cameo as the Jersey
trilogy's recurring characters, Jay and Silent Bob, respectively, the latter
of whom isn't so silent this time around (in fact, he's the voice of reason).
Most people will see Chasing Amy as Kevin Smith's return to form,
but in doing so they may ignore just what a huge leap this film is for him
in his maturity as a filmmaker.  It's everything Clerks was (and Mallrats
wasn't) and more--funny, fearless... and profoundly moving.  Never did I
ever think I'd come away from a Smith film with a lump in my throat.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Films live or die on the strength of their scripts.  Writer and
director Kevin Smith's third part of his New Jersey trilogy, CHASING
AMY, amuses, delights, and moves the audience with its highly
irreverent dialog.  The trilogy's first two parts were the acclaimed,
low-budget hit CLERKS and the less successful MALLRATS.
     (CHASING AMY's ending credits include "And to all the critics who
hated our last flick -- all is forgiven."  Only independent filmmakers
would have the courage to call attention to their bad reviews.)
     CHASING AMY offers much more than an effective screenplay.  The
film's actors breathe life into characters that in other such plots
would quickly degenerate into cliches or slapstick.  Instead, this
picture's population has some eminently likable people who are,
frankly, just fun to hang out with.
     The film features Ben Affleck and Joey Lauren Adams as a pair of
star-crossed lovers.  Ben plays Holden McNeil, part of a cartoonist
duo.  Jason Scott Lee is his friend since childhood and cartoonist
partner Banky Edwards.  Banky, whose role as a mere cartoon "tracer,"
gets him no end of ridicule.  Well, someone has to paint in the figures
that Holden outlines.
     Joey Lauren Adams as Alyssa "Finger Cuffs" Jones, gives a
breathless, almost Marilyn Monroe style, rendition of a blonde
bombshell.  Seeming at first to be someone only slightly smarter than a
bimbo, her part rapidly evolves into the most complex and challenging
character in the story.  An accomplished actress whose compelling
performance draws you into all her character's unpredictable twists and
turns.
     The show has two parts -- starting as comedy but slowly evolving
into a touching drama.  The first, and admittedly my favorite, part
relies on natural, but highly sexual conversations for the humor.  The
good spirited dialog has the quick cadence of BEFORE SUNRISE, but the
language and the subject matter revolve around explicit sexual
repartee.  Most of this is almost impossible to capture in a review for
general audiences.  One of the few printable lines has Banky explaining
his sexual techniques to Alyssa over drinks on what looks like a double
date.  He says he tells his lovers exactly what is happening, "like CNN
and the Weather Channel -- constant updates."  Holden rolls his eyes as
he wonders what his Howard Stern-like partner will say next.  Banky and
Alyssa even show each other their sexual war wounds.  (Yes, I did not
realize these existed either.)
     The simple plot of the picture moves in surprising ways, and the
film gets more mileage out of its setup than I thought possible.  I
expected the script to stay with the jokes until they had long since
worn out their welcome, but part way through, it becomes obvious that
Smith has a serious story to tell about relationships.
     From the first time Holden sees Alyssa, he is smitten by her
charms.  As she flirts incessantly with him, the chemistry between them
is genuine and infectious.  Soon the director is certain to cut to the
scene where Holden and Alyssa jump into bed together.  Well, maybe not.
     Holden goes to a bar where Alyssa sings a song to the one she
loves.  He beams with pride as she looks his way.  After her number is
over, she walks into the audience and plants a big juicy one on her
lover -- Kim (Carmen Lee).  Shock would be a mild description of
Holden's reaction.
     In one of the plot's delicious twists, Holden and Alyssa stay
great friends and have a string of platonic dates.  Alyssa probes
Holden's feeling about homosexuality.  "So, you've never been curious
about men?"  she inquires.  "Well, I've always wondered why my father
watched Hee Haw," he responds.
     After bottling up his love too long, he explodes and confesses how
much he loves her.  "You are the epitome of everything I've ever looked
for in another human being," he solemnly tells her.  The thought of a
straight man going for her sends her body into convulsions of anger and
other emotions.
     How this gets resolved I will not say, but it happens before the
midpoint of the show, so most of the film occurs afterwards.  In an
unpredictable story, my favorite part is how, at the end, Holden
attempts to bring closure to their myriad of difficulties.  The scene
comes out of left field, but the emotions in it are raw and honest.
     In a show about relationships, most of the people are either gay
or lesbian.  Holden and Banky seem to be the only practicing
heterosexuals left.  The chemistry and camaraderie between them could
form the subject for an entire review.  Jason Scott Lee is terrifically
funny as a cheerleader for the heterosexual cause, but all three of the
leads are precious.
     Kevin Smith's skills are best shown in the script.  His
directorial judgments are uneven.  Typical of the scenes that do not
work is the one where he interlaces a cliched hockey bloodfest with a
key confrontation between Holden and Alyssa.  Smith and Scott Mosier
edited the film, and too often they fell in love with their material.
Many scenes would have been handsomer with a little trimming.
     The sign of a good movie comes with your reaction when the ending
credits roll.  I left the theater wishing I did not have to leave my
newly found friends.  A more likable threesome I have not seen in some
time.
     CHASING AMY runs 1:41.  It is rated R for explicit and constant
sexual humor and for profanity.  The film would be fine for mature
teenagers.  I recommend this sweet and captivating picture to you and
give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jason Wallis
"Chasing Amy" * * * * (out of four)
Starring Ben Affleck, Joey Lauren Adams, Jason Lee, Dwight Ewell, Kevin
Smith and Jason Mewes
Directed by Kevin Smith
     Usually, when naming the greatest romantic comedies of all time, films
like "It Happened One Night" or "Annie Hall" spring immediatly to mind.  Of
all the discussions I've had with people regarding this genre, not once has
Kevin Smith's brilliant "Chasing Amy" come up.  My question is this: why? 
This one of the most perfect films I have ever had the pleasure of seeing. 
If there is one problem with most movies in the 90s, it's that alot of them
have characters that we really don't give a rat's ass about.  But with
"Chasing Amy", Kevin Smith has created no less than three of the most
memorible characters in recent cinema.  
     Holden (Ben Affleck), an intelligent, down-to-earth comic book artist
with a very insecure and immature best friend, Banky (Jason Lee, worthy of
a Best Supporting Actor Oscar nomination come Feburary).  Together, they
make a comic series called "Bluntman and Chronic", supposedly based on Jay
and Silent Bob (Jason Mewes and Kevin Smith, respectivly), characters who
pop up in all of Smith's films.  
     The film begins at a comic book convention in New York, where Holden
and Banky are autographing copies of their books and listenting to some Q&A
for a fellow artist, Hooper X (Dwight Ewell), an apparently wacked-out
Black Panther wannabe.  This results in possibly the funniest moment in any
film of the 90s as they argue and fight about whether or not the "Star
Wars" trilogy were films trying to bring down the black man.  Hooper X
pulls out a gun and pretends to shoot Banky, making all the fans run
screaming out of the building.
     As it turns out, Hooper is actually a friend of Holden and Banky's and
is not even a dangerous nutcase at all.  On the contrary, he is only a
gentle gay black man who just does this kind of stuff for publicity.  It is
little touches of humor like this opening that makes this film as memorable
as it is.
     Soon, Hooper introduces them to Alyssa (Joey Lauren Adams - another
Oscar worthy performance), yet another comic artist.  Ben and her really
hit it off well and even go out for drinks afterwards while Hooper and
Banky search for "Archie" comics so Banky can prove beyond a shadow of a
doubt that Archie was not Jughead's bitch and was by no means having sex
with Mr. Weatherby.  Meanwhile, Holden is falling head over heels for
Alyssa, who, unbeknownst to him, is (gasp!) a lesbian.  How's that for a
plot?
     Well, he finds out the next night when Alyssa starts making out with
another chick (in by far the best lesbian kiss since "Bound").  But Alyssa
doesn't see why, just 'cause they can't have sex, they can't be friends. 
So the two start hanging out alot together and we can gradually see Alyssa
making her mutation from lesbian to straight woman.
     I will say no more because part of the magic of "Chasing Amy" is
letting the story unfold before you.  And like I said, the main reason why
this is such a great film is that it has three terrific, fascinating main
characters.  I mean, Banky is probably the coolest, most hillarious person
to come out of recent cinema.   And as for Joey Lauren Adams (one of the
hottest women living, in my opinion - but she does have a bad, whiny voice
that sounds kinnda like Jennifer Tilly with larengitus; but that's okay), I
think if she gets the right scripts, she could be the next Sanrda Bullock,
except she can actually act and not just show off her cute little butt.
     I guess what I'm trying to say is that this film spoke to me like no
other romance has before.  Even though they have different sexual
preferences (or the same; it all depends on how you look at it), we can
still see that these two people belong together.  And even though it
doesn't have the happiest ending in the world, it is a very touching film
and easily the best to come out of 1997 so far.  I seriously doubt that you
will see a better film all year.

Author
Christopher Roberson
Sorry. But how else could I start a review of a movie by Kevin Smith? 
For those not familiar with Smith -- as you might have guessed, he uses
a lot of profanity. His first widely released film, _Clerks_, almost
received an NC-17 solely on the basis of language. _Chasing Amy_, which
Smith both wrote and directed, doesn't quite meet that standard, but it
comes pretty fucking close. 
Profanity is not ordinarily a matter worth mentioning in a review, but
in this case it seems sympomatic of both the good points and bad points
of the film. Smith apparently wants to send the message that his
characters are young and frank and raw, and also that he's not going to
present a fucking prettified Hollywood version of them. When that
strategy works, it works quite well. Unfortunately, it doesn't work all
the time. 
Recent Oscar-winner Ben Affleck plays Holden McNeil, a young comic book
artist who falls hard for a female comic book artist named Alyssa
(played by Joey Lauren Adams). Alyssa is everything he's looking for in
a woman, except... gasp... she's also a fucking lesbian! Fuck! What a
dilemma! Although Holden and Alyssa manage to overcome this small
obstacle, Holden's close friend and inker Banky (Jason Lee) finds a
whole heap of other obstacles to throw in their path. 
The core of this film is the relationships among its central characters
(as well as a gem of a supporting character, played by Dwight Ewell). Smith
manages to create a situation that is both witty and tragic, and quite
believable. _Chasing Amy_ takes the trouble to explore its characters in
detail. They even have extended conversations that sound like the
conversations real people have. This is quite refreshing after a diet of
typical Hollywood product. Indeed, it is a fucking relief. 
The actors are also quite impressive, particularly Affleck and Lee. It's
a bit late to be making predictions about bright futures for these
actors, as they're already well on their way to Hollywood stardom.
Adams's performance is a bit more uneven, and her whiny helium voice
(reminiscent of Jennifer Tilly's) became grating pretty fucking quickly.
As for the movie's shortcomings: for one, the characters are not always
convincing. For example, we are supposed to believe that Holden and
Banky are hip, with-it young cartoonists and yet also fucking clueless
enough not to realize that a bar they visit is a hardcore lesbian
hangout. I was not persuaded. The camera work is also remarkably
lacking. Smith seems content to "point and shoot" and never re-aim the
camera, to the extent that the actors almost slip out of camera range at
one point. 
And, finally, there's the matter of the cursing. It's difficult to
express reservations about profanity without coming across as a prudish
old fuddy-duddy. ("Shame on you, Kevin Smith. Wash that potty mouth out
with soap! Tsk, tsk, tsk," etc.) But the problem with the profanity in
_Chasing Amy_ wasn't that it was shocking, but that it was boring. It's
simply too restricted a palette to work from. Smith hasn't yet figured
out that saying 'fuck' and 'bitch' and 'cunt' twenty times in a scene
does not constitute character development. 
(I've tried to create the same effect in this review. Reading 'fuck'
over and over again became dull pretty quickly, didn't it?)
What's worse, even some of the character development doesn't really seem
like character development. Some critics have described Smith's dialogue
as "funny and raunchy," but a fair amount of it was depressingly
reminiscent of adolescents trying to be "daring" and "unrepressed."
Having had such conversations when I was sixteen, I don't see the
attraction in sitting through less clever versions of them in a movie. 
On the whole, 'adolescent' is a good description of what's right and
wrong with this movie. It has an adolescent's energy and intensity. It
also has an adolescent's tendency to think that it's really clever and
original to scorn subtlety, and also to say 'fuck' in every sentence.
While on the whole I enjoyed it, I think Smith's work will be better
once he gets over the desire to epater la bourgeoisie (i.e., "give the
squares something to bitch about").

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Kevin Smith's raunchy romantic comedy, of the boy-meets-lesbian
variety, has one of the smartest scripts that we'll likely see this
year.  Oh, sure, the writer/director of CLERKS and the underappreciated
MALLRATS covers his fair share of familiar ground.  That the main
characters are comic-book artists is no surprise.  Nor are the many
"R"-rated discussions of sexual practices.  (One, ah, cunning linguist
cites CNN and the Weather Channel and his need for "constant updates.")
What's new for the Smithster-- who also reprises his role as Silent Bob,
for one scene-- is a poignancy that creeps into the characters and their
situations.  (The subject of a young man trying to accept his partner's
sexual past is, indeed, heart-breaking.) Alas, the downside to this
wonderfully written (and side-splitting funny) work is that it's also
*directed* by Kevin Smith.  He's getting better with tone, I'll give him
that, but his choice of actors still leaves a lot to be desired.  The
worst offender, by far, is lead actress Joey Lauren Adams.  With her
Joker grin and Jennifer Tilly voice, she's instantly off-putting.  Bring
cotton for your ears.

Author
Bradley Null
.     The intro sequence of Chasing Amy, comic book frames of oddly
familiar characters, informs us immediately that we are entering the
world of Kevin Smith.  That world is one over-populated with comic book
fanatics, philosophical drug dealers, and ambitionless
twenty-somethings.  To Smith, the film's director, that world is New
Jersey.
     Like characters found in other recent Gen X movies, Smith's heroes
are unjustifiably hip.  n Chasing Amy  there are two groups of
characters, Jersey boys afraid of the city, and fixtures of the NYC
underground.  But regardless of background, every character in Chasing
Amy is poised with a witty remark or comical/philosophical riff on love
or life.  Smith even highlights the (self)-importance of his
protagonist, played by Ben Affleck, by unabashedly naming him after the
coolest literary character of the twentieth century, Holden Caulfield.
     Going well beyond other Gen X movies such as Swingers and Reality
Bites, Chasing Amy embraces the new generation with an unparalleled
frankness.  Although this boy-meets-lesbian love story is more mature
than Smith's earlier work, its never before seen subject matter is
indicative of Smith's predilection for ignoring the taboos of film. 
Frank discussions of sex and perversion are common in Smith's world of
wordy, quick-paced diatribes long on profanity.  Smith tackles this
material with characters and situations that come across, despite their
wit, as strikingly awkward and realistic.  They never have the perfect
line to describe their emotions or what they want.  Their attempts to
riff on their problems en route to solving them display a realistic
ineptitude in dealing with serious problems.  Either the characters have
too much to say or nothing at all, but in all cases the outcome of these
slipshod attempts is bad.  Although the intermittent stupidity and
vulgarity of Smith's characters is sometimes painful to watch, the
film's refreshing realism is an invaluable experience.
     Despite this powerful subtext, Smith's world is not devoid of
humor.  Though self-absorbed, all of Smith's characters are quite
amusing, and the plot development, camera work, and editing in Chasing
Amy capitalize on the humor in every situation.  In one instance, an
atypical riff on sexual acts leads to a fierce comparison of sex wounds
and a game of one-upmanship that riotously parodies such battle scar
comparisons from Lethal Weapon and the adventure film genre.  Smith's
hand-held camera and static long takes also serve to focus action within
the frame and on the borders, which he uses for comical and emotional
effect.
     In all cases, Smith's awkward situations, for both the characters
and audience, play off of traditional film structure in which everything
fits together seamlessly.  In Smith's world, you can count on only one
thing:  when Silent Bob (played by Smith himself) finally speaks (and he
will) he is going to say something profound.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Ben Affleck, Joey Lauren Adams, Jason Lee, Dwight Ewell, Jason
Mewes, Kevin Smith Director: Kevin Smith Producer: Scott Mosier
Screenplay: Kevin Smith
Silly me thought this movie was a children's story about a boy chasing a
girl called 'Amy'. I wasn't far wrong, just drop the 'R' in children's
and you have for yourself a movie rating. So you can imagine my
eye-popping surprise at receiving some intriguing sex education
experience, I had missed as a happy child; and it was presented with
such heart moving earnesty, timed to 141 'minty' minutes (I was sucking
'minties' all the way through).
Sure, I received my fair share of parental guidance about the 'birds and
the bees, the flowers and the trees', but they didn't quite say it with
the same flare that 'Chasing Amy' did. So here's a couple of things I
learnt about sex:
New Vocabulary (words used in a context never seen before): mouth, eat,
holes, hands, fists, three ways, finger cuffs, love, taste, pussy cat,
laid, riding high, working, shaft, virgin. Now Let's put these words
into a more educational context:
    "Once there was a penning cartoon artist with HANDS as supple as the
skin of a baby's butt. His every stroke WORKED it's way to create a mine
SHAFT of exciting pictures, that filled the imagination and teased the
eye. That was until he met Amy. Then his growing attentions shifted and
twisted and writhed, as he couldn't get this pretty 'dyke', ...ooops (slip
of the tongue), I mean girl out of his mind. Like him she also penned
pictures with lustful STROKES, she'd never penned a man before she
claimed, he was her very first. "My art is not of 'VIRGIN Birth' and
never before seen by any man."
    So with masterful, heaves and sighs, she stroked his ego and PUSSY
CAT, and  they fell in 'LOVE' with the same moans and groans of a
restless night. Then RIDING HIGH on this off-beat romance comes the
artist's best friend with breathless news, that in the deepest, darkest,
moistest regions of the past, she had once been imprisoned in a HOLE
with 'FINGER CUFFS'. "I don't believe it the artists says, how can this
be, she claims her art has never been seen by another of my kind. Her
MOUTH has not EATEN of the forbidden fruit,  but only tasted the
sweetness of mine. I am her first I am sure of it."
    But those curious thoughts still plagued his mind, until he LAID
down those angry FISTS, to find the truth revealed - that there were
actually THREE WAYS of penning it. 'Nay' says Amy, 'I've changed my
style. There is but one way of ending it' - Slap!"
    From the pages of 'Masterful Penstrokes' by T.M.T. Voon
Kevin Smith the writer/director of 'Clerks' and 'Mallrats', once again
presents his material with the same bold, brash, no-apologies style
evident in his previous work. Relatively new faces, Ben Affleck (the
cartoonist) and Joey Lauren Adams (Alyssa=Amy), seem to have a lot of
fun presenting the daring ideas and gritty dialogue. Certainly, this is
not a movie to be viewed by the conservative, and faint hearted  -  I
guess that includes me, but I thought it was a child"R"en's movie.
This is an intelligent comedy, with a witty/dirty script which
challenges the mind about unusual relationships that seem to defy the
normal terms of convention. This story speaks not so much of whether
you're gay or not, but more so about accepting a person for who they
are, despite their colourful, regretful past.
