Title
Review for ĄAy, Carmela! (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     AY, CARMELA! is a film by Carlos Saura and stars Spain's first
international box-office star Carmen Maura.  Maura was last seen in
Pedro Almodovar's WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A  NERVOUS BREAKDOWN, which was
my choice for the best film of  1989 (the year I saw it--it was released
in Spain 1987, I think).
     AY,CARMELA is set in Spain in 1938 during the Civil War, that
bloody dress rehearsal for World War II.  Carmela and Paulino, the
Tip-Top Variety, have been entertaining front-line Republican troops.
Carmela convinces Paulino to bug out for the safety of Valencia only to
land them in the clutches of the Falangist and Italian forces.  They are
recruited from a possible firing squad to do a show for the Fascist
officers and for a group of Polish volunteers captured from the
International Brigade and condemned to die in the morning.  Normally I
don't mention much if anything about plots in my reviews, but I know
that many of you will not get a chance to see this movie unless you find
it on video next year and I want you to see it.  This is a wonderfully
resonant movie with a wonderful performance by Carmen Maura (who can do
no wrong, as far as I'm concerned).
     The theme of this movie is the corruption of the artist by
totalitarianism and by extension the corruption of us all by forces
beyond our control.  Do we cooperate with evil or do we resist even if
it is hopeless?  Carmela resists, Paulino cooperates.  The results of
these choices both uplift and terribly sadden us.  I was crying as I
exited the auditorium.  Fair warning.  The film scholar might like to
compare AY, CARMELA! with Istvan Szabo's MEPHISTO (1981).  They are the
low and the high roads that lead to the same destination.
     For me it is enough merely to kick back and let Maura do her thing.
She is the nurturing mother, with her long, wise, Castillian face,
impossible, impractical in the face of evil, an unintentionally campy
vaudevillean, the heroine, the buffoon.  Maura captures this silly,
brave, ignoble, noble woman fully and perfectly; she hates being a
heroine, but she hates being a dupe even more.
     Backing Maura up is a fine actor Andres Pajares as Paulino.
Paulino is a man, vain, pliable, a survivor first, full of himself.
Pajares creates a slippery coward and we can see why Carmela loves him
even though she sees him as honestly as she sees everything else around
her.  And the two of them on stage leave no doubt as to why vaudeville
died.
     I also enjoyed the performance of Maurizio di Razza as the preening
Italian lieutenant who is the director/producer of the Fascists' show;
he especially delights us and illuminates the film when he leads a
military chorus of an amazingly racist song about turning the Ethiopians
(then under the Italians' colonial heel) into good Italians; I haven't
seen anything like it since the "Springtime for Hitler" sequence in Mel
Brooks' THE PRODUCERS, except I presume that this song is historically
true.
     And then there is Gabino Diego as the shell-shocked mute who
attaches himself to the Tip-Top Variety after they find him naked on th
road and starving.  Diego's performance draws into its unfunny comedy
the entire horror of Guernica and all wars.
     (The script is by Rafael Azcona.  AY, CARMELA! won 13 Goya Prizes
(the Spanish Oscar), including film, director, actress, actor,
supporting actor, adapted screenplay.  Saura was the director of CRIA,
CARMEN, and BLOOD WEDDING.)
     Viewing this film on the heels of the cease fire in the Persian
Gulf has strange and powerful resonances for me and a kind of special
relevance.  But its story and its message would be powerful and relevant
in any circumstance.  I completely and enthusiastically recommend AY,
CARMELA! to you.

Author
Pedro Sena
Carlos Saura has always been interested in dance, film, theatre, and many of
the artistic forms which people have related to.  He has depicted them in
his films as a part of life, a very important part of life, that provides
not only a spark, but also the means without which we are not capable of
surviving.
It is no surprise, then, when this film deals with such a theme, and in a
manner which is not pleasing, but this time, it is a compromise one has to
make between life and death.
A pair of down on their luck actors, take up a small living, in exchange for
food by providing entertainment for the troops  ( the republicans ) that are
fighting the forces supported by Mussolini, Hitler and Generalissimo Franco
( the nationalists ).  When they are tired of a small town, and decide to go
on to a larger place, life changes.  While resting close to Valencia ( their
destination ), they are approached by the advancing nationalists.  They are
arrested, and thrown in with all the others, only to be saved by an Italian
commander who used to be a theatre director, and stage manager.  He insists
on the creation of material for his own troops, and all of a sudden the
entertainers are forced to become real 'actors'.  It's the only alternative
to death.  However, Carmella ( the wife ) has a bit of a big mouth and often
speaks out, and this has a potential of getting them all in trouble.
Needless to say, they don't win, or get very far, although the nationalists
won all the battles and ruled until Franco's death in the seventies.
A bit of an oddity, for a Saura script, it is acted, in the spirit of a fun
farce, and play, but it is deadly serious, and the characters are in danger
at all times.  All in all, it is a slow film, that requires the viewer's
attention, because much of the dialogue is intended to create 'slips of the
tongue' which is a
very good, and strong acting tool.  However, this attitude, often gets all
of them in trouble, though the Italian commander, has a good enough sense of
humor and understanding of things, to be able to disagree, and defend their
position cleverly.  And without, meaning to, both the audience, and the
actors, are eventually forced, or resigned, to accept the inevitable
solution.  The life of the artists goes on.  The art lives on.  And a new
government is now in power, though it got there by the gun.
A politically minded film, it really shows the sensitive side of an
extremely volatile situation, and how one can deal with it, even if one
disagrees with it.  People do tend to stand up for life, given the choice.
And the ensuing  results are not always pleasant.
The acting is fun, and good.  The film does not have much music in it, but
it does have the political songs of the day, which at times are sung, and
their lyrics keep the film moving.  The subtitles, unfortunately do not do
the original dialect any justice at all, so one really misses out on the
actual
flavor, and style of insulting an invading force, which renders the actors
forced choice even more repugnant and disappointing.  Taken out of the
subtitles are the swearing, and the fowl language which these songs have.
The actors' original opinion on the nationalists is not very far from a pile
of excrement. The subtitle, doesn't even come close to telling us what was
really said.You may like to see this film, if you are a history buff, and
have an interest in Spain, or if you want to practice your vernacular
Castillian.
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1994
Reviewer and Moderator of the CENTIPEDE's THE FILM.
