Title
Review for Even Cowgirls Get the Blues (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Joan Ellis
"Even Cowgirls Get the Blues" is Gus Van Sant's vision of
Tom Robbins' counterculture classic. Set to a terrific score by
k.d. lang and Ben Mink, the director and some good performers
labor mightily to capture Robbins' freewheeling version of the
70s. The problem lies right there. It happens sometimes that a
writer can catch the essence of a time in a way that forbids
further tinkering. You have only to listen to Robbins' words on
the soundtrack to know that what is unfolding on the screen can't
catch what he saw. Credit Uma Thurman as Sissy Hankshaw, the
all-thumbs symbolic hitchhiker, Rain Phoenix as Bonanza
Jellybean, her lover, and John Heard for his energy as "The
Countess." And, two decades later, a salute to Robbins for
creating The Rubber Rose Ranch and peopling it with characters of
its time who defy the camera. 


Author
Jon A. Webb
     I feel that I liked "Even Cowgirls Get the Blues" more than it 
deserved. There is something about this film that is appealing, even 
though the writing is somewhat childish and the direction wooden.
     Uma Thurman plays Sissy, the woman with incredible thumbs, who is 
born to hitchhike,  She meets up with Bonanza Jellybean, played by Rain 
Phoenix (the latest of that strangely named, distinguished acting family) 
who leads the cowgirls on a Western dude ranch.
     I never read "Cowgirls," so I don't know how true this is to the 
book.  It seems to me that the story is a little dated now, when the shoe 
is on the other foot with regard to environmental issues, women's rights, 
and gay rights.
     But it is also clear that this story has meaning for a lot of 
people, quite a few of whom are in this film.  The cast list reads like 
something from Altman: Lorraine Bracco plays the whip-carrying peyote-
inspired cowgirl leader; John Hurt plays The Countess; Keanu Reeves the 
Native American object of Sissy's desire; Angie Dickinson runs the dude 
ranch; Sean Young and Crispin Glover are members of an Andy Warholesque 
party circle; and so on.  Its fun watching these actors stretch 
themselves in these odd roles.
     Gus van Sant has every actor speak his or her lines as if they were 
reading the script for the first time. This awkward effect is probably 
deliberate, as he also used it in "My Own Private Idaho." I don't know 
why he does this; perhaps it mutes the intensity of this strange material 
a little and keeps it from seeming ridiculous. It is probably what saves 
such outrageous scenes as the one where the cowgirls confront the 
Countess (which I found hilarious) and the one where Sissy does the 
commercial.
     I suppose it is the enthusiasm of the actors for the story, and the 
story itself, that made the film appealing to me. Lorraine Bracco, with 
her wild stare and whip seems to be truly enjoying herself, as does Sean 
Young with her teased hair. Buck Henry's turn as a crazed doctor seems 
heartfelt. Every one of these actors seems to genuinely want to be in 
this movie, disconnected and odd though it is.
     This is not a particularly insightful film, like "Drugstore Cowboy;" 
it does not even have very good direction. It is not a tribute to the 
book, so far as I can tell. It is a record of people who really want to 
work together with this material, and who are enjoying themselves doing 
it, while being held sightly in check by a talented artist who should be 
working with better material than this.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Uma Thurman, John Hurt, Rain Phoenix, Lorraine Bracco, 
           Noriyuki "Pat" Morita, Keanu Reeves, Angie Dickenson 
Director:  Gus Van Sant 
Producer:  Laurie Parker 
Screenplay:  Gus Van Sant based on the novel by Tom Robbins 
Music: k.d. lang and Ben Mink 
Released by Fine Line Features 
     Anyone following the behind-the-scenes history of EVEN COWGIRLS GET 
THE BLUES knew that the film was in trouble long before its release.  
Following a negative reaction at last year's Toronto Film Festival, 
director Gus Van Sant (DRUG STORE COWBOY, MY PRIVATE IDAHO) went back to 
the editing room to recut the picture, hoping to supply more life and 
coherency than was evident his first take.  It didn't work.  EVEN 
COWGIRLS is as close to an unwatchable film as there is available at this 
time in the theaters. 
     Perhaps I might be more sympathetic had I read Tom Robbins' 1976 
book - the "first hippie novel", as Van Sant calls it - but I haven't, so 
I'll leave the comparisons to someone else.  Whether or not this is the 
90s version of BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES remains to be seen, although 
cinematically, it's certainly on the same level. 
     Uma Thurman plays Sissy Hankshaw, a loopy drifter who hitchhikes her 
way across the country from adventure to adventure.  A letter from her 
old friend the Countess (played by a cross-dressing John Hurt) summons 
her to New York, where she meets with an asthmatic artist (Keanu Reeves) 
and is offered a job doing an ad campaign for the Countess' midwestern 
ranch - which is really a fat farm/beauty spa.  Once she arrives in 
Oregon, however, the cowgirl workers, led by Bonanza Jellybean (Rain 
Phoenix) stage a coup and take over the property, running the Countess 
and her rich clients out.  This provokes an armed federal response, and 
one of the most laughably idiotic denouements in recent film history. 
     Even if the plot made sense (which it really doesn't) and wasn't 
unbelievably contrived (which it is), EVEN COWGIRLS is difficult to 
follow because of its disjointed nature.  Whether this is a result of 
poor editing, confused writing, or (most likely) a combination of the 
two, the result is obvious - a chaotic motion picture that never finds 
its focus and is agonizing to sit through. 
     Sissy, the main character, is bland, although through no fault of 
Uma Thurman, whose performance is reasonably restrained in the midst of a 
festival of scenery-chomping.  The problem with Sissy is that Van Sant 
never forges a connection between her and the audience.  There is no 
emotional link, and the viewer isn't likely to care any more about her at 
the end than at the beginning.   
     With the notable exception of that given by Thurman, the 
performances are awful.  Lorraine Bracco (who I don't consider to be a 
good actor) and John Hurt (who I do) go so far over the top that you 
wonder if they'll ever reach bottom.  Rain Phoenix (the sister of the 
late River Phoenix, to whom this film is dedicated) isn't much better, 
probably because she doesn't know how to act. 
     The dialogue, especially the Tom Robbins-supplied voiceovers, is 
grating.  There's too much pretension and posturing here, and a typical 
conversation consists of characters trying to one-up each other in the 
number of meaningless profundities they can spew out.  This is probably 
supposed to make the viewer ponder; amidst all the other garbage that 
comprises EVEN COWGIRLS, it just made me reel. 
     The themes presented by the movie - feminism and the rights of the 
individual - have a heavy 70s flavor that Van Sant has done nothing to 
update.  In a rare case of getting something right, at least EVEN 
COWGIRLS gives a natural, non-exploitative view of lesbian love.   
     Then there are Sissy's thumbs.  Supposedly incredibly long and 
supple, these represent a botch-up by the prosthetics and make-up 
department.  Every time Sissy sticks out these monstrosities to hitch a 
ride, the viewer's eyes are glued to them - not because of some inner 
desire to gape at the deformity, but because they look so fake.  
     Further rumination on EVEN COWGIRLS is probably as pointless as the 
film itself.  The only possible reason to see it is to experience 
firsthand how badly a moderately-budgeted art film can go wrong.  In some 
sense, it's hard to believe that this much talent can produce something 
so worthless.  That's enough to give anyone the blues. 
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
James Brundage
Written and Directed by Gus Van Sant (Psycho)
Starring Uma Thurman (Pulp Fiction) as Sissy Hankshaw, Lorainne Bracco
(Medicine Man), Keanu Reeves (Speed)
Good serious movies, by their nature, have to have some element of comedy in
them. Whether it be satire, irony, or downright slapstick humor, they
distract us from the serious nature of the story until we don't know what
has happened and end up missing the movie and characters when they end. Of
course, you ask, how could a movie with a title like Even Cowgirls Get the
Blues be funny at all, let alone serious at the same time? The answer: a
beautiful adaptation by Gus Van Sant (who also directs) and a fine
performance by Uma Thurman.
In the movie, based on the novel by Tom Robbins, Uma Thurman plays Sissy
Hankshaw, the world's best hitchhiker because she has the world's largest
thumbs (expressed perfectly in the line, "The Lord God made me to direct
traffic."). She has no job most of the time but, when she works, is the
model for the Dew Mist feminine hygiene spray. On one modeling assignment
her travels takes her to a beauty ranch whose cowgirls are lesbians (without
a political agenda! A non-stereotyped Hollywood, at last!). Upon coming to
the ranch she finds love with the ringleader Bonanza Jellybean (Rain
Phoenix).
Trapped in the same world all of us are, trying to find love, fit in, and
get along, she believes that her happiness has been found with these
cowgirls, but sadness is just as likely to hit there as anywhere else, and,
as the title goes, Even Cowgirls get the Blues.
As just about everything Gus Van Sant does is, the film is excellent as a
metaphor movie. In addition, it keeps an interesting intelligence to the
cowgirls, all of whom are endowed with a wisdom that surpasses most
people's. Like Drugstore Cowboy (1989), Gus Van Sant's other fairly surreal
foray, it's inaccessible to the average viewer because of its trippy nature
and political riskiness (Drugstore Cowboy was a film about a crew of dope
fiends, Even Cowgirls Get the Blues is a film about lesbians that can offend
it's target group.) If you can actually get past the oddities, though, it's
one of the funniest films you'll ever see, but one that will leave you
wishing that cowgirls didn't have to get the blues.
