Title
Review for Wrestling Ernest Hemingway (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  12/17/93 (limited release)
Running Length:  2:02
Rated:  PG-13 (Nudity, language, mature themes)
     There's a lot of Academy Award potential in WRESTLING ERNEST
HEMINGWAY.  Not only is the cast a virtual who's-who of past nominees
and winners in the acting categories, but director Randa Haines was
responsible for the highly-regarded William Hurt/Marlee Matlin drama
CHILDREN OF A LESSER GOD.
     Frank (Richard Harris) and Walt (Robert Duvall) are both loners.
Frank is something of a loose cannon--he answers the door in the nude,
gets drunk on Irish whiskey, and tells stories about a time in 1938
when he wrestled Ernest Hemingway.  Walt, on the other hand, is neat
and orderly.  Twice daily he goes to the local Sweetwater Diner, where
he orders a bacon sandwich from a pretty waitress named Elaine (Sandra
Bullock), for whom he secretly carries a torch.  Then, one day in a
park, Frank meets Walt, and neither of their lives will be the same.
For each of them, the other means something they don't have--a
friend.
     WRESTLING ERNEST HEMINGWAY shows what an excellent cast can do
with an average script.  Steve Conrad's debut screenplay says little
that hasn't been presented before, but the actors make it seem fresher
and more powerful than it has a right to be.  Stripped down to its
essentials, this is a buddy film that also tackles the issue of coping
with old age and its accompanying loss of virility.  There's no attempt
to break new ground, and no sense that the script is willing to take
chances.  You can predict the ending long before it comes to pass.
     Robert Duvall always assures a director of a solid performance,
and Walt is one of his best-acted roles in years.  Even though Duvall
is easily twenty years younger than his character, there's never a
credibility problem.  He plays Walt with a simple sensitivity that's at
times poignant or humorous.  Duvall's abilities are so chameleon-like
that it's difficult to believe that this is the same man from another
current release, GERONIMO.  "Oscar-worthy" is an overused term, but it
applies in this case.
     It's been a long time since Richard Harris turned in a bad day's
work (possibly ORCA, and that was fifteen years ago).  Not many of his
films have been box office successes, but Harris' performances have
never been the problem.  WRESTLING ERNEST HEMINGWAY adds another
feather to his cap.  Harris' Frank isn't developed with the subtlety of
Duvall's Walt, but Frank is a much more boisterous and raucous
personality.  Harris knows who he's playing, and succeeds brilliantly
in bringing him to life.
     The three women have supporting roles.  Sandra Bullock is likable
as Elaine, the only under-fifty member of the cast.  Shirley MacLaine
doesn't have much to do as Helen Coonie, but she asserts her presence
effectively in two pivotal scenes.  Piper Laurie's Georgia is pretty
much a wasted character, and Ms. Laurie's performance is the only one
that's below the expected level.
     As is the case with many movies that deal with friendship and
aging issues, WRESTLING ERNEST HEMINGWAY doesn't go anywhere.  That's
not really a problem, but the total length of the movie could have been
cut by about fifteen minutes without losing anything.  This film
doesn't need to be two hours long.
     Humor and pathos are nicely mixed, but this is expected from any
moderately-successful entry into the genre.  In may ways, this is the
male version of THE CEMETERY CLUB, with many of the same themes
confronted from the other gender's point-of-view.  WRESTLING ERNEST
HEMINGWAY is more entertaining--THE CEMETERY CLUB never quite
clicked--but those who have seen both films will recognize the
similarities.
     Warner Brothers is having a hard time promoting WRESTLING ERNEST
HEMINGWAY, and the likely result will be a poor showing at the box
office.  They have an understandable problem, since the movie doesn't
offer a whole lot of quick clips to attract viewers.  It's a shame,
really, because while this movie has its fair share of flaws, there is
an audience for it.  The problem is that they probably won't know that
it exists.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Robert Duvall, Richard Harris, Sandra Bullock, Piper
Laurie, Shirley MacLaine.
Screenplay:  Steve Conrad.
Director:  Randa Haines.
     Hollywood films focusing on the elderly have generally fallen into
two broad categories: comedies making them lovable codgers whose most
mundane physical activity is turned into slapstick, and melodramas
about loneliness and facing death.  We've already had one from Column A
this winter--GRUMPY OLD MEN--which makes it somewhat surprising to see
WRESTLING ERNEST HEMINGWAY so soon, even though it falls under Column
B; studios are notoriously fastidious in avoiding conflict with target
demographics.  WRESTLING ERNEST HEMINGWAY is melodramatic, and its
pacing is rather slow, but it is also filled with fine acting and
quirky but believable relationships, and ultimately proves quite
satisfying.
     WRESTLING ERNEST HEMINGWAY is the story of two older men who
develop an unlikely friendship.  Frank (Richard Harris) is a randy and
boisterous ex-sailor fond of telling the story of the time he wrestled
Ernest Hemingway in Puerto Rico; Walter (Robert Duvall) is a Cuban
barber, both retired and retiring.  The two seem to share little in
common except their loneliness:  Frank's son backs out on a visit for
his 75th birthday, while Walter practices dancing alone, admiring from
afar the friendly waitress (Sandra Bullock) at his favorite diner.  As
they spend time together, they gradually begin to have an effect on one
another, Walter realizing he's lived safely for too long, and Frank
realizing he still has growing up to do.
     The only time that HEMINGWAY really missteps is in its forced
plot.  It's obvious as soon as the two men meet that the two opposites
will attract and change each other, and that somewhere along the line
(plot point #2 for you aspiring screenwriters) they will have a falling
out.  Director Randa Haines (CHILDREN OF A LESSER GOD) plays up scenes
like a shared skinny-dip and a certain male bonding ritual on the 4th
of July, which come off as more than a little silly, and the score by
Michael Convertino is enough to make one's teeth ache.  Parts of
WRESTLING ERNEST HEMINGWAY script themselves, and writer Steve Conrad
tries to get away with that laziness in his plotting.
     It is to his credit that when he lets his characters talk to each
other, things get much more interesting.  Harris and Duvall are
marvelous together, sharing a couple of poignant scenes where each man,
clearly thrilled simply to have someone to talk to, carries on a
practically independent conversation.  Yet this central relationship is
only one of several which truly shine.  Sandra Bullock (Stallone's
partner in DEMOLITION MAN) is thoroughly charming as Elaine, the
waitress for whom Walter carries a torch.  She demonstrates a genuine
affection for him, one which never comes off as patronizing; their
connection is sweet and very affirming.  Frank, meanwhile, spars with
his no-nonsense landlady, played perfectly by Shirley MacLaine.  Her
tough-love attempts to help Frank through his troubles and to lend a
friendly ear are spare and well-played.  However, perhaps my favorite
interaction involved Frank's attempt to romance a proper older woman
named Georgia, played by Piper Laurie.  In a small role, Laurie is
fantastic, showing Georgia's enjoyment of Frank's flirtations coupled
with her insistence on a decorum which Frank finds difficult.  From top
to bottom, the cast creates a rich and real collection of characters
whose interplay is exceptionally touching.
     It would be unfair to complete a review of WRESTLING ERNEST
HEMINGWAY without giving the two central performances their due.
Harris, as usual, is bigger than life, but the role of Frank calls for
such a reading, and it is testemony to his craft that Frank never seems
pathetic.  Robert Duvall, meanwhile, disappears into Walter.  A lesser
actor would have turned in a much more mannered performance, overdoing
Walter's habit of inspecting his beloved bacon sandwiches before eating
them.  Their screenwriter and director force them to jump through some
unnecessary hoops, but when they're left to do their own thing,
WRESTLING ERNEST HEMINGWAY becomes an appealing drama about the need
for contact.
