Title
Review for Stavisky... (1974)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Some scholars view history as perpetual but pre-determined
process, guided by easily predictable and irresistible
forces, either natural or social. Others see history as
nothing more than the series of chaotic, unpredictable
event. Somewhere in the middle between those two extremes
exist individuals, who either have or have not decisive role
in shaping world history. Those who believe that individuals
can make a difference believe in Great Man Theory, often
using examples of historical personalities that changed the
destiny of nations because of their unusual political or
military talents. However, individuals can play important
roles not only trough their great achievements, but also
because they just happen to be on the wrong place and in the
wrong time. French director Alain Resnais was used one of
such historical personalities for STAVISKY..., his 1974
drama.
The plot of the film begins in 1933, when French government
reluctantly gives political asylum to former Bolshevik
leader Leon Trotsky, exiled from USSR after his conflict
with Stalin. In the same time, another Russian Jew receives
much more favourable treatment by the same institution. He
is Serge Alexandre Stavisky (played by Jean-Paul Belmondo),
market speculator whose irresistible charm and audacity
enchanted and fascinated almost any part of French
establishment - industrialists, aristocrats, politicians,
bureaucrats and members of cultural elite. Stavisky used his
powerful friends to turn himself into financial tycoon and
start building business empire, enjoying life of luxury in
the process. There are some people immune to Stavisky's
charm, like policemen familiar with his previous career of
petty con man, as well as with the evidence that could put
him in jail. Stavisky is, however, shielded from prosecution
and convinced that he has government in his pocket. But when
his latest scheme collapses, so does his business empire and
the powerful friends not only abandon him, but instead try
to make him a convenient scapegoat for one of the greatest
scandals in French history.
History doesn't lack colourful personalities able to cheat
their way into impenetrable corridors of power and
establishment, but few of them left such impact like
Stavisky. After the scandal France barely avoided civil war,
only to be left with weakened finances, loss of faith in
democratic institutions and population deeply divided on
ideological lines - and, above all, tragically unable to
halt rise of Fascism in Europe which made WW2 inevitable. It
is understandable why this case intrigued Jorge Semprun,
screenwriter who had built his reputation on exciting
political films based on true stories. Relatively simple
story of Stavisky was used for much broader picture - few
films like this one capture the atmosphere of Europe in the
early 1930s, when the names like Hitler, Stalin or Mussolini
were actually viewed as excellent alternative to ailing,
corrupt and incompetent democratic governments.
Unfortunately, director Alain Resnais seems totally
disinterested in politics and concentrates solely on the
individual destiny of Stavisky at the expense of general
picture. What began as an interesting history lesson turns
into personal drama about over-ambitious man who pays
ultimate price for challenging the establishment. Such
stories were seen thousand times before in much better and
compelling films, and Resnais makes things even worse by bad
editing in the end, when scenes set in the past, present and
future mix without any particular sense. All those who want
to learn something about Stavisky through this film are
going to be disappointed, and only those viewers who are
more familiar with French politics in early 1930s would not
have problems in understanding the plot. What actually saves
this film is superb visual style and great work on props and
costumes, that give this film strong and convincing period
feel, especially the haunting musical score by Stephen
Sondheim. Acting is top-notch - Jean-Paul Belmondo was
perfect for the leading role, using his charisma of charming
rascal of his earlier films to become quite convincing con
man. Period feel is strengthened with the appearance of old
but still effective Charles Boyer who plays Stavisky's old
aristocratic friend; the link between new and old
generations in French acting is established with small role
played by young Gerard Depardieux. STAVISKY... is a
definitely a failed film, but attractive and interesting
enough to earn attention of all lovers of non-conventional
cinema.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
