Title
Review for One Magic Christmas (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        The only thing magical about this disgustingly sappy 
Disney movie is the tremendous sense of relief one gets when the 
end credits finally roll! It's one of those stupid "Miracle-at-
Christmas" movies with angels disguised as drunken bums that sit 
in trees, granting wishes for little kids. The whole plot of this movie 
concerns a woman with a complete humbug attitude about 
Christmas, and after seeing this awful movie, I feel the same.
        One year around Christmastime, an angel appears to the 
cute little daughter of the humbug woman and saves her from the 
path of a speeding car. Gideon's the guy's name, and -- get this -- 
he's working for Santa Claus. I guess he was laid off by God or 
something. They try to give her the "Christmas Spirit," although 
personally, I think that inebriated angel has been drinking too many 
of the "Christmas Spirits," if you know what I mean.
        And some Christmas this woman has, too. She's fired from 
her supermarket checker job (Oh no! However will the family 
survive without mom's $4.15 an hour?!), her husband is shot and 
killed by a bank robber, and her kids are kidnapped by the same 
bank robber, who eventually drives off a bridge. Miraculously 
enough, Gideon is able to save the kids, but -- surprisingly enough -- 
he can't save the father from being shot. He recommends someone 
who might be able to help. That's right, the big guy upstairs -- Santa 
Claus himself.
        But they find out Santa may be omniscient and omnipresent 
(you know how fat he is!), but he's not omnipotent, meaning he can't 
bring people back from the dead. He tells her only the mother can do 
that, asking her if she believes in magic. Personally, I don't, but I do 
believe this movie stinks.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!
