Title
Review for Uomo delle stelle, L' (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE STAR MAKER (L' UOMO DELLE STELLE) is an Italian film and one
of the 1995 Academy Award nominees for best foreign film along with ALL
THINGS FAIR (Sweden), ANTONIA'S LINE (Netherlands), DUST OF LIFE
(Algeria), and O QUATRILHO (Brazil).  It is by the director (Giuseppe
Tornatore) of the widely acclaimed and Oscar-winning Cinema Paradiso.
It is a great little story of a movie talent scout and huckster who
scours poor but picturesque Sicily enticing the locals with the promise
of great riches.
     Sergio Castellitto plays the con artist known as Joe Morelli or
Dr. Morelli.  He is supposedly an agent for the studios in Rome, and
Joe plays his part with great gusto stopping everyone and inspecting
their faces from all sides.  He finds them all worthy, of course, and
invites them to pay for a screen test promising them that the bigwigs
in Rome will get back to them in a month, after he is long gone of
course.
     The movie starts with a scared and terrified guy trying out in
front of the camera.  From offscreen the talent scout sticks his hand
in to pat him on the back and reassure him with a simple, but forceful
"very good."  Soon we cut to a scene with Joe driving through towns in
Sicily in an old beat up truck with big loudspeakers on it which booms
out with, "We are here to offer you a fantastic future!"  Soon the
whole town is practicing the last lines of GONE WITH THE WIND.  Some do
it straight, "Afterall tomorrow is another day," whereas other
embellish it or localize it.  There is one especially funny scene with
some old tough guys rehearsing Scarlet's lines to each other.
     Joe has the whole town convinced that they will be the one to get
rich.  He is treated like a god, and people dote on his every word.
Usually, he cons people out of their hard earned money without remorse,
but sometimes his conscience gets the better of him.  To one person he
tells, "movies are a new business.  I don't want to disappoint you,"
but most people he makes feel sure that they will be the one picked to
be the next movie star.
     Like a Woody Allen movie, the first thirty minutes or so of the
picture is filled with scores and scores of people doing short screen
tests.  Some people are fun to watch and some are incredibly boring and
repetitive which is one of the major downfalls of this format when it
is carried on for so long.  These scenes needed much stronger editing
by Massimo Quaglia.  Instead, he keeps too many scenes in and just
makes them too short and choppy to conserve time.
     Joe sees a dead body floating down a river, but the locals ignore
it since it is a Mafia hit.  Later, he runs into bandits who want to
kill him.  How he avoids death makes for a fantastic scene.  Joe is
confused and frighten by all of this.  A local physician whom he gives
a lift tells him, "We all understand things when it is too late."
     One of the major problems with the film is that the script by
Fabio Rinaudo and Giuseppe Tornatore is too talky.  The images and the
plot are more than enough to carry the show, yet many scenes have way
too much dialog which amount to little.  The simpler scenes are by far
and away the best.  Overall, I thought the script was the weakest part
of the film and was badly in need of rework.  It needed to be much more
focused.
     Eventually Joe falls in love with a woman named Beata (Tiziana
Lodato) so he refuses to take her money for the fake screen test.
Beata has a simple view of the movies, "I like love stories where
everybody kisses and are happy ever after."  Lodato is a great, but
simple actress who plays her part with great sensuality and feeling.
Quite a compelling performance.  Sergio Castellitto gives a sweet
performance, but I thought Lodato upstaged him with a smaller role.
     THE STAR MAKER has two parts.  A long, fanciful, funny, and
hopeful part switches to a morose shorter part.  I thought the first
part worked well, but the writer seemed to run out of energy and ideas
toward the end.  The first part is imaginative and unique; the last is
pure formula.  Overall, I thought the plot and the concept were better
than the execution.  It could and should have been much better, but I
certainly enjoyed it, and I hope to see both of the leads again,
especially Tiziana Lodato.
     The picture is beautifully filmed by Dante Spinotti with sets of
tremendous natural beauty.  There are beautiful brown and yellow stone
buildings in ruins and near ruins.  The Sicilian countryside manages to
outshine most of the people in Joe's screen tests.
     THE STAR MAKER runs 1:48.  It is in Italian with English
subtitles.  It is rated R.  It has sex, full frontal nudity, bad
language, and some violence, but would be fine for any teenager.  Flaws
and all, I liked the film, and I think you will too so I am giving it a
thumbs up and awarding it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE STAR MAKER (L'UOMO NELLE STELLE) (Italy, 1991)  *** 1/2  Directed 
by Giuseppe Tornatore. Written by Tornatore and Fabio Rinaudo. 
Photography, Dante Spinotti. Editing, Massimo Quaglia.Production 
design, Francesco Bronzi. Music, Ennio Morricone.  Cast: Sergio 
Castellitto (Joe Morelli), Tiziana Lodato (Beata), many professionals 
and non-professionals. A Miramax release. In Italian with subtitles. 
113 minutes. Rated R (sex)
Behind his battered but professional  movie camera, Joe Morelli 
instructs his subjects: "Right profile. Left profile. Center 
profile." Center profile indeed! It makes as much sense as the 
streams of rural Sicilians who pose for what has been sold to them as 
a "screen test."
You know right away that they are all the victims of a fraud.  In 
postwar Sicily,  scam artist Joe covers villages and small towns. The 
phony talent scout arrives in a truck covered with Hollywood posters, 
its loudpseaker blaring come-ons. He sets up his equipment in a large 
tent, dazzles people with name-dropping ("great actors I have 
discovered") and especially with the astronomical earning of stars. 
He then offers to shoot screen tests that will be examined by a big 
film studio in Rome. " I promise nothing" says "Doctor" Morelli, but 
that won't kill any dreams.
He adds that a small service fee will be charged - 1,500 lire, which 
was about a dollar, not a trivial sum for impoverished Sicily around 
1950.
Naivete, ignorance, hopelessness propel the locals into Joe's tent, 
but there are as many diverse reasons as there are faces among the 
wannabees. And voices. Joe records them on what must have been the 
last of the wire-recorders. (Its high fidelity is astounding). He has 
them learn a sentence or two from "Gone With the Wind," which adds to 
the ludicrousness and comedy of the situation, one made even more 
enjoyable for those who know Italian and are aware of Sicilian 
speech. (When Joe thinks that the local cop is on to him, he is 
relieved to find out that the man just wants his own test, to recite 
The Divine Comedy" which he had translated into Sicilian).
Sicilan-born Giuseppe Tornatore's second big screen feature (he came 
from photography and then TV), was the splendid, Oscar-winning 
"Cinema Paradiso." It was a hard act to follow, but the next movie, 
the entirely different "Everybody's Fine," was a very good picaresque 
road film about a Sicilian widower. Tornatore then did an excellent 
episode in an omnibus film. Then, the 1994 "A Pure Formality" broke 
with the writer-director's Sicilianness, was an ambitious, 
semi-Kafkaesque failure. With "The Star Maker" Tornatore follows the 
hard act of "Cinema Paradiso" with  confidence and ease.  Not with a 
sequel but by working the downside of the movies'magic.
The film's early section is one of light irony and mockery. Yet in a 
tour-de-force that is not at all obvious, Tornatore's sensitive 
script and Castellitto's layered acting never allow condescension 
toward the subjects. Joe may be fleecing his customers, Joe sometimes 
mutters " Animals, dumb beasts, rednecks!" but at the same time he 
has soft spots and a  comprehension of the underprivileged. There's a 
duality here. Joe shoots his footage on outdated film, yet on the job 
he seems to have an odd sort of professional conscience.
Gradually, the film gets more serious as it goes from the amusing to 
the satirical to the pathetic. Joe is perceived as influential in the 
film trade. A penniless mother offers him her body, hoping to promote 
her daughter.  A man in a Mussolini hat, delivers a Duce-style 
harangue.  An aged veteran who never spoke after his return from  the 
Spanish Civil War,   suddenly finds his speech before the camera, 
and, in Spanish, speaks insultingly of Franco, lyrically of his 
"Fifth Regiment."
He is touching. Pathetic too is the gay hairdresser who states that 
all others, including bandits and women (sic) now have rights, but 
not the gays. Eventually though, this moment with Joe, this 
confession to the camera, result in courage and optimism, change the 
man's life for the better. Later too, Joe is reproached for hearing 
more confessions than any priest. But, like a priest,  he does nor 
intrude on privacy -- and some confessions may have a salutary effect.
The encounters are not mechanically plotted. Tornatore can go from a 
sad moment to an outlandish scene, as when, in an episode worthy of 
The Book of Chutzpahs,  bandits who rob Joe end up by paying him for 
screen tests. Or as when Joe must take pictures of a 
never-photographed, now dead, Mafia Don. The sendup of Mafiosi is a 
gem.
Pathos arrives again on the scene in the shapely form of Beata, 
convent-born and bred, age 15 or 18 (she doesn't know),a cleaning 
woman for many, including an older man who gives her the 1,500 lire 
for a screen test, in exchange of Beata giving him a look at her 
naked body. Joe, moved by her simplicity, shoots additional footage 
of her, as though -- in another key to the movie -- he himself took 
his scam for a reality. In intriguing ways, Beata now becomes, off 
and on,  part of Joe's life.
More travels through Sicily show the land's uniqueness and beauty, 
never postcardish,   never artsy,  but as glimpses on what is part of 
the action.
Joe's manipulation of his customers is a scaled down version of 
politics and exploitation.
He gives a ride to an educated doctor who tells him of a  whore who 
cheats villagers, as all others do, from the government to the local 
authorities. "We don't want those who sell dreams, like you, to take 
advantage of us." There's always a bigger fish that swallows the next 
size down. Soon, Joe himself uis victimized.
"The Star Maker," has superior photography  (especially in the tricky 
tent shots) and one of those scores in Italian movies that cleverly 
use American pop songs, "Stardust" in this case. Subtler, much less 
sentimental, nostalgic or audience-manipulating than "Cinema 
Paradiso," the new film will, for those reasons, not attain the 
earlier movie's popularity. A pity, since it speaks volumes on a 
specific society and its culture.
In a sense Joe's travels are like Gulliver's (but among the gullible) 
and even closer to the classic 1941 film "Sullivan's Travels"  which 
concluded  that the more miserable people are, the more they need to 
escape into fantasy. Like Joe's clients who have stars in their eyes 
and get their little moments of dreaming movie dreams.
Movie reviews by Edwin Jahiel are at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Mirimax)
Directed by     Giuseppe Tornatore
Written by      Giuseppe Tornatore and Fabio Rinaudo
Cast            Sergio Castellitto, Tiziana Lodato, Franco Scaldati,
                Leopoldo Trieste, Clelia Rondinella, Tano Cimarosa,
                Nicola Di Pinto, Costantino Carrozza
MPAA Rating     Rated "R" (presumably for nudity and sexual content)
Running Time    106 minutes
Reviewed at     The Rialto, Raleigh, NC (26MAY96)
    One of last year's Best Foreign Film nominees is an odd, dour drama
about a movie-studio talent scout (Sergio Castellitto) scouring Sicily
for the Next Big Star.  He travels from village to village in his
vehicle, announcing over megaphone the promises of rags to riches, and
then setting up his lights, camera, and action to anyone willing to pay
the 1,500 lire fee.  (To cover the cost of film and developing, he
says.) The villagers all end up baring their souls to the camera, which
makes for an interesting travelogue of local Sicilian color.  (Early in
the movie, however, he has everyone reciting dialogue from GONE WITH THE
WIND.  In one hilarious sequence, the camera captures the various
butchered readings of Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.) Though a very
well- produced and good-looking film, THE STAR MAKER suffers on a number
of a fronts.  The talent scout, for example, isn't exactly the most
likable of characters.  And though his world-- and the film-- is
brightened after he meets a simple convent girl (Tiziana Lodato), she
arrives so late into the story that her presence barely makes a
difference.  Directed by Giuseppe Tornatore (CINEMA PARADISO).
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Foreign language films, when well made, have a charm all their own
and THE STAR MAKER is in that class.  It holds you in its grip as the
story unfolds and while nothing earth-shaking appears to be happening,
little by little what we have been missing begins to surface.
     From one little Sicilian village to another, Joe Morelli
(Sergio Castellio), a con man, travels selling dreams to the poor
inhabitants for a fee.  Morelli looks like a good man, which is a
requisite for that kind of job.  He comes with a truck laden with
camera equipment and reels of film (long since expired) and over his
loud speaker he offers the good people, the farmers and the workers,
and the women of the town, the chance of a lifetime.  For a fee he
will give a screen test, and if he thinks you have what it takes to be
a star who will make millions, he will forward the test to Rome where
big time directors will give their opinion and send for you.  He does,
however, make no promises.
     Naturally, Morelli finds in every face in the village a potential
star. He takes them inside the tent he has set up and cajoles them into
speaking.  If they do not know what to say, he gives them some famous
lines from GONE WITH THE WIND.  If they falter he encourages them to
say anything that comes to mind.  Thus the personal lives of the conned
are revealed.  The urge to do well spurs them on to tell all.
     One such is the beautiful girl, Beata (Tiziana Lodato) who was
brought up in a convent since she was a baby.  She dreams about going
to Rome and becoming a big star and is willing to do anything (which
she has never done before) to raise the money for the screen test.
     The film is, not surprisingly, very good as the director is the
one who gave us the wonderful CINEMA PARADISO.  STAR MAKER has its dark
moments but they only reveal the harm the con man has inflicted on
these poor people but gullible villagers.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE STAR MAKER (L'UOMO NELLE STELLE)(Italy,1995)  *** 1/2  Directed by 
Giuseppe Tornatore. Written by Tornatore and Fabio Rinaudo. Photography, 
Dante Spinotti. Editing, Massimo Quaglia.Production design, Francesco 
Bronzi. Music, Ennio Morricone.  Cast: Sergio Castellitto (Joe Morelli), 
Tiziana Lodato (Beata), many professionals and non-professionals. A 
Miramax release. In Italian with subtitles. 113 minutes. Rated R (sex)
Behind his battered but professional  movie camera, Joe Morelli 
instructs his subjects: "Right profile. Left profile. Center profile." 
Center profile indeed! It makes as much sense as the streams of rural 
Sicilians who pose for what has been sold to them as a "screen test." 
You know right away that they are all the victims of a fraud.  In 
postwar Sicily,  scam artist Joe covers villages and small towns. The 
phony talent scout arrives in a truck covered with Hollywood posters, 
its loudpseaker blaring come-ons. He sets up his equipment in a large 
tent, dazzles people with name-dropping ("great actors I have 
discovered") and especially with the astronomical earning of stars. He 
then offers to shoot screen tests that will be examined by a big film 
studio in Rome. " I promise nothing" says "Doctor" Morelli, but that 
won't kill any dreams.  
He adds that a small service fee will be charged - 1,500 lire, which was 
about a dollar, not a trivial sum for impoverished Sicily around 1950.   
Naivete, ignorance, hopelessness propel the locals into Joe's tent, but 
there are as many diverse reasons as there are faces among the 
wannabees. And voices. Joe records them on what must have been the last 
of the wire-recorders. (Its high fidelity is astounding). He has them 
learn a sentence or two from "Gone With the Wind," which adds to the 
ludicrousness and comedy of the situation, one made even more enjoyable 
for those who know Italian and are aware of Sicilian speech. (When Joe 
thinks that the local cop is on to him, he is relieved to find out that 
the man just wants his own test, to recite The Divine Comedy" which he 
had translated into Sicilian). 
Sicilan-born Giuseppe Tornatore's second big screen feature (he came 
from photography and then TV), was the splendid, Oscar-winning "Cinema 
Paradiso." It was a hard act to follow, but the next movie, the entirely 
different "Everybody's Fine," was a very good picaresque road film about 
a Sicilian widower. Tornatore then did an excellent episode in an 
omnibus film. Then, the 1994 "A Pure Formality" broke with the 
writer-director's Sicilianness, was an ambitious, semi-Kafkaesque 
failure. With "The Star Maker" Tornatore follows the hard act of "Cinema 
Paradiso" with  confidence and ease.  Not with a sequel but by working 
the downside of the movies'magic.  
The film's early section is one of light irony and mockery. Yet in a 
tour-de-force that is not at all obvious, Tornatore's sensitive script 
and Castellitto's layered acting never allow condescension toward the 
subjects. Joe may be fleecing his customers, Joe sometimes mutters " 
Animals, dumb beasts, rednecks!" but at the same time he has soft spots 
and a  comprehension of the underprivileged. There's a duality here. Joe 
shoots his footage on outdated film, yet on the job he seems to have an 
odd sort of professional conscience.
Gradually, the film gets more serious as it goes from the amusing to the 
satirical to the pathetic. Joe is perceived as influential in the film 
trade. A penniless mother offers him her body, hoping to promote her 
daughter.  A man in a Mussolini hat, delivers a Duce-style harangue.  An 
aged veteran who never spoke after his return from  the Spanish Civil 
War,   suddenly finds his speech before the camera, and, in Spanish, 
speaks insultingly of Franco, lyrically of his "Fifth Regiment." 
He is touching. Pathetic too is the gay hairdresser who states that all 
others, including bandits and women (sic) now have rights, but not the 
gays. Eventually though, this moment with Joe, this confession to the 
camera, result in courage and optimism, change the man's life for the 
better. Later too, Joe is reproached for hearing more confessions than 
any priest. But, like a priest,  he does nor intrude on privacy -- and 
some confessions may have a salutary effect. 
The encounters are not mechanically plotted. Tornatore can go from a sad 
moment to an outlandish scene, as when, in an episode worthy of The Book 
of Chutzpahs,  bandits who rob Joe end up by paying him for screen 
tests. Or as when Joe must take pictures of a never-photographed, now 
dead, Mafia Don. The sendup of Mafiosi is a gem. 
Pathos arrives again on the scene in the shapely form of Beata,  
convent-born and bred, age 15 or 18 (she doesn't know),a cleaning woman 
for many, including an older man who gives her the 1,500 lire for a 
screen test, in exchange of Beata giving him a look at her naked body. 
Joe, moved by her simplicity, shoots additional footage of her, as 
though -- in another key to the movie -- he himself took his scam for a 
reality. In intriguing ways, Beata now becomes, off and on,  part of 
Joe's life.
More travels through Sicily show the land's uniqueness and beauty, never 
postcardish,   never artsy,  but as glimpses on what is part of the 
action. 
Joe's manipulation of his customers is a scaled down version of politics 
and exploitation.
He gives a ride to an educated doctor who tells him of a  whore who 
cheats villagers, as all others do, from the government to the local 
authorities. "We don't want those who sell dreams, like you, to take 
advantage of us." There's always a bigger fish that swallows the next 
size down. Soon, Joe himself uis victimized.  
"The Star Maker," has superior photography  (especially in the tricky 
tent shots) and one of those scores in Italian movies that cleverly use 
American pop songs, "Stardust" in this case. Subtler, much less 
sentimental, nostalgic or audience-manipulating than "Cinema Paradiso," 
the new film will, for those reasons, not attain the earlier movie's 
popularity. A pity, since it speaks volumes on a specific society and 
its culture. 
In a sense Joe's travels are like Gulliver's (but among the gullible) 
and even closer to the classic 1941 film "Sullivan's Travels"  which  
concluded  that the more miserable people are, the more they need to 
escape into fantasy. Like Joe's clients who have stars in their eyes and 
get their little moments of dreaming movie dreams. 

Author
Pedro Sena
Giuseppe Tornatore is difficult to ignore as a film maker. He may not be the
flashiest of directors, or the best of them, but there is one thing that you
can always count in his films.... a real story, that you can relate to, and
cry with/for/along. The Star Maker is no different a film.
It is a simple story. A man, drives a truck through the countryside in
Sicily, and films people doing screen tests. They do whatever comes to their
mind, and do a few poses for the camera. The man tells everyone that he is
sending the film to Rome, for it to get checked out by other film people,
who may hire some of these characters they see on a screen test.
And he gets out of many localities some really gems of performances, from
the eclectic, to the miraculous, to the odd, to the most unusual of
assortment of people, including a few Mafia people.
And one day, he meets a young woman that wants to go with him. She has real
dreams, and he is her escape. It doesn't matter that all these people paid
for this audition, and that they couldn't afford it. All it matters is that
they have their one shot at being seen and loved. And they all take that one
shot. Another day, a police chief tries it. He is not as gullible as most
people and goes through the whole thing. Later on, in the film, the young
man finds himself arrested. The policeman has done some checking on him.
( Spoiler Alert ) The story turns into a really sad one. He is beaten up by
the Mafia family, who was going to rob and kill him. And is thrown in jail
for a couple of years. In the meantime the young girl who loves him dearly,
is not doing well. When he gets out of jail he sets about trying to find
her, and  seeing if they can save anything. She is in an institution, partly
damaged because her dream has crashed hard.
This sad film, has its truly beautiful moments, and I am of the opinion that
Tornatore's desire is to ask if it is such a bad thing, when one man can
wake up people, so well, like he does, even if the camera has no film in it
at all, or of it does, he has damaged it, one night while threading it. And
the questions arise... is it right for anyone to wake up people's dreams,
and leave them hanging? Will people be the same? Most will. But some will
not. But, generally, they all enjoyed doing what they did, and would do it
again in a minute for a chance to make it in film, be it real or not.
Wonderful film, in many respects, it is photographed beautifully and has
some magnificent moments to share with us. One may have wished that there
had been some poetic justice in the end, but it seems that hope just is not
one of the choices in Italy, specially in Sicily, it seems.
Worth seeing, although the last few minutes are sad. Ends on a positive
note.
