Title
Review for Sri (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Phil Hall
"Sri" -- Directed by Marselli Sumarno
1999 (Indonesia); FFTV-IKJ & KEM Multimedia, Running time 102 minutes
Starring Rina Ariyanti, R.M.T. Ronosuripto, Sardono W. Kusomo
In terms of cinematic output, Indonesia lags seriously behind its neighbors 
in the Pacific Rim; in 1999, only one indigenous feature film was 
commercially released there.  However, Indonesia's deficit in quantity is 
more than compensated by its surplus of quality.  That one local film, 
Marselli Sumarno's ghost story "Sri," is a new masterpiece of Asian cinema 
and an extraordinary lesson in creating a work of art through the power of 
intelligence rather than the power of the wallet.
Clearly lacking the cash, technical sophistication and razzle-dazzle of other 
Asian productions, filmmaker Sumarno (a Jakarta-based journalist making his 
directing debut) instead relies on the foundation of any great film--a 
powerful story--and builds a force of imagination with the barest of tools 
imaginable.  Audiences who have been lulled into sleep by the overbearing 
safety of American-style storytelling will be jolted by this harrowing tale 
which flows with the leisurely rhythms of a calm brook that actually runs 
deep and dark.
"Sri" opens in the home of Hendro, an elderly Javanese aristocrat whose prize 
possession is Sri, his second and considerably younger trophy wife.  Theirs 
had been a marriage of mutual convenience: Hendro was a rather unpleasant 
gambler who grabbed for the best that money can buy and Sri was a poor 
village girl who saw the old goat as her only chance out of poverty.  While 
Hendro never truly loved Sri, she allowed time to open her heart to her aged 
mate.
Hendro's wicked ways eventually catch up with him and he winds up bed-ridden 
and ill beyond medical care.  One night as Sri leaves him to tortured sleep, 
an uninvited figure in white joins her on the veranda.  It is Yamadipati, the 
God of the Dead, who announces his mission to ferry Hendro away.  Incredibly, 
with a steely determination hitherto unsuspected, Sri challenges Yamadipati 
to delay his mission to allow Hendro to make amends with several people he 
had crossed or betrayed over the years.  Completely shocked by this amazing 
request, Yamadipati reluctantly complies with Sri's request for an extension. 
 Sri then tracks down the various unhappy souls who Hendro damaged (including 
Hendro's first wife) and negotiates for their forgiveness.  Yamadipati 
returns frequently, but finds his efforts frustrated as Sri successfully 
plays him for extra time to clean Hendro's proverbial slate.
With an eerie story worthy of peak-Rod Serling, "Sri" offers its tale without 
any of distractions that weigh down Hollywood ghost stories.  There are no 
special effects or sound effects (although Western audiences may find the 
film's traditional Javanese score more than little disturbing), and the 
scenes are shot in lengthy takes without a flash of staccato editing or 
sudden whooshes of fright.  In fact, Sumarno's style may come as a surprise 
to sophisticated cinephiles: many of the scenes are framed in medium and long 
shots and the casual pacing reflects the funereal tempo of the Javanese 
culture, which is wholly alien to Western rush-rush-rush.  Yet the beauty of 
"Sri" reminds us of what genuine horror is all about: the attack on the 
senses and the intellect, with the unexpected insertion of the extraordinary 
into the ordinary.  It begins with the failing of Hendro's health, which 
ruptures the serenity and luxury of Sri's household and slowly tears away at 
the careful order into a world of newly unexplored chaos which precipitates 
the unexpected on various levels.  Yamadipati's initial appearance, standing 
unannounced in the distance for a seemingly endless period before he is 
acknowledged, offers a chill as Sri conducts her affairs without realizing 
the gravity of her visitor...and then deals with him in a manner which shocks 
the fatal entity.  Her negotiations with Hendro's victims carry an emotional 
thrust as she calmly but desperately seeks to tie all loose ends in Hendro's 
awful life so he can die without sin--the ultimate game of beat-the-clock.  
The audience watches this drama with the foregone conclusion that death can 
be delayed but never denied...yet can Sri achieve the impossible?
In one of the film's many amazing sequences, one of Hendro's dying peers 
escapes into the woods to evade Yamadipati.  The inevitable meeting between 
predator and prey cannot be prevented, yet it concludes in an unexpectedly 
joyful manner which frightens and enlightens the viewer with a dual fear: the 
fear of coming to death and the fear that we waste too much time being afraid 
of coming to death.  "Sri" forces us to confront our emotions and re-evaluate 
how we use our time on Earth--and for the truly introspective, it forces the 
wondering of whether there is a Sri who would negotiate with the God of the 
Dead to spare us from the inevitable goodbye.  This is clearly scarier than 
any Hollywood spook or ghoul.
"Sri" introduces Rina Ariyanti in the title role, and she graces the screen 
with a fragile beauty that masks a remarkable strength and focus.  Never 
resorting to melodrama, she points a laser-sharp focus on the subject at hand 
and delivers a mature and sublime interpretation of a young woman of untapped 
strength and heroism.  She is wonderfully matched by the long-haired Sardono 
W. Kusumo as Yamadipati, who sinks into despair and joyfully deranged 
frustration when Sri gets the best of him.  
"Sri" was offered as Indonesia's entry in this year's Academy Award 
competition for Best Foreign-Language Film.  It failed to get a nomination 
and, despite excellent response on the festival circuit, it has yet to secure 
a US distributor.  This situation is nothing sort of disgraceful.  Rarely has 
a film of such power and beauty tip-toed through the circuits without 
receiving the praise it deserves.  By all means, seek out and savor the glory 
that is "Sri."
