Title
Review for Ciudad de los prodigios, La (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Dalgleish
Original Title: La Ciudad de los Prodigios;
Starring Olivier Martinez, Emma Suárez, François Marthouret, Tony
Isbert, José María Sanz;
Directed by Mario Camus;
Written by Camus and Gustau Hernández, from a novel by Eduardo Mendoza;
Cinematography by Acacio de Almeida;
        Like too many movies adapted from complex novels, THE CITY OF
MARVELS wears its literary source on its sleeve: you can see the
scriptwriters labouring to translate prose into film, and failing.  There
is a crucial transitional moment when a woman goes from a state of
happiness to melancholy to insanity to dementia--all compressed into about
three seconds of screen time, thanks to the marvels of voice-over
narration.  Long expository narrations book-end the film, serving as a kind
of duct tape to patch together pieces of the movie which would otherwise
seem even more disjointed than they are.  Voice-overs shoehorn in
background details which could not be integrated into the script.
        It's a shame, because when the narrator keeps his mouth shut and
lets events speak for themselves, the movie is often superb.  The titular
"City of Marvels" is Barcelona, in the years before and after the Universal
Exposition of 1888.  Olivier Martinez stars as Onofre, a young man who
comes to Barcelona in search of the wealth of experiences offered by the
city.  He finds it harder than he thought it would to be find gainful
employment, and he ends up spending much of his time at his boarding-house,
where he is befriended by the owner and his daughter Delfina (Emma Suárez).
        Delfina introduces Onofre to an anarchist group.  Thanks to his
memories of a father who left for the Caribbean to seek his fortune and
came back an abject failure, as well as his own disappointments in the
city, Onofre is sympathetic to the anarchists' goal of equality for the
workers.  He joins the cause, but the anarchists' theoretical ideals are
opposed by the strong-arm pragmatism of the local police.  After surviving
a harsh example of police injustice, Onofre becomes disillusioned and gives
up the anarchist cause as hopeless.
        He is then bribed by one of the city's wealthy powermongers and
forced to join the ranks of the very people the anarchists are dedicated to
overthrowing.  But once he's within the establishment, Onofre finds that
the shoe fits.  He works at first as a hired thug, a bodyguard, a
street-level operative, but he has ambitions.  He initiates a cunning and
far-sighted play for power within the savage--and often fatal--world of
Barcelona politics.
        The momentum of Onofre's obsessive quest for power and the
corrupting effect of his realpolitik compromises make for fascinating
viewing.  It is here that the movie really hits its stride, at times
possessing something of the elemental force of grand tragedy.  Onofre
exists in a world of brutality and treachery.  He manipulates and schemes
and betrays in order to further his own aims.  He makes and breaks secret
deals in shadowy cobblestoned alleys.  He is a study in moral decay, and
perhaps a symbol of Spain's own failings; his tactics bring to mind, for
example, the rise of Franco and fascism in the years preceding World War
II.
        Onofre is a convincing villain, but the movie wants him to be more
ambiguous.  The cruel thrust of his ruthless political expediencies is
ostensibly balanced by the fact that he does it all for--what else?--the
love of a good woman.  The good woman is Delfina, the woman who introduced
him to the anarchists.  She loved him, once, but after he rapes her and,
later, manipulates her father into committing murder, she understandably
professes to despise him.  In a turn of events that could only have been
written by a man, she admits, years later, that she still really does love
Onofre, even though by now he is a rapist, thief, and murderer many times
over. The two find happiness together (sort of).
        The love story is misguided, to put it mildly, and it's no
coincidence that the best thing about the movie is the lengthy middle
section after Delfina moves to France, when the focus is squarely on
Onofre's rise to power.  Delfina's change of heart occurs only after Onofre
has obtained wealth, power, and privilege: in this movie, even the noblest
of human souls comes with a price tag. Just as the villainous man nurses a
secret love in his heart through the years, so the virtuous woman is
secretly seduced by the lure of status and luxury.
        The contradictions inherent in Onofre and Delfina's personalities
are intended to embody the contradictions of their age--the concluding
narration helpfully explains this to us, in case we missed the point.  And
it is indeed, like all eras, contradictory: the heady possibilities of
technology and industry clash with the rigid class divisions, political
repressions, and authoritarian violence.  Onofre is supposed to encapsulate
the best and worst of it.  But except for his brief stint as an idealistic
anarchist, he does not embody the best of anything, except perhaps the
cutthroat mentality of the born survivor.   He represents the sins of his
age and none of its virtues.  THE CITY OF MARVELS would have us believe
otherwise, and so founders under the weight of its own contradictions.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com)
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)
