Title
Review for Holy Smoke (1999)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "HOLY SMOKE" (Miramax Films)
With last year's Hideous Kinky and now Holy Smoke, Kate
Winslet seems determined to reach beyond her classic Titanic
heroine. In this psychosexual drama, Kate plays Ruth Barron, a young,
vulnerable Australian tourist in India who succumbs to the spiritual
"enlightenment" of a charismatic guru. Ruth thinks she's found
salvation and transcended into bliss, but her horrified parents are
sure she's lost her mind. So they lure her back home to a Sydney
suburb and hire an American "cult exit counselor," P.J. Waters, played
by Harvey Keitel, to deprogram her. Dressed in black from his dyed
hair to shiny cowboy boots, the tyrannical P.J. is a jaded, slick,
persuasive brain-washer who demands to be left alone with sari-clad
Ruth in an abandoned shack in the Outback for three days. There, they
play brutal mind-games while exploring their carnal lust, engaging in
a fierce battle of wills and, oddly, reverse roles. Ruth uses her
voluptuous body to sexually dominate and mentally control P.J.,
dressing him in drag and then savagely humiliating him, leaving him
whimpering. Australian writer/director Jane Campion (The Portrait of a
Lady, The Piano, Sweetie) collaborated on the script with her sister,
Anna Campion (Loaded) and, despite a few moments of comic relief from
Ruth's grotesque family of wackos, they're heavily into the
provocative issues of religion, sex and power. Brooding tough guy
Harvey Keitel is simply overmatched by willful, outspoken Kate
Winslet. You know from the beginning that he doesn't stand a chance
against her, particularly when cinematographer Dion Beebe exquisitely
bathes her nude body in sensual, shimmering light. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Holy Smoke is a bizarre 4, presenting a
frustrating battle of the sexes that seems unfairly matched.

Author
Ross Anthony
The temptation to compare this movie to director Jane Campion's other film
"Piano" is too great to resist ... so I won't. That said, if you appreciated
"Piano" you probably won't appreciate this review. So bail, before it irks
you.
What was great, in fact, really wonderful about "Piano" was that one lasting
image of a full spirited young woman nimbly massaging the keys of a grand
piano resting it's three legs in the warm gold-sanded coastline of some
exotic land. Wind through her hair, crystal blue water ... her audience. Oh,
and of course that last shot of her plunging into the ocean from the boat
later. But the in between lacked a movie. This is my frustration with "Holy
Smoke." Only this time those points of interest rely on an emotional factor
as well as visual. It's as if the writers had said, "Wouldn't it be cool if
we had her stroke lipstick across Keitel's face?" or "What if ... etc.?" So
that the movie as a coherent piece falls follower to a series of loosely
connected dots that like so many false gods ... don't seem to lead anywhere.
That said, I really enjoyed the dialogue between Keitel and Winslet. Winslet
plays a "messed up" Aussie girl that's become a groupie of some Indian guru.
Her folks trick her back to Australia and hire Keitel (a highly paid
American guy with a solid rep as cult-head breaker). The two finally steal
away in a "Halfway hut" in the outback. This is were the real drama unfolds.
I was liking it. I was intrigued, but in the end, I felt teased ... because
it never develops into anything interesting, rather it degenerates into sex.
Also distracting, an awkward humor surrounding Kate's family that never
seems to strike a funnybone; at times resorting to silly physical comedy ...
pretty boy smashes nose into pole, for instance. The film could have dropped
its attempt at "Fargo" humor and monopolized on what it did well ... the
drama of two hard-headed, vulnerable people of opposite sexes locked in the
outback.
And a theme? I missed it. Was it that this woman finally breaks down and
"Be's kind?" Because of a series of actions carried out by the supposed
teacher of that lesson, I don't buy it. All the picture seems to say is "Men
are slaves to their genitals and women are slaves to their emotions." (Not a
very impressive learning experience.)
Holy Smoke. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Kate Winslet, Harvey Keitel, Julie Hamilton, Tim Robertson.
Written by Anna Campion & Jane Campion.
Directed by Jane Campion.
Produced by Jan Chapman.
A Mirimax release.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Cornerhouse (Manchester)
Released in the UK by Film Four on April 7, 2000; certificate 18; 115 
minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Jane Campion; produced by Jan Chapman.
Written by Anna Campion, Jane Campion.
Photographed by Dion Beebe; edited by Veronika Jenet.
"Something... something happened, didn't it?"
So suggests Ruth Barron at the end of "Holy Smoke", and she's right -- 
something has happened. I'm just not sure what. Here is a movie that promises 
to be a drama about two passionate people waging intellectual war on each 
other, but disintegrates into a bizarre mixture of "Ticket to Heaven", "Last 
Tango in Paris", "Klute" and "Coneheads".
The early scenes glimpse Ruth (Kate Winslet), a young Australian woman, 
vacationing in India. Back home her parents are informed that she has joined 
some sort of religious cult. They go beserk; this is not a sophisticated or 
open-minded family. Their house is in worse shape than their caravan. The 
patriarch, Gilbert (Tim Robertson), flaunts a hairpiece, fake tan and bulging 
belly. Mother Miriam (Julie Hamilton) has weird mood swings and runs around 
wincing. The grown-up kids burp, fart, groan and attend tacky theme nights at 
pubs.
Given that she's grown up around these boors, it's hardly surprising Ruth 
wants to escape into an alternative lifestyle. So the family lure her back to 
Oz with cruel lies about dying relatives, and then arrange for her to meet 
with an American "exit counsellor", P.J. Waters (Harvey Keitel). The guy has 
a great track record, having convinced almost two hundred people to leave 
clandestine sects.
P.J. takes Ruth to an isolated shack. It is agreed that they will talk for 
three days. "You're never gonna break me," Ruth insists. "You're right," 
responds P.J. "Your own reason should break you." There is real tension 
onscreen at this point, because Winslet and Keitel are intelligent actors who 
don't avoid each other's gazes. Even when their characters are refusing to 
talk, we see them seething, and trust that when they finally do argue their 
conversations will set the screen ablaze.
Unfortunately there never really is much opening up about the issues at hand, 
or reasons for the characters' beliefs. Ruth does not even tell us what she 
thinks she's learned in India, so we can never judge whether she has been 
taken in by a sinister cult or simply found solace in a peaceful commune. 
"Holy Smoke" therefore lacks context -- is Ruth's indignation to P.J. 
something we're supposed to cheer or pity?
I haven't even hinted at the film's more bizarre reaches. One is the 
portrayal of Ruth's family, which goes so over the top it undermines the 
drama, by painting its members as a bunch of giggling, snorting animals who 
express their feelings through twitching and raised voices. Then there's Ruth 
and P.J.'s fourth day in the hut, in which both characters lose their reserve 
in favour of violence, sex and mind games. "Holy Smoke" begins with important 
discussion, follows it by poking fun at rural lifestyles and ends with Harvey 
Keitel wearing a dress and trying to break people's noses. What's going on? 
Answers on a postcard please.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
kala ladenheim
There's this game that I sometimes play when a movie or TV show is
particularly mind boggling:  "Whatever were they thinking?"  I try to
envision the moment when the story was pitched or the plot was hatched. 
I think I've got it for this one.
OK, this is what I think happened.  Harvey Keitel--consistently one of
the most interesting actors out there and one who has a playful/serious
"actor's workshop" approach to his craft, is hanging out, maybe
inhaling, maybe slugging back the scotch with his good buddy Jane
Campion and her sister Anna.  "Hit me with your best shot.  Give me the
most ridiculous scenario you can come up with.  I'll convince 'em."
They put their heads together and come up with a vision of him crawling
around the Australian outback in a red minidress and a single cowboy
boot--one of these strokes of brilliance the muse occasionally drops on
you (especially, as mentioned before, when the smoke is wholly...) 
"Great!  How did I got there?"  "Had to be a woman."  AND they were
off.  The writers had to back into the story, and when they did they
realized things got kind of draggy when it was just the dialogue in the
desert--a little too heady.  Needed some livening up.  So whenever the
action slowed down they'd roll the dice and add in a feature from a
collection of odds and ends they'd written on slips of paper and put in
a fishbowl to draw from--sheep as tray tables, reindeer antlers on the
car-- a game of dares.
For supporting evidence that this piece was an extended workshop
exercise, look to Keitel's 1995 "Smoke" and "Blue in the face" (as in
Krishna, blue-faced God?) for the title and spiritual allusion.
Anyway, fun for Keitel and Winslet, some interesting stuff, some too
silly stuff.  Probably not worth paying for but fun for free.
BTW, this is the second film preview I've attended at Pentagon City, and
I don't think I'll go to a movie there again.  At the first--Any Given
Sunday--the sound track kept breaking up.  At this screening they
cropped about the top 15% of the image (except for the period in which
the film slipped out of registration so we saw the top part but lost the
next 15%).

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Holy crap!  Holy Smoke is a holy mess!  Writer/director Jane Campion
still seems unable to return to the form that made her an Oscar winner
in 1993.  Since The Piano, Campion has cranked out the abysmally drab
The Portrait of a Lady and now Holy Smoke, which is definitely not a
step in the right direction by any stretch of the imagination.
The opening credits begin promisingly enough, using slow-motion shots of
India placed over a rockin' Neil Diamond track.  Once the story kicks
off, we learn that an Australian girl named Ruth (Kate Winslet, Hideous
Kinky) went to Delhi for vacation and never came home, apparently
choosing to live her life with the followers of some guy with Baba.
Naturally, her suburban Sydney family is distraught, and they try to
lure Ruth home so she can be deprogrammed by a `cult exiter' from Los
Angeles named PJ Waters (Harvey Keitel, Three Seasons).
The first step of the plan is for Ruth's asthmatic mother (Julie
Hamilton) to travel to Delhi to tell her that her father (Tim Robertson)
has suffered a serious stroke, which is just a lie to get her home.
While this is supposed to make Ruth fly back with her mum, she instead
shrugs it off and tries to get her mother to attend one of Baba's wacky
ceremonies.  Long story short, Ruth finally agrees to come home to see
her allegedly ailing father.
Once home, the family locks Ruth and PJ up in a second home in the
middle of the Aussie outback.  PJ explains that his technique generally
takes three days and that he has saved 189 souls during his career, with
a whopping 97 percent success rate.  Ruth is still obviously reluctant,
and after this forty-minute setup is complete, Smoke concentrates its
focus on its two acting leads.  This is when the film goes downhill 
fast.
You can guess what happens next.  Ruth hates him as he begins to make
headway in his deprogramming, but then uses her incredible rack to turn
the tables on PJ.  Before you know it, they're going at it like a couple
of horny teenagers.  Heck, if you locked me up in a house with a
mentally unstable Kate Winslet for three days, even I could get lucky.
Well, maybe four or five days.
Aside from being predictable on just about every level, Smoke seems to
go out of its way to be disturbing.  Ruth and PJ hit it off sexually
when she pisses all over herself and their crazy relationship ends when
he dons a red dress and lipstick.  At times, you will wonder if Campion,
who adapted the script with her sister Anna, intended the film to be
funny or dramatic.  It's neither, so I guess her intentions really don't
matter.  The film is brutally uneven, but not without visual flare.
It's a damn colorful picture, from the incredible blue skies, to
Keitel's ghastly white ass, to his bright red lipstick.
Winslet makes the best of the crappy script, acting crazy enough to be
believable.  But the craziest thing about Winslet is her choice of
post-Titanic films.  First, she ran off to Marrakech in Hideous Kinky
and now India in Smoke.  Get over yourself  two lousy art films are
enough of a penance to make up for starring in the biggest blockbuster
of all-time.  The good news is that her `area' is kept a little tidier
that it was in Jude.
And just what does Campion have over Keitel where she can continue to
blackmail him into taking risky roles in her films?  In The Piano, he
waived his tiny wiener at the camera, and here he's in a drag for the
last third of the film.  Whatever it is, I hope the debt has been paid
off.  I can't bear to see him embarrass himself again.
1:54 - R for tons of nudity, strong sexuality and a litany of adult
language

Author
Dennis Schwartz

HOLY SMOKE (director/writer: Jane Campion; screenwriter: Anna Campion;
cinematographer: Dion Beebe; editor: Veronika Jenet; cast: Kate Winslet
(Ruth Barron), Harvey Keitel (P.J. Waters), Paul Goddard (Tim Barron),
Pam Grier (Carol), Julie Hamilton (Miriam Barron), Sophie Lee (Yvonne
Barron), Tim Robertson (Gilbert Barron), Austen Tayshus (Stan), Kerry
Walker (Aunt Puss), Daniel Wyllie (Robbie Barron), George Mangos
(Baba,The Guru), 1999)
Holy Smoke is a beautiful film to watch -- from the feverish credit
sequence -- of the film's title written in smoky letters, to Kate
Winslet's psychodelic-like India sojourn, and then onto her trying
experiences in the naturally scenic Australian outback. The film has
perfectly framed scenes and magnificent visuals, and a divertingly
amusing storyline to tune into, even if it gives into its own silly side
and becomes after a fast start mostly a wonderfully entertaining film
touching on many societal nerve points but going nowhere but back into
its own cynical view of life, resorting to a politically safe response
to all its pin pricks about mind control. Though, in all honesty, it
should be commended for taking chances and telling its guru story in
this refreshingly different style.
How perceptive of a film it is, is questionable, as it is provocatively
stimulated by overwrought acting and filled with the Aussie taste for
slapdash comedy and vulgar dialogue. There is too much of a loss of
subject context to do any serious intellectual damage about any of the
themes it broaches. But it does, on the serious side of its agenda, at
least, raise some valid points about mind control and how men treat
women. It is scripted by the Campion sisters (Jane & Anna) and directed
by Jane, with a very noticeable woman's touch and a ribald sense of
lustiness.
It opens with the Australian Ruth Barron (Kate Winslet) in India with
her girlfriend, attending an "enlightenment rally" where a charismatic
Hindu guru, Baba, is performing at. At the gathering, there is a gaudily
resplendent array of yellow and pink colors to dazzle the senses,
seeming more like a light show for a Jefferson Airplane concert at the
Fillmore West than a religious ceremony. Ruth is moved by the experience
and the guru's touch of her forehead is the ultimate one for her, and
she thereby seeks to stay in India and adapt to her new spiritual
consciousness: changing her name to the one given her by Baba, studying
meditation, wearing a sari, and endearing herself to the customs of
India while living in a commune in New Delhi. She is hoping to
straighten out whatever is bothering her about her present life, though
she just came to India as a tourist with no interest in its religions.
But, as the new saying goes, when in India, do what the other tourists
do. So before going back home from her touristy vacation, she visits the
guru and really experiences something magical. I think, later on, when
she is back home, she mentions that she must learn how to cry for others
as being her problem, the thing that she wanted most to learn from her
blissful Hindu guru.
Back home in Australia, her traveling companion girlfriend tells Ruth's
parents that their girl has flipped out and has been brainwashed to join
a cult. The distraught mother (Julie Hamilton) talks her husband (Tim
Robertson) into paying for an expert American cult exiter, someone who
will deprogram her, who comes with the reputation of almost always
succeeding, the only drawback is that he charges a hefty fee for his
services. But first mom has to go to New Delhi to get her daughter to
come back home. She is advised by the local psychologist (Tayshus) to
make up a lie, to tell her daughter that she must come home because her
father is dying, and that once she is home, then the deprogramer will
take over until she is conditioned to go back to being normal again
(which in this case means dressing up in a cowgirl outfit and going to
the local pub for Disco Night, where you can get drunk or high on
drugs). But mom has trouble adjusting to India: its crowds, lack of
modern toilets, and its strange culture. Her collapse comes at just the
right time, as it prevents Ruth's participation in a group wedding to
Baba, and gets her to reluctantly board the plane and come back home to
meet again her calculating, cartoonish, bourgeois family.
When back home in the suburbs of Sydney, the sari wearing Ruth sticks
out from the rest of the middle-class family like a hippie at a
Republican convention. The immediate family consists of her gay brother
(Goddard), her macho brother (Wyllie) with his sexually frustrated
scatter-brained wife (Sophie), and her philandering father and timidly
nervous mother. All of their warmth and smiles for her seem
disingenuous, especially when compared to the guru's.
The deprogrammer, P.J. Waters (Keitel), arrives, dressed in all-black
and sporting snazzy cowboy boots, as if he's a western gunfighter
fighting the Indians-- he stands off to the side in a smug pose, as the
men in the family surround the girl and corral her as if she were an
animal, and force her to meet with the old and weary looking PJ, who has
dyed his hair black and breathes arrogance as easily as a fish makes
bubbles in the water. He also goes heavy on the mouth spray, making sure
he is sweet-smelling at all times.
The two go off to the outback as P. J. puts into motion his 3-day step
program, and the breakdown in the film's sensibility becomes
astronomical at this point, making me wonder what the Campion sisters
were thinking. The film loses its sense of credibility and becomes a
battle of the sexes, with the inevitable male-female struggle taking
precedence over the heavy-handed religious aspects first introduced into
the story. The expert Keitel in a matter of one day loses his grip on
what he has built his whole career on, as he falls in love with Kate,
which seemed far-fetched and unconvincing to me. That is not to say all
these hyperventilating and sexy scenes weren't watchable as mindless
entertainment, as the audience gets a chance to see how really beautiful
Kate's breasts are and how base Keitel could be, as he turns into a
dirty old man and pursues Kate across the outback in a red dress with
smears of lipstick over his face, supposedly getting his just desserts
for being a male chauvenist pig. He is so dishonest, that he gets
quickly sidetracked from his surefire program and means of a rich
livelihood at the first sight of a woman's body and that the family is
so loony that they interrupt his deprogramming, after spending a king's
ransom to secure his services, before he has finished, seemed like a
reach to me, as if the director forgot what her story was about and got
sidetracked into doing a screwball comedy.
Admittedly, it was funny to watch Harvey start to pray to her Baba (God)
for help in making this absurd love affair work, even if Baba can't
help. In reality, praying does not guarantee that one's prays will be
answered. So, in short, he's not for her, and no matter what he does
won't work, which kills the romance part to this screwball comedy.
What does this all mean, not too much, except its fun to see Keitel get
his stereotypical male psyche bruised and ham it up as Kate turns the
tables on him. It was also easy on the eyes to watch the talented
actress that Kate is, walk luringly in the outback night, in a sexually
uninhibited way, and have Keitel eyeball her naked body as she parades
in front of him and to watch as he eagerly makes love to her in the
gentle way a woman wants to be made love to (or deified).
Yes. She has won. He can't deprogram her. But, Ah! those breasts of Kate
are really something to behold...but it is her personality that is the
star of the film. She was the only one in the film who wasn't a shallow
caricature, and her performance was daring, even smashing, taking this
zany script and making the most of it, getting out of it certainly more
than it deserved. Which means the film actually worked in some skewed
sense, as it dove into the question of mind control and the human
condition and gave no answers, except the strong suggestion that having
compassion for another person is what has to emerge from a person's
heart before they can be expected to be free from their karma. And, in a
muddled way, this film lets the audience be the observer and lets it
come to its own conclusions, which is why I imagine this film will get a
mixed-bag of reviews-- ranging from those who can't stand it, to those
who rave about it.
There were so many wasted moments that blunted this beautifully shot
film, that shot itself unecessarily in the foot, even though it did
manage to escape from being a dud by its freaky humor and its nonstop
assault on the senses of propriety, making this a madcap comedy instead
of anything else. It also badly underutilized the talented Pam Grier,
giving her such a miniscule and predictable part, that she had no chance
to do her thing. But what it had going for it, is a sense of freedom, an
eye for beauty, and Kate's undaunting performance, which makes it
something to put in your pipe and smoke. Perhaps not getting the
ultimate high, but definetly not getting down in the dumps.
And speaking about smoke, how easy it is for everything to go up in
smoke, as the film's main ingredient becomes this free moving spirit
that takes charge of the story as it goes off in all sorts of
directions, some worth pursuing (Kate's spiritual trip) and some just
thankfully vanishing as quickly as it came forth (Keitel's ego trip). If
only it wasn't so ridiculous, it could have been a much more salient
film, even if it were to lose a few laughs along the way.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Dequina
  Up until a couple of days ago, the latest film from idiosyncratic New
Zealand-born director Jane Campion bore the more exclamatory moniker
_Holy_Smoke!_--an interjection that will serve as many people's immediate
reaction to the picture.  It certainly was mine--in a good way.  The
basic plot synopsis doesn't clue one in to the twisted path this unique
film takes.  A young Australian named Ruth (Kate Winslet) returns home
from a trip to India a changed woman, having fallen under the spell of a
spiritual guru.  Deeply concerned, her family enlists the services of
American P.J. Waters (Harvey Keitel), a cult deprogrammer with an
impeccable success record.  P.J.'s track record doesn't stand a chance,
however, when Ruth turns out to be as headstrong as he is.
Thus the stage is set for a traditional role reversal; as Ruth's
devotion to her guru fades away, P.J. finds himself falling under the
influence of a different cult--Ruth's formidable sexual allure--and he is
helpless to resist.  But this being a Campion film, the story hardly
unfolds in a traditional manner.  Walking into the auditorium, one would
not expect to see Keitel wearing a dress and full makeup for the last 20
or so minutes.  Then there are the surreal visual touches to rival the
talking lima beans in Campion's _The_Portrait_of_a_Lady_, such as the
comical parade of Ruth's past lovers, all of whom have twinkling eyes and
teeth.  It goes without saying that these flights of fancy lends the film
a bizarre fascination.
Which, I believe, is the point.  _Holy_Smoke_ is all about the strange
spells one inexplicably gets cast under, so it's only fitting that the
film itself craft one of its own.  But the audacity of Campion (and her
writing partner and sister, Anna) ultimately plays a smaller role in the
film's success than a more concrete quality: the performances.  It's a
testament to Keitel's work that P.J.'s emotional descent remains
believable while in drag.  More impressive, though, is Winslet, who once
again gets to bare another aspect of her being (in every sense) as Ruth. 
It's refreshing to see Winslet follow _Titanic_'s phenomenal commercial
success by returning to the edgy roles in smaller films that earned her
recognition in the first place.  As _Holy_Smoke_ displays, the work
proves more admirable and rewarding than anything in a big mainstream
Hollywood picture (such as _End_of_Days_, which she was offered and
understandably declined).
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Robert Strohmeyer
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/8730b4327ec078fd88256864001e0c14?OpenDocument
It's so comforting to see a talented actor recover from the precarious
heights of mass-market success.  After TITANIC, I was perfectly prepared
to condemn Kate Winslet to the same pit of has-been obscurity Leonardo
DiCaprio belongs in.  Fortunately, Winslet didn't sink with the ship.
 HOLY SMOKE is the entrancing story of two zealots on a collision course
with fate.  Ruth, played by Winslet, is a young Australian who finds
what she believes to be the path to enlightenment through the influence
of a Guru while on holiday in India.  When Mum (Julie Hamilton) gets
word, she cooks up a plot to lure Ruth home and hires top cult
deprogrammer PJ Waters (Harvey Keitel) to bring her daughter to reason.
 Once trapped by her family, Ruth agrees to spend three days with
Waters, beginning a game of cat-and-mouse that blurs all boundaries
between therapist and patient.  The balance of power turns when PJ falls
under Ruth's seduction, leading them both on a descent into madness that
is disturbing, enchanting, and sickly hilarious.
 Winslet is positively enthralling in her role, presenting an inspired
encore to her 1999 performance in Gillies MacKinnon's HIDEOUS KINKY.
Keitel is intense and commanding, tapping into the same hardcore
energies we saw in Abel Ferrara's 1992 shocker, BAD LIEUTENANT.  For
what it's worth, I'm predicting Oscar nominations.
 Once in a while, first-rate acting meets up with powerful directorial
and cinemagraphic vision to make a truly great film and this time it's
the audience who got lucky.  Cinematographer Dion Beebe and director
Jane Campion (THE PIANO) deserve strong kudos for this one.  Also worth
mentioning is the comic and bizarre contribution of the supporting cast,
including Pam Grier (JACKIE BROWN).  Sophie Lee (MURIEL'S WEDDING) is a
complete riot as Ruth's incompetent sister.  I suspect much of Grier's
work on this film is cluttering the cutting room floor, and her
character is just never realized.  Outside of this one shortcoming, HOLY
SMOKE is a masterpiece.  See this movie.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dean Kish
     Harvey Keitel re-teams with feminist director Jane Campion for another
journey back to the land down under. This time Keitel is the world's best
"cult deprogrammer" and his subject is a religiously confused Kate Winslet.
Holy Smoke is one of those art films that probably won't appeal to the
biggest of audiences because of its tone and harsh storyline. Kate Winslet
continues to grow as an actress with this risky and risqué venture. But it's
her spirit and screen presence which brought me in. As her emotions and
beliefs crossed with her parents, we began to actually see the two worlds at
war for this young girl. These were magical scenes which Campion did a
wonderful job with. But as Campion delivers a generous telling of the story
and makes it very compassionate and direct for us, we are shocked when
Keitel's man's man drop his pants in a comfort scene. And you begin to
wonder if this guy is a professional and if he should be looking after a
vulnerable young woman. Both in 1996's Portrait of a Lady and in 1993's
Piano, we saw this destruction of a man. And Campion continues her escapade
here as Keitel delivers quotes of morals but never really believes a word.
He self-destructs and delivers his own fiery flight into the flesh of an
innocent woman. What made me really cringe was the running time on Keitel's
destruction. Campion would never let up and this reminded me a lot of the
Piano as well. Is Campion saying that women destroy men or that men destroy
themselves with sex? Another begging question is why did a fully nude
Winslet have to deliver a "golden shower" before they could embrace and seal
his eminent fate? Is this a symbolism of a lost vulnerability and innocence?
A cross-dressing Keitel screams after a shoeless Winslet as they stumble
through the Australian outback this results in his final undoing and her
final deliverance from him. A lot of clouded symbolism and half truths had
me scratching my head. Or maybe "Holy Smoke" just isn't for everyone. (2.5
of 5) So Says the Soothsayer.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Harvey Keitel in a dress!  The bizarre image of him in drag may be worth
the price of admission for some filmgoers.  Others may demand a bit more
for their entertainment dollar.  This latter group will probably feel
cheated by HOLY SMOKE, a mess of a movie by Jane Campion (THE PIANO).
Part quirky Australian comedy and part film about cult deprogramming,
the script by Anna and Jane Campion is neither funny nor credible.
With the speed of instant coffee, the show's central character, an
Australian named Ruth (Kate Winslet), becomes a cult member.  With
literally a single touch from a guru in India, she is converted.
Deprogramming in the film is done by an American expert, PJ Waters
(Keitel), who can restore a person's beliefs in a standard three day
ritual.  His three-day miracle cure, he claims, has been successfully
executed on 187 people with only a 3.1% recidivism rate.  ("Day one:
Insult her, get her attention, win her respect," he gives as the first
part of his cookbook recipe.)
This infuriatingly short time for religious conversion and rejection is
made even less believable by Winslet's flighty and flimsy acting.  Only
in her erotic scenes is she ever the least bit convincing.  To be fair,
though, she is forced to say some pretty ridiculous lines.  ("What do
you think of me?" Ruth asks PJ as a taunt.  "Do you like my personality
or my breasts best?"  Given her brat of a demeanor in the story, PJ
doesn't take long to decide his answer.)
Dressed totally in black from his sunglasses to his cowboy boots, Keitel
makes a stunning impression.  But, asked to give an intellectual
performance devoid of much emotional impact, he's embarrassingly
miscast.  Still, Keitel is such a good actor than he manages to make the
part more interesting than it has any right to be.
The movie is filled with an array of eccentric characters.  Typical of
these is the young woman who writes herself fake love letters, which
makes her boyfriend jealous.  She's a twit who makes love to her
boyfriend while looking at the pictures of movies stars and calling out
their names in ecstasy, "Oh Brad [Pitt]!"  She's also inclined to ask a
guy during sex if he has a Web site.
None of these subplots have much to do with the story.  Campion treats
the movie like a mixed salad, throwing in every ingredient in her
kitchen in the hopes of spicing it up.  Rather than enhancing, the
result is sensory overload.  Nothing seems to blend even if some of the
parts are mildly tasty.
Although the movie starts off seriously, it slowly dissolves into pure
kitsch.  And after a semi-satisfactory ending, an unnecessary epilogue
is tacked on that blunts the show's modest impact, making an already
unsatisfactory film even more so.
HOLY SMOKE runs 1:54.  It is rated R for strong sexuality and language
and would be acceptable for high school students.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Miramax Films
 Director: Jane Campion
 Writer: Anna Campion, Jane Campion
 Cast: Kate Winslet, Harvey Keitel, Pam Grier, Sophie Lee,
Tim Rogers, Daniel Wyllie, Julie Hamilton, Paul Goddard
   Jane Campion's ("The Piano") new movie, which will open
for one week in December for Oscar consideration before
having an open run in 2000, should get the Academy Award
hands-down for "Best Picture about a Guy Who is Hoist with
his Own Petard."  Alas, such an tribute does not yet exist, but
"Holy Smoke" is one helluvan examination of the struggle we
poor human beings go through every day as our rational side
struggles with the irrational.  (If you don't believe such a
civil war is waged regularly inside our little skulls, just
try to remember what we dreamt about last night.)  In
particular, let us never underestimate the power of the sex
drive.  The energy unleashed or repressed by that dynamic
can hardly be overstated, and now, Ms. Campion uses her
vivid imagination and sense of cinematic color, light and
imagery to portray the tussle in an over-the-top drama of
gamesmanship that welcomes us once again to an
Australian Woop-Woop that features an unlikely duo's making
whoopie.
   Borrowing the theme from the classic Bertolucci film of
1973 "Last Tango in Paris"--about an American expatriate
who enters into a sexual liaison with a chance acquaintance
abroad--Campion plunges into the story of a cult
deprogrammer who is in grave danger of being programmed
himself.  After successfully busting up 189 cult-worshipping
young people with "a recidivism rate of only 3.3 percent," the
Los Angeles-based P.J. Waters (Harvey Keitel) is hired by a
couple far away in South Australia to deprogram their
daughter, Ruth Barron (Kate Winslet).  On a trip to India with
her friend Prue (Samantha Murray), Ruth had fallen under the
sway of a forceful guru, Chidaatma Baba (Dhritiman Chaterji),
and decides to remain in Delhi with Baba's devotees. 
Deceiving her that her father, Gilbert (Tim Robertson) is
dying, Ruth's mother Miriam (Julie Hamilton) travels to Delhi
and convinces her to return temporarily to their home,
whereupon she is forced by her extended family to go to an
isolated cabin for three days with P.J. Waters.  Waters will
proceed to break her down through a three-step
process--before building her up to return to her
normal life.  But Ruth exploits her sexual prowess to throw
the older man off course, turning the battle of wills into a
literal knock-down, drag-out struggle that threatens to trash
the cult-buster's undefeated record.
   Campion puts together two of the most unlikely characters
and compels us to accept the sexual bond that the much
older "ugly American" has with this powerfully libidinous soul,
giving new meaning to the joys of touring the terrain
downunder.  Kate Winslet, in the role of a woman trying to
find herself spiritually in a manner not unlike her striving in
Gillies Mackinnon's recent film "Hideous Kinky," radiates
a sensuality so strong that we can almost forgive Keitel's P.J.
Waters' descent into madness.  This is hardly a film that
takes itself with deadly seriousness, as Campion throws the
screen open to an array of wacky characters, especially
Ruth's outrageously flirtatious sister-in-law, Yvonne (Sophie
Lee).  Like a high-school kid in the throes of puppy love,
Yvonne writes romantic letters to herself and while enjoying a
sexual union with her husband, Robbie (Dan Wyllie)
fantasizes an array of movie stars like Brad Pitt and Tom
Cruise.  
   The goofy scenario is played out against the huge empty
spaces of the Australian desert (filmed in and around the little
town of Hawker in south Australia's Fliners Ranges).  A single
image, perhaps the most dramatically vivid, colorful and
impressive of any film this year, occurs at the moment in
Delhi that the Baba stares at Ruth, propelling upon her a
hallucinatory impression that a third eye has grown in the
middle of her forehead.  She swoons amid a kaleidoscopic
display that must be the first detail an enraptured devotee
sees upon entering a state of Nirvana.  Our assurance that
Ruth is indeed sold on her new life in India comes to the fore
when she dances wildly to Alanis Morissette's "You Oughta
Know."  At this point some in the audience will root for Ruth's
victory over Waters, particularly when Campion impresses
upon us the fuddy-duddyness of her parents and the near-
derangement of people in Ruth's extended family.
   If Harvey Keitel emerged as the invincible cleaner in
Quentin Tarantino's "Pulp Fiction," he materializes here as
the man who is sent to tidy up a soul but ends up as a
basket case himself, at least temporarily until his long-term
associate, Carol (Pam Grier), can straighten him out.  Keitel
enjoys his obligatory nude scene, attracted by a similarly
naked Winslet in what becomes a mock-serious film about
the vulnerability of both principals to the forces of the
irrational.  If the film comes across as too over-the-top, one
which makes you wonder what Campion is really getting out
(our search for spirituality? sexual politics?), the best way to
interpret its vision is that life is unpredictable.  Accept the
illogical, the untenable, the wildly imaginative as much a part
of our makeup as the coldly sensible.  "Holy Smoke" is a fun
picture full of vibrant imagery, wacky characters, and carnal
aspirations.
Rated R.  Running Time: 114 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
HOLY SMOKE!
(Miramax)
Starring:  Kate Winslet, Harvey Keitel, Julie Hamilton, Sophie Lee.
Screenplay:  Anna Campion and Jane Campion.
Producer:  Jan Chapman.
Director:  Jane Campion.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, sexual situations, drug use, profanity, violence)
Running Time:  114 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Late in HOLY SMOKE!, Jane Campion's latest attempt at gender
provocateurship, the principal male character refers to the principal
female character as a "man-hater." The principal female character then
responds that he calls her a man-hater "just because I criticize you." I
would never be so crude as to suggest that Campion is a man-hater, but
it's hard to not to wonder what testosterone-soaked demons haunt her. It's
one thing to ask pointed questions about gender-based power dynamics; it's
quite another to ask those questions using such weighty symbolism that
it's hard not to laugh out loud at the raving significance-mongering of
it all. 
     Campion's painfully strident stylings get a workout in HOLY SMOKE!, a
film that gets sillier and less insightful the longer I think about it. 
Kate Winslet stars as Ruth, a young woman from Sydney who begins following
a charismatic guru while travelling in India with a friend. Concerned that
Ruth has been taken in by a "cult," Ruth's family hires one of the world's
most successful "exit counselors," P. J. Walters (Harvey Keitel) to bring
her around again. After luring Ruth back to Australia under false
pretenses, the family leaves her in an isolated cabin with Walters for
three days, where he expects to break her down and build her up again. But
things don't work out quite so simply, leaving both parties searching for
their roles in their strange relationship.
     For a little while, it almost seems that Campion is on to something.
The opening montage, in which Campion sets up Ruth's introduction to
"Baba's" teachings, is an energetic sequence set to Neil Diamond's "Holly
Holy." Better still are the scenes of Ruth's mother (Julie Hamilton) 
visiting Ruth in India, her anxieties betraying the fact that she may be
most concerned about her daughter falling in with dark-skinned people. By
mixing in the racist element with the sexist elements of her story,
Campion promises a film that could have been a fairly complex examination
of exerting power and manifesting fear of "otherness." 
     Don't expect anything quite so measured. From that provocative
beginning, HOLY SMOKE! quickly disintegrates into a sluggish, rib-kicking
polemic. Walters is introduced, with little room for misinterpretation, as
a preening and self-important sort who slicks back his dyed hair, receives
oral gratification from Ruth's ditzy sister-in-law (Sophie Lee) and
prepares for his meetings with Ruth with breath spray. Ruth, meanwhile, is
a free spirit whose earth mother dance to "You Oughtta Know" provides all
the ur-femme credentials you could want. Campion seems little concerned
with exploring the side of Ruth that quickly transfers her devotion from
Baba to Walters. She's far more fascinated with the sociological
implications of a woman trying to escape into the wilderness by strapping
books to her feet, or of Ruth and Walters playing a role-reversal game in
which Walters is dressed up in lipstick and a skimpy red dress. For those
of you who think one of cinema's most unnecessary images was Keitel's free
willy in Campion's THE PIANO, please consider Keitel in lipstick and a
skimpy red dress.
     I suppose some viewers could find themselves intrigued enough by the
shifting nature of Ruth and Walters' relationship to give its freakish
elements a pass. I found it far too hard to take HOLY SMOKE! seriously as
anything other than an opportunity for Campion to rattle our collective
cage, whether the image is a nude Ruth urinating in front of Walters or
Walters hallucinating Ruth as a many-armed Indian goddess. It's not so
much shallow as it is garish and over-wrought, an Important Message Movie
without a solid base of characterization to ground it. It has begun to
appear that Campion is more concerned with filming themes than with
filming stories, struggling against oppression without making that
oppression recognizable in human terms. There's no need to use terms like
"man-hating" for that kind of film-making. "Clumsy" just about says it
all.
