Title
Review for Tetsuo II: Body Hammer (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Supercalifragilisticbiomechanoidism.
The original TETUSO: THE IRON MAN, made for about the cost of the opening
credits of many, many far less successful movies, was a 67-minute blitzkrieg
on the senses that became a deserved cult staple, both here and in its
native Japan. The director, a gentleman named Shinya Tsukamoto who will
probably not be receiving much babysitting work, has gone ahead and created
a follow-up, in spirit more than in form. It doesn't have the total
advantage of novelty, but it has searing images in abundance, and a very
strange story indeed -- a slightly more coherent one that its predecessor,
if that's an inducement.
As with the last film, Tomoro Taguchi stars as a meek "salaryman", except
this fellow has a wife and child, and they have what appears to be as normal
an existence as could be asked for from modern-day Japan... except the
camerawork as they eat is just a little bit creepy. Then their son is
kidnapped by a gang of thugs, and his rage somehow makes him mutate into a
kind of human gun, wreaking (unwanted?) havoc every-which-way. That's as
much of the plot as bears up under a synposis; the rest is one blast of
images after another. (One slightly astonishing item: the remarkable sets
were all "found"; nothing was constructed for the sake of the movie.)
Is this a horror movie or a piece of SF? With the blurring of the lines
between the two (thanks to some good movies like ALIEN and some dreadful
ones like HELLRAISER: BLOODLINE), it's safe just to call it a gut-level
experience. There are many moments where it doesn't make sense, but we never
get the feeling it was *supposed* to. It's quite a ride, and it leaves you
wrung out and raw-eyed, the way it should. As far as more coherency to the
story goes, there's a detour about 2/3 of the way through to explain a major
character's actions, but it should be regarded more for the sake of color
than plot: What's most fascinating about TETSUO and BODY HAMMER is not why
any of this is happening, but what everyone does because of it.
Three out of four body-cannon-electrode-probe-thingies.syegul@ix.netcom.com                                       EFNet IRC: GinRei
http://www.io.com/~syegul                          another worldly device...
you can crush me as I speak/write on rocks what you feel/now feel this truth
UNMUTUAL: A Digital Art Collective - E-mail syegul@ix.netcom.com for details
=smilin' in your face, all the time wanna take your place, the BACKSTABBERS=
