Title
Review for Angus (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Charlie Talbert, George C. Scott, Kathy Bates, Chris Own, 
      James Van Der Beek, Ariana Richards 
Director: Patrick Read Johnson 
Producer: Dawn Steel and Charles Roven 
Screenplay: Jill Gordon based on a short story by Chris Crutcher 
Cinematography: Alexander Gruszynski 
Music: David Russo 
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema 
     Coming-of-age movies generally fall into one of two categories:  
fresh, honest stories that transcend formulas or "safe" tales that 
embrace them.  Despite fitting perfectly into the latter camp, ANGUS 
nevertheless works--at least to some degree.  It is neither surprising 
nor original, but moments of genuine joy and poignancy, coupled with 
some solidly-developed characters, make ANGUS a better film than the 
storyline suggests.  Unfortunately, a poor conclusion blunts many of the 
picture's better elements. 
     An intelligent high school freshman with an aptitude for chemistry 
and some ability on a football offensive line, Angus Bethune (Charlie 
Talbert) is far from the golden boy of the class.  That's because, 
regardless of his good-natured and self-deprecating personality, all his 
fellow schoolmates see is an overweight teen who sweats a lot and cares 
little for his appearance.  It's a story that's played out everywhere in 
this world, both for children and adults--those who don't conform are 
ostracized, and the resulting pain can be a difficult burden to bear. 
     Angus has only one real friend, Troy (Chris Owen), who is as much a 
misfit as his larger companion.  However, while Angus is fat, Troy is 
short and skinny, with a face that resembles Howdy Doody's.  At home, 
Angus' "support system" includes a loving truck driver mother (Kathy 
Bates) and a liberal-minded, free-speaking grandfather (George C. Scott) 
who's engaged to a woman forty years his junior.   
     Angus' nemesis is quarterback and class president Rick Sanford 
(James Van Der Beek), a nasty-minded individual who will go to any 
lengths to embarrass and degrade the science whiz.  To that end, Rick 
arranges for Angus to be voted king of the freshman Winter Ball.  The 
queen, who the king is supposed to dance with, is Rick's beautiful, 
ultra-popular girlfriend, Melissa Lefevre (Ariana Richards, of JURASSIC 
PARK), upon whom Angus has secretly had a crush for years. 
     ANGUS is never subtle, but for the first seventy-five minutes, it 
gets the point across with style, humor, and an occasional bittersweet 
moment.  The predictability isn't much of a drawback since the 
characters--particularly Talbert's title personae--are essayed with 
great sympathy.  At some point in life, every teenager has to come to 
grips with who he or she is and what they wish they could be.  Angus' 
dilemma is that he wants to be normal, but can't.  He's socially inept, 
has two left feet, and is too nervous to talk to girls.  He's even 
frightened to take his grandfather's advice to "Screw [everyone]!  Who 
cares what anybody thinks?"  As portrayed through most of this film, 
Angus is a believably insecure young man who is routinely picked on 
while trying to find the courage to persevere. 
     George C. Scott hasn't had a memorable role since he donned 
Patton's four-star helmet and ivory-handled revolver in 1970.  And, 
while ANGUS certainly isn't classic Scott, the veteran's repartee with 
newcomer Talbert is as well delivered as it is intelligently written.  
Kathy Bates is woefully underused in a role that gives her almost no 
screen time.  The kids all do solid jobs, except James Van Der Beek, who 
is too sneeringly nasty. 
     All of us have been the butt of a joke at one point or another, so 
it's not hard to empathize with Angus' situation.  Director Patrick Read 
Johnson and his young actor effectively convey the awkward moments of 
being an out-of-place adolescent.  For that reason, adults may find 
enough in this movie to keep them as involved as the younger generation 
(the movie seems aimed at the eleven-to-fourteen year old group).  
Unfortunately, ANGUS is determined to have a grand, over-the-top ending 
that makes the finale of SCENT OF A WOMAN look restrained.  How's that 
for cornball?? 
     So, in going for mass crowd appeal, Johnson damages his film.  The 
watershed moment is too obvious, and no stone is left unturned in the 
attempt to get the audience up and clapping.  However, as is often the 
case when a movie tries this hard, it destroys the illusion of the story 
and we become uncomfortably aware that we're watching something scripted 
and acted.  On the whole, ANGUS has its own kind of low-key magic, but 
the enchantment is rudely dispelled by the ill-advised final act. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Chad Polenz
** (out of 4 = fair)
1995, PG-13, 87 minutes [1 hour, 27 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Charlie Talbert (Angus Bethune), George C. Scott (Grandpa Ivan),
Chris Owen (Troy), Kathy Bates (Mrs. Meg Bethune), written by Jill Gordon,
produced by Charles Roven, Dawn Steel, directed by Patrick Read Johnson.
        Although "Angus" isn't a very good movie, I have to admit it surprised me.
This is another comedy about the strict class system between teenagers, and
at first it doesn't follow the mold and shows a lot of promise.
Unfortunately, by the second half, not only did it start to plug in the
cliches, but did so in a very poor manner.
        Movies about young teens going through puberty are always about members of
the either the lowest or highest subdivision. Charlie Talbert makes a good
debut here as Angus "Bofoon" Bethune, who is the typical fat kid who is also
the class brian and is constantly taunted because of his weight and
overachievement. 
        The introduction was quite interesting in the way it sets up this character.
Through multiple flashbacks, we see him constantly punching the snotty kid
who's always picking on him. It seemed as if this time the underdog would
reign supreme. But this is a mainstream commercial comedy, so what are the
chances of that?
        Whenever you have movies about the class loser there must always be the
typical supporting characters. There is Troy (Owen), the obnoxious, shrimpy
sidekick; Mrs. Meg Bethune (Bates), Angus's widowed mother who smothers him
with love and food; and Grandpa Ivan (Scott), who is the lovable old man who
gives Angus two words of wisdom: "Screw 'em."
        It takes the movie a while to establish some kind of a plot, which was
forgivable at first, but later became extremely distracting. The popular jock
who had been at war with Angus since childhood fixes the election for prom
king and queen so that Angus will wind up with his girlfriend (who is the
most popular girl at school, and whom Angus also happens to have a crush on
since age five). This embarrasses Angus beyond belief, and most of the film
shows his struggle to prepare himself for the dance even though he doesn't
want to go.
        The second and third acts started a snowballing effect of incidents that
were not only unnecessary but done in such a transparent way as to be very
preachy and make for a sappy mood. Grandpa Ivan seems to be Angus's unwitting
role model, he constantly gives him advice and tells him to break the norm
but Angus doesn't listen. The chemistry between Talbert and Scott is quite
interesting in and of itself (is this really Buck Turgidson from "Dr.
Strangelove"?). I could not believe it when the film would sink so low as to
have the grandfather die on his own wedding day! The fact there is no real
sense of loss only makes it worse.
        The theme of "being yourself" seems to be prevalent in all such films. We
know one of two resolutions to a story like this will occur. Either the bully
will learn to accept Angus for who he is, or through an overdone, climatic
encounter the rest of the class will accept Angus and it will be the bully
who is the odd man out. Either way, there's unnecessary violence, profanity,
and a completely predictable, ironically poetic ending.
        "Angus" would work fine as an "After School Special" but it is not
acceptable as a feature film. Although the characters do seem realistic and
have depth to them, they are stuck in a lame story broken down by a
screenplay with a case of confused identity. (4/6/97) (5/21/97)
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This seemed like the movie for me. Socially-awkward fat kid 
goes through high school rejected by his peers and harboring crushes 
for beautiful girls who won't talk to him. Unfortunately, even though 
the theme was right out of my darkest high school memories, the 
movie itself wasn't quite executed properly. If ANGUS had been 
presented as a one-hour after school special, it would have worked, 
but as a feature-length film there's not enough substance. You have 
to get by the unsightly padding to find any value, which is actually a 
metaphor for what the movie's about.
        Angus (Charlie Talbert), doomed with the self-fulfilling 
prophecy of being named after a cow, is going through his freshman 
year as a tormented outsider, "a fat kid who's good at science and 
football." That's where the Angus character and I fundamentally differ. 
The movie could have been called ANDREW except that I hate sports 
and science, although I could identify with the scene in the beginning 
of the movie where Angus is responsible for the jock quarterback's 
winning touchdown but his contribution is ignored as the jock is 
surrounded by screaming fans. It reminded me of the days I would 
write plays for the popular kids to act out, after which they would 
conveniently forget to acknowledge my participation.
        The movie could have also been called ANGST, because it 
once again delves into the popular topic of people being ostracized 
for proudly being different. In Angus' case, a group of brainless jocks 
who are threatened by his nonconformity (and don't we all know the 
type?) arrange to have him elected Homecoming King so they can 
humiliate him at the dance. Angus, meanwhile, has to handle the 
decision of whether to skip the dance or take the opportunity of 
dancing with Melissa, the Homecoming Queen, on whom he's had 
a lifelong crush. The part of Melissa is played by Ariana Richards, 
the girl who had to escape dinosaurs in JURASSIC PARK. Here, 
she's chased after by someone slightly larger... Hey, I'm _allowed_ 
to make fat jokes. I'm in the club.
        There are several key people in Angus' life rooting him 
on -- his truck-driving mother (Kathy Bates), grandfather (George C. 
Scott) and best friend. They offer means of support in their own 
weird ways, including a mother-son Hagen Daaz binge (permanently 
answering the question of who taught the kid to pig out) and a 
videotaped dance with a blow-up doll... I identified with a lot of 
things in this movie, but just so you know, the blow-up doll thing 
held no personal meaning for me.
        Ultimately, the film is predictable and offers only a few 
laughs, some of which come at the expense of scenes which were 
supposed to be taken seriously, like the climactic scene at the dance, 
where Angus delivers an impromptu speech to the student body about 
how it's okay to be different and the oppressive jocks are actually 
afraid of us for not playing life by their rules or giving a damn about 
what they think of us. All this is true, of course, but it sounds 
unnecessarily absurd coming in the middle of a school dance. At 
least in REVENGE OF THE NERDS, they played this kind of thing 
for laughs, but in ANGUS we're supposed to seriously think a teenage 
crowd would applaud such a speech. Uh-uh. Take it from me, an 
asskicking would occur after a speech like that.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Christopher Null
     Bring together big stars George C. Scott, Rita Moreno, and Kathy
Bates to do a feature film and what do you get?  A movie about a
teenager named Angus, "the fat kid who's good at science and fair at
football" and who just wants to be accepted.  What else would you
expect?
     While not really a "kids' movie," ANGUS is a workmanlike
coming-of-age film, full of slapstick and insult trading among the
youthful cast and their parents.  Angus is played by newcomer Charlie
Talbert (who was discovered in a Wendy's restaurant).  Bates plays Mom,
and Scott is Grandpa.  With the help of his nerdy friend Troy (Chris
Owen), Angus chases after local beauty Melissa (JURASSIC PARK's Ariana
Richards) and overcomes the obstacles placed before him by the
requisite jock-bullies who are threatened by his being different.
     A heavily tested formula, to say the least.  The predictability of
ANGUS is mind-numbing, but thankfully it's pretty funny along the way,
especially Scott's crusty grandfather (note that the humor may not be
totally suitable for children).  But don't expect a lot of touching
dialogue or an even remotely believable romance between Angus and
Melissa; instead, between the jokes, just sit back and listen to 20 or
30 of your favorite pop hits, one after another.
     In the end, the movie is humdrum, marginal eye candy--made of pure
saccharine.  Take it or leave it, it's completely harmless and as
filling as a packet of Sweet N Low.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter & Novelist
-Contributing Editor, Mike's FEEDBACK  /  Film Critic, Texas Business Weekly
-[R]eply to be added to movie review mailing list

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The title character in this coming-of-age flick is a very large
(and very smart) high schooler with two primary problems:  a tremendous
crush on a cheerleader and a lifelong feud with her boyfriend, the
school's star quarterback.  In a plot twist reminiscent of CARRIE, fat
boy and blondie are unexpectedly named King and Queen of the prom and
you can guess what's planned to happen next.
     Though as lumpy as its hero, ANGUS has a soft heart and an even
sweeter message.  Newcomer Charlie Talbert, who plays the lad, is an
affable presence, even if he lisps a bit much.  Also on hand is Kathy
Bates, as Mom, and George C. Scott as the narcoleptic grandfather whose
sole advice to his `son is "screw `em."  Great soundtrack, too.
     "Hack the world!"  That's the credo of a gang of young cyberpunks
who find themselves doing damage control after one of them
steals-for-fun a sensitive corporate file with potentially ecologically
disastrous results.  As one character in the movie notes, "there is no
right and wrong, only fun and boring."  [The pocket-protected audience
nods in silent approval.]
     Director Ian Sofely (BACKBEAT) gives the film a grungy, lived-in
look that's very inviting.  As are the fresh faces in the cast,
including Jonny Lee Miller and Angelina Jolie.  (Look closely and you
can see the resemblance between Jolie and her father, Jon Voight.  What
a find!  And, yes, that's Alberta Watson of SPANKING THE MONKEY fame
playing the mother!)
     The "hacking" sequences are unusual.  Sofely opts for imagery
instead of explanation; dazzling VR instead of a line-by-line (or
window-by- window) demonstration of the craft.  Sure, there's not a
byte of believable technology here--the story is set some
not-too-far-future where laptops can do *anything*--but the characters
are strong.  What a concept, a character-driven "computer movie."
     Writer/director Todd Haynes' intriguing drama about a woman
suffering from "environmental illness" is maddening for two reasons.
First is the pace, which is s-l-o-w.  SAFE moves at about half-speed.
More time to reflect?  Perhaps.  More chances to become restless?
Yes.  The second method for my madness is Hayne's relentless ambiguity
towards his subject.  We're given the facts of the case--a housewife
(Julianne Moore) becomes increasingly "allergic" to her
surroundings--and nothing more.  Haynes invites us to draw our own
conclusion, but just a *little* bit of opposing viewpoint would be
nice.  At least *one* character who could stand up and say "what a
bunch of New Age bunk!"
     Three years after his underrated directorial debut on ALIEN 3,
music-video whiz David Fincher is back with an equally engaging
thriller about an ingenious serial killer stalking a nameless American
city.  The detectives on the case are played by Morgan Freeman (the
veteran) and Brad Pitt (the rookie).  Their quarry is a sermonizing
killer who's preaching through imaginative variations on the seven
deadly sins.
     Atmosphere is everything in Fincher's house of horrors.  Constant
rain, dismal lighting, and amplified sound effects all work to weary
effect.  As does the queasy subject matter.  (Though the gore is kept
to a minimum, you'll know very early if you have the stomach for
this.)  The methodical pace may also be off-putting to some.  SEVEN
requires patience.  Anxious viewers may find themselves straining their
chains much in the same manner that Pitt's gung-ho character does.
     Though it certainly doesn't aspire to any lofty ambitions,
SHOWGIRLS is still a failure.  The problems start in the opening scene,
where the liabilities of actress Elizabeth Berkley are exposed even
before her breasts are.  She has spunk and little else.  (Though some
might argue that she *needs* little else in a movie that wants to give
new meaning the term "titillate."  Forget the rating--the worst you'll
see here are a few female frontal shots.)
     Drawing from the Bad Actors Guild is only part of the problem.
The director, Paul Verhoeven (BASIC INSTINCT, ROBOCOP), can't decide if
he's presenting a strip show or a morality play.  So he tries for
both.  What he ends up with is $40M of Vegas glitz that's neither
erotic nor dramatic enough to be interesting.  A long sit.
     Los Angeles, circa 1960.  A young boy (Nathan Watt) is struggling
to cope with his dying mother (a graceful Andie MacDowell), his distant
inventor father (John Turturro), and two mentally ill uncles (Maury
Chaykin and Michael "Cosmo Kramer" Richards).  The first dramatic
feature directed by actress Diane Keaton didn't move me in the least,
so I can't advise on the story's emotional core.  *I* didn't find it.
Still, this is an admirably well-restrained weeper, with a polished
period look that's easy on the teary eye.  From the memoirs by Franz
Lidz.
