Title
Review for Yin shi nan nu (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Pedro Sena
Like Ang Lee's previous film, this one is funny, sad, wonderful, boring,
interesting, all wrapped up into one package.  As ususal, the story is about
the chinese in a new place and time, in America, and their  adjustments to
life, in general.
But, unlike, THE WEDDING BANQUET, this one is funnier for many reasons. The
word is eccentric.  And the bottom line is that we will never understand one
man's thinking, let alone one woman's. And the inevitable suggestion is that
a misplaced national of any kind, makes even more irrational decisions.  And
EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN, gives us just such a wonderful twist.
Chu, has been a master chef for a long time.  And since his wife died, his
way of enjoying life has been to cook up feasts for his three daughters at
least once a week on Sundays.  But the meal is overdone, in that there is
too much which the daughters can not even eat or touch anymore.  For chu,
burying himself in work life this is easier than facing the world, or his
daughters, with their ever present love life.  His is nil.
And one day, he has finaly gotten tired of the lack of appreciation by his
family.  He decides to make a little time for himself, and even comes up
with a girlfriend.  But, here the surprise is unwrapped, like a sumptuous
meal.  And, like a great chef, another dish is served.  But this time it is
not in the restaurant or the home.  It is his feeling, that has finaly been
defined enough, that he does something about.
With some nice touches here and there, the cinamatography around the food is
rather interesting.  It uses a fast cutting style, to show the fast way that
a chef thinks and acts in most cases.  But, in life, it is all slow.  The
daughters can never make up their minds, and Chu can't decide between
retirement, or hiding.  Well, he ends up doing neither.
A fun film to enjoy, it does stand out.  Ang Lee is letting us see a side of
the chinese life, that we never had anticipated in the  movies.  And for
once, the characters are not card board, or stereo types.  And it has some
nice touches.  The food is just amazing.  Makes your mouth water.  The film
isn't quite that good, but it sure teases enough.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Sihung Lung, Chien-Lien Wu, Kuie-Mei Yang, Yu-Wen Wang,
Ah-Leh Gua, Jui Wang, Winston Chao.
Screenplay:  Hui-Ling Wang, James Schamus and Ang Lee.
Director:  Ang Lee.
     Issues of quality aside, this is the best advice I can give to
anyone considering seeing Ang Lee's EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN:  do *not* see
it on an empty stomach.  Like 1992's LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, EAT
DRINK MAN WOMAN is a cinematic dream for those with a weakness for
scrupulously prepared cuisines, and a nightmare for dieters.  Also like
that earlier film, it is about much more than recipes.  EAT DRINK MAN
WOMAN, like Lee's Oscar-nominated 1993 film THE WEDDING BANQUET, is a
story of generational conflict, a witty and emotionally involving tale
in which food plays a pivotal role in observations on a changing
Chinese culture.
     EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN is the story of the Chus, a family living in
modern Taipei.  Old Chu (Sihung Lung) is a widowed master chef sharing
his home with three grown daughters.  Jia-Jen (Kuei-Mei Yang) is a
repressed schoolteacher who is a Christian convert; Jia-Chien
(Chien-Lien Wu) is an executive for a Taiwanese airline; Jia-Ning
(Yu-Wen Wang) is a student who works in a fast food restaurant.  All
three humor their father's elaborate Sunday dinners, but each has
desires conflicting with Old Chu's world.  Eventually all of them find
themselves entangled in complicated romances, including Old Chu
himself, who is pursued by a garrulous old family friend (Ah-Leh Gua).
The playing out of these relationships leads to a confrontation with
family tensions.
     The title of EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN comes from a Chinese proverb
dealing with the basic necessities for continuing life, but it is used
ironically by Old Chu to note how even the simplest things have become
complicated.  From the opening shots of a swarm of scooters crossing a
busy intersection juxtaposed with Chu's traditional cooking, EAT DRINK
MAN WOMAN becomes an examination of a modern world clashing with an
ancient culture.  Each of Chu's daughters represents a merging of
cultures:  Jia-Jen's religion brings Christianity into the mix;
Jia-Chien's airline is in the process of acquiring routes into new
countries; Jia-Ning's job at a Wendy's (where the customers can't
always tell what they're eating) mocks Chu's life work.  Chu copes by
maintaining a silent distance, yet as he notes other cultures seeping
into his own, he begins to lose the one thing that allows him to
preserve a pure culture, the ability to taste his food.  "We
communicate through food," notes Jia-Chien at one dinner, and with a
breakdown in the ability of the traditional cuisine to bridge the
generations comes a total failure of communication.  It's rich thematic
ground, and Ang Lee does a fantastic job of finding influences,
particularly American influences, everywhere (particularly a humorously
mis-named stuffed purple dinosaur called "Harvey").
     EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN also explores romantic relationships in this
context of generational change, and there it is less consistently
successful.  Each of the four main characters is given a subplot, and
like Old Chu's dinners the film begins to seem like there is a bit too
much to consume in one sitting.  The youngest daughter's story is
particularly weak, and the film might have been more effective if her
character had been dropped entirely.  Otherwise, solid acting makes for
some affecting stories.  Sihung Lung, so good as the father in THE
WEDDING BANQUET, is again taciturn without being one-note, and provides
a solid anchor for the film.  The best story belongs to Kuei-Mei Yang's
Jia-Jen, and she does a magnificent job of playing all of Jia-Jen's
buried emotions at just the right level.  Also noteworthy are two
delightful supporting performances:  Ah-Leh Gua (Lung's wife in WEDDING
BANQUET) as the non-stop Mrs. Liang, and Jui Wang as Old Wen, Chu's
best friend and fellow chef.
     I was not a huge fan of THE WEDDING BANQUET; I felt it was
inconsistently paced, and that its weak lead performances hindered its
emotional pull.  Here, however, Ang Lee has put all the pieces
together.  Though it runs a bit long, EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN is a warm and
keenly observed character piece, filled with mostly exceptional
performances.  See it as it makes its way to your town.  After a large
meal, naturally.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Delightful culinary comedy from Taiwanese filmmaker Ang Lee (THE
WEDDING BANQUET) about a master chef and his three grown daughters and
their difficulties in communicating at any other time than during
Sunday dinner.  Real characters and real situations are just two of the
reasons to see this handsome (and often hilarious) film.  Easily one of
the best films of the year.
     Super-cute, ultra-low budget comedy about two losers-who-know-it
who want to make a movie just because.  One drives a cab, the other
tends bar, and neither knows the first thing about filmmaking.  The
joke, of course, is that these two New York slackers (Eric Shaeffer and
Donal Lardner Ward) really *did* make a movie, this movie, without even
knowing what it would be about.
     Watch for a handful of cameos, including Phoebe Cates who had the
fortune/misfortune of hailing Shaeffer's cab.  In real life and in the
movie.
     Mildly diverting road-comedy stars Terence Stamp (BILLY BUDD,
SUPERMAN II) as one of three drag queens traveling across the outback
in a bus named Priscilla.  Aussie filmmaker Stephan Elliott doesn't
pace his film fast enough to keep your seat from squirming--that is,
unless you find the idea of men dressed as women dressed as Abba
hilarious.
     Lip-synching aside, the scenery is good and Terence Stamp is
always worth watching.  Especially when delivering droll lines like
"what is this, outback with Benny Hill?"  Stay through the closing
credits.
     Holy Oedipus Rex!  This hilarious dark dark dark dark comedy won
the Audience Award at this year's Sundance Film Festival and with good
reason.  No summer has ever been tougher (or funnier) than what
20-year-old Ray (Jeremy Davies) goes through while taking care of Mom
(Alberta Watson) while home from college.
     Low-budget to be sure, be redeemed fourfold by a super script and
sharp performances by Davies, Watson, and Benjamin Hendrickson (as the
father).  Title refers to masturbation, one of the many taboos blithely
broken by first-time writer/director David O. Russell.
     So what if Meryl Streep wants to play Linda Hamilton?  THE RIVER
WILD is one of those pulse-pounding, preposterous thrillers that works
best with your brain almost entirely on hold.  That way you can sit
back and smile and think of all the ways that you'd do things
differently if *you* were the person on the raft with your family and a
killer and not a banjo in sight.
     The photography of the trip is quite good and the river certainly
looks wild.  Too bad bad guy Kevin Bacon never really gets into the
act.  He can be creepy when he wants to be.  Streep and (David)
Strathairn are both fine.  From the director of BAD INFLUENCE and THE
HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE.
     KING KONG remade as a baseball comedy!?  Feel-good film stars
Albert Brooks as a veteran scout (for the Yankees) who discovers "the
greatest player he's ever seen" pitching 100mph fastballs in Mexico.
Too bad the talent (AIRHEADS survivor Brendan Fraiser) needs to play
with a shrink before he can play ball.
     Though the tone veers a little too close to drama at times, the
jokes are strong and the leads are good.  Fraiser's a charm, while
Brooks overacts to the max.  And who'd he steal that straw fedora
from?  Darren McGavin?  Walter Matthau?
     Cameos include Bob Costas, Tony Bennett, and George Steinbrenner.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     You say you got hungry at BABETTE'S FEAST?  Your mouth watered at
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE?  Then you are in for another feast treat with
this Taiwan film by the same director who gave you the hilarious THE
WEDDING BANQUET.
     Mr. Chu (Sihung Lung), Taiwan's greatest chef, will make your
mouth water as you see him prepare the food in a large restaurant with
dozens of helpers scurrying all around.  Listen to the pots sizzle as
he drops in his scrumptious delicacies and makes his wondrous dishes.
Get ready to watch a master chef prepare great Chinese food and be
prepared to get hungry immediately.
     Ah, but Mr. Chu, a widower, despite his being a food wizard, finds
he is having trouble at home managing his three pretty daughters,
Jia-Chien, a self-sufficient airline executive; Jia-Jen, a high school
teacher who may never find the right man; and Jia-Ning, the youngest of
the three and a confirmed romantic.  As if he needed more problems, Mr.
Chu is losing his taste buds; a deaf Beethoven.
     Sunday family dinner is a ritual to keep the family together but a
small torture for the daughters who would rather be elsewhere.
     One of the funniest and endearing scenes in the film is that
involving the lunch brought by Mr. Chu to a friend's daughter at
school.  You will "eat it up."
     Then there is the widow, Ms. Liang (Ah-Leh Gua) who has returned
from America and who has her eye out for Mr. Chu while she checks out
her newly divorced daughter, Jin-Rong (Sylvia Chang).
     Throw all that into the pot and let Director Ang Lee stir things
up and you come up with the most delicious foreign film of the year.
For good measure there is a delightful surprise.
     Finally, about the title.  EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN.  That is what
people need to survive: food and sex.  Need we say more?

Author
Steve Rhodes
     If you fall into one of the following categories, then I think EAT
DRINK MAN WOMAN should be on your must see list:
   1. A father with daughters
   2. Someone whose favorite food is Chinese food
   3. Someone whose hobby is cooking
   4. Someone whose hobby is food photography
     If you do not fall into one of these classifications (I fit in
exactly one of them), then you will probably still really enjoy the
show because it is ultimately about human relationships.
     EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN (see above for the unusual way the title is
written - I am a big fan of the fonts and graphics used in the titles
and the credits of a show) is about a father (Sihung Lung) who is
raising three daughters (Kuei-Mei Yang, Chien-Lien Wu, and Yu-Wen Wang)
on his own.  He and his wife had a stormy marriage, but she died when
the girls were younger.  This show is set when they are growing/grown
up and thinking about leaving home.
     The father is a marvelous head chef at a VERY large restaurant in
Taiwan.  At home, he spends most of his time cooking elaborate dishes
with enough food to serve 20 people.  The camerawork (Jong Lin) of the
food preparation is one of the joys of the show.  The colors and
textures are totally indescribable.  Keep watching the show; resist the
urge to leave and go to the closest Chinese restaurant!
     The father is as bad at communication as he is good at cooking.
He loves his daughters, but he is unable to verbalize it; instead, he
cooks it.  He is truly a good man and a life saver as a chef.  Watch
the dizzying camerawork as he comes in from home to save the day at the
restaurant at a banquet for hundreds when the shark fins in the soup
turn out to be fake.
     The heart of the movie is not the cooking, although it is worth
seeing the movie to watch it.  At its core, this movie is about the
relationships between a father and his daughters.  As they grow up, you
experience their pains and their joys simultaneously through their eyes
and through their father's.  More that this I will not say about this
part of the plot.  See it for yourself.
     The movie was by the director (Ang Lee) of THE WEDDING BANQUET
which, through my own stupidity, I missed seeing.  Since it was billed
as a comedy, I expected this movie to be a light hearted movie.  It
started off that way, but it evolved into getting to know, in an
intense and deep way, three women and their father.  Although the movie
was too slow in many parts and needed much crisper editing (Tim
Squyres); nevertheless, I left the movie wanting to know more about the
people and what would become of them.  The script by Ang Lee,  James
Schamus, and Hui-Ling Wang was wonderful from beginning to end.
     EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN runs 2:03 and is in Chinese with easy to
follow subtitles in English.  It is unrated, but would be PG I am sure.
There is no profanity, not much sex, and no violence.  Any kid who can
read could see it, but I think you would need to be 9 or 10 to
understand the issues it presents enough to enjoy it.  I give it ***
and recommend it to everyone, but especially to those in the categories
listed in the beginning of my review.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: October 12, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Ang Lee is the Taiwanese filmmaker best known to American
audiences for last year's charming but occasionally cliched THE WEDDING
BANQUET.  This year the fans of that film can enjoy his new film EAT
DRINK MAN WOMAN.
     Eating and drinking.  Men and women.  The title refers to two of
the basic human urges.  One is to consume food and drink; the other is
to mate.  These fundamental urges are central to Ang Lee's story of a
great chef and his three adult daughters.  Each of the four has a life
of her or his own and each of the lives intersect at the dinner table
over almost pornographically seductive Chinese banquet dishes.  Not
since BABETTE'S FEAST has food looked this sensually inviting in a
film.  (And, yes, I have considered LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, TAMPOPO,
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, and WHO'S KILLING THE GREAT CHEFS OF EUROPE.  Did
I miss any?)
     Eldest of the daughters is Jen (played by Kuei-Mei Yang), a
sexually repressed chemistry professor who is just coming out of being
shell-shocked from a college romance.  The second daughter is Chien
(Chien-Lien Wu) a successful executive for the Taiwanese national
airline.  Deep down she regrets that she never became a proficient cook
and housewife since her father would not let her do the cooking.  Third
of the daughters is Ning (Yu-Wen Wang) who rebelliously works in a
Wendy's Hamburger Restaurant to spite her father's culinary tastes.
     Then there is Chef Chu himself (Si-hung Lung).  Knowing that he
will soon lose his daughters and dreading an empty nest, he is losing
his taste for life and has already literally lost his taste for food.
In his attempts to connect he has adopted the family next door: a
friend of Jen's and her mother and daughter.  But nothing in this film
is very far from food.  Chu's relationship with the little girl next
door is through his cooking.  When the family gets together and
communicates it is over one of Chu's carefully prepared meals.  It is
over meals that announcements are made to the family.  Much of the
screen time is spent showing exactly how Chu prepares his feasts. These
interruptions would be irritating distractions from the storyline but
they have their own interest value.
     EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN is a long film at 123 minutes and at times the
film moves slowly developing the relationships that form the four
different stories.  Lee is ambitious trying to tell so much plot, but
even at more than two hours some of the stories end up a bit sketchy
and rushed.  In particular, Ning's story is slighted with a rushed
telling.
     But like THE WEDDING BANQUET, this film will probably be popular
in the United States for different reasons than it will be popular in
Lee's native Taiwan.  Remove the Chinese culture from each and you
have a story that is watchable but already a little familiar in this
country.  Neither plot is probably as common in Taiwan.  But United
States audiences may find that the view of the dynamics of a Taiwanese
family is compensation.  This story is not so well written or
structured as last year's JOY LUCK CLUB.  But it still is an enjoyable
comedy-drama, perhaps a bit on the light side.  I rate the film a high
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  Plan to go out for Chinese food after you
see the film.

Author
James Berardinelli
     "Everything is much different in EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN than the
other films I've made.  It has a bigger cast and a lot more complex
story line...  I started thinking about families and how they
communicate.  Sometimes the things children need to hear most are often
the things that parents find hardest to say, and vice versa.  When that
happens, we resort to ritual.  For the Chu family, the ritual is the
Sunday dinner...  At each dinner the family comes together and then
something happens that pushes them farther apart."
         - Ang Lee, writer/director of EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN
     Who said foreign films can't be fun?  Ang Lee's followup to his
internationally successful THE WEDDING BANQUET is a delicious
examination of the relationship between aging Chinese master chef Tao
Chu (Sihung Lung) and his three daughters.  The oldest, Jia-Jen
(Kuei-Mei-Yang), is an unmarried school teacher in her late twenties.
The middle daughter, Jia-Chen (Chien-Lien Wu), is a thriving corporate
airline executive whose career comes before all else.  The youngest,
Jia-Ning (Yu-Wen Wang), is a twenty year old romantic who works at a
Wendy's fast food joint.
     EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN is a more accomplished motion picture than its
predecessor--and THE WEDDING BANQUET was good enough in its own
right.  The comedy is spontaneous and relaxed, the drama is
finely-tuned, and the plot is seasoned with unexpected little twists.
The script delights in occasional forays just beyond the typical bounds
of a screenplay.
     Though filmed entirely in Taiwan (Lee's first film not to examine
cross-cultural issues), the themes of EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN are
universal.  The problems faced by the Chu family happen all around the
world, and the difficulty of communicating across the generation gap is
something almost everyone has experienced at one time or another.
Love, especially that of Chu for his daughters, often goes unspoken,
for to express emotion is to admit vulnerability.
     With an ease that marks the true craftsman, Ang Lee develops a
rapport between his characters and the audience.  These people have a
richness, texture, and depth that no stereotype could hope to match,
and which a film like Wayne Wang's THE JOY LUCK CLUB was grasping for.
The perfectly-proportioned measures of comedy and drama emerge through
character interaction, not as a result of contrived situations and
silly one-liners.
     For his cast, Lee has chosen a mixture of actors he has and has
not previously worked with.  The role of Chu was written with veteran
performer Sihung Lung in mind.  The actor appeared in a similar
patriarchal capacity in the director's PUSHING HANDS and THE WEDDING
BANQUET.  Also returning from THE WEDDING BANQUET are Winston Chao (the
reluctant bridegroom then and a co-worker of Jia-Chen's now) and Ah-Leh
Gua (the mother then and the obnoxious Mrs. Liang now).
     Food is as much a backdrop as a recurring symbol.  Chu's failing
taste buds parallel his loss for the zest for life.  Jia-Chen's love of
cooking harkens back to a frustrated childhood desire, and Jia-Ning's
work at a Wendy's makes a statement about the infusion of Western
culture into modern-day China.  Nevertheless, as with THE AGE OF
INNOCENCE, which displayed countless dishes guaranteed to whet the
appetite, EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN could perhaps be frustrating to any who
view it on an empty stomach.
     EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN is basted in its own wonderfully seasoned
juices.  Chu may have lost his taste, but writer/director Ang Lee has
definitely not.  A treat for those not scared off by subtitles, this
movie provides one of the year's most sincere views of family
dynamics.  Dealing with subjects that could easily have emerged
half-baked, Lee instead applies his talent and comes up with something
cooked to perfection.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
