Title
Review for Face in the Crowd, A (1957)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Before Andy Griffith hit the goldmine with a long-running
weekly television series, he made two very good films
in the late 1950s, "A Face in the Crowd" and "No Time
for Sergeants".  The two films presented very different
Griffiths.  While he begins as a down-home Southerner
in both, in "A Face in the Crowd" he becomes a power-mad
manipulator, while in "No Time for Sergeants" he never
strays from his Gomer Pyle imitation.  Guess which film
had greater commercial success...
Griffith, in his film debut, plays "Lonesome" Rhodes,
a talented entertainer discovered by Patricia Neal in a
podunk Arkansas jail.  Rhodes gets a local radio show
where his mesmerizing home-spun philosophizing and charm
makes him a celebrity.  Soon he graduates to a Memphis
television show, then a national show in New York.  Rhodes
is all too aware of his power over his audience, and becomes
a monster, hungry for political power and contemptuous of
his followers.
Lee Remick makes her screen debut as Rhodes' young wife,
while Walter Matthau is his world-weary writer.
Anthony Franciosa is Rhodes' cynical, on-the-move agent.
"A Face in the Crowd" received no Academy Award nominations
and stiffed at the box office, despite its quality and
the presence of Elia Kazan as director and Budd Schulberg
as writer (they had collaborated on "On the Waterfront").
Perhaps the public wasn't ready for the film's indictment
of television and its ability to manipulate the masses with
phony images.
The weakest part of "A Face in the Crowd" may be the ending,
in which good (naturally) triumphs over evil.  Milquetoast
Matthau delivers a speech to Griffith like a judge passing
a sentence, while Griffith goes half-mad upon his come-uppance.
But still, "A Face in the Crowd", if anything, is more relevant today
than during its own era.  Both Reagan and Clinton have demonstrated
that national electoral appeal comes from images more than
substance.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
