Title
Review for When the Daltons Rode (1940)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
A stranger (Randolph Scott) arrives in a sleepy western town,
and waits for a stage coach to take him to the next town.
To pass the time, Scott strolls the streets, and sees a family
having their portrait taken.  There is a mishap in the studio,
and Scott laughs.  This makes one of the clan angry 
(Brian Donlevy, fresh from playing the villian in 
"Destry Rides Again").  Scott next witnesses an altercation
between Ozark Jones (Andy Devine, fresh from playing comic
relief in "Stagecoach", and the only man on earth who can
talk off-key) and his latest girlfriend.
She has a gun and, to protect himself, Ozark hides behind
Randolph Scott.  It is Donlevy's turn to laugh, and Scott
and Donlevy get into a scuffle with Donlevy ending up in
the horse trough.  The tension is broken when Scott realizes
that they are old childhood friends: Scott was a neighbor to
this Dalton family.  Scott is invited to stay at the Dalton
ranch.
Scott hits on a woman at the ranch.  She turns out to be
a Bob Dalton's fiancee.  This love triangle is wooden and
empty, getting in the way of the film's pace.  Scott, who
is a lawyer by trade, agrees to stay in town to fight
banking interests who want to take the Dalton's land.
Soon, overseers arrive to take inspect the homestead.
Donlevy accidentally kills an overseer and is put on trial 
for murder.  Of course, Scott defends him, but Donlevy's
easily roused temper again flares in the courtroom.
There is violence, the Daltons flee the courtroom, and
become bank-robbing outlaws.
The Donlevy trial is the turning point of the film.
A good western drama suddenly becomes an average western
shoot-em-up.  The pace is too quick: now the Dalton gang
is wanted dead or alive, and their daring adventures
include robbin a train loaded with both gold and deputees.
There are some good stunts in these scenes.
The Dalton gang returns to their hometown with the
intention of going straight.  But they can't resist pulling
one last job.  The bank holdup misfires, the Dalton gang
is killed in a shootout, with only Scott surviving.
He gets the girl and first billing, but not the glory,
which must have been annoying to him when he first read
the script.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
