Title
Review for Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles III (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
     In 1603 Japan, there is a war in progress between a great warlord
(Sab Shimono) and a band of rebels led by a beautiful young woman
(Vivian Wu).  Through an odd series of events, a magical talisman of
the warlord is activated, transporting April (Paige Turco), a resident
of 1993 New York City, to feudal Japan.  Following her disappearance,
her four teenage mutant ninja turtle friends decide to go after her.
Using the same talisman that transported April, the reptilian brothers
cross through time and space to end up in the middle of the battle
between the warlord and the rebels.
     The TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES movies are New Line Cinema's cash
cow.  Ever since the unexpected success of the generally-dreadful first
film, the sequels have arrived at fairly regular intervals.  Until one
bombs at the box office, they will likely continue to appear.  Since
they aren't costly to make, it will require an extremely low turnout
for any of these movies to run a deficit.
     Quality obviously doesn't have anything to do with the appeal of
the turtles.  The first film was bad, the second worse, and the third
almost unbearable.  Children under the age of thirteen will probably
enjoy the movies - they have the same appeal and intelligence level of
the average Saturday morning cartoon - but any adults accompanying them
to the theater will have to invent new and interesting ways to stay
awake and interested.  Not only is this movie aimed at young children,
the script could have been written by them.
     It isn't necessary for a children's film to insult and bore
adults.  Many of them do, but movies like Disney's ALADDIN manage to
entertain people of all ages.  Not so for TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES
III.  The movie is supposed to be an offbeat adventure/comedy, but the
action is dull and predictable, and the comedy, which consists of
numerous hackneyed one-liners, is singularly monotonous.
     There is a lot of cartoon-style violence in this film.  In fight
scene after fight scene, many of which involve guns and swords, people
emerge relatively unscathed.  Death doesn't seem to be a strong reality
in the world of the mutant ninja turtles.  Like in HOME ALONE 2 (and,
to a lesser extent, the original HOME ALONE), men survive getting
bashed over the head with heavy objects, beaten up, and shot at.
Personally, I believe that when a movie uses violence, it should show
the unpleasant consequences.  In the TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES
movies, we get an idealized, sanitized violence where no one really
gets hurt.
     The film will appeal to children.  Marketing plays a big part in
this, enticing boys and girls to go out and see the newest adventures
of their favorite foursome.  The PG rating lulls parents into believing
that this is a wholesome family feature.  What it turns out to be is
too violent for younger viewers and unbearably tedious for older ones.
Yet, despite being one of the worst films of the year, it will probably
still make a tremendous amount of money and, as the unfortunate result,
we will be subjected to TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES IV.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
