Title
Review for Mohra (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David M. Arnold
India has one of the largest movie industries in the world yet its
product is nearly unknown to most Western audiences.  The staple of
Indian cinema is the long, stylized musical, with "musical" the
operative word.  There are musical comedies, musical romances, musical
action flicks, musical adventures, musical thrillers, musical mysteries
and no doubt musical war movies.  Last year, Indian movies began
appearing on DVD.  Many include English subtitles and this opens an
opportunity for Western audiences to be introduced to this interesting
and exotic genre.
I have a deep fascination with and fondess for Indian culture, history
and mythology.  The last time I visited our local Indian grocery and
spice shop, I noticed a stack of DVDs for rent.  I selected one, more
or less at random, titled "Mohra".
"Mohra", which I believe to be fairly representative of the Indian
action genre, concerns a pair of drug gangs in a turf war.  Vishal
(Sunil Sheety), the anti-hero in a Yojimbo sort of way, is freed from
prison as the result of the intervention of journalist Roma (Raveena
Tandon), and her boss Jindal (Naseeruddin Shah), a blind media tycoon.
Soon, Vishal is playing both gangs against each other and the body
count starts to mount.  Meanwhile, Roma falls for the film's hero Amar
(Akshay Kumar), a police officer assigned to drug enforcement.  Amar
and Vishal keep crossing each others' paths, until in the end they join
forces against a drug kingpin who is manipulating both crooks and
police in a grander scheme.
The plot is merely a framework on which to hang the musical numbers and
the fight scenes, which occur regularly and in about equal number.
Songs are so central to Indian cinema that the DVD includes a separate
chapter index organized by song.  The songs themselves are of the
Indopop variety -- a fusion of classical Indian music and modern pop,
and the musical numbers are sumptuously staged and photographed in a
way that often seems jarringly disconnected to the rest of the film.
The fight scenes are preposterous martial-arts extravaganzas, but I
ended  up admiring the level of effort, talent and training that must
go into staging one of these.
"Mohra" is very much over-acted and over-directed, but I'll have to
sample a few more titles before deciding whether or not this is merely
a characteristic of the genre.  The subtitles were helpful as I don't
speak Hindi, but some of the translations were unintentionally humorous
("I don't wish to pressurize you into talking about it").
I was suprised and pleased with the overall quality of the DVD.  The
image was bright, crisp and clear and letterboxed to 1.85:1 aspect
ratio.  I suspect that the film was shot in a 2.35:1 'Scope format
and a 1.85:1 flat extraction print used for making the video.  The
colors were vivid, although I saw several instances of poor color
timing towards the end of the film.  The audio was monaural and a
just a little harsh sounding.
I'm most encouraged by the approach that the Indian DVD distributers
are taking -- making high-quality, reasonably priced discs that are
NTSC standard and Region 0 (i.e. not region locked).  These discs are
priced so that pirating them simply isn't worth while.  Today, (2/2000)
Indian discs dominate the foreign film catalog at netflix.com, no
doubt the direct result of this open policy.  I'm hoping that this
strategy proves successful, and that other DVD producers will be
encouraged along these same lines.
Essay copyright (C) 2000 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
