Title
Review for Navigator: A Mediaeval Odyssey, The (1988)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Julianne Cripps Clark
     This Australian and New Zealand movie left me feeling hot and cold because
the director -- Vincent Ward -- has illustrated all my pet theories about Man
being his own religion in the most brilliant story that I have seen for a long
time.  It starts off in a mediaeval Cumbrian copper mining village in the snow
of March 1348 when two thirds of Europe was busy being wiped out by the Bubonic
Plague.
     THE NAVIGATOR works on several levels -- as an adventure story but mainly
as a spiritual fulfillment for the protagonists and not least for the audience.
It illustrated (to me at least!)  that it's not the religion itself that counts
-- but rather the power that humans have with their positive belief (be it in
themselves, God, Christ, Allah ...)  that constitutes Spiritual Reality.  In
this movie the Spirituality of the people  of an age passed controlling their
own destiny is contrasted with our own spiritual-less and consequently doomed
age.  Yes -- it *is* heavy stuff!
     All else I can say without spoiling the movie for those of you who are in
to this sort of thing and lucky enough to be able to see it is: be prepared to
suspend your disbelief fairly early on in the picture so that it won't get in
the way of the philosophy, just trust that all will "be revealed"!
[Several spoiler paragraphs removed here.]
     The plot is extremely well-connected although some 20th Century sequences
were a tad Indiana-Jonesish and drawn out for my taste.  This may bother some
people (who may have found it unbelievable that the 20th Century made it into
the movie at all) to the point that they might miss the underlying
philosophies.  Not all the acting is brilliant.  However at the very least
there is some pretty black humour in the juxtaposition of the 20th and 14th
Centuries (witness the tragic parting of one member of the party because he
cannot make it across the busy freeway).
     A brilliant movie (6 AFI Awards -- Best Picture, Director etc....).

Author
Shane Burridge
The Navigator: A Medieval Odyssey (1988) 92m.
New Zealand director Vincent Ward had some difficulty getting this,
his second feature, off the ground despite critical acclaim for his
debut VIGIL.  Story is seen through the eyes of Griffin (Hamish
McFarlane, who does too much earnest yelling for my liking), a boy
living in an isolated, snowbound village in 14th-century Cumbria.  His
older brother Connor (Bruce Lyons) has just returned home to bring
news of the plague decimating the surrounding lands.  Fearing the
wrath of God, an expedition is sent from the village to place, by way
of an offering, a cross atop a church on `the far side of the Earth'
(New Zealand).  Griffin claims he has already seen the journey (if not
lived it) and serves as the party's navigator - although what he is
navigating is not only space but also time and consciousness. 
Ward jumps the gap of six hundred years and the distance of half a
planet assuredly, but his unfixed narrative, interrupted by
repetitious flashbacks (which, since Griffin is using them to map
their future path, are simultaneously flashforwards), is less
comfortable.  This is a film based on an idea: Ward has a beginning
and an ending, but no strong narrative meat in the middle.  The
party's odyssey is over before it can reach the epic quality of a true
odyssey.  THE NAVIGATOR does not concern itself much with the spirit
of adventure (which would serve this particular story well) but
instead sticks to the more appropriately medieval doom-laden concerns
of God, death, and prophecy.  I'm glad at least that Ward didn't turn
his time-travel story into the kind of culture-shock cliche that
depends almost entirely on anachronism gags.  I also like the way he
keeps the nameless city (ostensibly Auckland) deserted and empty of
all activity save that of the machines and vehicles that prowl the
shadows like nocturnal scavengers.  His approach reinforces the notion
that everything Griffin is seeing is a dream (it's like an ultra-sober
WIZARD OF OZ - it's even bookended with black and white sequences and
features a journey to a magical city), but what prevents us from
dismissing his story as imaginary is the accuracy of his visions.
Griffin sees highways, television, a submarine, and even a glimpse of
a second potential apocalypse - the 20th century's nuclear update of
the plague.  This is Ward's nod to New Zealand's strong anti-nuclear
stance at the time, one which did not find favor with the US military
and caused much public debate.
Film has ambition and imagination, but still appears incomplete.  You
might come out of this feeling that something is lacking.  But you
have to admire Ward for sticking to his vision and producing something
other than the black comedies and urban/rural `social' dramas that had
the NZ film industry in a stranglehold.  His keen visual eye and deft
smoke-and-mirrors approach proves that a real director can still make
a class act out of a modest budget. 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  For the beauty of its photography and
     the originality of its concept this fantasy from Australia
     and New Zealand is the best that has been seen in America for
     several years.  Yet it loses points because of a muddled
     narrative that leaves the viewer wondering what the story was
     really all about.  Rating: +2.
     It is March 1348 in Cumbria.  In a small mining village there is the
certain knowledge that the Plague is coming.  Connor has been gone from the
village for three months, much longer than expected, just finding out what
is happening in the world.  Perhaps the Plague has claimed him.  His young
brother Griffin waits for his return.  And Griffin suffers from enigmatic
dreams, perhaps visions, of another world and a mission of faith, perhaps an
act of faith so great that God will intercede and protect the village from
the onslaught of the Plague.  God wants the villagers to dig through the
flat disk that is our world and come out on the other side, the Celestial
City.  There they are to forge a cross and place it on top of the mighty
cathedral that commands the Celestial City.  When Connor returns with news
of just how close the Plague really is, the urgency of the mission becomes
obvious.  They dig through the disk and find the Celestial City, a city of
great wonder, though to our eyes it is just your standard 1988 New Zealand
city.  Things we have come to live with are to the pilgrims' eyes great
sights and great dangers.  And so begins their adventure.
     Stylistically filmed in black and white and in color, THE NAVIGATOR
beautifully re-creates the life in a 14th Century village and a comparable
view of life in the 20th Century, though the color photography is much less
interesting.  It is a story told on many levels, not all of which are
comprehensible.  The style of story-telling is usually well told with the
sort of duality of vision that THE GODS MUST BE CRAZY has.  We see the
familiar, but we also see it through the eyes of a strange culture.  Only at
one point does this duality break down into slapstick worthy of a Terry
Gilliam.
     THE NAVIGATOR is an odd and murky fantasy that seems to be pointing to
some deeper meaning that is somewhere beyond view.  As a fantasy it edges
out even this year's FIELD OF DREAMS for originality of idea.  But in the
final analysis the film narrative is muddled and the point of this exercise
remains unclear.  I give it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Alex Patison
     This movie has been playing for a few months but I have only just caught
up with it.  It is a New Zealand/Australian co-production but it is but no
means typical of the films that have been produced in this part of the world
over the last decade.  The feel of the movie is more European, even though half
of the film is seen to take place in New Zealand.  As a winner of 6 Australian
Film Awards it is bound to get a showing outside of NZ/Australia.
     Without giving away more than the flyer advertising the movie, it is set
in England 1348, the year of the Black Death.  The Navigator is a boy who has
visions - dreams.  He dreams of tunnelling through to the other side of the
Earth to a Great Cathedral, to save his village from the Black Death.  The
movie follows this voyage and when they emerge at the other side of the Earth
it is New Zealand.  And it is 1988.  (Yes, another "time" movie.)
     No, the movie is not medieval meets the 20th Century.  Far from it.  It
deals with the people and their determination to achieve their goal - the goal
set by the young boy.  The fact that they are in New Zealand had nothing to do
with it.  One of the skillful parts of the movie is the way in which the modern
day cities are presented with the same medieval feel as the village "back
home."  1988 has its own terrors (cars/highways), its own "Black Death," and
all things familiar to the religion back home.  The camera angles used in the
modern towns do not give any detail - they just add effect.  And some of the
camera effects are good - the desolate, snow-covered landscape is all the more
desolate for the use of black and white.  Top marks for the cinematography.
     I came out of the theatre feeling that I had shared in an adventure, not
just watched one.  And the music, by Davood Tabrizi, with a feel similar to
THE MISSION, added all the more.
