Title
Review for Walking and Talking (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     WALKING AND TALKING is another one of those talkfest shows.  With
the right script these can be among the most enjoyable and rewarding of
any cinematic experience.  From MY DINNER WITH ANDRE to DINER to BEFORE
SUNRISE, this is a genre of which I have always been especially fond.
Thanks to an energetic cast this movie tries hard and almost delivers.
Sad to say that the directing and writing by Nicole Holofcener is not
of the same caliber.  This is not a bad show just a disappointing one.
It is one that keeps your attention and never drags.
     WALKING AND TALKING starts with two preteen girls reading "The Joy
of Sex" together in bed.  They are enthralled with it, but after this
brief scene we cut to them grown up and still friends.  They are just
as much interested in sex, but only one of them has been lucky in love,
and the other is jealous.
     Amelia (Catherine Keener who starred LIVING IN OBLIVION) and Laura
(Anne Heche who played Juliet in THE JUROR) are two attractive young
women.  Laura is living with her fiance Frank (Todd Field who played
Beltzer in TWISTER).  They all live in New York City.  Amelia works in
the newspaper classified section, Laura is an apprentice therapist, and
Frank designs costume jewelry including "men's leisure rings."
     Amelia was once almost lucky in love.  Her ex-boyfriend, Andrew
(Liev Schreiber from DENISE CALLS UP), and she are still friends, but
neither can figure out why they broke up.  Their conversations trying
to figure it out are among the best in the show.  There is also a
running gag about his having phone sex with this woman in San
Francisco.  Amelia does not approve, especially when he tries to borrow
money from her to pay his enormous phone bill.
     Into Amelia's life comes an ugly guy, Bill (Kevin Corrigan), who
works at her local video store, and who is heavily into the horror
movie production business.  Laura and Frank jokingly encourage her
friendship with Bill since he is so ugly, she will not have to worry
about any commitments.  A good one-night stand for her.
     The show is so completely natural that it borders on
amateurishness at times.  The actors are all good, and it is an
ensemble cast, but, on the whole, the show promises more than it
delivers.  The script is just not intelligent enough, and there are no
memorable lines.  I like the characters and the acting, but there is
just not quite enough there.
     WALKING AND TALKING runs 1:30.  It is rated R.  There is more bad
language than there needs to be, and there is a single brief drug
scene.  There is no sex, nudity, or violence.  Even the skinny-dipping
scene is done with their underwear on.  The show would be fine for any
teenager.  It is a marginal call, but there is not enough substance for
me to be able to recommend it.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     Well, a lot more talking than walking....  And not to be confused with
last year's KICKING AND SCREAMING.
     And not at all a bad movie, and the most aptly titled film out right
now.  WALKING AND TALKING is basically just that, focusing on best friends
Laura (Anne Heche) and Amelia (Catherine Keener) and their comedic
struggles with life and love at the dawn of the big 3-0.
     Laura is about to marry Frank (Todd Field) and is having the jitters.
Amelia is a confirmed, miserable bachelorette, and she dallies with the
local video store clerk (Kevin Corrigan), aka "The Ugly Guy," and
ex-boyfriend Andrew (Liev Schreiber).
     And essentially, they all just talk.  A lot.  And it's pretty funny,
with topics of conversation running the gamut from cat vomit to therapy to
schlock horror flicks.  The characters themselves have also been taken to
the hilt.  Frank isn't just a jewelry designer -- he designs only the
really tacky stuff you'd see in a Montgomery Wards catalog.  Schreiber, the
funniest of the lot, reprises his phone sex-obsessed character from DENISE
CALLS UP, and has an addiction to porn videos.  Then there's headliners
Amelia and Laura, whose collective litany of neuroses makes me look like a
sane person.
     So yes, it's funny, but at some point I kept wondering, do people
really talk like this?  The conversations tend to get a bit extreme and
explicit -- running into candid sexual discussions and descriptions of
bodily functions that would put off Madonna.  Humorous?  Sure.  Realistic?
I don't think so.
     That's unfortunate, because this reliance on over-the-top dialogue is
the only thing that really detracts from the picture, which is otherwise a
frank and funny depiction of urban life in the 90's.  (And I was a little
disappointed by the lack of a real ending, too.)
     So no ending on this review, either, but you get a parting fun fact:
watch for people's kitchens -- everyone has the same toaster oven.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Catherine Keener, Anne Heche, Liev Schreiber, Todd Field, Kevin
Corrigan.
Screenplay:  Nicole Holofcener.
Director:  Nicole Holofcener.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     WALKING AND TALKING is the kind of film men generally see only if
dragged by their wives or girlfriends.  They react much the same way a
male character in WALKING AND TALKING does when he refers to the acoustic
guitar tunes preferred by his fiancee as "vagina music;" by that
definition, this would certainly be a "vagina film."  With recent flops
like NOW AND THEN and MOONLIGHT AND VALENTINO giving films about female
friendships a rather bad name, it might be easy to dismiss WALKING AND
TALKING sight unseen.  But for what it's worth, writer/director Nicole
Holofcener puts a Woody Allen spin on the genre, making her debut feature
a quirky neurotic comedy in which appealing performances help counteract
a lack of substance.
     Two life-long best friends are at the center of WALKING AND TALKING:
Laura (Anne Heche), a therapist-in-training; and Amelia (Catherine
Keener), a newspaper classified ads editor.  Now rounding the corner from
twentysomething to thirtysomething, the two women face very different
relationship troubles.  Laura has just gotten engaged to Frank (Todd
Field), but suddenly begins to notice very little flaw in his personality,
and to be attracted to other men.  Amelia, meanwhile, seems to scare off
every man she is involved with, and goes out with a scruffy video store
clerk (Kevin Corrigan) because he seems unlikely to dump her.  Through it
all, Laura and Amelia find it ever more difficult to remain close, as
growing older means walking and talking with others as well as with each
other.
     WALKING AND TALKING seems to have two major themes working at the
same time.  On the one hand, it is about the romantic relationship of our
two heroines, and it provides some clever and amusing insights.  Both
Laura and Amelia are living the life the other one seems to want -- Laura
cuts off Amelia's description of a first sexual encounter with someone,
knowing she'll never have such an encounter again, and Amelia just wants
every man to be The One.  Holofcener makes her characters sexual beings
without having it be part of the joke that a woman is a sexual being, the
way it happens in many films written by men, and there is an impressive
ease to the way in which she portrays men and women who are comfortable
with each other.  One such scene finds Laura and Frank beginning a casual
shoving match in an elevator which turns into a playful war, and it is
typical of the economy with which Holofcener establishes the dynamics of
her characters' relationships.
     Surprisingly, the one relationship which doesn't always come across
is the one which is the basis for WALKING AND TALKING's other main theme,
the friendship of Laura and Amelia.  There are plenty of signifiers which
show us how significant this friendship is -- an opening scene of Laura
and Amelia as pre-teens reading "The Joy of Sex," the illness of the cat
they shared when they were roommates -- but the signifiers don't take the
place of effective scenes between them.  It is true that the problem
between the two is that they don't spend much time together any more, but
we don't get enough opportunities to see their friendship at its best so
that we can feel a sense of loss over their friendship at its worst.
     WALKING AND TALKING is not exactly meaty fare in either of its two
main themes, but what sells the film is its frisky tone and a cast which
downplays the angst.  Catherine Keener (who was the insecure ingenue in
LIVING IN OBLIVION) is a delight as Amelia, and keeps her borderline
obsessiveness from becoming either pathetic or disturbing.  It's a funny
and sad performance as a woman having difficulty differentiating between
needing and needy.  She also has two great co-stars to play off in Kevin
Corrigan as Bill, the quiet video store clerk with an excessive fondness
for horror films, and Liev Schrieber as Amelia's ex-boyfriend-now-friend
Andy.  Keener has an ability to connect with other actors, to really seem
to be listening, and that makes for some priceless interactions.  Anne
Heche is a weaker link in a weaker role; her Laura's predicaments never
seem as urgent to her or to us.
     Nicole Holofcener's script might be a bit talky, but the talk is
sharp and the talkers even sharper.  Forget labels like "chick film."
This one talks the talk _and_ walks the walk.

Author
James Berardinelli
     "I wonder if I'll ever know what it's like to not break up with 
someone," laments Amelia (Catherine Keener).  Meanwhile, her lifelong 
best friend, Laura (Anne Heche), is about to tie the knot with her beau, 
Frank (Todd Field).  This dynamic -- the relationship between a 
perpetually single young woman and her soon-to-be-wed soul-sister -- 
forms the core of Nicole Holofcener's debut feature, WALKING AND 
TALKING.  And, while the two women's romantic entanglements are part of 
the story, it's the chemistry between them that keeps the film on the 
right track. 
     WALKING AND TALKING is real.  It's also, by turns, funny, charming, 
and even a little touching.  Holofcener has an ear for dialogue, and, as 
is often the case with the best character-centered films, a chief 
pleasure is simply enjoying what the participants have to say to one 
another.  The two leading ladies represent another asset.  Anne Heche 
(one of Alec Baldwin's victims in THE JUROR) and Catherine Keener 
(LIVING IN OBLIVION) are effective in both comic and dramatic scenes.  
Each has mastered the knack of giving a completely unforced performance.  
Once they step into character, they never slip out. 
     WALKING AND TALKING successfully navigates a minefield of familiar 
territory.  The storyline, which is essentially a slice-of-life, doesn't 
attempt anything big, but it offers a number of small surprises.  Just 
when you think you know how one romantic entanglement is going to turn 
out, Holofcener throws in a little twist.  That's not to say that the 
plot is masterful (in fact, it's rather simple), but there's enough 
there to hold the viewer's interest. 
     While the meat of the movie is about Amelia and Laura, and the 
manner in which facing the future forces them to acknowledge unwanted 
changes in their relationship, there are a few men around.  The most 
prominent is Frank, Laura's intended.  Played by Todd Field (RUBY IN 
PARADISE, TWISTER), he seems to be the rock-solid sort, and it's 
difficult to say whether Amelia is more jealous of his steadiness or his 
closeness to Laura.  Then there's Andrew, Amelia's screwed-up best male 
friend.  Played by Liev Schreiber (whose last film was DENISE CALLS UP -
- this is acknowledged by an in-joke that has Andrew engaged in a 
telephone relationship), he's a likable neurotic who's addicted to 
pornography and smells his armpits for comfort.  Finally, there's Bill 
(Kevin Corrigan), the "ugly" video store clerk who tries his best to 
worm his way into Amelia's heart.  And, although he turns her off by 
laughing at her dying cat and taking her to a nerds-only, horror movie 
convention, she's the one who places the greatest obstacle in the way of 
a relationship. 
     While WALKING AND TALKING is pretty light fare, it's not without 
substance.  Both Amelia and Laura are confused about the future, albeit 
in different ways.  They're afraid of change, even though they recognize 
it's inevitable, and each suffers from the typical Generation X lack of 
self-esteem.  Amelia sits alone in her room, stroking her cancer-riddled 
cat and listening to "music to slit your wrists by", and Laura bemoans 
her career choice, saying that she's not a good therapist because she 
makes her patients worse.  Even though these two don't need each other 
the way they once did, their mutual importance is still apparent. 
     WALKING AND TALKING ends by giving us closure without wrapping 
everything up in a neat package.  Because the main characters are both 
women, the writer/director is a woman, and the themes relate to female 
bonding, this will inevitably be pegged as a "chick flick."  That's an 
unfortunate appellation, because WALKING AND TALKING has universal 
appeal.  Many of the issues it approaches have less to do with gender 
than with the simple condition of living in the '90s -- something we are 
all afflicted with.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
