Title
Review for IP5: L'île aux pachydermes (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
John Newman
Both directed by Jean-Jacques Beneix
     Watching Jean-Jacques Beneix's new film, IP5, is like holding a
conversation with a man with no long-term memory.  His individual
sentences make sense, and are sometimes well-crafted and beautiful; but
the the discussion does not hang together as a whole.  Every scene of
IP5 is a cinematographer's dream, a masterpiece of color, landscape 
and light; it is unfortunate that character development was given such
short shrift.  This film won several awards at the  Seattle
International Film Festival, but the SIFF is known for flaky
award-giving.  IP5 isn't worth a trip to the theatre, and wouldn't work
on video, so I recommend skipping it entirely.
     The plot of IP5, such as it is, centers on a young (about 18 years
old?) graffiti artist and his younger (12 years old?) sidekick.  The
young man roams Paris painting improbably beautiful graffiti (or
"hip-hop") and acting antisocial, while his sidekick mugs for the camera
and generally acts like W. C. Fields' worst nightmare.  On the side, the
young man pursues an icy-cold nurse, who never gets enough screen time
to make any sort of sense.  A gang of skinheads steal the artist's photo
album of his work, and force him to drive a van to another city to
retrieve it.  He and his sidekick set off, to retrieve the art and to
pursue the young nurse.
     Underway, our heroes abandon the van to steal a flashier car and
chase after the love interest, and that subplot is never seen again.
They wreck the car and are rescued by Yves Montand as an aging hermit
and eccentric.  The hermit seems to have magical healing powers and
insight, but is also an escapee from a mental institution.  They have
some adventures together in the primeval French forest and the
surrounding towns.  Montand contributes a fine performance, but is
unable to turn IP5 around.
     Other films by Jean-Jaques Beneix include BETTY BLUE, DIVA and
ROSELYNNE AND THE LIONS.  DIVA is a very watchable and stylish thriller,
and ROSELYNNE AND THE LIONS, while no masterpiece, does at least boast a
coherent narrative.  IP5 must be especially disappointing to fellow fans
of BETTY BLUE, which may be the sexiest movie ever made.  Starring
Beatrice Dalle as Betty, BETTY BLUE traces a writer's affair with a
younger woman as she gradually sinks into insanity.  Beatrice Dalle's
stunning performance as Betty merges with solid storytelling and
beautiful cinematography to produce a memorable film.
     To end this disappointing review on a bright note, BETTY BLUE
has recently been re-released in a director's cut, restored to three
hours in length.  BETTY BLUE L'INTEGRALE introduces little character
or plot development beyond what was in the original release, instead
lengthening some scenes and perhaps adding one or two sex scenes.  The
camerawork is earned here, however, and I recommend BETTY BLUE 
L'INTEGRALE without hesitation to anyone who watches subtitled movies.
