Title
Review for Naked in New York (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Chuck Dowling
Naked in New York (1994) **1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Eric Stoltz, Mary-Louise
Parker, Ralph Macchio, Kathleen Turner, Tony Curtis, Timothy Dalton, Jill
Clayburgh, Whoopi Goldberg, Griffin Dunne, Chris Noth. Directed By: Dan
Algrant. Running Time: 91 minutes.
"Naked in New York" tells an all too familiar story about trying to maintain
a relationship while trying to maintain a career, and deciding overall which
is more important. Well, it attempts to tell that story.
Eric Stoltz plays an aspiring writer who meets photographer Mary-Louise
Parker while in college. They move in together and everything seems fine.
Then, after a while, Stoltz gets an offer to have one of his plays produced,
but in New York City. At the same time, Parker also gets an opportunity to
further her photography career. He moves out to New York, and their only
communication is the occasional phone call.
The film then shifts gears (meaning: it doesn't know what it wants to be) as
Stoltz tries to get his play ready to premiere. His producer (Tony Curtis)
has faith in him, but various problems slow his efforts. Late in the film
there's some needless full frontal Eric Stoltz, part of a dream sequence
which seemingly served no purpose except to justify the film's title. Whoopi
Goldberg plays a concrete face in a wall, and really, that's the best way I
can describe it.
The film was entertaining enough to get a good rating, until it ends with a
"non-ending" where nothing is resolved. Its message is that no matter what
happens to you in life, everything will turn out okay in the end. What
fantasy land does this screenwriter live in? Martin Scorsese served as
executive producer. [R]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     NAKED IN NEW YORK is a trite and empty story about the trite and
empty lives of three Generation Xers.  It stars Eric Stolz as the
playwright, Mary-Louise Parker as the photographer, and Ralph Macchio
as the actor.  Every known older actor or actress in New York when the
movie was shot were given parts.  With major roles are Kathleen Turner,
Tony Curtis, Timothy Dalton, and Jill Clayburgh, but watch for dozens
and dozens of cameo roles.  I loved Jill Clayburgh in AN UNMARRIED
WOMAN, but she was so pitifully bad in this movie it made me feel very
sorry for her.
     The director of record for this show was Daniel Algrant.  In
theory there was a script written by Daniel Algrant and John Warren.
The dark and unimaginative cinematography was by Joey Forsyte.  I
detected nothing any of these people did worth any money.
     There is absolutely nothing to recommend you ever waste your time
watching even a minute of this.  I wish I had voted with my feet and
left, but I did not for reasons I can no longer figure out.  I rate it
1/2 of a * simply because it was only a colossal bore but not a painful
show to watch.  The good news is that you only have to endure NAKED IN
NEW YORK for 1:33; the bad news is that it seems like an eternity.  The
film is rated correctly rated R, but again, I would give it a big B for
boredom.  By the way, The choice of the title is pretty much an enigma,
but then again, who cares.
     CAVEAT: I confess to being a baby boomer.  Perhaps this show can
be seen by young people today as an incredibly brilliant protest
against the meaninglessness of this lives.  Then again, I have this
bridge for sale...
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Eric Stoltz, Mary-Louise Parker, Timothy Dalton, 
           Ralph Macchio, Tony Curtis, Kathleen Turner, 
           Jill Clayburgh, Whoopi Goldberg 
Director:  Daniel Algrant 
Producer:  Frederick Zollo 
Screenplay:  John Warren and Daniel Algrant 
Cinematography:  Joey Forsyte 
Music:  Angelo Badalamenti 
Released by Fine Line Features 
     By now, I've come to the conclusion that the filmmakers of every
"Generation X" movie feel that they must include heavy doses of angst
and aimlessness.  Are these therefore the hallmarks by which this age
group are known?  Motion picture people seem to think so.  Anyway,
after a while, it gets repetitious, and that's the main problem with
NAKED IN NEW YORK.  There's nothing here that hasn't been presented
before, often in a more original context.
     Eric Stoltz (who is in his second Gen X picture, following BODIES,
REST AND MOTION) is Jake Briggs, a playwright trying to discover his
niche in the world.  He's living in Cambridge, Massachusetts with his
girlfriend Joanne White (Mary-Louise Parker).  His relationship with
Joanne is on shaky ground, as their respective careers begin to eat up
the time they once devoted to each other.  Then Jake's friend Chris
(Ralph Macchio) calls from New York to say that powerful producer Carl
Fisher (Tony Curtis) wants to produce Jake's play MASTER OF MY
EMOTIONS.  So, leaving Joanne behind to pursue her new job with boss
Elliott Price (Timothy Dalton), Jake heads for the city.
     Jake is a self-centered character, and it isn't necessarily great
fun to spend ninety-one minutes with him.  By the end of the film, he
ends up hurting just about everyone around him, including Chris,
Joanne, and--not surprisingly--himself.  He compromises his
creativity and friendships to get a famous actress (Kathleen Turner) in
his play, and this sends him spinning into a self-loathing-induced
depression.
     The best parts of NAKED IN NEW YORK occur on the university
campus, before Jake and Joanne graduate.  The early stages of their
romance is conveyed with honesty and genuine humor, before Jake's
on-screen presence starts to become oppressive.  Like ANNIE HALL,
however, this is more a picture about breaking up than coming
together.
     The leads are both good.  By sheer force of personality, Eric
Stoltz enables us to occasionally sympathize with his character, and
Mary-Louise Parker brings a heart-wrenching blend of independence and
vulnerability to Joanne.  Stealing the show, though, is screen veteran
Tony Curtis as a no-nonsense producer who won't take "no" for an
answer.  Then there's a difficult-to-recognize Whoopi Goldberg, playing
a talking face on a wall.
     In many ways, the history of NAKED IN NEW YORK's development is
almost as interesting as the film itself.  Writer/director Dan Algrant
came up with the semi-autobiographical story while studying under
Martin Scorsese at Columbia University.  Following Algrant's
graduation, Scorsese called him and offered to executive produce the
movie as part of an effort to revive New York's film industry.  The
script attracted a great deal of attention in the business, resulting
in a cast that is, to put it mildly, loaded.
     There's a scene early in the movie when Jake walks into a party
filled with famous authors, and their literary resumes appear on the
screen.  Had this kind of wit and originality infused the bulk of NAKED
IN NEW YORK, it could have been a memorable motion picture.  Sadly,
moments like that are scarce, and most of the charm of the movie
results from its likeable lead actors.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
