Title
Review for Me Myself I (1999)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Jon Popick
Ever wonder how your life would have turned out if you had done a few
things differently in the past?  That question serves as the basis for
Pip Karmel's directorial debut called Me Myself I (not to be confused
with the upcoming Farrelly brothers/Jim Carrey gag-fest Me, Myself &
Irene).  Karmel's main character is a single woman that wonders where
she would be today if she had only accepted her high school sweetheart's
marriage proposal some thirteen years ago.
Rachel Griffiths (Oscar nominee for Hilary & Jackie) plays Pamela Drury,
an award-winning journalist known for hard-hitting magazine features.
As the film opens, Pamela has just given up smoking, found out that her
new crush is married, and received a male strip-o-gram from her
co-workers for her thirtieth birthday.  The combination of these events,
together with the nearly audible sound of her biological clock ticking,
drives Pamela to go home, get blasted and look at photographs of her Mr.
Right, Robert Dickson (David Roberts)  the guy she turned down several
years ago.
The next day, Pamela is hit by a car.  Her injuries are limited to a
bumped head, but when she comes to, Pamela notices that the car was
being driven by her apparent doppelganger.  They go to the twin's house,
where Pamela #1 learns that her twin isn't Pamela Drury #2, but Pamela
Dickson, an alter ego that said yes to her old boyfriend's marriage
proposal and squeezed out three of his kids.  Before she can get her
bearings, the doppelganger disappears, leaving Pamela #1 alone in the
house just as the kids are coming home from school.
Realizing that the double is gone and that the kids will obviously think
that she's their mother, Pamela is forced to switch gears and pretend to
be a happy housewife.  The trouble is that she doesn't know the first
thing about cooking, grocery shopping or carpooling, let alone the names
of her new children.  Things don't get any easier when Robert comes home
and Pamela has to figure out how to use a diaphragm.  I have a feeling
that this kind of thing happens to women all the time, which would
explain why they often seem like different people from day to day.
While Me Myself I may sound like a cross between Sliding Doors and
Freaky Friday, the film is actually quite well-written and deftly
executed.  Karmel, the Oscar-nominated editor of Shine, also wrote the
script for this first directorial effort.  Fellow Australian Griffiths
is very charismatic and, at times, resembles Juliette Binoche in both
appearance and demeanor.  The film is funny, touching and will probably
make you think of a few `what if' scenarios on the way home from the
theatre.
1:44 - R for brief nudity, sexual content and adult language

Author
Allan Jenoff
Pamela Drury (Griffiths) is a successful career woman.  She is an award
winning journalist.  But years earlier, she turned down a 
marriage proposal from her high school sweetheart, 
Robert Dickson.  But a magical moment changes all that.  
Pamela suddenly finds herself in an alternate universe 
where she said yes.  
But there is a big difference between the dream of a marriage
and the reality.  Pamela finds herself saddled with 3 children:
a boy who calls her dumbhead, a girl who asks questions like
'if you haven't had your period yet do you need to use 
condoms', and a small boy who can't go to the bathroom by
himself.  She has a husband who is often away on business
and is up much of the night reading for work.  
She overcomes these initial difficulties.  But she learns
that the perfect marriage and the perfect life really weren't
that perfect.  And things really come to a head when she
discovers what has happened to her career.
This is a film about the danger of getting what you wish for.
It's a serious theme but a lighthearted movie.  The depictions
of the reality of married life are dead on.  The humour
arises naturally from the subject matter and Griffiths does
a great job in both her roles.  Plus, it has some good
performances from the children who act like normal kids,
not the disgustingly sweet children we usually see in film.
This film fell short of 5 stars because I didn't find myself
making an emotional connection to any of the characters.
Possibly married people might find it easier to make that
connection.  But regardless of your spousal status, you
definitely should see this film.  Well worth theatre prices.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Pamela Drury (played by Rachel Griffiths) is an award-winning
journalist.  Thirteen years earlier she nearly married Robert
Dickson (David Roberts), but decided that her career was more
important.  She now looks with envious eyes on her married friends'
lives and she wishes she had made the other decision.  These days
she just finds the dating scene to be depressing and the market just
is not very good any more.  She tries to salve her ego putting up
little index cards that tell her things like "I love and approve of
myself."  On her 30-something birthday she is ready to commit
suicide, but fate seems to step in and stop her at the last moment.
The following day in a moment of carelessness she is hit by a car a
literally knocked into another world.  She is not in heaven or hell,
but a parallel world where she did marry Robert.  There Pamela
meets-well, call her Pamela-2 (also played by Rachel Griffiths).
Pamela-2 has been married for thirteen years to Robert and has a
daughter and two sons by him.  Pamela-2 regrets her decision to
marry and to turn her back on her career.  She gives Pamela the slip
and goes to take her place in the world of the career-Pamela.
Pamela decides to try out the life she spurned.
     Filling in for Pamela-2 is more of a job than Pamela was
expecting, but far easier than it would be in the real world.  There
one must remember what must be hundreds of thousands of bits of
information just so that people are not tipped off that you are no
longer the person you once were.  Pamela finds that as feminists
have been telling us for years, there is a lot of effort and skill
involved in being a housewife.  It would be easy for this film to
turn at this point into a feminist tract, leaving Pamela in awe of
how competent and savvy a housewife really is.  However the script
is a little more even-handed than that.  Being a housewife has its
positive and its negative sides, Pamela finds.  It is full of
moments that just fill Pamela with disgust.  The worst of which is
to clean up after her youngest who is neither toilet trained, nor
able to wipe himself.  Having been in need of sex well back into her
previous life, she is disappointed to realize that the passion is
gone from Pamela-2's marriage and Robert has very little interest in
rekindling it.  But her attitudes about her husband and herself are
due for some radical changes.
     ME MYSELF I is written and directed by Philippa "Pip" Karmel,
set in Sydney, Australia and filmed on a minimal budget which seems
to more than adequately support the script. Rachel Griffiths has an
extremely expressive face which projects emotions very effectively,
particularly her bewilderment at her situation.  Karmel's style
changes as the film proceeds.  Popular music is played loudly over
the soundtrack in the first part of the film, but much less so once
Pamela has made the transition.
     Some people tend to assume that in fantasy anything can happen
and there are few rules that need to be followed.  Actually just
about the opposite is true.  In the real world the apparently
impossible happens frequently.  In fiction authors are bound to be
at least believable, and fantasy writers have the strictest set of
rules of all.  Karmel has failed to observe the logic of her own
world.  Pamela discovers that there is no way to get back to her own
world from the world she was knocked into.  Even the street where
she lived does not exist in the new world.  Yet Pamela-2 seems to be
able to move between the two worlds without trouble.  Pamela's
replacement of Pamela-2 seems all too easy.  After a day or two she
seems to be able to function in the new world without suspicion
being raised.  There would be years of Pamela-2's experience that
would be a complete blank to Pamela.  People whom Pamela-2 would
know, Pamela would have never seen.  Even a tutored double can not
long stand in for the original without detection.  The self-
replacement theme was much better handled in the science fiction
film QUEST FOR LOVE or Akira Kurosawa's historical film KAGEMUSHA.
     In the end, Karmel seems to be telling us that whatever
alternative we have chosen, we will get some advantage and some
disadvantage.  Contrary to Frank Capra's IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE, the
choices we have made have not all been for the best and the world is
not necessarily better for the choices we have made.  It is merely
different.  Karmel is telling us to stop regretting the past and to
make the best of what decisions we have made.  It is something of a
platitude, but there also is some truth there.  I would give ME
MYSELF I a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
What if you had married your Mr. (or Ms.) Right?  What would your life
be like now?  Would it be a dream or a nightmare?
In writer/director Pip Karmel's ME MYSELF I, Pamela Drury gets to find
out.  The searching and uncertain Pam is played in a sympathetic
performance by Academy Award nominee Rachel Griffiths (Hilary from
HILARY AND JACKIE).
When we meet Pam, she's an award-winning investigative reporter for
Focus Point magazine.  An unhappy workaholic, she writes article on
topics like suicide, something she'd like to do given her inability to
establish any successful relationships.
She wished that she had married Robert Dickson (David Roberts), but she
didn't.  She wants to be dating a student crisis counselor named Ben
(Sandy Winton), until she sees him at home with his wife and kids.
One day, a fatal accident changes her life for the better.  Or does it?
After being hit by a car, she wakes up in a parallel universe in which
she meets herself -- the self that did marry Robert.  Her other self
happily chucks married life for the freedom of Pam's single one.  This
leaves Pam with a new husband and three kids, all of whom prove to be
real challenges.
Griffiths does a masterful job of portraying Pam's fear and jubilation.
After all, she has the man of her dreams in bed with her every night.
Needless to say, he isn't exactly what she had imagined.
Her kids provide perhaps her biggest shock.  Rupert (Trent Sullivan) is
a little kid old enough to be toilet trained but not able to wipe
himself.  9-year-old Douglas (Shaun Loseby) is a smart-mouthed brat, who
calls his mom "dummy" and "dumb head."
And then there is Stacey (Yael Stone), a ticking time bomb of a girl on
the verge of adolescence.  "Mom, if you don't get your period, do you
have to use a condom if you're having sex," Stacey asks in a casual hall
conversation.  Another day, she tries to tell Pam not to worry about
her.  "I don't smoke, I don't drink and I can't afford drugs" she
reassures her mother, which, of course, is more frightening than
reassuring.  Here is a girl who does not need to earn extra money.
The biggest surprise with the script is the way it subtly transforms the
movie from a breezy little comedy into something more substantial.  By
the end we find ourselves, along with Pam, pondering significant issues
ranging from self-actualization to the importance of love and family.
ME MYSELF I is a gentle movie that works its magic more by the small
turns in the plot than the large ones.  By the end, you'll be rooting
for Pam, while still not sure what is best for her.  Both of her lives
have their blessings and their hardships.  The story's resolution is
handled nicely and with just the right amount of ambiguity.
ME MYSELF I runs 1:44.  It is rated R for sexuality and some language
and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Greg King
ME MYSELF I (M).  
(Gaumont/Buena Vista International)
Director: Pip Karmel
Stars: Rachel Griffiths, David Roberts, Sandy Winton, Yael Stone, Shaun 
Loseby, Trent Sullivan, Rebecca Frith, Felix Williamson, Ann Burbrook
Running time: 104 minutes. 
Something of an Australian variation on films such as Sliding
Doors and If Only, Me Myself I tackles themes of destiny and having a
second chance of living your life over to rectify, or come to terms
with, past mistakes.
Fiercely independent, single and a successful journalist on
the wrong side of thirty, Pamela Drury (Rachel Griffiths) is starting
to suffer from a mid-life crisis.  She is suddenly plagued with a
sense of regret, doubts and dissatisfaction at her life.  She begins
to wonder if her life would have been different if she had married
Robert, her childhood sweetheart, thirteen years ago.  Has she missed
out on something by remaining single while all her friends are getting
married?
Then a mysterious accident enables Pamela to interact with the
parallel version of herself, and they temporarily swap roles.  Without
warning, Pamela is plunged into the routine of domestic duties with
husband Robert (David Roberts), who has grown distant and is occupied
with his business dealings.  She also finds her hands full coping with
the demands of three young children - Stacy (Yael Stone), on the verge
of adolescence and in need of some understanding and sympathy from her
mother; the sullen, surly and rude Douglas (Shaun Loseby); and Rupert
(a cute and scene stealing tyke played by Trent Sullivan), who is in
the throes of toilet training.
At first, Pamela has difficulty coping with her new life, but
eventually she musters all the strength that has marked her life as a
single woman and journalist and begins to pull this dysfunctional
family back together.
Taking its cues from Joan Armatrading's 1970's anthem to
independence, Me Myself I is an exploration of life, love,
relationships and life style choices in the '90's with a decidedly
feminist bent.  It is surprisingly even handed in its treatment of the
contrasts between a single, solitary life and marriage, motherhood and
domestic "bliss."  Some of its observations are truthful and honest.
Many of its ideas about regret, lost opportunities, and making the
most of your life will resonate with anyone in the audience over
thirty.  However, the film is also full of warmth and humour.
Me Myself I is the first feature film from Pip Karmel, a short
film maker best known for her award winning work as editor on Shine.
The film is an extension of an idea explored in one of her short
films, and is entertaining enough, although it seems to lack spark.
Karmel handles the material confidently enough, although the script at
times becomes a little too earnest in its approach and lacks the
breezy quality of many romantic comedies.
Griffiths is, as usual, excellent, and her wonderful presence
holds the film together.  Griffiths admits that her performance here
was largely inspired by Tom Hanks, Meg Ryan and Julia Roberts,
although she lacks their light touch and laid back style.  She has the
range to capture Pamela's emotional journey, but she also possesses a
great sense of comic timing that enables her to play the more physical
aspects of the film without embarrassment.  Roberts is also solid as
her husband, who is trying to deal with his own problems, while
newcomer Sandy Winton has an appealing presence as Ben, for whom
Pamela develops a strong attraction.
But ultimately Me Myself I is visiting familiar territory, and 
has little that is new or fresh to offer.

Author
Christopher Null
     What is it about foreigners and alternate reality comedy/dramas? 
On the heels of Sliding Doors, Twice Upon a Yesterday, and who knows
what other indies comes Me Myself I, starring Rachel Griffiths in the
dual role of a harried Australian woman and, well, herself.
     On her birthday, Pamela (Griffiths) wakes up to realize that her
life is a mess.  She's not thrilled with her job and eats cereal for
dinner, but more importantly, she doesn't have a man.  In fact, she
turned down a proposal some dozen years earlier, a move she now
regrets.  Surprise! when one day she is hit by a car that is driven by
none other than herself -- an unexplained alternate universe
dweller/magical leprechaun-type-of-person who accepted the
aforementioned proposal to Robert (David Roberts), and with whom she is
happily married.
     Or not so happily, as it turns out.  Single-Pamela soons discovers
numerous infidelities and three rotten kids, because Married-Pamela
quickly abandons her with her erstwhile family in a bid to swap lives. 
Single-Pamela learns the joys of dinner parties, grocery shopping for a
family of five, and potty training.
     I'm told the plot is virtually identical to The Family Man, only
with a chick instead of a dude.  You can take that for what you will,
but I for one and getting a bit tired of gimmicky stories like this. 
Griffiths is as capable as can be expected in her role, but the comedy
of Me Myself I is a bit flat, with only a few moments of ingenious
amusement to take your eyes off the advancing counter on the VCR.
     That said, the film also suffers from a horrendous sound mix, which
has its frequent musical numbers (including an atrocious title song)
blaring at four to five times the volume of the rest of the film.  I
actually had to get up and turn the volume down repeatedly, only to turn
it back up when people started talking again.  Not exactly what you want
from a romantic comedy when you're snuggling with your honey on the
couch.
Web site: http://www.spe.sony.com/classics/memyselfi/index.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Remember the "Sliding Doors" parallel lives concept in which
Gwyneth Paltrow imagined what might have happened if she had not
missed the subway one day? Remember Rachel Griffiths who co-starred
with Emily Watson in "Hilary and Jackie"?  Put them together and you
have this fantasy in which Rachel Griffiths plays Pamela Drury, a
celebrated, award-winning journalist who lives in a lonely, box-filled
apartment in Sydney, Australia, and worries that life may somehow have
passed her by because she didn't marry Mr. Right. She wonders "what
if"....until, suddenly, one day, in an alternate universe, she
magically switches places with her alter ego, Pamela Dickson, who
married her old sweetheart, has three demanding children and lives in
suburbia.  While Pamela Dickson gladly slips out of station-wagon
bondage, Pamela Drury copes with the strenuous, nitty-gritty routine
of the neglected wife and soccer mother she would have become if her
heart had ruled her head.  Australian film-maker Pip Karmel's premise
is reminiscent of the old adage, "Be careful what you wish for because
you may just get it." But it gets a bit clumsy during the transitions
between the two Pamelas, particularly since we never learn enough
about the newly liberated Pamela Dickson. And are we really to believe
that a serious woman with a penchant for investigative journalism
would be totally content writing hackneyed romantic how-to articles
for a women's magazine?  In the final analysis, it's the charismatic
dual performance by Rachel Griffiths that makes this road-not-taken
film memorable. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Me, Myself,
and I" is a poignant, daydreaming 6. It's summed up best by
Ms. Karmel's line, "Regret is futile."
