Title
Review for Going All the Way (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Why was I born; why am I living?" says the song in GOING ALL THE
WAY.  As the scrawny serviceman, Sonny Burns, coming back to civilian
life in the Midwest in 1954, Jeremy Davies gives a convincing portrayal
of someone who hasn't a clue as to his place in life.
     Jill Clayburgh, whose only exceptional performance was in her
Academy Award nominated role in AN UNMARRIED WOMAN, has been relegated
to cliched roles of domineering mothers.  Repeating a similar part to
the one she played earlier this year in FOOLS RUSH IN, she is Sonny's
mother Alma.  Alma knows just what her little boy needs: a fresh plate
of sandwiches brought to his room for dinner and his favorite breakfast
-- a berry pie with pancake syrup all over it.  As someone now in his
mid-twenties, Sonny is repulsed by this behavior.  Just the sight of
his old room with its childish wallpaper causes him to vomit, which is
admittedly my least favorite of all movie behaviors.
     Davies steals the show with his sympathetic performance.  If you
were ever the outcast in school or had a friend who was, Sonny will
undoubtedly bring back painful memories.
     Sonny's new friend and old classmate Gunner Casselman is played by
Ben Affleck, who has been wonderful in many roles, the last being the
smart mouthed lead in CHASING AMY.  Whereas Sonny was an accomplished
but unappreciated photographer in high school and college, Gunner was a
BMOC and star jock, who had one knockout girlfriend after another.
Affleck, excellent at boisterous, talky parts, seems out of his league
in this more subtle and introspective role.  Gunner spends as much time
admiring Sonny's talents as showing off his own.
     In this film about the effects of sexuality on young people's
lives, Lesley Ann Warren plays Gunner's sexually charged mother Nina.
She dresses in provocative attire and looks and acts Gunner's age,
although at 50 she is exactly twice his.  The way she hangs on him, one
might reasonably expect there might have been an incest subplot that
was left on the cutting room floor.
     Sonny's mother does not approve of his new fast and loose friend
Gunner.  "When you lie down with dogs, you come up with fleas," she
warns him.  Her solution comes in the religious tracts and icons that
fill her house.  When these are not enough to show Sonny the way, she
arranges for a beefy ex-con turned religious author to come and sit
with Sonny.  When the ex-con almost smashes him, Sonny informs him in
no uncertain terms that, "I don't believe in God.  I don't even like
the guy."
     Sonny spends most of his time worrying about sex.  Although he has
a perfectly willing and knockdown-dead gorgeous local girlfriend named
Buddy Porter, he wants something more.  (Using food metaphors, Gunner
likens sexual monogamy to just eating peach pie all your life.)  As
Buddy, Amy Locane, last seen as the sexually precocious teen in the
excellent but ignored CARRIED AWAY, gives a realistic portrayal of a
woman as interested in sex as the guys but without the hang-ups.
     The film's limitations are many.  The script by Dan Wakefield,
based on his book, too often skims the surface.  Although the character
of Sonny is fully developed and very well acted by Davies, the other
characters need more depth.  Davies, who stared in SPANKING THE MONKEY,
gives such a compelling performance that he makes the picture.
     GOING ALL THE WAY runs 1:10.  It is rated R for sex, nudity,
profanity, and adult themes, and would be fine for older and mature
teenagers.  I recommend the movie and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Go to www.nuvo-online.com for an cover story on "Going All The Way", plus 
additional film reviews.
Turning "Going All The Way" into a movie wasn't easy. So much of Dan 
Wakefield's classic novel takes place in the thoughts of one sad, 
repressed and desperately horny young man. How do you take such an 
interior story and transfer its essence to the big screen? Quite well, 
thankfully. 
With some PBS documentaries and the award winning video of Pearl Jam's 
"Jeremy" giving them a little clout, producer Tom Gorai and director Mark 
Pellington convinced Wakefield to write the screenplay for his story, 
then secured funds to film it in Indianapolis, where the novel is set. 
Pellington is an ardent fan of "Going All The Way", having read the book 
at least 25 times, and knows the lead characters inside and out. His 
vision and Wakefield's dialogue merge to create a remarkably faithful 
adaptation of the story of two young soldiers returning to Indianapolis 
in 1954. While train-bound home, Sonny Burns, an introvert who has spent 
most of his brief life trying to blend into the nearest wall, is 
mortified when another soldier, Gunner Casselman, strikes up a 
conversation. Sonny remembers Gunner as one of the "big rods" from high 
school, a handsome, assured athlete and cocksman, a member of a social 
caste Sonny envied and feared. Gunner's experiences overseas have changed 
him, however. He now views his glory days in high school as the stuff of 
childhood and longs to find the deeper meanings of life. He admires Sonny 
for "not buying into all that jock bullshit" and Sonny, feeling like a 
total fraud but grateful for the friendship, bonds with him. Much to the 
confusion and dismay of their respective parents, the two set off on a 
quest for substance, only to find their penises acting like divining rods,
 drawing them towards the nearest beautiful woman.
In his 1970 novel, which sold over a million copies, Wakefield made what 
could have been a stock coming-of-age story fresh with his stunningly 
honest look at the details of spiritual, social  and sexual desperation, 
balanced with many sardonically funny moments. Pellington conveys those 
feelings with striking visual style, using bold colors and contemporary 
editing techniques to allow us to see the world through Sonny's eyes. 
When the young man gets drunk at a dance, Pellington's edgy camera 
captures Sonny's perceived urbane finesse, including an absurd, brilliant 
dance scene you will never forget. When a sexual liaison turns into a 
disaster, Pellington employs a black and white palette and stark lighting 
to show Sonny's nightmarish race away from the scene of his humiliation. 
Again and again, Pellington comes up with just the right method to thrust 
us into the center of Sonny's tortured soul. Pellington came up with just 
the right actor as well. Jeremy Davies, who made his mark in the indie 
film "Spanking The Money", is a scrawny young man who doesn't faintly 
resemble the doughy character described in the novel, but within moments 
Davies makes it clear that he IS Sonny Burns. Stammering, shifting and 
casting his eyes ever downward, Davies is remarkably adept portraying a 
man who appears apologetic for merely existing. Complimenting Davies is 
Ben Affleck ("Chasing Amy") as Gunner, in an confident, effective 
performance. The original cut of "Going All The Way" was nearly three and 
one half hours. Forced to trim the film to under two hours, Pellington 
had to edit a major subplot involving, among other things, the 
ramifications of Gunner growing a beard in the ultra-conservative 
Indianapolis of the 50s. Sadly, the result somewhat mutes the development 
of Gunner's character and gives the talented Affleck limited time to show 
his chops. Hopefully we'll see a director's cut with restored footage 
someday.
Several supporting cast members stand out, notably Amy Locane as Buddy, 
Sonny's "safe" girlfriend, and Rachel Weisz, dazzling as Marty Pilcher, 
an art student who hits Gunner like a thunderclap. Jill Clayburgh is 
scary as Sonny's mother, an over-possessive fundamentalist whose cloying 
patter fails to mask her emotional terrorism, and Lesley Ann Warren is a 
knockout as Nina, Gunner's sexy Mom. Warren has one of the film's most 
outrageously comic scenes, when she confronts Gunner over his 
relationship with a Jewish girl and spews some absolutely insane anti-
Semitic bile.
Production designer Therese Deprez won an award at the Sundance Film 
Festival for turning Indianapolis into a model of 1950s style. Her sets 
are dead-on, providing a bright contrast to the story's dark tone. 
Enlivened by many funny moments, "Going All The Way" remains a dark tale 
that invigorates because of its bracing honesty. Wakefield, Pellington 
and company have much to be proud of here. Hopefully, their work will 
show other filmmakers that classic books can become winning films, when 
talented artists respect the integrity of the source.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 10/3/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:43
MPAA Classification: R (Sexual situations, nudity, profanity, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Jeremy Davies, Ben Affleck, Amy Locane, Rachel Weisz, 
      Rose McGowan, Jill Clayburgh, Lesley Ann Warren
Director: Mark Pellington
Producers: Tom Gorai, Sigurjon Sighvatsson
Screenplay: Dan Wakefield based on his novel
Cinematography: Bobby Bukowski
Music: tomandandy
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     GOING ALL THE WAY, based on Dan Wakefield's 1970 bestselling novel 
of the same name, is a coming of age story with characters who are a 
little older than is the norm for this genre.  While most stories about 
the rituals of entering adulthood are set in high schools, GOING ALL THE 
WAY looks at two twentysomething men who, having served during the 
Korean War, are fresh out of the army and trying to find their place in 
the world.  And, since the movie is set in 1954, it addresses the roles 
of religion and sex in the rites of passage -- this is, after all, an 
era when the latter was taboo and the former was de rigueur.  
     Sonny (Jeremy Davies) and Gunner (Ben Affleck) are an unusual pair 
of close friends.  Although both attended the same high school and each 
joined the army after graduation, that's where the similarity ends.  
Sonny is a shy, alienated young man who comes from a deeply conservative 
family and who gets tongue-tied around pretty girls.  His war experience 
was limited to guarding the home front from Kansas City.  Gunner, on the 
other hand, is an ex-jock who spent time in Korea and Japan.  He's 
popular, well-liked, and can get any girl he wants.  His mother (Lesley 
Ann Warren), a swinging bachelorette, treats him more like a boyfriend 
than a son.  Yet, one day while talking, Sonny and Gunner realize that, 
despite the differences in their personalities and backgrounds, they 
have very similar concerns and questions about life, love, and the 
future.  The two become inseparable, but, although their friendship is 
real, it is not a match of equals.  The brash and confident Gunner is 
the leader and Sonny is always the follower.
     Women are, of course, the unsolved (and perhaps unsolvable) 
mystery.  Gunner falls for a sexy art student named Marty (Rachel Weisz, 
sporting an unbelievably irritating faux American accent), while Sonny 
is looking for a way out of a dead-end relationship with his high school 
sweetheart, the loyal-but-uninteresting Buddy (Amy Locane).  He finds 
his escape in Gale (Rose McGowan), but learns the hard way that dream 
girls are sometimes better left in dreams.
     Kurt Vonnegut once described Dan Wakefield's novel, GOING ALL THE 
WAY, as "the Midwestern CATCHER IN THE RYE," and, while the film doesn't 
have quite the depth one might expect from a story tagged with that 
appellation, it's easy to see why Vonnegut made the comparison.  GOING 
ALL THE WAY deals believably with the tribulations of new adulthood and 
the youthful need to break free in a world that seeks to repress.  Many 
male viewers, regardless of the era they grew up in, will see bits and 
pieces of themselves in Sonny and Gunner.
     The movie, adapted by Wakefield and directed by MTV alum and first 
time feature filmmaker Mark Pellington, is at times uneven.  GOING ALL 
THE WAY contains elements of comedy ranging from subtle humor to blatant 
satire (most of the latter involve a scathing view of religion and 
conservatism in the '50s).  Not all of these blend seamlessly with the 
movie's more dramatic elements, and several of the comic-to-serious 
transitions are jarring (such as the tragedy that follows closely upon 
Sonny's surreal trip into a fundamentalist church where he asks 
directions to a whore house).  
     The women in the film function mostly as plot devices and 
attractive decorations.  None of them have any personality or depth.  
Jill Clayburgh and Lesley Ann Warren , as Sonny and Gunner's mothers, 
respectively, are stereotypes.  They are used to provide humor and 
emphasize the differences and, perhaps surprisingly, the similarities 
between religious conservatism and progressive liberalism.  The younger 
actresses -- Rachel Weisz (SWEPT FROM THE SEA), Amy Locane (CARRIED 
AWAY), and Rose McGowan (SCREAM) -- are on hand primarily to act as 
catalysts and to look pretty, whether clothed or topless.  
     Fortunately, the two leads are well-developed and ably portrayed.  
Ben Affleck (CHASING AMY) has the blend of charm and bravado necessary 
to bring Gunner to life.  His co-star, Jeremy Davies (who can also be 
seen in THE LOCUSTS), plays a character not unlike the one he essayed in 
SPANKING THE MONKEY.  Davies has an aptitude for fleshing out insecure 
individuals who have been dealt a raw hand by fate, and, as a result, 
are forever trapped.  The rapport established between Affleck and Davies 
is effective -- it's not difficult to accept that these two mismatched 
young men have become fast friends.
     Because of the nature of the material, GOING ALL THE WAY will 
probably appeal more to males than females, although, as with any well-
constructed motion picture, there's nothing to prevent a woman from 
enjoying it.  However, while the novel may have been an important and 
influential work of literature, the motion picture adaptation doesn't 
ascend to the same lofty heights.  GOING ALL THE WAY is a pleasant way 
to spend one-hundred minutes, and the characters are fashioned with 
enough detail for us to care about them, but this is in no way a seminal 
or transforming movie.  The only thing that sets it apart from so many 
forgettable period piece coming-of-age stories is that it has been put 
together with a degree of care and skill.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
GOING ALL THE WAY
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Gramercy Pictures
 Director:  Mark Pellington
 Writer:  Dan Wakefield
 Cast: Jeremy Davies, Ben Affleck, Jill Clayburgh, Amy
Locane, Rachel Weisz, Rose McGowan, Lesley Ann Warren,
Cup A' Joe.
  Perhaps the most intriguing thing about "Going All the Way"
is its subtext.  Since the title refers, of course, to every young
man's desire in the 1950s to have sex and not simply to neck,
you might think that Mark Pellington's film would show that
this was a consummation devoutly to be wished.  Instead, the
sex comes easy, not only with the girls who, in one
character's words, are hot to trot, but also with the girl next
door.  What's more the sex is easily available not only to
superjocks but to nerds as well.  As if that were not enough,
"Going All the Way," based on Dan Wakefield's 1981 novel,
does not even take place in New York or L.A. or some
progressive college towns, but in Indianapolis, for Pete's sake. 
Could it be?
But that's almost besides the point.  Despite the
cornucopia of satisfactions available to the smooth, swinging
bachelor, Gunner Casselman (Ben Affleck) and to the
painfully inarticulate, inner-directed amateur photographer
Sonny Burns (Jeremy Davies), the two are not content.  After
all, they're just a tad older than J.D. Salinger's Holden
Caulfield and so it's fashionable for them to feel the angst
which is de rigueur even among today's twenty-somethings. 
In fact, Kurt Vonnegut actually called Wakefield's novel the
"Catcher in the Rye" of the Midwest.  That it is, and as filmed
with a discrete portion of MTV-like images by the director--
whose background includes the taking charge of music videos
for PM Dawn, Malcolm McLaren and De La Soul--"Going All
the Way" is a sensitive, funny, and at times heartbreaking
story of two young men who form an unlikely duo but who
team up to help each other to come of age. 
   The story opens on a train to Indianapolis.  Gunner
Casselman, who saw violent action in Korea 1950-53 and a
more pleasurable kind of activity in Japan, is returning home.
He meets Sonny Burns, a repressed photographer with whom
he went to school and takes an immediate liking to him
despite their distinct temperaments.  Pellington makes their
differences clear from the start: seated for a while in the
dining car, Burns cannot get the waiter's attention, while
Casselman orders a beer before he even takes a seat, and
gets it immediately.
   The picture follows their adventures and conflicts with the
women in their lives.  Casselman's mom (Lesley Ann Warren)
is a textbook Oedipal case, a slinky, prejudiced woman who
seems scarcely older than her athletic son.  Burns's mother
(Jill Clayburgh) is smothering, religious by nature, who is
horrified by her boy's friendship with the assertive Casselman. 
While Burns, who by all rights should scarcely attract a fly if
he were drowning in honey, makes the scene with the girl
next door (Amy Locane) and with the sexy Gale (Rose
McGowan), Casselman does likewise with his own easy
conquests, but is truly bowled over by the alluring and
sophisticated Marty (Rachel Weisz).
   There is more to life than sex, screenwriter/novelist Dan
Wakefield has the audacity to maintain.  Both fellows seem to
have what they need, yet they yearn to leave home, to depart
from the conventions and pseudo-religious hoopla of their
Indianapolis suburb and head East to find the meaning of life-
-that's East to New York, not Benares.  Jeremy Davies is
absolutely perfect in the role of a guy who stutters so much
he may remind you of a young Bob Newhart, and Ben Affleck
provides macho and convincing support for his friend while
continuing the learning experience he began in Japan when
introduced to Zen Buddhism.
   The movie has its share of fun scenes, some featuring brief
dream sequences, and one in particular when Sonny enters a
fundamentalist church to ask for directions to a whorehouse. 
You may wonder why Sonny is never turned on by his sweet,
beautiful, girl next door played by the captivating Lesley Ann
Warren.  You may also wonder why both of these fellows are
so alienated and can ponder what they expect to find in New
York to liberate themselves. Whatever the answers, "Going All
the Way" is intelligent, sensitive, amusing.  Rated R.  Running
Time: 103 minutes.  (C) 1997 Hollywood Hotline
