Title
Review for Start the Revolution Without Me (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frankie Paiva
Shining in such classics as Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory and Young
Frankenstein, Gene Wilder is easily a big pull for renting a comedy movie.
There's just something different (and funny) about his voice, his face, and his
physical humor. That's how Start The Revolution Without Me grabbed me off the
comedy shelf, and I'm here to help you through not letting that happen to you.
Philippe (Wilder) and Pierre (Sutherland) are rich French gentlemen. They have
to make some type of agreement on a treaty and are traveling to France to do
just that. When they dock, they do battle with a group of homeless pirates (or
something of the sort) that Claude (Wilder again) and Charles (Sutherland
again) are a part of. Claude and Philippe were separated at birth, the same
with Pierre and Charles. So, naturally, the two get mixed up and are mistaken
for the other two.
When Claude is taken to the king's palace and asked by the king's servant the
kill the queen, the two have to escape and are sent into a madcap run around
the house (?) avoiding a maniac, a nymphomaniac, (?) and the rest of the king's
servants. They somehow start a war with the homeless pirates again that
Philippe and Pierre are now (unwillingly) a part of, and they go to battle.
I think that I laughed exactly twice in Start The Revolution Without Me. The
film obviously has some problems, the main one being that Wilder (and the
script) go way over-the-top with the stupid quota on this one. It takes the
fact that the twins are mixed up as the film's 100 minute joke. It also doesn't
really help seeing what Donald Sutherland looked like when he was younger
either. (I actually do feel very sorry for him.) But the worst thing is that
the film breaks an alltime rule. Any film with Orson Welles is either good or
funny. Horribly broken here as he appears for commentry before the film and as
part of the film's extremely strange ending. (That amazingly ends like some
film with hair gel and a dog.) 
This is a member of the film's that you could see if you enjoy inflicting pain
on yourself club (FTYCSIYEIPOYC is what I call it, and I do review so many of
them.) So Start The Revolution Without Me gets * star.
The Young-Uns: The film contains some sexual references and the end has lots of
gun battle. Also, some young children may be confused by what is going on. Good
Age: 7 & Up
