Title
Review for Return of the Killer Tomatoes! (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
RETURN OF THE KILLER TOMATOES: I think pretty much everybody knows that a
sequel to a cult film cannot be as good.  Of all the films that have tried
to imitate ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW's success the real sequel, SHOCK
TREATMENT, is one of the lamest.  RETURN OF THE KILLER TOMATOES fits the
principle on a technicality.  It is, to all intents and purposes, not a
sequel.  A mad scientist is creating imitation humans and he makes them from
tomatoes.  If he made them from mushrooms or turnips the film would have a
much smaller audience.  Stylistically, RETURN is very different from the
original in a lot of ways, not the least of which is that it is often a lot
funnier.  Among other things it takes a funny and well-deserved swipe at
product placement and another one at RAMBO.  This film isn't LION IN WINTER
but considering it is a low-budget sequel to a not-very-funny spoof of
horror films, RETURN OF THE KILLER TOMATOES surely beats the point spread.
Rate it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
DEVIL GIRL FROM MARS: In spite of its title, this film takes itself pretty
seriously.  several diverse odd characters are at an isolated Scottish inn.
Each has his own melodramatic problems when out of the sky pops a flying
saucer complete with an odd-looking alien woman and a powerful robot.  Her
mission is to kidnap a man and bring him back to Mars as breeding stock.
There is nothing like an alien woman with a deadly raygun and a menacing
robot to help earthlings get their lives in order.  Even making allowances
for the vintage, this film is an interesting historical artifact.
Stylistically much like STRANGER FROM VENUS, and a cut below MAN FROM PLANET
X.  Rate it a -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
THE PROJECTIONIST:  This film covers 24 hours in the life of a movie theater
projectionist.  And nothing much happens to him.  "Dull stuff," you say?
Oddly enough, no.  See it--it is very worth seeing.  Our projectionist lives
in a series of fantasy worlds.  There is a fake fantasy world he creates for
his friends.  In it he has a desirable young woman who is very interested in
him.  Then there is his real fantasy world in which he is a costumed super-
hero.  Then there are little short films he creates for himself in his own
mind including two about the world of the future: one optimistic, one
pessimistic.  All this is in stark contrast to our hero's real life.  he
lives in a squalid little apartment and has to deal with an unreasonable
boss (Rodney Dangerfield in his first film role, apparently).  There are
some remarkable people working at the theater, but the boss sees them as
only cogs in a machine that makes money.  Chuck McCann plays the title role
and shows some versatility and breadth.  Rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
This review is part two of a series which, in order, includes
ATTACK OF THE KILLER TOMATOES, RETURN OF THE KILLER TOMATOES:
THE SEQUEL, and KILLER TOMATOES STRIKE BACK!.
98 min., PG, Comedy, 1988
Director: John De Bello
Cast: Anthony Starke, George Clooney, Karen Mistal, Steve Lundquist,
      Charlie Jones, John Astin, "Rock" Peace, Frank Davis,
      Ian Hutton, John De Bello
     The tomato war is over and now tomatoes are illegal in the United
States.  Many young people smuggle tomatoes into the States because they
don't know the dangerous side to tomatoes.  Anthony Starke is a pizza
delivery boy, who creates and delivers pizzas that contain no tomatoes.
Evil doctor Gangrene, John Astin, is trying to make human soldiers from
tomatoes that will rule the world.  Beautiful Karen Mistal and Fuzzy
Tomato, a mutant tomato that has hair, escape from Austin's laboratory
and they go to Starke for help.  Starke and George Clooney, his friend,
have to stop Astin and his evil scheme.
     RETURN OF THE KILLER TOMATOES: THE SEQUEL is the sequel (surprise!
surprise!) to the horrible film ATTACK OF THE KILLER TOMATOES.  It is
followed by the pitiful film KILLER TOMATOES STRIKE BACK!  Actually
RETURN OF THE KILLER TOMATOES is not really a true sequel to ATTACK OF
THE KILLER TOMATOES!, but instead makes fun of ATTACK and B movies in
general.  On a scale of zero to five, I give RETURN OF THE KILLER
TOMATOES a four.  RETURN OF THE KILLER TOMATOES is rated PG for adult
situations and brief female nudity.
     The acting in this film is much better than in the first one.  John
Astin, of the television show "The Addams Family" (not the movie), gives
a great performance as the evil doctor.  As well as being sinister,
Astin makes his character amusing.  Karen Mistal, CANNIBAL WOMEN IN THE
AVOCADO JUNGLE OF DEATH (despite its title, a very good film), is
beautiful and a great actress.  She does a great job in her role,
though some people may say an actor or actress in a B movie can't do a
great job.  FT (Fuzzy Tomato), no matter how unrealistic, is, just
possibly, the best part of this film.  The worst actor in the film is
"Rock" Peace.  His performance makes me wonder how he ever got a role
in this series.
     The film does a great job of making fun of B movies.  Some of the
best parts were about running out of money and commercial placement.
The film also does a great job of making fun of ATTACK OF THE KILLER
TOMATOES, but those jokes will probably only be caught by people who
have seen the original film.  I highly recommend this film to any B
movie fan or movie buff (whether you liked ATTACK OF THE KILLER TOMATOES
or not).
     One last note, sadly one of the few funny gags from ATTACK OF THE
KILLER TOMATOES, the carrot joke, is re-used at the end of this film,
making it no longer funny.  I wish John De Bello had left it out of
this one.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Well, on the fast-moving satirical scale of film, this isn't up to
AIRPLANE!, but is about halfway between it and TOP SECRET! -- which I liked
fairly well, so this is a definite thumbs-up.  Lots of fast-moving jokes, but
perhaps the best point is that the film gets funnier, instead of running out of
steam, as it progresses.  It keeps the pace, and that is a rarity in so many of
these films.  I was grinning through all of it, and laughing through many of
the gags; about the only film that I have ever laughed continuously through is
MONTY PYTHON AND THE HOLY GRAIL.
    Tons of Meta-humor, including one running joke about financial problems
    which gets funnier and funnier as it goes.
    No "Killing Joke", i.e. gag that you carry out of the theater
    remembering for years to come.  With a Killing Joke, you don't see the
    joke, think about it and laugh (all in a nano-second, unless you're
    Jesse Helms) -- you see it and then black out from laughing.  Totally
    unexpected -- there's no middleman 'twixt the screen and the brain. The
    rear-collision Pinto gag in TOP SECRET! is a classic of that genre,
    though not up (by any means) to the Python films (the absolute pinnacle
    of Killing Joke humor is the bit in HOLY GRAIL where Arthur sends a
    knight down to dispatch the stuffed rabbit -- and then it leaps for the
    knight's throat and rips his head off.  Everything went black for me
    when I first saw the film...).  But very constant humor.
    John Astin is probably the only actor who can be endearing while
    cackling inanely for two hours.
    The film's low-budget works for it, not against it, and you feel almost
    parental towards it.  Some of the actors from the previous film ham it
    up just a too much (the parachute gag got old long before this), but I
    can live with it.
    Besides, it sports Karen Mistal, the most finest-looking woman ever to
    grace The Fox Television Network, in a prominent role (and her eyes
    glow red!  Keen!).  Imagine the girl you had puppy love for in high
    school crossed with a Norwegian sex goddess and you get the idea.  Oh,
    callow youth.
A definite success -- solid $4.50 film.
