Title
Review for Shaft (2000)
Number of Reviews
22

Author
Christian Pyle
There's a new Shaft in town, kids, and he's pissed.  In an update to the 
still-popular 1970's Shaft franchise, NYPD detective John Shaft (Samuel L. 
Jackson) arrests preppie Walter Wade (Christian Bale of "American Psycho") 
for bashing a black man's brains out in a racist rage.  Wade skips bail and 
runs off to Switzerland, while Shaft is exiled to a precinct in the slums for 
punching Wade.  Two years later, Shaft is fighting the local drug lord, 
Peoples Hernandez (Jeffrey Wright of "Basquiat"), when Wade comes back to 
town.  To save his butt, Wade hires Peoples to kill the only witness to the 
murder (Toni Collette of "The Sixth Sense").  Shaft has to find her first 
while fighting off corrupt cops (Dan Hedaya and Ruben Santiago-Hudson) and 
Peoples' thugs.  He gets a little help from a fellow cop (Vanessa L. 
Williams) and a comedy sidekick (Busta Rhymes).
The new "Shaft" is not a remake of the 1971 original.  Wisely, the filmmakers 
take a "next generation" approach.  Jackson's John Shaft is the nephew of the 
original, and "Uncle J." (Richard Roundtree) is still an anti-establishment 
private eye and is still cool after almost 30 years.  Gordon Parks, the 
director of the original "Shaft," also makes a cameo appearance (sitting in a 
bar with John Singleton, the director of the new flick), and Isaac Hayes 
contributes a new rendition of the classic theme song.
So how does the Y2K Shaft measure up?  He's certainly "the cat who won't cop 
out when there's danger all about."  Jackson's Shaft is even more tenacious 
and driven than Roundtree's.  He's also "a bad mutha" (shut yo' mouth) who 
doesn't mind breaking a suspect's nose or pistol-whipping a street punk.  But 
he's not a "black private dick" or a "sex machine with all the chicks."  
Shaft Jr. seems to remain a quasi-cop even after quitting the force in 
disgust, and he does only a token bit of sex-machining.  Of course, 
Roundtree's Shaft lived in the hedonistic 70's (and still does -- in one shot 
Uncle J. leaves a bar with a chick under each arm), while his nephew lives in 
the post-AIDS era of caution.  The potential romance with Officer Carmen 
(Williams) never comes off either, and she seems strangely like the sexless 
"girl Friday" characters who aided 40's detectives.  Still, the new Shaft is 
every bit as suave as his namesake and even more sensitive.  He's "a 
complicated man, and no one understands him":  the new Shaft is a compelling 
mixture of streetwisdom and naďve idealism, anger and compassion.
I was worried that this addition to the Shaft series would be an overblown 
80's-style action flick in the "Die Hard" tradition with a band of 
international terrorists taking over something and gigantic explosions 
aplenty.  Luckily, Singleton and screenwriter Richard Price stay true to 
Shaft as a neighborhood hero.  The bad guys are a rich punk with a bad temper 
and "a two-bit three-block drug dealer," but they provide enough trouble for 
Shaft to keep the action coming.  
At first glance, "Shaft" seems an unusual venture for Singleton, whose four 
previous films ("Boyz N the Hood," "Poetic Justice," "Higher Learning," and 
"Rosewood") were all high-minded dramas on serious racial subjects.  But his 
foray into the summer action genre also has more serious overtones.  The 
world Singleton depicts is filled with racism and corruption, both embodied 
by the white characters and by institutions like the police force and the 
courts.  The political content does not distract from the action, but instead 
gives it a deeper texture by contextualizing Shaft's righteous anger.  
"Shaft" is not only a worthy addition to the 70's series; it's the best of 
the lot.  The story is much tighter and moves faster; the direction is slick 
and skillful.  The performances by Jackson, Bale and Wright are stupendous.  
This is sure to be the crowd-pleaser of the summer.
Bottom line:  Shaft is back, damn right!
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by John Singleton.
Cast: Samuel L. Jackson, Christian Bale, Jeffrey Wright, Vanessa Williams, 
Toni Collette, Dan Hedaya, Ruben Santiago-Hudson, Busta Rhymes, Richard 
Roundtree, Josef Sommer, Lynne Thigpen, Lee Tergesen, Daniel Von Bargen, 
Mekhi Phifer.
2000 - 98 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and violence).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 17, 2000.
Without having seen Richard Roundtree in 1971's blaxploitation hit, "Shaft," 
this updated version, starring Samuel L. Jackson and directed by John 
Singleton (1991's "Boyz N the Hood"), can safely stand on its own as a wildly 
diverting, if one-note, action-comedy-drama that moves at such a 
lickety-split pace, it's easy to get completely caught up in the happenings 
on screen, while they are happening. Once they are over, the film ultimately 
loses much of its novelty, but as an "in-the-moment" popcorn entertainment, 
it works wonders.
Following the fatal beating of a young black man outside a New York City 
nightclub, and the evidence pointing towards Walter Wade, Jr. (Christian 
Bale), a wealthy bigot, NYPD investigator John Shaft (Samuel L. Jackson), one 
of the biggest badasses to ever hit the silver screen, hops on the case. He 
is quickly discharged, however, after giving Wade a taste of his own medicine 
(i.e. punching him twice in the face for the wrong Shaft knows for certain he 
did). Due to the one potential witness in the case, Diane Palmieri (Toni 
Collette), disappearing, Wade is unjustifiably set a bale of only $1-million, 
and before everyone knows it, he has skipped the country, relocating to 
Switzerland.
Flash forward two years, John Shaft is now on the narcotics unit of the 
police force, with a fellow cop partner in Carmen (Vanessa Williams). When 
Shaft learns that Wade is making his grand return to the U.S., he makes sure 
to be there for the plane arrival, and this time, he is certain that he can 
put him behind bars for good. But first, Shaft must find Diane and persuade 
her to testify in court, and dodge the increasing number of people in his 
life who are working for Wade, including corrupt cops (Dan Hedaya, Ruben 
Santiago-Hudson) and the wisecracking, hotshot Dominican druglord, Peoples 
Hernandez (Jeffrey Wright).
Like the title character, "Shaft" wastes no time in drawing the viewer into 
its derivative, yet engrossing, storyline. Nothing at all would matter, 
though, if Shaft were not portrayed with the correct measures of sleek 
coolness, attitude, and an at least somewhat tongue-in-cheek tone. In Samuel 
L. Jackson, director Singleton has found the perfect actor, and in "Shaft," 
the clearly talented Jackson has found what is possibly his most outstanding 
role, to date. The acting abilities of Jackson have never been doubted, but 
he also has never jumped so vibrantly off the screen as he does here, playing 
the character he was born to play. In short, he is funny, likable, oh-so-kewl,
 and projects a distinct joy of performing.
Supporting Jackson is a top-notch cast, not all of whom are used to their 
highest potential, but who are fine, all the same. Christian Bale, in a role 
that is virtually identical to the one he played in "American Psycho," is 
fabulous and appropriately chilling, turning his one-dimensional bad guy into 
one of the most memorable characters, and most impressive acting turns, in 
the entire film. Jeffrey Wright, as Peoples, is the secondary villain of the 
piece, and he is so good it is difficult to believe he is the same man who 
starred in 1996's "Basquiat." Fresh off her Academy Award nomination for "The 
Sixth Sense," Toni Collette does a respectable job as Diane Palmieri, but has 
little to do. And Vanessa Williams, as Carmen, is, in essence, the straight 
man to Shaft's flashier persona, and equips herself with a good-natured 
blandness.
With Shaft's groovy token theme song, by Isaac Hayes, prominently appearing 
at several points throughout, as far as can be told, "Shaft" successfully 
recaptures the feel of the 1971 original, but with a bare minimum of sexual 
innuendo. The film is action-lite, the type of high-spirited motion picture 
that knows it isn't great art, but thrives on this fact. Director Singleton, 
along with coscreenwriters Richard Price and Shane Salerno, and star Jackson, 
have all put their heads and hearts together to create a movie that will 
delight anyone looking for a big, silly action movie that seemingly succeeds 
without really trying, and doesn't add up to a whole lot in the long run.
Special Note: Producer Jerry Bruckheimer should be especially distressed to 
learn that the car chases within this film are infinitely more thrilling and 
fun than in his recent "Gone in 60 Seconds," a complete misfire that is 
supposed to be all about chase sequences, but never gets it right.

Author
Laura Clifford
In 1971, Richard Roundtree starred as "the cat who won't cut out, when there's
danger all about" in Gordon Parks's seminal blaxploitation film, "Shaft." That
film spawned two sequels and a TV series. Now, nearly 30 years later, Samuel L.
Jackson reprises the role of the title character, this time as the NYPD cop and
nephew of the legendary black private dick. John Singleton ("Boyz 'N the Hood")
directs the new "Shaft" and puts an updated and contemporary spin on the
original concept.
John Shaft is a well-respected New York City detective assigned to a case
involving the brutal beating of a young black man in a racially motivated
incident. The prime suspect is Walter Wade Jr. (Christian Bale), the scion of a
powerful, billionaire real estate tycoon with huge clout in the city. When
Shaft arrests the arrogant young man, he learns that there may have been an
eyewitness to the assault. The victim dies and Shaft becomes the champion of 
the murdered boy's mother and vows to take Wayne Jr. down.
Money talks, however, and Wayne is released on a pittance of bail, only to flee
the country to escape prosecution. The witness, Diane Palmieri (Toni Collette),
has also gone to ground, so Shaft's vendetta against Wayne comes to an abrupt
halt with no culprit and no witness. Flash forward two years. Shaft gets a tip
that the younger Wade is sneaking back into the country and catches the killer
cold. But, once again, political influence and money are more powerful than
justice is and Wayne is released on bail. Shaft, disgusted with the corrupt
proceedings, hurls his badge at the judge and vows to quit the force and
resolve the gross miscarriage of justice himself.
Shaft realizes that the only way he is going to take Wayne Jr. down is to find
Diane. Wayne knows this, too, and hires a small time drug dealer, Peoples
Hernandez (Jeffrey Wright), to ferret out the only person who can put Wayne
behind bars. Peoples contracts a pair of corrupt detectives to help out in the
search by tailing Shaft and reporting his moves. It becomes a race against the
clock as the disgruntled detective lays his life on the line to protect Diane.
John Singleton co-wrote the screenplay with Richard Price and Shane Salerno and
they come up with a hip, fast-moving action adventure that pays homage to the
original and the best of the blaxploitation genre. From the opening credits,
with the familiar sound of Isaac Hayes singing the original title song, to the
cheesy wipes between scenes and the sometimes equally cheesy score, we are
seeing a film that dedicates itself to the genre. But, the new "Shaft" still
maintains its modern, edgy nature that has evolved in film since the 70's.
"Shaft" is a heartfelt homage to the genre.
Samuel L. Jackson is John Shaft personified. The actor has always been a
favorite of my mine and I had high expectations for him as the new age Shaft.
He does not disappoint. The actor captures the sassy, irreverent nature of
Roundtree's original while giving the role his own imprint. Jackson has the
ability to switch from amiable to brutal in the wink of an eye, which suits the
character perfectly. If there isn't a sequel or two coming out of this, I'll be
hornswaggled.
Supporting cast is first rate with Jeffrey Wright making the biggest splash as
the flamboyant Hispanic drug dealer, Peoples. Wright is an extraordinary
character actor and almost leaps off the screen as the small statured, but
volatile and violent, drug lord. The actor is a true chameleon in his acting
and gives an attention grabbing perf. When a shootout ends in a tragic loss 
for the Peoples, the agony and vengeance he feels is palpable. The actor 
maintains his edge from beginning to end.
And the rest of the cast isn't shabby, either. Vanessa L. Williams goes
completely out of her usual glamour roles and plays a tough, capable cop, and
Shaft's friend and partner, Carmen Vasquez. It's hard to hide the actress's
beautiful looks, but her costuming as a no nonsense police officer does a good
job of hiding her inherent sexiness and allows Carmen's persona to come to the
surface. Christian Bale does a mini version of his recent, outrageous Patrick
Bateman in "American Psycho," but with a cocky toughness, not lunacy. He's
overshadowed by Wright's brilliant performance, though, and becomes more an
object than a character by the end of the film. Toni Collete, who can be
terrific, is merely OK as the fugitive witness, Diane. It's not her fault,
though, as there is little for her to do except be the target of everyone's
search. Richard Roundtree gets to play up the gracefully aging private eye and
ladies' man as John's Uncle John.
Tech credits are tops with cinematographer Donald Thorin capturing the feel of
the original but with an up to date image that is slick and new Millennium. The
frequent night shots are crisp and the action scenes and shootouts are tight.
Costume designer Ruth E. Carter gets high marks with her design of Shaft's
mostly black wardrobe, making him look like an avenging wraith when in action.
Editing is brisk and suits the fast pace that Singleton maintains in the just
over 90 minute flick. Brevity has its charms.
The only problems with the all-new "Shaft" are some enormous plot holes and a
trite, almost perfunctory ending that doesn't quite satisfy, detracting from
the rest of the film. I had me some good fun, still, and give it a B.
Director John Singleton ("Boyz in the Hood") breaks out of a slump with a
suprisingly adept, worthwhile remake in his modernized "Shaft."  Samuel
L. Jackson is John Shaft, newphew of the original John Shaft (Richard
Roundtree, who appears in this film as well) from the 1971 film which
epitomized the Blaxploitation film.
This new Shaft begins as a member of the NYPD (Uncle John was and still is
a P.I.) whose vigilante urges cause a despicable hate crime murderer (Christian
Bale as rich kid William Wade) to make bail and leave the country.  Shaft
hurls his badge at the judge and becomes a true vigilante (when he's not
bedding the numerous women lining up for the privilege) until we see the
'Two Years Later' subtitle which precedes Wade's return to the U.S.  (In
a major plot hole, which is either a result of editting for run time or a
huge problem with Shane Salerno's ("Armageddon") screenplay) the audience
is never given a single reason why Wade would return to face murder charges,
except for the arrogance of wealth.)
Wade encounters another Shaft adversary, drug lord Peoples Hernandez (Jeffrey
Wright, "Basquiat"), once Shaft's ensured Wade's weekend in the clink, and
Peoples is drawn to Wade's lifestyle (Peoples covets class).  Wade, knowing
that Shaft has an ace-in-the-hole witness (Toni Collette, "The Sixth Sense," as
Diane Palmieri), approaches Peoples to take her out, once he's infuriatingly
out on bail for a second time (the judge's concession to not being totally
bought this time around is to demand empoundment of Wade's passport).  Peoples
asks for admittance to Wade's world, which Wade dismisses out of hand, but
Peoples gets his revenge for when Wade gets mugged of the hit payment
(oh yeah, there are two corrupt cops playing everyone against the other, too,
although Shaft is clever enough to pull off the mugging and lay it at their
doorstep as a betrayal of Peoples) and is forced to deal drugs for him.
There are some big plots holes, mostly concerning Wade's storyline, but
Singleton keeps the story moving along so energetically and stages the 
action so kineticly (kudos to cinematographer Donald E. Thorin, "Thief,"
as well) that the film's coolness and entertainment value outweigh it's
problems.  Heck - this is far better than the original.
Samuel L. Jackson oozes cool as John 'It's my duty to please that booty'
Shaft.  He blows the Grade-B Richard Roundtree off the screen with his
formidable acting chops and screen charisma.  Yet even Jackson takes a second
seat to Jeffrey Wright, who gives a Best Supporting Actor Oscar
nomination-worthy performance as Peoples (as in "I takes care of my peoples"),
the class-craving, carved facial hair, icepick poking drug lord who's
entertaining to be around until Shaft shoots his brother during a 
standoff - then he gets real ugly (not to mention psychotic).
Bale does a twist on his "American Psycho" persona as Wade, throwing a 
bit of New York Irish into the mix - he's good, but suffers from the way
his storyline is handled.  Vanessa Williams is surprisingly effective as
an NYPD officer who stays loyal to Shaft - her looks don't get in the way
of her believability in the role.  Toni Collette is mostly wasted as the
witness to Wade's crime whom everyone's after.  Rapper Busta Rhymes is
fun as Rassan, a guy who's called to pay back favors by Shaft.  
The distinctive "Shaft" theme is updated and effectively used to cue
Jackson's every move by Isaac Hayes.
This is the first surprise treat of the summer multiplex season.  Who's
the man - Shaft!
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Homer Yen
When Detective Shaft (Samuel L. Jackson) says, "don't
make me chase you," the bad guy better be able to
escape.  When Detective Shaft is involved in a shoot
out, the bad guy better not miss.  When Detective
Shaft is on a mission, you better stay out of his way.
 If you don't, he'll come at you with the fury of a
tornado.  He's a man to be reckoned with, and he'll do
whatever it takes to get things done.
Shaft will have to take matters into his own hands if
he is to find closure with his latest case, which
involves the death of a young, black man at a local
club.  Arrogantly confessing to the crime is Wade
(Christian Bale), son of a wealthy and well-respected
community member.  He gloats about what he did and
chuckles to Shaft that he'll be released on bail and
that nothing will ever happen to him.  Because no
witnesses will testify and Wade has squirrelly
lawyers, he easily posts bail and walks away.
Shaft is incensed.  He wonders how justice can be so
blind.  But he knows what to do.  He must find a
witness to the murder.  Using his unique brand of
sleuthing skills, which means invariably demanding
favors or threatening people, he is able to locate
Diane (Toni Collette).  She was a bartender at the
club that night who actually saw the crime take place.
 She has been silent, fearing that testifying against
such a powerful person would be extremely dangerous.  
Shaft promises to keep her safe, but when Wade finds
out about Diane's intentions, he wants to have her
permanently silenced.
"Shaft" (the man and the movie) is mostly about
attitude and style.  Jackson is very confident,
sporting a wicked goatee while clad in leather pants,
a leather overcoat, and sleek sunglasses.  The women
just love him ("it's my duty to please your booty," he
says to one of them).  He talks tough, walks tall, and
never let's you down.  Meanwhile, the film showcases
the nostalgic look and feel of a 70's film.  It has a
soundtrack unique to that era, features Richard
Roundtree (who was the original Shaft), and includes
Isaac Hayes (who sang the original) singing the
opening song.  
Yet, about two-thirds of the way into the film, the
glaze of the "Starsky & Hutch"-like soundtrack and
Shaft's penchant to insult and intimidate may begin to
bore you.  You discover that the film is spiritlessly
plotted and lacks a rewarding dramatic arc.   It also
becomes oddly chaotic as it approaches the final
climactic scenes.  New people seem to come out of
nowhere, and there is a very busy shoot out sequence
where dozens of bad guys are crammed into a small
apartment.  
There are heroes that use intelligence to best their
opponents and there are heroes that use weapons to
defeat their enemies.  But Detective Shaft (Samuel L.
Jackson) virtually taunts them into submission.  He
reminds us that fighting crime is a tough business,
and it requires an equally rugged individual to get
things done.  He stares down his opponents, spews
threats like a volcano spews lava, and takes matters
into his own hands when he thinks, for example, that a
pistol whipping might get the point across more
effectively.  This guy is one tough mutha.

Author
Steve Rhodes
John Shaft is the coolest dude around, at least as portrayed with
supreme confidence and an eminently likeable bravado by Samuel L.
Jackson.  Dressed in his best Armani outfits, Jackson is so self-assured
that he slightly underplays his part and still rules the roost.
As directed by John Singleton (ROSEWOOD), the remake of SHAFT far
surpasses the original, which starred Richard Roundtree.  (In this
remake, Roundtree is given a nice small part as Uncle John Shaft.)
The movie is a perfect summer film, completely enjoyable with lots of
action.  Like the old westerns, this popcorn movie features a good guy
who kills bad guys left and right without worrying about any rules.
Criminals in SHAFT don't have any Miranda rights or any other rights for
that matter.  The film's body count is in the dozens since Shaft doesn't
shoot to wound, and he certainly doesn't miss.
When you mention SHAFT, most people just think of its theme music, which
this remake uses to advantage.  Besides opening with the theme to get us
in the mood, it cuts back to it periodically to reenergize us.  Of
course, with action this lively, it isn't clear that we ever need our
batteries recharged.
The simple plot has two major threads.  In the opening one, the racist
son (Walter Wade, Jr.) of a wealthy New York developer kills a black guy
outside of a bar in an unprovoked attack.  Christian Bale, last seen
chillingly as Patrick Bateman in AMERICAN PSYCHO, is perfectly cast as
Walter, a depraved preppie.  Since Bale is so good at playing nefarious
characters, my single complaint about the picture is that we did not get
to see more of Walter's villainy.  (Toni Collette does a nice turn as a
scared, reluctant witness who is the only one to see the murder.)
The other and more effective thread concerns a Puerto Rican drug kingpin
named Peoples Hernandez, whom Shaft ridicules as being the king of three
blocks.  Peoples and his large gang end up in a war with Shaft.  (Want
to place your bets on that match-up?)  Peoples is played by an
unrecognizable Jeffrey Wright, whose most famous role was as an artist
in BASQUIAT.  Wright delivers a fascinating performance that manages to
become even more mesmerizing by his Godfather-like speech.  With a thick
accent and talking like he has marbles in his mouth, Wright crafts a
unique character.  Looking like a prissy wimp, Peoples is nonetheless a
completely vicious killer, who has no compunction in throwing people out
of windows or stabbing them with ice picks.  Don't be surprised if
Wright is talked up for an Oscar nomination for his supporting role.
A hero of working-class cops and of good citizens everywhere, Shaft
risks everything in his pursuit of vigilante justice.  Actually Shaft
respects the law and wants most of all to bring Walter to trial.  But
along the way, if dozens of criminals have to die, well that's the way
it is in the Old West or in the ghetto.
Some movies stretch our imagination and build our intellect.  Some just
give us a good old-fashioned time at the theater.  SHAFT is happy just
to do the latter.  SHAFT may not tax your brain, but it will tickle your
funny bone and give you ample opportunity to cheer the good guys and
hiss the bad.  It's pure, unadulterated fun.
SHAFT runs 1:39.  It is rated R for strong violence and language and
would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
This film is not a remake of the original 1971 film starring Richard
Roundtree as the baddest mutha on the streets of New York, but an update,
starring the ultimate cool man, Sam Jackson, as the nephew of the original
Shaft character. By now, I think we've all heard the reports about director
Singleton messing around with the extras on the set and playing loud music
(how about lightening up a little, Mr. Rudin...the man knows how to enjoy
life, give him a break!), and the supposed rifts between Jackson and the
director, with everyone and their uncle having an opinion on the script. But
all that aside, the real question is...does the film entertain? Simply
put...f**kin' aye!
PLOT:
Detective John Shaft quits the police force after the system fails to put
away a rich, white boy who committed a racially motivated murder. He decides
to take the law into his own hands, roaming the streets of the city in
search of his own brand of justice.
CRITIQUE:
Is this a "bad" movie? You bet it is! "Bad" in the good sense, of course.
Take a hip character, a decent story line, a bit of violence, a bit of
action, an awesome score and some great performances from Wright, Bale and
the bad mutha himself, Sam Jackson, and enjoy this film as the gritty urban
crime drama that it is. I just loved the whole mood of this flick, with its
dark city shadows, its cool scene transitions, and its rapid pace, all of
which switched my gear to "fun" about two minutes in. In fact, about halfway
through the movie, I was already looking forward to sequels from the man,
which would definitely be a welcome addition to the sorry ass state of black
heroes in Hollywood today. Let's get Shaft to fly to Europe and kick some
French ass or something! The possibilities are endless. And who better than
Mr. Samuel L. Jackson in the lead role? Wow. If there ever was a role made
for anyone, it is the role of Shaft made for Jackson. The wicked fu-manchu
mustache, the slick clothes, the whole black Dirty Harry attitude, all
seemed to fit Jackson like a tight, leather glove. In fact, it is his
charismatic performance, along with those from Bale and Wright, which
actually take this movie a couple of notches above its standard TV cop drama
plot line.
Don't get me wrong, the story was actually pretty interesting, but not
really anything to get worked up about. In fact, there were even a couple of
plot holes which I let slide because of the whole kickass attitude of the
film itself. I gotta give it to Singleton, who seemed to have been slacking
according to crappy media reports from the set, he managed to create a fun,
quick-paced film here, although more reminiscent of last year's PAYBACK than
the original SHAFT film. In fact, like most everyone who saw this flick, I
was quite disappointed with the lack of girl-play for Shaft, and certainly
would've appreciated more sexual innuendo and even more profanity. I mean,
this is Shaft for God's sakes...the baddest mutha on the streets! Let him
loose! But those are just little qualms within the bigger picture which
truly did keep me entertained throughout. In fact, the performance from
Jeffrey Wright alone is worth the price of admission. He pulls off one of
the most over-the-top Tony Montana impressions since Pacino ate it up
himself in 1983's SCARFACE. In fact, his character makes the Benicio Del
Toro character from THE USUAL SUSPECTS actually sound coherent.
All in all, a fun reincarnation of a classic blaxploitation film whose
funky, slick score is as big a part of the movie as the action itself. Now,
shut yer mouth and go see this movie!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Some of Samuel L. Jackson's earlier film roles include "Gang Member No. 2"
in 1981's RAGTIME, the "black guy" in SEA OF LOVE (ironically, the
screenwriter of this film, Richard Price, also wrote that film), and "Stax
Edwards" in the classic Scorsese mob drama GOODFELLAS. His breakthrough role
came right after his kicked his own drug habit, when he starred as a
strung-out dope fiend in Spike Lee's 1991 movie JUNGLE FEVER.
Richard Roundtree, who played Shaft in the original 70s movies, returns as
Uncle John in this film. The original SHAFT film was followed up with two
sequels: SHAFT'S BIG SCORE and SHAFT IN AFRICA. There was also a short-lived
1973-74 TV series featuring Roundtree in a tamer incarnation.
The man behind the hippest score of the year, Isaac Hayes, is the same man
who did the score in the original film, and is better known nowadays as the
voice of Chef in TV's "South Park". He also performed the song "Chocolate
Salty Balls" on the 1999 South Park album.
All the cool clothes worn by Samuel L. Jackson in this picture were provided
for by a little stylish company named Giorgio Armani.
This film was originally titled SHAFT RETURNS.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SHAFT (director/writer: John Singleton ; screenwriter: Ernest Tidyman
(novel)/Richard Price/Shane Salerno; cinematographer: Donald E. Thorin;
editors: John Bloom/Antonia Van Drimmelen; cast: Samuel L. Jackson (John
Shaft), Vanessa Williams (Detective Carmen Vasquez), Jeffrey Wright
(Peoples Hernandez), Christian Bale (Walter Wade
Jr.), Busta Rhymes (Rasaan), Dan Hedaya (Jack  Roselli), Toni Collette
(Diane Palmieri), Richard Roundtree (Uncle John Shaft), Ruben
Santiago-Hudson (Jimmy Groves), Daniel Von Bergen (Lieutenant Kearney),
Mekhi Phifer (Trey, black murder victim), Lee Tergesen (Luger), 2000)
We know we are watching a Shaft movie without even looking up at the
screen, as we tune into the wah-wah funk sound of Isaac Hayes'
exponential title theme and get with its raucous sounds that echo
throughout this action-packed mainstream movie from the opening credits
to the film's end. John Singleton's ("Boyz N the Hood") "Shaft" is a
blaxploitation sequel film to the core, made in earnest for the urban
New Millennium and to satisfy its fans who have followed all the other
Shaft films. Why do we need another "Shaft," is easy to explain: the
public demands it, meaning there's big box office potential.
Samuel L. Jackson brings the right frame of mind to the film as NYC
Detective John Shaft; he is funny, violent, and able to stay in
character as Samuel L. Jackson, staring hard at the camera, hamming it
up with an easy smile or taking on a drug lord in a choreographed
showdown of violence. Jackson's the Man who takes charge of this film,
because he's the Man. His humor is of the vulgar kind, where he tells a
barmaid, "It's my duty to please the booty." His violence is exemplified
with him coming out of a witnesses' private house with both guns blazing
and with dead bodies strewn all over the neighborhood. The original
Shaft, Richard Roundtree, has a small part as Shaft's uncle, trying to
get his nephew to become a partner in his private eye service and give
up on the racist police force.
The film has its two eyes firmly set on the box office, its mind in the
gutter, and a serviceable script for all its mayhem and profanity to
have an urban gritty feel to it. The film makes only a few halfhearted
pretences of being anything more than a mindless entertainment
spectacle, and those efforts don't help but hinder. The film would have
been better served if went completely either for mindless violence or
played it completely like a Scorsese art-form gangster film. Mixing in
both styles, only jarred the rhythm of the film.
"Shaft" has the usual props for a black exploitation film: fancy cars,
gold chains, sexy chicks, drugs, guns, crooked cops, and a slick
anti-establishment hero. It also had the audience where I saw the film,
charged-up for the action scenes and hooting with wild delight at the
snide digs. It also had the right Shaft for the part; Samuel L. Jackson
gives the role some weight and puts an edge on his vigilante
characterization.
The action begins when Shaft gets called to a racially charged murder
outside a trendy Manhattan nightspot, and he arrests a bigoted, rich,
white young man, Walter Wade Jr. (Bale). But the rich kid posts bail and
skips for two years, living in Switzerland. The barmaid Diane (Colleti),
with her frightened doe-like eyes in the headlights for the entire film,
also disappears, and she is the only witness to the crime.
Walter returns after two years and Shaft arrests him again. The judge
this time sets a high bail, but one which Walter easily meets. In the
tombs for a day, waiting to post bail, he befriends a violent Dominican
drug dealer called Peoples (Wright). In a scene that was both
incredulous and awesome in how chilling it was, Walter goes to Peoples'
Dominican Washington Heights neighborhood, where he sticks out like a
sore thumb and offers Peoples $40,000 in his late mother's jewelry to
locate and kill the witness. Peoples' has other ideas than the money, he
wants to get his drugs pushed into Walter's white upscale neighborhood,
as he is looking for upward mobility and a white contact there. Of
course, one can ask why a racist like Walter would go to Peoples for the
contract murder, unless he's really insane and that the "American
Psycho" smile Bale still sports from his last starring role, just hasn't
worn off yet. It is more than likely, especially with the big money he
was willing to pay, that he could have gotten white Mafia professionals
to take care of his business.
The meeting of great minds, of the hateful WASP Walter and the
stereotyped lowlife Peoples, who speaks a stream of constant trash-talk
and with an enunciation that is so fantastically off kilter, that makes
it fun to laugh at him. The comedy provided by Wright's speech pattern
is comparable to a Cisco Kid movie dialogue, if the two stars were on
speed. Jeffrey Wright is the perfect villain to balance out the
super-serious Shaft; he steals scenes from his arch enemy Shaft by a
twist of his neck or by wearing a greasy shirt. After all, Samuel L.
Jackson is just playing one of those typical ego-maniac roles.
Shaft throws his badge at the judge who gave Walter an attainable bail
again, and quits the police force to become a vigilante, dedicating his
life in hunting down the crime's key witness and getting Walter
convicted. His role is very serious. While Peoples just wants to become
a bigger drug kingpin...realizing he's limited in this lifetime by his
ethnic quirks.
Shaft gets unexpected help in his vigilante stance from the attractive
narcotics squad detective, Carman Vasquez (Williams), who watches his
back. He will need her help, as things get twisted and two crooked cops
(Hedaya and Tergesen) who work for Peoples, tail him as he goes after
Diane. The film resorts to violent chases, shootouts, a final duel
between Wright and Jackson, and a twisted ending, to make its final
statement about what Singleton thinks of the justice system.
Shaft tells it like it is, he's: "too black for the uniform, too blue
for the brothers." He's angry at racism, and he's angry at urban crime
and corruption. The Shaft films have changed with the times, the 1970s
demanded "Black Pride," for Shaft to be a sex machine, and for him to be
one cool dude. This Shaft retains the loud dress code, his super-macho
attitude, and the political incorrectness of his character, but he is
more politically motivated, more set on violence as his calling card,
and even more cynical that the system can't work. It is stylishly
directed and acted, and achieves moderate success in telling its story.
It even offers some passing comments about a host of recent NYC police
corruption cases, and it can't resist a passing aside at the current
mayor, as Jackson in the middle of an assault on the drug dealers says,
"It's Giuliani time."This film was made for Samuel L. Jackson; just by
his presence, it makes this film a more perplexing one than the others.
What is missing  is any love interest or any sex scenes; what takes the
place of sex, is pure violence. You tell me if that's an improvement!
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jon Popick
It's tough to anticipate what to expect from a film with this much
baggage.  Throughout the production of Shaft  a remake/sequel of the
1971 blaxploitation film of the same name  reports surfaced almost
daily about ugly name-calling incidents between has-been director John
Singleton (Rosewood), star and Gardenburger pitchman Samuel L. Jackson
(Rules of Engagement) and cracker screenwriter Richard Price (Ransom).
The good news is that the theme song isn't messed up.  My greatest fear
was that on-his-fourteenth-minute-of-fame song-stealer Sean `No-Talent'
Combs would be tapped to hip the thing up with samples from Steppenwolf
and Kenny Rogers, in the way that frat-boy-date-rape rockers Limp Bizkit
ruined the M:I-2 theme.  The bad news is that the remake wasn't campy in
the slightest, which is how I would have approached the film - you know,
with really cheesy action sequences and bad guys with big, white top
hats, furry white coats, glass canes and ... wait; I'm describing P.
Diddy.  Shaft plays like a conventional action flick, which to me was
just disappointing.
The story involves a bar altercation where Walter Williams (Christian
Bale, American Psycho), the racist son of a New York City bigwig, offs a
young black man.  The case, which is caught by Detective John Shaft
(Jackson) hinges on the testimony of a waitress named Diane (Toni
Collette, The Sixth Sense) that may have witnessed the murder, but she
disappears.  Williams uses his connections to get a bargain-rate bail,
skips town and ends up in Switzerland.
The film flashes forward two years, where Shaft is still trying to hunt
down Diane, but catches wind that Williams is coming back to the
States.  Throw in a drug dealer named Peoples Hernandez (Jeffrey Wright,
Ride With the Devil), and you've got more story that an average action
film can probably handle.  You know this is the case when you realize
that Diane has been on the run for two years yet hasn't even left the
Bronx.  When Shaft is kicking ass, the film is great, but when he's not,
it really drags.  The resulting effect is a choppy and uneven viewing
experience.
On the plus side, ain't nobody in the world can say `motherfucker' like
Sammy J.  He's built a whole career around being able to deliver that
one word really well, and he throws it around quite often here.  I'd pay
twenty bucks just to have him say it right in my face.  Hell, it's
cheaper than an all-day pass to Six Flags, and probably at least twice
as scary as whatever their new ride is this year.  Can Jackson/Shaft
kick ass?  Lord, yes, but he could have kicked a lot more.  I would have
liked more fisticuffs as opposed to the standard gunplay that ran
rampant throughout the film.
Also worth mentioning are Collette's amazing Bronx accent (she's
Australian) and the hysterically over-the-top and nearly unrecognizable
performance from Wright, who may be one of the screen's best bad guys in
some time.  Bale nails his pretentious white prick role, but that seems
to be what everyone thinks about him anyway.  And big-mouth rapper Busta
Rhymes does an admirable job playing Shaft's wisecracking sidekick.
Also appearing in Shaft are Vanessa L. Williams (Light It Up), Dan
Hedaya (The Hurricane), Lee Tergesen (Oz), Gloria Reuben (ER) and
Richard Roundtree (Steel), the star of the original film, who plays
Shaft's Uncle John.
1:42 - R for strong violence and language

Author
Christopher Null
     That's right.  Just talkin' 'bout Shaft.  The remake.  Er, the
sequel that is -- in what might very well be the first and only time a
sequel has been given the same title as the original.  And believe me,
that's just where the stupidity of Shaft begins.
     Samuel L. Jackson is obvious casting for the role of John Shaft,
the nephew of that other John Shaft (Richard Roundtree), the man who
popularized New York's baddest cop in three films during the early
1970s.  While John Shaft is certainly a piece of pop culture, it's also
important to remember that the Shaft films were little more than classic
examples of blaxploitation.  And the Shaft of today does embarrassingly
little to change his image.
     It's a pity, because the update could have been a lot of fun -- a
modern-day John Shaft as tragic hero in a corrupt and oppressive NYPD.
Alas, no, the movie degenerates after 10 minutes of foot-tapping to
Isaac Hayes' classic "Theme from Shaft," with the audience left merely
to wonder: How long it will be until Roundtree makes his obligatory
cameo? (Answer: about 30 minutes.)
    The plot, what there is of one, is an utter throwaway.  Involving a
rich yuppie psycho (American Psycho's Christian Bale, now making a
living playing rich yuppie psychos) who bludgeons a black man to death
-- and the hush scheme to silence the only witness (Toni Collette) --
Shaft is so derivative as to be laughable, if only it didn't take itself
so seriously.  With Shaft's ridiculous beard trim, a joke-busting
sidekick (fittingly played by Busta Rhymes, the only real treat in the
film), and a whole army of bad guys, none of whom can shoot worth a damn
(though Shaft never misses), Shaft is a parody of itself but doesn't
even realize it.  Ultimately, the story serves simply to usher Shaft
from fight to gun battle to car chase, over and over and over again.  If
it wasn't called Shaft, no one would see this film.
     I tell you what.  Let Spike Lee direct Shaft instead of blood-happy
John Singleton.  Hell, let Spike Lee direct and star!  Now that'd be a
movie.  But what am I saying?  Shut yo mouth!
Director: John Singleton
Producer: Scott Rudin, John Singleton
Writer: Richard Price
Starring: Samuel L. Jackson, Vanessa L. Williams, Jeffrey Wright,
Christian Bale, Dan Hedaya, Busta Rhymes, Toni Collette, Richard
Roundtree
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html">
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
To unsubscribe from filmcritic.com's Breaking Reviews mailing list,
reply to this e-mail with UNSUBSCRIBE as the subject.  E-mail address
changes via reply with both old and new addresses.

Author
Shay Casey

*** out of ****
Year: 2000. Starring Samuel L. Jackson, Vanessa L. Williams, Christian 
Bale, Jeffrey Wright, Busta Rhymes, Toni Collette, Dan Hedaya, Ruben 
Santiago-Hudson, Richard Roundtree. Written by John Singleton & Shane 
Salerno (story) and Richard Price (story & screenplay). Directed by John 
Singleton. Rated R.
Coolness is hard to attain. It's really not something you can learn: 
Richard Nixon spent much of his administration trying to figure out how 
to be cool, and he failed miserably. What's worse, he wasn't the only 
one. No matter what they do, there are some people that just can't be 
cool. Martha Stewart can't be cool. Barry Manilow can't be cool. Pat 
Boone, despite his most bizarre efforts, can't be cool. John Shaft, on 
the other hand, was one cool motherf***er. He was played by Richard 
Roundtree, and Richard Roundtree is cool. The new edition is played by 
Samuel L. Jackson, and Samuel L. Jackson can't help but be cool. His 
Shaft 2000, nephew to the original, fights a war against all the 
seriously uncool enemies trying to bring him down. The bad guys might 
claim money or racism as their reasons for going after Shaft, but make 
no mistake; the bad guys are against Shaft because they're jealous of 
his ultimate coolness. Can you dig it?
Shaft 2000 is most definitely a new Shaft; this film goes to great 
lengths to explain that Jackson's John Shaft is the nephew of Richard 
Roundtree's original, and *not* the same guy. He's angrier, perfectly 
willing to punch a suspect in the nose right in front of all his 
supervisors. His sense of humor is a bit stronger: he enjoys making 
threatening movements towards criminals, watching them jump, and 
laughing at them. He's also been updated for the new millennium. Uncle 
was a "sex machine to all the chicks," but the new guy was obviously 
brought up with a slightly more modern worldview. He respects women and 
keeps his distance, though he doesn't mind a bit of flirting now and 
then. This is a good choice -- the 1970's Shaft held a rather cavalier 
attitude towards sex that simply wouldn't fly in today's HIV-infected 
society. Shaft 2000 may be a flaming heterosexual, but he's not stupid. 
Secondly, a "sex-machine" version of Shaft wouldn't work with Jackson in 
the role. We all know Jackson is an actor of many talents: his line 
readings are perfect, making even the clumsiest passage of dialogue 
bearable, and when he's really on (as in the scripture-quoting scene in 
"Pulp Fiction"), his unmatched intensity can galvanize an audience like 
no other. Jackson, in most ways, is a far better actor than Roundtree 
ever was. But Roundtree had something that can't be taught: sexual 
allure. He has it; Jackson doesn't.
Therefore I find it amusing to read several critics expending great 
energy writing long-winded analyses that all boil down to one complaint: 
not enough sex. If this were a remake, I'd see where they were coming 
from, but "Shaft 2000" is very much a sequel, and as such, the new Shaft 
is in no way required to mimic his predecessor. Director John Singleton 
has gone on record as saying that he wanted to update "Shaft," and it's 
a good idea. The original 1971 film has many good elements, but it's 
also badly dated. Nowadays, it exists mainly as a cinematic relic, 
historically important to the development of black film, but not 
terribly relevant to contemporary society. The 2000 version updates the 
dialogue and attitudes, but keeps the issues that made "Shaft" and its 
fellow blaxploitation movies important.
Shaft is still a character that fights not only against criminals, but 
against an indefinite, institutionalized force. While his superiors make 
thinly-veiled racist remarks to him, Shaft watches a rich white punk 
(Christian Bale, in a one-dimensional, but effective, performance) get 
away with killing a young black man because of his wealthy connections. 
Shaft vows to bring him to justice, quitting the police force. But he's 
now got to contend with crooked cops, a local crime boss, calling 
himself Peoples (Jeffrey Wright, strangely compelling despite a 
caricatured accent), who wants to expand his drug trade uptown, and an 
eyewitness who won't testify in court out of fear for her life (Toni 
Collette). Singer Vanessa Williams and rapper Busta Rhymes give Shaft 
support as, respectively, an old partner and a loudmouth Rastafarian 
sidekick.
As in most action movies, "Shaft 2000" draws up a very clear line 
between who is a "good guy" and who is a "bad guy." Here, it could not 
be simpler: the good guys are cool and the bad guys are not. Shaft is 
cool, obviously. Ditto Uncle Shaft (the original, played again by 
Roundtree). Other characters are cool by their willingness to hang with 
Shaft. The bad guys, meanwhile, couldn't be cool if their lives depended 
on it. Christian Bale's character may have lots of money, but he 
wouldn't know coolness if it jumped up and bit him in the ass. He's 
thoroughly outclassed in a restaurant by the young man he eventually 
murders, and watching him stroll through the 'hood, with his cap pulled 
forward and his collar turned up, he could not be more of a square. 
Peoples wants to be cool, but his goofy accent and even goofier 
entourage keep him from attaining his goal. Dan Hedaya plays half of a 
crooked-cop team, and there's no way this guy can be cool. He played 
*Nixon* (in 1999's "Dick"), for God's sake! Shaft, meanwhile, thrives on 
cool; he does things a person of lesser cool wouldn't even bother 
trying. His coolness makes him invincible. What else then do we require 
of an action hero? Shaft is ideal because nothing fazes him. Under 
pressure, he always keeps his head.
All of this is neatly packaged by director Singleton. The plot is simple 
and easily comprehensible, the action scenes are exciting, and there are 
bits of humor spread here and there to keep things from getting too 
somber (Busta Rhymes provides the most amusing moments). So what if the 
conclusion seems to come straight out of nowhere in particular, and the 
characters' motivations are about as subtle as a shovel to the forehead? 
What really matters is that the new John Shaft stands as a fine example 
of how to be a cool action hero. As for his movie, it's cool too.
For more reviews, go to http://www.geocities.com/sycasey/movies.html

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by John Singleton. Screenplay by Richard Price, from a story by
Singleton, Shane Salerno and Price, based on the novel Ernest Tidyman.
Starring Samuel L Jackson, Christian Bale, Jeffrey Wright. Running time: 
98 minutes. Rated AA for offensive language and violent scenes by the 
MFCB. Reviewed on June 18th, 2000.
As I compose this review, I find myself resisting the temptation to write 
the whole thing in early-Seventies urban slang. Fortunately, I think I 
can last just long enough to grind out another nine-hundred-odd words. 
Can ya dig it?
The stimulus behind this bizarre compulsion, of course, is the new action 
movie "Shaft". I've not yet seen the original version, nor indeed any of 
the so-called "blaxploitation" genre which blossomed in the Seventies, so 
as I watched the updated edition I had little basis for comparison. 
However, if the first "Shaft" is as enjoyable as this one, it will be a 
rental to look forward to. The new "Shaft" is a good example of a summer 
movie done right.
John Shaft (Samuel L Jackson) is a cop "too black for the uniform and too 
blue for the brothers". He's an uneasy fit in the police department, 
straining at the rules and regulations which govern his actions, and 
sorely tempted by the offer of his uncle John (Richard Roundtree, 
reprising his role from the original "Shaft" trilogy in a handful of 
entertaining cameos, still oozing cool) to join his private detective 
agency.
One night, Shaft is called to an upper-class club where a black man has 
been brutally clubbed to death. Shaft soon identifies the killer as 
Walter Wade Jr (Christian Bale), heir to a real estate empire. But a 
judge lets Wade off with a bail amount insignificant in comparison to 
either his bank account or the severity of his crime, and soon Wade has 
fled to Switzerland.
Fast forward two years, and Shaft is tipped off to Wade's return to the 
United States. But he is again allowed to post bail, causing a fed-up 
Shaft to quit the force in disgust, vowing to get Wade his own way. Shaft 
sets to work tracking down Diane Palmieri ("The Sixth Sense"'s Toni 
Collette), the only eye witness to the murder, who has since vanished 
without a trace. But Wade is also trying to find Diane, and has hired 
another of Shaft's nemeses, drug lord Peoples Hernandez (Jeffrey Wright), 
to silence her.
This year's first big summer action flicks -- "Mission: Impossible 2" and 
"Gone In 60 Seconds" -- were both let down primarily by poor 
scriptwriting. "Shaft" bucks the trend: the screenplay by Richard Price 
is one of the film's biggest assets. The story is solid, engaging, and 
frequently funny, and the characterisation is mostly top notch. The 
action sequences are watchable if not really inventive, and enough twists 
and turns are thrown into the mix to keep interest high.
Samuel L Jackson is in fine form as the title character, bringing 
together an unusual mix of intensity and humor, not to mention Shaft's 
trademark suave. He looks very impressive in a wardrobe consisting mostly 
of long dark coats, with a bald head and a fearsome goatee. He seems to 
shift from "approachable" to "indomitable" with but a glance. Jackson's 
Shaft is in some ways reminiscent of his "Pulp Fiction" character, with 
the same edgy humor and penchant for violence. Whereas Roundtree's Shaft
was known as much for his promiscuity as his crime-solving skills, this
version is far more single-minded in his search for Diane.
"Shaft" boasts not one but two stellar bad guys in Wade and Hernandez, 
both very well-cast. Bale could easily have made Wade a continuation of 
his starring role in "American Psycho", but plays this character as a 
more grounded sort of villain, the kind that's evil not because he's 
mentally ill but just because he can afford to be. Wade doesn't so much 
kill because he enjoys it, but because he sees his victim as something 
far less than himself.
Wright, meanwhile, portrays Peoples as an almost fey character, but with 
a dangerous volatility all the same. Particularly pleasing is that both 
Wade and Hernandez are given their own distinctive, rounded personalities 
and individual raisons d'etre. "Shaft" avoids the trap of, say, the last 
two "Batman" movies where one headlining villain stole the spotlight and 
the other was relegated to grunt status. Some of the best sequences in 
the entire movie come when Bale and Wright are interacting.
Also notable is rapper Busta Rhymes, who does an impressive comic turn as 
Shaft's reluctant pseudo-sidekick, Rasaan. Further, the movie takes a 
very unexpected risk with the character Luger, a bigoted police officer. 
I thought Luger was being built up as the prototypical racist cop, but 
was delighted when the movie totally subverted my assumptions. Luger is 
not made out to be a nice or admirable character, of course, but I found 
it interesting that Price chose to acknowledge a few shades of grey in 
the midst of the usual racists-bad black-and-white palette. Lee Tergesen 
manages to find just the right balance in the role.
Indeed, there are few stereotypes to be found in "Shaft". The only
notable exception to this is Jack Rosselli, a cop on Peoples' payroll.
Played by Dan Hedaya, Rosselli is a strong echo of Hedaya's "The
Hurricane" character. But even here expectations are twisted, as
Rosselli's partner in corruption is black. Indeed, "Shaft" is not about
black guys kicking white guys' butts, but an action flick which handles
issues of race more competently than is often the case. Shaft is black,
yes, and the film does not trivialise or dismiss the fact. But there is
more to the character; his race is part of what makes up John Shaft, not
the only thing.
Which is not suggest, of course, that this is a movie bogged down in the 
politics of race relations. "Shaft" is foremost a popcorn movie, and does 
not dwell too much upon such notions. But that such observations can be 
drawn at all is indicative of the fact that "Shaft" is not just an action 
movie, but an action movie with a brain. It might not be overly 
ambitious, but it's definitely good entertainment. Damn right.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/Shaft.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Frankie Paiva
Considering that casting director Ilene Starger rounded up a great cast 
including all of the names above, Dan Hedaya, and Richard Roundtree I really 
expected more from this movie. Shaft certainly kicks butt, but there are too 
many underdeveloped characters around him. The plot is very weak, twisting 
itself in all possible ways to attain more onscreen violence. Strong violence 
may have been a trademark of blaxploitation movies of the 1970s, but it 
doesn't need to be here. While most assaults are only worth mild cringes, 
Shaft works more as a modern action flick than a gritty ode to the original 
Shaft, Superfly, and all those Pam Grier movies. Too bad it takes the latter 
road.
John Shaft (Samuel L. Jackson) nephew of the original Shaft (Richard 
Roundtree in a cameo) is a police detective turned private eye. When a racist 
killing happens outside a night club, he's determined to bring the hateful 
perpetrator Walter Willaims (Christian Bale) to justice. Walter flees to 
Europe. Two years days later Shaft joins up with a narcotics team headed by 
Carmen (Vanessa L. Williams). Since the suspect has returned from a very long 
trip to Switzerland, the case gets resumed. Together the group searches for 
the scared witness who saw it all (Toni Collette). Peoples (Jeffrey Wright) 
is a drug dealer that will have an effect on everyone. He gets involved with 
two corrupt cops from the narcotics team. He also gets paid to kill the 
witness. The greed and betrayals that ensue ensure a machine gun happy good 
time.
With such a flimsy plot this movie relies almost entirely on Samuel L. 
Jackson's lead performance. Luckily, it is a very good one. At fifty-one, 
Jackson can still beat the bad guys with graceful ease. His ultra-cool 
persona gets perfectly completed with black leather everything and a blinding 
shining bald head. Shaft is one big bad "motherlover." One couldn't say that 
for the rest of the cast. While Busta Rhymes and Jeffrey Wright make 
impressions, there's no real reason Vanessa L. Williams needed to be in this 
at all. The same goes for Christian Bale whose performance was flat. Toni 
Collette, who was great in Muriel's Wedding and The Sixth Sense tries to make 
something out of her thankless role. Any scene without Shaft seems boring and 
stupid, but the scenes with him are marvelous. David Arnold's score along 
with the Shaft theme from Issac Hayes really heighten the experience. Getting 
louder at appropriate periods of action, it's the only consistently good 
thing here. The fast pace of events comes to a grinding halt a third of the 
way into the movie. Ninety-eight minutes isn’t too long, but the film seemed 
considerably longer than it was. To top it off there is virtually no sex in 
this remake. What happened to the private dick with all the chicks? The 
minuscule amount of sex that occurs involves Shaft uttering pickup lines 
like, "It's my duty to please that booty." Every line like this seems forced 
and uncomfortable from Jackson. 
Usual action movie clichés are present. It’s pretty unlikely that of the at 
least two hundred bullets fired at Shaft and crew, not one hits its intended 
target. Our hero seems invincible. Perhaps shots of Shaft slowly walking down 
a dark alley with his long black leather coat fluttering in the wind are 
purposely reminiscent of Batman. Regardless, they definitely best portray the 
man’s image. If anything, this movie has a slam bang unexpected ending. One 
the audience and I didn’t see coming. If more gasps like this got worked into 
the plot structure, the movie would be much more enjoyable. A stronger script 
providing better chances for better acting would also have made this far 
superior. I couldn't help feeling cheated by Shaft. It wasn't nearly as fun 
as it could have been.

Author
Scott Renshaw
SHAFT (2000)
(Paramount)
Starring:  Samuel L. Jackson, Christian Bale, Jeffrey Wright, Vanessa
Williams, Toni Collette, Busta Rhymes.
Screenplay:  Richard Price and John Singleton & Shane Salerno, based on
the novel by Ernest Tidyman.
Producers:  Scott Rudin and John Singleton.
Director:  John Singleton.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  97 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The promotional material for John Singleton's new film includes the
following copy: "Samuel L. Jackson. SHAFT. Any questions?" Assuming the
question isn't rhetorical, I'd like to pose one: Exactly why is this film
called SHAFT, anyway? The original 1971 "blaxploitation" film may look
rough and ridiculously dated to contemporary eyes -- it's hard to take
seriously any film in which the word "whitey" plays such a prominent role
-- but it was a fairly revolutionary portrayal of an African-American
anti-hero as tough, sexual and beholden to absolutely no one. The presence
of Isaac Hayes' famous theme song may tell you this is SHAFT, but is this
story the one described in those famous lyrics?
     "Who's the black private dick ..." Not this John Shaft (Samuel
L. Jackson), who is a New York police detective when the film begins,
investigating the death of a young black man outside a bar. The prime
suspect is Walter Wade Jr. (Christian Bale), who walks thanks to his rich
father's connections and spends two years hiding out in Switzerland.
Shaft is ready for him when he finally returns, but getting a conviction
will mean finding witness Diane Palmieri (Toni Collette), who has chosen
to disappear. When Wade is released on bail yet again, Shaft quits the
force and goes vigilante, attempting to locate Diane before Wade can have
her killed by drug lord Peoples Hernandez (Jeffrey Wright). And maybe his
private dick Uncle John (Richard Roundtree) can lend some support.
     " ... who's a sex machine to all the chicks ..." The 1971 original 
was an audacious film in its low-budget way, including a scene in which
Shaft (Roundtree) has sex with a white woman. It's depressing to realize
that mainstream Hollywood continues to be as timid as it ever was in
portraying the sexuality of black men. Aside from a stylized montage over
the opening credits, Jackson's Shaft is practically asexual. Where 
Roundtree's Shaft defied every easy presumption about him -- he was just
as disdainful of low-life brothers as he was of low-life honkies --
Jackson's Shaft makes use of his street connections to bring down a rich
white guy, with no visible personal life getting in the way. 
     "Who's the cat who won't cop out when there's danger all about ..." 
There's plenty of danger all about in SHAFT, with two extremely effective
villains. Bale may be radiating the same arrogant, upscale sleaze he
brought to AMERICAN PSYCHO, but he sure has nailed it. Wade is an easy
reptile to root against, as is Jeffrey Wright's intense Peoples. Some
viewers may find his performance the most outrageous Latino crime boss
parody since Pacino tore up his Cuban accent in SCARFACE. I found
something compelling and creepy about Peoples, from his manic
self-mutilation to his casual con artistry. Between the two of them, Bale
and Wright could have been the anchors of a better-than-average cop
thriller, one that didn't have a title immediately creating a different
set of expectations.
     "They say that he's a bad mutha ..." No question, Samuel L. Jackson
can be a bad mutha. His glare is as menacing as anyone's in film today,
easily making him the toughest guy to intimidate in any room. In fact,
there's so much emphasis on making him tough in a mad-as-hell way that
Jackson never captures Shaft's toughness in an I-don't-have-anything-to-
prove-to-anyone way. Throughout the film, it becomes ever more clear that
Singleton has either misunderstood what made John Shaft such an important
screen character or found himself unable to convey that same essence. He
also found himself unable to build a story that means anything, resorting
to a climax that may be intended as a triumph over the system but
ultimately renders the previous 90 minutes of action utterly pointless. 
     I can't deny that I might have felt much more positively about SHAFT
if it hadn't set itself up for comparison to an iconic film. There are
some solidly entertaining moments here, perhaps enough to satisfy viewers
with little or no awareness of the history behind the title. But there's
that title before the film, a title that just feels wrong for what follows
it on the screen.
     "Shut your mouth ..." They're just not talkin' about Shaft. And I
can't dig it.

Author
Scott Hunt
Cast: Samuel L. Jackson, Christian Bale, Jeffrey Wright, Vanessa
Williams,  Busta Rhymes, Dan Hedaya, Toni Collette,  Richard Roundtree.
Writer and Director: John Singleton
Review by Scott Hunt         Movie Hunt:
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Timing, the old saying goes, is everything. With the recent resurgence
in popularity of 70s movies and television, what better time to try a
sequel to Shaft? Although it's an exciting movie that briskly moves
along, it misses the soul of the original. Aficionados of the first film
might find that a bit unsettling. The original's wary pragmatism has
been replaced by a certain idealism. John Shaft of the original movie
was leery of whites and the establishment. He plied his trade in an
insular world that gave him a measure of comfort. He knew he couldn't
change the world, so he did what he could to better his little corner of
it. Today's Shaft, an Armani clad Samuel Jackson, is much more naďve.
This Shaft works with the establishment and is surprised time and again
when it lets him down. It's a marked and noticeable shift in tone. I
can't help but wonder how the newer film might have played if it took
the same anti-establishment, racially confrontational tone. But then
that wouldn't make for a wide based, commercially successful film, now
would it?
Samuel Jackson is the nephew of the original John Shaft. He's a
detective on the N.Y.P.D. who gets a brusque smack in the face when a
racially motivated killer is allowed to escape the country. Bale plays
Walter Wade, the killer, with a clench jawed bemusement at the melting
pot that is New York. There's a calculated, seething hatred behind his
smug smile that perfectly catches the skewed mindset of a sociopath. His
murderous rich kid has nary a chink in his emotional armor save devotion
to his dead mother. Eventually Shaft brings the kid in to face the court
system. His arrest brings him into contact with another of Shaft's foes,
Peoples Hernandez, a Latino drug lord.
The two men meet in jail and it's  one of a couple of fascinating
exchanges between the two. Hernandez quietly introduces himself to Wade
despite sensing Wade's distain. He's lured by the twisted prospect of
networking via the penal system. Wright takes the potentially
stereotypical Peoples to a mesmerizing level, playing him with a strange
effeminacy mixed with machismo. He knows he is society's scum, but has
enough self-awareness of his limitations to make him dangerous. When he
finally coerces Wade into dealing drugs for him, he does so with a
coiled cobra's lethality. As the film ricochets from side story to
gunfight and back again, Wade's menace fades as People's potency grows.
His unpredictable rages and manipulations to better his station in life
explode from the screen with the same fervor as Shaft's cool intensity.
It reaches its peak when he mourns the loss of a loved one, emphasizing
his grief with an ice pick. It's an image that will linger with you long
after leaving the theater.
The link between Hernandez and Peoples is Toni Collette's waitress, who
saw Wade commit the murder.  Wade wants Hernandez to find her. She makes
the most of her limited function within the film. At best she serves as
backdrop to show Shaft's compassion as the two have a quiet conversation
about her being a witness and how difficult it must have been for her to
be on the run for two years in order to evade both Wade and the court
system. Amid the rattle of the pervasive gun battles, it's a scene that
lands with a loud clunk.
Busta Rhymes has a supporting role as a sidekick of sorts for Shaft. He
basically serves the movie equivalent of television's wacky neighbor.
Vanessa Williams has a whisper thin role as a sometimes partner to
Shaft. Given the careening storylines of Shaft vs. Peoples, Shaft vs.
Wade, Shaft vs. the system, etc, there isn't much wiggle room for her to
do much.
Serving as totem of the first film, Richard Roundtree has a couple of
scenes where he tries to counsel the younger Shaft on the ways of the
world and  lure him into his private detective firm. It's a nice
counterpoint seeing the elder's contentment with the life he has made as
the younger man is self confidently still finding his way.
Shaft is peppered with snappy verbal exchanges and gun battles along
with some really solid acting. It's a fun, albeit, violent movie. Maybe
if it didn't try so hard to please all it's audience members and wasn't
so diffuse in trying to take the plot in so many directions, it might
have been a much stronger effort. As it is, it's a nice start to what I
imagine will become a franchise for the studio.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: John Singleton
WRITTEN BY: John Singleton
CAST: Samuel L. Jackson, Christian Bale, Jeffrey Wright, Toni Collette
In the shadow of "The X-Men", this film promises the good old
fashioned action with a more believable action hero.When it comes to a
character who can hold the audience's attention by the sheer power of
his presence, Shaft's your man. What's most important is that "Shaft"
doesn't resort to imaginative special effects in order to create a
super hero, but the true human elements that are necessary for such a
task. For those of you who hasn't seen the original (and in my opinion
a rather overrated) version that aired in 1971, here is the story:
Shaft is the NYPD detective in charge of the investigation of a race
killing. One night outside of an upscale nightclub, a pampered yuppie
named Walter Wade (Christian Bale) bludgeons a black man to
death. There is one witness, a waitress named Diane (Toni Collette),
and Wade warns her to keep her mouth shut... or else. Shaft makes the
arrest, but the well-connected Wade is back on the streets in short
order. It doesn't take long for him to jump bail and leave the
country. Two years later, when he tries to sneak back in, Shaft is
waiting. Meanwhile, the detective has been harassing a local drug
dealer, Peoples Hernandez (Jeffrey Wright). Wade and Peoples meet in
prison and thus begins an uneasy alliance to bring down Shaft.
What is true is that the theme from the original movie, which
concerned racism and injustice in America, is virtually lost here,
remaining nothing more than a good excuse to make a fun action
film. Of course director John Singleton has included the obligatory
elements of black exploitation (big cars, drugs, cigars, guns, sleazy
nightclubs, gold chains, racism, babes, black leather coats, expensive
booze, crooked white cops), but the problem is that all that is
nothing more than props -- elements of the set decoration. Most
importantly, however, "Shaft" delivers on it's promise of action, and
plenty of it, and with the added benefit of having story enough to
support it. Though the action sequences are not even nearly as great
as in Mission: Impossible 2, they do provide a certain tension and
suspense, though often descending to the kind of brainless, tiring
action such as in "Gone in 60 Seconds". What is truly amazing is
surprisingly the performances, especially by the three leads: Samuel
Jackson, Christian Bale and Tony Colette. Unlike Wesley Snipes'
ultra-cool vampire slayer in "Blade", Jackson has the physical as well
as mental capabilities of being an action hero. Basically carrying the
film on his shoulders, he presents enough of power, wit and strength
to knock out both James Bond and Ethan Hunt out of their
pedestals. However, the supporting cast is not far behind. Christian
Bale puts on a spectacular performance, though his screen time is
scarcely limited. Still not quite finished with Patrick Bateman from
"American Psycho", he breathes life into a rather stereotypical and
one-dimentional role. The third and probably one of the most amusing
performances of the season, comes from Wright, who speaks with a
Dominican accent so lushly indulgent it makes Al Pacino's Cuban
cottonmouth in ''Scarface'' sound like a George Plimpton
impersonation. What happens is that Wright takes a cliché -- the
hotheaded Latin street prince -- and pushes it into operatic satire.
Shaft pushes our buttons at least as well as some of the Dirty Harry
movies, which means it's something that has been next to unheard-of
this year: reasonably rousing screen entertainment, but doesn't always
succeed. Whatever the reason, the film is badly-focused and comes to a
rather dissatisfying conclusion. Succeeding basically everywhere else,
Singleton fails where others have not, by violating one of the key
tenets of this sort of motion picture - that the hero should always
confront (and subsequently defeat) the villain. This results in that
"Shaft" fails to provide the violent catharsis that everyone in the
audience is awaiting.
Though Entertainment Weekly called ''Shaft'' a "spicy fast food", I
think that it is simply a series of slickly filmed action sequences
dangling off a thin plot and held together by the force of Jackson's
charisma.

Author
Bob Bloom

 Shaft (2000) 1 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Samuel L. Jackson, Richard
Roundtree, Vanessa Williams, Jeffrey Wright, Christian Bale, Busta
Rhymes, Dan Hedaya and Toni Collette. Music by David Arnold and Isaac
Hayes. Story by John Singleton and Shane Salerno. Screenplay by Richard
Price and Singleton and Salerno. Directed by Singleton.
 The original "Shaft," when released in 1971, was big on attitude.
 The movie worked because nothing like it had been seen before - and
because of the charisma of Richard Roundtree, the then-epitome of cool
as private eye John Shaft.
 The film was helped along by a funky, driving score by Isaac Hayes as
well as his Oscar-winning Shaft theme song.
 Jump ahead nearly 30 years and we have Samuel L. Jackson as Shaft. The
movie still has loads of attitude. But today's audiences are more
sophisticated and demanding. Unfortunately this new "Shaft" offers very
little else.
 Jackson, like Roundtree before him, is a commanding presence. He is an
actor who can dominate the screen. He also is one of those actors who
can rise above weak material - most of the time - as he did earlier this
year in "Rules of Engagement."
 With young John Singleton directing, as well as having a hand in the
script, you'd think this "Shaft" would be a rousing action thriller, a
gritty homage to the original.
 Think again. Singleton's "Shaft" is flabby and disjointed.
 The plot is a muddled mess, motivation is preposterous and some of the
characters are ridiculous, almost insulting.
 Take Peoples, for example. He's the villainous drug dealer. As
portrayed by Jeffrey Wright, he speaks with an accent that sounds as if
he's doing a poor Desi Arnaz imitation. Any minute I expected to call
for Lucy and ask her to `esplain' what she's doing.
 He's not the only problem. The script by Singleton and Shane Salerno,
with help from Richard Price ("The Color of Money," "Clockers") is
unfocused.
 The movie just jumps from one scene to another without any cohesion or
thought. It's like Singleton just took what he filmed and glued it
together.
 Luckily Jackson is in most scenes. But he appears to have problems
getting a handle on his Shaft. He can't decide if he's a tough mother
... (hey, we're talkin' about Shaft), or if he prefers to be a bit
tongue-in-cheek.
 His persona seems to change from scene to scene, and he doesn't seem to
be getting any assistance from Singleton.
 Unlike Roundtree's Shaft who became a P.I. because he felt the system
was corrupt and discriminated against his people, Jackson's Shaft starts
out as a police detective, and leaves the force in disgust when he feels
the justice system has failed. He doesn't necessarily become a P.I., but
more like a lone-wolf vigilante, with most of his former police partners
helping him out.
 And while Roundtree appears in the film, he is wasted. His only scenes
involve him standing around and talking to his namesake nephew. He still
looks good, but it would have been nice to see the original Man in
action.
 The plot deals with finding a witness to a 2-year-old murder. The
killer, a spoiled rich young bigot, played by Christian Bale, seems a
lightweight case for Shaft to handle. And some of the killer's actions
make no sense whatsoever. How he and the thick-accented drug dealer come
to work together is just too silly to believe.
 Plus this is one of those movies in which the bad guys fire hundreds of
rounds from automatic weapons and miss everything, while Shaft makes
bulls-eyes with every shot.
 The bad guys are so inept, they are like the gang that couldn't shoot
straight. They are most unworthy adversaries.
 Smartly, Singleton retained Hayes' original score without any updating.
David Arnold did a fine job adapting the music and adding some touches
of his own.
 Overall, however, "Shaft" is a disappointment considering the talent in
front of and behind the camera. This is a movie that had potential. Too
bad it was wasted.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN . He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
Reviews by Bloom can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database
at: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Pictures 
 Director: John Singleton
 Writer:  Richard Price, John Singleton, Shane Salerno, novel
by Ernest Tidyman
 Cast: Samuel L. Jackson, Vanessa L. Williams, Jeffrey
Wright, Christian Bale, Dan Hedaya, Busta Rhymes, Toni
Collette, Richard Roundtree, Philip Bosco, Will Chase,
Jennifer Esposito, Ruben Santiago-Hudson, Josef Sommer
   "Shaft" was the subject of a debate in the Online Film
Critics Society forum that brought almost a record number of
responses.  A white male who is, I suspect, of a liberal
persuasion, wondered, "What is John Singleton aiming for
with his update of the lowly (by my standards) 'Shaft'? And
why would a black filmmaker want to reinvigorate the
blaxploitation genre, when it was clearly not a highpoint for
African-American cinema?  In my opinion, Singleton should
keep on doing what he does best.  Making truthful films about
real African-American life."
   The liberal was skewered by a white woman whose politics
I is further to the left.  "You shouldn't be so hasty to
take social entities out of context.  Blaxploitation may not be
high art, but it was groundbreaking as far as African
American cinema goes.  Just ask any African-American who
was around at the time when 'Shaft' came out.  After decades
of enduring movies in which blacks were ridiculed and
dehumanized--experiences which they have described as
making them leave the theaters in shame, self-hatred and
embarrassment--they finally had their own cinema.  And their
own heroes who prevailed against white racism.  Singleton
likely became involved in this project to honor and pay
homage to his own racially visionary roots."
   To which a third member responded, "I myself am black,
and I don't think blaxploitation is a low point, au contraire. 
These are cool movies, dammit!  Is there a cooler, badder
actress in movies than Pam Grier, black or not? 
Blaxploitation is not about art, quality filmmaking or depth, it's
about music, clothes and attitude!  As movies, films like
Dolemite or Superfly are mediocre at best, but man are these
dudes electrifying!  I for one am looking forward to seeing the
new 'Shaft,' with  Sam 'my middle name is attitude'
Jackson."
   Watch "Shaft" and see the first speaker's faux-PC attitude
go up in smoke.  Sure, there's a market for movies about "the
way black people really live today," but there's nothing
negative about so-called blaxploitation flicks. With Samuel L.
Jackson in the most charismatic good-guy role of this year,
"Shaft" is director/co-writer John Singleton's resoundingly
imaginative reinvention of the 1971 heavy sex-and-violence
groundbreaker, which featured Richard Roundtree in the title
role as Shaft.
   Now, three decades later, Mr. Attitude returns, this time
taking advantage of some of the cinematic tricks learned
since the original.  Happily, Singleton restrains himself on the
f/x, providing Shaft with only a single obviously faked image
as he announces his resignation from the sluggish justice
establishment by flinging his badge at the judge--who had just
provided absurdly low bail for a rich preppie accused of
homicide.
   As sleek as "Mission Impossible 2" but a lot more fun,
"Shaft" opens on a note of high adrenaline as we are
introduced to the larger-than-life hero against the background
of Isaac Hayes's winning theme song, knocked out in much
the style it was tendered in the seventies.  Shaft is on the
scene during an investigation into the sudden beating death
of a black man (Mekhi Phifer) and, through flashbacks
provided from the man's girl friend we learn that preppie
Walter Wade Jr. ("American Psycho"'s remarkable Christian
Bale) had provoked the guy by making racist remarks
astoundingly unsubtle considering Wade's class and
education.  Shaft busts the perp, whose first utterance to the
cop is "Do you know who my father is?" to which Shaft
responds, "No...do you?"  Much of the story's script follows
witty, easy-to-catch bon mots on this level, which is just part
of the fun in store for the audience.
   The movie moves along at a staggering pace that if a
Thesaurus posited an antonym for "Waiting for Godot," this
would be the choice.  Not only is the writing first-rate for the
genre, evoking predictably frequent merriment from its
audience, the tempo brisk, the outdoor scenes taken in
Brooklyn by photographer Donald E. Thorin authentic in look,
but most important the performances joyfully elicited from
Jackson, from Christian Bale, and especially from the
multi-talented dancer and stage actor Jeffrey Wright as a
comically vicious villain are right on the money.
   Singleton draws solid work from an ensemble representing
every shade of human personality, from the corrupt cops-on-
the-take Jack Roselli (Dan Hedaya) and Jimmy Groves
(Ruben Santiago-Hudson), determined to gun Shaft down and
get their hands on some big bucks; from the affable but
ditzy Rasaan (Busta Rhymes) who is there for Shaft when his
driving skills are needed; and from the Vanessa Williams in
the relatively bland role of narcotics officer Carmen.
   Gratifying as Samuel L. Jackson is, decked out in a long
leather jacket that virtually announces his wiseass attitude,
even more so are the performances of Christian Bale as
Walter Wade Jr. and especially Jeffrey Wright as Peoples
Hernandez.  Wright performs as the feudal lord of his mostly
Puerto Rican neighborhood who in one of the movie's
precious scenes tries to persuade the equally tough and wily
Wade to line up some upscale white customers for his heroin
trade through his connections and even to hang out with him
in the posh neighborhoods and restaurants of Manhattan's
Upper East Side.  Peoples Hernandez has got to be
"American Psycho"'s Patrick Bateman's major competitor for
most complex and absorbing villain of the year as he shows
various sides to his personality: his intense love for his
mowed-down brother which leads him masochistically to
inflict knife wounds on himself, his attention to an infant in his
arms in his downscale, ramshackle apartment, his negotiating
almost coyly with the preppie to give him access to the "best
people" on the Upper East Side, and flat-out rage against
Shaft against whom he ultimately focuses his vast energy.
   While the cell phones and street gang attire remind us that
the setting is contemporary, hip moviegoers will recognize a
70s cop-movie style to the production, which is backed up by
a dynamic, funky soundtrack.  Though a summer movie, this
"Shaft" is blessed by a marriage of all the elements that
make the genre fun: witty script, charismatic acting by the
good guys and knaves alike, superlative lensing, and a pace
that virtually dares any in the audience to fidget just once in
their seats.
Rated R.  Running time: 98 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: John Singleton
Written by: Ernest Tidyman (novel), John Singleton, Richard Price, Shane 
Salerno
John Shaft (Samuel L. Jackson) is back after a 19 year hiatus. This time his 
enemy is a racist young punk named Walter Williams (Christian Bale), who 
killed a young black man and skipped off to Europe on bail. Now, two years 
later, Walter has turned up again and Shaft hasn't forgotten him. Walter's 
father, a rich real-estate agent, has seen to it that no one can pin 
anything on his son by scaring the only witness out of her mind and causing 
her to run. The witness is a waitress named Diane (Toni Collette), who saw 
the whole thing happen. Now Shaft has to track her down before the case goes 
to trial again. Assisting him are a narcotics officer named Carmen (Vanessa 
Williams), an unusual friend named Rasaan (Busta Rhymes) and his uncle, John 
Shaft (Richard Roundtree). Unfortunately for Shaft, Walter has a little help 
too, which comes from the local drug lord, Peoples Hernandez (Jeffrey 
Wright). Now the two groups are in a race against time to find Diane, 
Shaft's group so she can testify, and Walter's group to try and silence her 
for good.
Okay, before everyone stones me for my low rating of this movie, let me say 
that I really enjoyed 1971's "Shaft". That version had an interesting plot, 
adept direction, and Shaft was a regular guy who we could relate to in some 
way. This version has none of these qualities. Singleton, who showed at 
least a trace of promise back in 1997 when he directed "Rosewood", seems to 
have lost his directing abilities. The plot, in this version, consists of 
nothing more than watching Shaft beat people up while delivering 
entertaining dialogue (my favorite line was: "Don't make me chase you more 
than fifty yards!"). Shaft was a normal guy back in 1997, but now he's been 
turned into some kind of super hero. I don't think I saw him so much as run 
out of breath throughout the film, much less face an opponent who could 
match up to him in a fight. I also found it puzzling and a little annoying 
that there was no womanizing on the part of Shaft in this version. I know, 
that sounds odd, but think about it - Richard Roundtree's Shaft was a cool, 
suave woman magnet. I don't even remember seeing Jackson's Shaft kiss a 
girl. It felt a little odd watching "Shaft" with all the sex sapped out of 
it.
It's not easy for an actor to carry an entire movie on his shoulders. Denzel 
Washington did it with "The Hurricane" and Angelina Jolie almost pulled it 
off in "Girl: Interrupted". Samuel L. Jackson is asked to do just this in 
"Shaft", but the script is too much of a dud for even this great actor to 
manage it. Don't get me wrong, it's a blast watching Samuel L. Jackson as 
the ultimate bad a**, but it's not enough to keep a movie going for long. 
The rest of the cast (with the exception of Christian Bale) does nothing to 
help Jackson carry the load, but I don't think they'd have been much help 
anyway. Richard Roundtree has little more than a cameo appearance, which is 
too bad since the audience went nuts the moment he showed up on screen. 
Vanessa Williams ("Soul Food") may not be the world's greatest actress, but 
she certainly deserved more screen time than she got here. Then there's poor 
Dan Hedaya ("Dick"), who shows up as a fellow officer, and looks woefully 
out of place throughout the film. Last we have Christian Bale, who was 
brilliant in "American Psycho", yet adds nothing to this film. Don't get me 
wrong, he turns in a great performance, but he plays a pathetic excuse for a 
villain. He's whiny and insecure and clearly no match for Shaft. The film's 
real villain is Peoples (or the script writers, depending on how you want to 
look at it), but he's not much more threatening than Walter.
I think one of the most irritating things about this new "Shaft" is that it 
plays more like a video game than a movie. The fight scenes go as follows: 
Shaft opens a door, guy jumps out, Shaft shoots him; Shaft turns a corner, 
guys jump out, Shaft shoots them. This got old and tedious after about ten 
minutes. In fact, that's the biggest problem with this movie; the entire 
thing felt old and tedious. Everything, from all the stereo-typical 
characters to the out of place soundtrack (except for the great Isaac Hayes 
score of course), felt old and dated, despite Singleton's attempts to change 
Shaft for the new millenium. Then there's the film's ending, which I'm 
obviously not going to go into in great detail, but after the movie ended I 
sat and pondered whether it was anti-climactic or realistic. I decided that 
since I had to think about it that made it anti-climactic, but you may 
disagree. So overall, what do I think of the new "Shaft" movie? I think the 
man should have stayed in the '70s. "Shaft" runs only 99 minutes, but it 
feels quite a bit longer. I'd recommend it only to people who worship the 
ground Samuel L. Jackson walks on (not that I can blame them for that) and 
give it two and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at: http://www.dependentfilms.net,
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Back in 1971, "Shaft" was a revolutionary film - it introduced an
African-American hero who bed countless women a la James Bond and
could be as mean and relentless as most other private detectives, such
as Philip Marlowe. Not just that, the film also showed an
African-American who preened and walked the streets as if he owned
them. He meant business and held no prisoners - a true fighting
machine. The other significance of "Shaft" is that it launched the
blaxploitation genre with popular hits such as "Superfly" and "Foxy
Brown." Though the genre eventually died out, it resurged somewhat
with Tarantino's take "Jackie Brown" in 1997 and now the Samuel
L. Jackson revisionist take by director John Singleton. With Jackson
in the title role and a super cool, sleek style, this new "Shaft"
delivers.
Jackson is Shaft, though he does not replacing the original actor,
Richard Roundtree. Instead, he plays his nephew and Roundtree is back
reprising his famous role, now a weary uncle who still has his way
with women. This new Shaft is also not a private detective but a New
York City cop (watch out Guiliani). At the start of the film, he is
investigating a racist yuppie, Walter Wade Jr.  (Christian Bale, in
his "American Psycho" mode), who killed an African-American man (Meki
Phifer) in cold blood.  Wade gets away scot-free and is deported to
Switzerland. Meanwhile, Shaft, sensing a gross injustice, quits the
police force. He does so in an unbelievably funny scene where he
tosses his badge across a courtroom as if it was a Chinese star. There
are various comic-book moments like this, especially when a runaway
drug dealer breaks through one building window and lands safely on the
other side by breaking through another building window. Jackson's
reaction makes the scene priceless!  .
Several years later, Shaft is still pursuing Wade and finds a way of
trapping him. Apparently, Wade has employed a Dominican coke dealer,
Peoples Hernandez (Jeffrey Wright), to kill a scared bartender (Toni
Collete), the sole witness who can pinpoint Wade to the murder. The
price is $40,000 for the hit, but of course Shaft tries to obtain the
cash and succeeds leading to a series of double-crosses, car chases
and lots of violence.  In other words, what else do you expect from an
action picture, right? True, but it is rare to see a fun, exciting,
truly spirited action picture like this one, and Jackson makes it more
so with his titanic presence and his unduly sarcasm.
Director John Singleton stages the car chase scenes with such panache
that it almost supersedes the similar velocity of car stunts in
"Ronin." They somehow feel new again, and the reason is in the
character development and the less-is-more policy. Most action
pictures overdose on action paranoia (see "Lethal Weapon 4") but this
Shaft proves to be a strong, durable hero with more than enough reason
for payback - he is no angry cartoon like Mel Gibson's Riggs. Shaft
shows no fear and little mercy, especially when roughing up a couple
of teen gang members or using Bale as a punching bag. "Oh, you are
firing me, for that?", as he knocks Bale out yet again.
The villains are also very effective - the golden rule in any action
flick is that the villains must be threatening and scary. "Mission:
Impossible 2" is a bad example of providing a villain that would not
even scare Barney the Dinosaur. In "Shaft", we have two villains, both
a major match for the hero. Bale as the mean, racist, impulsive Wade,
and the near-stereotypical yet vibrant turn by Jeffrey Wright (yes,
the same guy from "Basquiat") as the smooth Peoples who wants to use
Wade's clientele to up the ante on his drug sales. There is one tense,
frighteningly real scene where Peoples lets his emotional guard down
when he finds his brother dead - he literally stabs himself in protest
and sheer anger. Powerful stuff that you rarely see in a movie of this
type.
"Shaft" is not a great movie simply because the plot is too mediocre
to inspire much excitement (corrupt cops, drug couriers, etc.) but its
style is several notches above the original classic. One other minor
quibble is that I would loved to have seen more of Collette, who plays
a largely underdeveloped character. Still, I am no big fan of the
original "Shaft" but this new film has the spark and vivid persona of
Samuel L. Jackson to make up for everything else. He is the man, and I
can dig it.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com 

Author
Michael Dequina
Cinematically speaking, Gordon Parks' original 1971 _Shaft_ is not a
great film.  A bit slow at times and more than a little rough around the
edges as it builds to its climactic explosion of violent action, this
spirited but formulaic yarn that initially brought Ernest Tidyman's
"black private dick that's a sex machine to all the chicks" to the big
screen hardly qualifies as groundbreaking filmmaking.
Yet nearly 30 years after its original release--and long after the genre
it spawned, "blaxploitation," died with that decade--the 1971 _Shaft_
remains an extremely entertaining watch, never having completely escaped
pop culture consciousness.  The reason for this is the same one that
explains the film's connection with moviegoers far beyond the target
African-American audience: the title character of John Shaft.  While the
fact that the strong, smart, virile, and superbly suave Shaft is black is
the primary factor for his historical and cultural significance, his
broad-based appeal stems from an idea that transcends race: he is
comfortable, confident, and proud about who he is, and anyone who had a
problem with that could simply kiss his ass.
This fact also explains why John Singleton's Y2G revival of John Shaft
is as enjoyable as it is.  Much like the film that started the franchise,
this _Shaft_'s plot doesn't score points in the originality department,
but the energy level and smooth attitude distinguishes it from standard
crime thrillers.
Contrary to what has been reported over the past few months, this
_Shaft_ is not a remake of the original film, but more of a
sequel/spinoff.  The star audiences know and love from the original film
and its first two sequels (1972's _Shaft's_Big_Score!_ and 1973's
_Shaft_in_Africa_), Richard Roundtree, once again plays John Shaft, who
still runs a private investigation firm in New York City.  However, the
focus of the film lies on his same-named nephew (Samuel L. Jackson), who,
as the film begins, is a cop whose take-no-crap demeanor constantly
leaves him at odds with his superiors.  When a privileged young man named
Walter Wade Jr. (Christian Bale) accused of a brutal, racially-motivated
murder is allowed to be released on bail, a disgusted Shaft leaves the
force and decides to take matters into his own hands as a P.I.
But that's easier said than done, for also standing in the way of Shaft
and his way of justice is Peoples Hernandez (Jeffrey Wright), a Dominican
gangster who is hired by Walter to rub out waitress Diane Palmieri (Toni
Collette), the only eyewitness to his crime.  Peoples--or, rather, Wright
is also the big obstacle in Jackson's way toward commanding this film. 
Peoples is more of an outrageous comic character for most of the running
time, and Wright is insanely funny during these stages.  However, he
isn't so funny as to make the character come off as goofy and buffoonish,
and Peoples' eventual turn to more serious villainy is seamless and
believable (which probably would not have been the case had he been
played by original casting choice John Leguizamo, who bowed out before
filming).  It's no easy task to steal a film from the Jackson (who is his
usual captivating, charismatic self here), but that's exactly what Wright
does--and makes it seem effortless.
Then again, with such a talented ensemble surrounding him, it is not too
surprising that Jackson's impressive star turn doesn't quite tower over
the rest; he is strongly complemented not only by Wright but all his
other co-stars.  Bale has already proven his ability to play an uppity
killer in _American_Psycho_, so it only follows that his performance as a
similar, less exaggerated character would be spot-on.  Collette lends the
film some convincing and welcome dramatic weight as the frightened,
conflicted Diane.  Busta Rhymes brings some good laughs as Shaft's
sidekick Rasaan.  Registering not as strongly--but through no fault of
their own--are Vanessa Williams (as tough narcotics cop Carmen Vasquez)
and a dismayingly underused Roundtree; they simply are given little to do
in the script credited to Richard Price, Singleton, and Shane Salerno. 
(Jackson also has little to "do" in a sense; some throwaway footage
during the opening credits aside, his Shaft doesn't even have one sex
scene.)
That Singleton once again proves his ability with actors is an
especially good thing since he's not really an action director.  This is
not to say that he does a bad job with the numerous gunfights and the
requisite foot and car chases.  They move well (as does the film as a
whole) and are reasonably exciting; it's just that there's nothing
terribly inventive about them.  These set pieces are functional in the
way the script is: they work well enough, but they're unsurprising and
conventional.
But if there's anything that a _Shaft_ movie does well, it's make the
familiar look cool--and this _Shaft_ keeps that tradition alive.  From
the slick title sequence--scored, of course, to Isaac Hayes'
ever-infectious Oscar-winning theme song, which Singleton wisely
sprinkles throughout the film--on, the film looks great and easily sweeps
the viewer into its world with its energetic bravado.  Even a common
visual trick such as employing fancy wipes for scene transitions not only
feels unforced, it feels necessary.  Style doesn't exactly make for a
great film, but when it comes to _Shaft_, that's of little consequence. 
What matters above all else is having a good time, and the latest _Shaft_
should be just the first of many fun rides to be had with this bad
mutha--shut your mouth.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Chad Polenz
Samuel L. Jackson stars in this updated version of the classic early-70s 
blaxploitation action/crime movie.
And since it's the 21st century you can just imagine what level the intensity 
is going to be - a lot of violence
and a lot of attitude. 
The story is very intricate and involves Shaft's pursuit of a rich, racist 
murderer who can evade justice and
his partnership with a drug dealer to track down the sole eye witness who 
could convict him. In between
Shaft spends a lot of time trying to work within the system to bring all the 
bad guys down but eventually
becomes an all-out mercenary in his pursuit for justice. 
The action is vital to the story, and pretty much is the story at some 
points. It's not surprising the
screenplay and editing seem so disjointed according to all the stories of 
production problems on the set of
this thing. Still, it's got a little bit of everything for everyone. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Author
Susan Granger
 When Samuel L. Jackson learned that director John Singleton
was doing "Shaft," his first reaction was, "Why do we need a remake?"
- which was mine, too. Gordon Parks's 1971 original, based on Ernest
Tidyman's novel, starring Richard Roundtree, was emblematic of the
vitality of the blaxploitation genre, plus Isaac Hayes' thematic
music. But Roundtree is back as the original Shaft, 29 years older -
and so's the theme. Jackson plays his nephew, NYPD detective John
Shaft, a different hero for a different time, fighting against hate
crimes and drugs. His character's more volatile, ruthless and
violent. And he views violence in a different way. When things get
dangerous, Jackson's Shaft kind of smiles, indicating, "I can handle
this." The plot revolves around a racially motivated homicide. Walter,
a spoiled young college kid ("American Psycho's" Christian Bale),
kills a young black student, skips bail, and flees the country for two
years - after hiring a tattooed thug (Jeffrey Wright) to kill the only
witness (Toni Collette) to the murder. When Walter sneaks back home,
Shaft finds him - but his father, once again, posts bail, so Walter's
back on the streets only, this time, he's after Shaft - along with two
corrupt cops (Dan Hedaya, Ruben Santiago-Hudson) and a Dominican drug
lord (Jeffrey Wright). Shaft's only allies are a colleague (Vanessa
Williams) and a streetwise buddy (Busta Rhymes). Director John
Singleton and writer Richard Price delve into the usual urban crime
scene, predictably punctuated by street-smart profanity, and come up
with a disappointing conclusion. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Shaft" is a stylish, slick 6. It's hip and cool - if you dig that
"It's my duty to satisfy the booty" action. And a sequel's already in
the works.
