Title
Review for Becket (1964)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
How many times in film histroy have actors and actresses split the vote when
it's time to vote for the Academy Award?  Several.  1950.  The Best Actress
category.  Anne Baxter and Bette Davis nominated for 'All About Eve'.  Both
lost to Judy Holliday for 'Born Yesterday'.  1953.  The Best Actor category.
 Montgomery Clift and Burt Lancaster nominated for 'From Here to Eternity'.
 Both lost to William Holden for 'Stalag 17'.  Want a more recent example?
 1986.  The Best Supporting Actor category.  Tom Berenger and Willem Dafoe
nominated for 'Platoon'.  Both lost to Michael Caine for 'Hannah and Her
Sisters'.  Last but not least, 1991.  The Best Actress category.  Geena Davis
and Susan Sarandon nominated for 'Thelma and Louise'.  Both lost to Jodie
Foster for 'The Silence of the Lambs.'  The point here is that sometimes when
casting a ballot in deciding who the best really is, someone is bound to get
left out. 
Two of the finest actors to ever hit the motion picture screen never won an
Academy Award.  They are Richard Burton and Peter O'Toole.  Burton died in
1984 and while Peter O'Toole is still around, he is hardly active in motion
pictures anymore.  His last nomination came in 1982 for 'My Favorite Year'.
 That film was an entertaining little farce but a cake walk for O'Toole.  Of
all his nominations he should have won for his motion picture debut in 1962
for 'Lawrence of Arabia' but lost to Gregory Peck for 'To Kill a
Mockingbird'.  Burton should have walked away with one for 'The Spy Who Came
In from the Cold' in 1965 but lost to Lee Marvin for 'Cat Ballou'.
The two of them star in 1964's 'Becket' for which they were both nominated
for Best Actor but lost to Rex Harrison for 'My Fair Lady'.  'Becket' is a
towering example of movie making at its most subtle yet it still manages to
overcome any hint of tedium as Burton and O'Toole endure loyalty to their
characterizations practically unmatched by any other duo who have played
screen adversaries.  Set in th 11th century, the real story begins with King
Henry II (O'Toole) visiting the tomb of his once best friend, the Archbishop
of Canterbury, Thomas Becket (Burton).  The film then shifts back in time to
tell their story beginning early in their lives.  As young men they are
always together as best friends.  O'Toole a future king of England and Burton
a deeply religious man who will devote his life to God.  As the film
progresses there is the talk of war with France, the under handed dealings of
the powerful and an eventual breakdown in their relationship when Burton is
hand picked by O'Toole once he is king to make Burton the new Archbishop.
 O'Toole has it in his mind that Burton will do anything for him since they
are friends but after Burton demonstrates that his loyalty is to the church
over his king, things go terribly wrong.
Directed by Peter Glenville from a screenplay by Edward Anhalt (who won the
Oscar) based on the play from Jean Anouilh, 'Becket' is not only a triumphant
display of academics but has striking cinematography by Geoffrey Unsworth who
filmed the entire piece in a manner similar to recalling old paintings which
are displayed so prominently in some of the finest museums in the world.  He
captures details of expression and frankness splendidly.  'Becket' is a
perfect film for that rainy weekend afternoon and is for those with a
constructive mind in dealing with film while others will mistake it as being
stiff and unappealing.     
