Title
Review for Monkeybone (2001)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Homer Yen
"Monkeybone" starts off promisingly as an amusing
exploration into the personality of struggling
cartoonist Stu Smiley (likable Brendan Fraser).  His
earlier years were marked by bouts of horrifying
nightmares while success had always eluded him.  But
after meeting sleep therapist Julie (appealing Bridget
Fonda), things began to change.  His nightmares
disappeared and his newfound sense of peace led him to
his newest cartoon, "Monkeybone," an overactive,
orange-colored simian that's actually a representation
of his repressed and unsatisfied libido.
His idea becomes a hit.  The Cartoon Network thinks
it'll be the hottest thing since the Power Puff Girls
while merchandising opportunities hold the promise of
untold fortunes.  But he is currently more
pre-occupied with mustering the courage to propose to
Julie.  Unfortunately, a freak accident lands him in a
coma, and this is where the film's creative juices
begin to stream forth.
While Stu's body lies in a vegetative state in the
real world, his psyche descends to a place called
Downtown, a bizarre fantasyland that looks like a
haunted carnival influenced with a touch of Edgar
Allen Poe.   It's a visually stunning dimension with
it's unusual inhabitants lifted from the world of Star
Wars, including a bulbous Cyclops, a Bee lady, a
humanoid kitty, and Downtown's leader who resembles a
Satyr.  And, there's also a familiar looking,
overactive, orange-colored simian.
What the movie tries to become at this point, I think,
is a clever take on Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.  With the
multiple personalities that make up Stu now split into
two (one is the libidinous Monkeybone, the other is
plain vanilla Stu), perhaps he can come to terms with
some of his unresolved issues.  
Rather than being dramatic, however, the film wants to
be funny and strange.  But Monkeybone's vituperative
chatter becomes a nuisance.  Meanwhile, director Henry
Selick (who gave us "The Nightmare before Christmas"
and "James and the Giant Peach") goes for the gusto in
terms of bizarre presentation.  The world that he has
created looks great, but he seems to have forgotten
that the characters need to mean something too.  Case
in point: Stu receives help from an unlikely source,
but the reasoning for that is never convincing.
Midway through the film, "Monkeybone" becomes too
clever for its own good.  It introduces a conspiracy,
a plot that threatens the happiness of those in the
land of the living, and a bizarre showdown between
Stu's now-separated two personalities.  That's just
too much for this 88-minute film.  But, I am happy to
say that I hadn't laughed harder this year as I did
during its final 15 minutes.  This is thanks to
Saturday Night Live cast veteran Chris Kattan, whose
body is borrowed by Stu who has returned to the land
of the living to warn Julie about the conspiracy. 
Kattan's body is dead, decomposing with a broken neck.
 Watching him run across town is downright funny.
But, that kind of manic energy was just unsustainable.
  In part, Fraser seems a bit lost and out of place
(he was much better in "Bedazzled").  Also, the film
never lets us internalize Stu's plight because there
is just too much going on.  "Monkeybone" may be the
cleverest movie to come out so far in 2001.  It was
innovative in its look and offered numerous
interesting ideas.  But the film never really takes
off.  I really wanted to like this film more.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Henry Selick.
Cast: Brendan Fraser, Bridget Fonda, Chris Kattan, Dave Foley, Rose McGowan, 
Whoopi Goldberg, Giancarlo Esposito, Megan Mullally, Lisa Zane.
Voice: John Turturro.
2001 - 87 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for scatological humor).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, February 24, 2001.
There is a good movie hiding somewhere within "Monkeybone," just breaking to 
get out. Equipped with an imaginative premise and occasionally eye-popping 
visuals of a world and creatures that have never been glimpsed before on the 
silver screen, this otherwordly fantasy should be alive with energy and 
originality, but it isn't. It is an empty, lethargic slug of a movie that 
creeps along with several good ideas, but does nothing with them.
Stu Smiley (Brendan Fraser) has created an offbeat cartoon known as 
"Monkeybone" that has just been picked up by the Comedy Channel. Not really 
interested in mainstream success, his career is, nonetheless, just about to 
take off. On his way home from a premiere party with his loving girlfriend, 
Julie (Bridget Fonda), whom he is about to propose to, they are involved in a 
freak car accident with an unwieldily balloon that leaves her unharmed, but 
Stu in a deep coma. From here on, Stu finds himself arriving in a fantasy 
world known as Downtown, inhabited by creatures big and small, including 
Monkeybone himself (voiced annoyingly by John Turturro). He soon comes to 
find that it is a netherworld in which he is to stay in until word comes 
whether he should be sent to Heaven or Hell, or return to his life and 
girlfriend. Meanwhile, back on Earth, it has been three months since the 
accident and Stu is showing no signs of progression. When his older sister, 
Kimmy (Megan Mullally), decides it is time to pull the plug on him, Julie 
plots to inject him with "nightmare juice" that she hopes will scare him out 
of his comatose state.
At just 87 minutes (including opening and ending credits), "Monkeybone" feels 
like an ambitious film that was destroyed by a directing and editing hack 
job. While the movie just barely makes sense, it is also clear that large 
amounts have been cut out, and to lethal effect. In Harry Knowles' scathing 
review at "Ain't-It-Cool-News," he speaks of how the original screenplay, 
loosely based on a comic book called "Dark Town," was an extravagant, 
brilliant piece of originality and wonder, and in the process of getting it 
to the screen, large amounts were edited out after a shaky test-screening, or 
never filmed at all, due to budget restraints. Knowing this, it can safely be 
said that "Monkeybone" may very well have once been a good motion picture, 
but has, instead, been turned into a lifeless, overblown monstrosity.
While the scenes set in Downtown are, indeed, a visual feast of gorgeous set 
decoration and production design, they always feel rushed, as we 
intermittently are taken back to the world of the living to follow Julie's 
plight. Because of this, there is no rhythm or natural flow to any of it, and 
its spare parts clank together like pieces of rusted metal. Not only that, 
but director Henry Selick (who fared much better with 1993's "The Nightmare 
Before Christmas," and is making his live-action debut here) proves to not 
have a gift with human actors, as none of the characters are the least bit 
interesting, and hardly any of the actors give inspired performances. 
To be fair, no one is given much screen time except for Brendan Fraser 
(1999's "The Mummy") and Bridget Fonda (1999's "Lake Placid"), but even they 
seem distant throughout, as if their hearts simply weren't in on this 
production. Neither is given anything worthwhile to do, and their roles feel 
painfully rote. All of the other actors just struggle to appear onscreen at 
all, and each one of them is wasted. There seems to be promise in the 
friendly relationship between Stu and a half-cat/half-human named Kitty, 
played by Rose McGowan (2000's "Ready to Rumble"), but something tells me 
most of her scenes found their way to the cutting room floor. Aside from the 
humorous initial reaction to see Whoopi Goldberg play Death, she is given 
nothing to do. The same goes for the highly talented and extremely funny 
Megan Mullally (TV's "Will & Grace"), who isn't offered one funny line to 
utter. Only Chris Kattan (TV's "Saturday Night Live"), as a recently deceased 
runner whose body is inhabited by Stu, stands out from the crowd, and 
successfully blends both physical comedy and drama. Unfortunately, his screen 
time is as brief as everyone else's.
"Monkeybone" is a very bad movie, and amazingly so. With a story so fresh and 
a world so promising, it almost feels as if the results were intentionally 
botched. Whatever the case may be, the finished product is far more dull and 
artificial than it has any right to be. It leaves you feeling frustrated and 
angry at everyone involved in its journey to the screen.
    - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
      http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com 

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A cartoon artist falls into a coma and drifts into a nether world of
nightmares. In this place, the cartoonist meets the character that he
created, called Monkeybone, and attempts to return to the real world.
CRITIQUE:
Take one part annoying monkey, one part Brendan Fraser playing his "goofy"
character once again, one part cool nightmarish visuals and one part lame
story and you pretty much get the gist of this picture. But let's not forget
to mention Whoopie Goldberg as the character of "death" (or should I
say...the "kiss of death"? hehehe). Anyway, it all adds up to something
that's generally pretty interesting to look at, but ultimately unsatisfying
and a little schytzophrenic. One of the film's main problems seems to be
that it doesn't really know what it wants to be. Is it a movie for adults,
kids, a tear-jerker, romance, comedy...a little bit of everything? Probably
the latter, and trying to please everyone at the same time is generally not
the best way to create a solid picture. For me, the whole thing just seemed
a little off-kilter (and not necessarily the way in which they were trying
to achieve off-kilterness). The first half of the film didn't particularly
reserve any laughs for me or anything, but did display many an eye-catching
item in the "nightmare" world (oh yeah, and Rose McGowan, too...growl!). But
the second half of the film moved away from all that, and tried to slip some
romance and broad comedy bits in there, and despite some of it being
somewhat amusing, the general nature of it was pretty hum-drum.
And ironically, one of the last scenes from the movie featured one of the
worst blue screen effects that I've seen in any film for some time. How is
that even possible? It's almost as if they ran out of ideas or money in the
second half, and relied more on Fraser's over-the-top monkey acting and
Fonda's tears to keep things going (and I'm not insulting him here,
dudes...he's supposed to act like a monkey!). Granted, Chris Kattan was
really funny during his few moments on-screen (think D'Onofrio from MEN IN
BLACK), but the overall product was just too confused and unsubstantial.
It's especially sad when you consider that the movie does obviously have an
original concept, a great visual style and a pretty cool soundtrack, but the
characters aren't very developed and the story rather thin, so you really
aren't left with much to chew on. Of course, if you like to smoke the cheeba
and watch this kinda stuff, this might just be the movie for you, or even if
you just wanna see one of the coolest rollercoaster rides in any movie, but
for most, this picture will likely not entertain. An altogether dark movie
or a lighter, fluffier all-out comedy might've worked, but as the film
stands now, it's just too diluted to be appreciated by anyone.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Cell (8/10) - Edward Scissorhands (10/10) - Men in Black (7/10) -
Nightmare before X-Mas (10/10) - South Park (9/10)

Author
Christopher Null
Despite Fox's attempts to market this film on the coattails of director
Henry Selick's success with Tim Burton vehicle The Nightmare Before
Christmas, be thou not fooled.  Monkeybone bears none of the charm or
character of its predecessor.  The story of a cartoonist (Brendan
Fraser) who falls into a coma and enters a world where the star he
created, Monkeybone (who is -- get this -- both a monkey and a metaphor
for the cartoonist's own penis), this film lacks as much in the way of
creative inspiration as it does in taste.
It's not that the unending stream of preschoolish fart and pecker jokes
are offensive, they're just tiresome and invariably expected.  And they
persist, from the opening scene to the entirely unsurprising
conclusion.  Fortunately, though, the film has some subplots. 
Unfortunately, they're absolutely senseless.
Bridget Fonda plays the cartoonist's girlfriend, to whom he had intended
to propose before his accident.  As such, she serves sort of blandly as
his motivation to return to the world.  On the other hand, Rose McGowan
plays the purring catwoman in the fantasy world, and she's plenty of
reason to stay.  The cartoonist, however, is not tempted (though any
other male with a pulse might be), and the feline nymph assists him in
returning to the world to save his body and his girlfriend from the
treachery of the monkey.  Along the way we are treated to a
mesmerizingly lame appearance from Saturday Night Live's Chris Kattan,
who we all will someday recognize as the same sort of one trick pony
Dana Carvey (remember that wacky Church Lady?) turned out to be.
Attempting to pinpoint exactly where this flick goes awry is a tricky
thing to do.  Between the cold fish delivery of the sophomoric dialogue
and the insanely infantile butthole humor, it's really a toss-up. 
Surviving the first half of this 82-minute nightmare is easy enough. 
It's the second half that kills, as the wildly desperate "plot twists"
kick in and Stephen King turns up for his ridiculous cameo to make a
tired Cujo joke.
Chances are, if you're a die-hard Brendan Fraser fan, you'll love this
movie in the same way you love all of his idiotic work.  But, if you're
over the age of 12 and still have at least a third of your brain cells,
you'll do well to spend your seven dollars elsewhere.  Then again, Rose
McGowan....
Director: Henry Selick
Producers: Michael Barnathan, Mark Radcliffe
Writer: Sam Hamm
Starring: Brendan Fraser, Bridget Fonda, Chris Kattan, Giancarlo
Esposito, Rose McGowan, Whoopi Goldberg
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Stu Miley (Brendan Fraser) is on top of the world. He's madly in love with
beautiful Dr. Julia McElroy (Bridget Fonda) and has a hit animated TV show
based on his main character, a mischievous monkey named Monkeybone. A freak
accident puts Stu into a deep coma where his nightmare world comes alive
and he must fight his way back to the land of the living in "Monkeybone."
The film opens with a short animation, Monkeybone, conceived and created by
the reclusive Stu. He hates the attention, especially the merchandise
marketing, that the fame his creation has spawned. An unfortunate car
accident involving a giant, inflatable Monkeybone doll knocks Stu
unconscious with little chance for revival. While his doctor girlfriend,
Julie (Bridget Fonda), fights to bring him back before his selfish sister,
Kimmy (Megan Mullalley), can pull the plug, the animator finds himself cast
into the land of his nightmares. To his surprise, Stu learns that the bad
dreams that have plagued him his whole life are a big hit in Downtown, the
purgatory-like limbo between life and death. His celebrity status has come
to the attention of Hypnos (Giancarlo Esposito), the god of sleep, and poor
Stu soon learns that he can never leave his underworld prison.
Adding insult to injury, his creation, Monkeybone, comes to life in the
nightmare world and the malicious monkey escapes to take over Stu's body on
earth and garner all the perks of the cartoonist's fame - including Julie.
It becomes a battle of wills as Stu fights to escape the nightmare world
and get his body back from the willful, troublemaking Monkeybone.
This is the kind of movie that must have looked good on paper - the popular
Brendan Fraser starring in a Tim Burtonesque film about the land of
nightmares and all the creatures that reside there. Admittedly, the art
direction and imagination that went into the creation of Downtown and its
bizarre inhabitants is second to none, and is reminiscent, at times, of
Burton's "Beetlejuice." The effort is laudable in its visual achievements
in creating the frightening demons of Stu's dreams. But, this creative
artwork does not have a story to hold it together. There is no real tale,
at least not one I care about, to involve the earthbound characters. It's
visual eye candy in the nether world and not much more.
Helmer Henry Sellick has ample experience with the creating a fantasy wolds
as is very evident in "The Nightmare Before Christmas" and "James and the
Giant Peach." The demon world of the land of nightmares in "Monkeybone" is
further proof that he and his team of filmmakers know how to create a dark
fantasyland. The same cannot be said for his direction of the live actors
in their world. This is where "Monkeybone" falls flat, leaving the actors
to mouth their lines while the possessed Stu revels in the havoc he causes
amongst the living.
Brendan Fraser has been used to better effect, especially in his last film,
"Bedazzled," where he got to do a multitude of characters and some good
comedy. In "Monkeybone," he, like the rest of the "human" cast, is left out
in the cold, playing second banana to the terrific F/X, stop motion camera
work and computer-generated animation. The rest of the cast, a pretty good
collection of comedic actors, is wasted in their various character roles.
Bridget Fonda has the unenviable task of being the loyal girlfriend, Julie,
and has little to do but look pensive or startled. Whoopi Goldberg, a
veteran of this kind of comedy, doesn't do anything with the great
potential of her character, Death. Giancarlo Esposito does his best to give
some evil mirth to his half-man, half-goat, Hypnos, but, falls to the power
of F/X. Chris Kattan gets some mileage as the dead gymnast/organ donor that
Stu possesses when he returns to earth to get his own body back. Plan on
watching a stomach or a kidney fall out of Stu's temporary bod, only to be
snatched up by a greedy gang of organ harvesting doctors. Rose McGowan is
cute as the aptly named Kitty, while a blond, goateed Dave Foley could have
phoned in his slimy agent character, Herb.
Special F/X, alone, do not make a movie. There has to be a good story to
hang terrific techs on and that does not happen with "Monkeybone." I give
it a disappointed C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Ross Anthony
A cartoonist (Brendan Fraser) plagued by nightmares in the past, finds 
love and sweet dreams in sleep doctor (Bridget Fonda). Unfortunately, a 
freak accident on the night of his new animated pilot's gala celebration 
knocks him into a surreal fantasy coma. Here the mild-mannered artist 
faces his cute muppetlike alto ego - the nasty, selfish, horny 
Monkeybone. 
"Welcome to downtown - where the night mares." Brendan spends much of 
the movie here, making deals with the god of sleep (brought to life 
marvelously by Giancarlo Esposito as some sort of hoofed animal) and the 
god of death (Whoopi Goldberg). Like his earlier works, "The Nightmare 
Before Christmas" and "James and the Giant Peach," director Henry Selick 
relies heavily on good old-fashioned stop-motion animation for his furry 
lead as well as many of the downtown characters. Integrating all of that 
with live actors is a daunting task. 
Thick and dark art direction oozes like syrup on pancakes. Downtown 
(coma-land) floats appropriately in some cosmic abyss and plays like a 
twisted amusement park. It's a hauntingly delightful creation. Also, in 
one sweet scene, Brendan is able to witness the black and white 
crystal-ball dream of his true love who awaits him hospital bedside in 
the land of the real. 
Aside from one extremely hilarious scene in which Brendan "goes ape" for 
Bridget, swinging on bed posts to the tune of Jimi Hendrix's "Foxy 
Lady;" Fraser is (as Death says) rather vanilla. An easy first choice 
for this role might have been Jim Carrey, though I'm sure others could 
be found to navigate the difficulties in leading and pulling together a 
production of live and non-live costars and sets. Though cute and crass, 
even the animated "Monkeybone" isn't over the top entertaining. Never 
uninteresting, "Monkeybone" the movie doesn't break out of it's own 
dreamlike state into the land of "bust your audience's gut" until 
organ-donor-man brings new life to the project. 
This actor (Chris Kattan), his organ-donor character, scripting and 
capture on film score straight 10's in the humor Olympics. If the two 
leads were this passionately funny (coupled with a bit of story editing) 
- then we'd be talking about the best film of the year. 
Monkeybone. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Brendan Fraser, Bridget Fonda, Whoopi Goldberg, Chris 
Kattan, David Foley Giancarlo Esposito, John Turturro (Monkeybone), Rose 
McGowan. 
*  Directed by Henry Selick. 
*  Written by Sam Hamm. 
*  Produced by Mark Radcliffe, Michael Barnathan at 20th Century Fox. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Steve Rhodes
MONKEYBONE is the second film this week -- the other was 3000 MILES TO 
GRACELAND -- that doesn't live up to the promise of its trailers.  
MONKEYBONE is by far the better of the two, which isn't exactly high 
praise.
The movie's twisted, silly and sometimes sick humor comes from the minds 
of director Henry Selick (THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS), screenwriter 
Sam Hamm (BATMAN) and comics writer Kaja Blackley (DARK TOWN).  The 
stunning visuals look like a cross with THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS, 
the bar scene from STAR WARS and a nightmare vision of an amusement 
park.  Although the images devilishly delight the audience, the script 
is as dead as the afterlife, called Downtown, in which most of the movie 
takes place.  Whoopi Goldberg has a high old time as Death, the queen of 
the underworld.
Brendan Fraser, the star of MONKEYBONE, has two modes: hilarious, as he 
was in my personal favorite of his, BLAST FROM THE PAST, and awful, as 
in DUDLEY DO-RIGHT.  To be fair, he is a wonderfully gifted comedic 
actor and his failures come mainly from an inability to say no to 
terrible scripts.  
This time Fraser plays Stu Miley, as in S. Miley (get it?), a cartoonist 
who created "Monkeybone, America's most disturbed comic strip."  He met 
his girlfriend,  Dr. Julie McElroy (Bridget Fonda), at The Sleep 
Institute, where he went to get help with his severe and bizarre 
nightmares.  
After being hit on the head in a car accident, he goes into a deep coma, 
sending him to Downtown, from which he may never return.  At least not 
unless Death gives him a gold-plated exit pass.  Accompanying him on his 
journey is his sidekick, the sassy Monkeybone, who has a fixation on 
women's breasts and on his own lack of private parts, which he blames on 
his creator, Stu.  Rose McGowan does a sweet turn as Kitty, Stu's helper 
in the demented Downtown.
Chris Kattan, as a dead gymnast, gets the most laughs.  An organ donor, 
he has doctors hot on his trail, trying to get his organs.  He uses them 
like water balloons to toss at people.  If it sounds gross, it is.  
Personally, I was impressed by Kattan's acting but found the jokes 
merely stupid.
Finally, a piece of friendly advice for Fraser.  Please treat the 
projects that you are offered as you would a serious illness.  Once you 
receive the script, ask for a second opinion.  
MONKEYBONE runs 1:27.  It is rated PG-13 for crude humor and some nudity 
and would be acceptable for kids around 12 and up.
My son Jeffrey and his friends, all about 12, had different opinions of 
the film.  Jeffrey (**) said that he didn't laugh once but that he 
thought the plot was imaginative.  Maxim (***) commented on how much he 
liked the characters and the Fantasyland part.  Sam (*** 1/2) said that 
he found the movie very funny.  Nickolas (*** 1/2) mentioned how 
interesting he found the whole setup.  All of them liked the organ donor 
part.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The trailers for Monkeybone trumpet that it was made by the creators of The
Nightmare Before Christmas, which is making a lot of people think ultra-cool
director Tim Burton has something to do with the film.  He doesn't - Burton
only produced and co-wrote Nightmare.  The good news is that Monkeybone
director Henry Selick, who directed Nightmare and the equally hip James &
The Giant Peach, is probably the only person who can even come close to
making a Burton-esque film.
Monkeybone's opening credits show an artist creating a cartoon that he hopes
will become an integral part of a surprise marriage proposal.  The artist is
Stu Miley (Brendan Fraser, Bedazzled), the creator of a popular animated
television show about a frenzied, Roger Rabbit-like monkey (it's called
"Monkeybone").  Stu is shy, introverted, and totally freaked out by his own
success, as evidenced by his discomfort at a public premiere of his latest
show.  He's also dead-set against the merchandising of various Monkeybone
products, despite the pleadings of his business manager (Dave Foley).
Stu tries to leave the post-premiere party early to pop the big question to
his girlfriend, Julie (Bridget Fonda, Lake Placid).  But they're involved in
a car wreck (a funny one, if there is such a thing) that leaves Stu in a
very Trainspotting-ish coma.  Julie is devastated, but Stu's sister (Will &
Grace's Megan Mullally) wants to pull the plug.
The fun really starts when Stu enters his coma world.  It's a nightmarish
land of carnival rides, martinis and Rose McGowan in a low-cut cat suit
(geez, it sounds really awful).  In this in-between world known as Downtown,
people in situations similar to Stu's experience have their nightmares come
true.  For Stu, this means Monkeybone (voiced by John Turturro) has become
real, and his creation becomes a real pain in the neck, as well.  The chimp
hops around like David Arquette on speed and generally makes Stu's life even
more miserable.  After all, a cartoon monkey can't really replace somebody
like Bridget Fonda.
Without going into too much detail about the story, I'll just say Monkeybone
and Stu head back to real life in two different bodies - one of which is a
recently deceased organ donor played by Saturday Night Live's Chris Kattan
(it's one of the funniest physical comedy bits you'll ever see).  If you
don't pay too much attention to the plot, which involves a dream god
(Giancarlo Esposito) who tries to increase the world's nightmare output, you
should find Monkeybone pretty darn entertaining.
Monkeybone is based on Kaja Blackley's comic book called "Dark Town," which
was adapted by Sam Hamm, who has worked on several of Burton's films
(including the upcoming Planet of the Apes remake).  Helping to make the
picture look like one of Burton's is Sleepy Hollow's production designer
Bill Boes.  Monkeybone has sets The Grinch wishes it could have had.  The
film effectively blends stop-frame animation with live action, and flaunts
visual effects that may not be topped this year.
1:30 - PG-13 for crude humor and some nudity

Author
Brandon Herring
Monkeybone   *1/2 out of * * * *
Starring: Brendan Fraser, Bridget Fonda, Chris Kattan, Rose McGowan, Megan 
Mullally, voice of John Turturro.
Directed by: Henry Selick
Running Time: 90 minutes
Rated PG-13: crude humor and brief nudity.
"From the director of "The Nightmare Before Christmas" it said in the 
previews, which I'm guessing was said to get people to go see the movie, 
obviously it hasn't worked since the $75 million dollar movie has yet to 
break $5 million. To each it's own however, since "Monkey Bone" is not only a 
bad movie all together, but technically well-made. A tragic waste of talent 
and incredible visual effects.
Stu Miley is the genius behind the new phenomena "Monkey Bone" a crude comic 
strip, that everyone wants to merchandise, they go to great links to get it 
as well, including dollars that let out fart powder. When Stu and his 
girlfriend, Julie (Bridget Fonda) are in a freak car accident (you'll see) 
Stu goes into a coma, and while in his coma Stu travels to I'm guessing Dark 
Town, where all the characters in dreams come to life. People are stuck in 
this town, with their nightmares roaming around them. When Stu spots Monkey 
Bone (whom he really can't stand) he tries to keep him under control. Making 
a new friend Kitty (Rose McGowan) he learns that if he gets an exit pass from 
Death, he can go back up and live his life. When Monkey Bone and Stu steal a 
pass, Monkey Bone becomes a trader and takes it and goes into Stu's body. Now 
Monkey Bone must get everyone to buy these dolls with nightmare powder, so 
everyone has nightmares...or something like that.
Rather complex (in fact more than it needs to be) "Monkey Bone" had potential 
in the script and even the story. What is considerably noticeable is the 
gaping plot holes, and lack of character development. For instance we really 
don't get to know who Stu or Julie are, so why should we even care? Kitty 
played well by Rose McGowan ha a story behind her, but we are not given a 
chance to know her. 
The cast is decent however, Brendan Fraser seems to be enjoying himself in 
the role as Stu Miley, but becomes awfully annoying when Monkey Bone takes 
over his body. Bridget Fonda is dreary and seems to bring the film to a 
screeching halt, her performance is bad and she seems miscast. Dave Foley 
isn't given enough to do, as well as "Will & Grace's" Megan Mullally who can 
be funny. The standout performance is the voice of Nick Turturro as Monkey 
Bone himself, he is very funny and entertaining and really keeps the film 
from being a total bust. 
The special effects of "Monkey Bone" is what might really bring in some 
curious viewers, these special effects are highly effective, and nice to look 
at with the eyes. Some of them are believable and some unbelievable...for 
Monkey Bone he seems to be like Stuart Little, you really don't realize that 
he is animated...but on occasion it sneaks up on you. The direction by Henry 
Selick is good, but at times he doesn't know what kind of film he wants to 
make, and the ending climax falls off the cliff. 
It's too bad really, "Monkey Bone" could have been a real good movie, but 
with it's heavily done hack job, and lack of character development it just 
sinks when the end credits role. For those curious however, it might be worth 
the rental, but other than that avoid this one.
