Title
Review for Greedy (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by Jonathan Lynn
Written by Lowell Ganz & Babaloo Mandel 
Starring Kirk Douglas, Michael J. Fox, Nancy Travis, Olivia D'Abo,
Phil Hartman, and Ed Begley, Jr.
MPAA Rating     "PG"
Running Time    Approx. 110 minutes
     GREEDY is a horribly excuted "ensemble" comedy about a band of
money-hungry cousins who will do *anything* to get their hands on their
rich Uncle's dough.
     The story introduces Uncle Joe (Douglas), an eccentric millionare
who's taken up with a sexy pizza-girl (d'Abo).  His cousins have been
circling their bait for years and are, understandably, outraged.  So
they call in Joe's favorite nephew, Danny (Fox), to even the balance.
But Danny has his *own* ideas about how to take care of Uncle Joe.
     GREEDY tries hard to walk a straight line between slapstick and
serious.  But the tone is never correctly set.  Even *with* footage of
Jimmy Durante over the opening credits.  I don't care who you
blame--the bottom line is a film full of people trying either to be too
funny or too serious.
     The deck's already stacked with a cast of lightweights.  I mean,
come-on, Nancy Travis?  Ed Begley Jr.?  Or Jack Benny-lookalike Phil
Hartman!?!  Fox is fun, but he still looks seventeen.  Only Kirk
Douglas gets away with anything above acting.  He has a large time
growling and groaning and leering and lying.  Just listen to him
deliver the line "I'm richer than sh*t."
     Just as the cast is uninteresting, so are the characters.  The
cousins are all one-note cartoons and the central protagonist, Danny,
is a professional bowler!!  Who though *that* one up??
     If nothing else, GREEDY certainly *looks* good-- but who cares
about production values in a film with uninteresting characters?  For
that matter, who cares about uninteresting characters?  Which is the
problem:  when the jokes all-too-often go flat, there's very little to
fall back on.
NOTE:   As trying as the whole experience is, GREEDY has one genuine
        gut-buster that comes toward the end.  And it makes this mostly
        mediocre movie just a little bit above okay.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Michael J. Fox, Kirk Douglas, Nancy Travis, Olivia d'Abo, 
           Phil Hartman, Ed Begley Jr., Coleen Camp, Jonathan Lynn 
Director:  Jonathan Lynn
Producer:  Brian Grazer 
Screenplay: Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel
Music:  Randy Edelman
Released by Universal Pictures
     GREEDY is one of those motion pictures that doesn't quite know
what it wants to be.  It starts off as a farce with an edge, then
changes midway through into one of those "feel-good" movies that the
writing team of Ganz and Mandel (A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN, PARENTHOOD,
SPLASH) are known for.  The ending is a complete cop-out, but there are
at least enough laughs along the way to make the experience mildly
palatable.
     Joe McTeague (Kirk Douglas) isn't dying--much to the chagrin of
his large, greedy family.  But, since Joe has yet to decide who to
leave his considerable fortune to, various nieces and nephews are vying
with each other for Uncle Joe's favor.  Carl (Ed Begley, Jr.) has named
both of his boys Joe, and Frank (Phil Hartman) has hired a private
investigator to dig up dirt on the other family members.
     At one of Joe's birthday parties, the bickering has just gotten
started when the guest of honor introduces his new "companion", a young
British girl named Molly (Olivia d'Abo), who dotes on the old man.
Panic ensues as everyone sees their beloved inheritance slipping out of
reach.  Willing to try anything to limit Molly's influence, Frank and
Carl seek out Danny McTeague (Michael J. Fox), a pro bowler who was
once Uncle Joe's "favorite boy" before a family quarrel caused Danny's
father to break with his relatives.  Because he has fond memories of
Joe, Danny agrees to visit the old man, and soon finds himself
embroiled in the frantic scramble for money.
     The first portion of GREEDY, which features the antics of various
family members as they attempt to outdo each other in proving their
worth to Joe, is brilliant.  It's fresh, funny, and delivered with a
scathing edge.  Had director Jonathan Lynn (MY COUSIN VINNY) framed the
entire movie this way, it's interesting to ponder what the result might
have been.  However, the moment Michael J. Fox comes on the scene,
GREEDY begins gravitating towards a typical, formula-driven comedy.
There are still laughs to be had, but these form the backdrop for an
increasingly ordinary film.
     The less said about the ending, the better.  Like the wrap up of
another Ganz/Mandel story, PARENTHOOD, GREEDY's conclusion is too
pat--all happy and upbeat.  The big "plot twist" is obvious, despite
attempts to throw in a red herring or two.  Some of what happens during
the final quarter-hour rivals SCENT OF A WOMAN's finale for
mind-numbing, Hollywood-style audience manipulation.
     Even though the introduction of Michael J. Fox's Danny signifies
the beginning of GREEDY's decline, the actor acquits himself well.
Although affable as usual, Mr. Fox plays his role with a little more
spirit than has been evident in some of his recent box-office duds (the
latest of which was the forgettable FOR LOVE OR MONEY).  Kirk Douglas
is adequate, but the role of Joe wouldn't challenge any actor's
skills.  Nancy Travis is flat in the admittedly-limited part as Robin
Hunter, Danny's girlfriend.  Olivia d'Abo has spunk, and the costume
designers have found numerous ways to show off her natural physical
assets without being too revealing (the only nudity is a shot of
Michael J. Fox's backside).
     The scene-stealer is Phil Hartman, whose deadpan delivery is
perfect.  Even late in the film, when the story is on course for its
seemingly inevitable conclusion, Mr. Hartman's presence lends a
sarcastic bite to several scenes.  According to insiders, the part of
Frank was expanded from what was initially scripted when director
Jonathan Lynn recognized how big an asset the actor had become to the
production.
     During the course of this film, there are quite a few laughs to be
had, and if the sole purpose of going to a comedy is for laughter
(irrespective of story content), then the movie succeeds.
Unfortunately, looking beyond the gags and jokes, GREEDY suffers from a
split personality, and the resulting uneven tone can lead to feelings
of ambivalence.  Like the relatives vying for Uncle Joe's money, GREEDY
tries a little too hard to be likable.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Michael J. Fox, Kirk Douglas, Nancy Travis, Olivia D'Abo,
Phil Hartman, Ed Begley Jr., Jere Burns.
Screenplay:  Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel.
Director:  Jonathan Lynn.
     I prefer my comedy with an edge.  THE WAR OF THE ROSES, RUTHLESS
PEOPLE, and TV's "The Simpsons" show that sometimes nothing is funnier
than human nature at its nastiest.  It is also the case that few comedy
conventions irritate me more than starting with an edge and
progressively dulling it with warm-fuzziness.  So here comes GREEDY, a
promising enough comedy about avaricious relatives, but that fact that
it was written by the popular team of Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel
(SPLASH, PARENTHOOD, CITY SLICKERS) should have clued me in that it
wouldn't go for the jugular.  There are fewer big laughs than in any of
those films, as a largely uninteresting cast tries gamely to support a
limp story.
     GREEDY describes most members of the McTeague family, who want to
get their hands on the millions of scrap metal king Joe McTeague (Kirk
Douglas).  Nephews Frank (Phil Hartman), Carl (Ed Begley Jr.) and Glen
(Jere Burns) and their families are among those who make weekly trips
to Uncle Joe's mansion, kissing up to the sickly old man and tearing
each other down in an attempt to become his sole heir.  There is a new
obstacle on their latest visit:  Molly (Olivia D'Abo), a nubile young
pizza delivery girl who has become Uncle Joe's live-in "nurse."
Desperate to avoid being aced out, the family locates favorite nephew
Danny (Michael J. Fox), an earnest professional bowler who avoids the
family and its in-fighting.  They promise Danny a cut of the
inheritance of he can get rid of Molly, a deal which initially disgusts
Danny.  However, he gradually gets sucked in to the greedy McTeague
world, much to the consternation of girlfriend Robin (Nancy Travis).
     When it did work, GREEDY let its nasty characters be their
nastiest.  The opening fifteen minutes, focusing on one of the McTeague
family's Saturday gatherings, offered a lot of laughs as they took
turns revealing embarrassing secrets about each other to Uncle Joe.
Unfortunately, none of the laughs are as big as they could have been,
and that's primarily because Ganz and Mandel don't provide their
characters with distinct personalities, except for Siobhan Fallon's
horrendously overboard drunk as Hartman's wife.  They're all sort of
interchangeably grasping, and Hartman, Begley and Burns don't have
enough manic energy on their own.  While several of the lines are
funny, none of the characters is funny enough to give them a big push.
     After that early scene, GREEDY loses almost all of the bite it
might have had.  Michael J. Fox does a fine job of setting up the
insecurity which will make Danny vulnerable to the influence of his
family, but he isn't given the chance to sink his teeth into his own
greed.  Either director Jonathan Lynn or Fox himself wouldn't
completely allow Danny to get nasty.  The result is that nothing he
does seems particularly deserving of rebuke; when he tells his
distraught girlfriend that he's just acting in Uncle Joe's best
interest, I was willing to give him the benefit of the doubt.
Similarly, Olivia D'Abo is supposed to play a corrupted innocent, but
it's hard to recognize where she changes because her character is never
defined from the outset.  Apparently changing from a bikini to a
macrame body suit is supposed to signal moral degredation.  GREEDY
wimps out when it should be emphasizing lust for money is damaging its
characters.
     A simpler and more relevant criticism of GREEDY is that it really
doesn't do anything new.  Greedy relatives and fights for an
inheritance are film staples, and most previous attempts have handled
the subject better.  By its conclusion, GREEDY had become sort of a
recycled WILLY WONKA AND THE CHOCOLATE FACTORY, as Michael J. Fox has
to decide what to do with his particular Everlasting Gobstopper.
GREEDY does offer a few giggles, but they get buried under a fairly
self-evident message and a slow, unoriginal story.  GREEDY is like a
bottle of acid diluted in far too much water:  it's just not corrosive
enough.
