Title
Review for My Name Is Joe (1998)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Greg King
For over two decades Ken Loach has explored Britain's working
class with a brutal honesty, gritty realism, earthy humour and sense
of compassion that most other directors can only aspire to.  After
tackling more international concerns with his previous films (Land And
Freedom was set during the Spanish Civil War and Carla's Song was set
against the background of war torn Central America), Loach returns to
familiar territory with his brilliant new film.
Written by regular collaborator Paul Laverty, My Name Is Joe
is a touchingly honest portrait of life in the residential tenements
of Glascow's depressed industrial suburbs.  At its heart, My Name Is
Joe is an aching and touching love story, and this seems to
temporarily temper Loach's usually bleak and pessimistic outlook.  The
lighter, romantic touches and winning humour make this a far less
depressing effort than earlier Loach films, and it initially seems to
have more in common with Riff Raff than Ladybird, Ladybird.
In the role that won his a Best Actor Award at Cannes last
year, Peter Mullan gives a blistering but naturalistic performance in
the central role of Joe, a former alcoholic struggling to get his life
under control.  Rehabilitated through sessions at AA, Joe has been
sober for ten months.  He also supplements his regular dole payments
through odd jobs around the neighbourhood and by helping out the local
youth soccer club.  It is through his involvement with the soccer club
that he meets Liam (David McKay), a former drug addict with a young
family.  Joe inspires Liam to stay on the straight and narrow,
although it is sometimes a hard task.
Through Liam and his partner Sabine (Annemarie Kennedy), Joe
also meets Sarah (Louise Goodall), a social worker who is also trying
to help the pair.  Romance slowly blossoms between the two, despite
the baggage that Joe brings to the relationship.  But when Liam falls
back into his old habits, Joe becomes involved with the gangs that
rule the Glascow streets, with tragic consequences.  The latter part
of the film is slightly melodramatic in nature, but it also makes for
some powerful drama.  The climax is painfully brutal and harrowing.
Although set against a depressing background of poverty and despair,
My Name Is Joe also resonates with an inspiring sense of humanity and
compassion.  The Glaswegian accents are so thick that My Name Is Joe
carries subtitles, enabling audiences to easily get into the rhythm
and flow of the film.
My Name Is Joe is a powerful and memorable return to form for
Loach, and one of the year's most satisfying and unforgettable films.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Please post this review to the newsgroup.
For many years, Scottish filmmaker Ken Loach has made movies about the
struggles of the working-class citizen in today's society. His latest
film, MY NAME IS JOE, is one of the most powerful and intense
character studies I have seen in years. At the beginning of the film,
the title character, Joe Kavanagh(Mullan), announces that after being
an alcoholic for several years, he has finally sobered up. Joe is a
poor man who does odd jobs like coaching soccer. He runs into a woman
named Sarah(Louise Goodall) who works as a nurse and is higher up in
the ranks of society. Joe wants to ask her on a date, but he doesn't
have money for a fancy dinner, so they go bowling. At first she
declines his invitation, calling him too "wild", but she ends up
giving in to his charm. Also, both Joe and Sarah are trying to help
out Liam(David McKay) and Sabine(Anne-Marie Kennedy), a young couple
who are caught up in the underworld of drugs.
MY NAME IS JOE seems to be a simple and familiar story, but it rises
above mediocrity because of a raw, brutally sympathetic performance by
Peter Mullan, who won the Best Actor award at last year's Cannes Film
Festival. Mullan makes Joe such a three-dimensional character that he
makes up for the lack of depth in Sarah's character.  Few films can
match the emotional wallop provided by Joe's transcendence in MY NAME
IS JOE. The film also deserves praise for subtitling the thick
Scottish accents, providing us with pure English. Other British films
should take note of this new technique. It is a shame that MY NAME IS
JOE has been released in early 1999 and will definitely be forgotten
by next year's Oscars. But I'm glad to see that there are some
filmmakers interested in just putting out a film that's worth
seeing. MY NAME IS JOE is that, and more.  


Author
Dennis Schwartz
MY NAME IS JOE (director: Ken Loach; writer: Paul Laverty;
cinematographer: Barry Ackroyd; cast: Peter Mullan (Joe Kavanagh), David
McKay (Liam), David Hayman (McGowan), Annemarie Kennedy (Sabine), Louise
Goodall (Sarah ), Gary Lewis (Shanks), Lorraine McIntosh (Maggie),
UK-1998)
The power in this romantic drama, depicting the harsh lives of Glasgow's
poor, lies with the natural performances of its two stars, Peter Mullan
as the reformed alcoholic Joe Kavanagh, currently unemployed, and his
love interest, Sarah (Louise Goodall), as the good-hearted community
health worker.
The story is a very familiar one, its theme of someone who is inflicted
with troubles of his own but who gains strength by helping out those who
are even less fortunate than himself, is the kind of film Hollywood has
made ever since it started making films. Films such as this have been
popular ones, identifying with the down-trodden as they try to make a go
of it against insurmountable odds. The hero, predictably, finds
redemption in his generosity to others, forgoing his own concerns to
find an inner solace from all his past errors. The only thing different
about this one, is the intensity of the social realism depicted.
One of the young men Joe coaches in soccer, Liam (McKay), runs into
trouble with a local drug lord, McGowan (Hayman), and Joe helps him out
in an unorthodox way. He is told by the crime boss that Liam either pays
up the money he owes him from their drug dealings, or he puts his junkie
wife Sabine (Kennedy) on the street working for them, or he has both his
legs broken. The fourth choice is that Joe should run a few drug deals
for the mob and in this way have Liam's debt paid off. That's the deal
Joe reluctantly takes, to the detriment of his relationship with Sarah.
The emptiness and despair in all their lives is seen from the
ex-alcoholic Joe's point of view, as he is struggling to get a firm grip
on himself; it is also seen in the hapless soccer players he coaches,
looking for some respect and a way to hang in the game without being
completely put down. And the despair is seen, especially so, in the
lives of Liam and his junkie wife, who try to raise their young son and
battle the demons inside them, but are only able to relate to those who
are super kind to them.
The problem with this earnest, very realistic drama, that is certainly
well-meaning and done in a most edifying manner, is that I saw the same
type of film many times before. Humphrey Bogart made a career of playing
the part Joe does. There are just no great suprises, here. What works
well, though, are the little touches, that add some grace to the
characterizations, allowing us to see the wheels inside these characters
churning with their joy and pain. When Joe begins seeing Sarah, his
natural timidity overshadows all his blustery talk and profanity. In
love with her, he has lost all sense of futility and feels rejuvenated,
but the danger is that he has not found the power inside himself to
accept who he is; he has become too dependent on her love to sustain
him. And when he loses her, he naturally comes apart. That he is a good
guy, we readily see in the regular conversations he has with his best
friend Shanks (Lewis). She uses her co-worker Maggie (McIntosh) in the
same role.
The really nice touch seen in the film, that shows pretty much the
direction the story was trying to go, took place when Joe was trying to
tell somethings to Sarah about himself that are true and important to
him: one, about his wild days, stealing a truckload of cd's and selling
them to his pub mates; that is, all but the classical ones. Nobody would
buy them. So he keeps them and falls in love with that kind of music.
The other, is how he decided to admit he was an alcoholic and joined the
A.A.. This came after beating his girlfriend while in a drunken stupor
because she laughed at him.
Loach has created a sobering study of the disenfranchised, a film that
is worth taking note of, that probes into serious matters, and is honest
enough to know that there are no simple answers to the problems it
raises. In many ways it is a better film that his 1996 Carla's Song,
which this film is derived from. The film is entertaining, a comment
that might not be praise to Loach's ears. But his film doesn't rise to
anything greater than that, it is just not that emotionally affecting
for us to believe that we have seen great cinema. His characters are in
a situation that is not that memorable and their problems are largely
self-inflicted, which should make us cautious in accepting their version
of what is happening as gospel, even if, there is no doubt that the area
they live in is a drug infested commununity, where unemployment is
rampant, and the odds weigh heavily against survival.
It was a good idea having subtitles for the film, because the heavy
Scottish accents are very difficult to understand.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   There are probably those who will say that Ken Loach is a
director more to be respected than enjoyed. It's not that we in
the audience need to see Mary Poppins feel-good movies all
the time to consider ourselves entertained.  After all, the
current film festival in Toronto featured a spate of hard-edged,
cynical works about dysfunctional families including one which
Universal refused to allow its subsidiary, October films, to
release.  But Loach's view of British working-class society
is so bleak, with such unresolved conclusions, that we
sometimes long for closure, for some tying up of the loose
threads by the time we leave the theater.
   "My Name is Joe" is an example of such a movie, one
which will appeal mightily to the right audience because of the
superior acting by its principal performer and its bitter bite of
reality.  What's more the story becomes increasingly involving
and the romantic relationship it underscores is treated with
such authenticity that it is far more believable than those
invented by the Hollywood fantasy-factory.  Loach remains so
true to his portrayals of the lumpenproletarians of his country
that once again--as in "Carla's Song"--the Scottish dialect is
all but unintelligible (think "Trainspotting") to Americans. 
Happily, though, the situation is remedied by the use of
subtitles.
   The tale centers on Joe Kavanagh (Peter Mullan), a 37-
year-old guy who is balding but manly and looks every bit the
hale-fellow soccer coach that he portrays.  With his fine
appearance and compassion, he should not have had
problems, but he is a recovering alcoholic who has been on
the wagon for ten months and who is following the 12-step
problem of Alcoholics Anonymous religiously.  He has a keen
interest in the young men he coaches, working-class fellows
with a knack for getting into fights over nothing on the football
field.  [He will soon find himself in deep trouble for going to
the defense of one foolhardy friend, Liam (Davie McKay).] 
His life changes dramatically when he falls in love with a pert,
middle-aged health worker, Sarah Downie (Louise Goodall), a
woman who doles out solid advice to poor women trying to
care for their infants.  Unattached herself, she is gradually
drawn into Joe's orbit and seems relatively accepting when
Joe remorsefully relates an incident that occurred during one
of his drunken blackouts when he punched and kicked his girl
friend.  His relationship with Sarah comes to crucial point
when he goes to the aid of Liam, who is heavily in debt to the
local drug lord, McGowan (David Hayman) and who is trying
to make a go of his marriage to his volatile, drug-addicted
wife Sabine (Anne-Marie Kennedy).
   Loach's current work, a sensitive, intimate portrayal of the
difficulties faced by the lower working-class of Glasgow,
highlights the self-defeating but good-hearted foolishness of
its principal character.  In a previous offering, "Carla's Song,"
bus driver George (Robert Carlyle) goes through with a
quixotic scheme of running after the love of his life who has
gone to Nicaragua to find her own boy friend.  Similarly, while
chasing after his romantic interest, Joe risks his very life and
by doing so endangers his connection with a wonderful
woman who could turn his days around.  
   The movie is not without humor, some verbal, as when Joe
tells Sarah why he, a man with limited education, plays
classical music at home--in his wilder days he stole boxes of
cassettes and sold the country and western; he could not get
rid of the Beethovens.
   While the story begins with a loose texture to define the
daily routine of these down-and-out Gaswegians--the long
waits at the medical clinics, the refusal of doctors to grant
prescriptions, the power of gangs over basically decent
people--Loach tightens the narrative, building the tension to a
catastrophic, climactic scene.  This is obviously the work of a
man whom the BBC at one time refused to produce: his
"Cathy Comes Home" was apparently too raw a slice of
London life for its listeners.  Unlike "Carla's Song," none of
the dialogue comes across as improvised and though Loach's
left-leaning politics is implied it is not as obvious as it was in
that Nicaragua-based romance.  Even if bleak dramas of this
sort are not your cup of tea, you'll have to admire Peter
Mullan's first-rate acting, a performance which gained him the
Best Actor award at the last Cannes festival.  His is the sort
of accomplishment that could not be duplicated by one suited
to more commercial dramas, such as Malcolm McDowell and
Terence Stamp, who were, in fact, responsible for the failure
of the director's "Poor Cow."

Author
Matt Prigge
Starring: Peter Mullan, Louise Goodall, David McKay, Anne-Marie Kennedy, 
David Hayman, Gary Lewis, Lorraine McIntosh
Lucky for us, "...and I'm and Alcoholic" didn't fit on the marquee, 
because then we may have been guaranteed another tiresome story of a 
man's struggle against his past cornball affliction, which it could have 
very well been. It also could have been yet another in a long line of UK 
social commentary, where the characters and everything else that 
possibly go into filmmaking take a distant backseat to sometimes sharp, 
sometimes unabashedly naive satire - basically one of my major pet 
peeves - but miraculously enough, social commenter Ken Loach opts to 
toss that in the backseat, and run away with everything else, including 
characterization and emotion. And thank god, because not only have we 
seen too much UK social commentary in the last decade to last us our 
entire lives, but we've not had many films that are this alive and this 
intelligently realistic. Love stories these days seem to follow a 
tiresome group of cliches, like the people in love are merely taking the 
appropriate steps, and trying to get from point to point without every 
just savoring moments like the ones here. And when "My Name is Joe" is 
lingering over shared moments between not only its two protagonists, but 
with others like a soccer team and other aquaintances of the leads, it's 
one of the best films of the year. It has such a natural energy to it 
that doesn't feel put-upon, and such a whimsical brand of charm and wit 
that even when it begins to look like it may fly into Mt. Cliche, it's 
easily forgivable because we're near sure that other great moments and 
scenes are going to come up and bring us back into the movie, and only a 
couple more times does the alcoholism and recovering from thereof come 
back into play, and only once in a cliched fashion (that's not a bottle 
in his hand, is it?!).
And without all the great stuff that Ken Loach and company bring to the 
film, it would have been yet another movie about a man's escape from his 
past, which it basically is, only here the emotions are felt and earned. 
Joe, the main character, is played by Peter Mullan as a energetic, 
un-bitter man who's had a rough life before the present, but is eager to 
make up for his past life and maybe even find happiness. Many of we 
yanks may actually recognize Mullan: he's starred in not only in Danny 
Boyle's "Shallow Grave" (as one of the doomed henchmen), but also in 
"Trainspotting" (as the bald, buff, drug dealer, Mother Superior), and 
here finally comes into light as a strong and wonderful actor (he's 
already won himself an award at Cannes, and rightfully so). He has a 
welcoming presence, kind of like a more appreciable Will Patton, with a 
deep tobacco voice and an instantly aimiable presence that makes his 
character effortlessly sympathetic. He wears a windbreaker and sneakers, 
and seems impatient and always on the move, despite the fact that he's 
currently jobless.
He's also the coach of a local soccer team, which he handles like a 
father fusses over kids, and one day when picking up one of his players, 
he runs into a social worker named Sarah (Louise Goodall), has a bit of 
a tiff with her, and runs into her later on. Pushy yet not creepily, he 
gives her his phone number, offering to do her wallpaper for some extra 
money, and is soon flirting with her and then going out on a date with 
her. They get alone greatly and quickly, because they've both in their 
own way been beat down and aren't expecting much, and are soon carrying 
on a relationship that makes the both of them extremely happy. These are 
the best parts of the film because, depsite a couple put-upon instances 
(she locks herself out of her house and has to stay at his house for the 
night...), they have a natural comedy and feel that never succumbs to 
cornball sentamentalism (even a scene where he tells her about why he 
has a Beethoven tape that opens up a deep wound feels completely and 
100% real). The second half, which adds local drug dealing tension to 
the story, seems less real, though, and more like a need to fulfill the 
otherwise-goodguy-pulled-back-to-his-past formula. One of his soccer 
players, an otherwise superb chap named Liam (David McKay) finds he owes 
a good sum to a local mafiaso named McGowan (David Hayman), but can't 
pay it, even after his wife had tried to pay it off by dealing while he 
did a brief stint in jail (and ended up using a bunch of it). Feeling a 
father-like relationship with him, Joe goes to bat for him, and agrees 
to pick up two cars for McGowan filled with drugs, despite his wondering 
why Liam can't just do it.
Basically, it's a guess-what-happens-next rhetorical question here, but 
strangely enough, while the actual plot elements of Joe picking up drugs 
and trying to save Liam feel a touch on the fake side, the love story 
and the story of Joe never feel like they've been trifled with, and, in 
fact, they seem to only be accentuated and built upon because of them. 
This is because through everything, we understand Joe's character, and 
we can realize that despite doing otherwise stupid things, he's really 
trying to prove himself a good person all along, even if he can't 
correctly balance everything. And when the romance slowly becomes 
severed because of his involvement with McGowan, we feel that what's 
happening as a result is real, even if what has actually happened to 
cause the complications seem a bit fake. Even by the time he's resorted 
to the cliche of doing away with his alcohol aversion, we don't feel so 
much that a cliche has been touched upon, but that Joe himself as a 
character and as a person has been deeply woudned, perhaps without any 
hope. Frankly, despite the rampant use of cliches and contrivances, "My 
Name is Joe" posesses a really damn good story because it's told so well 
and in such an involving and unique manner.
And because Joe is seen as a good guy but with flaws (the occasional 
outburst of dramatics, the need to always do the right thing and be 
selfless, his desire to be happy, etc, etc), it's easier and much more 
comfortable to feel that Joe is a character worth caring about, and 
through most of it, he's not been destroyed by his past but by his own 
personality. He's not controlled by a plot, which is giving him a shit 
deal; he's giving himself a shit deal, and it's more justified for we 
the audience to care about what happens to him. A subject like this is 
many a time more interesting than a social commentary or another 
recovering alcoholic story, and it's told by Loach in such an 
idisoyncractic way, making due notice of the foibles and characteristics 
of its characters, that it's almost a shame that it does introduce the 
McGowan subplot at all. Loach has shot it using a dark, pale tone, 
accentuating the more dark aspects of the film's undertones (of a 
plagued society - thankfully, this is left as merely an undertone), but 
this is not a depressing movie - it's filled with life and the 
cinematography only gives it a deeper feeling of naturalism, despite the 
fact that the stateside print of this film has been given distracting 
(though helpful to some - not me, though) subtitles, perhaps a result of 
bitches about the regional accents in such UK films as "The Full Monty" 
and "The Butcher Boy," which start out I thought as a joke, but then 
continue on, like annoying closed-captioning.
And by the end, despite a rather sobering stream of tragic events, "My 
Name is Joe" is less of a social commentary or a traditional story of 
good guys with tragic lives and more of a celebration of life, since the 
best moments are the moments where the characters are just being, and 
these moments tend to overcome the otherwise traditional moments that 
populate a good deal of the second half. Even the ending, which could 
have otherwise been maudlin and generic, seemed like an emotionally 
devastating blow to the head without ever going too far, and without 
tending to stand out as bad moves in a film which is so filled with 
humor and wit (the comedy in this film, including stabs at a bagpipe 
player and the soccer team's uniforms, peeks its head up sporadically 
without feeling like it was tossed in there as a break). My only wish 
was that this film was more affecting, and took more advantage of the 
naturalism that it so wonderfully displays in the less didactic scenes, 
which are amongst the best of the year. For a film that steers so far 
away from sucumbing to becoming maudlin, it'd be nice if it just went - 
and excuse my clumsy allusion to a recent Disney movie here - the 
distance.
(And yes, that's Gary Lewis, of Gary Lewis and the Playboys, as Joe's 
chum, Shanks).
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Louis Proyect
Ken Loach's "My Name is Joe" is his greatest film. He has returned to
the gritty world of the earlier "Riff Raff", one hemmed in by poverty,
drug addiction and slum housing. What is different this time is that
he has created characters whose humanity soars above their miserable
settings. Out of the depths of a mean Glasgow neighborhood Loach has
fashioned a love story that is among the greatest I have seen in a
movie. What gives this love story such poignancy is that while wanting
to see it succeed--partly because of the charisma of Joe, the central
character--one can not forget for a moment that it will likely fail
because of the weight of the social conditions.
Joe Kavanagh (Peter Mullan) is a recovering alcoholic on the dole. He
supplements his meager income with an odd job picked up here and
there. His main passion is the soccer team he coaches, which is made
up of losers like him. Not only are some on the dole, they are also
petty thieves and recovering junkies. On the afternoon of a game, he
runs into Sarah (Louise Goodall), a public health social worker out to
visit Liam, one of his players. They argue whether Liam (Davie McKay)
should stay for the interview she has set up with him, his girl-friend
Sabine (Anne-Marie Kennedy) and their young child, or go off with the
team. She is a bit too insistent for Joe and he says that people like
her must think the sun shines out of their arses. Since he says it
with a disarming smile, and since she is a trained social worker used
to working-class resentment, she lets it slide.
Later that day, Joe spots her fumbling with some rolls of wallpaper
that have fallen out of the trunk of her car. He stops his van and
goes up to help her out. He proposes that he and a mate can come round
that weekend and do the job for her, at half the price of a regular
contractor. Even if the sun is shining out of her arse, she asks him
with a smile.
In a classic Loach comic interlude, as Joe and Shanks (Gary Lewis),
his best friend, drive out to Sarah's place to do the job, they fret
over how they've never wall-papered anything in their lives. In
particular they worry if a ceiling has to be wall-papered as part of
the job. Of course when they step foot in the apartment, the camera
reveals a scraped ceiling all set to be papered. Shanks and Joe try to
con her out of doing the ceiling. Who's living upstairs, Shanks asks.
A couple of students, she replies. Ah, that won't be good--students
have parties and the wallpaper won't stand up to the pounding.
In the course of the job, Joe takes a tea break and joins Sarah in the
kitchen. They discover that they share a love for classic
rock-and-roll and quiz each other about who wrote each song that they
sing to each other off-key. By the end of the afternoon, they are
flirting good-naturedly with each other. When Joe and Shanks return
that evening to Joe's place for a game of chess, they discuss the
possibility of Joe taking Sarah out for a date. How much is a dinner
nowadays, ask Joe. When Shanks tells him, Joe just winces. Shanks
suggests a cheap date: why doesn't he take her bowling.
They do go bowling and this is the start of a romance between the two
that is unlike any I have ever seen on the screen. While Joe is
ruggedly handsome, his hair is thinning and there is a suggestion of
the need for some dental work. He is turning thirty-eight and it is
clear that all the years of hard drinking have taken their toll. Sarah
is attractive in an unadorned sort of way, but Joe's passion for her
seems more related to her honesty and warmth than her physical beauty.
In their love-making scenes, there is more chemistry than in all the
Hollywood movies starring Brad Pitt, Gwyneth Paltrow, Val Kilmer and
Julia Roberts put together. The reason for this is that Joe and Sarah
are real people who you can identify with, and real life is much
sexier than the plastic fantasy-world Hollywood specializes in.
In addition to their love, Joe and Sarah share the frustrations of
having to deal with Liam and Sabine, who can barely keep their family
going. He had been released from jail the year before for dealing
drugs and now she has picked up where he has left off. He wants her to
stop dealing, but she needs the money to support her own habit.
Her supplier is a thug named MacGowan (David Hayman), who is always
accompanied by a posse of hulking men in leather coats. Joe used to be
in MacGowan's gang when he was on the booze, but has nothing to do
with him nowadays. Unfortunately, events have conspired to bring them
back together. Sabine owes MacGowan money from drugs she has shot up
instead of selling on the street. He gives Liam a choice. Either
Sabine will go to work as a whore to pay off the debt, or his legs
will be broken. When Joe finds out about this, he goes to MacGowan to
intercede on Liam's behalf. Fine, MacGowan tells him, do a couple of
jobs for me and the debt will be forgiven.
When Joe decides to take up MacGowan's offer, not only does he finds
himself sliding back into his old ways, he discovers that Sarah will
not accept him now that he has become a gangster himself. He tries to
defend himself: in his world, you sometimes have no choice. His plea
falls on deaf ears and Sarah leaves him.
The clash between the hardscrabble world of survival in a Glasgow slum
and the love of a man for a woman, who is not part of that world,
grows out thematically from what some critics would ascribe to Ken
Loach's quaintly old-fashioned notions of what movies should be about.
Rather than making films about monsters set loose on rocket ships, or
love affairs between people who never have to worry about where their
next meal is coming from, Loach pays full attention to the lives of
real people facing real economic hardship.
He is a throwback to the Depression era in many ways. His camera
studies the same landscape of artists like Ben Shahn or novelists like
Henry Roth. As critic David Shapiro points out in the introduction of
his book on social realist art, this school's "only landscapes are at
least partly cityscapes--a decaying mining village, or shacks along
the railroad tracks. A variety of genre painting, Social Realism takes
as its main subject certain significant or dramatic moments in the
lives of ordinary poor people. The moments in their lives selected
(and it is always a moment in someone's life--it is hard to think of
Social Realist painting that does not include a human being) are
almost always those that in some way focus on the indignity or pathos
of their situation--the hard work they perform. the inadequate rewards
they receive for it, or the miserable conditions they work under.
There is almost always, implied or explicit, a criticism made of the
capitalist system."
It is the rest of the movie making industry that is out of touch, when
you stop and think about it. If the purpose of art is to stir our
emotions and make us think about the human condition, Ken Loach is a
bigger success than anybody. There is nothing old-fashioned about a
Ken Loach movie, especially "My Name is Joe," because loneliness and
economic hardship are alas very much still with us.
(For Marxist discussion: www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html)

Author
Michael Dequina
"...and I am an alcoholic."  British director Ken Loach has made a name
for himself for gritty films of social realism, and his latest is no
exception.  Peter Mullan, who won the Best Actor award at this past
year's Cannes Film Festival, indeed gives an award-worthy performance as
the Joe of the title, a recovering alcoholic who falls for a nice and
stable health care worker named Sarah (Louise Goodall).  A romance
between such polar opposites has a number of strikes against it as it is,
but their relationship is further threatened, in a psychological sense,
by demons from Joe's past; and, in a physical sense, by thugs after his
ex-junkie friend Liam (David McKay) and his girlfriend Sabine (Anne-Marie
Kennedy).
The latter threat takes over the film's final act, which is a
wrongheaded turn by Loach and writer Paul Laverty; what had been a
thoughtful, complex, yet subtle character study suddenly devolves into
violent theatrics more befitting an action picture.  Loach and Laverty
are apparently at a loss as to how to recover from that misstep, and the
film abruptly "stops" rather than "ends."  But Loach's keen eye for
unpolished reality (down to the gravy-thick Scottish accents; thankfully
the film, while in English, is subtitled) and Mullan's passionate,
well-modulated turn keeps the film well worth watching.  (opens February
5)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com___________________________________________________________________
You don't need to buy Internet access to use free Internet e-mail.
Get completely free e-mail from Juno at http://www.juno.com/getjuno.html
or call Juno at (800) 654-JUNO [654-5866]

Author
Dustin Putman
In 1998, Peter Mullan won the Best Actor award at the Cannes Film Festival 
for "My Name is Joe," and rightfully so. A serious depiction of a recovering 
alcoholic (Mullan) who, aside from coaching soccer games and working as an 
amateur housepainter, has a life that's going nowhere...that is, until he 
meets the community health worker, Sarah (Louise Goodall). Sarah is a lovely, 
but cautious woman who isn't looking for a relationship but nonetheless is 
charmed by Joe. The plot thickens when one of his soccer novices' life is 
threatened for owing money to a group of drug traffikers, and Joe steps in to 
help by illegally transporting drugs to them, unbeknownst to Sarah. "My Name 
is Joe" is a captivating drama with a second stunning performance from Louise 
Goodall, whose Sarah is not simply the thankless "girlfriend" role, but an 
independent woman with her own thoughts and beliefs. Adding to the film's 
clarity are subtitles to help us Americans get over the extremely heavy 
Scottish accents. The film plays well as both a romance (even if this has 
been overdone) and a portrait of a lonely man coming to terms with the 
mistakes in his life.
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
        Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
