Title
Review for Parapluies de Cherbourg, Les (1964)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
     By the 1990s, the movie musical has become a dead art form.  The 
three recent revival attempts have been failures.  The first two, 
NEWSIES and SARAFINA, went to video after approximately one-week 
theatrical runs (even the Disney name couldn't save the former).  The 
third, I'LL DO ANYTHING, was transformed into a songless dramatic comedy 
following disastrous test screenings.  Since then, no one has attempted 
a non-animated, big screen musical (EVITA is coming, but I'll reserve 
judgment until I see Madonna in the title role).  So, for those of us 
who appreciate the genre, the best place to look is the past.
     THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG was initially released in 1964, and, 
amongst other things, helped catapult Catherine Deneuve to stardom.  In 
filming THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG, director Jacques Demy opted to 
sacrifice print longevity for vibrant color.  The stock he used yielded 
brilliant hues, but degraded quickly.  By the mid-seventies, the only 
remaining copies of the film were in terrible condition.  But Demy, 
anticipating this problem from the outset, had archived multiple 
monochromatic negatives that, when properly combined with each other, 
allowed re-creation of the original color.  With Demy's widow, Agnes 
Varda, supervising the re-mastering, THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG was 
recently brought back to life, and is now available in its previous 
splendor.
     As a musical, THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG is unusual in several 
ways.  First, unlike most big American productions of the time, there 
are no show-stopping production numbers.  There's no dancing, no chorus, 
and no duets.  Secondly, there are no spoken lines of dialogue -- 
everything, from the mundane to the important, is sung.  Finally, THE 
UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG isn't a lightweight bon-bon with a happily-ever-
after ending.  While the film has its share of effervescent moments, 
there's also an element of undeniable poignancy.
     The two main characters, 17-year old Genevieve (Deneuve) and 20-
year old Guy (Nino Castelnuovo), are star-crossed lovers.  Despite the 
stringent objections of Genevieve's mother (Anne Vernon), who thinks a 
gas station mechanic is beneath her daughter, the two continue their 
clandestine meetings, and eventually consummate their relationship.  
Soon after, Guy has to serve a stint away from France in the army.  
Following his departure, Genevieve learns that she is pregnant, and must 
decided whether to wait for Guy's uncertain return or marry the rich, 
cultured Roland Cassard (Marc Michel), who offers stability, undying 
love, and the promise of raising her child as his own.  Genevieve's 
choice irrevocably alters the lives of at least four people.
     Watching THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG, it's not hard to understand 
why Deneuve became such an icon.  Not only is she beautiful, but she 
possesses that elusive characteristic known simply as "star quality".  
She's the perfect lead for this film, which demands an actress 
possessing legitimate range.  Demy has used the musical to explore 
several universal themes, particularly the meaning and nature of 
different kinds of love.  Although most movies favor passion and true 
love, THE UMBRELLAS shows that another less demanding, more subtle kind 
of love has its own appeal.  
     Agnes Varda's reconstruction has done the film justice.  The 
colors, which include bright pinks, reds, purples, and oranges, look 
great, and the cleaned-up soundtrack is better than ever.  Although, as 
I said before, THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG lacks song-and-dance numbers, 
there is one tune that recurs throughout.  This song, beautifully 
composed by Michel Legrand, radiates longing and loss, and forms the 
movie's core.  It, like the film, is far more powerful than one would 
initially suppose.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So, do you like musicals?  Do you like opera?  How about a blend?
The classic 1964 film THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG (LES PARAPLUIES DE
CHERBOURG) by director Jacques Demy has been restored and rereleased to
the theaters.  Yes, it will undoubtedly make its way soon to video, but
for my money, I think you should see it in all of its radiant colors in
a real movie house and not a living room.
     There is a long history behind this restoration, but from what I
can gather, the key facts are that the film was originally shot on an
unstable type of film so that the colors faded quickly.  Even if you
saw the movie when it first came out, the colors may have already begun
to fade significantly by then.  They somehow found an original 3 color
separation negative and from that they reconstructed the color as it
was always intended to look.  For those of you who are specialists in
this area of film, please do not fill up my in-box with trivial reasons
why this is not quite the right explanation.  It is probably close
enough for the average movie goer.
     At any rate, this is a picture that looks spectacular.  The colors
are bright primary ones with blue and yellow tones dominating.  In fact
the cinematography by Jean Rabier has colors so saturated that if it
were on TV you might try to turn the color intensity knob down some to
"fix" the color.  Suffice it to say that it is the color that is
actually the best part of the show!
     THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG does have a plot, good acting, and
pleasant singing so it is more than just a splash of color.  The film
starts with the most impressive and lovely sequence in the movie.  The
camera is shooting straight down onto a cobblestone street.  Each stone
looks like it has been individually chosen for its lush and radiant
color.  The rain starts to pour although it appears the cloud must be a
mile high and about 4 foot wide based on the pattern of the rain.  Soon
people come strolling by except you can not see them given the angle of
the shot.  All you can see is their brightly colored umbrellas.  Their
walking pace intensifies until the film switches to a scene in a
garage.
     An auto mechanic named Guy (Nino Castelnuovo) is in love with
Genevieve Emery (Catherine Deneuve).  Her mother, Madame Emery (Anne
Vernon), does not approve of this match as she wants someone wealthier
for her daughter.  The umbrella theme reappears since Madame Emery runs
an umbrella shop.  From there the show goes on with Genevieve getting
pregnant, and Guy going into the army.
     None of the plot is important.  I love opera, especially Wagnerian
opera.  Now, if you read the plot of any opera or ponder the words, you
will probably never "waste" your time seeing it.  It is the same here.
THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG is first and foremost a musical and a
display of cinematic color richness and gorgeous sets (Bernard Evein).
If you do not like music and not care about the images of a film, don't
waste your time with this movie.
     Some words about the acting.  Catherine Deneuve and Nino
Castelnuovo are handsome actors with infectiously bright spirits.  The
acting is light, but lovely.  I had no idea how beautiful and innocent
looking Catherine Deneuve was.  The last film I saw her in was BELLE DE
JOUR (1967), and she was made to look harsh in that one.
     The singing is of the recitative variety where all of the words
are lightly sung rather than spoken.  If you are used to the more
traditional musical like THE SOUND OF THE MUSIC, you may be surprised
at how different this technique is.  There are no big musical numbers,
but rather people talk in a singing voice.  It reminded me of the
priest singing the Eucharist rather than saying it.  I liked the
singing in THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG, but I must confess, I like the
traditional musical with big musical numbers more.
     THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG runs just 1:27.  It is in French with
English subtitles.  It is not rated but I would guess it to be PG-13
material for some of the themes presented.  It is probably fine for
kids over 10.  Although I confess that I got a little tired of
recitative, I loved the images and the fresh acting, so I am
recommending this film to you and awarding it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG, THE (PARAPLUIES DE CHERBOURG, LES) (director:
Jacques Demy/writer; cinematographer: Jean Rabier; cast: Catherine
Deneuve (Genevieve Emery), Nino Castelnuovo (Guy Foucher), Anne Vernon
(Mrs. Emery), Marc Michel (Roland Cassard), Ellen Farner (Madeleine),
Mireille Perrey (Aunt Elise), 1964-Fr.)
The film critic, Jonathan Rosenbaum, has written a great review on the
merits of Jacques Demy and his film, The Umbrellas of Cherbourg, going
on to compare Demy to the great Japanese film director, Yasujiro Ozu.
The similarities between the works of these two is, indeed, striking,
since they both made films devoted to the normalcy of the family
structure, keen on preserving the daily traditional rituals of each of
their cultures; while curiously enough, both men were deviant of their
culture's sexual mores. Demy being married to the director Agnes Varda,
was nevertheless considered to be bi-sexual, dying of AIDS in 1990.
While Ozu, a bachelor, was thought to be gay. That both men achieved
excellent success in their films by portraying the human condition
through the eyes of normal lifestyles is, indeed, a curious oddity.
Umbrellas is made into an opera-like film by composer Michel Legrand.
The actors sing their lines rather than just say them. The film itself
is lushly colored in pastels, offering a very brilliant
color-coordinated production. It tells the story of two young lovers in
Cherbourg, in 1957; the 17-year-old salesgirl in her mother's umbrella
shop, Genevieve (Deneuve); and, the 20-year-old garage mechanic Guy
(Nino). They plan to get married, but the war in Algeria changes their
plans when to Guy's dismay he receives a draft notice.
Genevieve's mother, Mrs. Emery (Anne), every inch of her body is
bourgeois, objects to the marriage because she is too young to know what
love is. When her business assumes great debts, she goes with her
attractive daughter to try and sell her jewels but is rebuffed by the
jeweler; but, a rich young man in the store at the time comes to the
rescue by buying the jewels from her. He tells her he is a diamond
merchant and will not lose money. It turns out that this is Roland
Cassard (Marc), the rejected suitor from Demy's first feature film,
Lola. He is the one who couldn't stay at home when Lola spurned him;
and, thereby, went traveling to find himself, in the process of finding
himself he becomes extremely wealthy. The mother is impressed with
Roland's good manners and kindness, and feels he would be a protective
husband for her daughter.
The last date Guy and Genevieve have before he goes into the army, turns
out to be significant; it is the first time they sleep together. As a
result, she becomes pregnant, which she keeps secret. Their departure at
the railroad station is full of promises of marriage, being true to each
other, and their love being forever. But Guy turns out to be a poor
letter writer and Genevieve is disappointed in not hearing from him for
long stretches of a time. He probably doesn't write her because he
develops a limp when hit by a handgrenade and doesn't want to worry her.
But Genevieve's mother pushes her to Roland, taking advantage of her
confused state; and he proposes, willing to take the child as his own.
And so she marries the one she doesn't love... Roland is not aware of
this marriage until he comes home from the war in 1959.
He becomes bitter and has trouble adjusting to civilian life, after a
squabble with his boss at the garage, he decides to quit his mechanic's
job and live off his army pension from his wound. When his godmother,
Aunt Elise (Mireille) dies, she leaves him enough money so he can buy
his own gas station. On the rebound, he asks the sweet girl, Madeleine
(Ellen), who devotedly took care of his sick aunt, to marry him, even
though he doesn't love her.
It is now 1963: Guy and Madeleine have a son. It is snowing and they are
happily decorating their Christmas tree in his Esso station. As soon as
Madeleine and her son go out for a walk, a Mercedes pulls in with
Genevieve and her daughter. He is startled to see her.This is the first
time they have met since he went into the army. They talk inside his
office, exchanging banalities, but not saying what is on their mind. He
doesn't know that he has a daughter, and refuses Genevieve's offer to
meet her little girl. She never tells him about why she married, or of
his daughter. She drives back to Paris when Guy says, "I think you'd
better go."...  Guy's wife soon returns and he starts playing with his
kid.
Their class differences were well-mapped out in the final scene: he has
moved up the ladder to  middle-class prosperity. She has become
upper-class. Their lack of communication is now complete. He has never
met her husband, and does not realize that it was her husband's Mercedes
that he serviced on the day we first see him happily rushing off to date
Genevieve.
This story doesn't seem to be much on paper, but it is as poignant, as
surely as it is ordinary. It is one that happens most of the time,
rather than the reverse being true, of people marrying for love. And
that is Demy's point, that coincidences, luck, and good timing seem to
matter even more than love.
Everything about this film was done to perfection. Demy is one of the
most underrated directors of French cinema. American audiences rarely
get a chance to see his great body of films, and that is surely their
loss.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"

Author
Bryant Frazer
        One of these days, somebody may come along and make another great
musical. I'm not talking about PENNIES FROM HEAVEN, the British miniseries
(and Hollywood remake) that defined the impossibility of making another
great musical. I'm not talking about likely embarrassments like the
forthcoming EVITA, either. (If you ask me, the best thing that could
happen to Broadway musicals right now might be the announcement of Andrew
Lloyd Webber's imminent retirement.) I want an intelligent, tuneful
extravaganza along the lines of something Stanley Donen might have made --
SINGIN' IN THE RAIN or even FUNNY FACE. 
        You can hold your breath waiting for that to happen -- when you
get frustrated, but before you've quite turned blue, visit your local art
house for the revival of THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG. This singular little
production was first exported from France in 1964, and while it's not
quite as intoxicated on its own production values as the liveliest MGM
musicals, it probably benefits from its perspective on the self-aware
trailing edge of the vaunted Nouvelle Vague. Director Jacques Demy and
composer Michel Legrand tread confidently through dangerous territory,
concocting the film as a "pure"  musical -- almost an operetta, with no
spoken lines of dialogue at all, only song. In an oddly prescient casting
coup, the relative ingenue Catherine Deneuve was given the lead role of
Genevieve, the young daughter of an umbrella shop owner. She is in love
somewhat beneath her station, with Guy, an auto mechanic played sweetly by
Nino Castelnuevo. Naturally, Genevieve's mother registers gentle but firm
disapproval of this relationship, and it's with a mixture of pragmatism
and relief that she consoles her daughter on the news that her sweetheart
has been drafted into two years of military service. 
        The film is divided into three sections, and for my money, the
first is at once the most melodramatic and the most affecting. Titled
"Departure,"  this act chronicles the headlong affection of the two lovers
and the lush, nearly intolerable torture exacted on them when they learn
of their impending separation. It culminates in a wrenching, tear-soaked
railway platform farewell that's no less powerful for being a cinematic
hand-me-down. A tremendous asset is Legrand's love theme, which has
already intimated itself into the film's texture, but here is sweeping and
thunderous in full Dolby reverb. 
        I'm usually wary of remixed soundtracks, but it does seem to make
sense with material as musical as this (or the reissued TAXI DRIVER, which
rated similar treatment for Bernard Herrmann's fine score). As remixed by
Legrand himself, THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG sounds fine and looks even
better, although some of the more colorful shots bear artifacts of the
technicolor restoration process -- the original Eastmancolor release
negative has been unusable for most of the film's life. 
        Even so, it might have been nice if the color scheme weren't quite
so insistent. While the relentless mirroring of loud wallpaper with
equally shrill, matching costumes helps to establish a level of ironic
detachment that may be key to the film, it certainly breaks the spell of
the flatly gorgeous song and earnest performances. And after the nearly
perfect first segment, the second of three acts is a little tiresome,
plodding toward a foregone conclusion. 
        I hope I'm not spoiling anything if I tell you that the second act
is titled "Absence" and the third "Return." While Guy is away, Genevieve's
mother is given the opportunity to quietly encourage her to marry her new
suitor, a world-traveling jewelry dealer. Genevieve remains fond of Guy,
but finally relents and agrees to be married (viewers may note that, even
in this relatively fresh-faced persona, Deneuve was acquiring her
reputation as aloof and untouchable.) In the third act, Guy returns and
finds that -- well, he finds that everything has changed. 
        It's perhaps a characteristic of Demy's New Wave sensibility (he
had recently married Agnes Varda, after all) that a film this delirious in
its visuals and rapturous emoting can be, at the same time, so
distressingly sober. Demy's film doesn't give Guy the chance to woo and
win back his beloved, and it barely allows him his own sadness. The real
sadness, interestingly, is our own. These lives have not turned out the
way they had once seemed predestined, nor does the film turn out the way
we had hoped it might. The final scene, which at last reunites the two,
ever so briefly, is perhaps unavoidable, but this story is an inexorably
sorrowful one.  Denied our escapist pleasure, we can only watch,
misty-eyed, as the cinematic dream falls apart -- as the musical,
presumably, deconstructs itself.

Author
Brian Koller
Has there ever been a film more lovely than
"The Umbrellas of Cherbourg"?  Pretty faces,
voices, melodies and colors; it's a film where
tenement walls are painted bright green, and
ageless mothers are as lovely as their
daughters.  Only once is there a respite
from relentless beauty, when Guy shows up
for work in a dirty uniform.
The strength of "Cherbourg" comes from its
sets, its melodies, and its story.  But it
is known chiefly for its cinematic invention
of dialogue sung not spoken.  Its songs are
all derived from the dialogue between two
characters.  This might seem a gimmick if
the 'script' wasn't so revealing of character,
or if the Michel Legrand melodies weren't so
memorable.  But not even the most cynical
of observers can prevent from being swept
away by the film's brilliance.
The story is pure romance.  It begins in
France of 1957.  Guy (Nino Castelnuovo) is
a young auto mechanic who dreams of operating
his own gas station.  He lives with his sickly
Godmother (Mireille Perrey) who is nursed by
comely, gentle Madeleine (Ellen Farner).
Genevieve (Catherine Deneuve) is a young
woman who works in a financially failing
umbrella store owned by her mother (Anne Vernon).
Guy and Genevieve are lovers, but are parted
by his drafting into the war with Algeria.
(Some spoilers follow, which are needed in
order to better analyze the film.  You've probably
either already seen the film or never will,
but otherwise, at least now you've been warned.)
A final encounter with Guy leaves Genevieve
pregnant.  Her mother schemes to remedy the
situation by marrying her off to wealthy,
well-mannered diamond merchant Roland (Marc
Michel, reprising his character from director
Jacques Demy's earler film "Lola").  This comes
to pass.  Guy returns from the war, and after
some sulking makes the equally practical decision
of marrying loyal Madeleine.
A final, accidental encounter between Genevieve
and Guy is wistful but only confirms that both
have made the right decision.  That "Cherbourg"
begins with such an intense romance between the
leads, and ends with them as virtual strangers,
is as strong a commentary about the fleeting
nature of love as can be found in cinema.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
