Title
Review for Very Bad Things (1998)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Jamey Hughton
A more appropriate title for Very Bad Things would be Absolutely
Disgusting Things That Defy Belief. The movie is indescribably nasty; so
graphically violent that it may cause your stomach to do a somersault as
you valiantly attempt to hold your cookies. For those who can withstand
it, and (most importantly) aren't easily offended, Very Bad Things is a
refreshingly daring black comedy boasting an admirable courage as it
goes completely overboard (and then some...) into bad taste.
I would encourage those you want to truly experience this film to not
read any reviews, and just plunge straight into the grotesque, macabre
proceedings that resemble a mixture of Shallow Grave and Quentin
Tarantino. But for everyone else, here is the process in which the plot
takes off:
1) Kyle Fisher (Jon Favreau) and his fiancee Laura (Cameron Diaz) are
preparing for their wedding. But first, Kyle and four of his typical guy
friends - Adam (Daniel Stern), Michael (Jeremy Piven), Boyd (Christian
Slater) and Charles (Leland Orser) - are off to Vegas for a bachelor
party. Once in their hotel, the five immediately suck back an ample
amounts of alcohol and drugs.
2) A stripper arrives. After entertaining the group for a few minutes,
she heads into the bathroom with Michael for a particularly frisky round
of wall-slamming sex. Unfortunately, Michael forces her against the wall
in a hazardous place, impaling the stripper on a towel hook. After
informing the other four about the accident, Adam suggests they call the
police. Boyd steps forward  and recaps the situation, saying they would
all be risking jail time if they told the authorities. He suggests Plan
B: take the stripper out in the middle of the desert, and bury her where
no one will ever know. Or, as Boyd puts it: `We have a 105 pound problem
that we have to get from point A to point B.'
3) The group decides to bury the body in the desert, just as hotel
security knocks on the door. After entering, the guard notices the
stripper in the reflection of a mirror. He runs to check the girl's
pulse, and the others hover around the door in frightened shock. But
Boyd grabs a corkscrew from the counter and stabs the guard twice in the
chest, blocking the doorway as he bleeds to death in the bathroom. Now,
as Boyd informs them, they have two bodies to dispose of.
4) But first, a trip to the grocery store, where certain items (shovels,
plastic bags, etc.) are picked up. The group returns to the hotel, where
they clean up the blood spattered bathroom. Boyd, using an electric
turkey carver, hacks up the bodies so they can be transported by
suitcase and buried in the desert. The spare parts are sealed in plastic
wrap, and the five take off to finish the deed.
If you think this is almost unbearable after reading about it, I
wouldn't suggest you watch the movie. Actually, there is much more to
the story after the friends return home, and attempt to carry on their
lives in petrified horror. Stern, in particular, does a marvelously
convincing job of portraying a middle-aged good Samaritan who
experiences a gradual mental breakdown. The scene involving his
frustrated desperation to find `Whizzers' in a convenience store (for
his screaming kids) is extremely funny, as Adam's paranoia gets away
from him.
Some people may not find this funny at all. But I found that director
Peter Berg (an actor, best known from Chicago Hope) nicely draws the
line to prevent this from toppling over into a macabre horror movie. The
occasional scene is perfectly realized, and you laugh (sometimes in
disbelief) at the lengths Berg has taken this outlandish situation.
There are standout performances from Stern, Slater (on a highly
believable psychopath auto-pilot) and Ellen's Jeremy Piven. For the main
protagonist, Favreau is almost too bland and lifeless for the movie
surrounding him.
As I expected, the formula doesn't last for the running time.
Character's actions get out of hand, and Berg runs out of clever detours
to take. But when Very Bad Things is good, it's excellent - capturing
some of the finest black comedy ever caught on screen. Or maybe `black'
is too light a word...

Author
Scott Renshaw
VERY BAD THINGS
(Polygram)
Starring:  Christian Slater, Cameron Diaz, Jon Favreau, Daniel Stern,
Jeremy Piven, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Leland Orser.
Screenplay:  Peter Berg.
Producers:  Michael Schiffer, Diane Nabatoff and Cindy Cowan.
Director:  Peter Berg.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, nudity, sexual situations, drug use,
adult themes)
Running Time:  101 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The film's title offers too easy and convenient a bon mot.  Expect
cadres of critics to be trotting out innumerable variations on "VERY BAD
THINGS _is_ one of them," though it's both a cheap analysis and an
inaccurate one.  VERY BAD THINGS isn't a very bad movie.  It's a very good
idea approached from entirely the wrong perspective.
     The idea involves that most cynically macho of American matrimonial
institutions, the bachelor party.  The groom-to-be is mild-mannered Los
Angeles cubicle-dweller Kyle Fisher (Jon Favreau); his fiancee is Laura
Garrety (Cameron Diaz), a woman only slightly obsessed with her nuptial
details.  The boys' night out is to be an overnight in Las Vegas
including Kyle's four best buddies:  mile-a-minute real estate hustler
Robert Boyd (Christian Slater); family man Adam Berkow (Daniel Stern);
Adam's edgy brother Michael (Jeremy Piven); and reticent mechanic Charles
Moore (Leland Orser).  Though the party begins with the expected drinking,
drugs and bare breasts, it ends with the unexpected problem of a dead
prostitute on the floor of their hotel room bathroom.  That sets off a
grotesque chain of events, as the friends' attempts to cover up one death
lead to one death after another.
     Beneath the macabre, over-the-top situations surrounding the deaths
in VERY BAD THINGS is a savage satire of stereotypical gender responses to
impending marriage.  Kyle watches in a passive daze as Laura orchestrates
the ceremony from overture to finale; Laura plows over Kyle's every
hesitation with a fiercely muttered "Do you love me?", focusing so 
completely on _getting_ married she seems oblivious to the idea of _being_
married.  The horrific events in Las Vegas become a steroid-injected
version of more mundane bachelor party naughtiness, with the bachelor 
turning the "very bad thing" into both a source of guilt and a potential
excuse for getting out of the marriage he fears.  To Laura, it's all just
one more logistical glitch to be overcome, with Diaz turning in a
frighteningly funny vision of a woman whose wedding _will not_ be spoiled
by anything.
     Diaz nails the proper tone so completely (particularly in the film's
final act) that you may suddenly realize what's been so wrong with the
rest of the film.  While Diaz plays Laura entirely for absurd laughs, the
male cast members range from one extreme to another.  Slater plays Boyd as
too sinister to be funny, Stern and Piven play the brothers Berkow as too
genuinely  tormented to be funny, and Favreau plays Kyle as too dull to be
funny.  For much of VERY BAD THINGS, the script by Peter Berg (better
known from his role on "Chicago Hope") is simply a plot in motion, pulling
the characters along with it.  At times there's not even exaggerated
humanity in the reactions of the characters, the kind that would have
given a more humorous spin to more scenes.  For a film that could have and
should have been a dark comedy, VERY BAD THINGS is too much like the
menacing morality play of SHALLOW GRAVE.
     That kind of tone is going to alienate a lot of viewers, particularly
as the situations grow increasingly extreme and gruesome.  Though VERY BAD
THINGS ends with a hilariously horrifying subversion of suburban domestic
bliss, it doesn't given you enough reason to stick around for it.  Comedy
can still work when it's caustic, but at some point a film-maker needs to
understand that he has to keep an audience laughing at material this dark
to keep them from walking away.  VERY BAD THINGS is a great opportunity
wasted, and that's the _real_ very bad thing.

Author
greg king
VERY BAD THINGS (M).  
(Polygram/Twentieth Century Fox)
Director: Peter Berg
Stars: Christian Slater, Cameron Diaz, Jon Favreau, Daniel Stern, Jeanne 
Tripplehorn, Jeremy Piven, 
Leland Orser, Joey Zimmerman, Tyle Malinger, Russell B McKenzie, Lawrence 
Pressman
Running time: 98 minutes. 
While Very Bad Things shares a similar moral to A Simple Plan,
it is ultimately a vastly different film.  This grim black comedy
looks at how normally ordinary people can commit atrocious acts and
then be torn apart by their guilty conscience.  However, debut
writer/director Peter Berg (from Chicago Hope, etc) relentlessly
pushes the pitch black material down a vastly different path.  This
uncompromising and brutal film about murder and mayhem is pervaded
with an air of cynicism, misogyny, and delicious black humour, the
like of which has rarely been seen in mainstream cinema.  A week
before his wedding, Kyle Fisher (Jon Favreau, from Swingers) heads off
to Las Vegas with four buddies for a wild bachelor party.  It's an
orgy of drink and cocaine and male bonding, taken to excess.  The
weekend takes a turn for the worse following the arrival of the
stripper.  During some energetic sex in the bathroom with the callow
Michael (Jeremy Piven), she ends up impaled on a hook.  While everyone
else panics, sleazy real estate agent Robert Boyd (Christian Slater)
takes charge, suggesting that they bury the body in the desert.  The
simple plan does not go smoothly and before long the body count is
steadily rising.
When the five men return to Los Angeles, their uneasy sense of
guilt begins to consume them, and eventually explodes into hysteria
and anarchy, disrupting the smooth wedding plans.  The former friends
turn on each other with a frightening and unexpected ferocity.
Sibling rivalries and old jealousies boil over into murder, and they
all pay a hefty price for their sins.
Very Bad Things takes a number of unexpected and macabre turns
before the final sting in the tail.  Berg has a jaundiced view of
human nature, and he unerringly strips away the thin veneer of middle
class urban values and ethics.  He maintains a delicate balance
between outright farce and psychological drama.  The humour is often
quite uncomfortable and vicious, and will not be to everyone's taste.
The opening scenes are handled somewhat awkwardly.  However,
Berg quickly hits his stride, and directs this inventive, but
uncharacteristic and uncomfortably black comedy with assurance.  The
ensemble cast throw themselves into their unsympathetic characters
with relish, their frenetic performances capturing the spirit of the
material.
An often manic and mannered performer, Slater has rarely been
so perfectly cast.  His intense performance captures the demonic,
unscrupulous and completely amoral Boyd, who doesn't hesitate to act
when he recognises his smoothly laid plans beginning to unwind.
Cameron Diaz (There's Something About Mary, etc) is also good as
Laura, Kyle's tightly wound fiancée, who becomes increasingly
neurotic as the wedding approaches.  Laura is so desperate to ensure
that her wedding proceeds without a hitch that she eventually becomes
as morally bankrupt as everyone else around her.  Her performance
reveals an often unexplored nasty side to her usually sweet screen
demeanour.  Daniel Stern (Home Alone, etc) brings plenty of shrill
nervous energy to his role as the family man who succumbs to his
feelings of guilt and paranoia, and finally snaps under the mounting
pressure.
Very Bad Things is decidedly nasty stuff, but those attuned to
its perverse wavelength will also find much to enjoy.

Author
Joy Wyse
The main reason that Christian Slater has the Star billing is that he
also has credit as one of the Executive Producers.  This is definitely an
ensemble film.  If anyone is the star, it isn't Slater.
Cameron Diaz is the bride and Jon Favreau is the groom.  Although the
opening scenes are immediately before the ceremony, the action quickly
moves back a couple of days, focusing on the bachelor party in Las Vegas. 
The five male buddies are in their hotel room when a stripper arrives. 
Her rousing dance is too much for Jeremy Piven who accompanies her to the
big marble bathroom.  In a moment of passion, he accidentally kills her. 
It's a very startling scene.  From that moment on, their lives change
forever.  Instead of calling the front desk and the police to explain the
accident, they agree to Slater's suggestions for disposing of the body.
Supposedly it is humorous to see bodies sawed into pieces and packed into
suitcases…or to see brother attack brother, with a car…or blood
everywhere.  The term `black humor' seems to mean that if bad taste is
funny, then it will be even funnier if it's in dreadful taste.  
There are some very funny scenes mingled with the scenes that make you
squeamish.  Cameron Diaz is delightful as the Bride, playing with tiny
little tables and chairs to decide the reception seating arrangement.  You
almost feel sorry for her when Daniel Stern and Jeanne Tripplehorn's
children overturn the entire project.  Speaking of Tripplehorn, she plays
her part with flair, and a lot of gumption.  You're really pulling for her.
I really can't recommend this film for the older generation, although
most of the under-forty audience will probably love it.  I don't want to
see it again.  I give it a C-.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: Five friends at a stag party are involved in the
accidental killing of a prostitute.  The cover-up attempt becomes a
monster that eats up the friends, two wives and several innocent
bystanders.  This was a real audience pleaser at Toronto, but it did
not do much for me.  Rating: 4 (0 to 10), low 0 (-4 to +4)
   - Directed by Peter Berg who acted in THE LAST SEDUCTION and
     COPLAND.
   - Five buddies go on a stag outing to Las Vegas while Cameron Diaz
     works through the logistics of her upcoming wedding to one of
     them.  One of the buddies accidentally kills a prostitute.
   - Several people with no moral compass.  They started out with a
     simple, innocent little cocaine party (!) and by accident look
     what happened.  They have one moral person among them (Daniel
     Stern), and one totally amoral person (Christian Slater).  It is
     more selfish to let the amoral lead, so they do.
   - This film is strange, but not really funny or biting.  Black
     comedy should actually be funny as well as strange.  There should
     be some element of satire.  The satire is missing here.  I did not
     find myself laughing here either.  What we have is a strange crime
     tale.
   - One just does not care what happens to these people.
   - The same idea of people just getting themselves in deeper and
     deeper has been done frequently.  If this film is popular it is
     just bringing a familiar plot to a new generation.
   - It begins like DINER (particularly with Daniel Stern) and ends up
     like an extended horror/crime comic book.
   - There are several logical holes in script.  If a security man goes
     to investigate a complaint and disappears, wouldn't the guests he
     was investigating be the first suspects?  Someone framed for a
     crime in the way shown would be judged innocent after minimal
     forensic detective work.  (I am desperately trying to avoid making
     this a spoiler.)
   - Popular and situation ethics get a real slamming.
   - Some acting of grief is hammy and overdone.  More yelling than
     humor.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Polygram Filmed Entertainment
 Director:  Peter Berg
 Writer:  Peter Berg
 Cast: Christian Slater, Cameron Diaz, Daniel Stern, Jeanne
Tripplehorn, Jon Favreau, Jeremy Piven, Leland Obser
   When Bobby Burns advised that the best laid schemes of
mice and men gang aft a-gley, he did not mean his caution to
be taken as literally as director Peter Berg, writer and director
of "Very Bad Things."  This madcap adventure that veers
unsteadily from farce to horror and back again may be
considered pointless by some, but it has all the markings of a
comedy of manners.  In fact if it were written in England
during the reign of Charles II, it would fit in handily with a
company of restoration comedies and would probably have a
more lyrical title such as "A Hooker Hook'd."  Its present
awkward title notwithstanding, "Very Bad Things" is a most
entertaining piece, one with an edge that so many Hollywood
creations still lack in their efforts to please everybody with 
celluloid variants of elevator music.  Its ending, a payoff
which Mr. Berg thoroughly earns from careful foreshadowing,
is a stunner, the very antithesis of the feel-good windup that
the studios contrive all too often in order to please an
uncritical audience.
   Like other comedies of manners whose aim is to send up
the hypocritical gentility of the moneyed classes, "Very Bad
Things" lampoons the pretensions of a group of young people
whose ages run from twenty-seven to about thirty-five, some
of whom are ensconced in high-income jobs in brokerage
houses and the real estate game while another, a comely
lass, is of uncertain profession but obviously from a
prospering family.  With a wedding about to take place
between Kyle (Jon Favreau) and Laura (Cameron Diaz), the
two sides with their friends and associates make busy with
plans that make sense only because of rituals which are
imbedded in the culture of their social classes.  That their
plans go horribly amiss as do so many such foolish designs
is the very essence of writer Berg's premise.  For her part,
Laura has absorbed the middle-class notion that a wedding
celebrates the most important day in a woman's life. She is
obsessed with getting every last detail correct, from the way
the guests' chairs are padded to the cleanliness of the
ushers' fingernails.  For his measure, Kyle is agreeable to the
bachelor party which his friends have planned for him, though
he appears not especially enthusiastic at first.  He'll go along
for the ride if only because he's good-natured enough to
comply with the rules of his society.
   "Very Bad Things" is notable for its sheer variety of
images, which roam from an erotic dance by an gorgeous
Asian stripper whom Salome would envy to the gruesome
vision of a hotel bathroom whose walls are so bloodied that--
as one young man notes--the place looks as though the
Manson family had lived there for a month.  The story, which
moves forward relentlessly, takes flight as Kyle heads by car
from an L.A. suburb to Las Vegas with his friends Robert
(Christian Slater), Charles (Leland Orser), Michael (Jeremy
Piven) and Michael's contentious and tightly-wound brother
Adam (Daniel Stern).  They gamble, drink, snort coke, and
best of all enjoy the lap dancing of a stripper who has been
hired for $900.  When a turned-on Michael agrees to pay the
exotic dancer an extra $500 for a go in the hotel bathroom,
he accidentally impales her on a hook in a moment of
passion, killing her instantly.  After Robert literally screws an
investigating house security guard with a bottle opener, they
agree to cover up the two crimes by packing the
dismembered corpses in their luggage and burying them in
the Nevada desert.  
   When it comes to murder, two killers is a crowd.  No way is
this group of five friends to go about their daily routine
as though nothing more than a last stab of a groom's
freedom had occurred.  The weak link is Adam, the guy
whose conscience makes cowards of them all.  Engaging in a
round of nervous mini-breakdowns over his guilt as an
accessory, he becomes the catalyst for a series of
cataclysms that brings the quintet's latent hostilities to the
surface and results in an additional pileup of bodies.
   In their individual ways, Slater and Diaz are the
showstoppers here, with the current star of the Broadway
drama "Side Man" acting as the leader of the his quincunx of
quidnuncs.  Interceding at several points to calm
down the two hyper brothers played by Daniel Stern and
Jeremy Piven--who have been probably been sibling rivals
from Day One--Slater emerges from this blood-splattered orgy as
an off-the-wall fury determined to cash in on the very murders
he strives to cover up.  An episode of martial arts combat
with one newly-established widow (played by Jeanne
Tripplehorn) proves a gem of film editing that would please
Jackie Chan, while the blood-soaked comeuppance on a
wedding-hall stairwell recalls and exceeds the terror of a
comparable scene Bryan Singer's "Apt Pupil."   While
Cameron Diaz's stunning suburban California countenance 
never deceives us (she is a forceful bully determined to walk
down the aisle by any means necessary), we can still register
shock by the revenge she unleashes on one man who stands
in her way. 
   Despite a final scene that combines pathos with flat-out
ghoulish hilarity, it's not likely that "Very Bad Things" will
deter women from demanding their budget-busting
aspirations to be queen for just one day in their lives.  Nor
will the macho sex surrender their God-given right to enjoy
themselves for one last time before the fateful march down
the matrimonial corridor.  But thanks to Peter Berg's
unswerving objective to draw ever-moving battle lines in the
Nevada sand and California silt, "Very Bad Things" flourishes
as a genre-bender whose untenable scenes are oddly
believable.

Author
Jonathan Hauer
Y'ever see a car wreck?  How about one in slow-motion? How about in super
slo-mo?  How about one hundred one minutes of slo-mo car wreck up-close and
personal in all its teeth gnashing, nail scraping, shriek-inducing glory?
Well, if this is what's lacking in your life, please see "Very Bad Things."
The movie details Kyle Fisher's (Jon Favreau) ill-fated bachelor party.  You
see, his wife-to-be is demanding, the planning is a chore, and his only
relief is a night in Vegas with his mean-spirited, low-life, self-righteous
childhood pals.  After quickly tiring of the obligatory gambling and
pro-wrestling pay-per-view, the boys move on to cocaine and a woman of the
night, which one of the man accidentally kills.  This premise is not a bad
one, in my book.  This is not to say that I am condoning either hooker
slaughter or drug abuse, but the fact is that these are dark and titillating
subjects (see car wreck, above) which can propel a movie in the right
direction for an adult audience.
But, alas, these are cheap, contrived situations and Peter Berg leads us
through one hundred one of the most tedious and depressing moments of our
lives, second only to our own true tragedies.  On the positive side, the
acting is pretty good.  I was convinced (with the exception of the
developments involving Christian Slater's character) that these fellas were
being run through hell and back.  I truly felt Kyle was trapped, I felt Adam
(Daniel Stern) was grossand pathetic and I felt like Michael (Jeremy Piven)
was an irresponsible, hot-headed jerk.  However, gross manipulation does not
a movie make.  In this respect, I was reminded of last year's "Return to
Paradise,"  another long, slow car wreck of a movie, which showed us the
most pathetic and heart-rending of stories, but that's all it showed.
The tone of "Very Bad Things" felt awfully inappropriate at times.  At the
beginning I was impressed that the film decided to defy its previews and
take the much more serious tone of a darker film rather than a dark comedy.
But, then, as if to confuse, each act was concluded with an entirely
contradictory happy, jazzy tune...way to kill the mood, guys.  It's like
they were trying to say, "hey, we were just kidding about all that horrible
stuff," but without the actual humor to back it up.  Add to that a very bad
sense of timing -- how many days took place between the bachelor's party and
the wedding? -- and you've got yourself a stinker of a movie.
I found myself wondering why I had enjoyed other dark movies (Fargo, A
Simple Plan) to a great degree, but not this one.  What was the difference?
The difference for "Very Bad Things" was an uneven tone, a lack of any human
sympathy for anyone in the film, and a story that was entirely too
predictable.  It could've been better, the audience can see the potential,
Peter Berg's direction was very interesting at times, but that just made it
all the more frustrating.

Author
Allan Jenoff
Very Bad Things
Directed by:  Peter Berg
Starring: Christian Slater, Cameron Diaz, Daniel Stern, Jeanne
Tripplehorn, Jon Favreau, Jeremy Piven, Leland Orser
Running time:  111 minutes
My rating (5 star scale): No stars
You're a young actor who wants to be a young director.  You know a
bunch of other young actors who want to be young stars.  You
haven't any real ideas, but you figure that if you put all those 
young actors in one movie, it will be just as good as having a real 
star.  And if you move the camera around a lot, it will look as if you
were a real director.  And if people shout all the time, it will look
as if you have a real script.  And if your movie is dark and everyone
in it hateful, it will look as if you are really deep.
I don't know how many drugs or how much liquor you have to take to 
believe all that, but somebody involved in this movie does.  Very Bad
Things is about a stag party gone bad.  A bunch of guys, middle class 
white collar type guys, head to Vegas for a stag.  They gamble, snort
coke, get drunk, and hire a stripper to entertain in their hotel room.  
Unfortunately, she ends up dead.
For most of us, this would be a good time to sober up, call the cops,
and pray to God they will hush it all up.  Given that Vegas is a tourist
town and dead hookers aren't a big tourist draw, the odds are in your 
favour. And the cops are likely to believe it's an accident. After all,
they have the word of a bunch of nice middle class guys and only a dead
hooker on the other side.  But these guys don't take that chance.  Even
though they are in Vegas, gambling capital of the world, they aren't
ready to roll the dice.  Instead, they start an elaborate coverup.  
And it just gets more elaborate, more complicated as things go on.
People start dying left and right, but apparently no one notices.  No
one investigates, and the most important event in the movie, the wedding
goes on as planned.
For a movie like this to work, you have to like somebody in it.  You don't
like anybody in this film.  These aren't people like you and me, these
are people like characters in a bad screenplay.  One dimensional cretins
with just enough wit to further the plot.  Not that there is much of a
plot.  Just one death after another.
Berg leaves no cliche unturned in his fruitless attempt to become a real
director.  The movie could have been a learning experience for him. but
I doubt it.  At the screening I attended he spoke and told us all how 
wonderful the script was and how great the film.  I got the feeling he 
felt that if the AFI had waited another year, he would have beaten out 
Citizen Kane for the number one spot on the top 100 list.

Author
Homer Yen
I guess that if a very wild bachelor party had gone really bad, there
would be broken furniture, traces of smack and cocaine on the floor,
and a dead prostitute in the bathroom.  I guess that if a movie had
also gone really bad, there might be the same elements present. 
Coincidence?
Poor Kyle (a meek looking Jon Favreau)...he is about to marry his
radiant fiancee, Laura (Cameron Diaz).  But before he exchanges his
vows, he embarks to Las Vegas with his friends for one last blowout. 
But this bachelor party has gone about as bad as it could possibly
get.   The prostitute has met a horrible, though accidental death, and
drugs are everywhere.  The five friends agree that there is enough bad
evidence here that will send them to jail for a very long time.  A
surprisingly calm Robert Boyd (Christian Slater), who looks like he
was groomed to make nefarious decisions, ponders their dilemma for a
few minutes before deciding that the best thing to do is to bury the
body in the desert where she'll never be found.  Although they stomach
the gruesome deed of getting rid of the body (which also disturbingly
involves dismantling the body using power saws in order to stuff it
into suitcases), when they return from their trip, guilt and paranoia
begins to set in which slowly consumes some of the five friends.  One
is Adam (Daniel Stern)  He grows increasingly agitated.  Whenever
people look at his van or whenever a cop glances his way, his blood
pressure increases.  Or that just may be because of his dysfunctional
family.  Another is Michael, who was actually responsible for her
death.  He tries to bury his feelings, but the burden of guilt begins
to affect his judgment as well.  Boyd is the ‘doer' of the group. 
Seemingly suffering from a long psychosis, when he feels as if his
secret is about to be exposed, he is apt to take extreme measures to
cover up his tracks.  Kyle just hopes that his wedding will live up to
Laura's demanding expectations.  Then, there's Moore (Leland Orser)
who speaks 5 lines and walks around with a puzzled look on his face.
The problem with this reprehensible movie is that it wants to be a
cruel comedy, but it presents things in a manner that just aren't
funny.  Drugs, mutilation, and killing your own friends isn't
something to be laughed at.  As a straight psychological drama, I
could see how it might have worked, as each one tried to maneuver and
overcome the weight of their own guilt in their own sometimes-sick
ways.  But this movie insults us by assuming that we could simply
discard our values for 2 hours.   If you do like this movie, I don't
think that I want to know you.  I did find Slater a convincing  leader
who sways his friends to choose not the right thing but the ‘smart
play.'  And Diaz adds some brightness to this film as a
wedding-needing fiancee.  But her talents are essentially wasted here.
 It's obvious that the film maker is trying to strike a certain tone. 
But the way that he chooses to do it is tasteless.  Do not make a very
bad decision by seeing this film.


Author
Nick Amado
Starring: Jon Favreau, Christian Slater, Cameron Diaz, Daniel Stern, Leland Orser, Jeremy Piven
There aren't many films which have such an appropriate title. Very Bad
Things is very telling of what you are going to see if you view this
picture. It starts off pretty bad, then gets VERY bad. Actually, it
gets worse. This is truly an evil picture. I kind of liked it.
Jon Favreau and Cameron Diaz are about to get married. He seems
aimless in life, she is set on only one thing, getting married, and it
doesn't really matter to whom. All she wants is to walk down the
aisle. Try and stop her. Favreau and his buddies head off to Las Vegas
for a rowdy and raunchy batchelor party which includes, among other
things, cocaine, pot, and a strippin' hooker. Once the Jeremy Piven
character accidentally jams her head into a bathroom wall hook while
having wild sex, the madness begins. The film's most despicable
character (Slater) pushes the group to cut her up into itty bitty
pieces and bury her in the desert. "No one knows she's here, I called
her personally," he reasons. Just as the group decides to forego
leagal action, a hotel security guard enters the room and finds them
out. Slater's character takes it upon himself to do away with him
(using nothing but a handy corkscrew). Now they are in deep
doo-doo. So they have two bodies to cut up an bury. Then they have to
"reassemble" the sawed up parts for religious purposes. It is after
this that the film gets nasty.
Yep, Very Bad Things is full of very bad things. In actuality, most of
the gore comes with what I've already told you. But everything that
takes place after that is just evil.
Though there are a few funny moments, Very Bad Things, despite what
you may have read, is NOT very funny. It is the definition of black
comedy. In fact, it may redefine the genre. The film is truly sick,
and snowballs into whatever is past sick. Much of the audience
reaction is nervous laughter. You can't believe what you are seeing,
so you laugh, much like seeing a close up of male genitals caught in a
zipper in There's Something About Mary, or male goo hanging off the
side of someone's face in the same film. It isn't funny in and of
itself, but you certainly aren't expecting it, so you laugh.
Favreau gives a solid performance, despite having a one dimensional
character. Slater is perfectly cast as the worst among a bunch of bad
dudes. Most surprising is Jeremey Piven, who does a great job of going
bonkers as the film progresses. Diaz is wasted in this very small
role. She plays a real bitch with very little character, and one
wonders if she just took the part because she liked the script aside
from her role.
The squeamish should avoid the bathroom dismembering scene. Those that
want a redeeming film, should go see something else. And those who
want to see just how whacked one mind can get (Peter Berg's mind, he
wrote and directed) should definitley see it.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Peter Berg.
Cast: Jon Favreau, Cameron Diaz, Christian Slater, Jeremy Piven, Leland 
Orser, Daniel Stern, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Joey Zimmerman, Tyler Malinger, 
Carla Scott, Russell B. McKenzie.
1998 - 101 minutes.
Rated R (for extreme violence, gore, profanity, sex, and nudity).
Reviewed November 27, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
"Very Bad Things," is the most delightfully morbid film of the year, a 
movie that goes so far over the deep end with its outrageousness and 
violence that I couldn't help but be won over by the material.
The film starts off with five friends leaving their homes in Los Angeles 
for a bachelor party in Las Vegas. The groom-to-be is Kyle Fisher (Jon 
Favreau), who is about to be married to the controlling, 
wedding-obsessed Laura (Cameron Diaz). The other friends are real estate 
agent Robert Boyd (Christian Slater), quiet Charles (Leland Orser), and 
brothers, Michael (Jeremy Piven) and family man Adam (Daniel Stern). 
After a wild night of gambling, boozing, and drugs, a stripper (Carla 
Scott) who was paid for by Robert comes into their hotel room, but after 
a freak accident, to everyone's terror, she is killed. As Robert puts 
it: "There are two options: go to the police and go to prison, or bury 
her out in the desert where no one will ever find her." After a security 
guard enters into the hotel room unexpectantly and sees the body, Robert 
is forced to kill him as well. "Okay, there is only one option now. You 
can forget about calling the police," he says. By the time the five 
friends return home and as the wedding draws nearer, most of them are 
overcome with guilt, which sets off an even more elaborate series of 
event, that includes much, much more murder, double-crosses, and the 
inevitable wedding from hell.
"Very Bad Things," which is actor Peter Berg's feature film directing 
debut, is the shockingly perverse and wicked comedy that, "There's 
Something About Mary," wanted to be. It pulls out all the stops to 
create something fresh, original, and hilarious, even if that requires 
surprisingly graphic violence, gore, and a slew of truly hateful 
characters that all get what they deserve by the end. 
The screenplay, also written by Berg, is, to put it mildly, very funny 
and courageous. During the second act of the film, some of the fun was 
beginning to slightly dwindle due to so much death, which was beginning 
to undermine the humor, but it eventually recouped itself with a climax 
that has to be seen to be believed. The dialogue is edgy and inventive, 
and this film proves that a movie doesn't necessarily require likable 
character to be extremely enjoyable. There's more fun, I think, in 
showing ignorable people getting their just desserts.
Cameron Diaz gives her best performance to date here, and has a lot of 
fun in playing the hateful Laura, who eventually turns out to be more 
crazy than any of the five male friends. Diaz puts so much overblown 
energy to her character that I really do think she deserves a supporting 
actress Oscar nomination come next January. By the time she is beating 
someone to death with a coat hanger, and reciting lines like, "stuff him 
in the crapper and get your ass upstairs," I couldn't help but crack up 
at how "balls-to-the-wall" this film had become. Jeanne Tripplehorn 
creates another character original, as Daniel Stern's wife, who late in 
the picture, we discover, is a tough kick-boxer that should not be 
messed around with. 
It is at this level that, "Very Bad Things," was so entertaining and 
surprising. Just when you thought you could predict what was going to 
happen, there would be a little twist involving the characters that 
would be absolutely wacky. The last sequence was perfect and managed to 
go even further over-the-top. Although I enjoyed the film immensely, let 
me make this clear: "Very Bad Things," is not a movie for everyone. It 
is more tasteless than anything I have ever seen, it is more violent and 
bloody than a R-rated film usually is, and it is offensive. Luckily, 
these are elements that I would prefer in a comedy, since it clearly 
shows the filmmakers were set on making a no-holds-barred, politically 
incorrect comedy. The fact that this film slipped through the cracks of 
the usually mainstream and "safe" wide-releases coming out lately, still 
gives me hope for the Hollywood film industry.

Author
Victory Marasigan
I have to hand it to director Peter Berg. With his first feature Very Bad
Things, he's delivered a story so alternatingly hilarious and repulsive
that by the time it's over, you don't know whether you actually liked the
movie or not. Indeed, I don't think any film in recent memory has caused
such large groups of moviegoers to get up and walk out of the theater at
regular intervals. It's not that the film is poorly made; it's that Very
Bad Things grabs a hold of you and squeezes until you literally can't take
it any more.
At its outset, Berg fools us into thinking we'll be watching a City
Slickers-type weekend adventure, as five young-and-up-and-coming
30-somethings (wild guys Jeremy Piven, Daniel Stern, Christian Slater,
Leland Orser, and John Favreau) pack into a minivan and head off to Vegas.
Their mission: to celebrate that time-honored night of controlled chaos -
the bachelor party. Groom Favreau is excited but understandably tense, as
his bride-to-be (Cameron Diaz) has voiced quite clearly her disapproval of
the ritual.
Once in their Vegas hotel suite, the boys really let loose, absorbing
drugs and booze like sponges. Their raw ebullience turns to abject horror
when, in a coital frenzy, one of the guys accidentally kills the
prostitute they hired to entertain them. In the first of a series of
panic-induced bad decisions, the guys decide to take the body out to the
desert and bury it. Not just bury it, but chop it up with a store-bought
electric turkey carver and bury it. Thank God for the 24-hour Target, huh?
Their hideous deed done, the sullied boys head home so the groom can
prepare for his wedding. Of course, things are not as easy to sweep under
the rug as they'd like. As in Poe's "The Tell-Tale Heart,"  echoes of
their crime haunt the boys as soon as they set foot back on home turf. In
one particularly well-played scene, family-man Stern lets his paranoia
engulf him to the point of hysteria while trying to buy snacks at a gas
station/convenience store. His behavior doesn't go unnoticed, and it isn't
long before the boys' need for damage control leads to an even larger body
count.
Though it seems inconceivable that humor could be mined out of the deadly
serious premise I've just described, this film is a comedy. It is in some
ways a variation on There's Something About Mary, with the macabre
substituted for just plain gross. The proceedings are made all the more
shocking by the fact that these are normal guys-next-door doing...well,
very bad things.
Though the five leads seem more suited to the demands of wacky comedy,
some (especially Ellen regular Jeremy Piven) are able pull off unhinged
grief and mania quite effectively. The reserved Favreau, the film's moral
anchor, makes good as the tense groom who just wishes the madness would
all just go away. Slater's aphasic Robert is a look at what his Heathers
character might have become if he'd survived that film and gone into real
estate. Diaz, as Favreau's future bride, turns out to be the film's most
eccentric personality, a woman so hell-bent on having her wedding she will
stoop to new lows to make sure it isn't ruined. And Jeanne Tripplehorn, as
Stern's seemingly homey wife, elicits some cheers when she explodes and
goes ballistic on an intruding baddie.
Uneven but engrossing, Very Bad Things is able to generate some palpable
crackling tension, a merit on which I can easily recommend it. Whether the
carnage is too much is totally a matter of personal taste (which is so
significant you can either add or subtract a whole letter grade from my
own rating.)
Like the rest of the movie, Very Bad Things' final act cadenza is either
laugh-out-loud hilarious or downright offensive. You can almost hear the
Farelly brothers offering their approval. Whatever it's effect on you, you
have to walk out of the theater after that.
Reviewed October 15, 1998 at General Cinema Towson Commons, Towson, MD. 

Author
Matt Williams
Peter Berg directs this messy (in more ways than one) black comedy.  But
while it certainly is dark and morbid...someone forgot the laughs in
this dreary film.
Very Bad Things tells the tale of a bachelor party that goes horribly
wrong.  Kyle Fisher (Jon Favreau) is preparing to marry the controlling
Laura Garrety (Cameron Diaz).  For his final fling, his pal Robert Boyd
(Christian Slater) has planned a fun-filled party in Vegas.
Along for the adventure are Kyle's quiet mechanic buddy, Charles (Leland
Orser), and two of his co-workers, Adam (Daniel Stern) and Michael
Berkow (Jeremy Piven).
Things begin to go bad when the stripper (Carla Scott) hired by Boyd
meets an unfortunate, accidental demise.  Rather than report the death,
the five men decide to cover it up...but their problems start to rapidly
escalate from there.
If you couldn't tell, this is a rather bleak comedy, and the situations
just keep getting bleaker.  Unfortunately, the comedy doesn't keep pace.
The film is obviously attempting to reach for some morbid laughs, but it
just doesn't get them.
Take the characters, for example.  They're all given little
idiosyncrasies, but rather than being comic, most of them are merely
annoying.  These aren't people you'd really care to spend any time with,
in or out of the theater.
The situation (normal guys in an abnormal situation) is familiar, yet
something just never clicks here.  Even the usually watchable Cameron
Diaz becomes mildly repulsive in this film.
Filmmakers should learn never to use words like "Very Bad" in the title
of their films.  It's too convenient a place for such an apt description
of the film.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Steve Rhodes
"It's a 105 pound problem that's got to be moved from point A to point
B," real estate salesman and self-help fanatic Robert Boyd (Christian
Slater) explains confidently to his four buddies.  Well, it's a 105
pound "dead body" problem and moving it from one point to another proves
anything but simple in writer and director Peter Berg's VERY BAD THINGS.
The title of the movie should serve both as a warning and a come-on.
For those of you who loved THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY and -- this is
an important "and" -- are not squeamish when it comes to gore in the
service of comedy, VERY BAD THINGS will likely prove to be an extremely
enjoyable black comedy.  On the other hand, if you're the type that
closes your eyes during the bloody parts of films, pass on this one
since you are going to miss seeing large sections of it.
The movie's satire is so dark that the word black comedy doesn't quite
capture the essence of its take-no-prisoners approach.  It would be more
helpful if we had a grading scale like numismatists do for uncirculated
coins.  On a darkness scale, this movie would be a few notches shy of a
black hole.
The story opens at Laura Garrety's wedding.  She is an anal retentive
character, played with bitchy charm by Cameron Diaz from THERE'S
SOMETHING ABOUT MARY.  Diaz's character has shades of the one she played
in one of my favorite indie comedies, THE LAST SUPPER, in which a group
of pompous liberals set out to murder conservatives as their malevolent
way of improving the human race.
Flashing back to a few days earlier, her fiance, Kyle Fisher (Jon
Favreau), and his four buddies, Robert Boyd (Slater), Adam Berkow
(Daniel Stern), Michael Berkow  (Jeremy Piven) and Charles Moore (Leland
Orser) head for Las Vegas for Kyle's bachelor party.
Robert has hired the stripper, a.k.a., prostitute, that is de rigueur in
such crude affairs.  Before she arrives, the late twenty-something guys
stoke up their bodies with liberal doses of cocaine and booze.  By the
time she gets there, they are jumpy and excitable.  They end up breaking
the furniture and her, quite accidentally, but quite permanently.
When they realize the stripper is dead, the normally nice guys do what
most decent folks would, they start to call 911.  One suggests calling
the police instead since she is most sincerely dead.  And then Robert,
the group's leader, weighs in with his opinion.
"There are always options," he counsels.  And options in his book
include chopping up the body with electric saws and killing anyone else
that might get in the way.
Meanwhile, back at home, Laura is continuing to deal with her series of
crises, the biggest of which is that the chairs for the wedding aren't
going to have the pads on them that she was promised.  She calls Kyle
frequently to demand that he stay on top of this earthshaking issue.
Once the guys make it back home, the crime begins to weigh heavily on
their minds in one Hitchcockian moment after another.  The best part of
the film occurs in the pained look on all the guy's faces, with the
exception of Robert, who is the film's truest deviant.  Unlike the
seriously deranged Robert, the other guys live in absolute terror of
being caught.  Paranoia runs rampant in everything they do.
Jeanne Tripplehorn plays the closest thing to a normal person that the
film has.  She is Adam's wife, Lois.  A perky housewife, whose biggest
problem is getting the kids their favorite candy, Lois is oblivious to
her husband's panic attacks.  The worst she suspects him of doesn't even
come close to the sins he has committed.
Although not for the faint of heart, the movie will have you squirming
in your seats and likely, laughing loudly.  Our audience got so
rambunctious that they begin to shush each other so they wouldn't miss
any of the funny lines.
The film, which never pulls its punches, has a hilarious ending that's
so non-PC and generally indecent that it is likely to evoke the
strongest reaction of all from the audience.  If you hated the film,
you're likely to loathe this part most of all.  Those who like the
picture's over-the-top approach will probably think the ending is a
perfect cap to a completely irreverent comedy.
VERY BAD THINGS runs 1:51.  It is rated R for strong, grisly violence,
sex, nudity, profanity and drug use and would be acceptable for
teenagers only if they are older and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Jon Favreau, Cameron Diaz and Christian Slater.
Directed By Peter Berg
Running Time: 1 hour 40 minutes.
Oh, the puns available for this one! "This is a very bad film." "The title
is right, this film is a very bad thing." "The only very bad things are the
actors." But sadly none will apply. While Very Bad Things is far from
perfect, it does offer some entertainment value. The story centres around a
motley crew of five guys who accidentally kill a prostitute during a stag
night. After burying her in the desert, they slowly start to go crazy, and
Robert Boyd (Slater) starts getting rid of all the people who might know
anything about the murder.
Very Bad Things is an admirable attempt to bring gruesome horror and humour
to a movie, but something went wrong along the way. Perhaps it's the actors.
Jon Favreau, Slater, Daniel Stern, and Diaz have all proven to be good
comedic actors, but here their talents are reduced to nothing but shouting.
A lot. Nearly every line in this movie is said very, very loudly. Somewhat
amusing at first, it soon becomes boring watching five men (and a woman)
yell at each other. Also, many of the actors are below par, with only Slater
providing any real interest as 'the homicidal one.' I guess the film was
trying to make these guys unlikeable, but sadly they come across as
seriously irritating. And there's quite a big difference between unliveable
and irritating.
Perhaps the director is at fault. Peter Berg directs the film in a slapstick
fashion, but the two genres (horror and comedy) still very uneasily with
each other. The gore borders on gross, the humour is somewhat funny, but
doesn't fit within the film. It's like Cary Grant and Katherine Hepburn
suddenly got thrown into Natural Born Killers. A very odd mix, to be sure.
Berg also wrote the script, so I as hoping he would handle his own script
somewhat better. Sadly, he's not a competent enough director to direct this
kind of movie. While Wes Craven easily meshed horror and comedy in Scream
(1996) Berg likes the talent to pull this off.
The script itself is okay, but the plot promises a lot but delivers little.
There's a few funny lines, but not much is laugh out loud funny. The farce,
when it works, is actually quite amusing, but it's lacking sophistication
that this film really could do with. Also, the violence before the comedy
always makes the audience a little embarrassed to laugh.
Very Bad Things is ultimately disappointing, but there's some odd charm
about the movie that makes it watchable. If you have the stomach and want to
kill time, Very Bad Things is a mildly amusing 100 minutes. Just don't
expect anything special.

Author
Matt Prigge
Writer/Director: Peter Berg
Starring: Jon Favreau, Christian Slater, Cameron Diaz, Jeremy Piven,
Daniel Stern, Leland Orser, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Carla Scott, Russel B.
McKenzie, Lawrence Pressman
Well, "Very Bad Things" is not exactly bad, but it's not exactly great
either.  Peter Berg's hopeful satirization of the hidden angst and
horror that lies within the souls of yuppie suburbanites is hardly the
success in either the insightful field or the realms of actual funny
black comedy, and the result is a pitch black black comedy that is
actually blacker and more desolate than, say, "Dr. Strangelove," but
about a millionth as satisfying.  Walking out of this film one warm
Wednesday night, I wasn't laughing or particularly freaked out by what
had happened, but merely trying to figure out just why this film hadn't
taken off, when it did have some very big positive pointers going for
it, not the least being its excellent cast, and definitely not the least
being that it does, in fact, have a pretty killer story.
All I can think of is that this film is perhaps too intense, maybe too
black.  I know that the idealism behind the sub-genre of "Black Comedy"
is that you can push the envelope as far as you want to go, that
actually pushing it beyond the realms that anyone has ever gone is what
makes it so "black."  "Strangelove," in fact, pushes it farther than
anyone has pushed it hence (at least up until now), making comedy out of
nuclear anihilation, finding big chuckles in the mere sight of wild-ass
hick Slim Pickens riding a H-Bomb, waving his hat in the hair, as he
plumets to not only his death, but many others'.  There are similar
moments in "Very Bad Things," including several gruesome deaths,
freakish occurances, and some general orgiac pandemonium - stuff that
either equals or rivals the content of "Strangelove," yet there's a
world of difference between the two - in fact, so much that I'm of all
people wondering why I'm comparing the two, when in fifty years,
"Strangelove" will most likely still be one of the most-talked about
motion pictures and "Very Bad Things" will be viewed as merely a blemish
on the oeuvre of all involved...even Jeanne Tripplehorn.
The thing that differentiates this from all other black comedies is,
then, tone, and the matter in which it is applied.  The director and
writer, Peter Berg, has stated that he wanted to make a film for him,
and he likes his films like he likes his food, and probably everything
else: with spice.  And what happens is, yes, this film definitely has
spice, above everything else, but that's probably it's undoing.  It's so
audaciously in favor of being completely over-the-top that for most of
the film, I wasn't sure if I was supposed to be laughing or actually
being frightened by its ghastly events.  This apparently was the
purpose, as Berg has been quoted as telling its potential audiences to
just keep on reminding themselves that what they're watching is a
comedy, even though the film is so cartoonish in its presentation that
even if it is intense, it's absolutely impossible to take this as
anything short of a really black comedy, funny or not.
And for at least the first half hour, it isn't half bad (read: I
laughed, but not much or hard).  Berg's dissection of young upwardly
mobile members, living in suburbia, and just starting out their lives is
mildly amusing if not a little tired.  We're introduced to the five pals
(played by Jon Favreau, Christian Slater, Jeremy Piven, Daniel Stern,
and Leland Orser) and their respective problems (Favreau is getting
married to Cameron Diaz; Stern and Piven are perpetually feuding
siblings), and after all this, they all head out for the lavish Bachelor
Party for Favreau, all the way out in Vegas, where they engage in drugs,
general rucous, and eventually, a stripper who bares her body, then ends
up in the bathroom, where she fucks the now-emotionally-released Piven,
who slips on the wet floor, landing the back of the stripper's head on a
coat hanger.
Things get pretty intense from here, including a visit from a security
guard (some have actually made the mistake that this film is racist from
the fact that the stripper is asian, the security guard is black, and
Stern is openly Jewish), and like a first-time director trying to be
completely hip, Berg mistakens the stupidity of these five characters as
a form of really inspired comic flight, unfortunately the only real
source of jokes in this film.  Favreau does his character from
"Swingers," Stern does the trademark Stern character he's done twice too
many times before, Piven does the Piven-schtick, Orser just kinda sits
there with nothing to do, and Slater, for the first time since, oh I
dunno, "Heathers," actually steals the show and becomes pretty
engrossingly witty.  It's all generally interesting, and I was actually
pretty much into it so much that I was actually enjoying myself and
wondering what would in fact happen to hold this flawed but engrossing
mixture of bad jokes and extremely intense pseudo-drama for another hour
or so.
Sadly enough, once the guys are back home and when they're consciences
are getting to them is about the time the film just slowly collapses
under itself.  The jokes become less and less funny, the situations
become more intense, and by the end, it has come to an almost-completely
disappointing denouement, where two characters don't get at all what
they deserved, and one does.  When the movie was over, I got up, left,
and walked slowly to my car in a bemused state of depression, not
depressed over what had happened in the film, but depressed because I
wasn't at all satisfied with what had happened.  Theoretically, this
film should work.  It shows that humans are, deep down, horrible people,
and any pain they receive is justified.  Great point.  It was also made
in the black comedy "Your Friends and Neighbors," a brilliantly funny
movie that also doesn't respect its characters and still manages to
leave the audience satisfied.  Maybe that was because writer/director
Neil LaBute not only had a more observant tone, but also told funnier
jokes.  The characters were fully realized, and they seemed like, well,
real people who really did deserve their sad fates by the finale.
"Very Bad Things" rests on characateurs, and that's not really bad, but
it's not exactly great either.  It doesn't help that Berg has nothing
original or even very interesting to say about them, and the only
character who's even close to possessing anything resembling dimensions
is Cameron Diaz's, a Martha Stewart with a vengeance who isn't so much
interested in marrying as she is BEING married, and will go as far as to
bash a man's head in and order the deaths of man and canine to insure
her possible happiness.  Combined with Slater's joyously devious lawyer,
who seems that he may miss covering up for what happened in Vegas, and
you have the only real signs of wit and comedy in the entire film.  Even
Favreau, a really hilarious actor, seems like he was imported from
another film and is just standing around, awkwardly awaiting the finale.
But perhaps the worst thing about "Very Bad Things" is that after all
the hype, all the trailers that made it look like the hippest black
comedy to come our way since the dawn of Quentin Tarantino, it is
ultimately forgettable, and seems to be a direct miss in what Berg was
hoping would happen.  Afterwards, I couldn't get some of the carnage out
of my mind (particularly one pretty vile death about halfway through),
but a week later, I had all but forgotten what it was I didn't really
like about it.  Okay, sure, it's a tad engrossing, but when the film no
longer held my utmost attention following a promising beginning, there
was nothing left for me to really care about.  When the bomb finally did
go off in "Strangelove," I saw it as hilariously disturbing, since those
who caused it to happen were not only a bunch of imbeciles, but also the
ones in charge of our lives.  When the end finally came for "Very Bad
Things," all I could think of was "ugh."
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Very Bad Things (1998)
Christian Slater, Cameron Diaz, Daniel Stern, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Jon 
Favreau, Jeremy Piven, Leland Orser, Joey Zimmerman, Tyler Malinger, 
Carla Scott, Russell B. McKenzie. Produced by Cindy Cowan, Diane Nabatoff 
and Michael Schiffer. Written and directed by Peter Berg. 100 minutes.
Rated R, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Actor turned writer/director Peter Berg says his mantra during the making 
of "Very Bad Things" was "Death before boredom." It shows. Extremely 
gruesome and packed with violence, "Very Bad Things" is most certainly 
not boring. The film has a relentless forward thrust, an energy that 
keeps the proceedings as involving as they are bloody, until it runs out 
of gas near the end. The film has too much of a conscience to fully 
succeed as a black comedy and is too farcical to fully succeed as a 
straightforward horror film, but damn if it isn't perversely entertaining 
most of the way along. 
The Tarantino-influenced black comedy, about a bachelor party gone 
horribly wrong, desperately wants to be a boy's club version of "Heathers,
" but doesn't know how to get there. Berg hops all over the place, from 
humorous nihilism to blunt-edged social commentary. His finished product 
plays essentially as a messy curiosity, albeit a fascinating one. 
It begins with a trip to Las Vegas. Kyle Fisher (Jon Favreau) is days 
away from marrying Laura (Cameron Diaz), a young woman obsessed with 
creating the perfect wedding ceremony. Determined to satisfy his fiancée, 
he continues working on wedding arrangements by car phone, even as his 
buddies urge him to relax and enjoy the ride to Las Vegas for his 
bachelor party. 
Kyle's pal Robert (Christian Slater), a real estate agent and 
motivational book zealot, has assembled everything necessary for a night 
of gambling and debauchery; from liquor and cocaine to a beautiful hooker.
 Joining in the revelry is family-man Adam (Daniel Stern), his tightly-
wound brother, Michael (Jeremy Piven), and Charles (Leland Orser), an 
introspective cipher. 
Things go swimmingly until Michael, during an over-enthusiastic session 
of stand-up sex, accidentally impales the prostitute on a bathroom coat 
hook. The shaken men debate what to do, with Robert arguing for a quick 
disposal of the body in the desert. He dismisses all legal and moral 
issues, coolly stating "this is just a 105 pound problem that has to be 
moved from point A to point B." With strong reservations, the others 
agreed to the plan, only to have matters further complicated when a 
security guard arrives and spots the corpse. Ever the problem-solver, 
Robert uses a corkscrew on the guard, removing the witness and doubling 
the body count. 
The rest of the story follows the men on their damage control mission, 
with as many plot twists and turns as the aforementioned corkscrew. Each 
man reacts to the group decision in different ways, ranging from crushing 
guilt to gallows humor. Meanwhile, Laura continues her steamroller 
preparations for a wedding that will happen, no matter what.
With an actor at the helm, it's not surprising that the impressive cast 
of "Very Bad Things" is given considerable room to stretch. Christian 
Slater and Cameron Diaz have the juiciest parts, with Slater entertaining 
as a character who is essentially an older version of the sociopath he 
played in "Heathers." Diaz is a hoot as the marriage-at-all-costs bride 
to be. Her steely determination reminded me of Debbie Reynolds' ceremony-
fixated character from "In and Out," only much more ruthless.
Jeremy Piven is excellent as Michael, imbuing him with a great manic 
energy. The character is an explosion waiting to happen and Piven, known 
for his intense portrayals, perfectly captures Michael's hair-trigger 
emotions. Daniel Stern is less successful as Michael's brother, Adam, 
delivering a performance as a borderline hysteric that rarely varies in 
tone (incidentally, with all due respect to the intricacies of genetic 
coding, there is no way in hell those two guys could be brothers). As 
Charles, the sketchiest of the men, Leland Orser projects a jittery 
quality that keeps his character interesting. 
Which brings us to the groom. Jon Favreau, who scored a hat trick with 
"Swingers," is an extremely appealing actor, but oddly bland here. Kyle 
would have been more effective had Favreau cut back on the mealy-mouth 
squishiness and given the guy a little more oomph. Of course, all of the 
actors faced a challenge with their roles. After all, how do you play 
characters who are supposed to be tragic, despicable and funny all at the 
same time?
There are some big laughs in "Very Bad Things," although not as many as 
there could have been. Berg can't decide whether he's making a full-out 
tasteless farce or a noirish horror story involving real feelings, and 
refuses to commit to either. The potential impact is muted by the film's 
constant shifts in tone. One moment we're watching a character break down 
in heartfelt grief and shame over his actions, the next moment we're 
listening to one-liners about dismembered bodies. Berg punches so many 
contrasting emotional buttons that the whole system finally short 
circuits. The film's closing shot, intended to either provoke reflection 
or provide one last sick laugh, drew no response whatsoever from me. By 
that point, I just wanted to go home. 

Author
James Brundage
Written and Directed by Peter Berg (Chicago Hope)
Starring:
 Christian Slater (Pump Up The Volume) as Robert Boyd
 Cameron Diaz (The Last Supper) as Laura Garrety
 Daniel Stern (City Slickers) as Adam Barkow
 Jeanne Tripplehorn (The Firm) as Lois Barkow
 Jon Favreau (Swingers) as Kyle Fisher
 Jeremy Piven (Grosse Pointe Blank) as Michael Berkow
 Leland Orser (Alien: Resurrection) as Charles Moore
Very Bad Things marks the new level in dark comedy, the twisted and bizarre
level in which nothing is sacred.  To hell with PC, to hell with morals and
decency and not witnessing gore: Very Bad Things shows everything.  That
said, don't see it on a full stomach.  That said, make it a point to see
Peter Berg's Very Bad Things next weekend.
Very Bad Things is the blackest black comedy since Curdled, and the most
intelligent since The Last Supper, and the most fun independent film to
watch since Reservoir Dogs.  The movie functions on three levels: one
sublimely funny as we watch the world go into complete chaos around five men
and their attempt to cover up the accidental death of a Las Vegas
prostitute, and the not-so-accidental death of a hotel security guard.  The
second level is a Hitchcock-level psychological thriller that tracks
everyone's descent into insanity as they all struggle to cover up the
murders.  Level three, ironically, is a moral message in the midst of this
immoral and psychotic world: all wrongdoers are punished for their sins.
The film follows five men (Christian Slater, Daniel Stern, Jon Favreau,
Jeremy Piven, and Leland Orser) on Jon Favreau's Vegas bachelor party.
Christian Slater, the ringleader of the group, hires a hooker for Jon
Favreau's last night of freedom and Jeremy Piven, whoops, kills her.  When a
hotel security guard comes up to investigate the noise, Christian Slater
kills him too.  They all agree to cover up the murders, bury the bodies in
the desert, and act like it never happened.  But, sadly, Daniel Stern has
one too many morals for that.
What follows is everyone's collapse into complete insanity as they try to
cover up the two murders, then try to cover up a third murder, then a
fourth, fifth, sixth … well, you get the point.
The actors do their finest in the serious parts of the movie.  Most notably
Daniel Stern, who has always shied from serious roles, adeptly handles the
only truly moral character in the movie.  Also (my personal favorite of the
movie), is Christian Slater, an anti-Semite psychotic who is so deeply
involved with self help that just isn't working.
The film's creativity is truly shown with it's ability to make anything
funny: cocaine, anti-Semitism, car crashes, murders, burial practices,
minivans, wives, kids, the handicapped, the paralyzed, telethons, oral sex,
and power tools, just to name a few.  There's nothing this film won't -- and
doesn't target.  And, friends, it hits the bullseye every time.
It's not a movie for the weak of heart, the weak of stomach, or the weak of
morals (don't get any ideas, folks), but it is the movie for anyone who
doesn't meet those criterion.  See it for the dark comedy, see it for the
thrills, see it for the morals.  By God, indulge yourself: see it for the
Very Bad Things.
The Movie Critic's Heaven
http://members.tripod.com/~criticsheaven/

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Actor Peter Berg quietly tucks his thespian slippers under his bed for
a little while, and slips into a new role as writer and director of
this extremely black comedy starring everybody's favourite Jack
Nicholson-wannabee, Christian Slater, and the wonderfully cheery
Cameron Diaz.
PLOT:
Kyle and his friends go to Las Vegas for his bachelor party. They drink
like fish, snort a lot of cocaine and hire a hooker for some fun. When
the prostitute suddenly kicks the bucket, the boys have to resort to
plenty of sinful shenanigans to get out of their dilemma. One cover-up
leads to another, and all of a sudden, our friends are caught in a
downwards spiral of all things moral. Meanwhile, Kyle's wife Laura is
much more concerned with her wedding going off without a hitch, and the
guests having the padded chairs which she requested.
CRITIQUE:
Deeply disturbing, violently graphic, hilarious romp that chews into
every sick, twisted taboo that you'd ever think about, then goes one
step further, and then another step...and then one too many. This film
is one of the blackest of all the black comedies that I have ever seen!
It starts off with a good premise, and then gets darker and darker and
funnier and funnier, and then a little darker still. It pushes every
envelope that you thought would never be pushed, and succeeds in most
of what it is trying to do. These guys find themselves in an awful
predicament, and attempt to solve it by unsuspectingly placing
themselves in an ever worse predicament, and so on, and so forth. All
the while, the film laughs at itself, and the absurdity of every single
exaggerated situation that they find themselves in. Having said that,
please don't expect to find this story based in much reality, because
it does go overboard quite a bit, but that is its purpose.
The cast is great, with Slater playing one of his best roles in years
(Reminiscent of his psycho role in another great black comedy, HEATHERS
(8/10)), the rest of the boys also come through like gangbusters, and
Diaz plays the role of the ultimate wannabee bride convincingly. Berg's
camera technique is also well-handled, while the run time of the film
trickles in right before any indigestion. The only issue that I did
have with this movie was the fact that I did find myself rolling my
eyes about 3/4 of the way through, when some of the things just started
getting a little too much out of hand. Having said that, the ending was
ironically hilarious, and the overall audacity of the cast, and most of
all, Peter Berg was a sight to behold. This man must've been in some
kind of a funk when he wrote this crazy script because it is totally
"out there"! If you like to see movies that take things to the extreme,
then check this one out! If you like your standard, uncomplicated
Hollywood pictures, with your happy-go lucky couple and friends for
life, then forget this one, and go back and rent one of the eighteen
thousand romantic comedies out there.
Most of the humour in this film worked for me (and for most of my
friends, I might add), but admittedly, I have become accustomed to
overly-violent behaviour in films by now. If violence, murders and the
commitment of extremely immoral sins doesn't stir your darkened funny
cup, then forget that you ever heard about this film. This movie is
only for people who appreciate dark, dark humour under very bad,
horrible circumstances. But it's like I said, even I thought the
believability within this tent of black humour disappeared for a little
while, but all in all, the film worked for me as one of the year's most
original screenplays, and one of the most gruesome concepts to walk
down the cinematic aisle in a while. This is NOT for the faint of
heart, folks!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
The policeman character in this film is named Officer Randone. That was
the name of the cop role that director Peter Berg himself portrayed in
1997's COPLAND (7/10).
The man who plays the Rabbi in this film is the actual father of actor
Jeremy Piven. His name is Byrne Piven. You may remember Jeremy Piven
from his role as comedy writer on TV's "The Larry Sanders Show."
Leland Orser played the crazed man in the massage parlour who was
forced to dick a prostitute with a sharp object acting as his probing
member, in the gritty David Fincher thriller SE7EN (8.5/10).
Actor Adam Sandler was slated to play the part of Michael Berkow, but
pulled out after a couple of days, and was subsequently replaced by
Jeremy Piven.
An obvious homage to Quentin Tarantino's RESERVOIR DOGS (9/10) features
the five guys walking in slow-motion towards the camera during their
quick run to the local store.
Christian Slater's real name is Christian Michael Leonard Hawkins. He
was born in New York, New York, and most recently spent 59 days in jail
for assaulting his girlfriend and a police officer as well as cocaine
abuse. In 1994, good-guy Christian was also arrested for bringing a gun
on a plane. He is a major Star Trek fan, and word on the street is that
his unusual eyebrows are the result of him shaving them when dressing
up as Spock for Halloween. They apparently never grew back in properly.
Cameron Diaz was signed on as a model at the Elite Modeling Agency at
the age of 16, after being discovered at a Hollywood party. Soon
thereafter, she got alcohol poisoning in Australia at the age of 18. It
took Cameron 12 callbacks to get her breakthrough role in THE MASK
(7/10), opposite Jim Carrey. She was also slated to star opposite
Christopher Lambert in MORTAL KOMBAT, but was forced to pull out after
she injured her hand before filming had begun. Her father is a
second-generation Cuban, and her mother is of German, English and
Native-American ancestry. 
