Title
Review for Quarrel, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Two men, old friends and adversaries
     with different theological perspectives have each assumed the
     other died in the Holocaust.  Years later they meet by
     accident and continue a riveting philosophical argument of
     faith vs. rationalism. Extremely intelligent and rewarding.
     Rating: +2 (-4 to +4).
     Chaim Kovler (played by R. H. Thomson) survived the Holocaust, but lost
his wife and children to the Nazis.  He also lost his best friend and worst
philosophical opponent Hersh Rasseyner.  And while he still believes in the
existence of God, he no longer cares since he blames God for allowing the
Holocaust.  Even back at religious school as a boy he had his own ideas
about religion and God.  Now a year or so after the end of the war he is
living in the United States and has become a popular novelist and advice
columnist. Visiting Montreal, on the morning of a Rosh Hashonah that he
chooses not to acknowledge, he finds Hersh (played by Saul Rubinek) alive
and a very Orthodox rabbi.  The two men, one staunchly religious, the other
just as staunchly a rationalist finally have a chance to talk out their
different world-views after being separated for so long and with so much
tragedy that has happened to each of them.  If this sounds a lot like all
too many Sunday morning television religious dramas, it is not.  This is not
the story of somebody regaining his faith after a few pat religious
arguments.  It is a fair and even-handed exploration of two valid but
diametrically opposed philosophical points of view.  Chaim Grade's story,
adapted into a play by David Brandes and directed by Eli Cohen, is itself at
times coldly rational, at others sad and moving.
     The two old friends meet in park and argue not just about religion, but
about rain and the paths in the park and anything else that can momentarily
distract them from their real and fundamental philosophical differences--
which they will be resuming shortly.
     This is not the first time these three--Rubinek, Thomson, and religious
differences--have come together.  Rubinek was a man trying to get his friend
out of a religious cult and Thomson was a deprogrammer in the excellent 1982
film TICKET TO HEAVEN.  They are both very good actors, albeit very
different types, and they are very good on the screen together.  But while a
few films were made on religious cults (TICKET TO HEAVEN is merely the best
of the lot) THE QUARREL is in a category by itself.  Few films have
respected their audience sufficiently to give them this density of ideas and
concepts.  You basically would have to have a two character play that is
solid dialog.  In fact, cinema is probably not the best medium for this
story.  At the risk of saying "this is a great film, but don't go" I have to
say that the best way to appreciate this film will be on a videotape that
will allow you both to see the actors expressions and will allow you to go
back and replay portions to better take in what is being said.  And since
THE QUARREL is a theatrical release of American Playhouse (like the film I
saw minutes before it, THE MUSIC OF CHANCE) it will almost certainly show up
on PBS sooner or later.  However, with that one minimal cavil, this film is
recommended.  I give it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
