Title
Review for Gray's Anatomy (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
     The first five minutes of GRAY'S ANATOMY are as squirm-inducing as
any five minutes of film you'll see this year.  In a series of
black-and-white talking head interviews, people describe every possible
horror which could befall the human eye, including close calls with Super
Glue, aneurisms and inch-long shards of metal.  Though nothing is
graphically depicted, the descriptions are detailed enough to give a
surgeon chills.  It's a sensational set-up for an examination of the
fragility of vision; if you've never worried about going blind before, you
may be inspired to start.
     Spalding Gray had to worry about it, and for all I know it was very
traumatic.  That's certainly not the impression you get from GRAY'S
ANATOMY, however.  GRAY'S ANATOMY is a staged monologue about Gray's
experience dealing with a retinal disorder called a macular pucker,
particularly the various alternative treatments he explores in an attempt
to avoid surgery.  Gray is one of America's finest story-tellers, and some
of the stories about Native American sweat lodges and obsessive
nutritionists are quite entertaining.  But the story-telling is very
detached; Gray's milieu is the ironic observation, not the soul-baring
revelation.  It's true that plenty of frightening things seem ridiculous
with hindsight, but Gray shows us all the ridiculousness with little of
the fear.  The whole ordeal seems more like an amusing inconvenience than
an existential crisis.
     GRAY'S ANATOMY feels even more detached because of the way director
Steven Soderbergh has chosen to stage it.  This is the third of Gray's
monologues to receive a film treatment, but it is the first to be filmed
without a live audience.  The advantage of that choice is that Soderbergh
is free to create a surreal mood with arresting visuals.  The disadvantage
is that Gray seems adrift without an audience.  He becomes a story-teller
trying to be an actor, playing things too broadly in an attempt to
generate the energy he can't draw from audience reaction.  Like fellow
story-teller Garrison Keillor, Gray's strength is a straightforward
delivery which makes you laugh without _signaling_ you to laugh.  GRAY'S
ANATOMY is like "A Prairie Home Companion" turned into a performance art
piece.
     Soderbergh is a gifted director (SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE; KING OF THE
HILL); Gray is a gifted monologist (SWIMMING TO CAMBODIA).  They're just
not a very good match for the creation of a film.  Soderbergh's direction
creates an intensity of mood which Gray's stoic demeanor can't sustain,
and Gray's ability to wow an audience while sitting in front of a
microphone is undercut by Soderbergh's visual theatrics.  The absurdity of
some of the stories in GRAY'S ANATOMY is bound to generate some laughs,
but while you're chuckling at the stories you may feel there's something
missing, something the opening five minutes promises but doesn't deliver.
In this case, the eyes just don't have it.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Spalding Gray is arguably the premier monologist of our time.
Although at his best in a live monologue, his screen adaptations shine
as well.  To most people, sitting through a movie where one guy talks
for an hour and a half sounds like torture.  (Even MY DINNER WITH ANDRE
had two characters to provide variety and for them to bounce thoughts
off of each other.)  Spalding Gray talks a blue streak in his
monologues, weaving tales so mesmerizing that he entrances his
audiences.
     Gray bases his stories on a single theme.  Although he generally
writes his routines himself, in his latest movie, GRAY'S ANATOMY, he
credits his longtime friend Renee Shafransky with helping with the
script.
     Unlike his previous monologue pictures, GRAY'S ANATOMY opens with
someone other than Spalding.  In a series of interviews, filmed in a
grainy black and white, ordinary people tell unordinary stories about
their eyes.  Each has suffered some horrific eye accident but has
miraculously survived.
     This eight minute introduction could easily have people heading
for the exits.  The stories' validity make them all the more hard to
think about.  One woman was tired and mistook Superglue for eye drops.
Another got a one inch sliver of metal from a lathe trapped in his eye.
And you can imagine the possibilities with oven cleaner and fish hooks.
You get the idea.
     Although this portion of the film diverges from the tradition of
featuring Spalding and only Spalding, it effectively sets the stage for
the film's topic -- Spalding's macular pucker.  If you did not cover
pucker in your biology class, don't worry, Spalding quickly turns you
into an expert.
     The fascinating story revolves around Spalding's attempt to save
one of his eyes and to avoid a painful operation by checking into
alternative medicines.  (He grew up as a Christian Scientist so
non-traditional health care comes naturally to him.  He even briefly
consults the leading Christian Science eye expert, who rebuffs him when
Spalding finally admits that he has talked with a medical doctor about
his condition.  Spalding gets lectured that he must choose since
Christian Scientists will not help those who are "duplicitous."  Only
true believers need apply.)
     The best part of the film surrounds the long story of his seeking
to be healed by visiting a Native American sweat lodge with a bunch of
Swedish looking men and women.
     Spalding always manages to find and talk about some of the world's
most interesting human beings, and this film is no exception.  He
relates how he consulted an aging doctor who is the world's most
accomplished dietary ophthalmologist, and maybe the only one.  When
Spalding mimics the doctor's 87 year old receptionist and mother, you
can visualize her as perfectly as if he had a hologram of her.
     Spalding has had small acting parts in thirty traditional films,
but has made only two previous monologue movies.  The first, and most
successful, was SWIMMING TO CAMBODIA, and the second was MONSTER IN A
BOX.  Directors do make a difference.  SWIMMING TO CAMBODIA was
directed by Jonathan Demme (THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS and PHILADELPHIA),
and Demme understood and appreciated Spalding's unique talents so he
resisted the urge to embellish the film.
     GRAY'S ANATOMY's director Steven Soderbergh (SEX, LIES, AND
VIDEOTAPE) has no such respect for Spalding.  Soderbergh, lacking
confidence in the audience's intelligence, feels that he must jazz up
the production with cute camera work and bizarre lighting.  Although
Soderbergh's madness does have a purpose -- he wants you to feel what
it is like to lose you eyesight -- it, nevertheless, only serves to be
a tremendous distraction.  I want to see Spalding, not a talking shadow
or a man blurred with harsh backlight.  The cinematography by Elliot
Davis deserves one of those "worst of the year" awards.
     I was fortunate to see Spalding do MONSTER IN A BOX in a lovely
and intimate outdoor setting.  This is the way to experience him.  He
does not need Soderbergh's wizardry.  If you cannot see Spalding Gray
live, then do see his monologue films.  GRAY'S ANATOMY can be
infuriating, but Spalding makes it worthwhile.
     GRAY'S ANATOMY runs just 1:20.  The film is not rated, but would
probably be PG-13 for the brief profanity and sexual references.  It
should be fine for kids say 10 and up.  I would not have missed it, so
I recommend it to you and give it ** 1/2 for a terribly flawed but
intriguing monologue.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
