Title
Review for Untamagiru (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A sugar worker in Okinawa learns a terrible secret concerning the
daughter of his boss.  To avoid the wrath of his boss, he flees into the
Untama Forest, a magic place populated by spirits, where people
levitate, and other fantastic things happen.  A modern fantasy/folk
tale, with a very warped sense of humor.  Only of average quality, but
with sufficient humor to hold your interest.
Japan (English subtitles), color, 1989, 120 minutes.
Director/Writer:  Go Takamine
     Set in Okinawa just before it was returned to Japan (late 60's),
this film is the story of Giru, a sugar-mill worker who becomes a folk
hero.  Giru operates a crude sugar press, used to extract the juice from
the sugar cane.  The beautiful daughter of the mill owner takes her
daily siesta near the press, watching the workers while she smokes
(drugs) from a water-pipe.  Giru is quite interested in her and plans to
ask her to a party.
     Next we meet Giru's family: his mother, a compulsive eater who
craves armadillo sashimi, fried tapir, and goat testicle soup, and his
sister, a part-time prostitute who spends most of her time in a drugged
stupor, engaging in her favorite hobby, "animal dream divination"
(dreaming about animals and making an interpretation).
     Giru asks the girl of his dreams to the full-moon party, despite
his sister warning him of evil "pig influences."  Afterwards Giru takes
her to the Untama Forest for romance/sex.  The next day, Giru learns a
terrible secret: the girl of his dreams is actually a pig, appearing in
human form via magic!  The mill boss learns that Giru has stolen his
"daughter's" virginity, and swears revenge.  Since the boss is really
good with a spear, Giru flees for his life to the Untama Forest, a place
where magic is real.  The story continues with Giru learning to use
magic against the boss and the police.
     The overall quality level of this film is roughly that of a made
for television movie (i.e., only average).  However, what makes it worth
seeing is the rather warped, drugged-out sense of humor that pervades
the film.  An example of this is the characterization of the U.S.  High
Commissioner for the island (played by John Sayles), who is shown
receiving blood transfusions from dogs and pigs!  The review printed in
the film festival program compared it to a live-action version of a
Robert Crumb cartoon (i.e., underground comic).  However, I would
compare it more to the work of Gilbert Shelton ("Wonder Warthog," "Zippy
the Pinhead") than R. Crumb.
     The film has a number of drawbacks.  The story is told in a
disjointed fashion, using a bizarre barbershop quartet to provide
narration at times.  The lyrics of their songs are cute, but their
singing is pretty bad (deliberately, no doubt).  Also, there is probably
some important message or lesson in the film.  However, with all the
warped drug humor and magic, it's hard to be certain what the message
is supposed to be (perhaps not to get involved with pigs in human form?
not to cross your boss if he's good with a spear?).
     The film should appeal to those with an offbeat sense of humor.  If
you like underground comics, you will probably like this film.  If
underground comics don't appeal to you, then you probably should see
something else.
Distribution.  Not in general U.S. release at the present time.  Most likely
places to see it are film festivals, societies, or archives.  Print Source:
Parco Co., Ltd., 15-1, Udagoma-cho, Shibuya ku, Tokyo, Japan.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
