Title
Review for Gaslight (1944)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Gaslight" is a remake of the 1940 mystery and
suspense thriller.  It is an interesting film,
with a strong cast and competent direction.
"Gaslight" stars Ingrid Bergman as an impressionable
young woman, newlywed to cunning Charles Boyer.
Oddly, Boyer takes no physical interest in Bergman,
instead preferring to psychologically torment
her.  He tells her she is losing her mind, and
trains the servants to play along with his game.
Bergman becomes a virtual prisoner in her house,
isolated and frightened.  It doesn't help that
Bergman once lived in the house as a child, and
that the house was once the site of a brutal
murder.
The irony is that it is Boyer's character who
is mentally disturbed.  His performance is
sometimes sinister, sometimes impassioned, and
he was deserving of his Best Actor Oscar nomination.
Bergman won Best Actress, although her character
is much simpler and easier to play.  The film was
also nominated for Best Picture, Best Screenplay
(John L. Balderston, Walter Reisch, and John Van
Druten) and Best Black & White Cinematography
(Joseph Ruttenberg).
The audience spends most of the film puzzled.
Why is Boyer doing these terrible things to Bergman?
Also confused is detective Joseph Cotten, who
suspects Boyer in the long-ago unsolved murder.
Angela Lansbury makes her film debut in "Gaslight".
Still a teenager, she plays an impertinent and
flirtatious house servant.  She received a
nomination for Best Supporting Actress.
Why isn't this a great movie?  Bergman and
Boyer have characters that aren't completely
credible.  Bergman puts up little resistance
to Boyer's pattern of abuse, and Boyer is a
monster.  If this film were remade today,
there would surely be physical abuse, something
too disagreeable to 1944 censors, but probably
necessary to make Boyer's character more
effective.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Charles Boyer, Ingrid Bergman, Joseph Cotten, Dame May Whitty, 
      Angela Lansbury, Barbara Everest
Director: George Cukor
Producer: Arthur Hornblow, Jr.
Screenplay: John Van Druten, Walter Reisch, and John L. Balderston,
      based on the play by Patrick Hamilton
Cinematography: Joseph Ruttenberg
Music: Bronislau Kaper
U.S. Distributor: MGM
     Ingrid Bergman won her first Oscar for portraying Paula Alquist, 
the vulnerable, insecure heroine of George Cukor's diabolical, 
atmospheric thriller, GASLIGHT.   Bergman, essaying a much different 
character from either of her last two roles (Maria in 1943's FOR WHOM 
THE BELL TOLLS and Ilsa in 1942's CASABLANCA), is alluring and 
convincing as a woman held captive by her own fears.
     The first half-hour of GASLIGHT is deceptively romantic.  We are 
introduced to Paula, a young English singer living and studying in Italy 
during the latter half of the nineteenth century.  Over the past few 
weeks, however, her attention has not been on her craft, and her wily 
mentor remarks that he believes that she's in love.  When Paula confirms 
his suspicions, and indicates that she may marry the gentleman in 
question, Gregory Anton (Charles Boyer), she is released from her 
studies.  Less than a week later, she and Gregory are on their 
honeymoon.
     At this point, GASLIGHT turns ominous.  Gregory wants to live in 
England, so he and Paula move into a house that she inherited from her 
late aunt, a well-known singer who was murdered a decade ago.  Once 
there, Gregory's attentiveness acquires a sinister edge.  He convinces 
Paula that she's having delusions, and, as a result, isn't well enough 
to see visitors.  He hires a forthright young maid, Nancy (Angela 
Lansbury in her feature debut), who holds her mistress in contempt.  And 
he disappears every night on clandestine business of his own.
     A local Scotland Yard officer, Brian Cameron (Joseph Cotten), takes 
an interest in Paula's predicament, but Gregory and Nancy conspire to 
keep them from meeting.  The more familiar Brian becomes with the 
situation, however, the more convinced he is that Paula's current 
circumstances are somehow related to her aunt's murder and a cache of 
missing jewels.
     By the convoluted standards of many of today's ultra-slick 
thrillers, GASLIGHT may be seen as slow-moving and obvious.  But no film 
like BASIC INSTINCT can match this picture's intricate psychology.  
Paula's self-doubt builds slowly as her husband meticulously 
orchestrates her  spiral into insanity.  Since she's completely in his 
thrall, she never senses that he represents a threat.  And, because 
Paula is isolated from everyone except Gregory, Nancy, and one other 
servant,  she has no point of reference against which to gauge her 
mental stability.
     Beautifully filmed in a gloomy, atmospheric black-and-white, 
GASLIGHT exhibits all the classic visual elements of '40s film noir.  
The attention to detail is more obvious than in many modern films.  The 
benighted streets of London are cloaked with fog, and the large, lonely 
house where most of the action transpires is filled with shadows and 
strange noises.  The paranoid, claustrophobic world of Paula's 
confinement is effectively conveyed.  Even though we, as viewers, know 
that her insanity is contrived, we can feel the walls of the trap 
closing in as the situation grows progressively more hopeless.
     In addition to Bergman's fine performance as the harried Paula, 
Charles Boyer and Angela Lansbury do excellent jobs.  In less than two 
hours, Boyer's Gregory goes from a suave, debonair gentleman to a 
cunning, fiendish villain.  The success of this transformation is an 
eloquent testament to Boyer's range.  Meanwhile, Lansbury imbues Nancy 
with a impertinence that makes her Gregory's perfect, albeit unwitting, 
accomplice.
     In many ways, GASLIGHT is as much a character study as a thriller.  
And, although "tame" by today's standards (and even by those of 
Hitchcock's PSYCHO), GASLIGHT is chilling enough to engross even a jaded 
modern audience.  Yes, the ending is weak, and there are aspects of the 
story that don't stand up to scrutiny, but this is the kind of 
effectively-crafted, well-acted motion picture that rises above its 
faults to earn its "classic" appellation.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin (or) http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin
