Title
Review for Holy Matrimony (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
The easiest part of every criminal career is committing
crimes; getting away is what differentiates successful from
unsuccessful criminals. Same goes for the female protagonist
of HOLY MATRIMONY, 1994 comedy by Leonard Nimoy. Havana
(played by Patricia Arquette) and her boyfriend Peter
(played by Tate Donovan) rob state fair and cross the border
into Canada, where Peter, prodigal son of Hutterite family,
would seek shelter among his folks, with Havana posing as
his future bride. The idea is to hide money, get married and
live as good Hutterites until police abandon the search.
Unfortunately, Peter dies in car crash without telling
Havana where he had stashed the money. Havana, who took
great pains to adapt her worldly ways to simple Hutterite
lifestyle, is desperate. However, the obscure biblical
custom would rescue her plans - according to Hutterite
tradition, widow must be proposed by the deceased's younger
brother. Community elders see this as formality but Havana,
at the surprise of everyone, accepts to marry Peter's
12-year old brother Zeke (played by Joseph Gordon-Levitate).
Zeke actually can't stand Havana and correctly assumes that
Havana had some unsavoury motives.
David Weisberg's script for HOLY MATRIMONY probably looked
great on paper. This interesting mix of GETTING EVEN WITH
DAD and WITNESS had more in it than simple "high concept" -
story and characters offered numerous opportunities for
humour based on cultural, generational and gender gaps, all
wrapped in neat feelgood package of family entertainment.
Leonard Nimoy, who already had experience with this sort of
films while doing U.S. version of THREE MEN AND THE BABY,
seemed like a good choice for director. Unfortunately, while
Nimoy wisely decided not to take sides in Hutterite vs.
outside world conflict (even when their strict obedience of
biblical laws led to unpleasant results like institutional
paedophilia), he nevertheless missed opportunity to give
more insight into Hutterite world, their lifestyles and
worldviews. The film also suffered from bad pacing,
unnecessary subplot involving maniacal FBI agent and weak
and not very believable happy ending. Acting was good -
Patricia Arquette didn't seem tired from another role of
fugitive (she had played similar characters in TROUBLEBOUND
and TRUE ROMANCE in previous years) while young
Gordon-Levitt showed that even the children who lack
Culkin's cuteness might carry the film. In the end, HOLY
MATRIMONY, while amusing in some part, nevertheless gives
impression of a film with too many missed opportunities.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
