Title
Review for Zhong an zu (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
Crime Story (1993) ***1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Jackie Chan. Directed by:
Kirk Wong. Running Time: 103 minutes.
Being released officially for the first time in the US, "Crime Story" won't
disappoint most fans of Jackie Chan... mainly those of us who first gained
knowledge of him when "Rumble in the Bronx" was released to theaters in
1995.
"Crime Story" isn't as light in its tone as "Rumble in the Bronx" was, but
that's not much of a distraction. The plot involves a wealthy real estate
developer being kidnapped by corrupt police officials, and Detective Jackie
Chan hunts them down. Chan's character's name actually is Jackie Chan in
this one, although I wonder if that was also the character's name in the
film's initial release.
Now fans probably can care less about the plot, as I do, because it's
usually just an excuse to fill time between the action sequences. But the
plot is compelling enough, and easy to follow. And the action sequences and
stuntwork are, as always, incredible. There isn't as much hand-to-hand
fighting as in other Chan films, but there are plenty of excellently staged
shoot-outs and car chases.
There are a couple of drawbacks. The guy who's been taken hostage is just as
crooked in his own way as the men who kidnapped him, so who really cares if
he gets rescued? Also, the main villain is this big fat guy, so you pretty
much know there's not going to be a fantasic fight sequence between these
two at the end. Also, I wish Dimension/Miramax Films could spend just a tiny
bit of money and get some actors to dub the voices convincingly. Sometimes,
ridiculous dubbing works for the film when it's a comedy, like Chan's "My
Lucky Stars". But when the tone of the film is meant to be serious, as
"Crime Story" is, some effort should be made to make the dubbed voices seem
appropriate.
"Crime Story" has nothing tremendously special, but it is still better than
most American action movies these days. I only wish Chan's films could be
re-released a little quicker here in the US.  [R]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.
