Title
Review for Mr. Jealousy (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Eric Stoltz, Annabella Sciorra, Christopher Eigeman, 
      Carlos Jacott, Marianne Jean-Baptiste, Brian Kerwin, 
      Peter Bogdanovich, Bridget Fonda
Director: Noah Baumbach
Producer: Joel Castleberg
Screenplay: Noah Baumbach
Cinematography: Steven Bernstein 
Music: Robert Een
U.S. Distributor: Lion's Gate Releasing
     On the surface, MR. JEALOUSY is not a subtle film -- it's a dark 
comedy about what happens when a man's deep-rooted insecurity undermines 
his romantic relationship.  At times, the plot ventures into sit-com 
land, and director Noah Baumbach borrows liberally from other directors 
(Woody Allen and Whit Stillman in particular).  Nevertheless, despite 
numerous flaws, I appreciated elements of MR. JEALOUSY, in large part 
because Baumbach captures something about the inherent insecurity in 
sexual relationships that most films either ignore or oversimplify.  
Like Kevin Smith's CHASING AMY, this movie addresses questions about 
trust and fidelity, and gets some of the details right.
     The perfect relationship is an unattainable dream.  Whenever two 
people get together, each of them brings along a certain amount of 
baggage.  In the case of Lester Grimm (Eric Stoltz), anything less than 
a luggage cart won't carry it all.  Half a lifetime ago, when Lester was 
a teenager, he had the unpleasant experience of watching his date make 
out with another guy.  Ever since then, Lester has had serious issues 
about trusting women.  It's in his nature to expect betrayal, and to 
become suspicious whenever he sees a girlfriend talking to another man 
(especially an old flame).  This near-paranoid jealousy has led to at 
least one wrecked relationship.
     When Lester meets Ramona (Annabella Sciorra), he vows that things 
will be different.  Then he learns that Ramona has led a very active 
sexual life, and he begins to wonder what she was like before he met 
her, and whether her past track record might make her a candidate to 
cheat on him.  One day, he follows one of Ramona's ex's, a semi-famous 
author named Dashiell Frank (Christopher Eigeman), and learns where he 
attends a twice-weekly group therapy session.  Lester promptly joins the 
group.  Unwilling to reveal his genuine identity and history to 
Dashiell, Lester pretends to be his best friend, Vince (Carlos Jacott).  
But things get a little more complicated than Lester ever could have 
imagined.
     MR. JEALOUSY isn't the kind of movie that forges an intimate 
emotional connection between the protagonist and the audience.  The 
frequent, glib narrative voiceover ensures a certain distance between 
Lester and us.  After all, it's difficult to get involved in a 
character's life when the film maker is constantly intruding on the 
story with occasionally-amusing but often-superfluous commentary (sort 
of like watching MYSTERY SCIENCE THEATER 3000).  On an intellectual 
level, however, MR. JEALOUSY works when we try to puzzle out how we 
would react in Lester's position and whether his fears are well-founded.  
Baumbach understands the roots of relationship angst, and how damaging 
it can be, and, like Woody Allen, he opts for something more insightful 
than a superficial treatment.
     MR. JEALOUSY's central contrivance hurts the film's believability.  
It's hard to accept that Lester would be welcomed into an exclusive 
therapy group with one of the best psychologists in New York while 
posing as his best friend.  It's even less likely that Vince would later 
be admitted into the same group when using a fake British accent and 
pretending to be Lester.  The entire dynamic seems unnecessarily 
fabricated, and the slim humor that Baumbach milks from the situation 
isn't worth the strain on the story's credibility.
     Good acting is crucial to the success of an intimate piece like 
this, and MR. JEALOUSY is blessed with a solid cast.  Eric Stoltz (who 
previously worked with Baumbach in KICKING AND SCREAMING) makes Lester's 
paranoia seem almost rational (that's because it's presented as only a 
slight exaggeration of insecurities that everyone is familiar with).  
Chris Eigeman (a Whit Stillman regular who was also in KICKING AND 
SCREAMING) applies his uniquely flippant-yet-intense style to Dashiell.  
Annabella Sciorra is effective as Ramona, although the character could 
have used a little more fleshing out.  The supporting performers include 
Carlos Jacott as Vince, Marianne Jean-Baptiste (SECRETS AND LIES) as 
Vince's fiancee, Brian Kerwin as another of Ramona's ex-boyfriends, 
Peter Bogdanovich as a psychiatrist, and Bridget Fonda as Dashiell's 
current girlfriend. 
     In the end, I felt much the same about MR. JEALOUSY as I did about 
Baumbach's previous feature, KICKING AND SCREAMING.  The movie paints a 
good portrait of some of the most common Generation X concerns, but 
fails to personalize them.  The writer/director may have a deep 
understanding of his material, but MR. JEALOUSY doesn't offer anything 
original or remarkable, and, while what the film is saying often strikes 
a responsive chord, that alone isn't enough to earn it an enthusiastic 
recommendation.  
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Eric Stoltz, Annabella Sciorra, Christopher Eigeman, Carlos
Jacott, Marianne Jean-Baptiste, Brian Kerwin, Peter Bogdanovich, Bridget
Fonda
Director: Noah Baumbach
Screenplay: Noah Baumbach
Australian theatrical release date: December 3, 1998 (Adelaide and
Brisbane later)
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 2
stars
If it is feasible for a writer to develop characters of both sexes
equally - that is, understand the minds of males and females and convey
that understanding competently - it would be reasonable to say that Noah
Baumbach has achieved this feat.  In Mr. Jealousy, he displays a talent
for working on the fundamental needs of character development; that is,
giving the audience an instant relation to them.  Baumbach is not
concerned with whether his characters are male or female, good looking
or not - as long as they have a mouth and two ears, they are good
enough.  If he had chosen a vehicle that could have showcased these
qualities with more pizzazz, more depth and more confrontation, he may
have created a film which could have competed with its characters.
That's not to say that they are a particularly fascinating bunch.  They
are realistic, however, and that's always enough on which to build.
Baumbach has a gutsy attempt at doing so, but in the end the
relationship between the two protagonists is unrewarding, and a little
tedious.  His symbolism of relationships and emotions is ludicrously
simplistic, even down to the name of the film (instead of portraying
jealousy through character development, it's right there in the title).
This is not to say that Mr. Jealousy does not have its moments - some
are daunting, others make for pleasant viewing - but neither of these
elements are substantial enough to keep it on a continuous high.
Lester (Eric Stoltz) has a big problem with dating: he gets jealous.
Very jealous.  Ever since his first girlfriend - who he later spots
making out with an older man - Lester has taken his jealousy to a level
just below obsession.  He trails previous boyfriends like a bemused
private eye, keeping the exact count on how many there have been and
what their names are.  Perhaps it's a good thing, then, when he admits
himself to a therapy group.  But of course Lester is only doing this so
he can gain a greater insight into best-selling author Dashiell Frank
(Chris Eigeman), an ex-boyfriend of Lester's current woman, the
wild-spirited Ramona Ray (Annabella Sciorra, of What Dreams May Come).
When Ramona begins to make sense of Lester's lies, whilst Lester
develops an awkward and dishonest friendship with Dashiel, everything
builds up to a sensational climax.  Mr. Jealousy works best when
Baumbach positions his characters in the weekly therapy sessions, as
their spoken words reflect on the uniqueness of their personalities.
But Baumback refuses to let viewers ever feel wholly uncomfortable, so
the potentially confronting climax is filtered into sentimentality and
uses a cheap way of expressing the tension between two characters.
After skillfully crafting dramatic scenes of therapy, all Baumbach can
do is initiate a lame-brained fistfight.
Although with respectable performances all round, an underdeveloped
screenplay hinders Baumbach's direction.  This leaves him in an awkward
predicament: Mr. Jealousy is not funny enough to be a comedy, not
dramatic enough to be a drama, and not romantic enough to be a story of
romance.  Perhaps it's a comedy/drama/romance; but the jokes weren't
particularly memorable, the drama was watered down and the romance was
not invigorating.  The film's characters, however, save it from being a
disaster.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Lions Gate Films
 Director: Noah Baumbach
 Writer: Noah Baumbach
 Cast: Eric Stoltz, Annabella Sciorra, Chris Eigeman, Carlos
Jacott, Marianne Jean-Baptiste, Brian Kerwin, Peter
Bogdanovich, Bridget Fonda, John Lehr
   The most sparkling line in Noah Baumbach's follow-up to
"Kicking and Screaming" is a retort by Ramona (Annabella
Sciorra) to her boyfriend Lester (Eric Stoltz): "You're jealous
of yourself."  It's no wonder the name of his new movie is "Mr.
Jealousy."  Lester, an immature and neurotic thirty-one year
old who was never married and is still playing the dating
game is overcome with resentment toward all his girlfriend's
past and present lovers.  And isn't this an emotion that quite a
lot of us feel, one which few of us would own up to?
   Baumbach, who has cast a some of the actors he used to
good effect in his 1995 film--Eric Stoltz, Chris Eigeman and
Carlos Jacott--improves upon his earlier work, which was one
of those "we just graduated: what do we do now?" 20-
something, angst-ridden feats of which some of us have
becomes justifiably tired by now. This time the folks are past
thirty, and while they have had a succession of relationships,
they each have flaws that prevent them from permanent
commitment.
   We should say that Lester is not jealous of himself, as his
current love believes.  Disturbed, in a way, that Ramona slept
with him on their first date, he wonders just how many other
men had met with the same good fortune.  This is reasonable
enough, and is perhaps the principal basis for women's
conservatism when they enter new relationships.  "Mr.
Jealousy" is narrated throughout, a feature that interferes with
the smooth flow of the action but which has been justified by
director Baumbach as a way to dispense with tedious
exposition so that he can get right down to the essence of the
story.
   The tale centers on Lester, who drifts from job to job and is
currently a substitute Spanish teacher who does not speak or
understand Spanish.  He has been accepted into the
prestigious University of Iowa writing program but simply does
not want to go back to school.  In short, he's the laid-back
sort we've become used in movies featuring Eric Stoltz,
agitated only by the thought that Ramona has been with other
men--26 by her own count.  Suspicious that she is still seeing
a published writer, the insolent, full-of-himself Dashiell Frank
(Chris Eigeman), he follows Dashiell around and discovers
that he attends a psychotherapy group presided over by Dr.
Poke (Peter Bogdanovich). Enrolling himself in their company,
he intends to find out just how much influence this Dashiell
has in Ramona's life, but to do so without revealing much
about himself, he registers with the name of Vince, who is
actually his best friend (played by Carlos Jacott), who is also
unsure of himself and unable to commit to his girlfriend,
Lucretia (Marianne Jean-Baptiste).  Much of the humor of the
movie comes from Stoltz in a double role as himself and as
his friend.  As he works out Vince's problems, Vince himself
becomes increasingly eager to hear about "his"
psychotherapy.
   Baumbach seems always to be holding back as though
afraid of off-the-wall humor, and as a result his plot, though
satisfyingly complicated, never really rises to flat-out good
laughs.  The concept is such a good one--that of a guy so
obsessed with finding out the nature of his girlfriend's loyalty
that he will impersonate another in his psychotherapy group--
that we are surprised when the scenes peter out.  Stoltz and
Sciorra appear too old for their roles, though in fact Stoltz is
just six years older than his character, but they come across
as too naive for their age.  Annabella Sciorra is splendid in
her part, a slightly wacky woman who dashes around the
Brooklyn Museum giving lectures on the artworks there, while
Chris Eigeman, in particular, shines as the arrogant writer
who drops hints about the professional people chasing after
him with offers and options.
   As urban comedy (provided that you accept Brooklyn as a
hip, urban location), the picture will remind you of many of
Woody Allen's creations, though the omnipresence of the
narrator and the overuse of film techniques like irises call too
much attention to themselves.  The most puzzling bit of
casting involves Marianne Jean-Baptiste as Vince's fiance. 
The English actress Ms. Jean-Baptiste, who was wonderful in
"Secrets and Lies," adopts an American accent but simply
does not fit in with her current role. Bridget Fonda, who
cannot do wrong, knocks out a cute little role as the shy,
stuttering girlfriend of Dashiell, yet another character who
seems not suitable as the soulmate of a pompous and
outspoken writer.  Rated R.  Running time: 105 minutes.  (C)
Harvey Karten 1998
