Title
Review for Junior (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
George V. Reilly
Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Danny De Vito, Emma Thompson,
         Frank Langella, and Pamela Reed.  Directed by Ivan Reitman.
     Perfunctory is the word that sums up JUNIOR for me.  It's a
by-the-numbers exercise in movie-making, and never inspires much more
than an occasional chuckle.
     It must have been easy to position this as a high-concept movie:
Schwarzenegger Gets Pregnant.  The concept is fine as far as it goes,
but it doesn't go very far.  With a more imaginative and subtler script
it might have been quite a good film.  But JUNIOR shows little
imagination: stock characters doing stereotypical things in a
role-reversal.
     Schwarzenegger is a dour Austrian fertility researcher.  De Vito
is his partner, playing yet another character who's sneaky and greedy;
this time he's a good guy.  When their experimental fertility drug is
axed by the FDA, they decide in desperation to conduct their first
human trial on a man: Schwarzenegger.  The trial is supposed to run for
only three months, but Schwarzenegger, by now volatile with
hormone-induced mood swings, decides to carry the baby to
term---without telling De Vito.
     De Vito eventually realizes what has happened, of course.  In
time, so too do Frank Langella, the villain who first shut down their
project, Emma Thompson, the clumsy researcher who is falling in love
with Schwarzenegger, and Pamela Reed, De Vito's pregnant ex-wife.
     Of the cast, only Thompson manages to rise much beyond the
limitations of the material, being both very funny and endearing as the
perennially cack-handed love interest.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger; Danny DeVito; Emma Thompson & Frank Langella
The only thing that you can say about Junior is that it is a disappointment,
and a big one at that. Junior brings together Arnold Schwarzenegger and
Danny DeVito with director Ivan Reitman. These are the same men that brought
us the very funny Twins. So foolish me, I was hoping for something that
would at least come close to the level of quality of Twins. So much for
hopes. Schwarzenegger and DeVito play two scientists (Doctors Hesse and
Arbogast) who are working on a new drug that will reduce the possibility of
miscarriage in pregnancy. Unfortunately, due to circumstances beyond their
control, they are denied permission to test this new drug on humans, and
subsequently lose their funding. Still believing that their drug will work,
they decide to test it anyway, on Hesse. So, Dr. Hesse (Schwarzenegger)
artificially inseminates himself and begins taking the drug. Their theory is
that if the drug can prevent a man from miscarrying, surely it will work on
a woman.
Does the thought of Arnold Schwarzenegger pregnant sound funny or humorous
to you? Well, it must have to the producers of Junior. Admittedly,
Schwarzenegger has the comedic talent to pull it off. Perhaps if it had been
done differently it might have actually been funny. But it wasn't,
Schwarzenegger pregnant is goofy at best. The sight of Schwarzenegger
running around going through the hormone imbalances that come with
pregnancy, and the accompanying emotional swings, is not funny.
Schwarzenegger comes very close to embarrassing himself with these antics. I
kept thinking to myself, with the time Arnold wasted making this turkey he
could have been making an action picture. Better yet, with Schwarzenegger,
DeVito and Reitman all in the same place at the same time, why didn't they
make a sequel to Twins? Anything would have been better than this mess.
Danny DeVito is wasted in this movie. His part could have been played by any
joker they pulled in off the street. (After seeing the movie, if I was
DeVito, I probably would have wished they had pulled someone in off the
street.) Emma Thompson is wasted here as well. While Thompson is best known
for her Jane Austin adaptations, she is also a fine comedian. Too bad she
didn't get to use any of that talent here.
Am I being too hard on this film? I don't think so. Schwarzenegger and
DeVito are two of my favorite actors in film today, and Ivan Reitman is one
of the more talented directors in Hollywood. With a supporting cast of Emma
Thompson and Frank Langella, the filmmakers really have to be trying hard to
make a bad film. They certainly managed here. Maybe it was well intentioned,
but unfortunately this is a movie that never should have been made.
If you are tempted to see this film, do yourself a favor and go rent Twins,
a film that truly takes advantage of Arnold Schwarzenegger and Danny
DeVito's comedic talents.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Ivan Reitman has a spotty background directing comedies.  Films
like MEATBALLS, TWINS, and GHOSTBUSTERS I and II have had good gags but
have been rather thin on story.  DAVE seemed to indicate Reitman was
starting to get a feel for plotting and characters.  It must have been
a fluke, however, since he is back to featherweight comedies with
under-developed characters in JUNIOR.  Once you know that the idea is
to show Schwarzenegger going though the same physical changes that
pregnant women go through, you can probably think of more amusing scene
possibilities than you will actually see in this film.
     Dr. Alexander Hesse is an incredibly well-built scientist with an
Austrian accent and an aversion to babies.  Ironically, he is working
on Expectane, a drug to improve the safety of pregnancies.  When the
FDA decides that the drug needs more testing, Hesse's fast-talking
partner Dr. Larry Arbogast (Danny DeVito), thinks that human testing
will be more convincing.  Arbogast talks Hesse into a surgical
implantation of an egg, but only for the first three months.  Meanwhile
the university has evicted the two scientists from their lab space and
has replaced them with Dr. Diana Reddin (Emma Thompson), a winning but
rather awkward scientist.  Her research unwittingly provides Hesse and
Arbogast with some of the materials they need for their experiment, and
the first male pregnancy is initiated.
     It must have seemed like a comic natural to have the super-
masculine Schwarzenegger in a role with cross-gender implications, but
it is a real mistake.  Gender-crossing films like TOOTSIE and
MRS. DOUBTFIRE have been big successes for other stars, but
Schwarzenegger simply does not project personality the way that a
Dustin Hoffman or a Robin Williams does.  And Reitman intentionally
tones down Schwarzenegger's personality so that later in the film he
can appear to be more "humanized" by the experience.  The problem is
that it takes all of Schwarzenegger's strength to project any
personality at all and later it is hard to work up much interest in the
character even in his unusual predicament.  In TOOTSIE, look how well-
defined a character Hoffman creates even before any of the cross-gender
material.  Besides, Schwarzenegger already bulges oddly and making him
pregnant almost seems redundant.  Actually part of the pleasure of such
a film would be to see how a man struggles with the fatigue of carrying
the additional weight.  This makes an Austrian body-builder perhaps
less appropriate than many other actors would have been.  It is not
clear why Danny DeVito is in this film since he is not at all credible
as a scientist and his comic potential is all but ignored.  It may well
be that the film is trying to play off Reitman's previous success in
TWINS.  Similarly, Frank Langella is around to play a shady university
executive in a story that didn't seem to need a villain.  But he was
good in DAVE so Reitman seems to want to use what has worked before.
     It was obviously assumed that the situation would be so funny that
the writing seems to have been done on autopilot.  This is a film
without any well-developed character in anything but the physical
sense.  It returns again and again to common scenes of pregnancy whose
only humor value is that you are seeing a man going through the
changes.  Once you have seen Arnold complaining that his nipples are
getting sensitive and crying at soap operas, is it still supposed to be
funny to see him eating pickles and ice cream, or is that really justa
variation on the same gag?  I picture writers Kevin Wade and Chris
Conrad just making a checklist of pregnancy cliches and writing a scene
for each.  Time and again opportunities for a funnier and more
believable script are passed up for cheap gags.  At this stage of
development the drug would not have been given a suggestive trade name
like "Expectane,"  it would be called something like "Themoxodil."  To
pick up the pacing, the film throws in slapstick humor, mostly built
around Thompson's clumsiness.  But the slapstick isn't funny and it
sabotages her effort to make her character believable.  Her body
language is the best thing about this film, but the slapstick is
misplaced and even she cannot make it work.
     This is a cookie-cutter formula comedy that drags on what might
have worked as a short skit far too long.  Rate it a -1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Danny DeVito, Emma Thompson, Frank
Langella.
Screenplay:  Kevin Wade and Chris Conrad.
Director:  Ivan Reitman.
     In 1988, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Danny DeVito and Ivan Reitman set
the standard for "high concept" with their comic vehicle TWINS.  In
Hollywood pitch-meeting parlance, it could be reduced to five
words--"Schwarzenegger and DeVito are twins"--and proved that sometimes
a simple idea and the right talent could add up to $100 million even
with a paper-thin script.  JUNIOR goes TWINS one better and two words
fewer--"Schwarzenegger is pregnant."  And in a limited sense, it
works.  JUNIOR is so simple and gently directed that the warm
performances of Emma Thompson and Schwarzenegger manage to struggle
through a script that always goes for the easy gag, and even then can't
make most of them particularly funny.
     Arnold plays Dr. Alexander Hesse, a fertility researcher at a
California university whose project is a drug called Expectane,
intended to combat miscarriages.  After the FDA rejects a request for
human experiments, the project loses its funding and lab space, and
appears destined for research limbo.  But Hesse's partner Larry
Arbogast (Danny DeVito) has other ideas, and more radical ones.  He
convinces Hesse to test Expectane on himself, fertilizing an ovum
stolen from researcher Dianna Reddin (Emma Thompson) and implanting it
in Hesse's abdomen.  The impregnation is a success, but of course
complications ensue.  Hesse must hide his condition both from Dianna,
with whom he is beginning a romance, and a university official (Frank
Langella) who would turn the experiment--Hesse's unborn child--into
university property.
     This is not Hollywood's first attempt at a pregnant man story, and
the disastrous first attempt (the Joan Rivers-directed Billy Crystal
vehicle RABBIT TEST) would not seem to inspire eagerness to give the
premise another try.  The joke in JUNIOR, of course, isn't just that a
man is pregnant; it's that the man in question is Arnold
Schwarzenegger.  Schwarzenegger's choices of roles in the last several
years have demonstrated a mastery of his own image, as he alternates
action blockbusters with against-type comedies, and he has proved
remarkably adept at both.  As limited as his acting skills may be, he
is usually very likable, and JUNIOR is no exception.  Hesse changes
from a lonely lab hound to a glowing parent-to-be over the course of
the film, and Schwarzenegger manages the transition nimbly with the
sure-handed assistance of director Ivan Reitman in their third
collaboration.
     He is also aided by Emma Thompson, who gets a rare opportunity to
showcase her background as a standup comic.  Those familiar with
Thompson only from her Branagh/Shakespeare and Merchant/Ivory efforts
will be quite pleasantly surprised by her goofy performance in JUNIOR.
Her Dianna, a clumsy and socially inept scientist, is the perfect match
for Schwarzenegger's Hesse, and Thompson's delightful moments of
physical comedy make her scenes with Arnold very appealing.
     That's really what JUNIOR has going for it:  appealing performers
at their most appealing.  Most of the jokes are based on the obvious
incongruities of Schwarzenegger in the family way--his appearance in a
prosthetic belly; his emotional response to a sappy Kodak commercial;
his delivery of lines like, "My nipples are very sensitive."  And it's
only because Schwarzenegger seems to be having so much fun that any of
it works.  Other bits, including the obligatory scene of a baby with
urine streaming down its leg, are too trite for any amount of good will
to make them work.  The script, credited to Kevin Wade and Chris
Conrad, is full of missed opportunities and silliness instead of any
real inventiveness.  A subplot involving DeVito's relationship with his
pregnant ex-wife really goes nowhere, and seems to be nothing but an
excuse to joke about a middle-aged woman having sex with a member of
the rock group Aerosmith.  Frank Langella, who was so good in the
Reitman-directed DAVE last year, is woefully underused as the
obligatory villain, and gets the most obvious comeuppance available.
     Perhaps that's the word that defines JUNIOR best:  obvious.  This
is terrain we've all seen many, many times before.  But the cast of
JUNIOR is so engaging that it feels like we're seeing that terrain in a
very comfortable car, in the company of old friends.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     JUNIOR is the story of a scientist (Arnold Schwarzenegger) who, as
Jenner did with his small pox vaccine, decides to be a human guinea pig
for his own medicine.  His medicine is for controlling pregnancy hence
he must have an egg planted in himself and actually get pregnant to
prove his drug works.  And thereby make himself millions from the
biotech industry.
     His partner is an OB/GYN played by Danny DeVito.  The fellow
scientist working on frozen human eggs is played by Emma Thompson.
     As a person who had a recurring dream when he was in his 20s that
he was pregnant, and as one who loved the director's (Ivan Reitman)
last movie (DAVE), I was really looking forward to JUNIOR.  The set up
of the plot is fascinating.  It is cast with great people, and it had
terrific trailers.
     This is a single joke movie.  We have an increasing larger and
very realistically pregnant Schwarzenegger as a caricature of a
pregnant woman.  He gets to utter every cliche possible.  People tell
him he looks "radiant".  He complains to DeVito that he doesn't take
him out of the house enough.  He stuffs himself silly on ice cream,
pickles, Chinese food, and the entire contents of the refrigerator.  It
works okay for the first 5 minutes and then you start checking your
watch.  I don't blame Arnold - an actor I absolutely love.  It is the
scriptwriter's and the director's fault, not Arnold's.
     DeVito plays DeVito.  In general he is hot and cold as an actor.
In JUNIOR he is not believable or funny as an obstetrician.
     The sad part is that Emma Thompson, whom I think is brilliant, is
totally wasted in this movie.  It is frequently embarrassing watching
her.  She has no dialog worth remembering.  They have her doing one
sight gag after another.  Typical ones are where she falls asleep on
her cheese sandwich and wakes up and talks to people not realizing she
has a large piece of cheese stuck to her cheek.  In another she dances
with her paper napkin stuck to her high heel shoe until while trying to
shake it off she throws the shoe onto some one's table.  Gosh, I sure
had some belly laughs over that original material.
     On the good side, you get to see a lot of scenes of Berkeley's
Life Sciences building plus beautiful images of living in the best
parts of San Francisco.
     I give the show a single * and do not recommend it.  It is
correctly rated PG-13 for adult themes.  It runs a very long 1:50.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: November 23, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  11/23/94 
Running Length:  1:49 
Rated:  PG-13 (Mature themes, sexual innuendo, crossdressing) 
     The new Ivan Reitman/Arnold Schwarzenegger comedy is a one-joke
affair, and it takes surprisingly little time for the potential humor
in the situation to wear thin.  As a result, the viewer is left with
about ninety minutes of suffering through Schwarzenegger's attempts to
act--certainly not his strong suit.  Put simply, JUNIOR demands more
range from its leading man than he's capable of giving.  The
predictable result is a big-budget mess more likely to elicit groans
than laughter.
     Even suspending all semblance of disbelief doesn't make this film
work.  It is so poorly-constructed that a viewer has to go into a
catatonic state to appreciate what's happening on screen.  You don't
expect high art from a Reitman production, especially when Arnold is
the big draw, but this kind of unrepentant idiocy is unforgivable.
TWINS and KINDERGARTEN COP weren't great movies, but they had a lot
more going for them.
     The story revolves around the fertility team of Alexander Hesse
(Schwarzenegger) and his diminutive partner, Larry Arbogast (Danny
DeVito).  These two don't really like each other, but each is willing
to put up with a lot for the sake of their research--a new wonder drug
designed to reduce, if not eliminate, miscarriages.  However, when the
drug doesn't obtain FDA approval, Hesse and Arbogast are displaced from
their laboratory so that the space can be given to Dr. Diana Reddin
(Emma Thompson), whose work involves frozen eggs.  Undaunted, the two
scientists decide to continue their experiments, this time using a
human test case.  So, after some prompting from his partner, Hesse
fertilizes one of Reddin's cryogenically-preserved eggs and implants it
in his abdominal cavity.  Now, he's pregnant. (Does that make him
daddy, mommy, or both?)
     I won't deny that the premise has comic potential, albeit of an
unsophisticated sort.  The problem is that the trite script fails to
capitalize on opportunities, relying instead on worn-out cliches and
jokes that are, for the most part, unfunny (there are a few notable
exceptions--I do admit to laughing a few times).
     JUNIOR contains a couple of pointless subplots that serve only to
stretch the running length to an almost-unendurable one-hundred nine
minutes.  The first involves the machinations of an underhanded
character (played by Frank Langella) to use this unorthodox experiment
for his own gain.  The second focuses on Hesse's stay at a maternity
retreat, where he's forced to dress in women's clothes.  Those that
appreciate raw crossdressing humor would do better to view THE
ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT (although I suppose
there's some appeal in watching Schwarzenegger, looking like a beached
whale, in a frock).
     The only good thing about JUNIOR is Emma Thompson, but she's far
from sufficient to save the film.  Her comic aptitude is hardly new
(remember THE TALL GUY?), but it may come as something of a surprise
for those who remember her from only HOWARDS END, THE REMAINS OF THE
DAY, and MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.
     It's astounding how inconsistent Ivan Reitman's work is--the same
man responsible for such enjoyable films as DAVE and GHOSTBUSTERS also
has the dog of a movie BEETHOVEN on his resume.  Now, there's JUNIOR,
which, in a way, has a subject matter appropriate to its dubious
quality.  After all, eduring Arnold's labor pains, and all that leads
up to them, is something of a painful labor.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Eric Grossman
     What!  Arnold Schwarzenegger gets pregnant?  A high-concept movie
is typically defined as a film that has a premise which can be
described in twenty-five words or less.  As with his previous outings
with director Ivan Reitman, TWINS (what, Danny Devito and
Schwarzenegger are twins) and KINDERGARTEN COP (what, Schwarzenegger
becomes a kindergarten teacher), JUNIOR pushes the idea of
high-concept to the limit.  However, despite it's lack of story and
it's other assorted flaws, Schwarzenegger and company have managed to
create an entertaining movie.
     So how does Arnold becomes pregnant?  With a little bit of
science-fiction that has more science then one would expect,
Schwarzenegger plays Dr. Alex Hesse, a precise, European scientist who
along with his colleague, Dr, Arbogast (Danny Devito), is tying to
develop a pregnancy drug called Expectane.  Expectane eliminates the
problem of becoming pregnant and will yield millions for Arbogast and
Hesse. Trouble begins when bad guy, research administrator Noah Banes
(Frank Langella) sabotages the Expectane project so he can finance and
seduce Dr. Diana Reddin, (Emma Thompson) a cryogenic researcher.
Arbogast convinces Hesse to take a chance and experiment on himself.
The embryo is implanted and with a few female hormones and the
Expectane, Arnold quickly finds he has a baby in the oven.  Soon he is
experiencing all of the ups and downs of pregnancy and this is where
most of JUNIOR's humor emanates.  We get to see Arnold with morning
sickness, Arnold with cramps, Arnold becoming more emotional (he even
weeps at sappy commercials) and most of all, Arnold with a big, big
bulge in his normally lean torso.
     Schwarzenegger makes two types of films.  The first are the movies
such as TERMINATOR and PREDATOR where he exhibits his primary persona,
extreme masculinity.  The second are the Reitman comedies, where he
spoofs his primary persona by doing things that counterpoint his
"commando" mystique.  Schwarzenegger has the "A" version and the "B"
versions down to a science and as long as he does not try to mix them
(such as THE LAST ACTION HERO) he makes very successful movies.
However, how many more high-concept one-liners can Reitman and writers
such as JUNIOR's scriptors, Kevin Wade and Chris Conrad, come up with?
Actually, I'm afraid to ask.
     What really helps give JUNIOR some weight is it's supporting
cast.  Emma Thompson, who has proven herself adept at both comedy and
drama, is very likable and funny as the socially limited, Dr.  Reddin.
It was interesting to watch an actress of her wide range play against
the more limited mega-movie star.  They hold their own with each other
and there is actually some chemistry. Added to Schwarzenegger's already
established chemistry with the uncouth but affable Devito and you find
yourself with the ingredients that make JUNIOR more than just a one
line joke.  It's just too bad that Frank Langella (who played the
wonderfully wicked Chief Of Staff in Reitman's DAVE) did not have
much of a opportunity to stretch his wings in this film.
     Schwarzenegger surrounds himself with the best filmmakers he can
find.  Reitman is a top comedy director (ANIMAL HOUSE, GHOSTBUSTERS)
and he does his usual solid job with this film.  Cinematographer Adam
Greenberg who shot the monstrous TERMINATOR 2 and production designer
Stephen Lineweaver are conscientious in their use of color and light in
accordance with Schwarzenegger's arc from sterile scientist to pregnant
father. The film drags in the middle but I think this had more to do
with the screenplay than with Sheldon Kahn's and Wendy Greene
Bricmont's editing.  Finally, James Newton Howard's effective score
pulls all the right heart-strings.
     Although it's a lightweight film, JUNIOR actually deals with some
controversial issues.  I would not be surprised if I hear it referenced
in gender debates or abortion arguments.  However, all of this is
without design.  JUNIOR is an innocuous movie with some flaws, but it
certainly was funny to watch Schwarzenegger say, "I want to have my
baby."
