Title
Review for Anna and the King (1999)
Number of Reviews
21

Author
Scott Hunt
Review by Scott Hunt.   Visit me at Movie Hunt
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Cast:  Chow Yun-Fat, Jodie Foster, Bai Ling
Director: Andy Tennant
Writer: Anna Leonowens, Steve Meerson, Peter Krikes
Anna and the King strides onto the screen in full regalia, wearing a
brilliant suit of sumptuous landscapes, deep, vibrant colors and an
epic storyline. It's true beauty comes from it's subtle ruminations on
the politics of power, whether it's between governments, or the
interplay between a man and a woman.
Anna (Jodie Foster) is a widowed British schoolteacher with a touch of
wanderlust trying to grasp her quicksilver feelings concerning the
recent death of her husband. With son in tow, she takes the employ of
King Mongkut (Chow Yun-Fat) to tutor his son in the English language.
Mongkut sees the strength of the British and correctly surmises that
his country's future lies in opening itself up to the ways of the
western world. Anna function is to help provide that link.
The core of the film, of course, deals with the blossoming love between
Anna and Mongkut as it attempts to germinate in the unfriendly soil of
a shifting political climate. Foster plays Anna with equal parts
clenched jaw and wide-eyed wonder. She is assertive, yet, respectful of
the king as she initially tries to impose her western sensibilities
upon him. It is one of Foster's strongest performances since Silence of
the Lambs in a role she could not have played earlier in her career.
She brings a mature self- awareness and determination that might not
have come across from a younger Foster. It's a joy to watch her cagily
bargain for her own measure of influence within the realm of Mongkut's
monarchy. When she makes her entrance into a politically charged
banquet mid-film, she exudes a hypnotic beauty that is deepened by her
textured performance.
Chow-Yun Fat's King Mongkut is every measure of Foster's Anna, perhaps
even more so. This is the Chow Yun-Fat that  Hong Kong cinema has been
in love with for nearly twenty years. He is imposing, yet vulnerable,
playful, but stern. It is an impressively assured and nuanced
performance.
Precious time is stolen from the movie's 155 minutes running time by an
unengaging subplot involving one the King's concubines (Bai Ling) and
her love of a commoner. It strikes with the subtlety of Siam's fabled
white elephant as it stomps through the leisurely paced story.
Some may be put off by the action filled climax of the movie. Although
a bit inconsistent in tone from the rest of the film, it fits within
the established subplot of a perceived siege by neighboring Burma, a
country backed by the British.
Anna and the King transcends being a predictable, traditional love
story by avoiding mawkishness. It shows a seduction of intelligence.
Ever mindful of each other's positions, Anna and King Mongkut negotiate
a maze of social customs, conflicting world views and lost loved ones
to connect on a level that ultimately proves deeply satisfying, if not
achingly bittersweet.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ANNA AND THE KING(1999) ** 3/4. Directed by Andy Tennant. Written by 
Steve Meerson and Peter Krikes, based on the diaries of Anna 
Leonowens. Photography, Caleb Deschanel Editing , Roger Bondelli. 
Production design, Luciana Arrighi. Music,  George Fenton.Produced by 
Lawrence Bender & Ed Elbert. Cast: Jodie Foster (Anna), Chow Yun-Fat 
(King Mongkut), Bai Ling (Tuptim), Tom Felton (Louis), Syed Alwi (the 
Kralahome), Randall Duk Kim (General Alak), et al. A Fox 2000 
Pictures release. 2 hours and 28  minutes. PG-13
The British woman Anna Leonowens (1834-1914) did exist. When she was 
24, her husband -- a Major of the Indian Army-- died.  She lived in 
Singapore with her two children when, in 1862 (she was then about 28) 
she accepted the offer of Siam's King Mongkut, to come to the palace 
in Bangkok and educate his many, many children. She was a teacher 
here for five years. Later she wrote two books about her experience. 
In this century, Margaret Landon, an American who had spent over ten 
years in Siam, upon her return  to the USA wrote articles about Mrs. 
Leonowens. Later (1941), in an  amalgam of biographical and 
historical facts, plus fiction, she published  a novel based on 
Anna's life. This became the 1946 film, "Anna and the King of Siam" 
with Rex Harrison in his first American movie and Irene Dunne.
Then came the Rodgers and Hammerstein Broadway musical "The King and 
I," from the Landon novel. Yul Brynner, in his first leading role, 
was the King. Later yet, the stage musical became a movie musical, 
also with Brynner (who won one of the films 5 Oscars) and  Deborah 
Kerr.
The December 1999 release is mostly Instant Visual Gratification. 
Extremely lavish, beautifully produced, staged and photographed, it 
was filmed in Malaysia and not Thailand, which has officially banned 
all Anna/King movies. Still, at two-and-a-half hours it is even 
longer than "The King and I" which was stretched out by song and 
dance.
Thailand is the modern name of Siam, as most people know. Or do they? 
A newspaper article today reports: "A survey out last month found 
that among 500 students ages 12 to 17 from across the country, 
one-third reported learning about the war in school. The study, 
commissioned by the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, shows that nearly 
one-third couldn't correctly identify Vietnam's continent; 3%, or 15 
students, named North America." And that:"...when veterans ask 
students who won the war, as many as half say the United States, even 
though one- to three-quarters have relatives who fought."
The basic story is the confrontation of East and West and the 
friendship (more exactly what the French call an "amitie amoureuse") 
between the king and the governess. I will not waste space by 
summarizing a plot familiar from the earlier versions to many.  Anna 
is put in charge of the King's boys and girls, 58 of them in this 
version. His Majesty has several dozen wives and concubines, and this 
in Bangkok which today is the sex-for-hire capital of the world. 
However, nowhere do we even glimpse a bare breast, or a soupcon of 
lovemaking.
The monarch is played by Chow Yun-Fat, a superstar of Hong-Kong 
action films. Except for his approving an execution --but what's a 
beheading or two compared to contemporary screen mayhem?-- the 
demi-God Mongkut is portrayed by Mr. Chow (or is it Mr. Yun-Fat?) as 
a good-looking, fine speaker of English and above all as a sensitive 
and truly sweet man. As in real life, the King tries to initiate 
opening Siam to the West.
Anna arrives in Siam with her lively son Louis, a boy not impressed 
by titles or ceremonials. She does bring with her a sort of jingoism 
(though the term was not born until 1887), which could be summed as 
"There's one right way, It is the British way."
But then, this is a 1999 movie. It has to be Politically Correct. Not 
only is there no hint of the old Britannia's disrespect of WOGs 
(Worthy Oriental Gentlemen, a supercilious appellation), but Anna 
with miraculous speed learns some Siamese, quickly appreciates the 
strange new ways and quirks, fully (well, almost fully) understands 
the people and their land. While always polite, she is outspoken, a 
true Women's Libber.
Jodie Foster does this with cool, elegance, a pointy face and a 
reserve that make her hidden feelings quite British. British too is 
her accent. Having read somewhere a denigration of that accent 
(critics will say anything)  I checked out some reviews from 
London--where the movie is in 42 theaters. The critics confirmed that 
her Brit-speak was very good.
Now, except for the splendid production values, Mr. Yun-Fat steals 
the show in ways which are subtle compared to those of Rex and Yul. 
Those two got much mileage from their theatricality. They were, in 
their way, little Caesars vis-a-vis all, including Anna. Rex was a 
pre-echo of his autocratic Professor Henry Higgins in "My Fair Lady." 
His main weapon was his voice. Yul's was his physical energy and 
bluster. Both were clearly enjoying their rather comic, "fun" roles. 
But here, the King is a thoughtful fellow, a thinker even, vigorous 
yet on the  gentle side -- and a crypto-romantic. He calls attention 
to himself more by quietness than by flamboyance.
Countering much of Anna's political correctness is the portrayal of 
Britain's expansionist policy. Queen Victoria is not yet Empress of 
India (1876) but her country's imperialism is woven into the story, 
notably through a crass merchant, Mr. Kincaid, and politely haughty 
diplomats, especially a Lord played by Mister Superjowls, Geoffrey 
Palmer, familiar as Lionel in the TV series "As Time Goes By."
The theme of British interventionism runs throughout, but in a 
spasmodic, un-rounded way. It starts with attacks by killers who 
would destabilize the Siamese monarchy. Presumably, they come from 
neighboring Burma, which is a pawn of Perfidious Albion. This leads 
to a murky political subplot, with surprises which are essentially 
unnecessary, distracting, implausible--in fact silly-- and  clichés 
such as blow-them-ups found in action flicks. The movie's ending is 
downright soupy.
The bad guys are initially called "death squads," which is an 
anachronistic expression. There is no lack of anachronisms or 
historical goofs. In the film, at his first ever European-style 
reception for foreigners, the King's brood sings "Daisy, Daisy" years 
before the bicycle built for two became a reality. His Majesty, in 
his first ever dance (he had been a monk for many years), and, mind 
you, a dance with a European woman, proves a fine, agile waltzer. He 
offers elephants to the American President, receives a letter of 
thanks from Abraham Lincoln, who mentions the battle of Antietam 
(September 1862)  as causing 70,000 deaths, whereas these were closer 
to 27, 000.
Yun-Fat's Monkgut is infinitely nicer than the man depicted in the 
real Anna's journals. These are full of inventions as well as self 
aggrandizements.  His flirtation with Anna --whom he addresses as 
"Ma'am" while the other notables say "Sir" to her--is the biggest of 
all fabulations and anachronisms. In reality, Mongkut (1804-1868) was 
58 when Anna entered his service. In reality too, research has 
concluded that Anna never even met the King; that she was a teacher, 
not a governess; that, that, that ---ad infinitum....
There are, in many languages, sayings to the effect that people who 
come from far away can be major liars. Anna's diaries, written when 
Siam was still a "terra incognita" to most of the world, overflow 
with fabrications. It is not surprising that the understandably 
touchy Thailand of today has banned successively all the movie 
versions of Anna's "story," and have been particularly offended at 
the portrayals of King Mongkut. The current movie, coming in the age 
of the Internet, has caused a furore and a flood of messages from all 
sources. Thai ones, including protests by students; non-Thai, 
including exposes by researchers.
The only sensible way to consider the problem is to look at all the 
Anna-King movies as fantasy-fiction.
In version #3,  over and above all else, the spectacle is the thing. 
It was a huge undertaking which also involved  Oscar-worthy blending 
of photography, special effects and computer-generated images. From 
the palace to huge statues, from the grandest barges since 
"Cleopatra" to small, labor-intensive throwaway details, this is a 
paean to imagery, whether invented or not.. I'd love to see the 
movie's out-takes.
If the sights are painstakingly cultivated, the sounds lag behind, as 
they often do in films today. Inauspiciously, the opening has a 
muddle of conflicting noises, music and speech. The truly colossal 
list of end-credits rolls to a dumb, jarring, irrelevant and horrible 
song written by George Fenton and two other culprits. "How Can I Not 
Love You" is sung in an awful Junior High voice.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) ANNA AND THE KING is a joy to sit through. The lush,
exotic setting; a stirring performance from Jodie Foster; and a charming
Chow Yun-Fat make the two and a half hours drift by. One could easily
enjoy an afternoon at this movie.
But ANNA AND THE KING is full of problems, mostly coming from the script
of Steve Meerson and Peter Krikes. There are gratuitous explosions,
edits, subplots, and songs, not to mention a muddled message and fuzzy
focus.
The movie starts in Bangkok in 1862, just as Anna Leonowens is to
arrive. The British schoolteacher is here to teach King Mongkut's
children in the ways of the West. It's the story told in THE KING AND I,
and it's based on the diaries of Leonowens.
My own prejudiced notions say that this story should be about the
culture clash between Siam and Britain, and more to the point, the way
this clash works its way into a personal relationship.
For a while, this is exactly the focus of the movie. Anna settles in to
the new culture without giving up her Britishness. Her bold, cocky ways
make the Siamese bristle, but she remains proud and stoic. Because he
invited Anna, King Mongkut knows he should not restrain her. (He quickly
learns he CANNOT restrain her). Instead, he watches her efforts with
charmed amusement.
On the other hand, Anna truly IS arrogant, at one point stating
unquestionably that "The ways of England are the ways of the world."
Their relationship is flirtatious at first. Their mutual affection
reaches its peak at a great Western-style dinner party, where Anna and
Mongkut dance.
Afterwards, Mongkut presents Anna with a generous gift -- an elaborate
gold ring. She of course refuses the gift, which is far too great a
token. It represents a new level of seriousness in their relationship
where Anna will not go.
Her refusal of the king's gift casts an ugly light on Anna. The king no
longer sees her as charming, but as an arrogant, ungrateful guest, a
teacher who needs to be taught a lesson.
The first half of the movie works very well. The chemistry between
Foster and Chow is enjoyable and believable. The themes of power,
propriety, and respect are played out in every conversation. But the
movie loses its focus and intensity. It becomes less about cultures and
relationships and more about conflict and resolution.
Little problems abound, but worst of all are the two subplots that
hijack center stage. One is of a young couple's forbidden love, the
other is of a military coup. Both ostensibly tie in with the main
characters' relationship. But they are so prominent and distracting that
you forget whose movie this is.
The movie loses credibility in its handling of the subplot of the
lovers. Mongkut tells Anna that their cultures differ in every respect 
including love. The editor (Roger Bondelli) makes a point by immediately
cutting to the two lovers who are as Western as Romeo and Juliet. In
other words, the movie is choosing sides. It says that Mongkut is wrong
about love and that the Western way of love is correct. A movie about
culture clashes needs to be more open-minded than this.
It does even worse in its handling of the military coup. What started
out as a thoughtful movie about a relationship (a chick flick) now has
stunts, plan-blabbing villains, and even a gratuitous explosion (a guy
flick). All the while Anna (remember her?) is nowhere to be found. At
this point, the entire subplot is irrelevant. The movie's main
relationship has run its course. The 20 minutes it takes to follow the
"guy flick" plot should have simply been cut.
If there is a single problem that encapsulates all of the little
problems, it is that the movie panders. An explosion for the guys, Romeo
and Juliet for the gals, some cute children for the parents, and a pop
song over the credits for the teens. There's no mystery as to why the
movie panders: it's a big-budget studio picture with a Christmas
release. It bends over backwards to please all, which it can only do if
it is spineless.
I can't decide if the great-looking spectacle was enough to outweigh the
pandering plot. What I am sure of is that this movie could have been so
much more.
"I'm a filmmaker and that's why I will never make a movie on video tape" 
-- Burt Reynolds, Boogie Nights

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
Anna And The King (1999) 
Rated PG-13; running time 140 minutes
Genre: Drama
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0166485 
Official site: http://www.annaandtheking.com/  
  [I highly encourage my readers to visit this extremely well-done 
   webpage. It's stunning.]
Written by: Peter Krikes and Steve Meerson; based on the diaries 
of Anna Leonowens
Directed by: Andy Tennant
Starring: Jodie Foster, Chow Yun-Fat, Bai Ling, Tom Felton, 
Keith Chin, Syed Alwi (Kralahome), Kay Siu Lim, Randall Duk Kim, 
Melissa Campbell, Deanna Yusoff, Shanthini Venugopal
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 1999
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsanna.html
The first of my "1999 catchup" movies, I avoided "Anna and the King" 
when it first came out, because of my general distaste for most remakes, 
especially music and movie remakes.  While this distaste is not 
universal--I loved George Benson's turn on "Unchained Melody", for 
instance; similarly, I grooved on the Pierce Brosnan/Renee Russo version 
of "The Thomas Crowne Affair"--I can say without overmuch reservation 
that remakes twist my gizzards.  And for me, the ghost of Yul Brenner's 
King Mongkut loomed heavy on the horizon of this version; so much so 
that it took me until yesterday, to go see it.
Of course, the irony in all of the above is that Yul's "The King and I" 
was, itself, a remake.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Set in Siam of the 1860's, "Anna and the King" tells the epic - and this 
time, non-musical - tale, based on the diary of widowed English 
schoolmistress Anna Leonowens (Jodie Foster), on how she and her son 
Louis (Tom) came to live in Siam (now Thailand).  Their primary purpose 
there is to "Westernize" Prince Chulalongkorn (Keith Chin), the eldest 
son of King Mongkut (Chow Yun-Fat), "Lord of Life" in the eyes of head 
wife Lady Chang (Deanna Yusoff) and his 22 other wives and 42 
concubines; his daughter Princess Fa-Ying (Melissa Campbell) and 66 
other children; his brother, Chowfa (Kay Siu Lim); assistant Kralahome 
(Syed Alwi); and army General Alak (Randall Duk Kim).  But all is not 
well in Siam: his newest wife, Tuptim (Bai Ling) is still in love with 
the man she left out of duty to her King; and Burmese forces, backed 
with the power of the British Empire Anna so proudly boasts of, conspire 
against him--possibly backed by a traitor within the King's trusted 
circle.
The Upshot:
One of the traits that I have and generally consider a positive one - 
loyalty - is, alas, my undoing with regard to enjoying new things.  In a 
nutshell, it takes a lot for me to let go of an old passion, to be able 
appreciate a new one.  "Anna and the King" illustrates this precisely; 
try as I might, I kept comparing it, and its stars, Foster and Yun-Fat, 
to the "original" with Brenner as the King and Deborah Kerr as Anna 
(though I had far less problems with that role; Jodie Foster quickly 
made me say "Deborah who?").  Not that the "original", story-wise, was 
all that great; it had all of the Issues that come with musicals [who, 
really, breaks out in song to express an idea or problem?], but like 
many true Classics, such Issues are overlooked in favor of our nostalgia 
for Better Days.
Not so with the whippersnappers who come along as pretenders to the 
throne--to wit, "Anna".  That it has the audacity to not Break Out In 
Song, makes the scrutiny all the more great.  That "Anna", for the most 
part, is able to stand up to that scrutiny, is a tribute to the actors 
involved, if not the story itself (a story which resonates, "Black 
Factor"-wise, for me as a descendant of people taken into slavery.  But 
more on that below).  Foster, as I implied, was much easier a pill to 
swallow in the role of Anna than was her counterpart, Yun-Fat; a problem 
very much exacerbated by nostalgia.
My memories of "The King and I" are very much colored by nostalgia; I 
remember key scenes and songs (mostly because the school choir I was in, 
sang them), and the general storyline, but I haven't seen it on TV in 
quite some time.  Were it not for "Anna", I would have missed the 
heartbreaking story of Tuptim and her love for Balat (Shanthini 
Venugopal), and how that came to cause Issues for The King and Anna; I 
have no memory of whether this was an important part of the musical 
version, and in fact, though I remember the name "Tuptim", I thought it 
was the name of one of The King's sons. 
Were it not for "Anna", I would have missed the sweet Princess Fa-Ying, 
the "little monkey" who, in this version, held a stronger hold on The 
King's heart than did his eldest son; that bond, not the traditional 
"that's my boy!" father's pride, was more at the forefront here, and it 
bespoke a Kinder, Gentler King than Yul Brenner's, which of course has 
something to do with the times we live in (for modern times do have an 
effect on historical dramas), but I believe it has even more to do with 
the kind of actor Yun-Fat is.  I saw this as a deficit at first--I kept 
fighting the urgency to shrug him off with a flippant "yeah, but he's no 
Yul Brenner"--but Yun-Fat did the wise thing by not *trying* to be Yul 
Brenner.
And were it not for "Anna", I would have remembered Siam as it was seen 
by Hollywood of the 1950's: a country full of Happy Little Orientals 
with few worries in their Primitive heads, with  spoils afoot, begging 
for the taking--much like the Black slaves were seen in the book that 
the Prince was reading, "Uncle Tom's Cabin".  And less distant yet, the 
many African countrymen and women whose countries were being 
colonialized by the "Great Empires" in the 19th and 20th centuries.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
If there's anything that raises my hackles, it's the patronizing notion 
that colonialization did anything for the nations who came under the 
rule of the "Great Empires" besides strip colonized countries of their 
natural resources, and force missionary ideals of "civilization" onto 
people whose "primitive" lives might well have been a whole lot better 
off in the end had they not been "blessed" with civilization, thank yew 
verrah much.  How sad it was, then, that many times, it was the leaders 
of these "primitive" countries who sought out the Empire's patronage.
And Anna wasn't immune; Foster may or may not have meant to play it that 
way, but Anna's acceptance of White Privilege was not lost in all her 
posturing (sincere or not) about wanting Siam, The King, and Siam 
servants, to have the right to their freedom and destiny.  Perhaps the 
posturing would've come across less fake, had Anna's Indian servants not 
have been fetching her tea and crumpets at the time.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Some things are better left alone--Celine Dion will go to a Special Hell 
for having the nerve to dare try and remake anything previously sang by 
diva Patti Labelle--some things just cannot be improved upon.  But if 
you're gonna muster up the nads to remake a classic firmly embedded in 
the collective eyes of quite a few fans (I say again, Yul Brenner will 
ever be my vision of The King), you could do a damn sight worse than 
Jodie Foster and Chow Yun-Fat.
"Anna And The King": (rating: greenlight)  
Still, couldn't Jodie have *tried* to hum "I could have danced all 
night"?

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Twentieth Century Fox/Fox 2000 Pictures
 Director: Andy Tennant
 Writer: Peter Krikes, Steve Meerson, novel by Margaret
Landon based on diaries of Anna Leonowens
 Cast: Jodie Foster, Chow Yun-Fat, Mano Maniam, Bai Ling  
   A few years ago Princess Diana visited the Brooklyn
Academy of Music to attend a concert in my home town.  The
audience were told to be seated at least one-half hour before
the scheduled beginning and no commoners were admitted
after 7:30 that evening.  The assembly were also ordered to
stand when the princess arrived and to face her for a moment
of respect and awe.  The whole affair struck me as silly. 
After all, didn't Americans give their lives in the War for
Independence to throw off such nonsense?  Anyone in that
congregation at the Brooklyn Academy could well understand
the frustrations of Anna Leonowens, whose true story is once
again given dramatic dimension in yet another version. 
Having been the subject of a novel by Margaret Landon, the
British schoolteacher's diaries of her trip to Siam in 1862 to
tutor the 50-odd children of King Mongkut were made into a
movie in 1946 starring the 48-year-old Irene Dunne as the
titled teacher and Rex Harrison in the monarch's seat, then
given a Broadway performance as "The King and I" which, in
turn, was made into a sumptuous movie version in 1956 with
Deborah Kerr and Yul Brynner.  There was even a recent
animated version--which makes us think, "What's so special
about this tale?"  
   The story itself is now old-hat.  It's dated.  The movies and
staged musicals made with the yarn as its foundation were
produced not for the plot but for the production values. 
Consider the possibilities of shooting rolls and rolls of film in
the exotic East, particularly given the lavish beauty of the
palaces and temples of Bangkok.  And with current cinematic
techniques plus the virtually unlimited budget that could be
spent on costumes and on reconstructing the palace as it
must have looked in 1862, "Anna and the King" would be a
shoo-in for a stack of Oscars. Indeed the '46 film copped the
Academy awards for Cinematography and Art/Set Decoration
while the filmed "King and I" got statuettes for the same plus
an additional one for Yul Brynner.
   When you go to see the spanking new version of "Anna
and the King"--which is bereft of all the beautiful Rodgers and
Hammerstein songs like "Getting to Know You," "I Whistle a
Happy Tune," and "Shall We Dance"--think of it as a sure bet
to sway the Academy once again for the extravagant
cinematography and designs that have made even the proud
elephants the best dressed animals in the world today. 
Filmed in several locations in Malaysia to replicate the
appearance of Thailand over a century ago, the picture could
do for the Malaysian tourist industry what Joseph Ruben's
"Return to Paradise" took away from it the previous year. 
The country--or at least the varied sites in which this movie
was filmed, in particular the grounds of the Clearwater Golf
Resort outside the city of Perak--look gorgeous.  Jodie Foster
is nothing short of stunning.  Chow Yun-Fat as the proud king
who learns a thing or two from the lovely schoolmarm is a
more human-looking figure than Yul Brynner or Rex Harrison,
the highly popular performer acquitting himself just fine in a
genre far removed from the Hong-Kong action category. The
cinematography is striking from the get-go.  
   But that's as good as it gets.  In other regards, director
Andy Tennant ("Ever After: A Cinderella Story") uses little
imagination to bring the story to life for a 1990s audience,
dutifully filming the stately proceedings as a museum piece.
He makes the same error that led to the demise of the D'oyle
Carte Opera Company, which persisted in performing the
works of Gilbert and Sullivan in precisely the style used from
the launching of the Savoyard productions during the 19th
century.  Is there still an audience today for the usual
assortment of cute kids (especially those of an Asian culture
performing English-language songs) or Asian players
spouting fortune-cookie dialogue ("one can't plant new fields
overnight")?  The entire Saran-wrapped production is
packaged neatly for the holidays, and who knows?  There
may still be folks out there, the types who long for the
traditional dancing girls at Radio City Music Hall doing their
robotized kicks and bounces, lugging their kids who'd rather
watch "Toy Story 2" or play video games or see 007.  For the
rest of us, "Anna and the King" is scenic overkill, a travelogue
in place of a witty and absorbing movie, a believable
revolution, and a genuine feeling that something is at stake.
   Those familiar with "The King and I" will note a few
changes in the straight story, which include an attempted
coup and a monarch who does not die at the conclusion. 
Anna Leonowens (Jodie Foster) takes up an employment
offer of Siam's King Mongkut (Chow Yun-Fat) to tutor his 58
kids in English.  Though he continues to condone slavery at
just the time that the Americans were about to shuck the
peculiar institution, he wants to open his country to the world
and realizes ahead of his time that English is the language
that will expedite the plan.  He is dismayed by Anna's
contempt of protocol--her refusal to prostrate herself before
him and her insistence that he fulfill the contract and house
her in private quarters with her son, Louis--and not in the
palace.  The recently-widowed Anna is immediately liked by
all the king's young 'uns, most importantly by the heir to the
throne, Prince Chulalongkorn.  She is particularly dismayed
by the king's refusal to commute the death sentence against
one of his concubines, Tuptim (Bai Ling), who had schemed
to get together once again with her lover, but grows to realize
that in other ways England is not a culture which is superior
to that of Siam.
   The one scene of political interest takes place in the palace
to which a number of British bigwigs have been invited in an
attempt to gain their support against an anticipated attack by
France.  A wealthy trader, Kincaid, embarrasses all at the
large banquet by declaring to the king's face that England is
a superior civilization and by forcing him to face up to the fact
that he has invited the diplomats to Bangkok to curry favor for
a future military campaign.  There is also a tense action
sequence that recalls the blowing up of the overpass in David
Lean's stunning 1957 war film, "The Bridge on the River
Kwai," which portrays Sri Lanka in a far more gruesome way
than Tennant utilizes the magnificent panorama of Malaysia.
But the picture, which has not a single vulgar word, is so
eager to cater to a family crowd that when Anna's boy asks
"What's a concubine?" and "Why does the king need so
many wives"? he is told, in effect, that it's past his bedtime.
   To Tennant's credit, he has the people portraying Siamese
speaking Thai for the most part, employing clear English
subtitles, and Chow does a creditable job of speaking the
language fluently--as does Jodie Foster with the few words in
that language that her character chooses to vocalize.  Caleb
Deschanel's cinematography is at times breathtaking and
designer Luciana Arrighi has done her homework in giving
the palace the mid-19th century look, while Jenny Beavan
has costumed Foster appropriately in the well-worn dresses
she would be expected to wear and the elephants in the togs
that would dazzle even the owners of New York's Park
Avenue poodle emporia.  Unfortunately, what should have
been the highlight of the movie--the intense battle of wits
between the two immovable objects of Siamese royalty and
English obstinacy--simply lacks the razor-sharpness that
would have made this spectacular travelogue into a
compelling story.
Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 145 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Exhilaration please, not exhaustion.  Full of self-importance, directors
this Christmas season have lost all sense of proportion.  Movies seem to
take an eternity for no discernable reason.
In his non-musical ANNA AND THE KING, rather than giving us something
for our minds and our hearts, Andy Tennant gives us butt-numbing length
as we watch what is admittedly an absolutely gorgeous picture.  The
cinematography (Caleb Deschanel), the sets (Ian Whittaker and Luciana
Arrighi), the costumes (Jenny Beavan) and the music (George Fenton) are
all absolutely dazzling.  But with Steve Meerson and Peter Krikes's
pedestrian script, there is little to engage us.  The net result of such
beauty, scored to lush orchestral music, is to literally put us to sleep
as it did several men, women and children in my packed audience.
The fault does not lie with the actors.  Jodie Foster, as Anna, and Chow
Yun-Fat, as King Mongkut, do respectable jobs.  Foster meticulously
shows her carefully controlled anger, and Yun-Fat confidently moves with
a graceful fluidity.  The chemistry between them is never quite
believable, but it really isn't their fault.  The written material they
have to work with is awkward, and Tennant's direction is languid.  In a
key scene, for example, in which blowing up a bridge quickly is the key
to survival, Tennant has his actors move with a glacial pace.
We get the point that the Siamese in the picture do not speak proper
English, and their butchered English syntax and semantics can be funny.
But, after a while, this repetitive joke gets quite tiresome.  Let them
at least accidentally speak a few sentences of correct English
occasionally.
So would songs have been an improvement?  You bet!  Anything to put some
of the old magic back into the story.  Visuals are important, but they
aren't enough to carry a picture.  ANNA AND THE KING needs something to
make it compelling, and a few songs certainly wouldn't hurt.
ANNA AND THE KING runs way too long at 2:22.  A large part of the film
is in Thai with English subtitles.  It is rated PG-13 for some intense
violent sequences.  Given the explicitness of the bloody caning and some
of the other scenes, the film might have been more appropriately rated
R.  It would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jamey Hughton
`Anna and the King', the latest adaptation of Rodgers and Hammerstein's
renowned musical `The King and I', is a sumptuous and attractive epic
that manages to mask a great number of it's problems with a steady
dosage of beautiful imagery. There is impeccable detail applied to the
costuming and set designs, enough to captivate the audience over
droughts where both the pace and dramatic interest lags a bit behind.
You may be squirming in your seat periodically during this 2 hour, 30
minute epic - but luckily, two engaging stars are present to make the
experience a comfortable one.
One is Jodie Foster, who plays strong-minded British schoolteacher Anna
Leonowens, a woman who makes a long and perilous journey to Siam so that
she can tutor an influential young boy. The lad is the son of King
Mongkut of Siam (Chow Yun-Fat), who rules his people with strict
standards and cultural balance. Anna conducts herself with strong will
and incredible courage for a woman in her era, confronting the King and
demanding sufficient quarters even when she's not permitted. She is
bold, to be sure, but she is also wise in more areas than the King can
imagine. Anna winds up the enter royal family (which is... large), and
lecturing them in the ways of the West with their father's approval. I
had no doubt Foster could handle the role of the brisk and strong-minded
Anna, and she does, with believable authority and appealing wisdom. I
was happy, though, to see Hong Kong action superstar Chow Yun-Fat snag
the role of the King. Despite the fact his two American thrillers (`The
Replacement Killers' and `The Corruptor') have flopped, I was optimistic
about Chow's ability to handle a major dramatic role like this. He, like
his enthusiastic counterpart, pulls through with an admirable effort.
`Anna and the King' features a screenplay that tends to be clumsy and
meandering, but mainly the film is reasonably well written. There is
light humor sprinkled about and channeled successfully through awkward
meetings between King Mongkut and Anna, and plenty of amusing material
surrounding the plot device of the King having 26 wives. How could you
not crack a few good jokes with that little bit of information? For a
steady 90 minutes, `Anna and the King' resembles just the sort of epic
story that Hollywood is famous for. The performances click, the visual
content is spellbinding, and director Andy Tennant (`Ever After')
manages to successfully engage the viewer with continuous beauty.
And then, there's a little slip-up. Tennant stretches the film to an
unnecessary 140 minutes, testing the average viewer's patience with
scenes that ring with monotony and loss of dramatic impact. If the
running length were cut short by a half-an-hour or so, then perhaps the
initially absorbing material and lavish set designs would be better
appreciated while the audience exits the theater. In it's present state,
with the film ending on a sour and empty note, some of the good
qualities are bound to be forgotten. But despite it's length, `Anna and
the King' manages to radiate enough working star power and attractive
imagery to suffice as an entertaining epic, even if it falls short of
some potential.
It's also too violent in certain areas - never extremely graphic, but
too often unsettling (especially for younger viewers). But, if there is
one thing you can't pass over with giving due notice, it's the sheer
beauty of the entire production. Expect an Oscar-nomination or two in
the categories of costuming and cinematography, but little more. Both
Foster and Yun-Fat grace the screen with their style and pizzazz, but
nothing is particularly Oscar-caliber in the performance section. Bai
Ling (`Red Corner') is strong in a small but important role as the
King's latest concubine. Ultimately, `Anna and the King' loses it's
grasp on certain possibilities for prolonging it's running length for
the wrong reasons (a war is materializing, the leads begin to grow
apart...). But it's still a nice filler, boasting solid performances and
an attractive look that will appeal to viewers of all ages. Just try to
concentrate on the good stuff, and pick a comfortable seat.
Cast Your Votes for "1999 FILM AWARDS"
http://apps4.vantagenet.com/zsv/survey.asp?GO=Vote%21&id=9122019309

Author
Scott Renshaw
     For more than forty years -- certainly since the 1956 film version of
THE KING AND I -- Yul Brynner has been the King of Siam, and the King of
Siam has been Yul Brynner. Actors often define roles, and roles often
define actors (the latter much to the actors' chagrin), but rarely as a
role/actor identification been so strong, and so reciprocal. A Yul Brynner
impression without the words "puzzlement" or "et cetera" just isn't a Yul
Brynner impression; a King of Siam without a bald dome just isn't the King
of Siam.
     ANNA AND THE KING may not be Rodgers and Hammerstein, but Chow
Yun-Fat still faced a vexing challenge: re-defining a part so distinctly
connected to one man. It is the authoritative grace with which Chow pulls
off that feat that makes ANNA AND THE KING such an unexpected pleasure. 
The familiar story is based on the diaries of Anna Leonowens (Jodie
Foster), a Victorian era Englishwoman who accepts a unique employment
opportunity. A widow with a 10-year-old son (Tom Felton), Anna travels to
Siam to serve as tutor for the children of King Mongkut (Chow Yun-Fat),
the country's revered monarch. Though Anna bristles at some of Mongkut's
customs, she grows eventually to respect his commitment to progress and
learning. But the meeting of East and West becomes political as well as
personal, as Siam faces threats from the Eurpoean-colonized nations
surrounding it.
     Since the story is ultimately an epic romance, nothing is more
important to ANNA AND THE KING's success than the connection between its
principal characters. Foster, not surprisingly, is quite good as Anna,
striking an effective balance between her edgy independence and prolonged
mourning over her husband. Her tough-love teacher routine with Mongkut's
eldest son Chulalongkorn (Keith Chin) is a bit overly familiar, but she
comes thoroughly to life when she's on screen with the King. Chow then
proceeds to do everything one could possibly ask of an actor. When
necessary, he is convincingly aloof and regal, looking and behaving every
bit the stern ruler. He also shows a wonderfully light touch, lending a
devilish smile to his jabs at Anna's strong will. Even the more overtly
emotional scenes -- clearly meant to pound home the heaviness of the head
that wears the crown -- are nicely under-played. Those familiar with Chow
primarily as an action star should take note: his versatility keeps the
romantic angle in ANNA AND THE KING fresh and convincing.
     He's not quite so lucky with the political angle. Much of the film's
second half is dedicated to an attempted overthrow of Mongkut by unknown
forces, leading to battle scenes and narrow escapes. The double-dealings
are pretty conventional stuff, leading to an exploding bridge climax that
feels like it belongs in an entirely different film (one directed by Jan
De Bont, perhaps). In fact, ANNA AND THE KING stumbles whenever director
Andy Tennant draws too much attention either to finger-wagging at cultural
imperialism (a blowsy British merchant insulting Mongkut at a dinner
party) or to his own direction (an operatically staged beheading). Even in
a film that runs two and a half hours, there's just not enough time to
spend away from its complicated central relationship.
     Fortunately, ANNA AND THE KING is ultimately redeemed by its
splendor. No, not the splendor of Luciana Arrighi's production design or
Caleb Deschanel's cinematography, though both pieces of work are
exceptional. It's the splendor of Chow Yun-Fat that carries ANNA AND THE
KING through its occasional stretches of anachronistic anti-colonial
posturing and trite palace intrigue. Creating the image of a king is a
difficult enough task; re-creating a king who is already an icon would
seem to be thankless. Chow is nothing less than a presence that takes over
ANNA AND THE KING -- with his humor, his poise, his majesty ... et cetera,
et cetera, et cetera.

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
Andy Tennant's Anna and the King is so full of ideas that it doesn't need 
all of the gripping action.  But the action doesn't hurt.
In 1862 a widowed Englishwoman named Anna Leonowens brings her son Louis 
from India to Siam (now Thailand).  Already we have a white woman fending 
for herself in a culture in which men are all-powerful, and the king is a 
god.  Mrs. Leonowens (Jody Foster) is charged with educating the fifty-odd 
children of the King of Siam (Chow Yun-Fat);  she is a Bible-reading 
Christian bent on preserving the Western traditions that shape her life.  
Although the king is open-minded enough to know his children need to know 
about Western ways in order to carry Siam into the modern world, he is 
firmly grounded in his world:  Buddhism, polygamy, slave-owning, monarchy.  
Nothing but conflict could result from his meeting a strong-minded woman who 
refuses to touch her forehead to the ground before his feet.
Heard this story before?  Yes, it's the same source material used in the 
Rodgers and Hammerstein musical The King and I, the king's role made famous 
by Yul Brynner, and played recently by Lou Diamond Phillips.  This film is 
no musical, though its score is indeed well done (save for the forgettable 
pop song that runs over the early closing credits).  The king's large family 
and the clash between cultures remain central here, and even the motif of 
dancing has survived, a metaphorical substitution for passion, perhaps.  But 
what helps this modern adaptation of Anna Leonowens' memoirs is the 
political and military intrigue.
Like a terrible news item from a contemporary Third World country, death 
squads are killing innocent Siamese women and children, and hanging their 
bodies as warnings to peasants.  These Burmese squads appear to be under the 
distant protection of English interests, as trading and other commercial 
ventures have resulted in British presence around the globe.  So King 
Mongkut of Siam is forced to dispatch a regiment to deal with these 
black-clothed marauders.  Deceit and betrayal quickly enter the picture, and 
the very existence of the dynasty is threatened.  Thus the stage is set for 
war, the ultimate backdrop to highlight the personal stories that make up 
the subplots.
As Anna Leonowens, Jody Foster would seem to be the wrong pick.  An American 
to play such a British character?  But Foster pulls it off admirably, with 
the understated acting that only a veteran could deliver.  At times her 
voice is almost too quiet, even raspy, as she converses with her son, 
reinforcing lessons the boy's father would have liked.  It's rather a 
pleasure to see such a human portrayal, instead of the bucking-up, 
bearing-down façade that has become a stereotype for any Englishman faced 
with oppression.  And her dialect works as well - I did not detect one 
slippage, one American pronunciation.
Foster's performance is outshone only by the performance of Chow Yun-Fat as 
the King.  His acting is understated as well, buttressed by a smooth 
confidence that convinces us in every scene we watch.  Clearly Chow is 
expert in mixing the conflicting elements of real characters, in this case a 
domineering mien blended with bemused tolerance.  Look for him to be 
nominated for several awards for this solid portrayal.
The other cast members turn in strong support.  As the young heir to the 
throne, Prince Chulalongkorn, Keith Chin is very convincing.  Director Andy 
Tennant makes full use of the Prince's position, as a short voice-over tells 
us how the future ruler was influenced by his father and the foreign woman 
who touched their lives.  Randall Duk Kim is perfectly cast as General Alak, 
a soldier and indefatigable politician, his grimaces and pronouncements 
memorable.
Another star of this film is the costumes.  Remarkable Victorian dresses 
adorn Anna and the Siamese women during the banquet staged to impress 
English visitors.  Further, the colorful native garb is wonderfully 
designed.  The word "sumptuous" comes to mind, almost too much so, 
considering that the 1860's setting.  Similar applause goes to the set 
decoration, such an important aspect in a period drama.
The main message of the film can be interpreted as a simple statement:  
personal freedom is paramount.  In this film we can trace the ideas upon 
which much of Western civilization was founded - especially the emergence of 
the importance of the individual, and the realization that love is the food 
without which the human soul starves.  It's ironic that the king of the 
Siamese Empire, whose most trusted general hates imperialistic influences, 
ends up admitting that he can understand how a man could love just one 
woman, a way of life widespread in the West.  Of course this theme is very 
bankable, and happens here to tie in perfectly with the film's sources of 
conflict:  a society dominated by males, predicated on slavery, and steeped 
in the methods of a feudal past.
So the reason Anna and the King succeeds is clear:  its director uses an 
epic frame but highlights a very intimate story.  It's the same with any 
good story - within the span of history we are fascinated by well-drawn 
characters.  It's also clear that the tendencies of Hollywood resemble those 
of human nature:  a short memory never learns a lesson.
This film needs to be as long as it is, 140 minutes, occupying its length 
with meaningful scenes and a climax reminiscent of mid-century war films.  
The few scenes of violence remind us of the differences inherent in cultures 
distant in both miles and time.  There is no nudity or vulgar language, 
although the word "concubine" surfaces now and again.  Viewers 10 and over 
will enjoy the action and learn from the history.


Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
And believe you me when I tell you that I was NOT looking forward to seeing
this movie featuring a British Jodie Foster going over to Siam to teach some
King's spoiled brats to speak English. Somehow, it didn't tickle the JoBlo
fancy. But I went, I saw and by golly, I'll say it, I liked it. I really,
really liked it!
PLOT:
A widowed British schoolteacher is summoned by the King of Siam to his
country in order to teach his children about the language of English and the
world outside their own. The independent woman begins her teachings with
reluctance, but shortly settles into her own, and inevitably learns much
about herself as well. No songs. No dance numbers.
CRITIQUE:
A beautifully photographed motion picture. Wow. This is the kind of movie
that makes you want to travel the world's most exotic places, until you
realize that you will most likely bunk in two-bit hotels with no indoor
plumbing, as opposed to Jodie Foster in this flick, who was put in a King's
palace. It's only then that you will also start to realize that she's a rich
Hollywood actress, while you're just an overweight, pseudo-movie critic
who's still afraid to walk down his own street. Uhm, but I digress. That
aside, this film was wonderfully shot in all of its majestical glory,
exquisite cinematography, lush locations with plenty of exotic flair and
original costumes. Truly of epical proportions. The actors in the movie were
also right on, with a surprisingly rock-solid performance by Chow Yun-Fat.
My God, who ever thought this dude could act? I've seen him roll down a
stairwell with two guns blazing without losing the toothpick from his mouth,
but go head to head with Jodie "I can make you cry at the drop of a hat"
Foster, and kick arse? Yup.
Of course, that's not to take anything away from Foster, who as per her
usual talents, comes through with all kinds of colors-a-blazin'. Much like
Meryl Streep, Jodie always seems to be a consistent hitter, batting 1.000
whenever called upon. Even more importantly for the audience, the chemistry
between the two thespians works in this film and that is extremely important
for this tale, when you consider that much of the film is essentially a
character study between these two strong individuals. Add to that some funny
moments, some touching moments and a bit of history for ya'll, and this is
one fine film. And what didn't I like? Well, I didn't think the story was
rich enough to take up the entire two and a half hours that it filled, with
a couple of ho-hum moments here and there. I also didn't appreciate the
clean ending and the way everything was so simply resolved, but you know,
after the visual feast that accompanied my eyes during the film's first 120
minutes, I was willing to forgive even that. All in all, a very good picture
worthy of attention by the man named Oscar in at least a couple of his
nominated categories at the end of this fine year in film. Oh yeah, in case
you're not "into" subtitles, this film is loaded with them! I had no problem
with this, in fact, I thought it helped further my appreciation of the
story's authenticity (even though I know that many of the facts in this
interpretation were slightly tweaked, but that's another story altogether.)
Think SOUND OF MUSIC without Julie Andrews, maaaaaaany more kids and no
songs :)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Jodie Foster's full name is Alicia Jodie Foster. Besides an overly
accomplished career as an actress, Jodie also majored in literature at Yale
and graduated magna cum laude in 1985. Fun trivia includes the fact that
Jodie is fluent is French and was apparently the second choice for the role
of Princess Leia in STAR WARS. She reportedly received $15,000,000 for her
role in this film. One really tragic moment in her life came on March 30th,
1981 when John Hinkley Jr. attempted to assassinate President Reagan.
Hinkley claimed to be obsessed with Jodie and the movie TAXI DRIVER (9/10)
in which Travis Bickle, played by Robert DeNiro, tried to shoot a
presidential candidate. Hinkley is rumored to have said that he was doing it
in order to "impress" Jodie Foster.
Well, it turns out that Chow Yun-Fat does have some experience in receiving
praise for his acting chops as his three Won Hong Kong Academy "Best Actor"
Awards have shown. He received his awards for his roles in 1987's A BETTER
TOMORROW, 1988's CITY ON FIRE and 1990's ALL ABOUT AH LONG. Furthermore,
CineAsia, the Asian Theatre Owners Convention, recently named Chow the "Star
of the Decade".
Director Andy Tennant's last two films were EVER AFTER (7/10) and FOOLS RUSH
IN (5.5/10) respectively. He began his career as a dancer moved on to become
a writer and now likes to direct. Interestingly enough, two of his bigger
roles as an actor/dancer were in the two GREASE movies. He played a "dancer"
in the original GREASE and a "boy greaser" in the second.
And yes, you are right, that is producer Laurence Bender's name in the
credits of this film. The man behind such movies as RESERVOIR DOGS, PULP
FICTION, KILLING ZOE and the DUSK TILL DAWN trilogy, also likes to do some
"normal" films every now and then as well. He also played a "young cop" in
Quentin Tarantino's first film RESERVOIR DOGS.

Author
Ross Anthony
The gold-tiled grand palace of Siam (Thailand's former name) shimmers with a
story rich in culture and theatric recreation. It's a piece plucked from the
diaries of a prim British woman about her exploits with a macho Siamese king
during volatile times; played by a tough American woman and a Chinese action
movie icon, respectively.
During the mid-1800's, an English widow and her son move from
Bristish-colonized Bombay to Bangkok. Commissioned by the king of Siam to
tutor his first son in English, Anna soon finds herself the school teacher
of his 50+ offspring. Not just a tad self-righteous, Anna challenges the not
just a tad arrogant male chauvinist top banana of the country. "She thinks
herself equal not just to a man, but to a king." Of course, they fall in
love.
A misty-eyed Anna relives a romantic moment, "He made me feel like ... " The
curt Indian housekeeper interjects, "One of his twenty-six wives?" Not too
proud to chime cute retorts, this version of "The King and I" never bursts
into song. Its earlier lightness gives way to a sincere sense of impending
doom with hanging bodies and blood spillage; romance is left as a subtle yet
omnipresent magnetic attraction between two stubborn leads.
Jodie Foster, a fine gritty American actor, plays the part of Anna with
rigid grace; but her less than proper British accent never lets us forget
that she is, indeed, an American. Additionally, her character lacks a
demonstratively brooding element. When the king slices her sympathetic
encouragement with his terse line, "You are not qualified to criticize me
about living!" he's referring to a side of Anna that this production fails
to instill on us. Consequently, the power of such a potentially mighty
assertion is limited only to the beam of intensity from under Chow's glossy
and reddened eyes. Anna's practical optimism could have been richly
complemented with an occasional emotionally-charged reaction to anything
that remotely reminded her of her dead husband.
Chow is king of the glare. He reigns supreme in the facial expression and
body language department. He can communicate a page worth of text in one
word; but unfortunately the converse is also true. Chow does all he can to
maintain stage mediocrity when delivering any dialogue longer than a
sentence. His (non-Thai) accent sometimes leaving viewers asking each other,
"What? Did you get that?" Still, he is charming and ultimately lovable as
king.
Pictorially splendid, it's largely large, epic and expansive. This retelling
commands the screen with such disciplined cinematography and direction that
you'll almost forget the ethnicity mismatch. Even though there must have
been some fine Thai actor that would have put even Yul to shame, and a
proper British actress to counterbalance; the story is just so marvelous
you'll end up having a good time anyway. It's a long one, pack a lunch.
"Goodnight ma'am, You've helped enough for one day."
Anna and the King. Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG-13.
Starring Chow Yun-Fat and Jodie Foster.
Directed by Andy Tennant.
Written by Steve Meerson & Peter Krikes and Andy Tennant & Rick Parks based
on the diaries of Anna Leonowens.
Produced by Lawrence Bender and Edward Elbertat at 20th Century Fox.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
James Sanford
         Last year, director Andy Tennant transformed the tale of
Cinderella into "Ever After," one of 1998's most endearing sleeper hits.
For his follow-up, he's tackled the culture clash between British
governess Anna Leonowens and King Mongkut of Siam, the same material
that's previously been dramatized in the 1946 film "Anna and the King of
Siam" and musicalized as Rodgers and Hammerstein's "The King and I."
 Was another telling of this story absolutely necessary? Perhaps
not, although "Anna and the King," like "Ever After," puts forth some
intriguing new ideas about its characters while providing a banquet for
the eyes and ears. This is precisely the kind of "cast of thousands"
extravaganza Hollywood rarely produces anymore and the movie's seductive
visuals, charismatic performances and glorious scenery make for two and
a half hours of immensely pleasurable viewing.
 For those who grew up with the 1955 Yul Brynner/Deborah Kerr
version of "The King and I," "Anna" comes across as slightly
disorienting at first. It feels slightly strange not to hear "Getting to
Know You" when Anna is introduced to her scores of Siamese pupils and
though the screenplay retains the famous scene in which Anna is
literally swept off her feet by the king at a ball, "Shall We Dance" is
conspicuously absent from the soundtrack. Accept Tennant's film on its
own terms, however, and you'll be rewarded.
 Thematically, the biggest difference between the screenplays of
the two movies is found in their approach to the king.
 In "The King and I," Mongkut is portrayed as a steely but
slightly goofy monarch whose fascination with science and English
customs is often played for laughs. Anna, on the other hand, is the
walking embodiment of all the glorious traits Britain once attached to
its policies of Colonialism: She's single-minded but proper to a fault
and knowledgeable but not overbearing. She handles Mongkut with the same
firm hand and gentle manner a well-bred mother in 1862 might have used
to control a temperamental child.
 There's never any doubt in "The King and I" that Western ways
are superior to the mysticism and superstition that rule the East, and
those attitudes have led some contemporary critics to label the musical
as an example of benign racism.
 "Anna and the King" offers a more balanced picture of the two
worlds. As portrayed by Hong Kong action star Chow Yun-Fat, Mongkut is
exceedingly intelligent and powerfully sexy, a man who's not about to
let an outsider rearrange his traditions. Jodie Foster's Anna is a
strong-willed widow with backbone and determination, who announces upon
her arrival in the Orient that "the ways of England are the ways of the
world," but slowly begins to find value in certain aspects of the
Siamese approach to life.
 "Anna and the King" is drawn from the diaries Leonowens kept
during the six years she spent in the palace and the later part of the
story diverges markedly from "The King and I," as Mongkut and his family
fend off a plot to seize the throne and venture into the jungle to
escape a rebel army. Whether this is ultimately more accurate than
Rodgers and Hammerstein's version of the story is hard to say since
historians continue to argue over how much of Leonowens' writing was a
romanticized embellishment of life in the royal court.
 Regardless, it makes for exciting viewing, with cinematographer
Caleb Deschanel providing some of the richest on-location photography
since David Lean's "A Passage to India" and Sydney Pollack's "Out of
Africa." Unlike "Africa" author Isak Dinesen, the Victorian Leonowens
was not bold enough to reinvent her love life in the name of a good
story so the romance between Anna and Mongkut remains strictly platonic
-- even though the heat between Foster and Chow is all but palpable.
James Sanford

Author
Michael Dequina
_Anna_and_the_King_ (PG-13) *** (out of ****)
Fox chose an ideal year to produce and release Andy Tennant's lavish
non-musical treatment of the oft-told true story of the meeting of minds
between King Mongkut (Chow Yun-Fat) and English schoolteacher Anna
Leonowens (Jodie Foster) in 1862 Siam.  After all, it can only look good
compared to this year's other screen version of the tale, Warner Bros.'
woefully misguided animated adaptation of Rodgers and Hammerstein's
venerable musical _The_King_and_I_.  That fact aside, however, _Anna_,
while taking the occasional dramatic misstep, is a pretty solid drama on
its own terms, boasting beautiful pageantry, smart political intrigue,
and a convincing rapport between leads.
While they are a unit for most of the film, taken individually, Foster
and Chow have differing degrees of success.  Foster is good, but her
performance is a big step down from her Oscar-caliber work of recent
years (last in 1997's _Contact_), hampered by an accent that is only
sporadically convincing.  Chow, on the other hand, is terrific.  Although
he made a name for himself in Hong Kong as an action star, the King is
the first American role where he really shows the key to his appeal--it's
not necessarily the gun(s) in his hand(s), but his suave charm and
charisma.  He's also a solid dramatic actor; not for nothing do his
legendary collaborations with John Woo have such a potent emotional
impact.  Anna may get top billing in this retelling, but it's the king
who commands the show.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Mac VerStandig
A copy of this review can be found at 
http://moviereviews.org/anna_and_the_king.htm
If 1999 is the year of new filmmaking, consider Anna and the King proof 
that the old formula still works. The movie is an epic of epic 
proportions in that tradition of masterpieces like The Last Emperor, Out 
of Africa and Gone with the Wind.
Based on the renowned musical, The King and I, Anna and the King is the 
tale of a woman, Anna Leonowens (Jodie Foster), who does the unthinkable 
of a woman in the mid-1800's: she takes her son halfway across the world 
to Siam where she becomes a school teacher. Even more outrageous is her 
speaking directly to and refusing to bow to the King of Siam (Chow 
Yun-Fat), something no lady has ever done before.
Anna is accepted by the King who finds wisdom in her practices and 
privately considers her his equal. The class she has come to teach is 
not one of peasants, nor even rich, but rather the 58 royal offspring 
plus her own son. The movie is a tale of a woman who dares to do the 
unthinkable time and again, how people view her, how the King views her 
and how her new home of Siam is facing political tasks equally as 
impossible as the thought of a woman surviving in the King's court.
A movie of such grandness must have an equally magnificent appearance. 
Shot entirely in Malaysia, director of photography Caleb Deschanel 
captures breathtaking scenery that makes the film a near-lock for the 
Best Cinematography award. Director Andy Tennant matches the incredible 
imagery with numerous well-choreographed extras and a Kubrickian 
attention to details that creates a flawless appearance. It is big 
screen movies like this that will always give Hollywood an edge over 
independent works.
For Jodie Foster this is her finest performance since 1991's The Silence 
of the Lambs and she owes many thanks to a co-star who is one of the 
year's best actors in his breakthrough performance. Chow Yun-Fat has 
come a long way from his days being advertised as "International Action 
Star." The unforgettable scenes in the King's court wouldn't be as rich 
without an excellent King nor as intriguing minus a witty teacher. The 
extras who play the King's children are convincing while still 
maintaining a cute "awe" quality that sets the tone for a film sprinkled 
with a delightfully innocent humor.
For two and half-hours, Anna and the King completely engages its 
audience. The film isn't long; it just takes its time. Because the movie 
takes its time, the actors are able to play their roles to a level of 
completeness; sweeping camera shots and a strong background score can 
captivate the audience without being prematurely cut off and the movie 
is able to establish itself as the last great epic of the 20th Century, 
a fitting title for a movie made by 20th Century Fox.     

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
1999 may go down as the Year of the King.  Prolific horror author
Stephen King was able to sandwich a near-fatal accident between The
Storm of the Century and The Green Mile; Frank Whaley's directorial
debut Joe the King was panned by critics; and Return of the King, the
third part of the eagerly anticipated The Lord of the Rings trilogy,
began filming in New Zealand.
But the most curious cinematic King story this year has to be Mongkut 
as in the nineteenth-century King of Siam.  Mongkut has had two films
made about him and his relationship with Anna Leonowens this year.
That's one more film than Schwarzenegger had and two more than Claire
Danes should have made.  It's particularly strange considering that over
forty years have passed since we've seen Mongkut's story on the big
screen.  When Margaret Langdon turned Anna's memoirs into a best-selling
novel in 1944, it took only a dozen years to spawn the drama Anna and
the King of Siam and Rodgers and Hammerstein's hit musical The King & I,
as well as the theatrical version.
First up in 1999 was the critically panned dud The King and I  an
animated remake of the musical with horribly stereotypical characters
and a villain that had suddenly developed supernatural powers.  Now, at
the close of the year, Hollywood serves up a remake of Anna and the King
of Siam, the 1946 drama that starred Irene Dunne and Rex Harrison (in
his film debut).
This version of Anna and the King has a lot to offer, and a lot to be
wary of.  On the plus side is, of course, two-time Oscar winner Jodie
Foster (Contact) tackling the role of Anna.  Another big advantage is
the casting of Hong Kong action star Chow Yun-Fat (The Corruptor) as
King Mongkut.  It marks the first time that an Asian actor has portrayed
the King, who has previously been played by white guys with yellow
makeup doing bad Charlie Chan impressions.  The film also benefits from
a top-quality production team, including two Oscar winners (and a
nominee) from Howard's End.
There are some giant red flags, too.  Director Andy Tennant's last three
films were the disappointing Ever After, the ludicrous Fools Rush In and
the Olsen twins' debacle It Takes Two.  The two credited screenwriters,
Peter Krikes and Steve Meerson, last worked on Jean-Claude Van Damme's
Double Impact.  Their Anna script is just too long and, in the last
reel, even turns into a Van Damme-type action thriller.
The story is the same as it ever was.  Anna, twenty-three months a
widow, is hired to become the royal tutor for the children of the King
of Siam (now Thailand) in 1862 Bangkok.  She's all of the three P's 
prim, proper and prissy, delivering lines through perpetually clenched
jowls.  Accompanying Anna is her giant hat, hoop dress, knee-length hair
extensions and her equally prissy son, Louis (Tom Felton).  Upon her
arrival (I know it looks a lot like Waterworld at first, but don't flee
the theater), Anna refuses to follow protocol, insists on living in a
house outside the walls of the palace and is called `Sir' by all of
Mongkut's underlings.  She's firm and persistent, eventually winning
over the hearts of the King, his fifty-eight kids and even a few of the
King's ten wives.
In the meantime, Mongkut's Siam appears to be under siege by neighboring
Burma, while his General Alak (Randall Duk Kim, The Replacement Killers)
deviously twirls his moustache and maniacally rubs his hands together.
This version of Anna seems to focus more attention on the political
climate of Siam than it needs to.  It also blows about twenty minutes on
a subplot involving Tuptim (Bai Ling, Wild Wild West), the King's newest
concubine.
Foster is, as always, amazing as the lantern-jawed Anna, but the real
surprise here is Chow.  I never thought that I would be able to watch
him in a movie that didn't include his trademark double-fisted brand of
gunplay.  Chow exudes regal charisma like a copious geyser, deftly
stealing all of the film's good lines.  Even when the ending is reduced
to the level of a hokey action picture, Chow shines.
Filmed in Malaysia, Anna certainly looks sumptuous enough.
Cinematographer Caleb Deschanel (Fly Away Home) perfectly captures the
look and feel of Siam's palace, especially during the amazing banquet
scene where Mongkut entertains British emissaries.  Even a hardened
critic like myself found my eyes watering a bit during a couple of
scenes in this film.  But I'm still not sure if it was the emotional
impact or if it was because both of my legs were asleep from sitting in
the theater for so long.
2:35 - PG-13 for violence and very mild adult situations

Author
Greg King
The story of Anna Leonowens, the strong minded, widowed
British governess who travelled to Siam in the mid-1800's to educate
the king's many children, has been told in film many times before.
The most famous incarnation of this story is Rogers and Hammerstein's
musical The King And I, in which Yul Brynner virtually made the role
of the despotic but benevolent king his own, and its subsequent tv
spin off.  The story was previously filmed in 1946's non-musical Anna
And The King Of Siam, and more recently as a bland animated musical.
Director Andy Tennant, who magnificently reinvigorated the Cinderella
story in the recent Ever After, takes the familiar story and breathes
new life into the material in this lavish, epic version.
Jodie Foster essays the role of the outspoken Anna, who
arrives in Thailand from colonial India to educate the heir to the
throne in modern concepts.  She eventually charms and influences the
king, anxious to maintain a delicate balance between tradition and the
future, yet ensure his country's continued independence amidst
colonial expansion into Asia.
It is not clear whether Tennant, whose credits also include
the bland romantic comedy Fools Rush In, was trying to create a lush
epic in the David Lean tradition here, but his direction is a little
uneven.  The film's second half heads into boy's own adventure mode
with its subplot involving an attempted coup and treachery threatening
the palace.  The intrigue is resolved in a spectacular, if contrived,
climactic Bridge On The River Kwai-like confrontation.
While Anna And The King explores broader themes of
colonialism, tradition, and the clash of cultures, its treatment is
nonetheless rather superficial.  The film lacks enough dramatic
confrontations and clashes between the headstrong Anna and the king to
sustain tension and thus hold the audience's interest for its generous
running time.
The two leads combine well to inject passion and warmth into
their roles, and Tennant beautifully develops an air of sexual tension
between the pair.  Foster delivers her usual solid performance, and
maintains an impeccable British accent throughout.  But it is Hong
Kong action hero Chow Yun-Fat who delivers the most surprising
performance here, bringing a beautifully regal bearing and
intelligence to his role as King Mongkut.  Rather than merely
replicating Brynner's famous mannerisms, Yun-Fat stamps his own
presence on the role, creating a far more complex and interesting
character.
The film has been beautifully shot in Malaysia by veteran
cinematographer Caleb Deschanel, and certainly looks gorgeous.  The
production design, which recreates the king's sprawling palace, is
also quite sumptuous.  
***
greg king
http://www.netau.com.au/gregking

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/d7665b014d292aff8825684b000a1cf2?OpenDocument
My assumption is that every generation needs their own version of the
film The King and I.  My grandparents had Rex Harrison, my parents had
Yul Brynner, and now my generation has Chow Yun-Fat. Hold the phone
right there, mister.  Chow Yun-Fat... isn't he that the guy from those
crazy, violent, Hong Kong action movies by John Woo?  Fear not, kind
reader, for Chow Yun-Fat commands the role made famous for all these
years and gives both Harrison and Brynner a run for their money.
When I watch Chow Yun-Fat, one person comes to mind: Steve McQueen.
Watching Chow move across the screen and establish his presence strongly
echoes the attitude and the acting style of McQueen.  Upon the viewer's
first impression of the king of Siam, Chow is the complete image of
royalty in Eastern Asia.  His curt, rigid mannerisms and omnipotent
status as king are delivered strongly with simple, direct looks.  This
attitude clearly draws the line between the customs of the East and
West.  As the film progresses, I watched Chow evolve from this distant,
commanding presence to an emotional, tangible creature that, with an
honest glance, can covey passionate love for his family and for his
country.
The chemistry between the King and Anna is made concrete by Jodie
Foster's amazing acting abilities.  She encompasses fully the role of a
Victorian lady born and bred in England.  Her staunch avocation towards
defending her actions and securing proper respect from the King is
fueled by the directness of Foster's character.  Foster projects a
silent understanding of the King's actions towards his family and
strives to communicate with him on an equal level.  She brings to the
role a hidden sorrow that is shared by the King, and this sorrow lets
them draw closer to one another.  Her reservations towards temptation
are laid bare and Chow supplements the situations with his own
reservations towards love for another person.
The main issue with films that deal with an epic theme -- one that
requires grandiose set constructions, hundreds upon thousands of extras,
an amazing selection of costumes and jewelry, and exotic locations -- is
that it can all fail with the wrong director behind the camera.  With
all the amazing acting achieved by Chow Yun-Fat and Jodie Foster and
complex character development they pull off so well in the film, Anna
and the King has the wrong director for the job.  This is where my main
criticism for the film lies.
Andy Tennant, from such hits as Fools Rush In, that crazy Salma Hayek
comedy, and Ever After, must have gotten his directing credentials out
of a Crackerjack box.  The emotional impact of many intimate scenes
between Chow and Foster were lacking one thing: Intimacy.  Tennant never
draws close to the character's faces and I felt distant and removed from
most of the scenes.  The acting of Chow and Foster held strong
conviction for me, but the inclusion of these images would have left a
greater impression.  Tennant also lets the actors move within the scene
without letting the camera move with them, but this only instills
greater remoteness towards the audience.
Another main fault is the film's script.  I'm not to sure that this
subject matter should have been handed over to two guys, Steve Meerson
and Peter Krikes, whose last film was Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home.  I
could just see the first treatments of the film: `Kirk to Spock, put the
phasers on stun because the King of Siam needs our help to rid his
country of imperialist forces uniting against him in a deadly trade
war'.  `Dammnit Jim, I'm a doctor not a political advisor!'
This `political struggle' of Chow's King Mongkut between British
imperialism and the internal power struggles of his kingdom adds only a
distraction to the film's main focus of the unrequited love people can
hold for one another.  When it attempts to give partial validation to
the love of the King and Anna by their uniting to overcome this `power
struggle,' the film becomes trite and reaches resolution without fanfare
or emotional involvement from the audience.
Overall, the film is commendable for the acting of Chow and Foster and
the impressive set and costume designs of the film.  Anna and the King
should also provide Chow Yun-Fat the ability to finally move into a
stronger category of American actors and achieve the notoriety he has
held for so long in the East.  Would that it did more for the audience.
Director: Andy Tennant
Producer: Lawrence Bender, Ed Elbert
Writer: Steve Meerson and Peter Krikes
Starring: Chow Yun-Fat, Jodie Foster, Bai Ling, Tom Felton, Syed Alwi,
Randall Duk Kim
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ANNA AND THE KING" (20th Century-Fox)
If you've been heard to mutter, "They don't make movies like
they used to..." then this sentimental, spectacularly beautiful
historical epic is for you. In this fourth film version of Margaret
Landon's fanciful story of Anna Leonowens, the strong-willed, recently
widowed schoolteacher who travels to Siam in 1862 with her young son
(Tom Felton) to educate the King's 58 children in Western customs,
Jodie Foster delivers a magnificent performance, combining
intelligence with compassion, dignity with vulnerability. Equally
impressive is Hong Kong action star Chow Yun-Fat as imposing King
Mongkut, the proud monarch who is amazed when a stubborn, impertinent,
English schoolmarm has the temerity to consider herself his
equal. Anna has Victorian preconceptions of primitive Siam while the
King, in turn, has his own disdainful preconceptions of Western
civilization. Meanwhile, the ominous threat of an invasion by
neighboring Burma, perhaps aided by the British, hangs over their
obviously growing affection for one another in this exotic,
extravagant, romantic pastiche. Director Andy Tennant (Ever After) and
cinematographer Caleb Deschanel (The Black Stallion), shooting in
Malaysia, emphasize the lavish, breathtaking opulence and stately
splendor, conceived by production designer Luciana Arrighi, perhaps to
the extreme. That may be the result of the plodding, bland script by
Steve Meerson and Peter Krikes which dulls the sharpness of the
underlying culture clash of racial, political and sexual tensions,
relying instead on a weak, simplistic subplot involving
treason. Nevertheless, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Anna and
the King is a sumptuous 9, proving that the traditional Hollywood
formulas can still concoct gratifying entertainment.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Jodie Foster, Chow Yun-Fat. Directed by Andy Tennant. Rated PG-
13.
Anna and the King is at least the fourth film adaptation of Margaret
Landon's fact based novel The King and I, and it's big, expensive and
soulless. Though good-looking, its lavish sets, fancy costumes and
luscious cinematography can do little to compensate for the emotional
wasteland that is Peter Krikes and Steve Meerson's script. So much
money was spent on pretty pictures that they forgot to actually make
the movie interesting.
This is Jodie Foster's first movie since the jaw-droppingly brilliant
Contact came out more than two years ago and it isn't the best choice
to show off her acting chops. She's trapped in the stoic role of Anna
Leonowens, the uptight, widowed British schoolteacher who comes to Siam
(now Thailand) with her son to instruct the king's (Chow Yun-Fat) son
in the ways of the West (because "the ways of England are the ways of
the world). The king likes her so much he puts her in charge of
educating the whole royal family (58 kids with 10 more in the way;
impressive, no?). The eldest prince is none too happy about this
("Father, have I offended you in some way? Why do you punish me with
imperialist schoolteacher?), but soon gets to know Anna and her stern-
mother-who-loves-you personality better and comes to like her.
Meanwhile, Siam comes under attack from the neighboring British colony
of Burma. The king and his close advisors suspect that this is
Britain's doing which arouses suspicion in Siam, putting Anna in an
uncomfortable position. She is not sure what to make of this and seems
to herself suspect British involvement in the crisis but works to
diffuse the king's prejudices. He, though self-righteous as ever, can't
help but be influenced by the eloquent Anna and they slowly, quietly,
develop affections for each other.
There is a scene in the middle of Anna and the King where one of the
king's younger daughters dies. It's your classic deathbed scene, with
the girl's mournful eyes staring at her father, who tries only semi-
successfully to maintain his composure. Anna then comes in and cries a
bit. The sequence was there for a purpose: to evoke a strong emotional
response from the viewer. I'm usually a sucker for such scenes and yet
this time, I was just sitting there, my emotions untouched. This
remains true through all of the movie which remains emotionally barren.
We never develop connections to the characters; never given a reason to
care.
This ludicrously long epic was directed by Andy Tennant, whose last
film was Ever After, one of my favorites of 1998. I do not doubt
Tennant's ability to put together a decent movie, but Anna and the
King, aside from being psychologically inept is also technologically
deficient. The sets and scenery are gorgeous, but the camerawork does
nothing to convey its grandeur. Even Terrence Malick managed to do more
with flora and fauna in his otherwise abysmal The Thin Red Line than
Tennant can muster from $75 million worth of props and a shoot in
Malaysia. We feel like the camera is restricted to its immediate point
of view; there are no wide tracking shots or sweeping zooms to fill us
with larger-than-life awe.
I liked both Foster and Yun-Fat, who give entertaining if not terribly
involving performances in the two lead roles. Foster's generally stoic
persona serves her well here, as she is playing a reserved, formal and
rather underdeveloped character. Yun-Fat is especially effective,
perfectly conveying the King of Siam's sangfroid permeated with violent
outbursts.
What does Anna and the King in is its inability to involve the viewer
in its characters and situations. The cast is great, the director is
talented, and the budget is lavish, but this ill-advised remake of the
classic Rogers and Hammerstein movie is unable to utilize any of those
things to form a compelling whole. This is an emotionless costume epic.

Author
Indra Moeljadi
Thailand, 1862. Back then it was called Siam. A great monarchy ruled by the
powerful King Mongkut (Chow Yun Fat). He did everything his ways. Until Anna
Leonowens (Jodie Foster) came.
This movie is a remake of The King and I (which I haven't seen), and based
on a true story. Anna comes with her son Louie to teach the King's children.
All 68 of them, coming from 23 mothers. Surely makes me wish I was the King.
But instead of just teaching the kids, Anna also tries to "show" the King
the ways of the world, which is better known as the ways of the English.
Anna storms in as if she were a Spice Girl yelling Girl Power, standing up
in front of the King, while the whole country goes down on their knees,
saying things in to the King that even the closest advisors don't dare to,
and in the end even prevents a war. Wow, she must be related to either
Margaret Tatcher or Wonder Woman.
The scenery is absolutely great. Shot in Malaysia, it shows the beauty of
nature and the beauty of the Siamese kingdom. Too bad that the movie
concentrates too much on Anna's views, and not on the King's. The cultural
impact of an Anna seems too much, especially for a Monarchy who did survive
colonialism (Siam is the only South East Asian country who was never been
colonized by another country). The kingdom has is own way of doing stuff,
and Anna was forcing change upon it. No wonder that this movie is banned in
Thailand, because it was insulting them.
I feel the same way what the Thais are feeling. You cannot change a culture
by handing out copies of Uncle Tom's Cabin, or by teaching how an egg can
fit a bottle. The true story was probably during a long span, and the
moviemakers are putting that into a 2-and-a-half hour movietape. Not that
I'm saying that it was impossible to happen, but if you're going to show a
movie about culture, please show both sides of all the cultures. Not just
the bad ones and replace them by the good ones (which is always the Western
way).
Jodie Foster is as though as always, while Chow Yun Fat without his long
leather jacket and guns looked different. He did have the charisma of a
king, but at sometimes he didn't show the powers of a king. Or maybe this
girlpower is way too much for him. So guys, be careful. Even a king can be
helpless against girlpower.
A movie worth watching because of the scenery. Because of the Siamese
kingdom and culture. Because of the 68 kids from 23 wives. And to learn
another language, Siamese.

Author
Bob Bloom
 Anna and the King (1999) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Jodie Foster and
Chow Yun-Fat. Directed by Andy Tennant.
 The first thing you can discern from reading the credits of "Anna and the
King" is that this will be a politcally correct interpretation of the
oft-told tale about the widowed English schoolteacher and the King of Siam.
 You realize that when you see the film was directed by Andy Tennant, who
put a modernist, feminist spin on the Cinderella story in last year's
delightful "Ever After."
 The second thing you realize about "Anna and the King" is that these are
two people who need to shuck their duds and just hop into bed together.
This movie emits as much sexual tension as two virgins on their wedding
night.
 Then there's the nagging question you ask yourself as you watch "Anna and
the King". Why another remake of a story that - since 1947 - has been
filmed three times - once straight, and twice as the musical, "The King and
I" (the second musical was a dismal animated version released earlier this
year).
 "Anna and the King," taken for what it is, is an entertaining, but
overlong movie. Running nearly 2 1/2 hours, about 30 minutes could have
been saved if Tennant had judiciously edited out all the meaningful and
smoldering glances between Anna (Jodie Foster) and King Mongkut of Siam
(Chow Yun-Fat).
 Yes, we get it, Andy. Unrequited love, the passion that cannot be
consummated because of propriety as well as society's 19th century
conventions concerning the co-mingling of the races.
 So, let's move on with the rest of the story.
 Watching "Anna and the King" is an interesting experience, especially if
you have seen the 1947 version starring Irene Dunne and Rex Harrison. Then,
the notion of British colonialism, the bringing of Western culture and
ideas to less developed parts of the world, was applauded and seen as "the
white man's burden," to quote Kipling.
My, how times have changed. When Anna talks of the British bringing
enlightenment to the rest of the world, her Indian servants merely shakes
their heads at each other.
 Later, Anna castigates the British officials in Siam for initiating the
political intrigues in an attempt to incorporate the country into its
sphere.
 One added subplot concerning a rebellion to overthrow the king adds some
action missing from previous versions of the story.
 As Anna, Foster is prissy, prim, proper and unbelievable. This is a role
that should have been played by an English actress - an Emma Thompson or
Kate Winslett or Emily Watson. Foster seems to be spending a lot of time
concentrating on making sure she maintains her accent.
 Chow Yun-Fat. Ah, there's another story. He can almost make you forget Yul
Brynner. He has an aura of dignity and wisdom as the king. He is not so
childish or overtly funny as Brynner. His is a sly humor mixed with a
knowledge of the world as well as people.
 This is a king with sex appeal, thus making it more understandable while
all his wives love him. This king also is a family man, concerned about all
his sons and daughters, and they reciprocate that love.
 The story is so well known that I don't thin I'm giving anything away by
showing another example of how the story has been redirected to make it
more politically correct.
 In the other versions of the story when the girl Tuptim betrays the king,
she is punished because the king's pride and honor are wounded. Here, the
king is forced to carry out the punishment because Anna interfered, thus he
would lose face with his ministers and people if he acts to pardon the girl.
 It's a subtle difference, but one that does help set the tone of the movie.
 "Anna and the King," which was mostly filmed in Thailand, is very pretty
to watch. Beautiful scenery gives you a new appreciation of that small
nation. But you could have gotten the same from a travelogue.
 Overall, the movie is like vanilla ice cream. It tastes OK but needs some
added ingredients to spice it up.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net
