Title
Review for Vanya on 42nd Street (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
     A few years ago, I saw a production of "Les Miserables" in San
Francisco, and I loved it.  I loved the experience of being in that
theater, and of giving myself over to the spectacle and the energy of
that live performance.  Some time later, it occurred to me that if I
had seen the identical production on a movie screen, I probably would
have laughed myself silly at its bombast.  What does any of this have
to do with Louis Malle's VANYA ON 42ND STREET?  Only this: live
theater and film are not the same animal, and what works in one does
not necessarily work in the other.  VANYA ON 42ND STREET is a great
stage production, but as a film it is simply good.
     The film is a rendering of a sort of guerilla theater group
performance of Chekhov's UNCLE VANYA in a dilapidated theater on New
York's 42nd Street called the New Amsterdam.  The play is set on a
Russian country estate run by Vanya (Wallace Shawn), an embittered man
passing through middle age with little to show for his life.  He is
hosting Professor Serebryakov (George Gaynes), an ailing retired
academic and the widower of Vanya's sister, as well as the Professor's
young second wife Yelena (Julianne Moore).  Vanya is in love with
Yelena, as is Astrov (Larry Pine), the doctor who visits from the city
to tend to the Professor.  Astrov has an admirer of his own, the
Professor's daughter Sonya (Brooke Smith), but none of them seems
destined for happiness.
     The framing device, which shows the cast members and director
Andre Gregory walking down bustling New York streets towards the
theater, is clearly intended to establish a relevance of VANYA in the
modern day.  To the extent that it succeeds, that connection is really
about living a life in the theater.  There is a five year history
behind this production, as the principles met in living rooms,
abandoned theaters and really any available space in a pure labor of
love.  From the moment when the actors imperceptibly begin the
production with the line, "Your looks have faded," this VANYA becomes a
kind of purgation of the agonies of being an actor, and the characters
come to represent very recognizable types.  Serebryakov is every poseur
who succeeds while more talented performers struggle in anonymity;
Vanya is the workhorse who works unappreciated for years; Sonya is the
young would-be starlet who faces cruel realities about what it takes to
be noticed.  Played on a spartan stage and in contemporary dress, VANYA
seems startlingly modern and very personal to these performers.
     The years of rehearsal and refinement show in performances which
are effortless almost to a one.  Wallace Shawn, he of the gnome-like
features and familiar lisp, finds in Vanya a reservoir of black-humored
hope even as he acknowledges the horror of lost years.  Julianne Moore
(last seen--and plenty of her--in last year's SHORT CUTS) is a
stunning Yelena, and Larry Pine's Astrov is torn and conflicted
throughout without emoting.  However, perhaps the most wrenching
performance belongs to Brooke Smith, who tears into Sonya with an
emotional ferocity few actors could muster.  Her two scenes with Moore
are powerfully played, and when she broke down I felt tears welling in
my eyes.  It is as good a performance by a supporting actress as you'll
see this year.
     All these things VANYA ON 42ND STREET does exceedingly well, but
while I was sitting in my seat watching it on a screen, I often felt
more distanced than I should have felt.  Louis Malle's choices in
framing shots are not particularly inspired, and cinematographer Declan
Quinn's camera teeters for no apparent reason, creating that verite
vertigo pioneered by Woody Allen's HUSBANDS AND WIVES.  To put it
bluntly, I couldn't quite figure out why this film had been made.  I
started to become annoyed that I couldn't be one of the lucky few who
was able to see this production in the flesh, and I wondered why these
actors who were obviously so dedicated to this play hadn't considered
touring with it.  VANYA ON 42ND STREET is a superior interpretation of
a fantastic play, but I couldn't quite shake the conviction that I
really should have seen it *on* 42nd Street.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Wallace Shawn, Julianne Moore, Brooke Smith, Larry Pine, 
          George Gaynes 
Directors: Louis Malle and Andre Gregory (theatrical production director) 
Producer: Fred Berner 
Screenplay: David Mamet adapted from Chekhov's UNCLE VANYA 
Cinematography: Declan Quinn 
Music: Joshua Redman 
Released by Sony Pictures Classics 
     VANYA ON 42ND STREET may be the most innovative and successful
straight film adaptation of any play.  Eschewing the big-budget options
made available through the medium, Louis Malle's picture opts instead
for the exact opposite:  an intimate, unassuming view of a run through
of David Mamet's reworking of Anton Chekhov's UNCLE VANYA.
     The manner in which the play is framed is marvelously clever.
VANYA opens with the various actors and theater director Andre Gregory
walking the streets of New York.  One-by-one, they enter the run-down
New Amsterdam Theater, greet each other, engage in familiar banter, and
get ready to perform in front of a small audience.  When the film
transitions from dialogue between the actors to the actual play, the
switch is so subtle that it takes the audience a moment to realize what
has happened.
     In 1989, Gregory gathered a group of well-respected New York-based
actors to perform VANYA based on Mamet's new interpretation (complete
with his snappy dialogue).  Off-and-on for four years, the group
rehearsed together, often doing improvisations in a rented loft, and
giving performances for select groups.  Finally, Gregory and Wallace
Shawn approached Louis Malle (all three were involved in MY DINNER WITH
ANDRE) about making a film of the production.  Thus was born VANYA ON
42ND STREET.
     Excepting several transition sequences, the film is Chekhov's tale
of lost opportunities.  Those not familiar with UNCLE VANYA will find
the story alone a rich and rewarding experience--not only is this a
unique adaptation, but it does an excellent job conveying the issues,
emotions, and complex characters which make VANYA so potent.
     The play centers on a group of people (most of whom are related to
each other by blood or marriage) gathered on the Russian estate of
Professor Serybryakov (George Gaynes).  Joining the professor, a
supposed expert who really knows nothing, are his young, attractive
wife Yelena (Julianne Moore); the idealistic Doctor Astrov (Larry
Pine), whose lifelong passion is conserving the forests; Serybryakov's
intelligent-but-plain daughter, Sonya (Brooke Smith), who's in love
with the doctor; and Vanya (Wallace Shawn), a disillusioned and bitter
man who blames his life's losses on his brother-in-law.
     The familiarity of the cast with the material and each other is
apparent in the comfortable manner in which VANYA is presented.  The
play, as is often true of adaptations of Chekhov's work, is talky, and
the cast is populated with unhappy characters, but that doesn't stop
this from being an engrossing and surprisingly humorous tale.  The
perfectly timed, repeated interjections of "Oh, will you shut up!" are
responsible for a fair share of laughs.
     There isn't a weak performance.  In fact, there isn't a weak
moment.  Despite its many strengths, however, VANYA ON 42ND STREET
isn't for everyone.  It is, after all, a Russian play, with all the
qualities ascribed to that storytelling niche.  Issue-related and
character-centered, VANYA has what could best be described as a
minimalist plot.  Action-oriented viewers need not bother.
Nevertheless, for those seeking an amazing stage-to-film epiphany,
there is no better choice.
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily those of
Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This is a play within a play, though there is little in the outer
play to do much but to explain why the classic Russian play is being
done in modern dress and with virtually no set design.  A group of
actors get together in an old theater to perform Anton Chekhov's "Uncle
Vanya" for a tiny audience.  The film starts with a few external shots
of the streets around the theater, perhaps to get some motion and
action into the otherwise static film.  Once the play begins, it is
performed on one set which it leaves only for a minute or so at
intermission.  Even that would not matter as much for some playwrights,
but Chekhov wrote for a different culture, and audiences used to fast-
paced action plays by the likes of William Shakespeare may find the
style here a bit off-putting.  Chekhov is wont to have actors get their
turn in the conversation at speaking and not give up the floor for a
good five minutes.  The dialogue for this version was written by David
Mamet.  Mamet himself is used to giving characters short and choppy
dialogue, as he did in OLEANNA, and letting the actors speak for so
long may have been a bit of a strain on him.
     In the inner play Serybryakov (George Gaynes) is an incompetent
and talentless academic, successful without ever really understanding
his own supposed field of expertise.  His entire household sacrificed
to support him in his career, doing all the little low-profile clerical
tasks so that he could spend his time teaching and writing about art
that he did not really understand.  Now he has retired and spends his
days in writing about nothing at all and rudely demanding obeisance and
care from his household.  His beautiful second wife Yelena (Julianne
Moore) and Sonya his homely daughter from his first marriage (Brooke
Smith) tend to his whims.  Also tending is Vanya (Wallace Shawn), the
cynical and embittered brother of the professor's first wife.  Yelena
is lovelessly loyal to Serybryakov but is aware of the wistful,
unrequited love of her by both Vanya and Dr. Astrov (Larry Pine), the
physician who comes to the estate to treat the old professor.  In the
meantime, Sonya has fallen for Dr. Astrov.  With faster pacing these
tangled loves might have led to melodrama.  Instead it is preparation
for entanglement to come.
     Wallace Shawn, like Woody Allen, has one of those faces that is
hard to take seriously.  To some extent that acts as a hindrance to him
in this film, but less so than in many other dramatic roles.  But it is
part of the character Vanya's dilemma that he is not considered and
taken seriously.  Vanya is really something of a non-entity in his own
household and putting a man with a comical face in the role cuts a
little from the drama but also adds additional meaning to the story.
Julianne Moore, who plays Yelena looks like Jane Curtin and sounds like
Diane Keaton.  The former does not hurt all that much, but her
performance reminds one too much of Keaton in LOVE AND DEATH, which
makes a burlesque of just the sort of drama that Chekhov wrote.
     Somehow the technical credits show surprising unevenness.  Declan
Quinn's camera work is more irritation than art.  He frames scenes
badly, at times slicing off part of an actor's face.  Other times all
the action will be on one side of the frame while the rest of the frame
seems wasted.  During some speeches the camera seems distractingly
unsteady as if it is being hand-held.  All of this may have been
intentional, but if so the reason was not apparent.  Continuity is
poorly maintained.  At one point a character plays solitaire and when
seen from different angles there are different cards on the table.
Again there filmmaker may be saying that it is what is being spoken
that is important and not details like care for continuity.  It could
be a stylistic touch like e.e.cummings writing in lower case, but iF sO
iT dID nOT cONVEY aNY sPECIAL mEANING.  For that matter, if this is
supposed to be a stage play with no technical embellishments we are
seeing, we need some explanation as to why we can hear Yelena's
thoughts without her lips moving.
     There is little in this film that one could not get from seeing a
more traditional performance of the Chekhov play.  What is good the
film owes to Chekhov.  Because the play is good, the film gets a low +2
on the -4 to +4 scale.  But a more traditional performance with the
same actors would have gotten a higher rating.

Author
Jon A. Webb
     VANYA ON 42ND STREET is David Mamet's adaptation of Chekhov's
"Uncle Vanya," as directed by Louis Malle.  The adaptation seems
faithful so far as I can tell (I've never seen the play or read it, but
it sounds authentic) and shows great respect for the conventions of the
theater as well as great love for actors.  Still, as much as I wanted
to like this film, I found it dull and flat, except for a few scenes
where the actors and Chekhov's material break through and I felt I was
really learning something about humanity.
     The story is a play within a play; Andre Gregory is the director
of a production of "Uncle Vanya," currently in rehearsal in an old
rundown theater.  The decrepit theater helps create the right tone for
the story, which takes place in a now-neglected farmhouse on a Russian
estate.
     The story opens with Wallace Shawn, who plays Uncle Vanya, eating
a knish outside the theater, waiting for the others.  He complains of
being tired and lays down to take a nap on a convenient bench on the
stage; at that moment, the casual conversation between two actors
begins to change, and you realize that the play has begun; when Shawn
wakes up, he is Uncle Vanya.  This is a neat, elegant transition that
is quite in tune with the overall tone of the film, which tries in a
gentle way to bring us into the mood of Chekhov's play.
     Another thing I liked about the film were Julianne Moore's
performance as Yelena; her striking beauty is the main subject of the
play, and she has a complicated relationship with Uncle Vanya--he is
ardently pursuing her, as his one last hope at achieving transcendent
joy; she finds him disgusting but at the same time she is grateful for
his jokes and friendship as she feels herself wasting away.
     I was quite struck by the performance of the woman who plays
Sonya, Uncle Vanya's niece.  She is called upon to portray a plain
woman who is painfully conscious of how inferior she is as an object of
desire to Yelena, and she conveys this very well.  As an actress she is
of course beautiful but you can see how she thinks she is not beautiful
enough to be anything more than "plain"; you can see how this belief in
itself renders her plain and makes her unsuccessful in her own bid to
get out of the trap she finds herself in.
     In spite of all these good points, I found the film hard to take.
It is simply too much of a play to work well in the less fluid and
interactive medium of film.  Several times I found myself bored.  I
feel educated, and eager to see good stage productions of Chekhov; but
I don't feel the uplifting sense of having seen something really first
rate that I sometimes get from film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
    VANYA ON 42ND STREET comes from a unique idea.  Andre Gregory (from
My Dinner With Andre fame) has for years been gathering actor and
actress friends of his to do the Anton Chekhov play UNCLE VANYA for fun
at an off-Broadway theater.  They invite a dozen of their friends to
watch it and they do the play, sans costumes, just for the sheer
enjoyment of acting.
     Louis Malle heard of this and decided to film and direct one of
these gatherings.  The play was updated (read modernized) by the great
contemporary playwright, David Mamet.  You may remember Mamet from many
of his well written movies--my favorites being HOUSE OF GAMES (1987)
and THINGS CHANGE (1988).  His staccato style of terse, biting, and
thought provoking dialog is unrivaled.  (Okay, it is sort of like
Harold Pinter, but Pinter is so depressing).
     The show starts with the people coming slowly in off of 42nd
Street to the old Shubert Theater which is mainly in ruins now.  Andre
Gregory has a small speaking role as the leader of the audience of a
dozen friends.  Out of no where the play begins.  It is as if they had
come to your old house and were putting on a play just for you in your
living room.
     In the play Uncle Vanya is played with great gusto by Wallace
Shawn (the other person in MY DINNER WITH ANDRE).  He is a Russian
living at the family's country estate with his niece (Brooke Smith) who
is madly in love with the country doctor (Larry Pine) who visits almost
every day.  Sad to say the love is not mutual.  Also on the estate is
the niece's Father--a professor and his new wife, Yelena (beautifully
played by Jullianne Moore as a classic flirt).  There are several other
actors and actresses with important parts in the play.  All did a
wonderful job, but for me it was Shawn and Moore that really stood out
as giving terrific performances.
     In the play, Vanya is very sad because he has worked hard all of
his life, and he thinks that at the age of 47 he is now too old to be
of interest to women.  (47--imagine that!) He is head over heels in
love with the professor's wife--his sister having died before the play
starts and the professor having married Yelena.  Yelena flirts
intensively with Vanya.  Watch the camera angles which intensifies
their close face-to-face flirting.  It turns out however that Yelena
indeed does not find Vanya at all attractive--just as he feared.
     Yelena, on the other hand, confides in a great woman-to-woman talk
fest with her stepsister that she thought she loved the professor when
she married him but now realizes that she did not love him then and
certainly does not love him now, and yet, she can not leave him.  She
confesses that she is terribly unhappy with her life.
     The play is one great scene after another.  I do not remember the
original UNCLE VANYA so I can not say for sure how much Mamet modified
it, but I suspect a fair amount.  Whatever.  I found the dialog fairly
perfect as presented in this movie.
     I recommend VANYA ON 42ND STREET to everyone old enough to be
interested in serious material.  It is rated PG simply because of its
adult themes--there is no sex, nudity, or violence of any kind.  It is
not a happy movie, but it is a very thought provoking one.  I award it
*** 1/2.  It runs a well paced 1:59.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: November 29, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
