Title
Review for Return with Honor (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Ocean Releasing 
 Director:  Freida Lee Mock, Terry Sanders
 Writer:  Freida Lee Mock, Terry Sanders, Christine Z. Wiser
 Cast: Everett Alvarez, Jim Stockdale, Jeremiah Denton,
Robbie Risner, John McCain, Richard Stratton, John
McGrath, Douglas Hegdahl, Ron Bliss, others
   Presidents Kennedy and Johnson thought that if the U.S.
did nothing to stop North Vietnam from annexing South
Vietnam--as the former regime threatened to do in a civil war
between those two separated regions--the countries
surrounding Vietnam would fall to Communism one by one. 
Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, and eventually Japan would
succumb to pressure from their neighbors and install
pro-Communist regimes hostile to the West.  We know now
that they were wrong.  Things just didn't turn out that way.
The U.S. lost the first war in its history when the last of
450,000 American troops pulled out in 1973, Vietnam turned
Red, and for the past 26 years Thailand and Japan remained
solidly in the pro-Western camp.
   But back in the sixties, only a handful of intellectuals and
journalists warned against an action that most thought would
be over in a matter of weeks. Gung-ho Americans, longing to
reverse the Communist spread and see a little action, looked
forward with enthusiasm to the U.S. involvement. Not the
least of the ardent troops were airmen educated in the
famous school for U.S. Air Force Academy in Colorado, who
proceeded with the blessings of Kennedy and Johnson and
later of President Nixon to bomb the blazes out of the hostile
people taking their orders from Hanoi.  Inevitably, a large
number of aircraft were shot down, the men choosing when
they could to bail out, hoping to use their training to flee to
safety in the jungle.  Things didn't work out quite that way for
twenty particular men who are the subjects of a stunning
documentary financed largely by Tom Hanks called "Return
With Honor."  The movie, directed by Freida Lee Mock and
Terry Sanders (who had previously made "Maya Lin: A
Strong Clear Vision"), is not of the razzle-dazzle sort that
might bring a large nationwide audience to the multiplexes. 
Nonetheless, seeing "Return With Honor" is a moving
experience, a movie inhabited only partly with the bane of
documentaries--the talking heads--but populated as well with
dramatic film clips taken from the war archives.  Some
celluloid has been supplied by the North Vietnamese,
surprisingly enough, clips that put them in a bad light as
people who ignored the Geneva Convention and resorted to
torture and unconscionable manipulations to get the
prisoners to give information and to "confess to war crimes"
on TV.  They did not consider the American action against
them to be a war; hence, the prisoners were appraised as
common criminals to be treated with all the means prohibited
by international rules. By 1969 462 pilots were shot down and
treated by their captors with bestial strategies.  The subjects
of this film were kept in the so-called Hanoi Hilton, a dungeon
ironically built by the French to house Vietnamese while
France was fighting in its former colony.  The men were
paraded in the streets to be stoned and spat upon by the
residents, and, far worse, they were subjected to the rope
torture. This involved tying their arms and hand tightly and
twisting a rope until their elbows and shoulders were
dislocated--ostensibly to get information which these soldiers
could not possibly have about future targets.  
   Thinking that perhaps they could withstand the Asian
hellhole for two years, they were overwhelmed by
confinement for seven.  Despite all, the twenty subjects of
this picture had kept their spirits up and miraculously survived
the occasional solitary confinement and poor diet to be
reunited with their families after the signing of the Paris
Peace Accords.
   Although many returning veterans were emotionally
disabled by their battlefield experiences, these men came out
apparently without a trace of so-called shellshock and relate
stories of unusually skillful techniques which they mastered in
prison.  Douglas Hegdahl, for example, was able to rattle off
the names of all 268 POWs when he returned home, having
memorized the names without even the benefit of pencil and
paper.  John McGrath found out that he was an artist when
he broke the boils on his skin and used the pus to paint on
the bleak stone walls of his 7x7 cell.  Richard Stratton, who
agreed to confess, foiled his captors on TV by pretending to
be a robotized Manchurian Candidate while Jeremiah Denton,
similarly put in front of a camera, checkmated his captors by
blinking the word "torture" in Morse Code with his eyes.  The
men agreed that if they could not communicate with one
another in their separate cells, they would go stark raving
mad.  They figured out a way to do this by tapping out a code
of their own invention, putting the letters of the alphabet in
five rows of five letters each and, for example, hitting the
walls with tap tap (pause) tap tap tap, to mean row two letter
three (which is H).
   This extraordinary documentary was trashed in a mean-
spirited Village Voice review by Michael Atkinson, who--
apparently furious that the antiwar protests were not given
more than a few seconds of time--trashed everything from the
camera's "drunken pans through jungles" to the lack of black
and Hispanic prisoners, even taking the opportunity to jab at
Steven Spielberg and Roberto Benigni for "dulcifying the
Holocaust."  Ignore the knee-jerk leftist reaction.  "Return
With Honor," which opened commercially in only one New
York theater and seemingly not at all in L.A., is unabashedly
patriotic--giving Americans a long-overdue message that the
people who fought on the American side in the Vietnam was
are indeed heroes.

Author
Ross Anthony
Generally, documentaries don't carry well in the movie theater (that goes
for the one's I've produced as well). However, "Return with Honor" is an
exception. Its spirit is more than enough to scale a 70 foot screen.
Beginning with what in hindsight sounds like pipe-dreams, "The clouds open
up like fields of cotton ... it's really beautiful," top-gun pilots talk
about the joy of flying ... and then the painful reality of being shot down
into enemy territory.
"I was taught to escape and evade under a variety of conditions and terrain,
and then after I was shot down and ejected to the ground I was able to
escape and evade for all of five seconds before I was surrounded by what
seemed like a hundred guns." This paraphrase sums up the "capture" segment
of "Return with Honor."
>From there the POWs (now 25 years later) recount their experiences in
"Heartbreak Hotel" and other prisons deep in Northern Vietnam. In a terribly
candid manner and then occasionally moved to tears (or humor), these
survivors sit as relaxed as old friends and tell in detail the tragic
hardships and bone bending tortures that just needed to be endured. Even at
their breaking points, they seem somehow to crawl away with chins up.
The interviews are shot on film and mixed with occasion recreations. Most of
the field footage is real -- including images of the prisoners under
captivity (from the archives of North Vietnam).
"We weren't allowed to talk, but we had to communicate, so we worked out a
tap code. We coughed in code, we raked leaves in code, we swept the floor in
code."
Some may see "Return with Honor" as an Air Force propaganda film, and though
it may tip in that direction, the genuine testimonials of these "Heroes"
transcend political opinion. The filmmakers create a work that progresses
with a very sincere intensity resulting in a rare mix of drama and fact. It
has all the soul of the Rambo movies, without the acting. Truly
inspirational.
Testimonials of Lt. jg. Everett Alvarez, Lt. Cmdr. Bob Shumaker, Lt. Cmdr.
John McCain, Cmdr. Jeremiah Denton, Cmdr. James Stockdale, Lt. Col. Robinson
Risner, Capt. Douglas Peterson, Maj. Red Cherry, Capt. George McKnight, Maj.
Sam Johnson, Lt. Paul Galanti, Lt. Ron Bliss, Lt. Tom McNish, Lt. Cmdr.
Richard Stratton, Seaman Douglas Hegdahl, Col. Tom Madison, Lt. Ed
Mechenbeir, Lt. Kevin McManus, Lt. John McGrath, Maj. George Day, Sybil
Stockdale, Henry Etta Madison, Alice Stratton, Phyliss Galanti, Marlene
McGrath, Lorraine Shumaker.
Written/Produced/Directed by: Freida Lee Mock, Terry Sanders with Christine
Z. Wiser at An American Film Foundation. Released by Ocean.
Grade..........................A
See Ross Anthony's interview with Terry Sanders and Freida Lee Mock at
http://www.rossanthony.com/interviews/returnint.shtml
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
