Title
Review for O.C. & Stiggs (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Everybody, including me, who'd read National Lampoon's magazine feature 
'Summer of O.C. and Stiggs' rejected this film version when it eventually 
showed up.  Firstly, it's just not that funny -  at least not in the way 
that the original stories were.  Secondly, it suffers from monumental 
miscasting - not of the actors, but of director Robert Altman.  I can't 
understand how Altman ever got involved with this assignment, as his 
distinctive, observational satire is poles apart from the sophomoric  humor 
that trademarks the Lampoon.  We'd already seen the magazine's classic story 
'Vacation 58' watered down for the film that would become NATIONAL LAMPOON'S 
VACATION, so in retrospect shouldn't have maintained high hopes for any 
further film projects based on their catalogue.  Perversely, NATIONAL 
LAMPOON'S ANIMAL HOUSE, which was a huge hit and did manage to capture the 
magazine's anarchic tone, was written for the screen first and translated 
into a magazine edition afterwards.
O.C. AND STIGGS would have been a tough sell anyway.  As written, the 
characters are hilarious because they are unconscionably cruel - their sole 
reason for existing is to pursue an ongoing campaign of persecution against 
the wealthy Schwab family.  It's easier to get away with this sort of thing 
in print than it is on film, so to make the characters more 
audience-friendly, the screen versions are given a background history.  This 
is a major mistake, because it's the absence of motive that makes the 
original stories so funny: it was the mission of O.C. and Stiggs to make the 
Schwab's life a living hell for no other reason than they were Schwabs.  
What the film-makers didn't recognize was that in this context the cruelty 
of the story couldn't be taken seriously (or offensively) because there was 
no rational framework on which it could hang.  At least Altman does manage 
to capture the surreal tone of the story to some degree.  His distinct 
directorial style finds actors ignoring the absurd subtext of the story and 
seemingly making up their own film within a controlled visual landscape of 
studied pans and slow zooms.
In the final reckoning it looks as though Altman is more at ease when he is 
directing the veteran players in his cast - Ray Walston and Dennis Hopper 
provide the film with its most amusing moments even though their approach 
and characters are entirely different.  It's amusing at first to see Hopper 
decked out like he was still a photojournalist in APOCALYPSE NOW, but less 
amusing when this connection is blatantly spoofed with a helicopter charging 
along to Wagner in the finale.  The ending of the film aims to be farcical, 
but Altman's pacing is all wrong.  It reminds me of the instructions that 
Alan Alda is given in SWEET LIBERTY, in which he is told that to make a 
successful film he must show nudity, destruction of property, and defiance 
of authority.  This would seem to suit the mission statement of the Lampoon 
quite happily, but not Altman -  he tries for two out of three, but it looks 
more like two falls out of three, and he loses both times.  Ultimately, O.C. 
AND STIGGS is either a disappointment or just bewildering, depending on 
whether or not you've read the source material beforehand.  It's easier 
going the second time around if you're willing to give it another chance, 
and it is definitely a unique product.  On those grounds alone, it can't be 
dismissed completely out of hand.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
