Title
Review for Sherlock, Jr. (1924)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Sherlock, Jr." is one of the most famous of all silent films.
It is a comedy, and is filled with many excellent stunts and gags.
Buster Keaton plays an everyman who has a dreary job running a
film projector, but dreams of becoming a detective.  He courts
a pretty girl at her father's house, but has competition:
a much bigger man who is also a criminal.  The rival steals
the father's pocket watch and frames Keaton.  Keaton has
lost his girlfriend unfairly.
At the theatre, Keaton falls asleep during a film he is showing.
In a dream, he sees himself joining the movie's plot.
Here, Keaton plays the great detective Sherlock Jr.
His rival plots to kill Keaton so that he can continue
stealing from others.  This all leads to several incredible
stunts, usually involving moving vehicles and intricate timing
ordinarily found only in cartoons.
Keaton performs these stunts himself.  Legend has it that
years after the most famous stunt from this film (Keaton 
jumps from a moving train, grabs a watertower's drainage pipe, 
turning in downwards, thus dousing himself, leading to a nasty 
fall) Keaton went to a doctor for a checkup, and the doctor 
asked him "When did you break your neck?"
"Sherlock, Jr." is considered to be one of the best silent
films.  I assume that this is because of the stunts.  However,
these stunts only take up a few minutes (in total) of the film,
and cannot have a major impact on its grade.
There is much to like about the film.  There is genuine
dramatic tension when Keaton is playing pool, surrounded by
bad guys who are attempting to kill him.  It is also easy to
identify with Keaton, who dreams of a better life and
courts his girlfriend with such innocence.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Heather Picker
     Directed by Buster Keaton.  Story by Jean Havez, Joe Mitchell, and Clyde
Bruckman.  Starring Buster Keaton, with Kathryn McGuire.  1924, 45 min., Not
Rated.
     "Sherlock Jr." features extraordinary visual trickery and yet another
charming Buster Keaton performance.  Keaton is a projectionist who is timidly
and successfully vying for the affections of a girl (Kathryn McGuire) until her
father's watch disappears and he is framed by her other suitor, a criminal.
Reality and fantasy are masterfully interwoven as the dejected projectionist,
whose aspiration is to become a detective, winds up in the movie he is playing
for a packed theater.  Keaton breezes through a series of astounding shots with
an equally impressive ease.  
     The forty-five minute running time flies by, leaving you enchanted and
pondering the implications of the projectionist's reliance upon cinematic
example to interact with McGuire. Keaton's father, Joe, plays the girl's
father.  Jean Havez, Joe Mitchell, and Clyde Bruckman, who are responsible for
the story, also wrote "The Navigator" (1924), a Keaton classic in which McGuire
has a part, and his "Seven Chances" (1925).  Cinematography by Byron Houck and
Elgin Lessley, who worked on the two aforementioned films, as well.  
