Title
Review for In the Winter Dark (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: In an isolated part of the Australian outback a
mysterious creature is preying on farm animals.  An older farmer leads
four local people into a journey of their inner fears as they try to
find the source of the animal mutilations.  Dark is indeed this story
of natural and unnatural evils.  Rating: 7 (0 to 10), 2 (-4 to +4)
   - Directed by James Bogle who co-wrote the screenplay.
   - Four people are living in this remote region of the outback:
     Morris and Ida, an older farmer who has seen his share of evil
     done by nature and his strange wife.  Then there is Murray Jacob,
     an inexperienced farmer.  Finally there is Ronnie, a semi-hippie
     from the city whose husband has abandoned her.
   - Based on a novel by popular Australian novelist Tim Winton.
   - The film was five years in the making, made for three million
     Australian dollars-something like one and a half million American
     dollars.
   - Ida is played by Brenda Blethyn of SECRETS AND LIES.
   - Moody photography.  Score by Peter Cobbin long on ominous strings.
   - Morris finds what may be a footprint of the beast, but this as
     almost everything else is ambiguous.
   - Morris and Ida lost a child to some unknown animal.
   - Could be one animal or coincidence and several animals.
   - Nature is a force to be feared, not a benevolent being.
   - Tension under the surface of people dealing with each other.
   - Everyone drinks for recreation.
   - Morris to Ronnie in labor: "You can't have that baby right now.
     You have to wait for the authorities."
   - Some echoes of Moby Dick.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW: In the Winter Dark
By Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au)
Starring: Ray Barrett, Brenda Blethyn, Miranda Otto, Richard Roxburgh
Director: James Bogle
Screenplay: James Bogle, Peter Rasmussen
Australian theatrical release date: September 10, 1998
Australian films have recently gone from the grueling The Interview, to
the confused and muddled Sound of One Hand Clapping, to the funny but
problematic Crackers (although not necessarily in that order).  Although
In the Winter Dark and all of the above films are of different genres
and styles, they all bear one thing in common: Australian writers and
directors seem to do whatever they wish with their characters and
scenarios, and to hell with you if you don't like it.  Such is the story
with this film; an exquisite experience that merges its way almost into
excellence - and the only reason it doesn't quite wear the crown of
excellence is its lack of reason to get there.
This year's most stunning narration is delivered by Ray Barrett (Hotel
de Love, Heaven's Burning), who plays an old but likeable grouch Maurice
Stubbs.  "I started to have these dreams," he says, "Not mine. Other
people'slike there's some pressure point because they can'tget it out
anymore, can't get it told."  Maurice seems condemned to tell his story,
and as we get further into his soul we begin to understand that the only
thing limiting his heart from expressing his true feelings is his own
arrogance.  And perhaps it's that arrogance which, bit by bit, pushes us
further away from the true essence of his character.
Something or someone is killing animals in the secluded valley where
Stubbs lives.  All of the residents of the area - including himself,
wife Ida (Brenda Blethyn) and a couple of younger folk - fear for their
produce and property, and desperately attempt to seek out and destroy
the beast.  But as they do so, not only do they realize that the beast
is almost impossible to find, but also that in order to find it they
have to confront hidden parts of themselves.  Exactly what these hidden
parts are is never fully understood.
If I could choose any two words to describe this indescribable adoption
of Tim Winton's novel, they would be sublime and hollow.  Sublime,
because of the unmistakable excellence in which the film was shot and
hollow, because it tells a story with no real point or ambition to it.
The cast of four main characters shines, with some beautifully
interlaced performances and snappy dialogue.  Barrett especially is
completely believable; there aren't many lead roles nowadays that go to
sixty something actors, but he sure makes good use of his material.
More than anything else, this film demonstrates the closeness yet
eternal distancing felt between people living with fences both real and
superficial around them, and how they solve both the problems of the
future as well as the nightmares of the past.  In the Winter Dark is a
subversive and gripping experience, with a climax that is so wonderfully
etched out of nothing from director James Bogle.  The presence of an
unseen beast brings forth some important questions: is the beast a
vicious animal, a maniacal human being or simply a metaphor of fear and
desperation?  Much to Bogle's credit, we are kept guessing all along,
and then when the daunting climax occurs, we guess some more.
But that is ignoring that fact that it is indeed a hollow experience.
That's disappointing, considering the amount of vibrant talent and raw
Australian enthusiasm which shapes this rich experience.  With no real
pay off, and no powerful message to leave us shattered, it's still an
absorbent and admirable film.  And - I can just picture Bogle saying
it - to hell with you if you don't like it.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au
