Title
Review for Wayne's World (1992)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     One of the most standard architectures for a comedy team is the
straight and the wacky.  The straight person will generally seem either just
very normal or perhaps romantic.  The wacky person is, well, wacky.
Examples are Crosby and Hope, Burns and Allen, Abbott and Costello, Martin
and Lewis, Rowan and Martin, and even Bergen and McCarthy.  Generally the
wacky person gets most of the laughs and the straight person gets top
billing just for setting up the wacky person's jokes.  There is more
potential when you have two or more comics playing off each other as you did
with the Marx Brothers or what is to my mind the best of the teams, Laurel
and Hardy.  So Mike Myers and Dana Carvey--playing their SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE
alter egos Wayne Campbell and Garth Algar--start with a plus.  Both are
comics.  There is potential for some really good humor.  Unfortunately, they
rarely play off each other for laughs.  Either each does his own thing or
they just both do the same thing.  Wayne's main thing is to make a joke or
do something clever and then flash a big open-mouthed grin as if he were
standing in front of a cheering audience.  He also negates sentences by
adding a belated " ... not."  Garth's thing is to act a little befuddled and
stupid.  Not the most auspicious starting material, but with enough
personality the team could have potential.  Where they go wrong is that they
are just not all that winning, and most of their gags are familiar and not
funny.
     Wayne and Garth have a public access television show on cable
television.  The show is done on almost no budget from the basement of the
house where Wayne lives with his parents.  The idea is that in spite of the
low budget of the cable production, they are supposed to be the best thing
on television.  Sadly, their cable hijinx are not all that funny and leave
one wondering what the attraction is to their cable program.  (SPOILER
ALERT: They sell out to commercialism but realize that commercialism is not
what they really want.  George Romero did the same basic plot considerably
better in KNIGHTRIDERS.)
     Besides the two main characters, the film features Tia Carrere as
Wayne's singer girlfriend from Hong Kong.  Her singing, like Wayne's
program, is just never as good as the script calls for it to be.  Rob Lowe
is a sleazy, slimy television promoter who is more style than substance.
One of the better bit parts is Ed O'Neill as the doughnut shop owner with a
darker side.
     As in an AIRPLANE! film, about a quarter of the jokes but, but unlike
in an AIRPLANE! film, the jokes do not come nearly fast enough.  At times
the film drags.  That is particularly bad since the plot is predictable and
if you know what is going to happen, you wish it would get it over with.
Nearly every funny joke in the film is an allusion to or lampooning the
entertainment industry.  Most are meta-jokes that poke fun at product
placements or actors talking to the camera.  There are several film and
television allusions.  They give the film some chuckles but still too few
laughs.  WAYNE'S WORLD is often on the edge of being funny, but rarely
crosses that line.  Even at 95 minutes the film is often too slow and just
not rewarding enough.  I give the film a flat 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
135 min., PG-13, Comedy, 1992
Director: Penelope Spheeris
Cast: Mike Myers, Dana Carvey, Rob Lowe, Donna Dixon, Lara Flynn Boyle,
      Tia Carrere, Alice Cooper, Ione Sky, Robert Patrick, Ed O'Neill,
      Chris Farley, Brian Doyle-Murray, Colleen Camp, Meatloaf
     Wayne and Garth (played in order by Mike Myers and Dana Carvey)
run a public access television show called Wayne's World from Wayne's
basement.  Television executive Rob Lowe wants to buy up the show so he
can put it on a network station.  Mike Myers sees female rocker Tia
Carrere and falls in love with her but is chased by his airhead
ex-girlfriend Lara Flynn Boyle.  Dana Carvey sees beautiful Donna Dixon
and falls in love with her but can't bring up the courage to speak to
her.
     WAYNE'S WORLD is very funny at most times, although it is
occasionally slow.  Probably after you finish the film you won't even
remember the slow scenes.  WAYNE'S WORLD is just a "vege-out" movie,
there is nothing really important said.  Actually there is one point
made in the film.  It is that someone should not sell out to
commercialism.  This film is just for someone who wants to spend a
night at the movies without having to think.  On a scale of zero to
five, I give WAYNE'S WORLD a four.  WAYNE'S WORLD is rated PG-13 for
explicit language, adult situations, and adult humor.
     I don't know whether to recommend that you go out to the theaters
to see WAYNE'S WORLD.  Some of you will love it, some of you will hate
it -- it all depends on your preferences for comedy.  If you are a fan
of "Saturday Night Live" or are a fan of silly movies, like THE NAKED
GUN 2 1/2: THE SMELL OF FEAR and HOT SHOTS!, then I highly recommend
that this film be on your list of films to see.  If you are a fan only
of more subtle comedy, like PRETTY WOMAN or "CROCODILE" DUNDEE, I really
don't recommend that you rush out to the theater to see the film.  This
film will probably lose nothing on video, so those of you unsure about
the film might want to wait for the video to come out.
     WAYNE'S WORLD is based on a series of "Saturday Night Live" skits
created by Mike Myers.  The "Wayne's World" skits on "Saturday Night
Live" tend to be funnier than in this film.  Three members of the cast
of this film, that I know of, are also currently members of "Saturday
Night Live."  Those are, Mike Myers, Dana Carvey, and Chris Farley.
     WAYNE'S WORLD features many cameo appearances by movie and
television stars.  Ed O'Neill ("Married... with Children") stars as a
psychopathic waiter at an all night diner.  Alice Cooper has a concert
performance in the film and talks with Mike Myers and Dana Carvey.
Meatloaf stars as "Tiny."  Robert Patrick (TERMINATOR 2) stars as, well,
you'll see.  Chris Farley stars as a limousine driver.

Author
Mark Santora
     Tonight I got a chance to see an advance screening of WAYNE'S
WORLD.   Based on the sometimes comical skit on SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE, I
had mixed feelings going into this film.  But, two minutes into the
film, I was laughing my ass off.  This film is really funny.
     Quick Summary:  Wayne has a public access television show he runs
from his basement.  Garth is is best friend and sidekick on the show.
The show is really popular in their small town.  A big time producer
(Rob Lowe) sees the show.  He decides to buy the show and make it more
commercial.  By the way, Rob Lowe is the "bad" guy in this film, but you
knew that already I'm sure.
     Both Wayne and Garth address the camera directly.  They do it
really well too.  Fortunately they don't overuse this and allow a small
story to develop around the characters.  They also take time out to poke
fun at everyone.  Reebok, Pizza Hut, Nuprin, ... nobody is too far away
to attack.   But they do it smartly and do not insult the audience's
intelligence.
     Along the way, Wayne falls in love with a female rock singer.  Rob
Lowe attempts to steal her away.  This leads to a scene with Alice
Cooper as they sir around and discuss the philosophy of the town of
Milwaukee.   And while in Milwaukee, they don't forget to pay tribute to
the two most famous people in Milwaukee, Laverene and Shirley.  These
scenes are really great.  There is also a great scene where Wayne,
Garth, and their three crew members are driving down the street singing
"Bohemian Rhapsody."  It is really good.
     I don't want to give anything away, which is why I am being so
vague.   What I will say is that you should look for cameos by Ione Sky,
Robert Patrick (grin), Ed O'Neil, and Chris Farley.  They all play
interesting roles.
     How would I rate this movie?  It is really funny.  It is just the
type of mindless humor that is what makes films fun.  Don't expect to
see any Oscar nominations, even though they even poke fun at that, just
expect a good time.

Author
Rachel Gordon
Sometimes, no matter how much you love analyzing and breaking down
movies, you have to understand that some are just made for fun.  Wayne's
World is a prime example.  Sure, you can predict everything that's going
to happen, but the characters are entertaining and it's a fairly decent
mix of physical and verbal comedy.  Of course, who can forget the
variety of endings they invented and the moments of dialogue that still
pop up today, such as, "Shaw... and monkeys might fly out of my butt!"
The most memorable television I watched in my teens consisted primarily
of those "not ready for prime time players" at Saturday Night Live. 
They had cutting edge music and hosts who could act.  Not to mention
they had talented writers, including Michael Myers and Dana Carvey. 
Carvey had the Church Lady and Myers had Dieter and Simon.  And when
they worked together to produce the Wayne's World sketch, I never
thought I'd love a pair of naďve losers more.
This sketch, surprising, turned into a successful feature film.  After
all, adults who don't want to grow up can only be interesting and fun
for a certain amount of time... say five minutes.  But a full 90? 
Carvey had participated in a few failed attempts (not really his fault,
poorly written material) like Opportunity Knocks and Myers was pretty
much getting his start with this film.  The last time Lorne Michaels had
produced a successful film based off an SNL sketch was with The Blues
Brothers, 12 years previously.
To top it off, Wayne's World was directed by Penelope Spheeris, who was
infamous by that point for her classic observation of punk rock artists
in Decline of Western Civilization (over ten years previously to the
making of this film).  Asking a director to switch from this documentary
style to a comedy about two innocents in the Midwest with a cable access
show was quite a leap of faith.
Despite these reasons for reservations, Wayne's World was far from
disappointing.  Is it an important movie to see?  Heck no, but if you
want something to watch on a rainy afternoon that will lighten your
mood, this should do the trick.  It's unclear how much creative input
Spheeris had in the final product as the two stars of the film had also
created the characters, but there are signs that this was an enjoyable
team effort.  For instance, the conversations that Wayne and Garth have
directly with the camera are actually engaging.  This device is normally
annoying, but Spheeris has done this before and has an eye for
concentrating on subjects one by one.
Films about small-timers who suddenly make their dent in society and
receive instant fortune only to realize they rather appreciate their
simple lives are a dime a dozen in Hollywood.  The trick with Wayne's
World that seems to cross age and gender in terms of enjoyment is that
the characters are endearing.  They lead humdrum lives, but they enjoy
them enough that it's interesting to watch them from one scene to the
next.
Wayne (Myers) is the leader of the pair.  He makes all the decisions
about where the show goes, drives the car when they hang out, and gets
the best wise cracks.  The show is also named after him.  He's not the
most attractive or intelligent of men, but he is charismatic and knows
how to enjoy himself.
Garth (Carvey), his sidekick and best pal, keeps his mouth shut most of
the time while he fantasizes about "Dream Girl" (Donna Dixon) in the
donut shop.  He allows himself to be led around by Wayne, including
during their show, but he does get to reach his own shining moment when
left to go his own way as success has spoiled and separated them,
courtesy of smarmy television producer Benjamin (Rob Lowe).
Spheeris may not be the best female director Hollywood has to offer.  It
seems that she will do films like Wayne's World for the sheer value of a
paycheck so she can concentrate on other observational material when she
has saved her pennies.  And I don't begrudge her this possible
tendency.  I'd probably do it myself if I were in her shoes.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Chad Polenz
Wayne's World
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1992, PG-13, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Mike Meyers (Wayne Campbell), Dana Carvey (Garth Algar), Tia
Carrere (Cassandra), Rob Lowe (Benjamin Oliver), written by Mike Meyers,
Bonnie and Terry Turner, produced by Lorne Michaels, directed by Penelope
Spheeris.
        "Wayne's World" is probably one of the most intelligent and creative
comedies I've ever seen, which is quite an accomplishment considering how
unintelligent the premise is. In short, this movie shouldn't be as good as it
is.
        The story revolves around Wayne Campbell (Meyers) and Garth Algar (Carvey),
two guys who are really quite enigmatic. They're late 20-something
"headbangers" who act like teenagers. They have their own cable access show
"Wayne's World," but both still live with their parents. Maybe this premise
seems a little cartoonish, even the first gag involves a vacuum placed on
Garth's head as a hair cutting device. It doesn't seem like it should be
funny, but Meyers and Carvey's improv is what makes the humor work. It's not
sight gags and slapstick (a la "Pee Wee Herman"), nor is it wisecracks and
one-liners, it's just a vivid establishment of an offbeat atmosphere.
        And it's that offbeat atmosphere is what makes the film great. The mood
constantly changes from straight comedy to offbeat satire, but it stays in
synch, much like John Hughes' great 80s comedies. For example, when Garth is
pushed around by a bully at a metal club, he goes back to his car and
retrieves a tazer while the theme to "Mission: Impossible" plays. Meanwhile,
when Wayne sees Cassandra (Carrere), a sexy, rockin' singer, the camera
remains on her while "Dream Weaver" plays.
        Since this is a commercial comedy there must be a plot to it. Rob Lowe
co-stars as Benjamin Oliver, a typical, smooth-talking television producer
who wants to buy "Wayne's World" and sell it to a sponsor, thus making it
completely commercial and highly profitable. Most of the first two acts
revolve around this plot, and although it does seem a little formulated, it
doesn't become the driving force of every little event.
        In fact, there isn't much direction to this film as a whole. It constantly
skips around from setting to setting: sometimes Wayne and Garth are partying
at the rock club; sometimes Wayne is wooing Cassandra; sometimes Benjamin is
plotting something sinister, and all yet they are all connected.
        By the final act, everything is going wrong for Wayne. He has been conned
out of, and then fired from his own show. He also loses Cassandra when he
suspects Benjamin of seducing her with opportunity. You know everything will
be resolved in the end, but the actual ending sequence is completely original
as it follows the cliches in a satirical manner.
        From start to finish "Wayne's World" is a great, funny parody. The jokes
always connect and never recycle themselves. The fact so much happens in this
film (and so little as a whole) without a trace of burnout is quite amazing. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
[Yes, I know Roger says one is not a comedy.  But it is marketed and
perecived by most as one, so ....  -Moderator]
Starring Chevy Chase, Daryl Hannah, and Sam Neill
Directed by John Carpenter
     The trailer of this film does its best *not* to make it look like a
comedy, but unfortunately, it succeeds.  If someone were to go into this
film expecting a comedy, they would probably be sadly disappointed.  I
mean after all, Chevy Chase is in it, right?
     I am sad to say, however, that MEMOIRS OF AN INVISIBLE MAN is *not*
a comedy.  It can be considered a curiosity, and is definitely much
better than some of John Carpenter's earlier ventures (THEY LIVE, PRINCE
OF DARKNESS, BIG TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA).  The special effects (done by
ILM) are of course first-rate, but I think casting Chevy Chase as an
invisible man and not making the film a comedy was a big mistake.
     The film is good if it is not considered as a comedy; this is the
kind of movie you just go to vegg out for.  Just watch as the invisible
man eavesdrops on conversations, chews gum, brushes his teeth, and even
digests food before your very eyes.  Don't pay attention to the story
too much--I don't think you will have as much fun.  This seems to be a
movie that is banking on the "Wow"-factor (like TERMINATOR 2), but I
don't think it has the budget nor the story to count on that too much.
Nevertheless, it is an interesting movie; worth at least a viewing at
the local dollar movie theater.
     MY COUSIN VINNY starts out slow--it's not the most gripping of
beginnings.  And when Joe Pesci's character comes into the picture, the
storyline shifts from Ralph Macchio's character and his buddy directly
to Joe Pesci.  Okay, we can forgive them a little digression.  But once
this movie gets going, it's not bad.
     I found this movie to be surprisingly funny.  Not hilarious, just
funny.  Joe Pesci hasn't been running a good streak of luck lately (THE
SUPER), which is why I was a little adamant about this venture.  But I
believe he succeeds in this movie, and the supporting cast is really
good.
     I have to admit that this movie took me by surprise.  I thought it
would be another run of the mill comedy that Hollywood churns out
because it believes it has the right formula.  But MY COUSIN VINNY is
worth at least a matinee price at the box office, if anything at all.
     WAYNE'S WORLD is a wonderfully stupid, offbeat, ridiculous kind of
farce that you want to watch at least a hundred times.  Given forty days
and twelve million dollars to work with, Penelope Schipps and the crew
of WAYNE'S WORLD have churned out a consistently stupid movie, one that
requires no brains and no intellect.
     The cameos in the film a in plenteous supply; some good, some just
plain silly.  This movie is truly WAYNE'S WORLD, not anyone else's.
When to go to see this movie, you are in his world, not your own.  And
WAYNE'S WORLD may delight you, or just outright repulse you.
     I have reviewed movies like this in the past; the kind that are
subject to interpretation.  Well, if you spend too much time trying to
interpret this movie, you'll be expending way too much energy and
missing the entire point.  This is a vegg-out movie, something so stupid
that you don't even have to know how to breathe in order to watch it.
     So if you're in that "in-limbo" kind of mood, go check out WAYNE'S
WORLD.  IMHO, it;s worth full price at the box office.  Who knows?  You
may wind up liking it!

Author
Rory Mackay
THE CREDITS: Director: Penelope Spheeris; Starring: Mike Meyers, Dana
Carvey, Rob Lowe, Tia Carrere
THE VERDICT: You know something, people? I just *love* this film! Party on!
Despite being yet another entry into the American Teenage Airhead (tm)
genre (ala BILL AND TED), WAYNE'S WORLD is a resounding triumph. For a film
based around two brainless idiots, it's actually surprisingly intelligent -
the writing is sharp, the jokes witty and the script is packed with
well-observed parodies and social comment.
The film is a visual feast of gags, and the come fast and furious. Forget
the plot, because there's really not that much to it, but it's executed
with such energy, enthusiasm, wit and finesse, that WAYNE'S WORLD is a
winner - big time! Mike Meyers and Dana Carvey star as two "himbos", Wayne
and Garth, who run a cheap, tacky (and supposedly funny!) public access TV
show which is picked up by a big network (headed by the slimey Rob Lowe)
with the intent to exploit it. The plot does afford some clever satire with
regard to the scruples (or lack thereof) of television advertising, but it
plays second fiddle to some inspired performances and some genuinely
hilarious gags. Myers does a great job as ageing teenager Wayne, and Ron
Lowe is suitable sleazy as the double-crossing network exec, but it is Dana
Carvey who steals the show as the geeky Garth! He gets some wonderful
moments and some of the best lines - and there's a hysterical sequence
where he sings "Foxy Lady".
WAYNE'S WORLD is one of the most inventive, consistently funny and
downright endearing comedies I've seen in a long time. Needless to say,
it's also responsible for a number of phrases that have since crept into
our everyday vocabulary! Sch-wing! 
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
For more regularly-updated Film and TV reviews, check out my site!
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
Review written by and (c) Rory B Mackay, 1998

Author
Jim Kung
Director : Penelope Spheeris (Decline of Western Civilization II - The
         : Metal Years, Dudes, & Suburbia)
Cast     : Mike Myers (Wayne Campbell), Dana Carvey (Garth Algar),
         : Rob Lowe (Benjamin Oliver), Tia Carrere (Cassandra)
I must admit being a bit reluctant going into this film.  I didn't
believe that they (Mike Myers and Dana Carvey) could hold it up for an
hour and a half, I figured that perhaps the first half-hour would be
great, and the rest would be "fluff."  However, I was really surprised
about how well they were able to keep the laughs going for the virtually
the whole film, with the exception of the ending.  (Which I won't
discuss for obvious reasons, but it's not *that* bad.)
Story: The plot was quite thin, but it really wasn't that noticeable,
because of the rapid-fire jokes that Myers wrote in.  Alot of the jokes
are very similar to Hot Shots!, in being very "parodyish."  (Okay, bad
term.)  Extremely witty throughout, although (as in HOT SHOTS) it got a
bit repetitive in the middle.
Acting: As in many comedies, the acting isn't really *that* important.
However, Myers turns in a good performance as Wayne, playing the
character perfectly, (Although I still liked him better back on MUCH
MUSIC, in a more "Canadian" type of mode.)  Carvey is okay as Garth,
but he lacks the spark Myers puts into Wayne.  Tia Carrere is mediocre
as Cassandra, playing it very stilted.  Lowe is fine as Ben Oliver, but
is nothing to write home about.  Without a doubt, this movie is Mike
Myers all the way.
Direction: Spheeris is a classic "music" movie director, making DUDES,
and DECLINE OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION II -- THE METAL YEARS.  (She also
directed THE BOYS NEXT DOOR, which is different, to say the least.)  She
is very capable, knows how direct a comedy, the correct camera movements
it instill laughs, etc.  One of the better jobs I can remember for a
comedy.
Overall: I would suggest to anyone that likes SNL's skits to go see
this film in the theatres.  However, my personal opinion, as in most
comedies, is that they work just as well on video.  You definately have
to be fan of music, and all forms of media in general to enjoy this
film.  Without a doubt, this is the best comedy so far this year.  It'll
make tons 'o' dough for everyone involved.  Let's just hope they make a
thousand sequels.
[Sorry, I had to get the lame joke in...  Forgive me.]

Author
Frankie Paiva
Wayne's World, the popular Myers/Carvey skit was from Saturday Night Live was
turned into a phenomenon when it was released in 1992. It spawned a sequel,
merchandising, and had several very memorable lines. But despite being funny, I
still don't think Wayne's World is that good of a movie.
Wayne (Myers) and Garth (Carvey) are two happening punk rock dudes that host a
weekly television show where they make fun of inventions and talk about what
makes them hot from their basement. When evil television executive Benjamin
Oliver (Rob Lowe) sees the show, he decides to exploit it and make it the next
big hit. Then Wayne meets Cassandra (Tia Carrare) the girl of his dreams who is
also being hit on by Benjamin. Garth must deal with the fact that Wayne has met
his first true love and that he's not his only friend anymore.
As the show gets picked up. Wayne and Garth find their show being changed way
too much. A sponsor from Noah's Arkade comes on to talk about their new video
games, and the title song is totally re-done. This is against the punk rocker
way, so Wayne, Garth, Cassandra, and others, must unite to beat the snobby
executives.
Yes, the film is very, very, funny. It features several memorable scenes (the
multiple endings being my favorite) and funny moments. But Wayne's World
doesn't have much else going for it. Alice Cooper also makes an appearance in
one of the funniest scenes in the movie. Looking for a laugh? You'll find it
here in the shallow Wayne's World, which gets ** 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains some discussion of male erections and contains
bad attitudes by almost every member of the cast. Good Age: 9 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic
