Title
Review for Blow Out (1981)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dustin Putman
We often hear about and see movies that are an example of style over 
substance, which is those films that are technically more impressive 
than the story and characters are. Brian De Palma's "Blow Out," however, 
is one of the few films I've seen that is a triumph of both style and 
substance.
"Blow Out" stars John Travolta in one of his best early roles as a sound 
man for a bunch of B-horror movies. It is in the midst of election 
season, as well as the 100th-anniversary of the Liberty Bell in 
Philadelphia, and while out one night on a bridge recording nighttime 
sounds, including tree branches hitting each other, leaves rustling, and 
owls hooing, he witnesses a car blow out, which then plunges off the 
bridge and into the river. Travolta is able to save the woman inside 
(Nancy Allen), but the driver, who turns out to be the Governor, is 
killed. Later, while listening to the accident that he got on tape, he 
is surprised to hear a bang right before the actual blowout occurred, 
and becomes convinced it was a conspiracy to kill the Governor. 
Meanwhile, the infamous Liberty Bell Killer is stalking the women of 
Philadelphia.
"Blow Out" is a truly virtuoso thriller that is superbly made in all 
aspects, and includes many purely original and visually stunning 
moments, including one scene in which, as Travolta slowly replays the 
sound on the tape, he visualizes where all of the sounds came from. 
Another impressive moment is the first sequence of the picture, a POV 
shot in which a killer slowly stalks the residents of a college dorm. 
And without giving anything away, the last brilliant moment comes in the 
climax, with a giant American flag hanging in the background. All of the 
scenes, as well as the rest of the movie, are helped considerably by 
Pino Donaggio's unforgettable music score. 
Another aspect of "Blow Out" that is refreshing is the amount of layers 
the film piles on. On one hand, it is about a conspiracy. There is also 
a subplot involving the post-production work of the B-movie they are 
making. And then there is the subplot involving the Liberty Bell Killer, 
which leads to a few extremely chilling, suspenseful moments. And there 
is the political election going on. And the anniversary of the Liberty 
Bell. And the sweet relationship that develops between Travolta and 
Allen, who has never been better. By the sound of all of these stories, 
it may seem like the picture may be overstuffed, but it isn't at all. 
Instead, all of these different plotlines add to the atmosphere of the 
film, and makes the movie seem richer and more inventive.
"Blow Out" is one of director De Palma's best films, and ranks right up 
there with 1976's "Carrie," and 1980's "Dressed to Kill," the former 
starring Travolta and Allen, and the latter featuring Allen once again. 
Sadly, De Palma has recently fallen on hard times with the recent 
disappointment, "Snake Eyes," but "Blow Out" is an example of how great 
De Palma can really be.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BLOW OUT (director/writer: Brian De Palma ; cinematographer: Vilmos
Zsigmond; editor: Paul Hirsch; cast: John Travolta (Jack), Nancy Allen
(Sally), John Lithgow (Burke), Dennis Franz (Manny Karp), Peter Boyden
(Sam), John Aquino (Detective Mackey), Curt May (Frank Donahue), John
McMartin (Lawrence Henry); Runtime: 107; Orion Films; 1981)
Brian De Palma is a commercial filmmaker who imitates other noted
filmmakers but has not met with the same artistic success as a Hitchcock
or a Coppola, ones he in particular gravitates towards; but, by adding
his own brand of sleek cinematography and gratuitous violent action
scenes to jazz his films up, he at least salvages some identity of his
own. This film is mostly imitative of Michelangelo Antonioni's art-house
film Blow-Up (1966) and somewhat of Francis Coppola's The Conversation
(1974). But what Antonioni does, is make you wish to penetrate his film,
he makes you think about what you are seeing. Coppola will challenge you
to have a political view of what you are seeing. Their films are so
well-received as art films because they go beneath the surface of
things, they have something to say. While De Palma's films are all
surface vehicles, there is nothing to think about. His films are pretty
to look at and are good at simulating what an art film is, but they are
more interested in being entertaining than anything else. Therefore,
even if "Blow Out" pretends to be like the above mentioned films, it is
in style only. This film will prove itself in the end to be without
sufficient weight to be put in the heavyweight class. It's mired in the
lightweight class, working as an effective film mostly because it has a
sense of humor and Travolta is convincing as the unlikely hero fighting
against political corruption.
It is a thriller set in Philadelphia, where Jack Terry (John Travolta)
is a sound man on "B" horror movies. Jack worked two years for the
police to wire undercover agents exposing corrupt policemen, but he
quits because an agent he worked with got killed when he was spotted
being miked. He is currently working with Sam (Boyden), knocking off as
many as 5 cheap films a year. The running gag is that he needs a perfect
scream for his current film, a Psycho-like one, with a shower slashing
scene, and the actresses auditioned can't give a realistic one. You can
guess where he gets a perfect realistic scream by the film's conclusion.
One night recording the outdoor sounds for his film, he witnesses a car
go over the bridge railing and into the river below. Instinctively, he
jumps in and saves the pretty woman, but the man in the car is already
dead.
When he is at the hospital, he learns that the dead man was the governor
of the state and that he's running for president, and that the girl in
the car is a hooker named Sally (Nancy Allen-the then-wife of the
director). One of the governor's aides (McMartin) asks him to cover it
up that there was a girl in the car, since he was a family man and it
wouldn't look right. This is an obvious reference to Teddy Kennedy's
Chappaquidick political scandal.
When questioned by a hostile detective Mackey (Aquino), who knew him
from his cop days, he tells the officer it wasn't an accident as
reported to the newspapers, but that the tire was shot out. He knows
this since he audiotaped the car crash and can clearly hear two bangs,
one of which he is sure is a gunshot, while the other is the tire
blowout.
Jack gets angry when he discovers there was a sleazy photographer, Manny
(Dennis Franz), who happened to be there at the time of the accident and
has taken pictures of it, which he sells to a magazine for a hefty fee.
Jack gets the magazine photos and links his sound to the still photos.
When completed, Jack is absolutely sure it was the gunshot from an
assassin he heard. He goes to Mackey with this evidence, who says he
doesn't believe him but will check out his tape anyway because that's
his job. But the assassin Burke (John Lithgow) went to his studio and
erased the tapes, so what he has given the police is nothing but a blank
tape.
The film was taut and exciting to this point, but there are several
breakdowns in the story, as it veers into the slasher film mode. Jack
figures out that Sally and Manny worked together setting the
presidential candidate up for a compromising photo. The attention of the
film goes no deeper than seeing if he can get Sally to now help him
prove it was a murder and if he can  keep her alive. The film also asks,
will the police believe him and can he stop the assassin? It
unsuccessfully tries to work a conspiracy theory into the mystery.
De Palma has moved solidly into mundane territory, jettisoning ideas in
favor of high-tech shots and thrilling action scenes. "Blow Out" has
moved into the range of the unbelievable horror films, worrying more
about special effects than about having an intelligent story.
The political agenda of the film, a reaction against the right-wing
Reagan types, becomes apparent in the film's climactic scenes, where
Jack is caught at the "Liberty Day" celebration of the 100th anniversary
of the Liberty Bell. The action takes place in the crowded streets of
Philly, as he has Sally miked just like he had the agent when he worked
for the police. But, the right-wing fanatic Burke has fooled her into
thinking he is the newspaper reporter (May) who is going to expose the
cover up on TV and she meets him to give him the tapes. Politics is seen
as being as corrupt and dirty as ever, even so soon after Watergate, as
those involved in it are still capable of using any means possible to
get elected.
This was not the gloomy theme the public wanted to see, as "Blow Out"
was never popular in its day. It had received mixed reviews from the
major film critics at the time, but the film, even though it was an
uneven one, has caught the attention of some current film critics and
film buffs, and is now established as a cult-favorite. I thought it was
limited in scope but because of the flashy camerawork, the fine
performances by both Travolta (his first major starring role) and
Lithgow, and the many thrills it provided, it was easy to watch and just
as easy to put out of my mind.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Vince Deehan
Written and Directed by Brian De Palma
Cast:  John Travolta, Nancy Allen, John Lithgow, Dennis Franz.
(Warning- review contains a few minor spoilers).
With all the resurgent interest in John Travolta lately, post PULP FICTION, 
it was with great interest that I checked out one of his earlier films which 
has received some praise recently. Quentin Tarantino has said of BLOW OUT that 
it contains one of  Travolta's best ever performances.  
BLOW OUT is a thriller set in Philadelphia where Jack Terry (John Travolta) 
works as a sound effects man on low budget horror movies.  Whilst out one night 
recording the sound of the wind for one of his films, he is witness to a car 
crashing through a bridge and into the river below.  Jack jumps into the river 
where he saves a young lady in the car from certain drowning. He is unable to 
save the man in the car who has already died.  It turns out that the dead man 
is a governor and a presidential candidate and the young lady is a girl he has 
picked up, Sally (Nancy Allen).  The tyres of the car have been blown out and 
the whole accident is presented to the public as being an accident. Jack knows 
otherwise as he has taped the whole incident on audiotape and can distinctly 
hear two bangs, one of which he feels sure is the gunshot of an assassin and 
the other bang being the fatal tyre blowout.
The stage is set for a fight by Jack to prove that there has been a cover up, 
where the authorities are covering up an assassination.  A photographer , 
Manny (Dennis Franz), who just happened to be at the scene of the time,  has 
also taken a roll of pictures of the accident.  When Manny sells his pictures 
to a magazine, Jack uses his film skills to link his sound to Manny's still 
photos.  When the two are put together Jack has both visual and audio evidence 
of the gunshot.  Armed with this evidence he goes to the police who at first 
seem uninterested but eventually agree to see what Jack has got. Unfortunately, 
the assassin Burke (John Lithgow) wipes the tapes clean before the police can 
see and hear Jack's evidence.  As the film progresses we discover the real 
reason why Manny was so fortuitously present at the accident and the real 
reason why Sally was in the governor's car.  
BLOW OUT is a taut thriller with some great moments of humour.  A running gag 
throughout the film shows the trouble that Jack's boss has in trying to find 
a good screamer to use in dubbing one of his horror flicks.  The film has dated 
quite badly though, with some rather dodgy and jarring music which gives the 
film a rather hammy feel in places that I feel sure was not intentional.  The 
dialogue is not too great either but is adequate enough. I guess I am so used 
to hearing John Travolta spouting Tarantino's snappy dialogue in PULP FICTION 
that anything else pales in comparison. 
John Lithgow turns in a gripping performance as the assassin ,which is very 
effective and chilling.  Dennis Franz, currently in NYPD Blue, is great as the 
slimy photographer Manny. Although it has to be said that Franz really hasn't 
changed very much in the proceeding 15 years, except he had more hair then !  
Nancy Allen's performance improves as the film  goes on, but is pretty woeful 
at the start where she fails to match Travolta's convincing acting.  
John Travolta turns in a great performance, his charisma carries the whole 
film - so what else is new ?  His early scenes where we see him working as a 
sound effects man are terrific. Mainly because there is so much humour when we 
see him and his boss having trouble with the scream track on their horror 
film.  As the film goes on and the pressure on Jack  intensifies, Travolta 
effectively conveys the tension and stress he is under.  The best scene though 
in the film is the scene near the beginning where we see Jack on a bridge in 
the late evening recording the sounds around him.  There is hardly any dialogue 
at all in this scene, but the way John Travolta moves around with the 
microphone you never doubt his believability as a sound recordist. 
All in all, BLOW OUT is an effective thriller which, although not essential 
viewing, is well worth a look if you get the chance. 
Review Written on Thur 7th March 1996 by Vince Deehan (vince@deehan.demon.co.uk)
