Title
Review for Household Saints (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Tracey Ullman, Vincent D'Onofrio, Lili Taylor, 
           Judith Malina, Michael Rispoli, Victor Argo
Director:  Nancy Savoca
Producers:  Richard Guay and Peter Newman
Screenplay:  Nancy Savoca and Richard Guay based on the novel by 
          Francine Prose
Released by Fine Line Features
     HOUSEHOLD SAINTS, based on the complex novel by Francine Prose, is
really two distinct, albeit interrelated, stories.  While the first
claims an easygoing, amiable tone and a few interesting characters, the
second, although imaginatively-realized, is poorly-paced and saddled
with a bland protagonist.
     Set just after World War II in New York's Little Italy, HOUSEHOLD
SAINTS opens in the midst of a brutal heat wave.  A group of local men
are gathered for their regular game of pinochle in the back room of the
butcher's shop.  When Lino Falconetti (Victor Argo) runs out of money,
he agrees to wager the hand of his daughter Catherine (Tracey Ullman)
against unlimited blasts of chilly air from the freezer of his host,
Joseph Santangelo (Vincent D'Onofrio).  Joseph wins, and sets about
smoothing over the differences between himself and Catherine so that he
can claim his prize.
     Years later, Catherine and Joseph's daughter Teresa (Lili Taylor)
is growing into maturity, and has decided to follow the calling of God
and join the Carmelite order.  Her father, of the opinion that nuns are
sick in the head, forbids this.  Although bitter and hurt at first,
Teresa eventually decides to follow her mother's advice and be useful
as the Lord's servant in everyday matters.  So it happens that, one day
while ironing her boyfriend's shirt, Teresa has a vision of Jesus.
     HOUSEHOLD SAINTS begins with a promising sequence featuring the
fateful pinochle game in which Joseph wins the right to marry
Catherine.  Unfortunately, with the except of a few notable scenes
during the courtship of the pair, nothing else in the movie comes close
to matching the simple magic of the opening.  While most of the
Catherine/Joseph story is passably entertaining--if somewhat
unoriginal--the film strikes a dissonant chord when shifting its focus
to Teresa.
     In addition to dragging on for too long, Teresa's spiritual
struggles are uninteresting, as director Nancy Savoca proves unable to
create a compelling drama out of Teresa's relationship with God.
Expressions of Catholic mysticism comes across as hokey, and the
character as pathetic rather than sympathetic.  By the end of the
movie, it's difficult to care what happens to this confused girl.
     One of the faults of HOUSEHOLD SAINTS lies in the casting of
Tracey Ullman.  Lifeless and flat in her performance, Ullman fails to
imbue Catherine with more than the occasional, fleeting emotion.
>From her first appearance, trying to look much younger than she
actually is, it's apparent that the actress is wrong for the part.
     Vincent D'Onofrio, however, does an excellent job in his
three-phase role as randy bachelor, loving husband, and concerned
father.  His strengths help offset Ullman's weaknesses.  The supporting
cast is also solid, especially Judith Malina as the superstitious
mother who hates her son's choice for a bride.
     HOUSEHOLD SAINTS' decision to change viewpoint around the midway
point proves to be an unfortunate choice.  After laying the groundwork
for a story whose potential is never fully explored, the film
inexplicably metamorphoses from a simple drama about an Italian family
to an exploration of religious fanaticism.  The result is that
something which starts as an enjoyable narrative becomes disjointed and
uncomfortable, with a lighthearted tone at odds with its serious
theme.  HOUSEHOLD SAINTS is an admittedly ambitious project for Nancy
Savoca and her cast, but sometimes ambition isn't quite enough.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     If a miracle happened today, would we believe it?  Would we explain it
away?  How would people react?  That is the theme of Nancy Savoca's
HOUSEHOLD SAINTS.  The story is about two generations of a family and takes
place over twenty-one years or so.  To aid in the suspension of disbelief
the story is told in flashback as a neighborhood legend by an old Italian
couple.  The inner story starts around 1949, taking place in New York's
Little Italy.  Joseph Santangelo (played by Vincent D'Onofrio) wins
Catherine Falconetti (Tracey Ullman) in a game of pinochle.  But winning
turns out to be one thing and collecting something else.  It seems unlikely
that these people would be married this way, but it seems the hand of some
sort of fate is pushing them onward.  The story dwells on their problems of
home life: Joseph's superstitious mother (Judith Malina) hates her
daughter-in-law; Catherine's brother is bewitched and obsessed by Puccini's
MADAME BUTTERFLY and devotes his life to getting a wife who Japanese or
Chinese--a distinction of which he in unaware.  Yet all of this seems
directed toward getting Teresa Santangelo born or forming her saintly
character.  As a young girl (Rachael Bella; older she is played by homely
but angelic Lili Taylor) she sees John Brahm's THE MIRACLE OF OUR LADY OF
FATIMA and decides to devote her life to being like the saint in that film.
The film then follows the first eighteen years of the life of the woman who
may or may not be a saint.
     This is a slow and atmospheric film that takes a long time to develop
its story, but getting to the main story is as interesting as being there.
There are details of life in Little Italy told with a sort of magical
realism.  In humorous contrast to films that focus in on the details of
sumptuous meals, here we see the meal that an inexperienced Catherine makes
under protest.  In spite of the best intentions inexperience dominates and
for once an Italian meal on screen looks less than totally appetizing.
     Perhaps central to the story is the examination of three kinds of faith
represented by three generations of Santangelo women.  For Teresa's
grandmother faith seems entwined with the dark superstitions of the old
country.  Catherine found faith later in life, frightened into it by her
mother-in-law, and her faith is thin.  Teresa's faith is innocent and pure
and it is spurred by mystical visions perhaps from neurosis induced by her
upbringing, or perhaps they are genuine miraculous events.  And each woman
responds to life differently--each somewhat strangely--based on her own
brand of faith.
     While I am personally skeptical about the existence of true saints, I
found that if I went with the flow and thought of this as a fantasy film,
there was more than enough to keep me interested here both in an exploration
into a religious viewpoint and as a window onto the community in Little
Italy.  My rating would be a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
