Title
Review for Dancer in the Dark (2000)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Michael Dequina
_Dancer_in_the_Dark_ (R) **** (out of ****)
Without question, the love-it-or-hate-it reaction that greeted Lars von
Trier's _Dancer_in_the_Dark_ at this year's Cannes Film Festival will be
duplicated as the film slowly rolls out in theatres across the country. 
The controversial winner of this year's Palme d'Or is a film that not
only challenges conventional explanation, it also defies easy analysis. 
But given the dramatic effect--both positive and negative--that it has on
audiences, it can be agreed that Dancer in the Dark is a film like
no other, and even if only to simply bear witness to such a bold,
experimental work, it commands a viewing.
However, I believe there is a lot more to _Dancer_ than simple curiosity
value, and I think my--and the rest of the film's fans'--embrace of the
film stems from an idea suggested in a comment that von Trier made (which
has also been echoed by co-star Catherine Deneuve) about the film's star,
Icelandic music sensation Björk (who won the Best Actress prize at
Cannes): "She can't really act; she can only feel."  Similarly, I think
the key to appreciating _Dancer_ is not to watch it, but to "feel" it--to
experience the raw gamut of emotions it thrusts upon the audience
throughout its 140 minutes.
This idea of "feeling"--and the big debate over the film--is established
long before a single image appears on screen.  _Dancer_ begins with a
somber five-minute overture accompanied by a black screen, and it would
be easy to dismiss it as a pompously pretentious move.  But it also
clearly announces two of von Trier's objectives in this film: first, to
evoke the spirit of the grand melodramas of yesteryear; and second, to
immerse the audience the point of view of his main character, Selma
Jezkova (Björk).
Selma, a Czech immigrant trying to carve out a living as a punch press
operator in the 1960s Pacific Northwest, is going blind.  Keeping Selma
going as her condition rapidly deteriorates is the love of and for her
12-year-old son Gene (Vladica Kostic) and her love for the lavish
Hollywood screen musicals.  The latter initially manifests itself in
Selma's life in her ability to imagine music out of everyday sounds. 
While the strains of the overture don't derive from such a recognizable
source noise, this opening gets the general idea across: the audience
sees darkness yet can hear music, much like how Selma experiences her
reality.
A number of writers as well as distributor Fine Line Features have been
remarkably indiscreet about divulging details about _Dancer_'s story; in
fact, the film's trailer gives away one critical plot point.  I won't do
that myself though I will say this  much more about the story: Selma's
condition is hereditary, and she puts away every single penny of her
negligible factory wages toward an operation that would save Gene from
her literally dark fate.  To say more than that is to say too much,
making the temptation to include spoilers quite understandable--there
really isn't much to von Trier's story.  That has also been leveled as a
criticism of the film, but I think it's a deliberate move; the
straightforward plot again reflects old-fashioned screen melodrama dating
back to the silent era.
There is another cinematic spirit von Trier conjures up, and that is of
the classic, cheery Hollywood musical.  References are everywhere--Selma
regularly attends showings of Busby Berkeley tunefests with her best
friend and co-worker Kathy (Deneuve), who often has to verbally describe
the onscreen action to her; Selma and Kathy spend a number of their off
hours rehearsing for a community theater production of
_The_Sound_of_Music_; and, most notably, Selma has elaborate fantasies of
her life as a musical.  These numbers, which are shown in a glorious
mock-Technicolor splendor, starkly contrast with Selma's reality not only
in a visual sense (the shaky hand-held camera work and washed out,
_Breaking_the_Waves_-style hues evaporate in favor of a vibrant faux
Technicolor and quick cuts between what reportedly are up to 100 fixed
digital video cameras) but in an emotional sense--these scenes are all
unbridled joy while the rest of the film bears an unshakable air of
misfortune and misery.  Much has been said about von Trier "reimagining"
musical conventions by marrying high-kicking production numbers with a
grim story, but, again, he's not so much attempting something fresh than
reviving what had been an out-of-fashion aesthetic: that of classical
opera, which invariably is tragedy set to music.
Granted, however, these are non-traditional musical numbers, beginning
with the music itself.  Björk composed all of the songs, and like her
other work they are characterized by a dissonant marriage between
orchestral arrangements and more manufactured sounds--an admittedly
acquired taste for general listening, but a perfect match for this
context; nearly all of Selma's numbers are triggered by a real world
noise, which lingers as a song's backbeat.  That makes just about none of
the songs instantly hummable nor memorable (though the pivotal "I've Seen
It All" leaves a haunting impression); consequently, each appearance of a
musical number--which are all heavily choreographed--is made all the more
jarring and, in certain cases, annoying.  Nonetheless, a strange effect
is achieved; a couple of the interludes don't quite work as you watch
them, but when looked back upon as part of the bigger, completed picture,
a method is revealed to the madness.  Selma's imaginings grow more
outrageous as her situation grows more dire, and it becomes clear that
her dreams are not so much an escape route from her real life than her
only way of actively and effectively living that life.
If, as the comment goes, Björk can't act but only feel, von Trier could
not have made a better choice for his lead.  Selma's story is all about
emotion, and in order for _Dancer_ to succeed, her portrayer must make an
instant connection with the audience.  And that Björk instantly achieves;
Selma may be rather naďve (another point of criticism for the hate-its),
but she is endearingly, honestly so, and one is easily willing to
accompany her on her flights of fancy and stand by her during her many
trials and tribulations.  While von Trier's radical storytelling and
directorial hand are a large factor, the astonishing, unadorned force of
the film's finale would not have been achieved with an "actress" playing
Selma.  Björk simply is Selma--and the film itself.
Given von Trier's reputation as an insincere provocateur, the
impassioned hate-it contingent for _Dancer_in_the_Dark_ is not only
understandable, perhaps it's even correct in pegging the film as a
fraudulent come-on.  _Dancer_ could very well be read as some sick joke,
a cynical jab at an America that invites foreigners to its land with
sunny propaganda (here, movie musicals) only to plop them down in the
diametrically opposing genre--tragic melodrama; or even an experiment in
shameless audience manipulation.  But if von Trier's machinations are
able to wring such a genuine and profound emotional response from the
audience by the final frame (and I speak not only of the overwhelming
sense of loss and devastation it brings the film's admirers but also the
equally fervent anger it incites in its detractors) how can the work
be--as the now-infamous _Daily_Variety_ review of the film put
it--"artistically bankrupt on every level"?  (opens September 23 in New
York)
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Homer Yen
"In a musical, nothing dreadful ever happens," says
the wispy-voiced, diminutive Selma (played by
Icelandic diva, Bjork).  You can feel the pain that
occupies her mind and see the glint of desperation
that glosses over her eyes.  Her life is
unquestionably grim as she slaves away in a metal
factory.  
To escape from reality, she conjures up fantasies of
elaborate musical numbers set to the rhythm and beat
of ambient sounds of her environment (the humming of
machinery or the clacking of a passing railroad). 
It's all she can do to keep her sanity.  She wishes
that her life could be filled with the same kind of
gaiety that characterizes those kinds of musical
productions.  But her reality is filled with a general
sense of gloom and despair.  Her inner strength is
slowly waning, eroding against the tide of hardships
that have mercilessly chipped away at her soul.  She,
with the doll-like appearance and romanticist
disposition, is much too sweet to be dealt such a
cruel fate.  But in this depressing, angst-drenched
tale of a woman's life turned upside-down, seldom will
you find things to smile about.
"Dancer in the Dark" introduces us to Selma, a woman
who, at first, is filled with hope in the way that
fountains are filled with water.  Yet, even water
evaporates over time.  She suffers from a hereditary
ailment that is causing her to go blind.  Her son will
also succumb to its effects, but Selma works extra
hard to save enough money to pay for an operation to
save her son's vision.  But 
Selma's failing eyesight creates all kinds of
dangerous situations.  Maybe she'll become injured
working the heavy machinery.  Or perhaps, she won't be
able to get out of the way of an oncoming car or
train.  There is an overhanging sense of impending
danger.
As her eyesight worsens, so too does her situation. 
After a series of costly mistakes, her employer fires
her.  Her warm-hearted, yet careworn landlord (David
Morse) confesses that he's going bankrupt.  He asks
Selma for a small loan.  It saddens her that she can
not help.  The money is for her son's operation.  Her
meager savings are all that she has.  Without it, her
world would collapse.  However, her string of
unfortunate events continues, spiraling this film
towards its tragic denouement.
There are several notable elements that justify the
praise it received at the Cannes Film Festival, for
which it won best picture.  Bjork is confident in her
role, emoting the kind of feelings (her personal
losses, her devotion to her son, her inner fight to
deflect the pressure that is building upon her) that
endears us to her plight.  David Morse also turns in a
fine understated performance.  And, the inclusion of
the musical numbers (composed and performed by Bjork)
was unique.  However, this is not a musical in the
style of "The Sound of Music" or even "South Park:
Bigger, Louder & Uncut" was.  Rather, these numbers
are merely manifestations of Selma's daydreaming. 
They are unique elements of the film, but not an
essential component.
The real complaint lies within its headache-inducing
camerawork.  For most of the scenes, the director opts
for handheld cameras (the dance sequences use
stationary ones).  Thus, many of the scenes look
choppy as if you were looking at a home movie. 
Another huge distraction was that there were frequent,
excruciatingly close close-ups.  If Bjork had any
freckles, you could count each one.  Also, during an
exchange of dialogue, the camera would continuously
pan left and right as each person spoke.  It was like
watching a tennis match.  You are forewarned to sit in
the back of the theatre to minimize any potential
motion sickness.  
Film buffs will undoubtedly not want to miss this
unique offering.  It's a bold movie with several nervy
ideas.  But, given its disheartening theme, this film
can only put you in a sad mood for the rest of the
week.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DANCER IN THE DARK (director/writer/cinematographer: Lars von Trier;
cinematographer: Robby Mueller; editors: François Gédigier/Molly Marlene
Stensgaard; cast: Bjork (Selma Jezkova), Catherine Deneuve (Kathy), Joel
Grey (Oldrich Novy), Zeljko Ivanek (D.A.), Udo Kier (Doctor), Vladica
Kostic (Gene), David Morse (Bill), Vincent Paterson (Samuel), Cara
Seymour (Linda), Stellan Skaarsgard (Doctor), Peter Stomare (Jeff),
Jean-Marc Barr (Norman); Runtime: 140; Fine Line Features; 2000)
Lars von Trier (Breaking the Waves/The Idiots), one of the Danish
founders of Dogme '95, that gimmicky method of filming only with certain
sparse cimematic rules, creates this film  in drab digital video and
with a hand-held camera. He has the flair for showbiz promoting, and has
created a film that pulls every string in the book Hollywood wrote about
making tearjerkers, but without the love for those musicals that a
Jacques Demy had when he revitalized the Hollywood musical with his
brilliant "Umbrella's of Cherbourg." This film is a captivating love it
or hate it musical melodrama, one that should divide its audience to
either pole, that unfairly pulls cards out of its sleeve to make sure
its case against the death penalty can't lose. The film itself, tries to
show America as a country of harsh laws and questionable values, where
its capitalistic system forces people to make bad decisions about what
is important in life. If there's any explanation for this Eastern
European looking musical used by von Trier (the 'von' part of his name
was not given but added by him for whatever reason) as a satire on
Hollywood, it is that von Trier's parents were communists and he was
raised to think that the Hollywood musical was a result of bourgeois
decadence.
The story's heroine is played by Icelandic pop singer-composer Bjork,
who won the Best Actress prize at the recent Cannes Film Festival, with
childlike simplicity and unbelievable dumbness on her part, allowing her
character to lack depth. The film won the prestigious Palme d'Or for
Best Picture. Praise from abroad for this film has been far greater than
the less than warm reaction its has gotten from most film critics in the
States.
It is a film about a single mother with a 12-year-old son Gene (Vladica
Kostic) who emigrates to America from communist Czechoslovakia and she
ends up working at a tool-and-die factory, adding to her income by
placing hairpins to cards at home for less than a penny per card. She
saves every cent in a tin can she keeps in a bureau drawer, for an
operation to save her son's sight. She came to America because only the
doctors here can perform such an operation and only here can she make
enough money to pay the hefty doctor bill. Both she and her son suffer
from the same heriditary eye ailment, whereby if they don't receive the
operation they will go blind. She can not save up enough for both
operations and therefore sacrifices herself for her son's sake, but
never tells her son or anyone else about her going blind or how serious
his condition is. Her salvation and only happiness -- is her love of
Hollywood musicals -- as she lives in them in her mind. She also acts in
an amateur theater group, where she has the lead part of Maria in the
musical The Sound of Music. She is accompanied there by her factory
friend Kathy (Deneuve) who sees for herself the trouble she has with her
eyesight and tries to help her in the workplace. They are also seen
together watching old-time Hollywood musicals at a local theater.
Because Selma can hardly see the screen, Kathy must explain what is
happening, which causes a disturbance for a man who is seated in front
of them the both times we see them in the movie house and he reacts each
time to their talking in an irritated way. That scene was a typical
contrived one that von Trier uses, throwing it in the viewer's face that
everything about this film is shamelessly rigged and there's nothing you
can do about it. I got the feeling, that if you don't accept his
world-socialist view of things, you are made to feel like you are on the
wrong side.
The film is set in 1964 in the state of Washington, in an outlying area
of the state, where Selma (Bjork) and her son rent a trailer on the
property of the local policeman Bill (Morse) and his wife Linda (Cara).
The couple seem outwardly friendly to their tenant, offering Selma candy
and giving a bike to Gene so that he can get to school.
One day the troubled landlord Bill tells Selma a secret that he's about
to lose his house because he can't make the payments, something his
spendthrift wife is unaware of, thinking he has a lot of money from an
inheritance. Selma trades secrets with him and tells him about her
impending blindness, and when Bill asks her for a loan soon after they
traded secrets and she said she couldn't, Bill finds where she hid the
money and steals it. Her grief gets piled on, as she gets fired from her
factory job and gives up her role in the play because of her poor
eyesight -- a condition she stubbornly continues to deny to everyone so
as to keep the truth from her son. She even rejects the friendly
romantic overtures from a good-hearted local worker Jeff (Stomare), who
is constantly offering her a ride home.
When Selma goes to get her stolen money back, she encounters a hostile
Linda, who says Bill told her Selma made sexual advances toward him.
When Selma faces Bill, he pulls a gun and pretends that he couldn't
commit suicide, and tells her if she wants the money she better kill
him. After he pulls a gun on her, there's a struggle and he's shot. When
he asks her to kill him, she reluctantly complies, inflicting 34 wounds
in all -- first with the gun and then with the money box slammed into
his skull when she runs out of bullets.
She's arrested for murder, and, after a speedy trial in which her
incompetent court-appointed lawyer does not mention what really went on,
she's sentenced to death by hanging. She won't agree to an appeal
because the new competent lawyer would have to be paid with the money
saved for Gene's operation.
Then the most startling thing about this so far very manipulative and
dull story takes place, flighty song and dance numbers break out
everywhere among the characters, as fantasy and reality get intermeshed,
and original songs written and performed by Bjork and inventively
choreographed by Vincent Paterson are acted out -- where some numbers
take place in the factory, the rehearsal hall, a railroad bridge and the
courtroom. Even the already murdered Bill comes back to life to be part
of the song and dance routines. These numbers were hardly memorable, but
they were attention getting since they didn't fit the action and had a
bizarre look to them. What they all had was a verve, like something
important was happening, rather than the songs and dances being good
music. Yet there was something about this break in the story line that
interrupted the boredom of the story and gave the film renewed life. It
was the only time the film wasn't dried out by the manipulative story
and seemed like a true cinematic fantasy experience. It was the only
thing in the film that seemed to be innovative and chancy, as for once
the director stopped exploiting the poor dumb woman for a brief respite,
before carrying on with making her into a martyr. He did that in the
film's final scene, where he exploits her suffering for one more time,
as he shows her scared of dying, comforted only by a sympathetic prison
guard, who leads her gently to the execution rope, where we needlessly
see the entire horrific hanging.
I don't think the director made his point that well against the death
sentence by making the trial and her death such a blatant mockery. All
those scenes were obviously phony, a set-up for the director to force
his beliefs down the viewer's throats. Everything about this film was
unreal and embedded with such an effete snobbishness to show only its
view was the right one about how the system works. It seems as if von
Trier is, as always, the ego-driven publicist and never the artist first
and he is always seeking to gain attention for his views about society,
without giving me the sense that he really cares about what he is
railing against. I never for one moment in this film thought he cared
about Selma's suffering, her blindness, or that he viewed any of the
workers with real understanding. His point of how economic conditions
makes one a murderer seemed too simple a generalization to take
seriously. It also seems to me that he used the hanging only because
without it he couldn't finish the job he had of exploiting her suffering
to the extreme. Billy Wilder in his "Double Indemnity" didn't have to
use the electric chair to get across his point about how the justice
system operates, neither was it used by Tay Garnett in his superior 1946
"The Postman Always Rings Twice." Both films in their earnest telling of
a real story, make a better argument than von Trier does against capital
punishment, even though he uses every heart-tugging trick there is to
make his case. He does this because what he really believes, is that he
must shock an audience in order for his film to work, he doesn't seem to
be able to operate in any other way. The best I can say for him about
this film, was that as trying as it was to watch it and as difficult as
it was not to feel exploited by the story, his film had a quality about
it that kept connecting with so many things that are interesting, that
despite the dullness of the film and despite my resentment at his
methods of filming, I was still enthralled about the film. But I have
come to think of him now, after watching his film career evolve, as less
of an artist and more of a showman. He is certainly not another Danish
Carl Dreyer, who was always a filmmaker first.
They speak English in this film, but the film doesn't feel like an
American one. It has the  static energy of a film made in communist
Czechoslovakia. Von Trier has never been to America and most of the
actors in this film are foreigners, and the story is not a very
believable presentation of America and how its judicial system works,
unless you want to take extreme cases as the rule. For von Trier, taking
an extreme case gives him just what he is looking for, not a chance to
search for the truth, but a chance to make a splash. With this film, he
is the one dancing in the darkness, but brazen enough to give one the
impression that he is re-inventing cinema. I take him for a charming
huckster, with enough vitality in his films to pull the hustle off. I
just don't trust him as a filmmaker. This is the most exploitive and
least riskiest film he has made to date, in my humble opinion. It is not
daring to be against the death penalty with the evidence he stacked up
against it here. The only risk he took in this film, is that he would
torture the viewer to death by all his contrivances and the brutally
slow-pace of the film, and by the song lyrics being so empty a gesture
to Hollywood, and therefore there is the possibility of him not making
the 'big bucks' he envisioned by bringing his act to America.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Christopher Null
     Early on in Dancer in the Dark, Peter Stormare confesses to Björk
that he doesn't understand movie musicals, because all the characters
suddenly start singing and dancing for no reason.  He doesn't start
singing and dancing for no reason, he says.
     Selma, as played to perfection by the almost childlike Björk, does
her share of singing and dancing, but she's got a reason:  It's all in
her head.  And with that said, get ready for the creepiest, most
depressing, and certainly the most unique movie musical ever put on
film.
     At its heart, Dancer in the Dark is the simple story of Selma, a
Czech immigrant to a small town somewhere in America, somewhere in the
recent past.  By day she works in a factory stamping out metal
cafeteria-style tubs.  By night she attaches bobby pins by hand to
cardboard displays, readying them for sale, all to raise a little extra
cash.  Frugal with her money, Selma saves every penny because she is
quickly going blind due to an unnamed genetic disorder.  But her son can
avoid the same fate if he undergoes an operation -- to which all Selma's
savings are being put.  Naturally, dad is long gone.
     Her only thrills are evenings out watching (as best she can) old
Hollywood musicals with her friend Kathy (a sparkling Catherine
Deneuve), plus her chance to star as Maria in the local theatrical
production of The Sound of Music.  If only she could see the other
actors....
     For those not paying attention, Selma's life is obviously set up
for some serious tragedy, and it doesn't take long before Selma has gone
suddenly and totally blind, she's lost her job, and her savings have
disappeared from the trailer home she lives in.  On paper, this all
sounds like either a soap opera or a country-western song, but believe
me, on screen it goes well beyond the clichés of melodrama and into the
realm of near-genius, the tale of a truly lost soul told by Danish
auteur Lars von Trier as only he could tell it.
     Dancer's charm lies in its conceit:  To escape her melancholy,
Selma imagines herself as part of the musicals she enjoys so much.  She
daydreams one musical after another, where people do suddenly begin to
sing and dance, and where she is the star.  One second, she's cranking
out metal tubs, the next the factory is a hive of tap-dancing, jumping,
spinning, and singing workers, each wielding a broom or a hammer as a
prop or musical instrument.  It's Stomp by way of Laverne and Shirley.
     Before long, the line between Selma's fantasy and reality has
blurred, just as her life has become so miserable it can't get any
worse.  But of course it does get worse, and watching Selma slip down to
her fate is both gut-wrenching and, oddly, richly rewarding.
     When every movie coming out of Hollywood is the same as the last,
it's wonderful to see something with astonishing originality that defies
comparison.  Lars von Trier is no stranger to challenging fare, with
work that includes Breaking the Waves and the Danish hospital soap The
Kingdom, all rich psychodramas that semi-adhere to his Dogme 95
principles of shooting in available light, on location, and with
hand-held cameras.  Dancer is probably his best work to date, and with
the film winning best picture and a well-deserved best female
performance (for Björk) at Cannes, I'm not alone in this assessment. 
For its acting and ability o generate an emotional response, I don't
think you'll see a more capable film this year.
     Then again, of course, there's the slapdash editing -- a trademark
of von Trier's -- that can be nauseating and ineffective.  At 2 1/3
hours in length, the often poor pacing is also responsible for robbing
Dancer of some of its passion.  Perhaps my biggest complaint, however,
regards the songs that lilt out during Selma's daydreams.  Composed and
performed by Björk herself, the music doesn't stand up on its own,
unlike the memorable tunes in The Sound of Music, a constant reference
point for the movie.  In Dancer, the songs are unilaterally middling,
most notably the final fantasy production number, which one would expect
to be a real smash, but is actually the worst of the bunch.
     Gripes aside, Dancer in the Dark is bound to be a film that
frustrates as many viewers as it pleases.  The movie is long, with
difficult material and a deeply disturbing theme that tells us, indeed,
we can't always get what we want.  Hollywood would have us believe
otherwise.  That Selma shines through it all is a testament to Björk's
ability as an actress (which she has reportedly now sworn off for good),
von Trier's ability as a teller of tragedy, and the audience's ability
to enjoy a movie that just doesn't "feel good."  But trust me, you can
take it.
Director: Lars von Trier
Producer: Vibeke Windelřv
Writer: Lars von Trier
Starring: Björk, Catherine Deneuve, David Morse, Peter Stormare, Joel
Grey, Vincent Paterson, Cara Seymour, Jean-Marc Barr, Vladan Kostic, Udo
Kier, Siobhan Fallon, Zeljko Ivanek, Stellan Skarsgĺrd
http://www.tvropa.com/tvropa1.2/dancer/main.asp
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Ross Anthony
"Dancer in the Dark" is actually a completely accurate title, just don't be
mislead by the romantic connotations it might conjure. This is one special
film and in some ways fantastic. Yet at the end of the day, it's as edgy and
risky for a night's entertainment as the lead actress herself -- Björk who
was born and raised in Iceland. Her music reaching and daring into un-pop
territory, she's released some 14 albums by her current age of 34.
Shot mostly in the now not-so-fresh-and-exciting "gorilla video style" of
films like "Blair Witch", "Dancer" finds refuge (and indeed we the audience
do as well) in wonderful "musical" interludes. There, the colors are
fresher, the cameras stabilize, and the sound track fills with music
noticeably absent from the real world segments meant to portray Björk's
gritty factory-worker life in the most abrasive manner bearable. Our reward
for tolerating the overly wobbly videography and awkward editing is Björk's
stunning performance and a 100-cam view (as if inside-her-mind's-eye) of her
daydreams offered us via the handful of musical interludes where coworkers
break from their normal concrete lives and burst into song and dance.
"In musicals nothing dreadful ever happens." Unfortunately, Björk cannot say
the same of her hard life as a single mother working multiple jobs in order
to pay for an eye operation for her son Gene.
>From not-so-good to worse, Björk's story progresses, with the six or seven
fantasy reprieves.
Strong acting and direction grace this bold film, with choreographed moments
by Vincent Paterson of "Evita" and "Michael Jackson" fame.
Björk's music is eclectic and unusual. Imagine Grace Slick fronting for a
moody B-52's or Eurythmics tune while an industrial crunch replaces the
drummer.
Struck by her unique face on a poster, I sampled her music some years back
and decided I liked the poster better. However, in this film, her music not
only works, but fastens the scenes together with rivets.
I personally found the hand-held panning video camera tiresome, but loved
the shot from the vidcam mounted on the wheel of Gene's bicycle just under
the clothespins clamping a card to flutter off the spokes. The card's sound
is cleverly captured in the soundtrack.
Whether you enjoy this piece or not, this film will linger (perhaps "haunt"
is a better word) in your mind for days afterward.
Interestingly enough, one of those Dogma 95 filmmakers, Lars Von Trier set
this film in America, but filmed in Sweden; greatly due to the fact that he
simply doesn't take airplanes.
Dancer in the Dark. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Björk, Catherine Deneuve, David Morse, Peter Stormare.
Written and directed by Lars Van Trier.
Produced by Vibeke Windelov at Zentrope/Trust/Film I Vast/Liverator(C)2000.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     DANCER IN THE DARK is a masterwork by one of the most audaciously
brilliant filmmakers working today ... or it's a huge, sick joke at the
audience's expense. Or maybe it's both. You can't really put any
motivation past Lars von Trier, a director whose fondness for rendering
his own name in block letters four times larger than the film's title
belies a certain streak of ego. This is a man who decided to write the
rules for a new aesthetic of minimalist cinema with his Dogme '95
manifesto, then proceeded to break all those rules by making a live-action
musical. It has become clear that you can predict virtually nothing about
the way von Trier will try to make a movie, except that it will inspire
extreme emotions. You may want to gasp, or cry, or smack him silly for
dragging you along on his exercises in self-indulgence.
     In DANCER IN THE DARK, von Trier takes at least three huge risks, and
the two that pay off more than make up for the one that doesn't. His story
is set in Washington state in 1964, where a Czechoslovakian emigree named
Selma Jezkova (Bjork) is working as a machinist at a factory. A single
mother raising her 12-year-old son Gene (Vladica Kostic), Selma devotes
virtually all her time and energy to making money for a very important
purpose. Gene needs an operation for a hereditary eye disorder -- the same
one that is causing Selma to go blind. Only musicals can temporarily
distract Selma from her mission -- watching one in a movie theater,
performing in one in a local theatrical production, or imagining that the
world around her is turning into one when life gets particularly grim. And
it gets plenty grim when a conflict with her troubled landlord (David
Morse) threatens Selma's money and her life.
     The grimness of Selma's life is rendered in von Trier's favored
washed-out morph of film and digital video -- Big Risk #1 -- but it's a
tactical blunder for this particular script. DANCER IN THE DARK is
fashioned as a melodrama, with developments that pit our morally pure
heroine against dastardly forces. On glossy celluloid, such an
old-fashioned narrative approach might have worked. The hand-held,
documentary-style of DANCER IN THE DARK, however, demands a level of depth
in the characters' motivations and relationships that isn't always there. 
Von Trier spends too much time on Selma's interaction with an unrequitedly
infatuated admirer (Peter Stormare) while never bothering to explore his
interest in her. That's time that could have been much better spent on the
underdeveloped relationship between Selma and Gene, which should be
central to the film. What are we to make of her obsession with his future
needs while apparently ignoring his present, including truancy? It would
have been possible to turn Selma's conflicted motivations into a
compelling plot point. When a character is left to ask Selma, "Why did you
have Gene?" you realize that von Trier has turned the son into an
abstraction, and let the mother off too easy.
     Such a gaping hole at the center should have killed DANCER IN THE
DARK where it stood. Instead, it's still often dizzying, chilling and more
engrossing than virtually any other film this year. Big Risk #2 was the
casting of Bjork as Selma, and it's hard to do justice to how
extraordinary her performance is. While her less-than-authentic Czech
accent occasionally distracts, she hits every emotional note with such
resonance that it's painful to watch her. And as painful as it is to
watch, it's equally impossible not to watch when Big Risk #3 -- the
musical production numbers -- kicks in. They're rendered as
brightly-colored interpretations of Selma's interior life, inspired by the
natural rhythms of a train's wheels, machinery and a record's run-out
groove. Undoubtedly some viewers will find it impossible to get past the
contrivance, or past Bjork's distinctive yodeling vocals. Others will be
transfixed by the image of a killer fantasizing the forgiveness of the
victim, or the most abruptly concluded musical number in film history.
     Many critics have already noted that DANCER IN THE DARK bears more
than a passing resemblance to von Trier's 1996 film BREAKING THE WAVES in
its focus on the trials of a beatific female martyr. Indeed, Selma's
sacrifice is not set up nearly so convincingly as that of Emily Watson's
Bess, which can only make DANCER seem to suffer by comparison. That
doesn't diminish what von Trier is able to accomplish this time around
with another spectacular performance and more giddy disregard for
expectations and conventions. DANCER IN THE DARK is a deeply flawed
narrative that  becomes a long sit during its third act; it's also studded
with several moments of jaw-dropping brilliance. It's the work of a
director who'll do anything to inspire a reaction. In a world of overly
sanitized cinema, it's hard to dismiss that kind of raw nerve.

Author
Steve Rhodes
It's amateur night at the movies in DANCER IN THE DARK, the musical 
written and directed by Lars von Trier (BREAKING THE WAVES).  From 
factory floor production numbers to death row dances, the movie doesn't 
shy away from unusual locales for singing and dancing.  But with musical 
numbers that are so awful that they are only one notch away from the 
musical spoof in THE PRODUCERS, DANCER IN THE DARK isn't likely to have 
you running out to purchase its soundtrack.  If this movie were ever to 
open on Broadway, they could hold the opening and closing night parties 
simultaneously.
There may be those that will argue that Trier, famous for the stern 
DOGMA 95 manifesto -- under whose rules this picture wasn't made, 
although it was shot on digital video -- wants DANCER IN THE DARK to be 
viewed as a tragedy.  If that is how we are to evaluate it, then there 
is even less to recommend it.
European singer Björk stars as Selma, the story's dirt-poor heroine, who 
is rapidly going blind.  Not a professional actress, Björk, with her 
awkward and unreal performance, is unlikely to ever be mistaken for an 
actress.  (For the record, she does at least have a lovely smile.)  As a 
drama, the story requires one suspension of disbelief after another.  
Selma has a congenital disorder that will cause her to go blind within a 
year.  She has been saving up for an operation for her son so that he 
will not suffer the same fate.  Working two shifts at a factory that 
requires her to operate heavy machinery and rehearsing for an amateur 
production of "The Sound Of Music," she must have little time for the 
preteen son that she is trying to save.
Selma's passion is the movie musical.  She loves watching musicals and 
making up her own routines to which she sings and dances, along with 
other members of the cast.  An essential ingredient of musicals is music 
that is worth hearing.  In DANCER IN THE DARK, the songs are more spoken 
than sung, and they are excruciatingly bland.  You know the songs are 
coming because the movie's drab color palette, which approximates a 
faded home movie, is changed to oversaturated colors reminiscent of old 
Technicolor musicals.
Speaking of filming, you'd better take along your motion sickness 
medicine to DANCER IN THE DARK, which frequently looks like it was 
filmed during a series of earthquakes.  If your son panned and zoomed 
this much with your family's camcorder, you'd lecture him and then erase 
the tape.
The body of the morose movie concerns a murder and Selma's imprisonment.  
It also includes two quite horrific scenes.  This movie, which has 
produced widely different opinions from praise to derision, is an uneasy 
one to view because some of the scenes, especially toward the end, are 
so manipulative and ridiculous that they are laughably bad.  
Nevertheless, out of respect for those around you who may have bought 
into the story's premise, you feel compelled to hold your laughter.  
It's not easy.
DANCER IN THE DARK runs a long 2:20.  It is rated R for violence and 
would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Ross Anthony
Press Conference Interview with Björk, David Morse and Catherine Deneuve
Björk approaches our table bright-eyed, but somehow faintly timid; she
pauses before sitting as a diver pauses to mentally prepare herself on the
board. Suddenly, she shakes her head, smiles, and taps a little dance, "They
were playing jazz -- I was having none of it. I was dancing Charleston."
The Icelander having broken her own patch of ice, sets a silver-glittering
Kuala bear purse on the table and then comfortably takes a seat.
Press: We had heard you decided not to act again...
B: Being in that creative environment were the film was I made an exception,
because of the film I wanted to act. But I should do music ... that's where
I'm at my best.
B: It's not like I got it all planned out. Things keep happening that I
thank God, I couldn't even imagine. Right now I feel very strong on focusing
on music. I get really depressed when I go to Tower records, I don't think
there are a lot of good records there. [Even my own stuff] I'm still far
away, I get embarrassed listening to my last CD's and so I've got a lot of
work to do.
On Selma songs:
I'm very proud. I was really into it at that time ... giving my interior up
to someone else. For someone as obsessed with music as I am, I always hear a
song in the back of my head all the time, and that's usually my own tune,
I've done that all my life and then suddenly to have someone else's songs in
there is like ... "AHHHHH" a bit scary! Right? But at that time I was ready
for it. I was ready to get really craftmanshippy, because I did 10 years at
classical education as a child, so I was ready to go really anal into music.
The whole idea of writing the music and then going back and hooking up with
Lars and getting someone else's vision I was really into that. That's a
challenge. That's actually understated ... a harder job than sitting there
and thinking of something.
RA: What were the parameters that Lars had given you? Did he give you
specific ideas for the songs?
B: I read the script and my immediate reaction was very emotional. So I
would start writing the songs from a very emotional point of view. More like
a form of love for Selma rather than anything else. For me to react in an
intellectual way ... I couldn't even though I tried, it's not what I'm
about. But when it came to arranging the music -- that's kind of when I can
get maybe slightly clever. That's the part that Lars wasn't interested in at
all, that's why he contacted me. Me being one of the most idiosyncratic
people around. I did the music very much how I wanted to.
Press: What was the first song you wrote?
B: The song that happens on the train. My first question to Lars was, "Does
she have a boyfriend?" Once [I got that song down], I knew what she was like
as a woman and the rest kind of ...[fell into place]. The next was "New
World" the title tune, that sort of was her being hopeful and really
believing that music can save people's lives.
(Some people, while addressing a group, tend to look around at each person,
but Björk turns her head to the person asking the question and responds only
directly to them. Her attention seems very personal - and her bluish brown
eyes, oddly hypnotic.)
On taking on the project:
B: My instinct is 50 times more wise than my head for sure. From the start
my instinct was saying, "Go go go" and my head was going, "This is the most
ridiculous thing you could do in your life." I had to follow my instinct.
Press: The music was so haunting, I was thinking about it all weekend.
B: I guess my music is always an emotional thing. I could never sit down and
decide okay let's do it now. You can't control those things and if you want
to control them then you got a problem. You're just being arrogant. It's not
your choice. It's finding strength in being vulnerable. I think sometimes
discipline is very important [too], but you have to be very careful what
areas you put discipline into. And when I arrange songs I can go with my
academic education. Okay, here we have something that was just burning...
okay just make sure it's got what it deserves and then you can sit there
with like 500 hours of studio time. Some of this music I was 12 to 16 hours
in the studio everyday for a year. You're definitely not on a high, inspired
all the time, you just sort of sit there with big bags under your eyes and a
cup of coffee.
On understanding Selma's pain:
B: She experienced a lot more pain than I have ever experienced. I've had a
lucky life. Some of these songs come from a painful place ... but it's not
mine. This is not my pain. I never felt this pain. But it provokes empathy
for sure.
On her terms with Lars:
B: I want to mix my tunes in London with people I normally work with, I'm
going to do the album sleeve for my album, the record's going to be the way
I want it to be, I'm going to have a final mix. For example, after Cannes I
went back and mixed it again. Basically, what I was asking for was that I
could protect my music ... nothing to do with acting being too difficult. So
I was one day off work, so I came back the next day with a piece of paper
and for one day they said we can't sign that, it's impossible. And then in
the evening -- they did. I was working from August to May non-stop. All that
work I wouldn't be able to do that if they didn't sign the paper. It's
happened so much, just because they were editing something and then
suddenly, "Oh, no, now we gotta do this" and then they'd like chop a minute
out of the song, which I don't mind, I actually prefer my songs to be 4
minute songs ... it was Lars who asked them to be 8 minute long. But it
would have to be the minute chopped out of it that I had to agree with. I'm
ready to collaborate, let's talk about it. It's not like I hand my music
over and go home, I can't do that. After twenty years of doing music, I just
can't do that.
B: There were other things... The fact that they put that thing over the
overture. Because apparently people don't concentrate because there's
nothing for the eye, only for the ear, and I was like "Uhhggg." First the
ears please, because listening in the dark is incredible and the fact that
you need something for the eye, just kills it. But in a funny way it
supports Selma's argument that people don't trust their ears and they don't
trust their instincts and the subconscious and mysterious. They have to like
analyze everything ... the eye is very much an instrument of logic.
On seeing herself on screen:
B: I can't really relate to it. I'd be lying if I told you what it was like.
I just watched it like "blahh" I don't even have an opinion on it. I know I
gave everything I got and a lot more, I'm proud of the film. If I close my
eyes I know all my heart is in there. And that's all I can do. I sit and
watch it, if I don't like something - it's out of my hands. I'm not
controlling like that at all, my acting or image or visual stuff. I wish I
was more ambitious ... but I just don't care. I always knew that when it
came to visual vanity ... I don't really give a shit. And I was right
because [just look at the film] I'd like have a handicam up my nostrils
after I haven't slept for a month and I'd be like [ah so what]. But there'd
be one wrong note and I'd be like "AHHHH" and I'd be running to the studio.
Choreographer Vincent Paterson, speaks with a deep resonating voice, like a
choir teacher or Harrison Ford:
VP: I think that the whole film is really a fable, I think that the great
contradiction for people is that you're seeing a fable for the first time
through a very documentary real world sensibility of filmmaking. Lars is an
amazing director, so much of what Lars does is alters his grips and vision
to bring out as much of the actor's personality ... so almost as much as he
asks us to be improvisatory, he's actually as equally as improvisatory as
he's creating.
RA: Were there really 100 cameras in the dance scenes?
VP: Yes, we used 100 digital Sony video cameras
VP: Yes, and actually in some pieces we used over 100, like in the train
sequence, we would mount 100 on the train and 50 in the landscape, they were
all cabled together. It was fantastic for the actors ... they got to go
through the entire piece from the beginning to the end. [Actually] Lars'
original idea was to do it live, vocally live, but the logistics of that
were too difficult. Lars makes a lot of rules and then breaks those rules
immediately. Even with the dancing, not a Dogma, this is not a Dogma film,
but he created his own commandments for the pieces. Part of it was, there
was no front to the pieces ... that you could face anywhere. I tried to
explain to him that it works better on paper ... [Finally] he changed that
rule and said, "Okay, okay, make it the other way." But everything is like
that with Lars, I mean the script is written out, he told us don't memorize,
just be familiar and then we would walk into the space and he'd pick up the
camera and just say go.
David Morse stands well over six foot, perhaps 6'4," and though he's played
several bad guys recently, his face is peaceful and reassuring. He sits
comfortably, ready, but calm and relaxed. He fields questions with a moment
of careful thought shown only in his eyes. His answers are mindful and often
times sown with a subtle, dry, biting humor easily missed, unspoiled by his
poker face.
Press: When you first read the script, did you have a sense of the
potential?
DM: No. (pause) I thought it'd be potentially something awful.
Press: Is that how you're choosing roles these days?
DM: No. (pause) It was really Lars that convinced me. I did question my
choice, not that what they were doing wasn't good, it was just the character
... was a really hard one to do... because I did not sympathize with him. He
chooses to do something I don't get. So how do you find your way, believably
and truly living that through, if you don't get it. So it was a hard one. I
tried mightily. But this one was a hard one to really feel like I'd done my
job.
RA: Of the wealth of roles you've played in the past of which are you most
proud?
Press: Were you happy to "Get out" of singing and dancing?
DM: No. (pause) Actually I was really disappointed. I was looking forward to
it. It would be fun to be up on the tables.
On possible audience reaction to the film:
DM: It's not a whole lot different than anything you do for love, you'd like
it to be embraced. In a way there's a satisfaction in doing something so
challenging that people are going to come down on different ends of the
spectrum. We have, Lars has, succeeded in making the film that he wanted to
make.
On Björk:
DM: She is so alive (pause) and unusual, she has no preconceptions, she's
not protecting herself - she was living her life as this woman Selma. It
just brings out things that don't always happen on film.
David mentions that the gun sequence was a bit frustrating for him because
the use of a weapon was so foreign to Björk:
DM: She couldn't just do the scene, (pause) but she WAS doing the scene.
Acting Legend Catherine Deneuve sits donning tint-gradated glasses, she
pulls the table mic a bit closer, and waves to Björk at the other table.
CD: I don't work hard anyway. That's not my type of living. It's difficult,
but it's not hard.
Press: How do you feel when reporters refer to you as legend or icon?
CD: I find it a little boring. Because it's a way of putting me away on a
pedestal and watch me and expect me to speak a few lines, but I try to
always break that strange idea.
On audience reaction:
CD: Yes of course, you always want people to like it. [But whenever] someone
special like Lars, takes a normal story and brings it into musicals, makes
you think differently and see things differently ... it's not reassuring.
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Several "experiments" were tested in the film industry this year. Director
Mike Figgis decided to put together a slew of actors with no script and tape
them for 90 minutes straight and turn it into a film entitled TIME CODE. An
interesting experiment which was also entertaining, at least, in my point of
view. Director Kenneth Branagh also tested a small experiment when he mixed
Shakespeare and old-time musicals in a bag and came out with LOVE'S LABOUR'S
LOST. Another interesting experiment which was for me, even highly
entertaining, despite its fluffiness.
And now comes Lars Von Trier, winner of the 2000 Cannes Palme D'Or award,
with a dramatic motion picture starring singer Bjork in her acting debut, in
a film which courageously attempts to mesh an extremely serious dramatic
story with Hollywood musical interludes? Yup...let's see how that worked
out.
PLOT:
An immigrant woman who is slowly losing her sight is saving up money to give
her kid an eye operation so that he will not go similarly blind in the
future. Her neighbor is a married copper who needs dough to pay the mortgage
and maintain his wife's standard way of spending money. The two become
friends and share their troubles with one another, until the day things
begin slowly disintegrating in both of their lives. Expect musical
interludes during the film, as the lead character escapes reality via a
fantasy world of Hollywood musicals.
CRITIQUE:
A very strange, provocative film which cannot leave you without an opinion,
featuring some great acting, some interesting musical numbers but ultimately
an experiment that runs too long and doesn't provide for much true emotional
attachment or appreciation. Now before every art lover begins to bust my
balls, here's what didn't work for me in the film. This movie reminded me a
lot of those modern pieces of art. You know, the kinds of pieces which
amaze, delight and touch many quite deeply, while others shrug them off as
just plain junk...and pretentious to boot! Well, I certainly wouldn't call
this film junk (pretentious, natch), in fact, I admire it greatly for its
courage to break all of the rules and try something very different, but for
me, the overall film wasn't anything more than that...an experiment. And
despite appreciating the acting throughout most of the film, I didn't
particularly get attached to any of the characters, and could not feel
anything for them as negative elements began to touch their lives. Perhaps
it was because of the musical interludes which led me to interpret it all as
one big fantasy, or perhaps it was because the film just moved too slowly
and the lead character was too irrational and sacrificial for me to believe,
but whatever the reason, the film itself left no emotional resonance on me.
That's not to say that the movie stunk, but it certainly didn't overpower me
as it did many others who apparently left the theatre deeply touched and/or
moved. I enjoyed the performances, particularly Bjork, who should definitely
get a nod for this, the songs and dance numbers, which were shot using 100
locked-down video cameras and a look different from the rest of the film,
and the ambitiousness of it all. Mind you, I didn't particularly care for
the lyrics of the songs, which were "spoken" rather than sung and just
seemed kind of...well, lame. You haven't seen a movie until you've seen
David Morse dance and "talk along" with a musical ditty. Trust me, see it
and be afraid...be very afraid.
But here you have this very, very serious story being told by a woman whose
motivations I just didn't buy into. She seemed to be writing off everything
else in her life, just to get her son that operation. And even though I
appreciate her altruistic sentiment, the film just wasn't able to pull me
into its corner in that respect. And let's not kid each other here, this
film is not for everyone. The so-called "art-house" crowd will undoubtedly
eat it up, but I don't see most regular movie-goers appreciating much about
this film. Films generally fall into several categories: fun cheese (which
this is not and doesn't pretend to be), entertaining and light (which this
is not and doesn't pretend to be), deep and emotional (which this wasn't for
me but does pretend to be) or just interesting as a watch (which this was
for me and did pretend to be). The film is also partly shot in Dogme95
style, natural lighting, lots of handheld cameras, a real "documentary"
feel, which may or may not turn off certain people. I enjoyed the acting,
appreciated the originality of it all and liked the songs by Bjork (but then
again, I've always been a fan of hers), but didn't really "get into the
story", thought it moved too slowly and ran way too long, and didn't buy
into the lead character's motivations. Admittedly, there was one pretty
harrowing scene in this film featuring one of the most realistic murders
that I have seen on screen, but I guess that overall, you could say that I
am on the fence with this one. I liked the experimental aspects of the
movie, but not so much the complete movie itself. Now that was easy, wasn't
it? Yipes.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Bjork's last name is Gudmundsdottir. She has one son with ex-husband Thor.
She comes from Iceland and used to be the lead singer for the pop-punk band,
"The Sugarcubes". Since leaving the band, she has led a successful solo
career of her own. She won the award for Best Actress for this film at the
2000 Cannes Film Festival, after which she apparently noted that she would
never act again. She was originally hired by director Von Trier to compose
the songs for his "radical anti-musical", but after spending a year
identifying with the doomed, self-sacrificing heroine in the script, she
finally decided to accept Von Trier's continuous pleas to portray the woman
on camera.
Director Lars Von Trier's advice to Bjork in regards to her character was,
"Please don't act. I hate acting; feel yourself through it." So Bjork claims
that she kind of "became her".
Ironically, this film features continuous references to one of the greatest
musical movies of all-time: THE SOUND OF MUSIC. In fact, Bjork's character
is set to play Maria in the theatrical version of the film in this movie.
Cameo appearances in this film include Stellan Skarsgard, Udo Kier and Joel
Grey.
Despite this film being set in the state of Washington, most of it was shot
in Sweden. The rumor is that this was done because director Lars Von Trier
doesn't take airplanes.

Author
Laura Clifford
Selma Jezkova (Bjork) is a Czech immigrant living in the Pacific Northwest
where she supports herself and her ten year old son by working at a tool
and die factory.  She and her best friend Kathy (Catherine Deneuve) escape
their dull lives by going to musicals and staging an amateur production
of "The Sound of Music."  However, Selma is slowly going blind and is
frantically saving money to save her son from the hereditary condition.
When that money is stolen, tragedy ensues in director Lars Von Trier's
musical Cannes Palm d'Or winner, "Dancer in the Dark."
How you feel about this film may largely depend on how you felt about
von Trier's "Breaking the Waves," another hand-held shot film about a 
woman who martyrs herself for a loved one.  While more flawed that that film,
"Dancer in the Dark" gets its audience more emotionally invested in its
story.
While von Trier again portrays womanhood as martyrdom, a tendancy that is
sure to exasperate his audience if repeated, his central character here
doesn't go through the character arc that Emily Watson did in "Breaking the
Waves."  Selma is instead immediately established as a sacrificier.  Not
only is she going blind, but she must place metal plates into dangerous
machinery where they are pressed into sinks.  When she's not at work, she's
engaged in the tedious labor of pinning cards on the side.  She and her
ten year old son Gene (Vladica Kostic, a symbolic character only, as his
name headlines his weakness) live in a small trailer in the backyard of local
cop Bill (David Morse, "The Green Mile") and his wife Linda (Cara Seymour,
"American Psycho") who've become good friends of Selma's.  However, it's
Bill's inability to tell Linda that she's spending beyond their means that
will result in Selma's ultimate tragedy.
Bjork's performance is a natural wonder.  She may be no actress (and she
claims she will never act again), but she embodies Selma and allows a
charming, off-kilter humor to sneak through her sunny naivete.  Peter
Stormare gives the most moving turn as Jeff, a simple man who arrives
at Selma's factory each day to offer her a lift home in his pickup truck
even though she constantly rejects him (kindly).  It's Stormare who takes
up the arc of slowly discovering the buildup of tragedy which engulfs Selma
and it's a terrific performance.  Deneuve and her director accomplish the
impossible by making Kathy believable as a factory worker.  When (single 
and childless) Kathy's unflagging support of Selma ends in outrage at Selma's 
refusal to save herself, the baton is picked up by prison guard Brenda 
(Siobhan Fallon), a mother.  Fallon is also terrific, having a similar effect 
as Stormare, syphoning our emotions as witness to Selma's fate.
Cara Seymour is effective as the pathetically 'high flying' wife, while David
Morse's Bill gains our sympathy (and Selma's) as a decent guy with a 
relatively trivial problem, although his performance suffers in a pivotal scene.
Joel Grey has a small scene as Oldrich Novy, a Czeck Fred Astaire.  Former
von Trier stars Stellan Skarsgard ("Breaking the Waves") and Udo Kier ("The
Kingdom") have cameos as optometrists.
Von Trier's camerawork, criticized by many, works completely for this reviewer.
His washed out colors and shaky, hand held digital video work portray reality
in a documentary-like (and Dogma 95 like) fashion.  When the rhythm of
machinery, a train on its tracks or marching feet cause Selma to segue into
a musical interlude, the fantasy glows in bright colors and fluid camerawork
(achieved by use of 100 cameras).  Von Trier's collaberation with Bjork (and 
choreographer Vincent Paterson, "Evita") make the musical numbers transporting, 
particularly when Bjork declares 'I Have Seen It All' to Jeff (who's just 
realized the state of her eyesight) as she dances along a flatbed.
In von Trier's script, two scenes misfire.  Maybe real life murders are every 
bit as sloppy as the one shown here, but Morse's acting evokes titters even as 
Selma's actions become more desparately violent.  Kathy's last ditch 
communication with Selma, literally at the gallows, seems forced, in a scene 
which begins devastatingly but is allowed to go on too long.  (Both this and 
the final scene recall Kieslowski's "A Short Film About Killing," although that 
film handled them expertly while this film stumbles over them.)  Overall,
though, this over-the-top melodrama, which by its nature should be laughable,
works.  Von Trier's vision may be maddening to some, but he's a unique and
bold filmmaker.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "DANCER IN THE DARK" (Fine Line Features)
   Love it or hate it, you gotta admire its audacity!  Danish
director Lars von Trier who, back in 1995, co-authored the Dogma
manifesto, demanding that cinema be purified of tricks and illusions
and go back-to-basics, has come up with a bizarre homage to the
Hollywood musical. Making her film debut, the Icelandic pop singer
Bjork plays Selma, a Czech immigrant working at a factory in the
Pacific Northwest in the 1960s. An avid admirer of American musicals,
she fantasizes song-and-dance routines as she goes about her
depressing daily existence. It's her "emotional landscape." One
complication: because of a congenital condition, she's also going
blind, as will her 12 year-old son (Vladica Kostic) if she cannot
raise the money for surgery to save his sight. Which makes her lyrics,
"I've seen it all. There's nothing left to see," particularly
poignant. Catherine Deneuve is a supportive co-worker and Peter
Stromare is a besotted suitor but, when a treacherous neighbor (David
Morse) steals her stash of cash, Selma panics, commits a grotesque
crime and faces a bleak future. Like Emily Watson in "Breaking the
Waves," Bjork is a compelling, elfin creature playing a stubborn
child/woman trapped in an irrational paradox of reality versus
fantasy. In addition, of course, Bjork composed the music. Curiously,
von Trier contradicts his own Dogma purity principles by creating an
improbable, deliberately stylized film using not only 100 cameras in a
dance sequence but also recorded music to which Bjork lip-synchs; I've
heard there are 110 tracks in every song. Winner of the Golden Palm at
the Cannes Film Festival, on the Granger Movie Gauge, "Dancer in the
Dark" is a fascinating but, ultimately, frustrating 7. It's a musical
melodrama that's blatantly manipulative in its overt sentimentality.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Fine Line Features
 Director: Lars von Trier
 Writer:  Lars von Trier
 Cast: Bjork, Catherine Deneuve, David Morse, Peter
Stormare, Joel Grey, Vincent Paterson, Cara Seymour, Jean-
Marc Barr, Vladica Kostic, Udo Kier, Siobhan Fallon, Zeljko
Ivanek, Stellan Skarsgard
   At one point in this movie--quite an unusual one if only
because one cannot place its genre squarely into the
category of American musicals or European tragedy--the
principal character, Selma (Bjork) declares that she is not
afraid of going blind.  She has seen everything.  And boy,
has she ever.  She has observed not only the beauty of her
adopted country, America--its trees, lakes, mountains, even
its railroad trains--but she has been witness to the adversities
of life as well.  Little does she know just how much more
catastrophic her life will become as she has not only lost her
job and most of her sight: she may have to give up her
obsessive goal to get her son an operation to save his own
sight, her chance at what could have been a developing
relationship with a good albeit weak-willed man, and even her
very life.  Selma is a saintly person in the manner of director
Lars von Trier's principal played by Emily Watson in his
wonderful "Breaking the Waves."  Von Trier, once again 
following the Dogme rules of avoiding the usual
appurtenances of Hollywood filming such as an ever-present
soundtrack and dramatic lighting, follows the characters
around with a hand-held camera to give his picture the rough
texture that symbolizes the bleak, working-class lives of the
Washington State community.
   The story is simple enough to follow and is hardly the
reason that "Dancer in the Dark" is bound to compete with
"Shadow of the Vampire" as the most talked-about film of the
year.  Selma, a homely woman who often appears mildly
retarded, is an immigrant from Czechoslovakia who in 1963
has found work on a cutting machine in a factory.  Her thick
glasses will soon be of no help to her as she is swiftly going
blind.  To save her young boy, Gene (Vladica Kostic) from
the same difficulty, she is saving money to give the lad an
operation by his 13th birthday.  Selma has only two things
going for her: one is her friendship with another emigre on
the factory floor, Kathy (Catherine Deneuve) and with her
landlord, a policeman named Bill (David Morse) who lives
with his spendthrift wife, Jean (Cara Seymour).  The other is
her rich fantasy life.  She has apparently come to America
not only to get her son the eye operation he needs but
because she believed that this entire country is inhabited by
people perpetually performing as though they were in a
Hollywood musical.  This latter fantasy is what gives von
Trier's movie its delightful originality, putting "Dancer in the
Dark" on the cutting edge of innovative cinema.  Though
Selma is a member of a drama group which is about to stage
the laughably sugary and banal "The Sound of Music," her
fancy takes her into a territory mined more by contemporary
stage composers like Stephen Sondheim than by Rodgers
and Hammerstein.  Every so often--encouraged in some
cases by the rhythmic beat of the machines on the factory
floor or the choo choo choo of the local railroad train--Selma
sweeps herself away into flights of fancy encouraging all
those surrounding her (in her own mind) to join in.  Since the
lyrics, which were composed by Sjon Sigurdsson and the
director himself, are sometimes drowned out by the din, and
the original music of the lead performer, Bjork (who is also
famed in Iceland for her song), is likewise submerged, the
audience is unable to feel the impact of the Brechtian
commentary.  Nor is the choreography particularly inspired.
   Nonetheless the movie, which won the Palme D'Or at the
recent festival at Cannes, evokes the life of drudgery and
soulless existence of factory work in rural America while
Bjork's performance as a woman who is sinking both
physically and emotionally into a morass of adversity, is
utterly heartbreaking.
   Bjork and Deneuve are supported well by an ensemble that
includes David Morse as the perennial cop and Peter
Stormare as the aspiring boy friend.  Lars Von Trier shows
himself once against as a director with imagination, one who
continues to push back the boundaries of cinema, eschewing
the fatuous feel-goodism endemic to Hollywood movies for
real-life, emotionally gripping drama.
Rated R.  Running time: 134 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
Since premiering at this year's Cannes International Film Festival, Lars
von Trier's Dancer in the Dark has radically divided its viewers into
two distinct camps  those that love the film, and those that think it's
a piece of garbage.  The film won both the coveted Palme d'Or (for best
feature) and the Best Actress award at Cannes, but the announcement was
met with boos and hisses.
Critics are just as split as the audiences in Cannes, some hailing it as
a stunning success while others reserve their harshest condemnations for
von Trier's (The Idiots) picture.  Fine Line Features, Dancer's U.S.
distributor, uses the shocking disparity on the home page of the film's
official website, with Entertainment Weekly gushing words like
`exhilarating,' `astonishing,' and `a triumph,' while Variety grumbled
it was "artistically bankrupt on every level."
Despite all of this, I was surprised to find Dancer extremely mediocre.
It's certainly not a bad film, but it isn't a great one, either.  I
thought the best part about it was the performance of Björk, and my
critique is more positive than negative because of her.  Admittedly, I
am a huge fan of the Icelandic pop star, so people that don't care for
her music may like Dancer considerably less.
Dancer is set in small town in Washington State during 1964.  Björk
plays Selma, an immigrant from the former Czechoslovakia living in a
trailer located in the back yard of a local policeman named Bill (David
Morse, Bait).  Selma works in a factory, but her job performance is
hindered by a hereditary disease that will rob her of her sight within a
year.  The possibility of being rendered sightless doesn't seem to
bother Selma, who works double shifts at the factory to squirrel away
money for her 12-year-old son Gene (Vladica Kostic) to have an operation
to correct the inherited ocular disorder that he will soon develop.
Selma also has a fondness of musicals, spending her spare time at the
theatre with co-worker and best friend Kathy (Catherine Deneuve, East
West), and is even set to play Maria in a local production of `The Sound
of Music.'  As her eyesight becomes worse and worse, Selma is forced to
make changes to her daily routines, but her spirits remain high, and her
desire to save money for Gene (named after Gene Kelly?) becomes only
stronger.
Oh, and there's singing, too.  Dancer features six musical numbers
(written and performed by Björk).  Song is Selma's means of escape from
her dreary, monotonous job, with the rhythmic clatter of the machines
helping her daydream about dance routines like the ones she saw in
American films as a child in Czechoslovakia.  `I've got little games I
play when it goes really hard,' Selma says, `I just start dreaming and
it all becomes music.'  And, boy, does it.  The choreographed musical
numbers are a striking contrast to the dowdy appearance and feel of the
rest of the film.
It's hard to watch Dancer and not think of von Trier's Breaking the
Waves.  Both pictures were filmed using handheld video cameras, giving
the final products a shaky, dizzying look.  Both are set years ago in
tiny towns with close-knit communities.  And both featured stunning
debut performances from female leads (Björk here, and Emily Watson in
Waves) that play haunting and, ultimately, doomed characters that seem a
little kooky, but end up making sacrifices that the rest of us would
never dream of.
Even the opening of Dancer is reminiscent of Waves.  Here, von Trier
begins with a three-minute overture played over abstract paintings that
slowly dissolve into one another.  You might remember Von Trier doing
something similar before each `chapter' in Waves.  While both films are
both triumphant and tragic, Dancer has an ending that's a vast
improvement over the disappointing epilogue in Waves.
It's tough to say whether the eccentric Danish director was trying to
make a film that shows a strong, pure character making the ultimate
sacrifice for a loved one, or if it was just a tongue-in-cheek poke at
the allure that sweeping American musicals have on susceptible children
in other countries.  Imagine thinking that America is one big, gaudy
song-and-dance number with a happy ending, only to get here, work your
fingers to the bone and then go blind.
von Trier has indicated that his parents strongly disapproved of big
Hollywood musicals.  But, then again, your typical Hollywood musical
usually doesn't have a seen where a guy gets his head bashed in.  I
wonder if they'd be happy with Dancer.
