Title
Review for French Connection, The (1971)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"The French Connection" is probably the most famous and heavily
praised of all buddy-cop films.  It is an excellent film
with much action and dramatic tension.
Gene Hackman and Roy Scheider play cynical but determined 
New York City cops out to bust a big heroin ring.  Stake-outs 
and hunches lead to encounters with the criminals, who vary 
from dangerous assasins to wealthy businessmen to streetwise
hoodlums.  There is a famous "chase" scene which has Hackman
driving a car, recklessly weaving through traffic, following
a sniper who has commandeered a train.
"The French Connection" won a mountain of Academy Awards.
Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor (Hackman), Best Film
Editing, and Best Writing.  The Academy must have been
impressed by the film's gritty edge and realism, and forgiven
its excesses (Hackman engages in violence, threats and racial
slurs; He accidentally kills a cop which is given trivial
treatment; In one scene his young blonde one-night-stand
has handcuffed his leg to a bedpost; There are the usual
dramatic arguments between the "rogue" cops and their
supervisors).
There are some great moments besides the chase sequence.
Hackman tries to follow criminal mastermind Fernando Rey,
who plays cat and mouse games to escape.  Another great scene
has Hackman and Scheider tapping a criminal couple's home phone,
and falling over laughing after hearing the wife lay down
the law.
The Three Degrees appear as nightclub performers.  They are
best known for the hit "When Will I See You Again."
Is "The French Connection" the best buddy-cop film ever?
Perhaps it doesn't qualify, since Scheider has a lesser part.
Maybe "48 HRS. (1982)" is a better movie.  But it avoids
the pitfalls of later police dramas, which are too heavily
cynical or have unrealistic portrayals of the cops 
and criminals.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Blake French
The French Connection puts the majority of contemporary action movies to
shame.  It proves how potentially smart this genre can be, and how dumb
recent action films really are.  Unlike many modern-day thrillers, this
film is an exciting, taut, and realistic portrayal of urban police life,
but it does not fill its running time with gratuitous violence, nonstop
profanity, and copious amounts of sex.  Character motivation and story
drive the film forward--not a needless excess of violent, antisocial
behavior.  It's a standout cinematic achievement that won five Academy
Awards including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor (Gene Hackman),
Best Film Editing, and Best Writing.
Ernest Tidyman's story follows the adventures of two New York narcotics
cops, "Popeye" Doyle (Hackman), and his partner, Russo (Roy Scheider). 
They track a lead about a large drug delivery that develops into a plan
that could entirely destroy the marijuana trade between Paris and New
York.
The movie contains convincing, memorable action sequences.  In an
unexpected, timely scene, Doyle walks down the street when suddenly a
sniper hiding on top of his apartment opens fire.  The sniper misses and
hits an innocent bystander.  Doyle finds cover behind a tree.  More
pedestrians rush to care for the injured victim.  Doyle tells them to
run.  This sequence convinces us that the threat of the sniper is real,
which leads us to one of the most thrilling chase scenes in film
history.
Most modern action scenes involve massive gunfire from both the good and
the bad.  It's almost as if the bullets have read the screenplay,
hitting their targets only at the plot's discretion.  The French
Connection gives us convincing situations without the plot contrivances
and predictable shoot-outs.  The story flows smoothly because everything
that happens is character driven.
Recent action movies contain special effects that make The French
Connection look like child's play.  Nowadays, a film can contain
enormous explosions, amazing car chases and crashes, impressive computer
generated images, and enough gunfire to impress the Army.  But it's not
the special effects that make The French Connection a true classic, it's
the quality of the performances, the enticing direction by William
Friedkin, the brilliant editing, and the intensity and selectivity of
the action sequences.  Today's filmmakers can throw almost anything into
their movies, but there's one thing that they often forget that The
French Connection hits right on the nose: action itself doesn't drive a
story forward, character does.  In today's world, that's almost a
novelty.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
