Title
Review for Original Sin (2001)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
James Brundage
Depending on who you ask, the original sin was either the eating of the
apple, the act of disobedience against God, or the act of betrayal.  But
in case you didn't know this, don't bother remembering it... the words
"original sin" never come up in the movie of the same name, let alone
the concept of it.  The closest the film even gets to Catholicism is in
its narrative (the story is told by Angelina Jolie to her priest while
on death row in Cuba, circa 1900).
Regardless of its senseless title, Original Sin does actually have a
plot (albeit one of the most mangled acts of screenwriting since The Art
of War, based on the book Waltz Across Darkness).  Boy (Antionio
Banderas) places personal ad sometime around 1900, searching for a
wife.  Since this is a century ago, we narrowly dodge a remake of Green
Card, only to find that the Girl (Jolie) faked her photo and is actually
beautiful.  Skipping a few moderately useless sex scenes (getting the
question out of the way, yes, we get to see Angelina Jolie's breasts
again), the Girl turns out to be a con artist, swindles Boy for his
money, and heads for the hills.
Original Sin then briefly tries to be a thriller.  We see Boy go
whore-chasing, saying he wants to find Girl and kill her.  But as soon
as Boy actually finds Girl, instead of following what might have been a
promising (or at least not completely fucking boring) thriller, the film
degenerates into the worst dissection of the virgin/whore complex since
Milk Money.  Girl toys with the idea of reforming her con-girl past, all
the while avoiding the "other man," a lover that keeps making her start
these scams in the first place.
Add insult to injury with some of the worst stylistic choices in
cinematic history (literally half of the film is either in slow motion
or uses a strobe effect), and acting roughly the caliber of a B.B. gun,
and Original Sin is one of the most torturous films of the summer,
definitely front running to make my bottom ten of the year.
Don't even bother with Original Sin, but if you do go, be honest with
yourself and admit its pure sex appeal.  Just keep in mind that although
this film may not be the most original on the block, it's much worse
than a sin.  This is sacrilege.
Director: Michael Cristofer
Producer: Carol Lees, Denise Di Novi, Kate Guinzburg
Writer: Michael Cristofer
Starring: Antonio Banderas, Angelina Jolie, Thomas Jane, Jack Thompson
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Michael Cristofer. 
Cast: Antonio Banderas, Angelina Jolie, Thomas Jane, Jack Thompson, Gregory 
Itzin, Allison Mackie, John Pringle, Cordelia Richards, James Haven. 
2001 - 116 minutes 
Rated R (for violence, sex, and nudity). 
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, August 3, 2001. 
Well, here's something we don't see very often. "Original Sin," based on the 
novel "Waltz Into Darkness" by Cornell Woolrich, is a motion picture that has 
enlisted the aide of two big stars to tell a melodramatic, overwrought 
potboiler. It plays like a cross between the latest installment of the 
direct-to-video erotica series, "Body Chemistry," and 1999's elegantly woven 
"The Talented Mr. Ripley," yet its occasional dips into pure insipid 
filmmaking are so loopy it sort of invokes a charm all its own. 
Told through elongated flashbacks by American temptress Julia Russell 
(Angelina Jolie), who is in jail and about to be executed for an unknown 
crime, her troublesome ways lead her into the arms of Luis Vargas (Antonio 
Banderas), a wealthy, Cuban merchant who requests for a mail-order bride. She 
comes in the form of the bewitching Julia, who doesn't look like the picture 
that has been sent to him, but explains that she didn't want a man that was 
only looking for external beauty. Moving in with Luis and instantly getting 
married, Julia and Luis are both taken by surprise when they find that they 
truly are connecting and falling in love with one another. 
Enter Detective Walter Downs (Thomas Jane), a man sent by Julia's sister to 
search for her whereabouts when she doesn't receive a reply to the letters 
she has mailed. Soon after, Julia disappears (along with practically all of 
Luis' bank account). Had Julia been merely deceiving Luis the entire time? 
And who exactly is she, when it is discovered that the real Julia Russell was 
murdered while on the ship transporting her to Cuba--the same one that the 
fraudulent "Julia" was on? 
Written and directed by Michael Cristofer (who got his start with Jolie on 
the cable movie, "Gia"), "Original Sin" is a "Jeckyl and Hyde"-sort of tale, 
both in terms of plotting and payoff. Until the very end, the characters 
remain specters whose true intentions are always in question, and even then, 
their true selves are left open for debate. As a thriller set during the turn 
of the 20th-century, the film moves at a relatively slow pace, yet casts a 
spell of mystery of intrigue that is palpably felt. It features moments of 
sheer power and earnestness (and even a few surprising twists), and others 
that are so misdirected and ludicrously written, they must be seen to be 
believed. The movie is not a comedy, but judging from the near-consistent 
laughter that came from the audience, it has what it takes to become a camp 
classic. Like 1980's infamous "Mommie Dearest," the picture is serious-minded 
and ambitious, yet so incredibly banal as to become an unintentional riot. 
To get an idea of just how goofy the movie can get, a key character blatantly 
shoots another right in front of two police officers, and then nonchalantly 
tells them that there's no need for him to get medical help--because he's now 
dead for good! In a "Naked Gun"-style spoof, this would be a comedic 
showstopper. In a serious period piece, it is so uninhibitedly oddball that 
it almost crosses over into the realm of brilliance for its sincerely 
clueless courageousness. 
Just for keeping a straight face throughout, Antonio Banderas (2001's "Spy 
Kids") and Angelina Jolie (much better here than in this summer's "Tomb 
Raider") should receive well-earner accolades. Both actors bring an 
unexpected intensity to their roles that often manage to hide the technical 
inanities of the film, and for Jolie, this is her most challenging and 
impressive turn since 1999's "Girl, Interrupted," for which she won an Oscar. 
In a pivotal supporting role, Thomas Jane (1999's "Deep Blue Sea") is 
exceptional as the detective who teams up with Luis to find, and possibly 
murder, Julia. Jane has a smoldering profundity about him that calls upon the 
incomparable Russell Crowe for inspiration. 
Of special note for those interested, Banderas and Jolie also perform a 
couple of sex scenes that are so prolonged and explicit (with Banderas 
getting ample opportunity to show off his backside, and Jolie exposing her 
double--ahem--assets), they could almost pass for soft-corn porn. How this 
got past the MPAA with an R-rating when the blasphemous organization unfairly 
strikes down upon every other sexual situation that occurs in today's movies 
is one for the stars. 
I can't wholeheartedly recommend "Original Sin," although fans of the actors 
will certainly want to check them out in very good performances stuck in one 
of the weirdest big-budget movies to come around the pike in some time. Is it 
a laugh riot? An erotic thriller in the vein of "Red Shoe Diaries?" An 
involving romantic mystery that, as Julia Russell so eloquently puts it, "is 
not a love story, but a story about love?" You be the judge. One thing's for 
certain: "Original Sin" may not be looked upon as a particularly good movie 
(and it isn't), but it surely won't be forgotten. 

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Original Sin (2001)
Antonio Banderas, Angelina Jolie, Thomas Jane, Jack Thompson, Gregory
Itzin, Allison Mackie, John Pringle, Cordelia Richards, James Haven,
Pedro Armendariz Jr. Written and directed by Michael Cristofer, based on
the novel "Waltz Into Darkness" by Cornell Woolrich. 112 minutes.
Rated R, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
For "Original Sin," the road to the screen has been rocky. Initially
slated for release last November, the film was bumped twice, finally
landing in the dog days of summer 2001. Advance screenings of the film
were denied to all but a few critics, generally a sign that the studio
realizes it has a dud on its hands. So is "Original Sin" really all that
bad?
Yes it is, but the melodrama does offer some rewards. The location
settings are gorgeous and there is a healthy sprinkling of T&A (with
Angelina Jolie providing the "T" and Antonio Banderas the "A"). More
importantly, the movie is entertainingly bad. Veteran readers know that,
as a rule, I don't encourage people to patronize lousy films. Most of
the time, there are plenty of quality offerings on the marketplace that
are more deserving of our money and besides, the "let's go laugh at the
failings of others" mindset reflects an elitism that makes me
uncomfortable.
But things are different this summer. Quality films, to put it mildly,
have been few and far between, so as far as I'm concerned, it's fair to
find our kicks where we may. "Original Sin" will never join such
treasures as "Valley of the Dolls," "Road House" and "Showgirls" in the
Bad Movie Hall of Fame, but it'll do until something worse comes along.
The film, adapted by director Michael Cristofer from the Cornell
Woolrich novel, "Waltz into Darkness" (which was also the source for the
1969 Francois Truffaut film, "Mississippi Mermaid"), opens in a
turn-of-the-century prison, as Jolie's character, slated for a dawn
execution, tells her lurid tale to a priest who appears desperately
horny. The freshman writing class tone is quickly established when she
says things like, "This is not a love story, it is a story about love."
Wary of local gold-diggers, Cuban coffee dealer Luis Antonio Vargas
(Banderas) makes arrangements to secure a mail order bride from America,
listing himself as a mere clerk to dissuade foreign gold-diggers. A
practical man, Luis chooses a frumpy looking lady, hoping she will be a
loyal mate able to provide him with children. Imagine his surprise when
his fiancée, Julia Russell (Jolie), turns out to be infinitely more
attractive than the woman in the photo.
Julia explains that she sent a different woman's image because she
didn't want to be selected solely for her pretty face. Luis then
confesses his deception, leading Julie to state, with great
significance, "We have something in common, We are both not to trusted."
After their wedding, Luis and Julia retire for a glorious night of
carefully choreographed lovemaking, with their bodies positioned to
display her breasts and his bottom as erotically as possible. Jolie and
Banderas are attractive people and watching them naked is fun, although
the filmmakers' insistence on using one of Banderas' legs to cover
Jolie's crotch makes it look like he's trying to climb her.
Luis, the stupidest man who ever lived, immediately instructs the bank
to make his personal and business accounts available to Julia, despite
the fact that she seems nothing like the woman with whom he
corresponded. His blissful ignorance continues as the warning signs
mount up. Luis must force Julia to write to her sister Emily, who is
frantic over her lack of communication. Shortly after Julia complains
about the chirping of a pet bird, it is found on the floor of its cage
with a broken neck. Finally, when she cleans out his accounts and
disappears, Luis begins to suspect that something might be wrong.
Incidentally, if you're afraid I'm giving too much away, rest assured
that all of this happens in the first 30 minutes of the movie, leaving
plenty of time for numerous dopey plot twists, a great deal of operatic
acting and more footage of her tits and his ass.
Along the way, private detective Walter Downs (played by Thomas Jane,
who was terrific as Mickey Mantle in the HBO movie "61*") turns up,
hired by the frumpy woman's sister to find out what happened to the real
Julia. Luis is also eager for the detective to track down the con
artist, having decided that if he can't have her, he will kill her. Oh,
the pathos of it all.
The cast appears to recognize the trashiness of the story, adjusting
their performances accordingly. Banderas is suitably impassioned, while
Jolie alternates between vamping and pouting (and with those lips, she
can really pout). As for Thomas Jane, he starts off acting suspicious
and cagey, then accelerates to a Snidely Whiplash level of nastiness.
His most startling moment comes when, to prove his power to humiliate,
he forces Luis against a wall, verbally taunts him while rubbing his
cheeks against those of Luis and then finishes establishing his
dominance with a full-on kiss. If anyone ever questions the difference
between sex and rape, show them this chilling scene.
And if anyone ever questions the difference between real drama and a
laughable potboiler, show them "Original Sin."

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Michael Cristofer. Screenplay by Cristofer, based on the novel
"Waltz Into Darkness" by Cornell Woolrich. Starring Antonio Banderas,
Angelina Jolie, Thomas Jane. Running time: 119 minutes. Rated AA for
sexual content by the MFCB. Reviewed on August 14th, 2001.
Synopsis: Wealthy Cuban landowner Luis (Banderas) gets more than he 
bargained for when he sends away for an American bride. Not only does his 
new wife turn out to be the beautiful Julia (Jolie), she also harbours a 
secret past of dubious merit. Soon, Julia has absconded with both Luis' 
fortune and his heart, and as he pursues his wife through the Cuban 
underworld, Luis begins to realise that, for him, there is no turning 
back.
Review: Given the absurdism of its would-be plot, it's unlikely that 
"Original Sin" could have been turned into a reputable piece of 
filmmaking, regardless of writer, director or stars. This is, at its 
heart, B-movie junk: a lurid melodrama which appeals to neither the brain 
nor the heart but to the nether regions. That said, "Original Sin" could 
at least have become enjoyable junk had the filmmakers embraced its 
trashiness and indulged in it. Instead, Cristofer seems to have mistaken 
this for a serious production, and directs it as such. The result is a 
vapid, uninteresting morass of obvious crosses and double crosses, as 
likely to incite a yawn as a thrill. Consider the initial sex scene 
between Banderas and Jolie: brightly-lit and mostly filmed from above, it 
looks like an excerpt from an amateur soft porn show. Cristofer doesn't 
even manage to capture the allure of Cuba; instead of portraying his 
setting as a steamy, sensuous island paradise, it appears bland and 
lifeless. At least Banderas and Jolie manage to inspire some interest; 
there are hints at times that they want to have more fun with the script, 
but aren't being given the chance. The same cannot be said of Jane, whose 
Billy is nebbish and transparent. Also unwise is the Jolie framing 
sequence, which practically gives away the film's denouement.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Jerry Saravia
While watching the over-exaggerated histrionics and sexual biplay of "Original
Sin," all I could think of was how much more I admire Stanley Kubrick's wildly
panned last hurrah, "Eyes Wide Shut." If you recall, "Eyes Wide Shut" was the
infamous film starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman that dealt with jealousy in
a marriage and sexual innuendoes. Except for the de-eroticized orgy, most of
"Eyes Wide Shut" left sexual romps to the imagination. It was all done with
class, style and sophistication and left audiences puzzled and frustrated,
particularly since one was not privy to seeing Kidman and Cruise in their
birthday suits. "Original Sin" delivers on its promise of promiscuity, sex and
tons of nudity - yes, Angelina Jolie is naked throughout this film. And so is
the leading romantic star Antonio Banderas. And it is all about as sexy and
erotic as any episode of "Red Shoe Diaries."  
Based on the novel "Waltz into Darkness" by Cornell Woolrich, the film begins
with a Cuban coffee planter, Luis Durand (Antonio Banderas), who is ready to
marry a mail-order bride. His interests are primarily lustful since he does not
believe in love ("Love is for those who believe in it.") Durand meets the bride
named Julia Russell (Angelina Jolie) although she looks nothing like the
photograph she sent him. This should be cause for alarm but Durand is, after
all, rather smitten (hey, it is Lara Croft after all!). They agree that they
can't trust each other since he told her he was a worker at a coffee plant, not
the owner.  What is striking about this scene is how lovingly composed it is.
Director Michael Cristofer ("Gia") takes a cue from Martin Scorsese's "The Age
of Innocence" by showing us Durand's subjective glances at the striking figure
of Julia, dissolving from shots of her hair, lips, eyes, hands, etc. After
seeing this sequence, I was convinced that Cristofer was g!
oing to rein us in on one heck o
f a full-blooded, passionate love story. Not so. 
What starts as a sumptuous mood piece quickly degenerates into heavy,
over-the-top melodrama. Julia is not what she seems since she takes Durand's
money and splits. Durand is heartbroken, so much that he is ready to kill her
only to then realize he is actually ready to kill for her (?). He hires a
private investigator (Thomas Jane) to find her, though the investigator has
already been looking for her for reasons that should be obvious to anyone who
loves melodramas of this type. Revelations take place as does twists and turns,
all foreseeable if, again, you have not lived in a monastery for the last twenty
years. Oh, yes, but we do see Banderas and Jolie cavorting in the nude, in
high-angle, softly pornographic scenes that only made me yawn. To call this
eroticism is to forget what true eroticism is - consider the lovemaking scene
between Greta Scacchi and Tim Robbins in "The Player," which is as erotic as
they come. Even Bertolucci's "Last Tango in Paris" had a modicum of nud!
ity. The sex scenes in this film
 play like a Playfold centerfold with Jolie at its center - it is no different
than any soft-porno film you might catch late at night on HBO.
Perhaps "Original Sin" was meant to be melodramatic (I have not read the book
nor seen Truffaut's original film version) but it is so high-pitched complete
with a grating soundtrack of Spanish songs that it becomes a chore to sit
through. Banderas succeeds in making Durand a torn man and I do enjoy watching
Jolie, a stunning screen presence. They just do not have an iota of chemistry
and since the characters are so one-dimensional, it is hard to care about them.
Thomas Jane's role is crudely overdone and simply too cartoonish. The ending is
such a howler and so nearly parodic that the whole audience erupted in laughter.
"Original Sin" simply needed to be dialed down a bit for its own good.
For an analysis of Stanley Kubrick's EYES WIDE SHUT, go to
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/index5.shtml 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Have you heard the one about the mail order bride?  A man with Antonio
Banderas's looks feels the need to order his bride via the post office. 
Although he picks a homely woman, he gets a gorgeous one with Angelina Jolie's
raw sexuality instead.  Not objecting to the bait-and-switch, he decides that
she's a keeper.  
Michael Cristofer's ORIGINAL SIN, a film which could spark a rebirth in the mail
order bride business with men hoping to hit a Jolie jackpot, is a costume drama
sans any real drama.  Set in what appears to be late nineteenth century Cuba, it
is a story of love, deception and revenge starring Antonio Banderas and Angelina
Jolie as less than star-crossed lovers Louis Durand and Julia Russel.  Julia, in
voice-over, explains, "No, this is not a love story, but a story about love."
With lush settings, handsome costumes and beautiful actors, the film does have
some rewards, the plot not being one of them.  You'll soon guess where the story
is going, but you won't care.
Those purchasing tickets in hopes of seeing a guilty pleasure will likely be
disappointed.  As Louis and Julia engage in open-mouth kissing, they smack
loudly like a couple of preschoolers woofing down greasy hamburgers.  And in
their one substantial sex scene, they look like kids playing the game of
Twister, in which you contort your body into various bizarre combinations in
order to cover certain squares on the game's floor mat.  
Don't be shocked, but Julia isn't faithful.  One of her lovers marks his
territory, not with urine, but by opening her mouth and spitting in it.  Maybe
this is the original sin to which the title refers.  It's certainly one that I
haven't heard of before.  
Of the many over-the-top moments in the picture, my favorite happens when Louis
comes riding at full gallop straight towards the audience.  The editor speeds up
the film so that it looks rather like a scene from an old Keystone Cops comedy. 
It's one of many unintentionally funny moments.
"I love it, even the cheap melodrama," Julia says of the theater.  Well, I
suspect that the only people who will love this melodrama will be those who
enjoy it as something like an illustrated version of a Harlequin romance novel. 
Don't go, however, if you're looking for substance or for cheap thrills.
ORIGINAL SIN runs a long 1:56.  It is rated R for "strong sexual content and
some violence" and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.   
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Eugene Novikov
"Say it! Say that you love me! You better make me
believe it. Your life depends on it."
Starring Angelina Jolie, Antonio Banderas, Thomas
Jane. Directed by Michael Cristofer. Rated R.
It's been a while since Hollywood has come out with a
really good, sultry, steamy, shameless melodrama. I'm
not a fan of the genre, but an occasional entry can be
a terrific guilty pleasure. So I found myself looking
forward to Original Sin, the year's most bad-mouthed
studio release. But while it's sultry, steamy and
shameless, it is not, unfortunately, really good.
The story concerns Luis Vargas (Antonio Banderas), a
rich coffee merchant who has procured a mail-order
bride from Delaware. When the woman, named Julia
Russell (Angelina Jolie), arrives, Vargas is surprised
to find that she looks nothing like the picture he
received. Russell covers himself by saying that, since
she is quite the looker, she sent a picture of her
sister to make sure that her man wasn't interested in
her solely because of her "pretty face." This is hint
number one that Julia is Not What She Seems, and it is
followed by a mysterious trunk that she just can't
open, a sister she neglects to write to, and a
mysterious private detective who appears out of
nowhere. Of course, Luis is too dense to pick up on
any of this.
The only suspense generated here isn't whether Julia
will take the money and run, it's how soon she will do
it. Turns out that it's about halfway through, and
Luis's complete astonishment at that point is truly
laughable. There have been idiotic protagonists
before, but I think this transcends all boundaries.
This is about when the movie stops being at all
interesting, even in a cheesy so-bad-it's-good way. To
have effective melodrama, you need at least one
character that the audience can identify with; in the
heated, violent confrontations between the two
pro/antagonists that occur in Original Sin's second
half, I disliked them both. Jolie's character is a
scoundrel and Banderas is a vengeful jerk, and a dense
one at that. Their mental tug-of-war is rendered
pointless, because I would just as soon see their
hotel room on fire with them in it than see either one
of them win.
It doesn't help that director Michael Cristofer (Body
Shots) isn't really competent; his camerawork too
often resembles an actual daytime soap opera (I don't
know if he has any experience in the field, but this
wouldn't be out of place at 1 pm on ABC). He does
things like cutting between different shots of the
same scene from the same angle, a bizarre eye-roller
of a camera trick that pretentiously calls attention
to itself. And when he does it during a sex scene,
it's downright absurd.
But for all its shortcomings -- and there are
countless -- Original Sin does have a redeeming
factor, and it's a big one. Angelina Jolie can make us
believe the most farfetched dialogue and rise above
any material she is given. There's also, of course,
the fact that she provides a reason for just about
everyone on the XY side of the chromosomal map to
shell out eight bucks.
Aside from that, nothing to see here. I can't sit here
and write that I was bored -- I was either laughing
derisively, awaiting Cristofer's next demonstration of
ineptitude, or ogling at the aforementioned member of
the cast -- but this isn't a good movie by any stretch
of the imagination. I'm still hard-pressed to tell you
to stay away. 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
    Early on, Michael Cristofer focusses on an opera, "Faust,"
being presented in Havana before the cultural elite of Cuba. 
After the first act, one particularly supercilious woman sitting in
the boxes dismisses the performance as "cheap melodrama." 
"But entertaining theater," responds her companion. At this point
you could swear that someone up there in the reserved seats,
whether Antonio Banderas or Angelina Jolie, gave a quick wink
to the movie audience as if to say, "That's exactly was you can
expect from "Original Sin."  The film, based on the novel "Waltz
Into Darkness" by noir writer Cornell Woolrich, shows that the
haughty woman would be right on the money if she were
describing the film instead of the staged performance. "Original
Sin" is a fun story to sit through even with its lingering stretches
not just because there's quite a hot nude scene (which has been
trimmed, so I've heard, to garner just an "R" rating from the
MPAA--and one wonders just how much more these two stars
actually did in the uncut version).  The fun lies in the mounting
array of twists and surprises which, together with some solid
lensing by Rodrigo Prieto in various locales of Mexico (which
stands in for Cuba) makes the experience of watching the movie
a must-see for fans of bodice-rippers and less than subtle
melodrama.  This is a Harlequin romance for adults, a guilty
pleasure especially for fans of the two engaging stars.
   The story begins in a Havana prison unfortunately utilizing a
flashback technique to undercut what could have been a more
surprising climax.  Julia Russell (Angelina Jolie) relates her story
to a fascinated monk who is keeping her company on the night
before she is to be garrotted by the Cuban authorities--that is,
before her neck is to be placed in a vise-like structure which, if
she is lucky, will be broken and if not will lead to slow suffocation. 
By placing the end of the story right up front, director Cristofer
undercuts its romantic inclinations in part, as we are immediately
aware that Julie has done something terribly wrong to merit such
punishment.  Julie has met a coffee baron, Luis Durand (Antonio
Banderas) near his plantation in Santiago de Cuba because Luis,
who does not believe in love (because he obviously had never
met Julie), simply advertised for an American woman to bear his
children, fearing that the local females who knew him might
simply be golddiggers.  When a detective, Walter Down (Thomas
Jane), shows up indicating that Julie may be other than she
claims to be, Luis begins to sweat with the realization that this
perfect love that he has been experiencing could be ground down
like the beans that have brought him great wealth.
   There's nothing wrong with pure melodrama, movies of the
"Showgirls" type that do not pretend to be art or to parade
complex personalities for us to meditate upon.  Though there are
indeed quite a few twists to the story, with persons who are other
than they claim to be, Cristofer does not even pretend to deliver
more than a delightfully trashy romance set in the fanciful
surrounding of Cuba in the year 1900 when the rhythms of life
were slower and people could ride in luxurious trains that granted
its well-heeled users the comforts of home.  Thomas Jane does a
particularly fine job as the searching detective, pursuing both
Julie and Luis like a turn-of-the-century Javert, while Banderas
proves that real love surfaces to cynics from people for whom the
emotion might be least generated.
Rated R.  Running time: 112 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A rich guy who doesn't believe in love, orders a mail-order bride for himself.
That very evening, the couple is married and fall madly in love soon thereafter.
But what's this? One of them might not be the person they are pretending to be?
Wow...a sin, indeed.
CRITIQUE:
Easily one of the worst movies that I've seen all year. Too long, too boring,
too predictable and too ridiculous for anyone interested in watching a good
movie. What the hell were they thinking when they made this thing? (it's no
wonder that the film has been sitting on the racks for about a year) This felt
like a really bad TV movie of the week, with some nudity stuffed in from time to
time, just to wake up the audience. Have you ever switched channels and fallen
upon one of those ridiculously melodramatic TV movies, one that you just
couldn't help but switch back to from time to time, just to make sure that it
wasn't part of some sick joke? Well, this movie is exactly like that, only it
isn't a joke, it isn't on TV and you are asked to pay money to see it!! I say
again...what the shite were they thinking? Okay, so where do I start? First of
all, the trailer of this film gives away the movie's main plot twist, the
betrayal. So for the first half hour of the film, you're basically just sitting
there, watching these two "lovers" go through the motions until the "betrayal"
occurs. Whoopee, big surprise. Second of all, Angelina Jolie is horribly miscast
in this part. Why? Well, it's like this: not for one second do you ever believe
that she is not a nasty backstabbing woman! I mean, it's like all of those
people who complained about Jack Nicholson being psycho from the start of THE
SHINING, well, the same goes here. Every look in Jolie's eyes screams "psycho"!
Then of course, you have the case of the "patsy" husband, a man who just can't
seem to figure out anything in time. I mean...how boring is that for the
audience? You're watching this guy screw up time after time after time, and
somehow, we're supposed to feel sorry or care about this dude. No, thanks! And
if we don't care about him, and we really don't care about her (she's a beeyatch
and as confused as we are about her actual motivations in the film), who the
hell are we supposed to care about in this film? Well, I'll tell you. The only
thing that I was worrying about the whole way through this picture was whether
or not I'd actually fall asleep before the end credits rolled. No suspense, no
chemistry between the leads, no real love or passion, no sense of surprise,
plenty of plot holes for everyone and an extra moronic ending. So why am I even
giving this film a rating of three points? Well, it's actually pretty simple. I
liked the locations in the movie and the groovy score, but my primary reason for
slipping three notches onto this bedpost is for the gratuitous shots of Jolie's
boobies (that's two points right there!) and another one for Antonio's ass
(hairless, just for the record). Everything else in this movie was pointless,
boring and just plain stupid. Try imagining a soft-porn movie...but without the
plot! That's pretty much what you've got here. A low point in the careers of
both stars.
Oops, I almost forgot to mention the crappy dialogue...God oh mighty...make it
stop!!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
American Psycho (9/10) - Cruel Intentions (8/10) - Eyes Wide Shut (6/10) - Fatal
Attraction (8/10) - Playing by Heart (7/10) - Under Suspicion (7/10) - What Lies
Beneath (8/10) - What Women Want (4/10) - Whipped (7/10)
