Title
Review for Get Shorty (1995)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Steve Rhodes
     GET SHORTY is a gangster comedy.  Think of it as an overly subtle
and glacierly paced PULP FICTION.  There are many funny parts and some
wonderful acting by John Travolta, but the spaces between the
brilliance are maddeningly long.  The show was a major disappointment
to me since I love PULP FICTION and think Travolta's rebirth last year
as a star was long overdue.
     In GET SHORTY we have East Coast gangsters, West Coast gangsters,
and movie people.  They are treated as having roughly similar moral
values, and they are all played for laughs.  Nothing is taken seriously
in GET SHORTY.  Almost every man and one of the women get a broken and
very bloody nose in the movie, and they are all done as sight gags. I
found the bloody noses and almost all of the sight gags in the movie
not paricularly funny.  Many people are killed in GET SHORTY, and this
too is done for increased mirth.
     In the East Coast (Miami and Brooklyn) mob we have our protagonist
Chili Palmer (John Travolta) as well as Ray "Bones" Barboni (Dennis
Farina) and Momo (Ron Karabatsos) among others.  LA bad guys include Bo
Catlett (Delroy Lindo), Bear (James Gandolfini), and Ronnie Wingate
(Jon Gries).  Flying in from Columbia to LA we have Mr. Escobar (Miguel
Sandoval) and Yayo Portillo (Jacob Vargas).  The movie people include B
grade horror movie producer and director Harry Zim (Gene Hackman), his
leading actress and sometime girlfriend Karen Flores (Rene Russo), and
Academy Award winning actor and Karen's ex-husband Martin Weir (Danny
DeVito).
     The story by Scott Frank based on a novel by Elmore Leonard is
complex and has a plethora of characters.  It starts with Leo Devoe
(David Paymer) skipping town with money owed to the East Coast
mobsters.  Elmore heads to Vegas and then onto LA with our hero Chili
in hot pursuit.  Along the way, Chili discovers that his true calling
in life is making movies, and he spends most of GET SHORTY trying to
get Martin Weir to make Harry Zim's movie.  Meanwhile, people are blown
away, money deals for drugs are going on, and each bad guy is trying to
outwit the other.  The best and most effective example of this is the
series of scenes at the lockers at LAX.
     From the first slow series of scenes in Rich's Barber Shop in
Miami, I kept wondering when the director (Barry Sonnenfeld) was going
to pick up the pace and pump some energy into the show.  Intermixed
with the boredom and most lines that fall flat, there are,
nevertheless, some great lines.  Harry, for example, says, "I once
asked this literary agent what writing paid the best, and he said,
'ransom notes.'"  Bo knows the true purpose of LA, and tells us, "What
is the point of living in LA if you're not in the movie business?"
Gangster Chili wants to make a movie, but can't because he is having
trouble "getting the visual fabric together."  I must admit, Scott
Frank's ending is imaginative, and I loved it.
     Travolta did a terrific job.  His performance as a low key and
pensive, but always happy gangster was a treat to watch.  He made the
role special in a movie for which I cared little.  His performance is
compelling, and he is so likable in it.  I have not much good to say
about the rest of the actors.  Mercifully DeVito did not overact as he
has a propensity to do.  The biggest disappointment for me was Russo.
She has played smart characters in her other movies, especially as a
Secret Service agent in IN THE LINE OF DUTY.  Here she plays a blonde
bombshell that is certainly knock down dead gorgeous, but the lines she
is given are terrible, and she seems quite tired and sleep walks
through the movie.  What a waste.
     The costumes designed by Betsy Heimann are right on target.  Chili
has a real cool look with his black tee-shirt, his gray sport coat, and
his sleek dark hair.  In contrast, Leo's outfit is a riot of outlandish
color choices and ridiculous looks.
     Most of the movie had me with glazed eyes and mouth hanging open
waiting for editor Jim Miller to get rid of the slow scenes and for the
director to put some life into the show.  I waited in vain.  I did
enjoy the intermittent good parts and Travolta's performance is a
delight, but the rest of the movie is a waste.
     GET SHORTY runs a slow 1:45.  It is rated R for lots of violence
and some bad language.  There is no sex or nudity.  It would be okay
for most teenagers.  Although there were parts of the movie I enjoyed,
I do not recommend it, and I give it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: John Travolta, Gene Hackman, Rene Russo, Danny DeVito,
      Delroy Lindo, Dennis Farina, James Gandolfini, Bette Midler
Director: Barry Sonnenfeld
Producers: Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, and Stacey Sher
Screenplay: Scott Frank based on the novel by Elmore Leonard
Cinematography: Don Peterman
Music: John Lurie
U.S. Distributor: MGM
     The better you know movies, the more appreciation you'll have for
the wit and energy of Barry Sonnenfeld's GET SHORTY.  While it's quite
possible for the cinematically unaware to enjoy this film--it's got a
fair amount of readily-accessible comedy and action--this is a real
treat for movie buffs.  The story is as much about the love of motion
pictures as it is about gangsters.
     Scott Frank's script for GET SHORTY, which lifts huge chunks of
dialogue directly from the book, captures the spirit of Elmore Leonard's
work the way no previous adaptation has been able to (THE MOONSHINE WAR,
STICK, CAT CHASER).  This film is wry and sardonic all the way through,
with the actors and director knowing exactly how to play each scene for
maximum effect.  GET SHORTY is much more a comedy than anything else,
and a very funny one at that.
     John Travolta, playing his second gangster in a row, is Chili
Palmer, a loanshark on a mission to Los Angeles to recover $300,000
gained through an insurance fraud.  Once near Hollywood, however, Chili,
an avowed movie-lover (he has the lines from TOUCH OF EVIL memorized and
can recognize RIO BRAVO from a sound byte), becomes seduced by the
thought of producing a film.  So he hooks up with schlock director Harry
Zimm (Gene Hackman) and scream queen Karen Flores (Rene Russo).  And
when Chili starts to pitch an idea, none other than big time actor
Martin Weir (Danny DeVito) shows interest.  Nevertheless, even as things
start looking up for Chili's movie, a host of gangsters try to muscle in
on his action--one way or another.
     Not since SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER has John Travolta been this cool.
His comeback work in PULP FICTION may have been effective, but he's
better here.  Travolta has got Chili down cold, from the mannerisms to
the look.  With a fine supporting cast that includes Danny DeVito, Rene
Russo, and the always-reliable Gene Hackman, Travolta is surrounded by
talent.  It would have taken a poor director to botch up this
production.
     One of the great pleasures of watching GET SHORTY is that you don't
have to turn off your brain while the film is on screen.  The script is
smart, and makes few concessions to mentally challenged audience
members.  There's a lot going on beyond the obvious.  Take role
reversals, for example.  As Chili is seduced from a criminal lifestyle
by movies, his motion-picture colleagues are drawn away from film by the
lure of the gangster experience.  Ultimately, it turns out that the
common denominator for success in either career is attitude--a quality
which Chili possesses in abundance.
     Those familiar with PULP FICTION may detect hints of that film
here, and not just because of Travolta's presence.  Much of the dialogue
has the same kind of quirky, snappy quality as that which Tarantino
writes.  (Quentin is an admitted Leonard fan; in fact, his next
directorial effort may be an adaptation of the author's RUM PUNCH.)
There's one instance where tough gangsters discuss the meanings of
"e.g." and "i.e."  On another occasion, Chili lectures Martin on the
importance of a stare.
     The ending is a little reminiscent of that of THE PLAYER, with a
couple of big name cameos.  It's a clever way to conclude a wonderfully
entertaining romp.  GET SHORTY may indeed be 1995's PULP FICTION, but
this less profane film is likely to find wider acceptance.  It's
certainly more mainstream, but, at least in this case, that's not a bad
thing.  With GET SHORTY, Sonnenfeld has shown that broad appeal doesn't
necessarily equate with stupidity.  That's a lesson Hollywood should
learn.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
James Brundage
Directed by Barry Sonnenfield (Men In Black)
Starring John Travolta, Rene Russo, Gene Hackman, Danny DeVito, Dennis
Farina
     In my line of work, the most fun you normally get is in the insult.
The good reviews, on the average, are trite, fairly boring items.  They say
the same things, over and over, and rarely give you a chance to have a
creative outlet.  The bad reviews, on the other hand, allow you to have lots
of fun.  The real challenge of the job is to insult a movie in the most
creative way possible, because, although insults run rampant in the world,
very few of them actually take time to use any brainpower.  They normally
come in formats as cliched as some of the films I review, and are equally
boring.
     Sadly, I cannot exercise my creative skills at insulting Get Shorty.
It was just too good of a movie to warrant that.  The thing that is most fun
about Get Shorty, however, is the way it insults the system of Hollywood.
Watching a movie like that, I feel like the movies themselves are replacing
my job: that maybe, maybe, Hollywood might start policing itself.
     The movie is a surprisingly post-modern tale: a shylock trying to
collect money from an idiot doing a scam on an airline ends up in LA and
pitches a movie to another person he's collecting from.  What's the pitch?
A shylock is trying to collect money from an idiot doing a scam on an
airline.  By the end of Get Shorty, you swear you just saw a true story play
out in front of you, but one that poetic license has made completely
hilarious.
     The movie opens with plot and conflict brewing.  `Chili' Palmer (John
Travolta) is having a conversation with a friend in Miami on the coldest day
of the year… the temperature is a chilly 34.  Palmer's jacket is stolen by
Ray `Bones' Balbone (Dennis Farina), and Chili quickly steals it back,
breaking his nose in the process.  Bones tries to kill Chili, but almost
gets his hairline shot off instead.
     Chili heads off to Las Vegas to collect a debt, then heads to LA in
further pursuit, having picked up an additional debt on the way.  In LA, he
hooks up with B-movie producer Harry Zimm (Gene Hackman) and his
scream-file-star girlfriend Karen  (Rene Russo).  All of a sudden, he
decides he wants to produce a movie, that is, with the help of Zimm.
     Only one problem: Zimm already owes money to another, LA,
 `Variety'-Reading, loan shark.  One with seventy dollar a yard carpet, a
stuntman for a hood, and an idiot for muscle.  Meantime, he's working on a
drug deal with an idiot named YaYa who thinks that ten year olds in the
airport are actually DEA agents guarding a bag full of $500,000.  Not to
mention Bones is hot on Chili's trail trying to get even with Chili, and
Chili is falling in love with Karen while trying to produce his first
Hollywood feature film.
     As normal, Elmore Leonard's seemingly out of control story has a
direction, a steady plot, and a nice, tidy ending.  Everything comes
together at the end, but it looks messy beforehand.  In between, we're
granted a black satire of the Hollywood system where a loan shark decides to
go into the movie business and seems to know more about it than a seasoned
pro.  Scott Frank does his normal great of capturing a novel so out of
control and transferring it onto the screen without gift-wrapping it for us.
So many of today's adaptations are made nice and neat and ruined in the
process.
     Barry Sonnenfield does an especially good job: his camera follows Chili
everywhere, and his use of the stedicam augments the fast storyline to make
the film itself seem as fast-paced as a baby's heartbeat.
     Like I said, I like to insult.  But I can't do it with this film, this
satire did it for me, taking on the Hollywood system and organized crime
alike and still coming out very funny.  Definitely see it.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Barry Sonnenfeld
Writer: Scott Frank (from the novel by Elmore Leonard) 
Starring: John Travolta, Gene Hackman, Rene Russo, Danny DeVito, Delroy 
Lindo, Dennis Farina, David Paymer, James Gandolfini, Martin Fererro, 
Miguel Sandoval, Linda Hart, Big Daddy Wayne, Bette Midler, Penny 
Marshall, and the immortal Harvey Keitel
>From the 30-some films based on best-selling pulp writer Elmore 
Leonard's books, this (and probably Quenitn's up-coming "Jackie Brown" 
based on Leonard's "Rum Punch") is probably the only Leonard book to 
ever actually be brilliant.  Most just play out his complex plots and 
get some pulp out of it (like the recent un-spectacular "Pronto," which 
was too TV-movie-esque, even for a TV movie) or make nonsense out of 
them (Burt Reynolds in "Stick" - ???).  But "Get Shorty" finally finds 
that nerve that Leonard has and even goes the next level with it - by 
making satire out of it.  
"Get Shorty" compares Hollywood and the crime business in a flawless 
satire which gets more fun and intriguing every time one watches it (so 
it's one of my faves of all time - this review ISN'T biased - swear to 
God).  John Travolta perfectly inhabits the character of Chili Palmer, 
an ultra-confident Shylock from Miami Beach who loves movies.  He can 
name "Rio Bravo" after hearing Dean Martin utter one line.  He can mouth 
the ending to Orson Welles' "Touch of Evil."  He can even quote lines 
from grade triple Z horror films.  He's basically the man, in my 
opinion.  I mean, even I can't mouth the words to the end of "Touch of 
Evil."
The story starts when Chili gets in trouble with a guy from another 
Miami mob - Ray "Bones" Barboni (the also flawless and highly underrated 
Dennis Farina) - who steals his $399 Serpico-esque black jacket in the 
beginning causing Chili to break his nose and later on shoot some of his 
scalp off.  Ray can't touch him because he's from another mob but 
Chili's mob boss dies from a stroke (or something) from a surprise 
party.  Now Chili is Ray's man and he sends him to fix a blank in his 
book having to do with a stupid dry-cleaner (David Paymer) who got lucky 
and missed a flight that blew up but everyone thinks he was on it and 
has taken his insurance money from his poor wife (who hates him anyway) 
and gone to Vegas (smart idea, let me tell you).  Chili goes out to get 
him but also has to pick up money from a grade triple Z "film" director, 
Harry Zimm (Gene Hackman).  Thus starts Chili's life in L.A, the 
Hollywood/Mafia satire and just the beginning of a typically complex 
Elmore Leonard plot (this is just the first 10 minutes, hang in there!).
Chili decides to stay out there and make movies with Harry Zimm, but 
quality movies.  Chili has pitched his story to Harry and he likes it a 
lot but he wants to make another one, a quality flick called "Mr. 
Lovejoy."  But all his money comes from a crooked Limo-service owner, Bo 
Catlett (the yet again, flawless and underrated Delroy Lindo), who gets 
sucked into the movie business after reading the "Mr. Lovejoy" 
screenplay but gets pushed away from Chili who just wants him to give 
the money and keep his nose in its on place.  Meanwhile, they're trying 
to get huge (yet short) movie star, Martin Weir (the flaw...hell, 
everybody's flawless - Danny DeVito) to be in it so they can get 
financing, and the only way to do it is to have Chili talk with him 
("I'm gonna put a gun to his head, say 'Sign the papers, Martin, or 
you're dead,' and that's it.") but also talk with Martin's ex, a grade 
triple Z movie actress, Karen Flores (Rene Russ - you know it...) whom 
Chili can quote from her crap flicks...and who he has a relationship 
with later on.
All these diverse characters come together in a character clash and by 
the end, people are dead and even crooks have switched from the mafia to 
making movies.  One of the great things the film shows is how easily 
crooks can be influenced by movies and movie actors can be influenced by 
crooks.  For one thing, Chili is a walking film encylcopedia who's every 
move has been influenced by a cornucopia of movies.  His jacket's from 
"Serpico," his slicked-back hair is from Michael Douglas in "Wall 
Street" (proving I read the book too), etc.  Yet when he goes to 
Hollywood, it is Hollywood that is influenced by him.  Immeadiately, 
Harry begins acting tough and saying Chili's trademark "Look at me" 
line...of course, he says it to the wrong person.  And after meeting 
him, Martin Weir is dressing like him and giving a pseudo-Chili look to 
everyone...even driving a replica of Chili's rented mini-van which was 
ironically a mistake.
But this satire would be dull if it didn't have a great screenplay, and 
this one actually quotes from the meister of criminal-lingo, Elmore 
Leonard (come on, you know Quentin was totally influenced by him).  
Travolta said in an interview that the screenplay took out all of his 
dialogue and shortened it.  For example, when Chili finds out his coat 
has been stolen, the script read "Where's my coat?  It cost me $400!" or 
something to that forte.  But Travolta claims he had them put it back to 
the long one of something like "Where's my long-sleeved, black lapel, 
with pockets and everything black jacket that looks like Al Pacino's in 
'Serpico?' 'Cause if you can't find it, you owe me $379!"  Again, I 
don't know the actual quotes, but you get the point that Elmore writes 
great dialogue.  His characters are well-defined and well portrayed by a 
wide assortment of character actors.  Even Gene Hackman plays a totally 
different character - a wannabe toughguy yet a wimp.  
Barry Sonnenfeld, who started out as a Coen Bros. cinematographer and 
later directed the two Addams Family Movies (the first one was okay, but 
the second one was classic) and the upcoming cool-movie-of-the-summer 
"Men in Black" - which looks so cool, it's orgasmic - well, he does an 
awesome job with the film, giving it that right pulp kick as well as 
showing a knack for creating priceless comic moments - from the big 
"Stuntman Fall in the fancy restaurant" to the very subtle stupid limo 
driver who shows a guy from Miami Beach the L.A. ocean.  He's a great 
director and should have gotten much more notice than he did for this 
film.
The best acting job from "Get Shorty" really goes to Travolta, who 
stands out at the top of a great cast (with cameos from Bette Midler 
and, as I said, the immortal Harvey Keitel).  He won the Golden Globe 
for Best Comedic Actor but really should have had a chance at the Oscar 
for his priceless work on this film.  He inhabits every quirk of his 
character and presents a character so likable and so utterly cool (that 
it hurts), that he just makes you applaud him at the end.  This film was 
the deciding factor in whether or not Travolta has actually "come back" 
even after stunning everyone in the world with "Pulp Fiction."  They 
couldn't have chosen a better film to show that he has come back - 
everyone went to see it for the man Travolta and even if they didn't 
like the complex plot and/or appreciate the brilliant black comedy or 
satire, they at least could see Travolta giving a commanding performance 
as one of a character so goddam cool he HAD to be named "Chili."
But the best part of it is all fo it.  It works so great as a whole that 
it is entertaining while it is intelligent.  Imagine that.  "Get Shorty" 
was arguably the best film to come out of 1995.  Thank God someone could 
make a perfect film that year.

Author
Simon Doherty
Director Barry Sonnenfeld in now best known for the blockbuster Men in
Black, but previously his biggest hit was this slick comedy.  John
Travolta plays Chilli Palmer, a loan shark with an idea for a movie
that he's pitching to washed up producer Harry Zimm (Gene Hackman).
However, Zimm has blown money gambling that he owes to shady character
Bo Catlett (Delroy Lindo).  We also meet actress Karen Flores (Rene
Russo), the ex-wife of Hollywood star Martin Weir (Danny DeVito), who
Chilli wants to be in his film.
Get Shorty is based on an Elmore Leonard book, and was the first film
to successfully evoke the author's cool, witty style.  It has since
been joined by Jackie Brown and Out of Sight as the best Leonard
adaptations, although Get Shorty is closer to the upbeat Out of Sight
than the slower, more thoughtful Jackie Brown.  The story is
convoluted, and it becomes tricky to remember who owes money to whom
as the many characters flit across the screen.  However, the plot is
largely irrelevant, the film being driven by the snappy dialogue and
excellent acting.  Travolta consolidated his comeback after Pulp
Fiction, creating a charismatic character with understated menace.
Hackman is as good as always, and Dennis Farina steals the film as Ray
‘Bones' Barboni, Palmer's underworld boss, who delivers many
of the funniest moments (‘Don't puke on my shoes, Harry').
DeVito also relishes the chance to send up his own image.  The
screenplay draws the characters sharply and makes them all
entertaining, a considerable achievement given that most of them are
pretty unpleasant people.  Sonnenfeld also gets credit for this; he
keeps the tone light even during the violence.  He also gets the
pacing just right, keeping the viewer absorbed whilst developing the
characters fully.  Unusually for a Hollywood film, the ending avoids
tying up too many loose ends, keeping it at a tight 105 minutes.  It
also enables the movie to finish with a memorable final image.
Get Shorty epitomises cool 90's film-making; fast talking, stylish
characters, knowing references to real life movies and actors, and a
funky soundtrack by John Lurie that fits the mood perfectly.
Definitely recommended if you liked Pulp Fiction, Scream or Out of
Sight, and the plot vagaries also make a second viewing worthwhile.

Author
Christopher Null
     The cryptic title of GET SHORTY should forewarn you of the confusion
to come when the film actually starts.  To be honest, I *still* don't
really know what it's supposed to mean.  Initially, I was pretty excited
about the prospects for GET SHORTY:  it's John Travolta's much-anticipated
follow-up to PULP FICTION; great actors Gene Hackman and Rene Russo both
star; the well-regarded Elmore Leonard penned the novel that the movie is
based on.  What a disappointment!
     The story goes:  Travolta is Chili Palmer, a small time Miami hood, a
"shylock" whose job is essentially coercing money out of people.  His boss
sends Chili on a chase for some questionably-raised funds; in Vegas,
another contact sends him to L.A. to track down an entirely unrelated
debtor, Harry Zimm (Hackman).  And there are a few drug dealers who have
their payoff stuck in a locker at LAX.
     With all this money lying around, someone has the bright idea to
produce a movie.  Actually, *everyone* has the bright idea to produce a
movie--Chili, Zimm, Zimm's leading lady (Russo), the drug dealers, you
name it.  Somehow Danny DeVito gets wrapped up in all this, and of course,
it's nothing but wacky hijinks until we get to the tidy ending!
     While it's fun to watch Chili get caught up in the Hollywood scene
and continually pitch this oddly familiar movie (it's a movie about a
shylock's trip to L.A. to track down some absconded cash), it's not so
much fun to watch 80 different plotlines convolute around what should have
been, at its heart, an innovative and simple story.  The sheer volume of
information presented in GET SHORTY is just way too much to absorb in 2
hours, and it results in a talky, sanitized, often boring, tragicomedy
that begins to fade from memory as soon as you leave the theater.
     There are a few plusses to GET SHORTY.  The direction is good and the
acting is solid for the most part, and while I genuinely like Travolta,
he's beginning to become a caricature of himself, a la Jim Carrey.  Will
Vinnie Barbarino ever die?  By the looks of it, certainly not anytime
soon.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Ed Powell
     Take one Miami loansharker (John Travolta), send him to collect
$300,000 from someone who was gone to L.A., and mix him with a horror
movie director (Gene Hackman), an actress from his movies (Rene Russo),
and a bigtime actor (Danny DeVito).  Add several twisty plotlines, and
let insanity ensue.
     GET SHORTY is a tounge-in-cheek look into the world of film making
and organized crime.  While is was a very entertaining and engrossing
film, I couldn't help but be confused with the way that the many
plotlines were intertwined.  It seems as if the writer was trying to
get too creative.  Not that there is anything wrong with creativity,
it's just that the writer could have directed it towards clarifying
fewer plotlines.  Overall, however, I give high marks to the writer and
director for overall story execution.
     Four big names in a film ... I usually take that as a sign that
those names are trying to cover up for a weak story.  The story wasn't
weak, though, and the acting was excellent.  John Travolta is made for
playing a loansharker, Gene Hackman is good in anything, and Rene Russo
and Danny DeVito are excellent actors playing actors.
     The settings were well thought out, the music was well suited for
the action, and the director made fine use of several fancy camera
moves, even if there were a few too many.
     GET SHORTY is a wonderful film, and I wouldn't be surprised if it
gets an Oscar or two.  It seemed a little short, and it ends rather
suddenly, but it is well worth paying to see.
Produced by Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, and Stacey Sher.
Directed by Barry Sonnenfeld.  An MGM release.

Author
Andrew Hicks
     Up until about a year ago, John Travolta's career consisted of
those "Look Who's Talking" movies (notice how they never called them
LOOK WHO'S TALENTED) and the 1991 bomb SHOUT (which was bad enough to
make most people scream).  But somewhere along the line, Travolta got
the starring role in the Tarantino masterpiece PULP FICTION and his
career soared once again.  Weird how someone whose career was on par
with the Bee Gees back in 1978 would experience fame and fortune once
again, while Barry, Robin and Maurice Gibb could do no better than a
1993 straight-to-the-cutout-bin album aptly named "Size Isn't
Everything" (and of course, they learned that sales are everything).
     But now Travolta's back on the Hollywood scene once again, and I
think we all know why.  Four words: contract with the devil.  And this
has nothing to do with Newt Gingrich's "Contract With America."  No,
Satan is much more humane.  Anyway, yes, Travolta has sold his soul to
the hairy host of the netherworld.  How do I know? I own the document
in question.  Amazing what you can buy at those collector's shops for a
few hundred dollars, isn't it?
     GET SHORTY continues in the vein of PULP FICTION, with Travolta as
crime minion Chili Palmer.  He goes to collect some of the mafia's
money from a B-grade director (Gene Hackman) and suddenly finds out he
wants out of the mob game and into the movie game.  Sure, a ruthless
criminal like him is far too honest to make it in Hollywood, but I
guess that's beside the point.
     Palmer is determined to get Hackman's next project made, so he
sets out to convince big star Martin Weir (Danny DeVito) to star in the
movie, bringing along down-and-out horror actress Karen Flores (Rene
Russo), who has already had affairs with Hackman and DeVito.  It
doesn't take a Las Vegas odds-maker to predict that she and Travolta
will soon be hitting the sheets as well, after the customary sexual
tension and denial, which has been used in every comedy from "Who's the
Boss?" to Speechless.  It works in this case, unlike "Who's the Boss?"
although it's interesting to note that Tony Danza has signed a contract
with the devil also.
     Complicating matters somewhat are the mobsters who have backed
Hackman's other films and want in on this one too, along with
Travolta's mob boss trying to track him down for defecting.  GET SHORTY
is by no means on the same level as PULP FICTION, despite the obvious
similarities.  This movie doesn't have near the amount of originality
or depth as PULP FICTION but it is definitely one of the most
entertaining movies I've seen this year (yes, even better than
HALLOWEEN VI).  GET SHORTY is my kind of movie, one that mixes
intelligent humor with action and violence.  I'm definitely going to
have to check out the novel it was based on.  Are you getting this,
shorty?
