Title
Review for Dead Man (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DEAD MAN (director/writer: Jim Jarmusch; cinematographer: Robby Müller;
cast: Johnny Depp (William Blake), Gary Farmer (Nobody), Lance Henriksen
(Cole Wilson), Michael Wincott (Conway Twill), Eugene Byrd (Johnny "The
Kid" Pickett), Mili Avital (Thel Russell), Gabriel Byrne (Charlie
Dickinson), John Hurt (John Scholfield), Iggy Pop (Salvatore "Sally"
Jenko), Billy Bob Thornton (Big George Drakoulious), Jared Harris
(Benmont Tench), Jimmie Ray Weeks (Marvin, Older Marshall), Mark
Bringelson (Lee, Younger Marshall), Michelle Thrush (Nobody's
Girlfriend), Alfred  Molina (Trading Post Missionary), Robert Mitchum
(John Dickinson), Crispin Glover (Fireman), 1995)
Jim Jarmusch (STRANGER THAN PARADISE/PERMANENT VACATION/ DOWN BY LAW/
MYSTERY TRAIN/NIGHT ON Earth) has directed and written a poetically
unique and disturbing Western, one that is an American masterpiece, and
is clearly one of the best films of the '90s. The electrical guitar
played and scored by Neil Young, complements the eerie mood of the film,
as Young's improvised melodic theme is repeated with different strains
and variations to it throughout. The film could also be viewed as if one
were reading a book of poems, as each scene is separated by a blackout,
which allows the next scene to be read as a new poem or viewed as a new
development in the film, one that is not necessarily related to the
previous scene.
The film opens with a written quote onscreen from Henri Michaux- " It is
preferable not to travel with a dead man." This sets the tone for the
film, which will take a jaundiced look at how the white man settled the
west and abusively treated the Native Americans. This film is viewed on
the side of the outsider, the loner, and the visionary, who have the
wherewithal to see through all the violence that America is built around
in its pursuit of happiness and economic comfort. Aside from Jarmusch's
deadpan humor, the dreamlike intonations, the psychedelics, and the
surreal camerawork (a beautifully shot black-and-white film by Robby
Müller slowly unfolding, that catches hold of the deathlike odyssey
sequences and the superb imagery of the landscape), but also relates a
strong history lesson and a colorful mystical tour of the death
experience that adds an especially vibrant visionary sense to this
stunning and problematical film.
In the late 19th century, a meek, orphaned young man, foppishly
misdressed for his journey in a checkered suit and bow tie, named
William Blake (Johnny Depp), leaves Cleveland by train with a letter
guaranteeing him a job as an accountant for the Dickinson Metal Works
out west, in a town called Machine.
The train ride is a trip into the hostile frontier, where the rugged
passengers will at one point open fire on a herd of buffalo going by.The
white man cruelly killed off for no reason, the Indian's natural food
supply, as they performed a form of genocide against the Native
Americans. The only civilized conversation Blake has on the train, comes
from the fireman (Crispin Glover), who is smudged with soot on his face,
telling Blake he can't read his job acceptance letter, but forewarns
him, "I wouldn't trust no words written on no piece of paper."
Blake's destination point, is a squalid place, with no redeeming
features or common civility about it. It is a menacingly dark and
satanic mill town that he has gone to for his economic salvation. It is
a comment on the Industrial Revolution and how it destroys people's
sensibilities and their environment, and takes away any hopes that they
might have had for a quality life. The further bad news that comes
Blake's way, is when he is told derisively by the office manager (John
Hurt) at the Metal Works, that the job was filled a month ago, and when
Blake demands to speak to the boss, John Dickinson (Robert Mitchum), he
is told by the morbid bossman, to get the hell out of there before he
shoots him with the shotgun he is pointing at him. To console himself,
the low-on-funds easterner buys a small whiskey bottle in a saloon and
when he comes out, a former prostitute who is now selling paper flowers
and has the name of one of the real poet's visionary muses, Thel (Mili
Avital), gets pushed in the mud by some ornery local. Blake helps her up
and the two misfits in town, find that they are kindred spirits and
spend the night in her bed. This turns out to be unfortunate for the
young man, as Thel's former fiancé, Charlie Dickinson (Gabriel Byrne),
the son of the Metal Work's boss comes to visit her, and finding Blake
there, he attempts to kill him, but Thel takes the bullet meant for him,
as Blake, though critically wounded in the chest, uses her gun to stop
Charlie from killing him.
Blake escapes from the town by horse and is spotted on the outskirts by
a wise-talking Indian, calling him a stupid white man, who is treating
his wounds, but who realizes that the bullet is lodged permantly in his
chest and that he will soon be a dead man.
The outcast Indian has taken the name Nobody (Farmer), which is a good
indication of how the white man considered the Native Americans. He was
captured by British soldiers as a youngster and paraded around to
different cities in a cage, and when he was brought to London, he aped
the way the British talked and they thusly gave him a chance to go to
their schools. That's where he read the Western world's greatest
visionary poet, William Blake, and knew he met someone who felt the same
way about life's meaningful things that he did. When the young man tells
him, that he is named William Blake, Nobody thinks that he is a
reincarnation of the poet and he treats this white man with a new
respect, believing that he is a dead white man but his poetry is eternal
and that is what he carries with him in spirit, even if he is ignorant
of it. William Blake states that he is not a poet and doesn't even
understand poetry. Nobody just comments on his modesty. The two
dissimilar men will now go on a spiritual journey that is similar in
some ways to the one the real Blake took and the one the Native
Americans took, and they will also try and elude the white men that
Nobody can smell from their stench, who are following them.
John Dickinson is upset that his son was gunned-down by Blake and that
he also stole his prize pinto, and while talking maniacally to a stuffed
bear, he hires three notorious gunslingers as bounty hunters: the
legendary cold-blooded killer Cole Wilson (Lance Henriksen), who
supposedly "fucked his parents," "killed them," "cooked them up," and
"ate them," and the crazy talking Conway Twill (Michael Wincott), who
sleeps with a teddy bear, and a tough talking black youngster, Johnny
'The Kid' Picket (Eugene Byrd), to go after Blake and bring him back-
dead or alive.
Along the way, Nobody tells William Blake, after he recites to him some
of Blake's poetry, from his "Songs of Innocence," 'Some are born to
sweet delight, Some are born to endless night.'  "William Blake," he
says, "you will learn to use your guns instead of words, your poetry
will now be written in blood."
On his odyssey, Blake will come across many who are trying to get him,
which will include some deranged trappers, Big George Drakulious (Billy
Bob Thompson), Salvatore Jenko (Iggy Pop), who wears a dress, and
Benmont Tench (Jarred Harris), two money-hungry marshals (Jimmie Ray
Weeks and Mark Bringelson), a racist Christian missionary (Alfred
Molina), and an ambusher who wounds him again towards the end of his
journey. They will all be killed by either Nobody or Blake.
The transformation of Blake comes, when he takes peyote and sees things
differently, no longer afraid of dying, he becomes connected Indian
style to the nature of his surroundings, as Nobody leaves him alone so
that he can find out what his inner trip is.
When the two are together again, Blake is prepared for death, barely
clinging to life, as Nobody takes him to spiritual friends among the
Kwakiutl settlement and he passes through the hellish worldly sights for
one last time and then having been prepared for death by Nobody-- who
tells him,"it is like passing through the mirror." He is prepared to die
in peace, as he is placed in a canoe and sent out to sea to return to
the spirit world he came from.
This is an original film, the kind that you are not likely to see being
made from those box office watching directors and those studio heads who
wouldn't know a real visionary work even if the real William Blake was
to appear before them and shout his poems into their ears. What makes
this film particularly exciting, that allows it to have such a
real-Blakeian feel about it, is when some of those magnificent
Blake-like aphorisms are dropped into the film, such as when Nobody
says, "The eagle never lost so much time as when he submitted to learn
of the crow." This fits easily into the flow and grace of this perfectly
made film, where Nobody can say "You don't stop the clouds by building a
ship," and that could either be taken for an old Indian saying, or
something Nobody made up, or one of Blake's sayings from his "Songs of
Innocence" and "Songs of Experience."
The most remarkable aspect about this film, is not only that it didn't
falsely romanticize the Western settler and idolize him for how good he
was with a gun, as most films foolishly do, but it debunked that whole
Western John Ford type of liberal myth, that the cowboy was doing all
that violence to advance civilization, that if the Indian can be
civilized he can and should live with the white man. That sort of
feeling those films conveyed, coming only from the white man's
patronizing position of superiority, left a lot to be desired, even if
Ford in his masterpiece "The Searchers" did tune in to the inherent
racism in America, he still couldn't convey with the kind of depth this
film does, how the Indian viewed the white man.
In this pyschedelic Western film, Blake and Nobody are almost complete
opposites, contraries if you will, borrowing from one of the bard's
adages of how best to gain wisdom. They enjoy each other's company
despite not knowing what the other is saying. Humor is sometimes a
saving grace when all else fails and that is what is indisputably
working here, in the odd relationship between the two travelers; and,
even if what Jarmusch's well-researched, historically accurate film was
delving at, is not always clear to some of the viewers, as the
establishment critics who dutifully lambasted this film because they
said they didn't get it, even though, they say that they laud the poetry
of Blake, but still hated the film for its murkiness ( I feel these are
the same sorts that called Blake a madman in his lifetime and said his
work was rubbish, and I am not surprised in the least at their
negativity toward this original film).
The film had energy; and energy, Blake said, is 'eternal delight.' It
also has a prophetic message for the modern technological age, and that
message is that all is not rosy if we continue to destroy the planet and
ourselves. It's not that cool a thing to just shoot people, as portrayed
in so many popular action films, films that think they have to
substitute action for image.
"Are here frozen to unexpensive deadly destroying terrors,
And War & Hunting, the Two Fountains of the River of Life,
Are become Fountains of bitter Death & of corroding Hell.
Till Brotherhood is chang'd into a Curse & a Flattery
By Differences between Ideas, that Ideas themselves (which are
The Divine Members) may be slain in offerings for sin."
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Jim Jarmusch's (STRANGER THAN PARADISE, DOWN BY LAW, and MYSTERY
TRAIN) latest film is his best.  The film is entitled DEAD MAN, not to
be confused with the completely different DEAD MAN WALKING from last
year.  Although I have not been a Jarmusch fan before this picture, I
am now.  DEAD MAN features a great performance by the ever enthralling
Johnny Depp (ED WOOD, DON JUAN DEMARCO and EDWARD SCISSORHANDS),
impressive and moving black and white cinematography by Robby Mueller
(TO LIVE AND DIE IN LA and REPO MAN), and a score by Neil Young so
strong that it dominates, but never overpowers the picture.  Although
the show is quirky enough not to be everyone's cup of tea, I was blown
away by it.
     DEAD MAN is a mystical journey set in the old West in the later
half of the nineteenth century.  An accountant with the same name as
the great English visionary poet, painter, and inventor William Blake
(Johnny Depp) leaves on a train to travel deeper and deeper into the
wilderness of the American West.  He is going to the end of the line to
the filthy town of Mechanic to accept a job offer.
     Possibly the best scene is on the train to Mechanic.  Blake keeps
falling asleep and when he awakens his fellow passengers keep changing,
getting scruffier and rougher (thanks to great costumes by Marit
Allen), whereas he is wearing a fancy outfit described by others as a
clown outfit.  He shows his job offer to the train's ethereal fireman
(Crispin Glover).  The fireman prophetically advises him, "I wouldn't
trust no words written on no piece of paper."  The coal dust make-up
(Neal Martz) on the fireman gives him a realistic but macabre
appearance.
     When Blake arrives, he finds the owner of the metalworks, John
Dickenson (Robert Mitchum) has already given his job to someone else.
Office manager John Scholfield (John Hurt) roars in laugher at city
slicker Blake and thinks it fitting he lost his job.
     Through even more bad luck, Blake hooks up with Thel Russel (Mili
Avital).  He is in bed with her when Dickenson's son and Thel's long
gone fiance, Charlie (Gabriel Byrne) shows up.  Thel and Charlie both
get killed.  This sets up the body of the movie, as Dickenson hires the
three best gunslingers around, Cole Wilson (Lance Henriksen), Conway
Twill (Michael Wincott), and Johnny Picket (Eugene Byrd), to bring
Blake back - dead or alive.  Along his spiritual journey, Blake teams
up with a rotund Indian whose name means, "He who talks much and says
nothing", but who goes by the nickname of Nobody (Gary Farmer).  Also
along his odyssey, he comes across a group of unusual animal skinners,
Big George Drakulious (Billy Bob Thompson), Salvatore Jenko (Iggy Pop),
and Benmont Tench (Jarred Harris), two marshals (Jimmie Ray Weeks and
Mark Bringelson), and an anti-Christian Christian missionary (Alfred
Molina).
     The acting in the show is sharp and taut.  There are two
outstanding performances by Depp and Farmer.  Depp can convey more
through just expressions than most loquacious actors can with volumes
of words.  In a film whose strength lies in its bold imagery, the
casting of Depp as the lead is brilliant.  Farmer plays an assertive,
fresh mouthed Indian with a natural gift for humor.  Nobody has Blake
wrapped around his fingers.  I loved Farmer just as much as Depp in the
picture.
     The script by Jim Jarmusch is smart and biting.  When Nobody meets
Blake he demands, "What name were you given at birth stupid white man?"
When he replies "William Blake", Nobody is in rapture since William
Blake is his favorite poet, and he decides this man must be he.  Soon
Nobody is off reciting his favorite Blake passages, "Some are born to
sweet delight; some are born to endless night."  When Blake is
surprised that Nobody knows they are being followed, Nobody explains,
"The evil stench of white man precedes him."
     The director's pacing and the relaxed and smooth editing by Jay
Rabinowitz make for a dreamy show.  Most scenes have dramatic Neil
Young electric guitar music, cinematography with sharp black and
whites, but with highly gradational grays, and long blank places
between words.  This is a director who knows the value of a character's
silence and how to use it to maximum effect.  I do not remember a movie
where the music worked better or where it was more central to the
success of the film.  I am not a Neil Young fan either, but I was
mesmerized by his work here.
     As the show was drawing to a close, I began to wonder how they
would end it.  To me the ending is perfect, and it provides a beautiful
symmetry to the beginning.  When the show was over and the house lights
went up, I felt privileged to have seen a incredible piece of cinematic
art.  Totally unique.  To be fair, I later got into a conversation with
a local newspaper movie critic who found only the opening scene
appealing, but I loved DEAD MAN from beginning to end.
     DEAD MAN runs 2:07.  It is rated R for some sex, brief nudity, and
some very violent scenes like the one where they slice someone's skin
and blood spurts out.  I think it would be fine for any mature
teenager.  For some movies like ANNE FRANK REMEMBERED and THE JOY LUCK
CLUB, a critic can recommend it knowing that almost everyone will love
it, where in other films like DEAD MAN, it is not so clear.
Nevertheless I recommend this show to you strongly if you are the last
bit adventuresome in your cinematic tastes, and I award it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Combee
Jim Jarmusch makes movies.  He makes art films.  He explores concepts,
and he usually does a competent job.
I saw _Mystery Train_ about two years ago and found it interesting,
but not too special.  _Night on Earth_ sits on my video shelf, but I
never found time to watch it.
This evening, I went with my friend John Oakley to see _Dead Man_,
Jarmusch's take on the American western.  It was playing in the
Egyptian room at the Dobie.  We got good seats, I MSTed the slide
show, and after a couple of previews, the film started.
First thing: it is in black and white.  This was a plus.  Jarmusch's
lighting and composition were perfect for the monochrome medium.
Second thing: it stars Johnny Depp.  Mr. Depp always seems to do
excellent in B&W films.  _Ed Wood_ was the most recent example.  In
_Dead Man_, he plays William Blake, an accountant from Cleveland.  He
plays the character well, showing real emotional growth.
The title is quite appropriate, although a plural form might have been
better.  There are many deaths in the film, most from bullet wounds.
Almost every major character dies.  Shakespeare did it, so why change
the formula?
Two elements of the film really grabbed me.  One was Jarmusch's use of
fade-to-black to represent the passage of time.  These fades were
frequently and consistently used, and they produced a neat, unifying
effect.  During the occasional recollection scenes, he negated the
fade, going to white to indicate a memory.
The second element was the dialogue.  The first half of the film was
quite dialogue heavy.  While not exactly Tarentinoesque, the
conversations reminded me of a Western _Pulp Fiction_.  There were
some very funny lines.  The second half wasn't as colorful and the
conversations were scarce, mainly due to the lack of characters.  It
became more abstract and surreal, but still poignant.
This is an important film.  It ranks very highly on my list of films
for 1996, up there with _Fargo_ and _My Flower of the Secret_.
On the Combee scale of [-4..+4], it gets a +4.
-- 
Benjamin L. Combee (combee@techwood.org) http://www.yak.net/combee/>

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Not to be confused with DEAD MAN WALKING, this tedious, episodic
anti-western stars a bespectacled Johnny Depp as William Blake, a timid
accountant from Cleveland whose first day in the muddy frontier town of
Machine is a busy one.  In order, he loses a job that he didn't have,
has a gun pointed at him by the plant owner (Robert Mitchum), beds a
friendly flower girl (Mili Avital), kills her ex-boyfriend (Gabriel
Byrne), rides off into the woods wounded, and is mistaken as the famous
dead poet by the frank-speaking, world-traveled Indian (Gary Farmer) who
rescues him.  There's also trio of bickering bounty hunters (Lance
Henriksen, Michael Wincott, and Eugene Byrd) on the trail, as the dead
man courting was also the plant owner's son.
     Long on interesting characters, but short on interesting action,
DEAD MAN is engaging for, oh, about an hour.  Robby Muller's crisp
black-and-white photography adds a welcome layer of grit to several
sights not normally seen in a western.  As Depp mucks his way down Main
Street, for example, we see a prostitute performing a sex act here and a
horse urinating over there.  The realism is refreshing and goes a long
way toward balancing the more-absurd moments, like Robert Mitchum
speaking to a stuffed bear, Iggy Pop appearing in drag, and Lance
Henriksen feasting on human flesh.  (Need a hand?  No thanks, got one!)
And how about that wild, weird guitar-only score by Neil Young?  Written
and directed by Jim Jarmusch (NIGHT ON EARTH). 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 5/10/96 (limited)
Running Length: 2:00
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, sexual situations)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Johnny Depp, Gary Farmer, Lance Henriksen, Michael Wincott, 
      Eugene Byrd, Robert Mitchum, Mili Avital, Gabriel Byrne, 
      John Hurt, Alfred Molina
Director: Jim Jarmusch
Producer: Demetra J. MacBride
Screenplay: Jim Jarmusch
Cinematography: Robby Muller
Music: Neil Young
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     DEAD MAN, Jim Jarmusch's first feature since 1992's NIGHT ON EARTH, 
is a quirky chronicle of one man's physical and spiritual search for a 
place of belonging.  Jarmusch chose to make DEAD MAN a western because, 
according to him, the genre is "very open to metaphor, and has deep 
roots in classical narrative forms."  Actually, any kind of road picture 
could have been used to tell this oddly-compelling tale.
     The main character is William Blake.  He's not the William Blake, 
of course (the English poet), although a Native American named Nobody 
(Gary Farmer) accepts him as such.  Blake is an accountant from 
Cleveland who travels to the frontier community of Machine sometime 
during the latter half of the 19th century.  When he arrives, he learns 
that his would-be employer, John Dickinson (a scenery-chewing Robert 
Mitchum who spends half of his scenes yelling at a stuffed bear), has 
filled the position.  At gunpoint, Dickinson tells Blake to get out of 
town.  But, before he can decide what to do with his life, Blake becomes 
involved in a shoot-out in which he kills Dickinson's son (Gabriel 
Byrne).
     Injured and on the run, Blake is befriended by Nobody, and the two 
travel together.  Their destination is a mystical place where Blake's 
spirit can cross back to where it belongs.  Along the way, they 
encounter a number of strange characters (including lawmen named Lee and 
Marvin), and are hunted by a trio of hired killers (Lance Henriksen, 
Michael Wincott, and Eugene Byrd) who are as likely to off one another 
as their quarry.
     DEAD MAN is an undeniably strange movie, and sometimes it's hard to 
figure out what to make of it.  Filmed in black-and-white with an eerie 
score by Neil Young, and using contemporary dialogue and mannerisms, 
Jarmusch's picture has a dream-like quality.  It's filled with irony and 
subtle humor, but contains a serious message about the fragility and 
uncertainty of human existence.  Blake, normally the mildest of people, 
discovers how easy it is to kill.  In fact, he becomes wanted for a 
series of murders.
     Johnny Depp has always been willing to take acting chances.  From 
EDWARD SCISSORHANDS to ED WOOD, Depp has consistently sought out 
challenges. With William Blake, he breathes life into another in his 
series of oddball personalities.  Depp's Blake is lost and injured both 
physically and spiritually.  Playing opposite the lead actor, Gary 
Farmer portrays the enigmatic Nobody with a caustic edge that makes him 
very unlike other Native American movie "sidekicks".  The impressive 
list of actors with cameo appearances includes Robert Mitchum, John 
Hurt, Gabriel Byrne, Crispin Glover, and Alfred Molina.
     Even if it accomplishes little else, DEAD MAN will almost certainly 
inspire thought and discussion.  This isn't the kind of movie that can 
be digested easily or immediately.  Although I don't have all the 
answers, I recognize that this provocative, puzzling movie will stay 
with you long after the twangy strains of Neil Young's end credit music 
have faded away.

Author
Kevin Patterson
Dead Man (R, 1996)
Directed and written by Jim Jarmusch.
Starring Johnny Depp, Gary Farmer, Lance Henriksen.
        Jim Jarmusch's Dead Man  is an alternately haunting and hilarious film
that follows one man, a meek accountant named William Blake (Johnny Depp), as
he travels to the Western town of Machine to accept employment and quickly
finds himself in the middle of a dangerous and increasingly out-of-control
situation. The film looks a lot like a Western picture, but it possesses a
dreamlike, hallucinatory feeling that often lets the audience wonder what is
"really happening." From the opening moments of the film, in which the camera
fades in and out on Blake's train to the twangy chords of Neil Young, it is
clear that something is not quite right, and when a quirky stranger (Crispin
Glover) approaches Blake to warn him against going through with his trip to
Machine because "you might find your grave" there, we have a feeling he may be right.
        Blake doesn't listen, however, and lo and behold, he finds that his
promised position as an accountant has been taken. With almost no money left,
he spends the night with a local woman, only to be discovered with her by an
ex-boyfriend. A gunfight ensues, although, as in many of the gunfights in this
film, it appears that none of the characters involved actually know how to use
a gun. The woman's ex-boyfriend, shot by Blake in self-defense, turns out to
be the son of the wealthiest man in town. He quickly sends three hired killers
after Blake, who has escaped but is seriously wounded. From then on, the film
follows Blake as he and a Native American who calls himself Nobody (Gary
Farmer) try to outrun the killers, but the film retains its dreamy atmosphere
to the end and usually seems more like a nature walk than an old-fashioned
Western chase.
        More bizarre episodes ensue, including several more awkward gunfights,
a confrontation with three lowlifes who have an interesting take on the old
story of Goldilocks and the Three Bears, and an odd running joke in which
Blake is asked by almost every single character if he has any tobacco. Also
recurring throughout the film are numerous references to the work of the
famous poet William Blake, for whom Depp's character is at first mistaken by
Nobody, and to ideas of Native American spirituality. And although it tiptoes
to a vague and inconclusive ending, Dead Man  never seems arbitrary or
manipulative; the ending may not be typical Hollywood material, but it feels
appropriate within this film's aesthetic. 
        All of this makes Dead Man  an enjoyable viewing experience as a
quirky, off-beat take on the Old West. Yet as with all such "art films," there
is the issue of whether or not there is a deeper meaning to be found, and on
this point the film is perhaps a bit too elusive. One popular interpretation
is that Blake is in fact a "dead man" from very early on, perhaps after the
initial confontation in Machine. But if that is the case, the film offers few
clues as to what exactly the events in the rest of the film are meant to
symbolize. The William Blake references and Native American spiritual concepts
are interesting, but they never quite tie together into a single, coherent
idea. Jim Jarmusch has a reputation as a very literate director, and perhaps
he wants us to do our own homework based on what he has given us here, but if
that's the case, he hasn't given us much to start from.
        Yet with a film as subtle and skillfully directed as this, I cannot
help but think that Dead Man  might have lost some of its dreamy, mysterious
atmosphere had it declared itself more clearly. While it doesn't quite hit the
mark as an intellectual experience, it does at least succeed in echoing the
haunting spirit of the romantic ideas that it references. And as a cinematic
experience of mood, style, and imagery, it is no less than remarkable.
Grade: A
