Title
Review for Snitch (1998)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MONUMENT AVE. ** Directed by Ted Demme. Screenplay by Mike Armstrong.
Photography, Adam Kimmel. Editing, Jeffrey Wolf. Production design, Ruth
Ammon. Music supervision, Amanda Scheer-Demme. Prodcuers, Jim Serpico.
Cast: Denis Leary, Jason Barry, Billy Crudup, John Diehl, Greg Dulli, Noah
Emmerich, Ian Hart, Famke Janssen, Colm Meany, Martin Sheen, Jeanne
Tripplehorn, et al. A Lions Gate release. 90 minutes. Not rated.(Violence,
language, drugs).
In the 19th century arts, reaction to romanticism begat realism (mostly in
France) which begat naturalism, which begat verismo (in Italy), which, in
the 1940s, begat Italy's neorealism in movies, which begat various types of
neo-naturalist films in America and elsewhere.
Monument Ave. is a slice-of-life movie that leaves the viewer uncertain as
to whether it is plain realism (telling it like it is) or mixed with
naturalism (heredity, environment, circumstances beyond their control
determine the life and fate of the characters).The film has its share of
atmosphere but is lacking in explanations, motivations, and development of
characters.
Charlestown, a one square mile Boston enclave of Irish-Americans, is a
depressing location. Monument Avenue separates its blue-collar area from
the part that apparently is being yuppieized by outsiders. Only the
drabness of its "natives" and their homes is shown. Within this, the focus
is almost exclusively on insular low-lifes, specifically a group of five
pals who drink a lot, talk a lot, snort coke and are what's usually
described as "petty thieves," an expression that makes me wonder where
"petty" starts and where it  stops. Their specialty seems to be car thefts,
under the tutelage of Bobby O'Grady (Leary).
The first thing you might notice is that the United Kingdom does not have
an exclusive in local accents. The Charlestownites' speech  can be as
tricky as cockney. As they gab, their sentences often overlap; many
conversations are set bars with distracting ambient noises; some accents
come and go -- not  a major objection given the devilish difficulty
performers have with accents. The sound recording is not adequately sharp.
To follow the dialogue is a problem. Not that the audience misses much, as
the talk is less than fascinating. In one of the clearest arguments, the
pals are discussing movie actors and specifically female breasts, natural
or siliconed.
This is one of the more picturesque bits in the movie. Another is the
opening, a skillfully done sequence that looks like a car chase at night,
but is not. It has marginal relevance to the story, such as it is. A third,
most suspenseful and frightening, has the boys grab, insult, mistreat and
almost shoot an unfortunate black man who had wandered onto their turf.
Several of the characters display crosses hanging from their necks, but
religion does not go a long way with these men and women. Nor does their
very limited vocabulary in which the only clearly uttered words are the
f-verb and the f-adjective. They are used perhaps 1,350 times, or once per
four seconds, which makes the film a champion in the Guinness Book of
Records.
In the bars (more exactly, gloomy pubs), both nothing and everything goes
on. A friend just out of jail, suspected of having talked too much to the
cops, is executed Mafia-style -- the way many Mafiosi are gunned down in
restaurants. The Irish code of silence (called omerta in the Mafia) makes
the witnesses tell  police inspector Hanlon (Sheen) that they saw nothing.
He has already guessed that their alibi will be "I was in the bathroom."
"21 guys in the bathroom at the same time?" marvels Hanlon in one of the
very few bits of (sinister) levity of the movie.
The petty thieves have no capo, no don, no godfather, as in the Mafia, yet
there is a puppet-master,  Jackie O'Hara, called rather too cutely Jackie
O, as sometimes Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy Onassis was. He is played fairly
interestingly by Colm Meany who justly became famous for his lovable Irish
father in the wonderful The Snapper (U.K., 1993). His subsequent film
roles, both light and heavy, have not been impressive -- although he is
very good in the not-yet-released Claire Dolan.
Jackie is unloquacious by Irish standards. Behind his show of friendliness,
is a quietly menacing figure, that of a benefactor to some locals whom he
helps with donations -- or loans that place them under his thumb. There's a
current of antagonism between him and Bobby, who, presumably the smartest
of a sad lot, a candidate for first place among the boys in the hood, a man
conscious of Jackie's manipulations.(This is spelled out in an explosion of
tempers during in an awkward hockey-on-asphalt game).
Leary has presence, cool and not overdone within the film's context, and
with glimmers that may make you say about him :"What a waste! He could have
done better things." The rest of the characters are merely unexplored
sketches.
The plot is minimal -- but that's no criticism. Real life does not always
have plot material in it, so that the lack of it would not have been a
drawback had more care been lavished on the characters. Were the
film-makers thinking that their creatures were so empty that there was no
way to round them out? Instead, the film concentrates on mood, more
atmospheric than artificially colorful -- and does this well. Even so, the
photography may have tried too hard to be uncompromisingly realistic by
shunning the use of supplementary lighting, so that some interior scenes
remain too dark and eye-straining.
At picture's end, suspense does pick up. I will not give away the details,
but it is unlikely that when gunplay explodes, the dancers right next door
to it do not seem to hear it; and that inspector Hanlon appears within
seconds. Also, the death of a character just as he had decided he wanted
out, is too neat a cliche of tragic irony.
It's a sad little film. As an abused girl --Jackie's mistress who has, on
the side, an affair with Bobby--states: "Nothing's gonna change."
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Dennis Schwartz
MONUMENT AVE. (director: Ted Demme; cast: Denis Leary (Bobby O'Grady),
Ian Hart (Mouse Murphy), Jason Barry (Seamus O'Grady), John Diehl
(Digger Bruce), Famke Janssen (Katy O'Connor), Colm Meaney (Jackie
O'Hara), Billy Crudup (Teddy Timmons), Martin Sheen (Hanlon), Jeanne
Tripplehorn (Annie), Greg Dulli (Shang), Noah Emmerich (Red), 1998)
A realistic, hard-boiled peek at an old Irish, close-knit neighborhood,
in Boston's blue-collar Charlestown section. The neighborhood is
beginning to change a bit with "yuppies" moving in nearby; and, then,
there is the more dangerous threat to them of blacks possibly moving in.
This is upsetting to these insulated residents, fearful of what they
don't and can't understand. The focus of the film, is on Bobby O'Grady
(Denis), who is living with his mum, while being unemployed and hanging
out with Mousey (Ian) and his cousin from Dublin, Jason (Seamus), and
his other bar cohorts. They steal cars for the local crime boss of the
area, known as Jackie O (Colm), who tightly controls the neighborhood
with a menacing friendliness. Jackie O strictly enforces the code of the
neighborhood, making sure that no one squeals to the cops. His motto is:
"loyalty is what counts the most."
What makes this over-used type of storyline for many recent films, stand
out from the rest, is that there is no mistake, this is the actual
mentality of the neighborhood. The film is seen through the eyes of
Bobby, the film's low-life protagonist, we are stuck with him, perhaps,
to a certain extent even commiserating with him, seeing that he can't
escape from being born into a life of  crime, even if he has a good mum
and doesn't appear to be a really bad sort of a person, just a little
wild and rough in spots. He has no one around to point him in the right
direction. Now having someone around, still might not have been enough
to change him, since he is inarticulate and intractable.The one person,
Jason, whom he could talk to, he can't, because Jason could only express
his anguish that things are rotten over here and he does not find Bobby
to be receptive to what he says about altering his behavior. That is the
deep sadness about the film, it traps everyone into its malaise, and we
feel that there can be no getting out of the neighborhood or the
criminal ways these street people cling to.
When Jackie O starts rubbing out those close to Bobby, just on the
perception that they might have said something to the police, Bobby
starts a slow boil. He is unable to think straight about what he should
do; but, breaking the code of silence is never one of his options.
Thrown into the mix, is a sexy neighborhood girl, who is a bit of a
head-case herself, Katy (Famke). She is Jackie O's girl, but is seeing
Bobby on the side; and, is extremely jealous if Bobby goes after any
other girl. This is evident in the scene that really summarizes the
direction the story is going, when Bobby, out of frustration, at seeing
Jackie O and Katy together at the local bar they hang out in, decides to
pick-up an attractive yuppie, Annie (Jeanne). She came into the local
bar out of curiosity. This does not go well, and he is rejected by her.
Then the most annoying and daring scene in the film takes place, as he
goes riding with his pals, and they spot a black man in their
neighborhood, and even though nothing comes of this, the violence and
hatred shown to this outsider, clearly shows how narrow their lives are.
This incident becomes transfixed on our protagonist forever, forewarning
us, that there is no way out for him.
MONUMENT AVE. works well as a potently atmospheric film, that captures
the mood of a neighborhood but cannot penetrate the souls of  the
individuals who live there. The boundary line from yuppieville to
blue-collarville, is Monument Ave., and our boy and the other boys can't
cross the boundary line; that is, without being thieves. Everything is
empty and missing from their lives. They have inane conversations about
movie stars' tits and their frivolous adventures, while snorting coke
and getting boozed up. But, even with all this bravado, they feel and
act like losers. The Irish cop Hanlon (Sheen) knows them as well as any
outsider really can, having grown up in the "hood," even though, he now
lives in the more affluent suburbs. He knows them from his dealings with
them, that their code of silence is all that one can expect from them.
The power of the story stalled somewhere in the midst of all the
turbulence in the young men' lives, leaving them with no place to go
after all the cursing and shooting pauses for a break. As the message is
simply, that nothing changes here. If you don't go along with the way
things are done by the crime bosses, your only other choice is a
dead-end job.
Bobby has this anguished look on his face, as he does what he has to do
and is as successful as he will ever be in this lifetime. He settles his
old debts the only way he knows how to; and, his friends drink a toast
to him, and the inane conversation mixes in with the bar music, as the
picture fades out on this powerful but unfulfilling film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Lions Gate Films
 Director: Ted Demme
 Writer:  Mike Armstrong
 Cast:Jason Barry, Billy Crudup, John Diehl, Greg Dulli, Noah
Emmerich, Ian Hart, Famke Janssen, Denis Leary, Colm
Meaney, Martin Sheen, Jeanne Tripplehorn
   Movie critic Roger Ebert relates that he was once criticized
by his editor for saying in a review, "The Irish have the gift of
gab."  Not politically correct, the statement was cut.  Now, as
the P.C. movement seems in retreat, a victim of its excesses,
we can safety bring back that stereotype.  If we're to believe
some of the recent movies featuring people of Irish ethnicity,
the Irish talk even more than the French.  The star-filled
"Monument Ave.," which becomes compelling only if you have
the patience to allow ambiance to take precedence over plot,
is no exception.  The story, not outrageously original, is wholly
redeemed by demonstrating the love that Irish-Americans
have for talk and, in fact, during the first twenty minutes or so
you're likely to wonder where the story is headed.  Since with
one exception the characters are supposed to be Bostonians
and not Dubliners, theirs is not the lilting language of W.B.
Yeats but rather the rugged conversations that saturate the
banter of working-class folks.  The earthy women are as
leathery as the men, a quality that's highlighted as director
Ted Demme contrasts the discourse of one hard-drinking,
chain-smoking lass (Famke Janssen) with that of a yuppie
individual from the other end of town (Jeanne Tripplehorn).
   "Monument Ave." bears the stamp of autobiography,
permeated with photos of an extended family of Boston Irish
from their childhood.  The pictures contrast the happy,
innocent beach scenes of youth with the smoke- and intrigue-
filled days of their approaching middle years.   Bobby O'Grady
(Denis Leary) and his circle live in Boston's Charlestown
neighborhood, which is a square mile but whose working-
class population is being slowly eroded by an influx of cash-
rich yuppies.  He makes his living as a petty thief, the kind of
charming burglar so popular in largely comic movies: a
smooth, magnetic type whose best friend is the improbable
Mouse Murphy (Ian Hart).  They break into yuppie houses to
steal cash and furniture and when they take cars, they go for
the Ferraris.  Their circle includes the treacherous Jack
O'Hara (Colm Meaney), whose specialty is making sure that
nobody rats to the cops and who shares his wealth with the
needy older women of the small neighborhood.  Others
involved in the general malfeasance are Red Coherty (Noah
Emmerich) who acts as a fence and Digger Bruce (John
Diehl) whose taxi is used for their transportation.  Not
exceptionally greedy, they are not above helping relatives
come over from Ireland.  Bobby's Dubliner cousin Seamus
(Jason Barry), brought over with the stolen funds, quickly
becomes Americanized albeit unwillingly into a life of crime. 
The only threat is the police, particularly Hanlon (Martin
Sheen), who tries to break through the code of silence that
keeps the gang going strong.  Human flaws have a way of
causing friction, and in this case Jack's girl Katy (Famke
Janssen) has been cheating on her man by seeing Bobby.  
   Helmer Ted Demme, using Mike Armstrong's circuitous
screenplay, demonstrates his love for the salt-of-the-earth
Irish Americans by a broad toleration for their little schemes. 
The movie's funniest scene involves Bobby's description of
one of the jobs, with his friend Mouse breaking into a yuppie
household to steal cash and jewelry. Mouse takes his time for
a triple-decker sandwich from the homeowner's frig, thumbing
through the guy's collection of old baseball cards, and
eventually falling asleep on the waterbed--an upscale
contraption he had never before seen.  Demme also hones in
well on a professional ice hockey game in a rink watched over
by Red, and contrasts this with a choose-up game on the
neighborhod streets played by the winsome group of friends. 
Though the foibles of this little band of thieves is looked upon
with approbation, director Demme makes clear his horror of
the tragedy that can result when a nasty leader is threatened
by rumors of squealers among his people.
   Milking the milieu of both the working-class and of the
ethnic Irish in America, Demme imparts a slender but
ultimately compelling story made into superior fare thanks to
the exceptional acting of the always reliable Denis Leary, who
is supported by an ensemble of performers--including Billy
Crudup, who shows another side to his fine acting talent. 
"Monument Ave." suceeds by being at once a sociological
tract, a caper film, and a showcase for superb performances.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

MONUMENT AVE. (director: Ted Demme; screenwriter: Mike Armstrong;
cinematography: Adam Kimmel; cast: Denis Leary (Bobby O'Grady), Ian Hart
(Mouse Murphy), Jason Barry (Seamus O'Grady), John Diehl (Digger Bruce),
Famke Janssen (Katy O'Connor), Colm Meaney (Jackie O'Hara), Billy Crudup
(Teddy Timmons), Martin Sheen (Hanlon), Jeanne Tripplehorn (Annie), Greg
Dulli (Shang), Noah Emmerich (Red), 1998)
A realistic, hard-boiled peek at an old Irish, close-knit neighborhood,
in Boston's blue-collar Charlestown section. The neighborhood is
beginning to change a bit with "yuppies" moving in nearby; and, then,
there is the more dangerous threat to them of blacks possibly moving in.
This is upsetting to these insulated residents, fearful of what they
don't and can't understand. The focus of the film, is on Bobby O'Grady
(Denis), who is living with his mum, while being unemployed and hanging
out with Mousey (Ian) and his cousin from Dublin, Jason (Seamus), and
his other bar cohorts. They steal cars for the local crime boss of the
area, known as Jackie O (Colm), who tightly controls the neighborhood
with a menacing friendliness. Jackie O strictly enforces the code of the
neighborhood, making sure that no one squeals to the cops. His motto is:
"loyalty is what counts the most."
What makes this over-used type of storyline for many recent films, stand
out from the rest, is that there is no mistake, this is the actual
mentality of the neighborhood. The film is seen through the eyes of
Bobby, the film's low-life protagonist. We are stuck with him, perhaps,
to a certain extent even commiserating with him, seeing that he can't
escape from being born into a life of crime, even if he has a good mum
and doesn't appear to be a really bad sort of a person, just a little
wild and rough in spots. His main problem seems to be that he has no one
around to point him in the right direction. The one person, Jason, whom
he could talk to, he can't, because Jason could only express his anguish
that things are rotten over here and he does not find Bobby to be
receptive to what he says about altering his behavior. That is the deep
sadness about the film, it traps everyone into its malaise, and we feel
that there can be no getting out of the neighborhood or the criminal
ways these street people cling to.
When Jackie O starts rubbing out those close to Bobby, just on the
perception that they might have said something to the police, Bobby
starts a slow boil. He is unable to think straight about what he should
do; but, breaking the code of silence is never one of his options.
Thrown into the mix, is a sexy neighborhood girl, who is a bit of a
head-case herself, Katy (Famke). She is Jackie O's girl, but is seeing
Bobby on the side; and, is extremely jealous if Bobby goes after any
other girl. This is evident in the scene that really summarizes the
direction the story is going, when Bobby, out of frustration, at seeing
Jackie O and Katy together at the local bar they hang out in, decides to
pick-up an attractive yuppie, Annie (Jeanne). She came into the local
bar out of curiosity. This pick-up does not go well, and he is rejected
by her. Then the most annoying and daring scene in the film takes place,
as he goes riding with his pals, and they spot a black man in their
neighborhood, and even though nothing comes of this, as far as going
through with the actual violence they threaten him with, but the overt
violence and hatred shown to this outsider, clearly shows how narrow
their lives are. This incident becomes transfixed on our protagonist
forever, forewarning us, that there is no way out for him.
MONUMENT AVE. works well as a potently atmospheric film, that captures
the mood of a neighborhood but cannot penetrate the souls of the
individuals who live there. The boundary line from yuppieville to
blue-collarville, is Monument Ave., and our boy can't cross the boundary
line; that is, without being thieves.
There is a prevailing  emptiness in their lives. When they have inane
conversations about movie stars' tits and their frivolous neighborhood
adventures, while snorting coke and getting boozed up, it all seems to
be a tragically wasteful way of life. Even with all their bravado, they
feel and act like losers. The Irish cop Hanlon (Sheen) knows them as
well as any outsider really can, having grown up in the "hood," even
though, he now lives in the more affluent suburbs. He knows them from
his dealings with them, that their code of silence is all that one can
expect from them.
The power of the story has stalled out somewhere in the midst of all the
turbulence in the young men' lives, leaving them with no place to go
after all the cursing and shooting pauses for a break. As the message is
simply, that nothing changes here. If you don't go along with the way
things are done by the crime bosses, your only other choice is a
dead-end job.
Bobby has this anguished look on his face, as he does what he has to do
and is as successful as he will ever be in his lifetime after he settles
his old debts the only way he knows how to; and, his friends drink a
toast to him, and the inane bar conversation mixes in with the bar
music, as the picture fades out on this insightful but unfulfilling
film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
The bathroom, that's where most of the guys who live in the neighborhood
hang out.
At least they always claim to have been "in the head" when murders
occur, as they frequently do in Charlestown, a bleak Irish-American
ghetto in Boston.  As the streetwise Detective Hanolon, Martin Sheen
explains the rules to the new kid on the block, a recent Irish immigrant
named Seamus (Jason Barry).  Hanolon tells Seamus that every man in bar
that day will have been relieving himself when a snitch named Teddy
(Billy Crudup) was gun-downed in cold blood.  Sure enough, to a man,
they all swear during their brief interrogations to have been in the
restroom at the time of the crime.
As directed by Ted Demme and written by Mike Armstrong, MONUMENT AVE.
concentrates on the texture and the hopelessness of the community that
the people feel stuck in.  Although there are no guards at the border,
it is clear that the locals are trapped.  Having been together since
childhood, the guys are bound to their life of snorting cocaine,
drinking booze, stealing cars and gambling away the money they don't
spend on drugs.  Using jump cuts and fast-talking dialog, the movie
imparts an immediacy that allows the movie to transcend the lack
substantial narrative drive.  Filmed by Adam Kimmel in a dull blue gray
and with dilapidated location sets by Ruth Ammon, the visuals convey
hopelessness and poignancy.
One of the film's major pitfalls is that the director allows the actors
to get sloppy, causing much of the dialog to be lost to low mumbling.
And the actors' Irish accents wax and wane like the moon.  Sometimes
they are thick and convincing, and other times they mysteriously vanish.
A remarkably controlled Denis Leary plays the lead character Bobby
O'Grady in an ensemble cast.  The few times that Bobby loses control of
the situation are all the more impressive because the usually explosive
Leary keeps his emotions in check throughout most of the picture.
Bobby is so much a part of the neighborhood culture that he struggles to
answer the hardest question of the movie.  An attractive yuppie named
Annie, played in a cameo by Jeanne Tripplehorn, has happened into his
bar.  When he hits on her, to the great consternation of Bobby's
girlfriend (Famke Janssen), Annie asks him what he does.  Stammering
nervously, he replies that he works on antique cars.  Actually he steals
cars, mainly newer ones, to support his habit, but honesty is rarely the
best policy in such circumstances.
The movie works best in its small moments, which the director gets just
right.  One scene has the guys arguing over the relative merits of the
movies of their generation.  All are in agreement on THE BREAKFAST CLUB,
but ST. ELMO'S FIRE is more controversial.  In another scene, Bobby's
girlfriend comes in drunk and sexually aroused.  His reaction isn't to
take advantage of the situation, but, instead, to cuddle with her and
let her fall asleep in his arms as he covers her gently with a blanket.
Colm Meaney plays Jackie O'Hara, the local crime boss.  Like the old
mill towns, in which the mills owned the stores as well as the only
place of employment, Jackie employs many of the locals and is also the
neighborhood bookie.  This means that he gives money only to take even
more back, leaving Bobby and his friends constantly beholding to him.
Since they have few ways at getting back at him or their surroundings, a
street hockey game with Jackie and his other hoods provide one of the
few harmless outlets for their aggression.
Typical of their unlucky life, the film's title comes from a botched job
shown in flashback.  Mouse Murphy (Ian Hart) had gone to rob an
apartment on Monument Ave., when a comfortable waterbed lulled him into
a sound sleep.  Interrupted by the surprised owner, the only thing Mouse
managed to take was a nap.
Like members trapped in a religious cult, Charlestown's inhabitants have
no idea that leaving is even an option.  The tragedy of their situation
isn't what happens, but what doesn't or, at least in their view, what
can't.
MONUMENT AVE. runs 1:33.  It is not rated but would be an R for
violence, profanity, and pervasive hard drug usage and would be
acceptable for teenagers only if they are older and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
