Title
Review for Chorus of Disapproval, A (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ben Hoffman
One can pretty well expect that if it is something Alan Ayckbourn has
written, it is going to be a great farce. In fact, the play on which
the film is based did win several awards.  One can only assume that
something happened in the transition to film. For one thing, sets with
hilarious goings-on in different rooms are a hallmark of Ayckbourn
farces.  Seeing the film with the mobility of a movie camera where the
set no longer is an integral part is possibly what is missing in the
film.
Initially released in 1989 it was withdrawn because of a legal
disagreement between the producers.  Because the film does not depend
on any particular date, however, the fact that it is now being released
seven years later does not spoil the story in any way.  It is a kind of
timeless farce with  Dafydd Ap Llewellyn (Anthony Hopkins), as a
tyrannical, hysterical monster of a director of an amateur production
of THE BEGGARS OPERA. Into this town of Scarborough, England comes Guy
Jones (Jeremy Irons) who has been sent by his employer to do some work
there.  Guy is of the opinion that he was sent there because of a
computer glitch.
Guy, a shy man who has recently lost his wife, sees an ad in the local
newspaper announcing casting of amateurs for a play.  He thinks this
may be what he needs to alleviate his boredom.  However, much to his
innocent surprise, every woman in the cast as well as others who just
live in the town are trying to get him into bed.  This includes Hannah
(Prunella Scales of Fawlty Towers fame) who is the sex-starved wife of
Dafydd. Then there is the swinging couple who like to have different
partners to break the monotony of married life. (Jenny Seagrove and
Gareth Hunt) in a very funny episode involving Guy, a woman friend, and
the swingers.
While the comedy is handled flawlessly, the film slows down
considerably with the insertion of a sub-plot involving Guy's company
and the greedy townspeople of Scarborough.

Author
Jeff Meyer
[Seen at the Seattle International Film Festival]
A CHORUS OF DISAPPROVAL (Great Britain, 1989)
Director/Producer: Michael Winner
Screenwriter: Alan Ayckbourn and Michael Winner, from the play by Ayckbourn
Cast: Jeremy Irons, Anthony Hopkins, Jenny Seagrove, Prunella Scales,
      Lionel Jeffries, Richard Briers, Patsy Kensit, Alexandra Pigg
     Rambling comedies with eccentric characters have been very much in vogue
within the independent cinema over the last decade; and indeed, some very good
work has been done with this kind of premise.  A CHORUS OF DISAPPROVAL is not
one of them.  It opens with a very shy widower (Irons) who has been moved to a
British seaside town by his company deciding to start a social life again.  He
comes upon an ad in the local paper about a volunteer production of "The
Beggar's Opera" looking for players, and decides that this will be the means
for his reentry into a social life.
     The cast of "The Beggar's Opera" is a collection of characters from all
social and financial strata, most of them rather strident; the only really
enjoyable one is the director, played by Anthony Hopkins with hearty grouchy
malice.  Irons starts out with a bit role, but due to either illness on the
part of a cast member, or bad blood between actors, he finds himself moving
into better and better roles.  At the same time, Iron's personality begins to
change as he takes on bigger, more challenging parts; he becomes more
self-confident, more charming -- and more manipulative of the people he's
working with.  He also starts affairs with two of the company, one of them
being Hopkin's wife.  The dilemmas this creates throw Irons back and forth
between the Garrison Keillor side of his personality and his "star" side -- and
several levels in-between.
     This isn't new ground for a film, but that doesn't matter; the point is
really that it isn't very funny.  The dialogue is fairly flat, and the
characters never take on any real dimension (except for Hopkins'); if it was
meant to be more of a drama than a comedy, then the characters need added
dimension.  It ends with no surprise, just a wry side-glance at the acting
profession and those who work in it.  The trouble is, the events of A CHORUS OF
DISAPPROVAL, presented the way they are, are hardly worth a side-glance in the
first place.
