Title
Review for Quills (2000)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Philip Kaufman. Screenplay by Doug Wright, based on his play.
Starring Geoffrey Rush, Kate Winslet, Joaquin Phoenix. Running time: 124
minutes. Rated R for graphic sexual content and explicit nudity by the
MFCB. Reviewed on August 28th, 2001.
Synopsis: Committed to an asylum, the Marquis de Sade (Rush) continues to 
publish pornographic literature, aided by young maid Madeleine (Winslet). 
Abbe Coulmier (Phoenix), who runs the hospital, disapproves of the 
stories, but humours him in the hope of achieving a cure. De Sade's craft 
and life are threatened when the Emperor dispatches Dr Royer-Collard 
(Michael Caine) to stop the Marquis' work, permanently.
Review: "Quills" is an exploration of the Marquis de Sade: his madness, 
his cruelty and his perversion, his obsession with sex in any form, no 
matter how obscene. But "Quills" also details the Marquis' determination: 
to write in spite of the obstacles put in his path, and to propagate his 
words to the masses. The extent to which de Sade is willing to go to 
practise his trade is amongst the movie's most intriguing elements, as 
when de Sade scribes a story in his own blood, or narrates a tale via of a 
chain of fellow inmates, cell to cell. To provide a contrast with the 
Marquis, Wright involves him with two very different characters. One is 
the Abbe, a handsome, charming and kindly man whose desires are stymied by 
his oath to God. The Abbe lusts for Madeleine, but it is the wizened 
Marquis who is able to have her. And then there is Royer-Collard, a 
hypocrite who in truth is as sadistic as any of the Marquis' motley 
creations. Rush is splendid as de Sade, utterly inhabiting the character. 
Kaufman's direction is fine, and he is able to bring a sense of bizarre 
humour to the grim proceedings. The plot itself is rather mundane and 
plays out unsurprisingly, but this is virtually unimportant. For two 
hours, "Quills" acquaints us with the Marquis de Sade -- and, more 
frightening still, allows us brief insight into his scatological soul.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This year there were two films about the infamous Marquis de
Sade and his imprisonment at the mental asylum at Charenton.  There
was Benoit Jacquot's more reserved SADE and Philip Kaufman's QUILLS.
Both tell the same oft-repeated story as such diverse films as GREAT
BALLS OF FIRE and THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT.  Each of these films
tells the account of somebody notorious in his own time.  But, we
are told, the REAL evil was that of the establishment that tried to
suppress and crush these free spirits.  The world has come to
tolerate what the outcast was doing and the real villain was not the
free spirit but the world that wanted to suppress him.  There
probably are few other ways to tell the narrative of someone
punished for free expression from the viewpoint of a world that now
tolerates free expression.  It would be hard to tell the story of
the Marquis de Sade at Charenton any other way in a world that now
tolerates Gangsta Rap that is just a violent.  Though Peter Brook's
1966 MARAT/SADE is a film that escapes the cliched just about as
well as it could be done.
     It is the early 1800s and Napoleon is Emperor of France.  The
infamous Marquis de Sade (Geoffrey Rush) has seen the excesses of
the Revolution and the Terror that followed.  He has incorporated
that horror in his "sadistic" writings.  Now he lives imprisoned but
in luxury at the Asylum at Charenton under the sympathetic but
ineffective care of the Abbe Coulmier (Joaquin Phoenix).  All he
needs to engage his bizarre fantasies is paper, ink, and quills.
Coulmier uses argument and what he sees as reason to try to reform
his patient and bring him to God.  Coulmier argues for restraint and
virtue; De Sade is the prophet of unrestrained hedonism and
fulfillment.  Sade's therapy also involves his staging of innocuous
plays with the inmates as actors.  Naturally he subverts these plays
in any ways possible.
     But Sade is an angry spirit who vents his furies by continuing
to write his lurid and explicit sexual fantasies.  For him writing
his fantasies is an irresistible compulsion.  His laundress
Madeleine (Kate Winslet) manages a tidy business smuggling his
fiction to a courier who takes it in turn to be published.  The
stories sell and are enjoyed all over France and the Emperor
Napoleon wants to see this affront to public decency squelched.  He
sends an alienist Dr. Royer-Collard (Michael Caine) to Charenton.
(Alienists were the forerunners of psychiatrists like alchemists
were the forerunners of chemists.)  Royer-Collard obtains real
results by torturing patients nearly to death and forcing them to
give up their insanity.  Royer-Collard is a respected man and
recently has taken as a bride the reluctant Simone (Amelia Warner)
who is about a third his age.
     The screen has yet to provide a really hypnotic and effective
de Sade.  Such diverse talents as Kier Dullea, Klaus Kinski, Patrick
Magee, Daniel Auteuil and the great Conrad Veidt have played the
man, but it was (with the possible exception of Veidt) never played
by someone who combines the whimsy and malignancy that the role
requires.  Rush has some power in the role, but even he falls short.
Michael Caine represents a much more urbane and administrative evil
and does a sufficient job but seemingly without his heart being in
it.  Kate Winslet of TITANIC fame plays the laundress transfixed by
the notorious author.  Joaquin Phoenix as a benightedly idealistic
cleric is also acceptable but uninspired.
     Sadly the theme of this story is over-familiar and tired from
over-use.  Where this film stands out is its ghoulish Grand Guignol
vision of the tortures of the asylum and its enjoyably unpleasant
anti-establishment view of the early 19th century.  And perhaps in
that de Sade would have appreciated it.  I rate QUILLS a 7 on the 0
to 10 scale and a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.  There were two
additional treats for me.  And it is a pleasure to see seasoned
character actor Billie Whitelaw playing as the laundress's blind
mother.  Also being in the telecommunications industry myself, I
enjoyed seeing the early telecommunications fiasco.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Fox Searchlight Films
 Director: Philip Kaufman
 Writer:  Doug Wright (play & screenplay)
 Cast: Geoffrey Rush, Kate Winslet, Joaquin Phoenix,
Michael Caine, Billie Whitelaw, Patrick Malahide, Amelia
Warner, Jane Menelaus, Stephen Moyer
    If you're reading this online review, you are, of course,
familiar with the power of the Internet.  All sorts of movie
data, even whole books, can be uploaded to the 'net and
then downloaded in a matter of seconds by readers from
Passaic to Port Moresby.  How easy things have become in
the Information Age!  Our very freedom to gather printed and
even visual material from a gadget that can be held on our
laps furnishes dramatic contrast to the difficulties people had
in disseminating their views during the Nineteenth Century
and before.  Although Gutenberg's invention of movable type
had been around for a couple of hundred years, governments
and religious leaders were reluctant to allow their people to
read materials they considered subversive of the political or
social order.  In our own time, an age that beholds eight-
year-olds gazing casually and without shock at pornography
on the Internet, we may feel bemused that at one time some
books considered corrupt by those in power were off limits to
the populace (as a few are even today).  One such work was
"Justine," published anonymously but recognized everywhere
as the work of the Marquis de Sade.  While the contents
would today be considered hokey, even downright laughable,
the flagrantly erotic text of "Justine" created quite a scandal
in Paris, so much so that while many who could get their
hands on the outlawed novel gobbled up the pages hungrily,
Church officials and even Napoleon himself were apoplectic
with outrage.
   Phil Kaufman, whose "The Right Stuff" was neither arty nor
subtle, now comes across with a decidedly uncommercial
movie; cynical where "The Right Stuff" was idealistic,
grotesque where the all-American movie was straight-laced,
depraved and revolting where the rah-rah picture was
uplifting.  Based on Doug Wright's Obie (off-Broadway)-award
winning play by the same name, "Quills" cannot be mistaken
for a naturalistic movie but instead evokes its theatrical
origins in virtually every scene.  Resembling in spirit Peter
Brook's 1996 film "Marat/Sade"--which was in turn based on
Peter Weiss's breathing-down-your-neck play about a so-
called performance staged by inmates of the French asylum
for the insane at Charenton--"Quills" offers a potent, arch,
humorous and downright fascinating glimpse into a society
both terrified and titillated by literary descriptions of raging
sexuality.  While "Justine" appears to me to be more
gynecological than arousing, the illustrated novel in its time
became a cause celebre, as controversial as the current
presidential quagmire in the U.S.
   "Quills" takes place in 1807 and centers on the Marquis de
Sade, a man whose very name has given us the word
"sadism" but whose cruelty in this screenplay is limited to a
passing comment about his activities--which included the
carving up of a 16-year-old's backside and the rubbing of salt
into the wound.  Instead de Sade is made into an artistic
hero, a man who, while imprisoned at a mental institution for
his past sadism, is for the most part a gentlemanly, intelligent
fellow with a compulsion to write and comfortable quarters to
do so.  If denied the privilege of putting his ideas on paper
with his feathery, quill pen--of subliminating his madness
through his art--he believes that he will go as demented as
his fellow inmates, who include one guy who thinks he's a
bird and another a bald, lecherous Frenchman who could
pass for a Sumo wrestler or for the masked executioner who
in the opening scene lowers the guillotine on a hapless
aristocrat.
   The Marquis (Geoffrey Rush) is treated well by the Abbe
de Coulmier (Joaquin Phoenix), who believes that insane
people can act reasonably when treated with kindness and
given therapy.  (In one situation, he gently asks a pyromanic,
"Isn't it better to paint fires than to set them")?
A virginal chambermaid in the institution, Madeleine (Kate
Winslet), is regularly aroused by the Marquis' erotic writings,
which she reads to the giggles and pique of other workers,
but more important she has been smuggling the banned
chapters of the Marquis' literature out of the asylum for
general publication--handing the pages over to a mysterious
equestrian comrade.  With Napoleon himself infuriated by the
novels and the Marquis' wife scandalized by the pornography,
Dr. Royer-Collar (Michael Caine) is sent to Charenton to
bring both the Marquis and the Abbe to heel.
   Most of the film deals forcefully, dramatically, and
exquisitely with what happens after the Marquis is forbidden
to write.  His quill pen taken away, he resorts to writing on
the tablecloth with a chicken bone dipped in wine.  Absent
the chicken bone, he pricks his own finger and writes in his
own blood.  When even the ability to cut himself is removed,
he implements yet another resourceful method to get his
ideas into print, one which horrifies the entire institution and
could turn quite a few stomachs of those in the theater
audience.  (His final words give new meaning to smut on
bathroom walls.)
  "Quills" informs us with striking drama what happens when
art and sexuality are repressed by the forces of pious
hypocrisy.  Director Kaufman draws the lines clearly, giving
the viewer no doubt that compromise is out of the question. 
The gentle Abbe is pitted against the throughly unsentimental
Royer-Collard, the latter infuriated when his own marriage to
a orphaned girl decades younger than he is brutally satirized
in a play written by the Marquis and performed by the
inmates to the glee and horror of the audience.  The Abbe
himself is torn between his vows of chastity to the Church
and his arousal by both a naked Marquis and the winsome
chambermaid, Madeleine.  The lovely wife of the Dr. Royer-
Collard, Simone (Amelia Warner), is torn between her
marriage vows to the aging doctor (who supplies her with all
the material luxuries any woman could want) and her
"Justine"-inspired desire for the young and handsome
architect, Prouix (Stephen Moyer).  
   While most of the action of this stage-born work is filmed
within the institution, Kaufman's photographer, Rogier Stoffer
and his production designer, Martin Childs, give the work a
painterly essence, a gruesome exhibition of the guillotine in
action in the very opening of the film climaxing with the horror
that befalls the Marquis as he uncompromisingly alienates the
powers that be.
   The always reliable Michael Caine plays admirably against
the extraordinarily talented Geoffrey Rush, while the erotic
nature of the young women is tested against the repressive
notions of the Church and government.  Strip away the
costumes and you could almost see our own times: the
ongoing dialectic about Hollywood's alleged corrupting of
youths around the world; the absurd overreaction of right-
wingers to President Clinton's peccadilloes; even (as ace
online critic Maitland McDonagh points out in her prescient
essay) the controversy over the defense given by the
American Civil Liberties Union to repulsive organizations like
the American Nazi Party and other skinhead bands. 
Contemporary relevance aside, "Quills" stands out as a
tough-minded, lush portrayal of people acting in extremis,
particularly of one man unwilling, nay unable, to compromise
even at the risk of torture and death.  There's a place on our
screens for small, low-budget indies like Kenneth Lonergan's
remarkable "You Can Count on Me," which NY Times critic
Stephen Holden named one of the two or three best movies
of the year so far.  "Quills" demonstrates that we also need
off-the-wall high drama, powerful tales of larger-than-life
characters whose uncompromising heroism elevates them to
mythic stature.
Rated R.  Running time: 120 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
        Come frolic with the Marquis de Sade deep in the bowels of the
Charenton Asylum, where he'll tickle your fancy with lavish descriptions
of bestiality, flatulence and the dimples of a fat mademoiselle's
bottom.
        As portrayed in Quills, based on the Obie Award-winning play by Doug
Wright, the Marquis is an earthy, dirty, jolly old soul with the
unquenchable desire to write his perverse dreams on paper.  He's the
unflinching id in the face of mediocrity and tolerance, the middle
finger held like a candle to the powerful hypocrites, and the loud fart
in the house of God, an affront to restrictive dogma.
        It's not enough that the madman hole up in his room with quill and
reams of parchment to indulge his fantasies, no.  He has to publish it
to the secret, unspoken delight of the masses.  Chapters are being
smuggled out of the asylum by a curious chambermaid, Madeleine (Kate
Winslet from Heavenly Creatures, Titanic).  The streets are buzzing with
outrage and titillation.
        Napoleon (Ron Cook) would love nothing more than to see the head of the
Marquis twitching under the guillotine, but martyrdom would only
increase the sales and spread the word.  Therefore, a man is sent to the
asylum with the intent to cure the Marquis of all the devils inside his
head, whether it be through torture or, worse, the restriction of his
writing privileges.
        That upstanding citizen sent to Charenton is Dr. Royer-Collard (Michael
Caine, reclaiming his title as Hardest Working Actor in the Business), a
man so moral to the core that he marries a young lass whom he could have
fathered twice over.  This pinnacle of morality even has to force
himself upon her on their wedding night.
        Our friend the doctor is just the sort of closet dirty bird the Marquis
delights in mocking.  A play is swiftly written, performed by the
inmates of the asylum (which is indeed based on fact, since de Sade's
plays were quite popular in his day) about a dirty old man humping his
young bride in a variety of sexual positions.  Dr. Royer-Collard sits in
the audience, silently biding his time.  In this battle of wills between
doctor and madman, this is only the beginning.
        Doug Wright's story takes tremendous liberties with the Marquis' life,
but the approach taken by director Philip Kaufman (Henry & June) feels
appropriately mannered, clever and seedy.  From the start, we accept
that every character will be a bit off.
        Geoffrey Rush is wonderfully carnal and hungry as the Marquis,
sashaying and swaying his body as he spouts out his scathing indictments
of the so-called upstanding members of society.  He makes full use of
his robust voice, moving from ticklish prods to hot ecstasy.  Rush
manages to play the role over-the-top without going into camp, since he
reveals small, subtle moments of genuine feeling (such as the moment we
knew was coming, when the men in power take away his precious quills).
        Kate Winslet continues to impress as his loyal supporter, choosing
challenging roles in independent films rather than cashing in on the
success of Titanic.  She could have become a major Hollywood star, but
instead opted for building a quality body of work in such films as Holy
Smoke and Hideous Kinky.  She and Rush attack their scenes with playful
relish together.
        There's also fine support from Joaquin Phoenix's (Gladiator)
humanitarian priest whose noble principles are rocked by the decadent
charms of the Marquis.  Michael Caine takes what could have been a
predictable arch-fiend and turns him into a complex, firm presence -- a
steady rock who makes for quite a match against Geoffrey Rush's Marquis,
though they share very few scenes.
        Philip Kaufman brings bravura camera placement into the film, whether
it be low angles of leering faces or tracking shots following horse
drawn carriages intercut with passengers rocking back and forth as
vampiric music rejoices on the soundtrack.  The production design is a
Merchant Ivory film gone to seed, with mossy green walls and costumes
which are soiled, wrinkled, and dirty.  Even the wigs have flecks of
sweat and grime.  The actors, feeding off of these props, give
performances like grinning masks, scary and hilarious.
        The plot is fairly traditional melodrama, complete with secret affairs
and betrayals, bodice ripping and murder.  It all culminates in an
inevitable, explosive riot within the madhouse where the insane run
wild, rattling their chains and ripping off their clothes.  The sex and
violence crowd will find their fair share of it here.  While the
mechanics are not unfamiliar, there's so much gusto thrown into the
performances and attention to period detail that Quills plays out as
enjoyably lavish, but not laughable.
        This film never goes as far as Pier Paolo Pasolini's interpretation of
de Sade's Salo: 120 Days of Sodom, happy to be entertaining if not
challenging.  Altogether, it makes for a fitting beginner's introduction
to the Sadean school of thought (and a much better one than De Sade, an
earlier film on the man's life).
        Oddly, even though Geoffrey Rush spends the final half hour of the
picture wandering around completely naked, this version of Marquis de
Sade's life could almost play in Peoria.  Almost, I say.  While the
Marquis spends much of the film talking about the bizarre sexual acts he
committed during his life, Quills does find time to give us a little
necrophilia.  Gotta love that Marquis.
Director: Philip Kaufman
Producer: Julia Chasman, Peter Kaufman, Nick Wechsler
Writer: Doug Wright
Starring: Geoffrey Rush, Kate Winslet, Joaquin Phoenix, Michael Caine,
Billie Whitelaw
http://www.quillsmovie.com/quills/options.htm
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Steve Rhodes
"It's not even a proper novel," Father Coulmier (Joaquin Phoenix) 
complains to the Marquis de Sade (Geoffrey Rush) about his book, 
"Justine."  "It's an encyclopedia of perversion!"  The priest is the 
head of the mental institution in which the Marquis is incarcerated in a 
rather sumptuously furnished cell.  "Justine" was written and smuggled 
out against Father Coulmier's express orders.
In Philip Kaufman's QUILLS, which is fascinating and repelling at the 
same time, Kate Winslet plays Madeleine, the washer woman who smuggles 
out the Marquis's scandalous prose.  At the price of one kiss per page, 
she gets to read the words, which are so hot that they almost burn the 
page.  (Actually, yesterday's perversions are likely to seem silly, tame 
and obtuse today, as it relies on cute euphemisms like "Venus mound.")  
In the movie, people profess shock but read his works as fast as they 
can.  "That's terrible, too, too terrible," Madeleine's blind mother 
claims as she is read the bawdy text.  But when her daughter pauses, the 
mother exclaims, "Well, go on!"
The real sadist of the story isn't the infamous Marquis, but his new 
doctor, Royer-Collard (Michael Caine), whom the emperor sends to oversee 
Father Coulmier.  The doctor believes that it is possible to torture 
patients to sanity.  There is nothing like being strapped into a chair 
and held upside down under water to restore one's senses.  The good 
doctor has a new, young wife, Simone (Amelia Warner), whom he keeps 
caged like a bird.  With bars on her windows and locks on the outside of 
her bedroom door, she is kept ready to be ravished at will by her 
husband without any worry that she will escape.  Or at least that's the 
theory.
The subject of the story, which takes many unexpected approaches, is 
about obsessions.  The doctor's number one desire turns out to be 
control.  More surprising is that what truly turns on the Marquis isn't 
so much sex or violence, but the act of writing.  Of course, all he 
wants to write about is sex and violence.  In a telling scene after his 
writing quills and ink have been confiscated, he slices up his fingers 
and uses fingernails and blood as substitutes.  A man who knows no 
bounds, he turns to his own feces as an ink substitute when that's all 
he has left.
Father Coulmier, who tries to understand and help the seriously deranged 
but brilliant Marquis, argues with the doctor that the Marquis's 
writings are "a purgative for the toxins in his mind."  Needless to say, 
the doctor doesn't buy this theory, although he sees no problem in 
personally profiting from his prisoner's pen.
"How can we know who is truly good, and who is evil?" Madeleine asks 
Father Coulmier, who replies, "We can't."  QUILLS illustrates this 
vividly.  No matter how much the Marquis repulses us, we find ourselves 
drawn to him when those more wicked than he abuse him.  Rush makes him 
such an eminently likeable rogue that we can't help but find ourselves 
secretly rooting for him no matter how despicable he becomes.  QUILLS is 
a fascinating and sometimes bizarre motion picture.  Perhaps its biggest 
surprise, however, is how relatively tame it is.  Think of it as a 
ribald ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST with a script that it is 
correctly rated R and not NC-17. An intriguing movie, it leaves you with 
a lot to ponder.
QUILLS runs 2:03.  It is rated R for strong sexual content including 
dialogue, violence and language and would be acceptable for older 
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
QUILLS
(Fox Searchlight)
Starring:  Geoffrey Rush, Kate Winslet, Joaquin Phoenix, Michael Caine.
Screenplay:  Doug Wright, based on his play.
Producers:  Julia Chasman, Peter Kaufman and Nick Wechsler.
Director:  Philip Kaufman.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, sexual situations, adult themes, profanity,
violence)
Running Time:  123 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     As the title character in THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT, Woody Harrelson
says at one point (and I paraphrase), "If the First Amendment protects a
scumbag like me, then it will protect anybody." That's the approximate
thematic gist playwright Doug Wright is going for in QUILLS: an
exploration of the idea that even free speech at its most extreme and
offensive should still be free. It's a worthy enough idea to espouse, and
the movie based on Wright's QUILLS should have been plenty worthy as well
-- if only it weren't so damned self-congratulatory about its position. As
splendidly staged as Philip Kaufman's cinematic version of QUILLS may be,
it's ultimately stunted by a text so concerned with making its artistic
points that it flops as simple story-telling.
     QUILLS takes us to Paris during the reign of Napoleon, where street
vendors are selling scandalous, sexually explicit novels attributed to
"Anonymous." Of course, everyone knows they are the work of the Marquis de
Sade (Geoffrey Rush), even though he is currently an inmate of Charenton
Asylum under the kindly supervision of a priest, the Abbe Coulmier
(Joaquin Phoenix). He has been smuggling out his work with the help of a
laundress named Madeleine (Kate Winslet), arousing the ire of Napoleon
himself. The emperor sends Dr. Royer-Collard (Michael Caine), noted
alienist, to clean up matters at Charenton. But the not-so-good doctor
finds that silencing de Sade will be no easy matter, as the prolific
nobleman is practically compelled to spill his obscene thoughts onto
paper.
     Thus begins an all-around celebration of the purgative powers of
porn. The Marquis, we are told, has been so tainted by the world around
him that he must spill "the toxins in his head" into his stories;
Madeleine, who revels in his naughty work, tells Coulmier, "If I wasn't
such a bad woman on the page, I'll hazard I couldn't be such a good woman
in life." QUILLS offers a dozen different defenses of free speech at its
most unfettered, including commentary that we must know vice in order to
appreciate virtue, and a taunt from the Marquis to the Abbe: "Are your
convictions so fragile that they cannot stand in opposition to mine?"
Every five minutes or so, there's another re-phrasing of the same point in
a slightly different way: Art is just art, words are just words, and even
the most ghastly art and the most ghastly words must be given their table
in the marketplace of ideas.
     A debatable point, to be certain, but the problem isn't so much
whether or not one concurs with Wright's absolutist interpretation of
freedom of speech. The problem with QUILLS is that Wright is so intent on
hammering his point home that he ignores little matters like fleshing out
his characters. Winslet and Phoenix are effective as the essentially good
people aware of their darker impulses, but Wright is mostly interested in
them as representations of the dark impulses in all of us. Michael Caine
plays one narrow-eyed note as the hypocritical man of morality who,
naturally, is sexually cruel to his own young wife (Amelia Warner) and
leeches funds from de Sade's wife to help finish his opulent home. And
Rush, while thoroughly entertaining as the ultimate libertine, never gets
at what de Sade was ultimately all about as a human being. Once you've
figured out what Wright is saying in QUILLS -- and it doesn't take all
that long -- the playing out of the narrative feels like a long walk
around in circles.
     Wright does deserve credit for not taking the easiest ways out with
his arguments. He shows de Sade's work provoking a group of madmen to
violent acts, and he doesn't soft-pedal the cruel, petulant de Sade
himself as a torture artist just to make him more sympathetic as a
tortured artist. There are several individually enjoyable scenes in
QUILLS, from the "telephone game" rendering of one of de Sade's tales to
the staging of a bawdy play intended to humiliate Royer-Collard.
Physically, it's a lovely production to behold. Emotionally, it is
provocative stuff. But intellectually, it's redundant. It's clear that
Wright believes even the kind of art that could inspire a Columbine
massacre must not be suppressed. It's equally clear that he feels pretty
good about himself for saying so. Ironically, QUILLS probably works best
as simple, sensual, prurient-interest entertainment. As a presentation of
ideas, it's more thesis than theater.

Author
Michael Dequina
The thought that most immediately comes to mind with the mention of the
Marquis de Sade is that of sex--not just any sex, but the kinkiest acts
of fornication imaginable.  Yet Philip Kaufman's provocative account of
the infamous 19th Century French writer's final days is titled _Quills_,
and the reason is simple: this powerful version of Sade's story is one
ultimately not about sensationalistic salaciousness, but the power--and
price--of self-expression.
But sex--both the forced act of and graphic writing about it--is, after
all, what lands the Marquis in various forms of captivity: prison and,
ultimately, an asylum.  It is in the latter, Charenton, where Sade
(played by Geoffrey Rush) is introduced, submitting his latest torrid
text to a publisher through unlikely supporter Madeleine (Kate Winslet),
a young laundress.  Immediately upon publication, Sade's sexually
explicit _Justine_ is the talk of France, leading an outraged Napoleon to
send self-righteous Dr. Royer-Collard (Michael Caine) to Charenton and
give Sade the discipline he had not been receiving under Abbé Coulmier
(Joaquin Phoenix), the young priest in charge of the asylum.
The clashes and collisions that power _Quills_ don't necessarily derive
from differences in one's nature than differences in one's ideals.  The
conflict between Royer-Collard and the Marquis is the film's most heated,
but they are two sides of the same proverbial coin.  For all his talk
about morality, Royer-Collard is himself engaged in a scandalous
affair--that with Simone (Amelia Warner), his very young, almost
child-like bride; the hypocritical doctor shields what would otherwise be
a frowned-upon indulgence under an "upstanding" societal
convention--marriage--while Sade is shameless in expressing his darker,
deep-seated urges.  The seemingly angelic Madeleine is, in fact, Sade's
closest match.  She is quite comfortable with and honest about having
those base instincts, but she knows her place in her constricting world;
hence, she enjoys her natural naughtiness in the expanse of her mind,
whose limitless imagination is further fueled by possibilities presented
by Sade's incendiary prose.  For the Abbé, his most-valued belief in a
divinity overpowers--barely--his simmering attraction to Madeleine.
The psychological conflicts, both internal and external, are lent
immediacy by the actors.   Caine, in a much more impressive performance
than his Oscar-winning _Cider_House_Rules_ turn, is a subtly formidable
foil to Rush, who gives the Marquis genuine vulnerability as his veneers
are gradually stripped away.  The complexities of Madeleine are handled
with characteristic ease by the ever-astonishing (and -ravishing)
Winslet, and Phoenix proves his versatility with his nuanced portrayal of
the anguished Abbé.
Given the subject matter, _Quills_ could have been unbearably heavy, but
Kaufman and writer Doug Wright (adapting his own play) infuse the film
with a decadent playfulness befitting a film about the Marquis--a spirit
that is perfectly embodied by the exuberant Rush.  This quality does act
as reinforcement of the film's endorsement of uninhibited expression, but
to Kaufman and Wright's credit, they don't sidestep the negative fallout
that could occur along with the obvious benefits of artistic freedom.  
Prices, both fair and unfair, are paid all around, and those costs
continue to be felt even after _Quills_ etches the disappointingly
contrived images of its lackluster epilogue.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Laura Clifford
An aristocrat during the French Revolution who spent over half his life in 
prison, the Marquis de Sade, whose actions and literary works resulted in
the coining of the word 'sadism,' has been praised by some as a genius and
vilified by others as a pornographer.  Oscar winner Geoffrey Rush
("Shine") stars as the Marquis during his later years spent in the Charenton
insane asylum supported by his wife, befriended by the Abbe Coulmier (Joaquin
Phoenix, "Gladiator"), bedevilled by Napoleon's emissary Dr. Royer-Collard
(Michael Caine) and in love with a teenage laundress (Kate Winslett).
Doug Wright has adapted his own off-Broadway play and together with director 
Philip Kaufman, ("The Right Stuff," "Henry and June") explores the nature of 
the artist and the effects of repression in "Quills."
The art of writing isn't the most visual one, yet Kaufman, who tackled
writers before in "Henry and June," succeeds with his provoking film "Quills."
Maybe its because he's chosen authors of controversial works laden with
sex, but here, at least, his film works because it gets his audience thinking 
- does the reading of De Sade's books cause humans to behave badly or does the 
censorship of his work create the evil atmosphere?
Kaufman startles us right at the onset of his film.  As the Marquis tells the
tale of a noblewoman with a taste for pain, we see that woman responding to
the hands and kiss of her lover.  Slowly, we realize that that man is an
executioner and that we are seeing a woman at the guillotine just as De Sade
is, gazing out of his prison window.  (The guillotine really was moved behind
a jail when the Parisians began complaining about the smell.)
De Sade, who was arrested for sodomy and kidnapping before his writing
landed him in trouble, spent his last years in an insane asylum because his 
wife's family preferred that to prison.  He had a well furnished room, dined 
well, put on theatrical productions and was visitted by the Abbe Coulmier.
However, when his most notorious novel, 'Justine,' (smuggled out by laundress
Madeleine (Kate Winslet) in this film) made its way into the hands of Napoleon,
Antoine Royer-Collard (Michael Caine), an alienist, was sent to observe
the asylum and its most notorious inmate.  When De Sade's quills and ink
were taken away, he resorts to chicken bones and red wine and later to his
own body.
Wright plays with historical fact in that Coulmier was really a four foot tall
hunchback and little is known of the real Magdeleine except that she visitted
the Marquis.  Here a love triangle is created and it's an effective device
because it shows that good (Madeleine) can be exposed to evil and remain
untouched yet evil (De Sade's writings) is inherent in all men (Coulmier).
The film's climatic tragedy, where De Sade tells a new story to Madeleine
like a game of telephone, illustrates that Royer-Collard's repressive actions
have set the stage for disaster.
Rush revels in naughtily tweaking the saintly Abbe and exposing the 
self-righteous Royer-Collard but he can become scary, allowing darkness to
wash over his face, even as we're laughing at his latest quip.  It's a
charged performance.  Winslet is delicious as the curious laundry girl.
She does devilishly juicy readings of De Sade's work (invented for the film)
yet has an apple cheeked purity about her.  Phoenix, who's shaping into 
a really good actor, gradually changes from a good and innocent Abbe
to a tormented man wrestling with lust.  Caine, beautifully introduced
by Kaufman from behind the head of a man being tortured in a dunking
machine, turns in a bland performance as the brutal doctor.
Support includes Amelia Warner ("Mansfield Park") as Royer-Collards'
child bride, whose sexuality is unleashed by reading the forbidden De Sade,
but with another man.  She's a pretty girl, but this subplot does little
for the film other than to gratify by seeing Royer-Collard cuckholded.
Rush' wife, stage actress Jane Menelaus, plays De Sade's wife and
makes us feel her character's frustration.  Michael Jenn ("The Messenger"),
Danny Babington, George Yiasoumi "Elizabeth," and Stephen Marcus ("Lock,
Stock and Two Smoking Barrels") all create unique inmates.  The great
Billie Whitelaw has been given little to work with as the blind mother
of Madeleine.
The film feels claustrophobic, as the imprisonment of a theatrical
writer should, although the monochromatic palette is somewhat dull.
Costume (Jacqueline West, "Pulp Fiction") is notable from the sexy draping 
of the Abbe's robes to the buxom milkmaid look given to Madeleine.
While "Quills" is provocative, relatively little sex and nudity are shown.  
"Quills" is a movie about words and ideas that will make you think.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
When I think of the Marquis De Sade, I think of sadism, pure and simple (heck, the word comes from his name). Others may see him as a pornographer, a brutally harsh man, bestial, etc. It is a surprise therefore to see that director Philip Kaufman ("The Unbearable Lightness of Being") has sanitized the grand old Marquis somewhat, making him less the dangerously lecherous man and more the swooning, almost sympathetic writer dying to write his devilishly seductive prose with his needful quills. 
Geoffrey Rush is De Sade, shown living in a dank stone cell in a mental institution known as Charenton. De Sade delights in writing and in speaking in gentle, arousing tones, embellishing and enunciating each and every syllable as if the English language were his own. Though he is imprisoned, he continues to write his novels, particularly the controversial "Justine," with the help of a chambermaid (Kate Winslet), a secret courier who delivers his work to the nearest town to be published anonymously. Of course, most of the townspeople know it is De Sade's work, only he could publish such scandalous writings. 
Naturally such published works cause controversy and so the institution sends Dr. Royer-Collard (Michael Caine), a brutish, callous man to cure De Sade of his fiendish talent by way of torture. De Sade's work gets so out of hand and causes such scandals everywhere, including one involving Collard's own youthful wife, a former nun who reads De Sade's work with relish, that the writer is stripped of his talents, physically and emotionally. His quills are taken away, as are his clothes. You can't censor a good writer for too long since he uses any available means of writing his prose, including his own blood (by pricking his fingers) and his feces. This lunatic cannot live without writing, and never before have I seen such a slowly developed emotional catharsis for an artist intent on making his work come to fruition in any way possible. 
"Quills" is quite prescient in its look at censorship, and how the writer of what some have described as pornography can be used as a scapegoat for the ills of society  - certainly such lascivious prose would not cause women to act lustful now would it? And what about the other patients in the institution who act out his plays regularly  - are they capable of misinterpreting his work and using it as an excuse to commit violent acts? 
The centerpiece of the film is the naive young priest (Joaquin Phoenix), who believes that De Sade's work is immoral yet still admires the man for his tenacity. Still, the priest does manage to read some of the man's work and it may be possible that it causes him to develop feelings for the beautiful, buxom chambermaid.
"Quills" works mainly because of Geoffrey Rush's magnificent, fully alive performance - he wretches, he cavorts, he has a devilish laugh and smile, and basically, he is irresistible. I think the real De Sade must have been too, and his work shone with equal engagement. The chambermaid may find De Sade too intensely passionate for her blood, but she is nevertheless intrigued by him and sexually connected to him. De Sade turns out to bring out the best and worst in everybody close to him, including his long-suffering wife and, in a couple of startling scenes, the hypocritical Dr. Royer-Collard. 
Exquisitely acted and often hauntingly beautiful in its bleached, murky look, "Quills" is about a madman who writes such erotic, violent words that it causes trouble not only for him, but for everyone around him. We can't stand to bear his pain or his enclosed surroundings yet we are unable to turn away and that, in the end, was the beauty of De Sade's art.    
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Bob Bloom

 Quills (2000). 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Geoffrey Rush, Michael
Caine, Kate Winslett and Joaquin Phoenix. Written by Doug Wright, based
upon his play. Directed by Philip Kaufman. Rated R.
I  have no objection to movies that try to send a message or make a
pertinent point about the integrity of the artist or freedom of
expression.
 What I canít abide, though, are films that do it in such a
heavy-handed, obvious manner that it seems condescending to the
audience.
 With a screenplay by Doug Wright, based upon his play, and direction by
Philip Kaufman, Quills is at times riveting, disturbing and provocative.
 But it also is obvious. The story revolves around the last days of the
infamous Marquis de Sade (Geoffrey Rush), locked up in the Charenton
Asylum, but still allowed quills and ink to write his shocking and
explicit novels.
 Emperor Napoleon, disgusted by de Sadeís writings, orders Dr.
Royer-Collard (Michael Caine), a conservative moralist, to oversee the
asylum and cure de Sade by any means possible.
 At the asylum, Abbe Coulmier (Joaquin Phoenix) uses more humanitarian
methods to try to reach those mentally defectives incarcerated in his
institution. He encourages painting and theater, plays staged and
written by de Sade, in the hopes of soothing the demons within his
charges.
 Where Quills missteps is in the portrayal of Royer-Collard. He is so
obviously one-dimensional  hypocritical, venal, capricious,
small-minded  that the scales are automatically tilted in favor of de
Sade, no matter how abominable you may find his writings.
 De Sade is fighting for freedom of expression  no matter the subject,
no matter the cost. Royer-Collard is the symbol for those who want to
stifle that freedom and make everyone conform to what the state
considers the norm.
 Who in their right mind could favor Royer-Collard's position?
 Wright and Kaufman have so stacked the deck that Caine has no chance of
creating any understanding of his character or his position. Wright and
Kaufman fail to instill one iota of decency or compassion within
Royer-Collard.
 And this is grossly unfair and totally undermines their argument.
  Rushís de Sade is a flamboyant rabble-rouser who believes his writings
are art that forces his readers to examine their souls and convictions.
 Rush does not portray the marquis as a dirty old man, but rather as a
singular, hedonistic visionary who fervently believes pleasure is no
sin.
 Caine does his best with what Wright and Kaufman have given him. His
Royer-Collard is cold and calculating.
 Kate Winslett portrays Madeleine, the asylum laundress who is de Sadeís
courier to the outside world. She smuggles the marquisí writings to his
publisher's agent by hiding the papers in her laundry basket.
 In exchange the marquis reads his works to her, as well as teaches her
to read and write.
 Phoenix instills his cleric with benevolence and mercy. He also
displays his battles with temptation as he fights his attraction toward
Madeleine.
 Kaufman stages some rather interesting sequences, including one in
which de Sade, stripped of quill and ink, arranges a relay system in
which his latest work is passed on from inmate to inmate until it
reaches Madeleine, who transcribes it.
 Toward the end, Quills falters as it becomes a gross depiction of
torture and humiliation, almost a chapter from a de Sade novel.
 Quills is a rather interesting feature. If only Wright and Kaufman had
not been so fervent is trumpeting their message. A little more balance
would have gone a long way toward making Quills a much better cinematic
argument.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com. Other
reviews by Bloom can be found at www.jconline.com at golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database at: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Robin Clifford
During the Reign of Terror of the French Revolution, the infamous Marquis
de Sade (Geoffrey Rush) narrowly avoided an appointment with Madame
Guillotine. Instead of losing his head, the randy aristocrat was given over
to the care of Abbe Coulmier (Joaquim Phoenix), the  head of the Charenton
Asylum for the Insane. The Marquis, whose writings were sexually
inflammatory, produced some of his most notorious works with the unwitting
help of the Abbe and the more than willing help of Madeleine (Kate
Winslet), a smart, inquisitive laundress at the asylum in director Philip
Kaufman's "Quills."
Philip Kaufman doesn't make a lot of movies. He certainly is not known for
his ability to "crank out" films on a quick and regular basis. Instead, the
helmer provides quality, and sometimes groundbreaking work, like the paean
to America's space program, "The Right Stuff," and his controversial, NC-17
(the very first movie rated as such) "Henry & June."
Now, he adapts the play by Doug Wright (who also wrote the screenplay) on
the last, imprisoned years of one of the most famous authors and men of his
time.
Today, the word sadism - which refers to sexual pleasure derived from pain
- draws a picture in our minds of a man who has forsaken propriety for the
satiation of his carnal and prurient pleasures. The Marquis de Sade may
have epitomized the definition of the word that bears his name, but
scripter Wright takes us down a very different path in his examination of a
man who, at the very basis of he accomplished, was the devout proponent for
the freedom of speech and artistic creativity.
We first meet Sade as the guillotine is falling on those hapless folks who
were on the wrong side of the Revolution. The story begins with the Marquis
telling what sounds like a bawdy story of a comely young woman only to have
the action change from lustiness to carnage as the razor sharp blade of the
guillotine snuffs out her life. It's a shocking opening to a film that
proceeds to tell us about the man, Sade, who is compelled to tell his tales
in a way that both shocks and titillates the reader. His unwillingness to
compromise his work causes his imprisonment (in relative luxury) by the
leaders of the revolt. His brief stint of freedom, following the
Revolution, is ended when he is committed to the Charenton Asylum by the
Emperor Napoleon for publishing erotic novels.
Wright's screenplay follows the last years of Sade as the man subverts the
system that imprisons him by secretly spiriting new manuscripts to his
publishers with the help of Madeleine, the laundress. Sade and Madeleine
form a chaste, though laden with sexuality, relationship that allows the
confined aristocrat a distraction from his confinement. Madeleine proves to
be extraordinarily intelligent, learning to read and write from the Abbe,
and using her education to read Sade's 'scripts to the unwashed masses
working at the asylum. (Madeleine is kind of like an 18th century book on
tape.) With her help, and the unknowing cooperation of the naďve Abbe, one
of Sade's most notorious works, Justine, hits the streets, eventually
falling into the hands of Napoleon, who "leafed through the most abominable
book that a depraved imagination ever conceived."
The Emperor's less than kindly attention results in the assignment of Dr.
Antoine Royer-Collard (Michael Caine) to act as "advisor" to the Abbe. The
doctor's methods of treatment for "psychiatric" patients crosses the border
to the barbaric, making the viewer wonder who the true sadist is. During
this period, the Abbe is ordered to curb the work coming from Sade's cell
and the cleric begins by removing all the author's quills (hence, the
title), ink and parchment. Not one to be easily stymied in his creativity,
Sade uses chicken bones and red wine as his writing implements and his
sheets as paper to get his stories out to Madeleine. When even these meager
tools re removed, the resourceful Marquis uses bits of broken glass as
pens, his blood for ink and his very clothes for parchment. Besides the
obvious free speech theme of the story, you also get the moral that you
can't keep a good man down.
The acting amongst the three principles - Rush, Winslet and Phoenix - is
superb. There is a triangle of sorts but in a different way than one would
expect. Sade and Madeleine have a teacher/student relationship through most
of the film. It's not that the randy-minded marquis wouldn't like to jump
the pretty laundress's bones, he respects her too much to insult her or
drive her away. Madeleine and the Abbe also have a flirtatious
relationship, but, again, one that remains chaste through to the tragic
end. Sade and Abbe Coulmier strike up a long-term friendship with the
enlightened priest allowing Sade to oversee Charenton's theater as a form
of therapy. Each of the actors puts a convincing spin on their perfs with
Rush standing tallest. Caine's Royer-Collard is the symbol of the
oppression of free expression and isn't allowed beyond the symbolic nature
of the character. The members of the asylum provide an interesting,
sometimes bizarre, backdrop.
The claustrophobic feel of the play is carried to the screen and is
effective in showing the imprisonment of the remarkable marquis. I found it
to be a bit too constrained, not translating to the big screen as well as
other plays turned screenplays, like "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest."
But, this is a minor complaint on a uniformly solid work.
Tech credits are exemplary with production designer Martin Childs lending
his Oscar-winning talents in creating the Marquis's prison as it
deteriorates from comfortable chambers to a bare prison cell. Costuming, by
Jacqueline West, isn't pretty - it does take place in an insane asylum,
after all - but it certainly fits the tone and period of the story.
Newcomer to American film, lenser Rogier Stoffers, captures the
claustrophobic feel of Sade's prison.
Philip Kaufman may not come out with a film but once every several years,
but they are worth waiting for. The quality work in "Quills" is no
exception and worth the effort. You won't get big, flash F/X and explosions
or lines like "I'll be back," but you will get a thought provoking yarn
about a man whose name is in the dictionary. How many people can you say
that about. I give it a B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 QUILLS (director: Philip Kaufman; screenwriter: Doug Wright, based
 upon his play; cinematographer: Rogier Stoffers; editor: Peter Boyle;
 cast: Geoffrey Rush (Marquis de Sade), Kate Winslet (Madeleine),
 Joaquin Phoenix (Abbe Coulmier), Michael Caine (Dr. Royer-Collard),
 Billie Whitelaw (Madame Leclerc), Patrick Malahide (Delbené), Amelia
 Warner (Simone), Jane Menelaus (Renée Pelagie), Stephen Moyer
 (Prouix), Tony Pritchard (Valcour), Michael Jenn (Cléante), Danny
 Babington (Pitou), George Yiasoumi (Dauphin), Stephen Marcus
 (Bouchon), Elizabeth Berrington (Charlotte); Runtime: 120; Fox
 Searchlight Pictures; 2000)
I'm not an admirer of Philip Kaufman's (The Unbearable Lightness of
Being) previous films. In Quills he has adapted Doug Wright's play to
create a drab period piece of the Marquis de Sade story. It lacks an
edginess, as the shocks against civilization's sensibility are not
geared to move the intellect. Its theme embellished the belief that
freedom is in writing without censorship. The film's rallying cry could
be, 'Bring me a quill!'
The story is set after the days of the French Revolution, when the
Napoleonic empire was in place. It was a time of mixed messages in the
areas of social reform and repression. The story takes place in the
Charenton Asylum, where the Marquis de Sade (Rush) has been spared his
life and has become the most famous inmate of the asylum. He occupies
luxurious accommodations in a private cell, and is given the privilege
to write for the hospital's theater, has his own library, a feathered
bed, and is served special gourmet meals. These are all paid for by his
wealthy wife. He doesn't have the privilege to publish, but does so by
smuggling his manuscripts out with the virgin laundress, Madeleine
(Winslet). The asylum is run by the benevolent Abbe Coulmier (Joaquin
Phoenix), who believes in progressive methods to help his 200 patients
and that kindness is the medicine to cure them.
The story picks up when the Marquis' sadistic-erotic book "Justine" is
published in Paris and achieves popularity with the public. Napoleon
decides to burn the book and take action against the author. He calls in
a man of science Dr. Royer-Collard (Michael Caine) to go to the asylum
and be the overseer of the asylum. He allows him to use torture, if
necessary, to get the Marquis to conform. The elderly Royer takes a
lovely virgin teenage bride, Simone (Warner), from the nunnery and goes
to live in Charenton. Their marriage becomes the target of a new vulgar
play the Marquis puts on about them while they are in attendance, which
gives Royer the ammunition needed to shut down the theater and for
Coulmier to take away his quills.
Since the Marquis must write in order to live, he finds various unique
ways to write his manuscripts and get them out. But when the Marquis is
caught in the act of smuggling, his privileges are removed; eventually,
he is left naked in his bare cell after being tortured. His liberal care
under Coulmier now changes completely to Royer-Collard's harsher
treatment of him.
Kaufman shot this dreary tale at Pinewood Studios and used mostly an
English cast, though some cast members were Australian and American. In
this version, the Marquis de Sade is made out to be more of a misguided
writer and a witty aristocrat than truly a murderous villain. There are
many quotes from his writings, but not those that show him in his more
beastly nature. The best quote is when looking at the figure of the
Virgin he says: "An entire religion built on an oxymoron." Royer-Collard
is reduced to be more the villain than the Marquis is. Phoenix is the
idealistic priest, who is mentally tortured by what he sees and what he
has become. He has the most solid role in the film and makes the best of
it. Kate Winslet didn't convince me she was a peasant laundress, but she
still came off with a feisty although a forgettable performance.
The film failed because it was too dull to be entertaining and it didn't
have anything startling to say about a startling subject to be
intellectual. Its shrill moments outweighed its moments of irony, when
it was able to show how insane the men of reason were in their treatment
of the mentally ill. This was a middlebrow work, that made light of the
innovative Marquis as a man who was merely politically incorrect rather
than completely debased. He was glorified for his wit only because he
was up against a heavy-handed man of science in Michael Caine and a
hypocritical man of the cloth in Joaquin Phoenix. Aiming at those
targets is like shooting at ducks in a pond.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ross Anthony
Paris seventeen ninety-four, a criminally insane man scribbles out 
barely pornographic, cheap, lust novels masked with poetic sounding 
prose. Aided by a chambermaid at the asylum, the books make print with 
copies selling faster than prostitution. 
The film begins with a very nicely filmed execution scene and a 
bloodthirsty observation, "How quickly pleasure is taken from one and 
given to others." The sex-guilty maiden is fitted to the guillotine as 
the townsfolk enjoy the festivities. 
Soon the crazy Count demands a warmer form of payment from the maid 
(Kate Winslet), "A kiss a page!" 
Winslet coyly replies, "May I blow them or must I administer them?" She 
then asks if there's room for negotiation, to which the Rush smugly 
expounds, "The price is every bit as firm as I am." 
It's a festival of snobbish, yet still plainly sophomoric puns. Though, 
I chuckled a few times, these were rarely due to the double entendres. 
Surprisingly and inappropriately, a serious film erupts from between the 
buttocks of this Shakespearean-like farce. The Abby in charge of the 
Asylum and the crazy Count debate human nature "To eat, sh*t, f*ck," the 
Count insists. Countering the Count, the Abby offers, "To fall in love." 
But the staid half of the production relies too heavily on vanity as a 
motivating force for every turn, mudballing the film into a mucky 
progression of farcical twists that never seems to stop rolling. The 
film itself becomes like the Terminator. Seeming ending after seeming 
ending, it just won't die. 
Rumor had it that this is a sexy picture. Eek, about as sexy as 
necrophilia. The lewd fable proves an inhospitable host for the more 
meaty conflict between priest and pervert. "Have you no faith in your 
own mission?" Rush bitingly asks the Abby, ... a great poke toward a 
subplot that unfortunately drowns in the muddle. 
Though the performances are fair and the costuming & sets very nice; 
these characters have no depth. All but Rush's are mere whims of the 
author, vehicles for pointless plot twists. Simply stated, the film is a 
cheap novel itself with an insulting attempt at a moral stapled on at 
its end. I'm not appalled by the vulgarity ... I'm appalled by the lack 
of entertainment. 
Quills. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Geoffrey Rush, Kate Winslet, Joaquin Phoenix, Michael Caine, 
Billie Whitelaw, Patrick Malahide, Amelia Warner, Jane Menelaus, Stephen 
Moyer. 
*  Directed by Philip Kaufman. 
*  Written by Doug Wright (based on his play). 
*  Produced by Julia Chasman, Nick Wechsler, Peter Kaufman at Industry 
Ent/A Walrus & Assoc/ Hollywood Partners/ Fox Searchlight. 
Grade..........................C
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 
