Title
Review for Speechless (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Michael Keaton, Geena Davis, Christopher Reeve.
Screenplay:  Robert King.
Director:  Ron Underwood.
     All right, all right, we get the point:  despite all similarities
to the best-selling story, SPEECHLESS is *not* based on the romance
between 1992 Presidential campaign rivals James Carville and Mary
Matalin.  In fact, the script was in development well before 1992.
Still, the comparisons are inevitable, until one realizes a critical
difference.  No, it's not that the SPEECHLESS twosome are speech
writers, not campaign managers; it's that Carville and Matalin's story
is actually interesting.  SPEECHLESS is a limp, poorly structured
would-be romantic comedy.
     SPEECHLESS is set during a New Mexico senatorial campaign, where
Kevin Vallick (Michael Keaton) and Julia Mann (Geena Davis) meet and
get romantic one night when neither one can sleep.  What neither one
realizes is that they are on opposite sides of the campaign:  Kevin is
a sit-com writer brought in to punch up the Republican candidate's
speeches, while Julia is the chief speech writer for the Democratic
candidate.  At first each one believes that the other has an ulterior
motive for the relationship, but eventually they let down their guard
and become closer.  But there are plent of obstacles in the way,
including Julia's stud-reporter fiance (Christopher Reeve) and a series
of stunts which continue to prove that all's fair in love and
politics.
     The standard formula for a movie like SPEECHLESS would have the
two principles starting out as antagonists and realizing only at the
end that they're crazy about each other.  Screenwriter Robert King
completely subverts expectations by throwing Kevin and Julia into each
other's arms in the first fifteen minutes, then developing the
antagonism.  It's a noble attempt to shake things up, but unfortunately
it just doesn't work.  Part of the fun of watching sparring in a
romantic comedy comes from recognizing the chemistry even before the
characters do, but in SPEECHLESS they already know they're attracted to
each other, and we're left with waiting for the campaign to end so
they'll admit that they love each other already.  There is such a
herky-jerky feel to the constant bickering and making up that even
King's sharp dialogue can't prevent SPEECHLESS from becoming repetitive
after about half an hour.
     Inconsistency is also the defining characteristic of the
performances of Geena Davis and Michael Keaton, and with those
performances most of their scenes together.  The problems begin with
their initial courtship, which does virtually nothing to establish
Julia's character and merely establishes that Kevin is a wise-ass.
Davis is radiantly beautiful, and Keaton is generally entertaining, but
these characters are so plastic that nothing that happens to them seems
to matter one bit.  In a couple of scenes, like a quiet moment sitting
at a fountain, they actually achieve some measure of connection.  For
the most part, however, they're just actors spouting lines.  You keep
waiting for a little spark, and it never happens.
     Perhaps most disappointing is that King and director Ron Underwood
completely waste their premise by removing all the punch from
SPEECHLESS's politics.  The setting seems perfect for a high- energy
battle of the sexes with partisanship thrown into the mix, but that's
never the tone that Underwood is going for.  He wants a warm, fuzzy
romance compatible with Marc Shaiman's flute-and-wind musical score,
and the campaign which should have defined the conflict between Kevin
and Julia fades into the background.  It might as well have been a
story about rival grocers, and every single character is about as
uninspired as he or she could possibly be.
     I was about the only reviewer in the civilized world who seemed to
enjoy Robert King's previous screenplay, the Dana Carvey flop CLEAN
SLATE, so I had some hopes for SPEECHLESS.  But while there is wit in
the words, this is a script which was probably much better on paper.
On screen, it's still paper thin.

Author
Pedro Sena
Speechless might have been a better film if it weren't just an acting
showcase, and had more to do with the two characters in question.  But it
tries to get political, and full of ideals and desires, and the ending is a
mess of bad design and writing.  But the rest is entertaining, at least.
Specially if you like to see a good actor going through his motions.
Michael Keaton is a has been Hollywood writer that has just about quit what
he does best, and has been taken on as a writer, for a campaign for public
office.  And he is, at first, clever, a good writer, and gets the results.
But his competition is no slouch in the process and has a history of good
works, but lacks in the other areas, like a little influence, and being able
to get things done efficiently enough to be effective.  And Geena Davis, is
the other writer.
And they meet.  Of course.  And they happen to decide that they like each
other, only to find out that they are in the opposite camps, writing against
each other.  This does no favors to any relationship at all, but it does add
its moments.  The whole thing becomes a war of  attrition of words and
nerves, to see who is cleverest of all, and who  is able to manage the goods
better.  And the scoop is not cleared up until we see it to keep us
surprised.  In between these events, some materials get stolen and borrowed,
and each campaign works to be better than the other to help the candidate in
question.  It doesn't matter that she is the pro who has done this before,
or that the writer's ex-wife is the one that got him involved in this new
role, thus providing a bit of more chaos to the whole thing. All of a sudden
it isn't just a writing campaign, but a personal vendetta.
Speechless has funny moments, and they may be on the shoulders of Michael
Keaton and his acting ability to keep us busy and entertained. Without it,
the film nay have been too drab and boring.  And Geena Davis, gets a chance
to be next to someone who is good and will be better, and that is good for
her character.  The question is if it will work out in the end.
Well, it does, and it doesn't.  The ending feels like a throwaway. I think
that the outcome of the election should have been ignored and not a matter
in question.  Instead they make a mess of it by implicating bad political
precedent onto the running parties, whose behind the back dealings are as
dishonest as the relationship between the two writers has become.  And even
more so, because the public is unaware  of it.  The film doe snot resolve
this, and instead makes sure that the two characters get together.
And in the middle of it is a drab reporter that has some new designs on his
past flame, Geena Davis.
Well, it is nice to watch, but someone will have to remind me what it was
that was nice.  I enjoy solid acting jobs, and the only person that gets his
kudos for an evening's work here is Michael Keaton.  The rest, you'll have
to decide for yourself.

Author
James Berardinelli
     The story told in SPEECHLESS is not unlike the one played out
during the real life 1992 Presidential campaign when the romance
between James Carville (Democrat) and Mary Matalin (Republican) crossed
party lines.  Those who saw THE WAR ROOM or any of the news shows
documenting the relationship will doubtless find something familiar in
this Michael Keaton/Geena Davis coupling (although, to be fair,
SPEECHLESS was written while Ronald Reagan was still in the Oval
Office).  Nevertheless, an unwelcome ingredient has been added to this
fictional account of rival political speech writers falling in love:
hogwash.
     SPEECHLESS is overplotted and underwritten.  Every situation is
straight out of stock, with no room for variation or originality.  The
two leads--Kevin Vallick (Keaton) and Julia Mann (Davis)--meet, are
attracted to each other, find out they're on opposite sides of the New
Mexico senatorial campaign, spend half the movie sparring with each
other, then eventually get together.  It's the "Taming of the Shrew"
romantic comedy formula.  Opposites, after all, are supposed to
attract.
     Alas, too much of SPEECHLESS feels hopelessly forced.  The
dialogue isn't memorable, the verbal jabs are mostly bland, and the
romance is only sporadically engaging.  You probably have to go back to
1992's THE CUTTING EDGE to find a recent mainstream romantic comedy
with the same basic plot structure.  That film, however, possessed a
certain amount of style and subtlety.  SPEECHLESS' approach is more of
the sledgehammer variety.
     As with this past summer's Nick Nolte/Julia Roberts flick NOTHING
BUT TROUBLE, perhaps part of the problem is that SPEECHLESS spends too
much time concentrating on other things (politics) when it should be
exploring the characters' relationship.  No one really cares which
candidate wins the race--that particular plot element should have been
permanently relegated to the background.  The only worthwhile scenes
are the cute ones involving Kevin and Julia arguing or making up.
     In any romantic comedy, the individual performances are far less
important than how the leads work as a team.  Keaton and Davis have
enough chemistry to generate a few sparks, but they're a pale shadow
of, say, a Tracy and Hepburn.  Bonnie Bedelia and Christopher Reeve are
along for the ride to provide relationship complications, and both are
woefully underused.  As for Ernie Hudson... why bother getting a
familiar name for that thankless part?
     Ultimately, most problems in SPEECHLESS come back to the script,
which, in addition to displaying a remarkable unwillingness to vary the
familiar, has a major believability problem.  The "grand" climax, while
vintage Hollywood, is so silly that it's more likely to cause snickers
of laughter than sighs of longing.  For SPEECHLESS, if suspension of
disbelief was a rubber band, it would have snapped long before the
closing credits.
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily
those of Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SPEECHLESS is a story of the love/hate romance between rival
speechwriters in a New Mexico senatorial campaign.  They are a month
away from the election, and Geena Davis and Michael Keaton are
competing with each other to get their candidate elected while having a
romance at the same time.  The story has superficial similarities to
the real life romance between Bush's speechwriter, Mary Matalin, and
Clinton's speechwriter, James Carville.
     The two speechwriters alternate between playing tricks on each
other and helping out each other in getting their candidates elected.
They have a romance full of sight gags like the cliched love making
scene in a much too small car (MG I think).  Throughout the movie,
their bosses never realize who the other speechwriter is.  Right.
     The movie starts slow but has two or three good laughs.  After
that it is downhill all the way.  Keaton and Davis are both uneven
actors.  Keaton is better at his best that Davis, but they both have
had many brilliant and many embarrassing roles in their repertoire.
Here thanks to some awful direction by Ron Underwood and a miserable
script (SPEECHLESS is a perfect title given the quality of the script)
by writer Robert King, Keaton and Davis play unbelievable and worse,
boring characters.  It was like they were on Prozac in some of the
scenes.
     Screenwriting 101 teaches that romantic comedies should either be
romantic or funny and preferably both.  This movie was neither.
     The worse part of the movie was the ending.  Which senator would
win you were wondering?  Having given up on romance or comedy, at least
you could hope for a little mystery.  The ending was totally out of
left field.  It was as if one candidate had to drop out because he
admitted to having adopted a space alien.
     Finally, being a political junkie, I figured I would at least like
the show for the political aspects.  Well, there was no Contract with
America to argue over here.  These candidates had no apparent belief in
anything and, moreover, did not even claim to believe in anything.
Success was getting the lead on the local stations with any story
including inviting TV crews into your home to watch you make dinner and
to show how cute your dog is.  Zzzzzzz.
     For my 2 or 3 laughs, I generously award SPEECHLESS a single *.
Please avoid this show and don't rent it.  It is rated PG-13 for
reasons that escape me.  One time they literally whispered a single bad
word.  Everybody kept all of their clothes on, and no one even raised a
hand in anger.  All that having been said, they could rate it NC-95 for
all I care.  The movie runs a tediously long 1:39.  Good time for
catching up on your sleep.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: December 16, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This a typical boy-meets-girl, boy-loses-girl, boy-gets-girl-back,
boy loses girl-again, and on and on, over and over.  The only
difference between SPEECHLESS and the hundreds of others of its genre
(or "ilk") is that this one is about two speech-writers, one for a
Republican Senatorial candidate and the other for his opponent.   This
latter may remind you of the recent marriage of James Carville, the
brains behind Clinton's campaign, and Mary Matalin, one of the leading
lights helping Bush.   However, that is mere coincidence, Life
imitating Art.
     More interesting than the love story is how the candidates read
the speeches over which their writers have labored.  They sound so much
like TV Anchors who frequently seem not to have the foggiest idea about
the text they are reading so beautifully and with so much charm.  The
film contains a gag about a teleprompter that has been tampered with
leading the candidate to recite "Someone's in the Kitchen with Dinah."
     While both Davis and Keaton are charmingly delightful and loving
as always, they seem to be even more so here and after a while it
begins to get a bit dull.  Christopher Reeve and Bonnie Bedelia help
keep the film going but their efforts are in vain.
Directed by Ron Underwood, whose CITY SLICKERS was a great comedy.
