Title
Review for Dead Man Walking (1995)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Among the bitterest disagreements people have (right after
religion) is on the subject of the death penalty.  Put at its basic
is "an eye for an eye" vs. "Who is man that he should play God?
There are many sub-issues to the arguments and DEAD MAN WALKING
takes on many of them.  The film is based on a book by Sister Helen
Prejean, C.S.J., but dramatic liberties are inevitably taken as this
is not a documentary.  The basic story, however, is true.
     Matthew Poncelet (Sean Penn) is in prison after having been
found guilty of rape and then the killing of the teenage lovers.
Penn's performance is superb, now cocky, now desperate, sneering and
laughing with disdain.  Sister Helen Prejean (Susan Sarandon)
learns about Poncelet and, understanding his anguish, decides to try
to comfort him despite his horrible crimes.  At the same time, the
nun has to consider the feelings of the parents of the slain couple,
the fierceness of their understandable hatred and their wanting full
retribution knowing that their children are gone forever. Director
Robbins keeps everything as fair as possible
     Sister Prejean is asked by Poncelet to be his spiritual advisor
and to accompany him in his last moments before the execution.  It
is the final hour before his death that lifts the film onto a new
plateau as we are shown, in detail, what happens at an execution to
the prisoner, to the parents who want to watch, to the warden and
the jailers, the reporters.  It is a film to make you think and to
think hard.
     Robert Prosky has the role of the lawyer who seeks a
last-minute stay of execution.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
There really is a Sister Helen Prejean, and she really did befriend not just
one but several Death Row inmates, serving as their spiritual advisors before
they were gassed or electrocuted.  The book "Dead Man Walking", from which
this astonishing movie is drawn, goes into far deeper detail about the
politics and inherent ugliness of Death Row, but the movie preserves the
deepest spirit of the book: to bear witness to and to bring humanity to a
troubling subject.
And what a film this is.  This is not a simple-minded piece of propaganda --
although the film is avowedly against the death penalty, it does not bore us
with speechifying.  It simply presents the case of two people -- one, a nun
who works in inner-city neighborhoods (Prejean, played radiantly by Susan
Sarandon), and the other, a death-row inmate named Matthew Poncelet (Sean
Penn) who unrepentantly aided in the murder of a lovers'-lane couple. 
(Poncelet is a fictionalized combination of several characters, but this does
not distract from the storytelling in any way.)
As the movie opens, Poncelet writes to Prejean and asks here to visit. 
Nothing more than that.  Prejean takes this in the spirit in which it was
offered, and goes to see this fellow without pretense.        With his hair
Brylcreemed back in an Elvis pompidour and his wiry facial hair, Poncelet
looks like he's some odd mixture of gigolo and back-alley dweller.  But he's
clearly scared and nervous, and he admits to Prejean that he is frightened of
dying, and wants to do whatever he can to avoid the chair.  Prejean agrees to
help him file his appeals, and draws quiet little parallels between them that
get under Poncelet's skin.
What follows from this is by turns brutally sad and achingly beautiful.
Poncelet has spent his whole life squirming on the hook, avoiding
responsibility, and one of the things Prejean does is help catalyze the
latent guilt inside of him.  Not by lecturing him, although she does do that
every so often, but simply by confronting him with his own humanity, and
hers.  At one point Poncelet makes something like a pass at her (she's
moderately attractive, and he is a prisoner, afer all), and she simply looks
at him and murmurs: "Here you are with death breathing on your neck and
you're playing your little man- on-the-make games."  He seems ashamed, like a
schoolboy who has been caught sneaking a puff in the boy's room (even the way
he smokes is guilt-ridden, come to think of it).  Then again, in many ways,
he *is* a boy, and a good deal of his stance comes from trying to "take
things like a man" -- all macho bluff, without any of the real humility and
sensitivity that maturity requires.
The film also toys with the possibility that Poncelet is not entirely guilty,
that he was ramrodded through the system as a scapegoat while a confederate
in the crime (who may have done the actual trigger-pulling) was given a life
sentence.  But by the time we learn the truth about this, it's irrelevant. 
The question is not Poncelet's guilt in the eyes of the law, but his sense of
dignity.  Murderer or no, Prejean argues, he is human, and what we are doing
in this cold and calculated way is every bit as hateful and vile as what he
did in his drunkenness and shallow stupidity.
Prejean's attitude about Poncelet is put all the more brutally to the test
when she goes to the parents of the victims and haltingly tries to help them
as well.  At first they angrily spurn her offerings.  One couple horribly
misinterprets her help as a sign that she's "changed sides" (although in
Prejean's mind, the only "sides" are life and death).  But one of the fathers
lets her into his heart, and realizes that it hurts worse to suffer alone no
matter what.
The final half-hour of the film has the midnight execution deadline looming,
and brings Poncelet back into contact with his family.  His mother appears
briefly at a parole board hearing earlier in the movie, a thin and pathetic
figure, and breaks down sobbing before she can even speak of her son at all.
Poncelet's brothers sit with him in the visiting room and act like they're
unruly schoolboys at detention, while their mother sighs and shakes her head,
and we get a hint of what was lacking all along.
And then there is death itself.  This is not one of those movies where there
is some fancy courtroom theatrics that brings down a last-minute reprieve.
Poncelet and Prejean stare down death in the face together, and in the end
there is redemption, but not in the form of Poncelet praising Christ, either:
there's real redemption, with the victim's families standing there behind a
glass partition while Poncelet bares his soul.
Penn and Sarandon disappear completely into their characters; there isn't a
moment I was less than convinced of their performances.  The supporting cast
(with R. Lee Ermey as one of the fathers and Robert Prosky as a death-row
lawyer) is also excellent, and the director is none other than Sarandon's
longtime companion Tim Robbins.  This film shows him to be gifted and
perceptive in ways that most Hollywood films are incapable of being, because
they are handicapped by the sense that you *need* to have the 11th-hour
reversal of fortune, etc.  Here, Robbins simply wades into the story, and does
amazing justice to it.
When people are interested in finding movies that are uplifting or
"spiritual", this is one of the first films I mention.        I hope they see what
I mean.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Steve Rhodes
     DEAD MAN WALKING is a carefully crafted filmed by writer,
director, and co-producer Tim Robbins.  It tells the story of a
convicted murder and rapist named Matthew Poncelet (Sean Penn).  He has
been on death row in Louisiana for six years and is soon to be executed
after numerous appeals to the state and federal courts.  DEAD MAN
WALKING is purported to be an evenhanded view of both sides of the
capital punishment issue.  More on how successful the film is at that
later in the review.  This show is much more than a message movie, and
it contains some incredible performances.  Whether your feelings on the
death penalty are strong one way or another or even if you simply don't
have an opinion, this film will move you and challenge you to think
about your beliefs and values.
     The movie is based on an autobiography by Sister Helen Prejean.
The characters in the story are not real, but rather are fictional
compositions of similar ones she has known.  Susan Sarandon plays
Sister Helen and getting to know her through Saradon's Academy Award
quality performance makes your time at the movies special.  The many
other marvelous aspects to the film enhance your movie going experience
even more.
     Matthew Poncelet committed his crime in 1988.  He and his buddy
found two teenagers kissing in a car in a wooded lovers lane area.
They pulled them out of the car, raped the girl, viciously stabbed them
and then shot them in the back of the head.  As a teenager, I once had
a stranger try to come into my car in the same circumstance and in a
similar wooded place.  We got away, but even today I am frighten when I
think about what could have happened.  Certainly for me, this movie
rang true, and it was easy to identify with the victims.  As a parent,
it was also even to identify with the parents in the movie.  Chilling
real.
     Sister Helen works in a poor black ghetto, but gets a letter from
Poncelet in prison and goes to visit him.  She is scared and uneasy in
her first visit ever to a prison, but agrees to help him file new
appeals and find him a new lawyer.  In this and every scene Sarandon is
nothing short of incredible.  She manages to be reserved, but show her
emotion with her expressions and her soft but effective speech.  Other
actresses and other directors would have overdone the nun's role.  Here
her outward uneasiness and trepidation is conquered by her inner
courage.  A tour de force acting performance by Sarandon.
     Penn is terrific as a prisoner.  Watch especially how downcast his
eyes are and how fidgety he is.  The audience is quickly convinced that
this guy did it.  Nevertheless, he claims he only watched while his
buddy did the rape and the murders.  His buddy, of course, claims just
the opposite is true.  On one level the movie is about whether Poncelet
will get his execution postponed and whether he really did it or not.
Most of the film however reminded me more of MY DINNER WITH ANDRE than
any other film.  Sister Helen and Poncelet have long conversations
about everything from racism to Jesus and salvation.
     The director sets a slow and deliberate pace where there are a lot
of natural pauses in the conversations.  In a mediocre movie, this
technique is the kiss of death as it rapidly gives rise to boredom, but
here it allows the audience to contemplate the meaning of the excellent
script.  The sound effects editing of the movie is unusual.  There is
little ambient noise in most scenes causing the dialog to be
accentuated much as a room with only a single picture focuses the
viewer attention on it.
     The movie shows the nuns as real people who are not afraid to
laugh, and the script has several quite natural jokes.  When Sister
Helen gets stopped by a state trooper (Clancy Brown from THE SHAWSHANK
REDEMPTION), he says, "You're a nun.  I gave a ticket to an IRS agent
one time.  I got audited the next year.  I don't think I'll give you a
ticket."
     The actors and actresses playing the victim's families (Raymond J.
Barry, R. Lee Ermey, etc.) are some of the strongest minor characters I
have seen in a long time.  Their discussions of why there should be a
death penalty contribute to the picture's attempt at evenhandedness.
The Academy Award quality editing (Lisa Zeno Churgin) provides another
pro-death penalty argument.  It is hard to watch the flashbacks of the
rape and the murders interlaced with photos of the victims growing up
and not want Poncelet to die.  On the other hand, I still think the
script and most of the movie is so sympathetic to the killer that is a
flawed attempt at evenhandedness.  The audience ends up wanting the
killer to live.  There was major weeping in my audience.
     I did not find Robert Prosky's role as lawyer Hilton Barber very
effective.  He gave his usual performance unchanged from many other
movies he has been in.  Clearly the weakest character of the lot.
     The script is brilliant.  There so many examples that is hard to
know where to start.  When Sister Helen first meets Poncelet and he
comes on to her, she tells him, "Look at you.  Death is looking down
your neck, and you're playing your little male come on games."  The
mother of the girl victim speaking about the last time she saw her
daughter says, "You don't know when a child leaves, it will be the last
time you'll ever see her again.  If I'd known this, I'd of told her I
loved her."  When Sister Helen asks Poncelet if he isn't sorry for the
parents of the victim, he answers that "It's hard to have much sympathy
with the parents when they are trying to kill me".  Toward the end he
tells Sister Helen, "It's quiet.  Only three days left.  Plenty of time
to read my Bible and look for a loophole."  When the male victim's
father asks Sister Helen how she has the faith to do what she does, she
replies, "It's not faith, its work."
     The cinematography (Roger Deakins) is slow, deliberate, and
intimate just like the script.  Watch especially how the camera moves
during the naturally lit scenes in the victims' houses.  The sets
(Richard Hoover) and the costumes (Renee Ehrlich Kalfus) are extremely
accurate in recreating poor Southern whites and their houses.  Penn's
attire and make-up help create his character before he even speaks.
There is little use of music (David Robbins), but what there is has a
wonderful reverential feel.
     I had two guys sitting behind me talking some.  When I realized
they looked like the death row inmates in the movie, I decided I would
let them talk without interruption.
     I do have some criticisms of the movie.  First, it is too
sympathetic to the killer.  Watch how they make him into Christ at the
end.  Second, the black ghetto was made to seem like too much fun.  It
was full of happy people on the streets and has churches filled to
overflowing with people singing and dancing.  I have been to ghettos
before, and Robbin's vision is not realistic.  Third, the lawyer claims
that Poncelet's chances are a thousand to one.  Given the large ratio
of people on death row to those actually ever executed, the odds are
that most convicted killers will never be executed even if there are
initially sentenced to die.  Finally, having Poncelet be such a racist
that he gets on TV while he is trying to get the governor to pardon him
and proclaim that, "Hitler was on the right track that the Aryan was
the master race," is a bit much hard to belief.  I think in those
circumstances, he would have held his tongue.
     DEAD MAN WALKING runs an absorbing but slow and deliberately paced
2:02.  I would not have changed the pacing at all, and I hope to see
the editor win lots of awards.  It is rated R for rape and murder.  It
is a realistic show, but should be fine for teenagers interested in
serious material.  I strongly recommend this film to you, and I give
it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Chad Polenz
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1995, R, 122 minutes [2 hours, 2 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Susan Sarandon (Sister Helen Prejean), Sean Penn (Matthew
Poncelet), Raymond Barry (Earl Delacroix), R. Lee Ermey (Clyde Percy),
produced by Jon Kilik, Tim Robbins, Rodd Simmons, written and directed by Tim
Robbins, based on the novel by Sister Helen Prejean.
Capital punishment is one of the most difficult issues of all time. Many
people base their opinion upon ethical and spiritual values, but we usually
don't stop to consider the prisoner as a person do we? "Dead Man Walking" is
quite an accomplishment as it sheds light on the issue from all angles. 
Susan Sarandon stars as Sister Helen Prejean, a very friendly and kind nun
who suddenly finds herself drawn to a convicted murder and rapist named
Matthew Poncelet (Penn) in his time of need. She believes anyone is capable
of salvation and murder is wrong whether it be in combat, crime, or
authorized by the government. 
Throughout the film Poncelet declares his innocence, claiming he was framed
and the real killer is walking free. All criminals tend to say this, and
after a while they convince themselves they really are innocent and feel no
remorse for their crime. 
Robbins carefully places flashbacks of the night of the crime to show just
how brutal the crime was and to prove Poncelet's guilt. This is a great
method of storytelling because each person who views this film will form a
different opinion. He obviously is a vicious criminal and he should pay, but
because of the love that Sister Helen has for him we really start to consider
other options.
At first Sister Helen tries desperately to fight his death sentence, but
since she is poor she cannot get a good lawyer. This is very realistic
because we all know the rich and powerful are able to buy their freedom.
In some ways it's difficult to relate to the situation of the story. Most of
us are not family members of murder victims, and so we can only imagine the
pain and rage the family members of Poncelet's victims must feel. In any
other film we wouldn't get to hear their "side" at all, but this film does an
excellent  job in depicting all the possible viewpoints. Raymond Barry
co-stars as Earl Delacroix, the father of one of the victims, who hates
Poncelet and can't understand how a nun could defend that "monster." When
Sister Helen tries to explain her reasoning, we realize she might be
following a foolish heart. 
One of the most moving scenes occurs when Sister Helen visits the family of
the other victim and hears them tell the horrible story of when they heard
their daughter was dead. R. Lee Ermey and Celia Weston (Mr. and Mrs. Percy)
give incredible performances. At first, they think Sister Helen is on "their
side," but they become almost as furious with her as they are with Poncelet
when they discover that she wants to save his life.
It seems what everyone is missing is Sister Helen is not so much trying to
save Poncelet's life so much as his soul. She frequently visits him in prison
talking to him about the Bible and about the teachings of Jesus. "And the
truth shall set you free" she tells him. At first he doesn't understand it,
but after deep contemplation he confesses his sins and seems to make peace
with himself, although I am not completely sure if he makes his peace with
God. There are many unresolved themes and elements like this throughout the
film, but this is probably the most significant.
Maybe "Dead Man Walking" leans a tad to the left because of its detailed
characterization of, and our sympathy for Sister Helen and Poncelet. But what
it really wants to show is the criminal is a human being with a soul, and
therefore is able to redeem themselves if they so choose.

Author
Vince Deehan
Director: Tim Robbins. Screenplay: Tim Robbins based on the
book by Sister Helen Prejean
Cast: Susan Sarandon, Sean Penn, Robert Prosky, Raymond J. Barry, 
R.Lee Ermey, Celia Weston and Roberta Maxwell.
Release Date: March 29th 1996 (UK)
I have been waiting for DEAD MAN WALKING to be released here in the UK for 
many months now, and with all the high praise the film has received in the 
US I was very pleased to finally get a chance to see this fine film this 
week.  Whilst I enjoyed the film a great deal, I did feel slightly
disappointed, but this was probably inevitable considering the huge build 
up the film has received. 
The film begins with a letter sent by a Death Row inmate, Matthew Poncelet 
(Sean Penn) to Sister Helen Prejean (Susan Sarandon) asking for her help.  
Matthew is facing the death penalty for his part in a rape and double murder 
of two teenagers, Hope Percy and Walter Delacroix (played by Missy Yager 
and Peter Sarsgaard, who we see in flashbacks).  Matthew committed the 
crime with another fellow who has fortuitously been spared the death penalty. 
It is suggested in the film that at least one of them had to be seen to be 
given the death penalty and there is the suggestion that the other guy had
a better lawyer 
Matthew's family are poor and live very far away from the prison so are 
unable to visit Matthew very often, so Matthew is clearly pleased when 
Sister Helen comes to see him. Sister Helen has never counselled a death 
row inmate before and her awkwardness at their first meeting is brilliantly 
conveyed by Susan Sarandon.  Matthew comes across as a bit of a tough nut 
who although not nearly as articulate as the more than likely better educated 
Sister Helen is still more than able to get his views across to her. At times 
though Matthew appears a bit slow, especially when in the run up to his 
imminent execution he gives a series interviews to the media where he 
lets forth his racist views and desires to bomb buildings. As Sister Helen
tells him, he makes the mistake of making it very easy for people to hate him. 
Only later in the film does he finally realise the error of revealing to the 
media his leanings towards the views of Adolf Hitler. 
During the film many people question Sister Helen's motives for helping 
Matthew. A particularly poignant moment occurs when the young black children 
she works with become quietly hostile to her after Matthew's racist views 
appear in print alongside her own name.  I found myself constantly questioning 
her motives too, but quickly remembered that it was Matthew who asked her
directly for help and she saw it as her duty to do her best for him, 
regardless of how appalling his crimes were.  All along she tries to get 
Matthew to face up to his crime, which he is very reluctant to do. He 
constantly claims that whilst he was there, he never killed anyone.  Sister
Helen wants Matthew to admit his true part in the crime so that he can 
be honest with God and then face his death with dignity. 
We also meet the parents of the murdered teenagers whose pain and torment 
is a lasting reminder of the horrific killing that Matthew was involved with. 
Sister Helen meets them for the first time at a hearing for Matthew where 
he tries and fails to get a reprieve from his death penalty.  The father of 
the murdered boy, Mr Delacroix (Raymond J. Barry) confronts Sister Helen 
afterwards and tells her he is a Catholic and asks her why she is 
befriending and helping Matthew and not him and the other parents.  
Sister Helen is terribly flustered at this and admits that she hadn't 
thought they wanted her help. The anger felt by Mr Delacroix when she
gives him her number and tells him to call her (and not her call him, as he 
would have hoped and expected) is very palpable and well conveyed by 
Raymond J. Barry. 
When Sister Helen goes to visit the parents of the murdered girl, Clyde 
and Mary Beth Percy, they seem to accept her and welcome her presence. They
talk lovingly of their daughter and really open their hearts to Sister Helen. 
But in one of the most powerful moments of the film they thank Sister Helen 
for coming round to their side. This moment when Sister Helen realises that 
they have assumed that she is no longer helping Matthew and has instead
decided to help the relatives is very moving and takes Sister Helen by 
surprise and she is visibly shaken by what is happening. For me as a 
viewer I was left pretty shaken too, especially when Clyde (R. Lee Ermey) 
and Mary Beth Percy (Celia Weston) spell it out all too clearly when 
they tell her that she can't (in their opinion) be Matthew's friend and theirs
too. 
Early in the film, the lawyer that is helping Matthew, Hilton Barber 
(Robert Prosky), says that to get him off the death penalty they have 
to convince the authorities that they are dealing with a human being and 
not a monster. A monster being infinitely easier to execute than a 
three-dimensional human being. This is very true of the film as a whole, 
which through Tim Robbins' excellent script and brilliant acting by Sean 
Penn never leaves you in any doubt that whilst Matthew committed a terrible 
crime, he is still someone's brother and someone's son.  This is powerfully 
conveyed in the scene where Matthew spends some time with his mother and 
three brothers in the hours before his execution. We see Matthew 
colluding with his brothers in teasing their youngest brother into 
admitting that he broke off an all night camping expedition in their back
garden because he was scared by the sound of an animal he heard.  The love
between the whole family just shines off the screen.
The acting in this film is uniformly excellent, with Sarandon and Penn 
in particular giving the kind of exquisite performances that must make 
all other actors so proud to be in the same profession.  Whilst I thought 
Nicolas Cage was excellent in LEAVING LAS VEGAS, I feel Sean Penn gave the 
better performance and it would have been nice to see Sarandon
and Penn win both Best Actress and Best Actor at last weeks Oscars.
Special mention should also go to Roberta Maxwell who gave a fantastic 
performance as Matthew's mother and had such great dignity in the face of 
such a terrible trauma as losing your son to the death penalty.  
Raymond J. Barry was also terrific as the father of the murdered boy, 
especially in the scene where he described the sheer joy of his marriage to 
his wife who was now divorcing him due to the conflicts which arose
from the different ways they both grieved for their beloved son. 
DEAD MAN WALKING is a film which tackles the difficult topic of the death 
penalty and bravely decides to show both sides of the argument, and never 
downplays the suffering of the people left behind, both the parents of the 
murdered teenagers and the family of the executed murderer.
Review written by Vince Deehan on Sun 31 March 1996
(vince@deehan.demon.co.uk)

Author
Zak Forsman
"A film about looking into the heart of a killer and finding the soul of a
man." These were the words used to describe DEAD MAN WALKING in the
trailers and commercials that ran for the film. They're dead on, it's
exactly what this film is about. It is not about the death penalty or
right and wrong. It is about taking responsibility for your actions,
honestly.
Based on the book by Sister Helen Prejean, played by Susan Sarandon, DEAD
MAN WALKING is a film about her experiences with death row inmate Matthew
Poncelet. And at the same time that she is fighting to have his sentence
reviewed, she is meeting with him and trying to get him to understand what
he did. The film is about the process of working toward redemption.
The screenplay by Tim Robbins is first-rate. The dialogue between Sarandon
and Penn is smart and never dull. Their scene together just before Penn is
to be executed is one of the most moving experiences I have ever had in a
movie theater. The dialogue is fresh and quick. Ideas, thoughts and
subjects move quickly--they never drag--and much of this can be accredited
to the two actors' performances. There was only one line that I was
disappointed with. When Sean Penn is about to be executed, he expresses
tearful apologies to one of his victim's father. Just then, the father of
the other victim quips, "What about us," to his wife. This may be trite,
but it was distracting in an otherwise solid screenplay.
Tim Robbins also directed this film. He did a fantastic job capturing (and
never intruding on) Sarandon and Penn's scenes together. He also
introduced some interesting aspects with regard to his shots. For example,
there is a mesh-wire divider between the two actors much of the time.
Robbins used that to symbolize a character's emotional state by how much
the divider was obstructing the view of the actor's face. Much of the time
Sarandon's is out of focus, well beyond the camera's depth of field, her
face shown clearly. However, Sean Penn's wire-meshing is often as in focus
as his face is, blocking his face more and making him appear hidden or
closed off. Later, when the divider is changed to a clear plastic one,
Robbins makes use of the actor's reflections in each other's shots under
similar motivations.
If you have not seen this film, you are missing one of the greatest scenes
between two actors that have ever been filmed. These two deserved their
Oscar nominations and although only Susan won hers, they both deserved to.
Once Sean Penn began to cry, I was sold.
This film has been accused of being pretentious for presenting Sean Penn's
character as a Christ metaphor during the execution sequence because the
table he is on requires his arms be strapped down out to the sides in a
fashion similar to the crucified Jesus. Tim Robbins said that he was aware
that the scene could be taken that way, but he was more interested in the
fact that the table and equipment used were exact replicas of what was
being used for actual executions. The table actually is designed that way
and the only thing in that scene that they changed was how long it took to
kill him. In the film it takes two or three minutes, in reality it takes
about twenty. 
Ratings are based on the four-star system

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
WARNING:  Spoilers are contained to make a point in reviewing this film.
It's December 9, 1998.  A Canadian man named Stan Faulder is awaiting
execution by lethal injection tomorrow in the state of Texas, convicted
of a 1975 murder, and the circumstances leading up to the man's date
with death and the facts of his involvement in the crime remain somewhat
hazy.  Whether or not Faulder will die at the hands of capital
punishment remains uncertain.  As a Canadian citizen myself, I support
the use of capital punishment but only in absolutely certain cases where
the killers confess or where the criminal implicated is definitely
identified and his or her case is not circumstantial.  In any event,
their death means they will never kill again and the tax dollars needed
to support them in prison for thirty, forty or even fifty years could be
better spent on education, medicare, old age pensions and other worthy
social causes.
In 1995, Tim Robbins directed an absolutely brilliant film that was
fair, unbiased and left you wrestling with the moral dilemma of people
playing God (assuming you believe in God) in a world God gave us to run
as best we can.  Does that mean killing killers?  Perhaps.  Perhaps
not.  The film was 'Dead Man Walking' and it, along with 'The American
President' and 'Leaving Las Vegas' should have replaced the silly
choices of 'Babe', 'Il Postino (The Postman)' and 'Sense and
Sensibility' as some of the Best Picture Oscar nominees that year.
The film did win an Oscar for Susan Sarandon's heartfelt performance as
a nun who counsels a death row inmate (Sean Penn), sentenced to die in
Louisiana by lethal injection for the torture and murder of two
teenagers.  Fingers were pointed at Penn and another man but only Penn
got the death sentence while the other man got life.
Sean Penn is also extraordinary in this film.  He was Oscar nominated as
Best Actor and a strong case could have been made for him winning over
Nicolas Cage who scooped up the prize for 'Leaving Las Vegas'.  Based on
a novel by Sister Helen Prejean (whom Sarandon portrays in the film),
'Dead Man Walking' took the courageous step of examining the grief of
the victim's families.  Sarandon visits with the family of the murdered
girl and they believe that she is on their side in comforting them
through the pain of dealing with their child's death but when they find
out that she is counseling the death row inmate, they are enraged and
order her to leave their house.  The other murder victim's father is
more understanding but is still filled with hate and also objects to
Sarandon comforting the man about to die.  Sarandon also visits the
condemned man's family to get their response to the events about to take
place.
Tim Robbins made this film coming off an extraordinary performance in
the classic prison drama 'The Shawshank Redemption' in 1994 and turning
to another prison film within a year by examining a different subject
from a different point of view as a director rather than as an actor
shows Robbins' range on both fronts.
Elements of the convict's trial are exposed as unfair since he had a tax
lawyer defend him in court.  I have a lot of respect for Tim Robbins as
a director for showing both sides of the debate and letting the audience
make up their own minds.  He cross cuts footage of the execution at the
end of the film with footage of the crimes and uses the ghosts of the
murder victims to appear in the witness box at the time of execution.
Balanced with the expressions on the faces of the murder victims
families upon seeing a man executed and all done with a hauntingly
soulless musical interlude, 'Dead Man Walking' spells out one of
society's controversial topics that deserves as much consideration and
spotlight as any other important social issue.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Andrew Hicks
        The phrase "wholesome R-rated movie" is usually the 
ultimate oxymoron in Hollywood, but this time it applies. DEAD MAN 
WALKING is an intense human drama about two polar opposites--a 
convicted murderer on death row (Sean Penn) and a nun (Susan 
Sarandon). For once, a Christian movie character is portrayed in a 
good light. The nun is a dedicated, caring woman who helps Penn 
with his eternal struggles despite ostracism and rejection by her peers 
and, most importantly, the parents of the two teens Penn killed.
        Penn writes Sarandon a letter asking for her help and, having 
taken all those vows, she agrees. At first, he acts the part of a 
remorseless convict--refusing to admit he committed the crime, telling 
Sarandon she's lookin' mighty good about now (you'd have to be in 
prison for quite awhile to think that) and spouting off about the Aryan 
nation--but Sarandon's unconditional acceptance eventually gets to 
him and he changes his ways.
        Much of the movie deals with the various court appeals 
Sarandon is involved in on Penn's behalf. Of course, none of the courts 
anywhere along the line will overturn the death sentence ruling and, as 
the days to Penn's lethal injection execution get closer, he has to accept 
the fact that death is inevitable. By the time execution day rolls 
around, the audience has collectively been sucked into the movie and 
truly cares for Penn's character. If anything, DEAD MAN WALKING's 
purpose is to show how even murderers aren't beyond redemption.
        Like I said, there are strong Christian overtones in the movie, 
which was adapted by Tim Robbins (also the movie's director) from 
the autobiographical book written by the actual nun. You'd think ultra-
liberal Robbins and his live-in lover Sarandon, who hijacked the 
Oscars a few years ago to preach against General Electric, would 
produce a more secularized, New Age-ized story, but thankfully, they 
didn't. No matter your religious persuasion, you'll agree leaving the 
story in a Christian context is more powerful than if Sarandon had 
sermonized Mother Earth or the life force to Penn in the face of death.
        DEAD MAN WALKING has the distinction of being the 
movie that almost made me cry (and I was pushed over the brink once 
I learned the concession stand was out of Jujy-fruits). It really is an 
emotionally-charged film that successfully plays on all our human 
tendencies. It's an almost-perfect movie from the movie critic 
standpoint, the only flaw I noticed being Penn's absolutely awful 
coiffure and goatee, which mesmerized me during most of the movie, 
causing enough distractions that I missed the entire second act.
        Now that I think about it, we could have all done without the 
agonizing vocal score that accompanied most of the dramatic scenes. It 
sounded to me a few bushmen wailing in anguish at some sort of 
throbbing pain, perhaps brought on by dental surgery. It caused pain 
for me too. Music this bad should be a form of capital punishment in 
itself.
        The movie wouldn't have been watchable without the 
outstanding performances from Penn and Sarandon, who I'm sure will 
both be nominated along with Robbins at Oscar-time. I saw the movie 
about a month after its original release and the theater was still 
packed, which might have taken something away from my viewing 
experience, because when Penn's life was flashing before his eyes at 
the movie's climax, the person next to me's rank breath was flashing in 
front of my nose. Despite that factor, the goatee and the painful score, 
I still give this movie my wholehearted endorsement.
        I personally don't see why DEAD MAN WALKING has been 
given the R rating. Granted, the f-word is uttered once, but the PG-13-
rated THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT featured the word three times. 
And there's hardly any violence. Perhaps it earned the R rating for its 
inclusion of highly adult themes and overtones. Kids may not be able 
to handle the lengthy death scene at the end of the movie, but DEAD 
MAN WALKING has a strong message for all ages.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Gramercy)
Directed by    Tim Robbins
Written by     Tim Robbins, from the book by Sister Helen Prejean
Cast           Susan Sarandon, Sean Penn, Robert Prosky, Raymond J. Barry
MPAA Rating    "R" (presumably for language, violence, and rape)
Running Time   122 minutes
Reviewed at    Movies at Mt. Pleasant, Mt. Pleasant, SC (3FEB96)
     The set-up is deceptively simple in this much-acclaimed Southern
drama from writer/director Tim Robbins (BOB ROBERTS).  Susan Sarandon
plays a nun on a last-minute mission to save the soul of Sean Penn's
convicted murderer on death row.  It's a straight-forward set-up that
firmly holds our attention through the various preachy, predictable, and
downright tedious turns taken by the story.  The subtext is capital
punishment and Robbins-- adapting from Sister Helen Prejean's best
seller-- lays it on a bit thick.  To the director's credit, his
in-your-face exploration of the issue is (reasonably) balanced on both
sides of the argument.  He also keeps the theatrics to a considerable
minimum.  (The Christ allusions at the end do get a bit tiresome,
though.) Both Penn and Sarandon do impossibly good work here and will be
likely contenders at Oscar time.  Also worth noting is supporting actor
Robert Prosky, usually just another familiar face and who, for a change,
actually finds some flavor.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Rui Sadio
Since I remember, I can't find any movie so capable to obligue an 
audience to reflect about a certain subject, in such a powerful way as 
"Dead Man Walking" makes us to reflect about the death penalty question.
First of all, I have to say that this movie is, in my opinion, the best 
movie of 1995 and certainly one of those which I won't forget easily.
"Dead Man Walking" is based on the book with the same name by Sister 
Helen Prejean, a nun who has worked with condemneds to death for a long time.
Directed by Tim Robbins, one of my favourite actors, this film has also 
the brilliant and unforgetable performances of Sean Penn and Susan Sarandon.
Sean Penn is Matthew Poncelet, a condemned to death who receives 
spiritual help of Sister Helen Prejean, a role interpreted by Susan Sarandon,
in his last days of life.
Both artists are sensational in their performances and that happens 
because they don't act separately. I mean, the Sean Penn's interpretation 
"lives" from the Susan Sarandon's interpretation and vice versa. Is 
something like Jodie Foster and Anthony Hopkins in "The Silence of the 
Lambs". However, now the dialogues between the two principal characters 
are even more dramatic and emotional than those in the Jonathan Demme's 
film. That's why I think Susan Sarandon and Sean Penn should win the 
oscars of the Academy, this year. The most significant part of the 
movie's power is due to their work.
"Dead Man Walking" is too far of being an anti-deathpenalty movie. On the 
contrary, "Dead Man Walking" follows a guide-line which divides the two 
opposite opinions, becoming the frontier between those convictions.
There are times when we think that death penalty is a fair way to punish 
a person who has already destroyed the life of so many people. However, 
there are times when we start believing that a death can't pay another 
death. After all, if no one has the right to kill then we shouldn't apply 
the death penalty, or else we should be punished too.
Tim Robbins is the responsible for this revolution inside our minds. He 
manipulates us as he wants and he never discloses what is his position.
He makes us be sorry for the condemned but he makes us hate the condemned!
All the directing work is superb, including the beginning of the film, 
showing that Tim Robbins is more than an excellent actor. In fact, he is 
also an excellent director.
At last, a reference to the mysterious music that emphasizes the dark 
side of the film. Songs which are intimately connected with the 
characters and the movie environment. We can listen to Bruce Sprinsteen, 
Johnny Cash, Suzanne Vega, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, Eddie Vedder and many 
others. After seeing the movie is very important to listen to the 
soundtrack.
"Dead Man Walking" is one of those movies that everybody should see and 
reflect about. The death penalty question deserves that reflection.
About my position, I just say I'm happy for living in Portugal, one of 
the first countries to abolish that kind of punishment.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Release Date: 12/29/95 (NY, LA), 1/12/96 (limited)
Running Length: 2:02
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, violence, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Susan Sarandon, Sean Penn, Raymond J. Barry, R. Lee Ermey, 
      Roberta Maxwell, Robert Prosky
Director: Tim Robbins
Producers: Jon Kilik, Tim Robbins, and Rudd Simmons
Screenplay: Tim Robbins based on the nonfiction book by Sister Helen 
      Prejean
Cinematography: Roger A. Deakins
Music: David Robbins
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     Not since Krzysztof Kieslowski's A SHORT FILM ABOUT KILLING has a 
motion picture about capital punishment been so disturbing and 
compelling.  DEAD MAN WALKING has appropriated a controversial subject 
by giving pain and personality to both sides of the issue.  
Writer/director Tim Robbins (BOB ROBERTS) recognizes that there are no 
clear-cut answers, and, as a result, his script is never skewed or one-
sided.  
     As a film about capital punishment, DEAD MAN WALKING is effective, 
but the true brilliance of this picture is that it deals with so much 
more.  Touching such universal themes as revenge and redemption, crime 
and punishment, and fear and salvation, the movie explores the 
relationship between Matthew Poncelet (Sean Penn), a convicted 
rapist/murderer on death row, and his spiritual advisor, Sister Helen 
Prejean (Susan Sarandon).  The bond that develops between them is, 
paradoxically, both exceedingly complex and deceptively simple, and 
Robbins, with considerable help from his actors, captures it perfectly.  
DEAD MAN WALKING could easily be manipulative or exploitative, but it's 
neither.  Instead, this is hard-hitting drama that neither accepts nor 
offers quarter.
     Sean Penn, in a remarkable performance, brings Matthew to life.  
For his accomplishment here, Penn deserves consideration alongside 
Nicolas Cage and Jonathan Pryce for a Best Actor nomination.  There's 
never any doubt that Matthew was involved in the crime for which he is 
going to die, although he denies pulling the trigger.  And DEAD MAN 
WALKING doesn't attempt to portray him as a wrongly accused innocent man 
or someone misunderstood by society.  He's a nasty piece of work -- an 
arrogant, trash-talking racist.  But, beneath all the bluster, he's 
lonely and frightened, as Helen discovers when she starts to probe.
     Sarandon's Catholic nun is at the focal point of DEAD MAN WALKING -
- and it's a performance to match her co-star's for aptness and 
intensity.  Helen is the one we identify with, and the person around 
which all the moral and spiritual crises revolve.  How can she lend 
comfort to someone like Matthew Poncelet?  How can she, as a servant of 
God, refuse?  And, if she remains firm in her resolve to stand by his 
side, how can she face the parents of the murdered boy and girl?  DEAD 
MAN WALKING knows the right questions, but there are no easy answers, as 
Helen quickly discovers.  She is exposed to everyone's pain:  Matthew's 
("Sister, you're all I've got"), his family's, and that of the victims' 
relatives (looking for "simple justice for their unbearable loss").  
It's almost more than one woman can bear, but Helen is strong -- strong 
enough to offer love to one of the most detestable human beings she has 
ever met.  
     Ultimately, the questions come back to capital punishment.  They're 
all familiar.  Is Matthew going to be executed because he was too poor 
to hire a fat-cat lawyer ("Ain't nobody with money on death row")?  Is 
there a moral difference when the State kills as opposed to an 
individual?  Should justice be based on the "eye for an eye" edict or 
the one that says to "turn the other cheek"?  In his 1988 film, A SHORT 
FILM ABOUT KILLING, Kieslowski asked the same things in a much different 
manner.  Like Robbins, he arrived at certain conclusions, but -- also 
like Robbins -- he didn't force them on the audience.  There's no 
preaching in either film.  Only in subtle details does it becomes clear 
that neither director can condone the government taking a life.
     I defy anyone to sit unaffected through DEAD MAN WALKING.  This is 
as powerful as motion pictures get, yet, like all great films, it 
doesn't descend into a valley of spiritual gloom.  There are moments of 
comic relief, and, even if some of the humor is of the gallows variety, 
it keeps this two-hour odyssey from becoming unbearably intense.  
Although this is only his second directorial outing, actor-turned-film 
maker Robbins has clearly mastered his craft.  There's no sophomore jinx 
here.  
     DEAD MAN WALKING refers to what the people on death row are called 
as they take that final walk towards their execution.  It's ironic that 
a film with this title should be among the most vital, alive, and 
challenging cinema experiences of the year.  

Author
Michael J. Zwirn
I saw Dead Man Walking this past week at the Mall of America. This is
an adaptation of a book by Sister Helen Prejean of New Orleans,
relating her work with two death row inmates in Angola Prison in
Louisiana.
It's not hard to give away much of the plot for this story, simply because
there isn't much of one. That's not a criticism; this film is a fine
character portrayal that offers Susan Sarandon as Sister Helen and Sean
Penn as a condemned inmate the chance to develop strong and
three-dimensional subjects. The point isn't to develop a convoluted
plot but to create the human element of a painful and ambiguous true
story.
Superficially, this plot could be described as a prison drama with Penn
attempting to escape his imminent execution by whatever means possible
with Sister Helen's help. That would be misleading. Really, there's no
doubt that Penn is not only culpable, but a deeply flawed human being
who will not admit his own complicity but is quick to blame the faults
of others -- blacks, lawyers, police, his accomplice, anyone. As his
execution nears the inescapability of his situation becomes more clear,
Sister Helen's motivation changes from achieving a temporal reprieve
for Penn to helping him to achieve an eternal spiritual reconciliation with 
him soul and God. 
Particularly strong points in the film-making were the portrayal of
Sister Helen's developing friendship with Penn, through the bars or
windows of the prison (the two cannot touch one another until Penn is
on his way to the execution room), the acting of the supporting
characters representing the families of the murder victims, and the
soundtrack, which deserves special praise. Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan and
Eddie Vedder of all people duet on the haunting music during the
climactic final scene, during which the execution is quickcut with the
murders (which are seen only in flashback). Other artists on the score
include Springsteen, Suzanne Vega, Lyle Lovett and Michelle Shocked,
who is reemerging from an extended exile from recording.
There are some weak points in the story -- Would a murderer appealing
his death sentence really praise Hitler in a TV interview? And must we
be bombarded with images of the malliciousness and hypocrisy of the
government and the prison authorities, if the larger point of the movie
is to demonstrate the acceptance of personal responsibility for one's
actions? But this is a very strong movie which will certainly get Oscar
nominations for both Sean Penn and Susan Sarandon, and deservedly so.
It's the best work Penn has ever done and Sarandon is better than
usual. Especially praiseworthy in this film is the deliberate ambiguity
of the filmmakers on the volatile issue of the death penalty -- there
is no one-sided propagandizing on the question, and both the accused
and the victims' families make stng cases. Also notable is the
portrayal of a representative of the Church as a real human being
rather than a figurehead for a larger institution.
--
Michael J. Zwirn     zwirnm@carleton.edu    Carleton College   Northfield MN
Senior/International Relations Major/KRLX-FM Station Manager/Pop Music Freak
         http://public.carleton.edu/~zwirnm/index.html

Author
John Schuurman
     Sometimes, at the end of a film, watching the credits, hoping for
one of those surprises with which they sometimes reward you for staying
to the end, you have the sense that you'd like to stay even longer.
Fundamental things have roiled up in the last coupleof hours and you
know that setting your face towards the exit will somehow cause them to
subside. (It has happened before.) So you linger.
     That happened to me when I saw *Schindler's List* and when I
saw*The Black Robe* to name but a couple recent examples. Today, again,
as I sat and watched the credits of *Dead Man Walking* I tried to
retain somehow a bit of the essence of what this experience was.
     For me, it is more than having an encounter with a great piece of
cinematic art. High quality, of course, has to be there, but there are
many superb examples of the film maker's art available. Sometimes,
there is something more -- another dimension. Call it"close
encounters," call it "chemistry." I call it "beyond art" or something
very like it: "faith tested and proven."
     *Dead Man Walking* is ("inspired by" rather than based on) a book
by the same title written by Sister Helen Prejean, a progressive nun in
Louisiana. The movie concerns Sister Helen and her attempts to stop the
execution of Matthew Poncelet, a particularly vicious punk who along
with an accomplice, killed and raped a teenage girl along with her
boyfriend. I have seen some ads for the movie with an 'R' rating and
some with a 'PG-13.' There is no question that it ought to get the
former.
     Most critics have only laudatory things to say about *Dead
ManWalking*.  I join them. Common to the reviews is the marvel that the
well-known 'Hollywood Liberal' Tim Robbins was willing to simply be
honest in telling this anti-capital punishment story.It *is* no small
accomplishment, (one shudders to think what this movie would look like
if Kevin Costner had made it). The movie is full of integrity "that
way." There is no romanticizing of the killer or dismissing the crime,
(in frequent flashbacks the vicious act is shown without blinking). The
anguished parents of the killer's victims are not monstrous or even
unreasonable when they cry out for vengeance.  Even the sanctimonious
prison chaplain is human.
     And, making this film really unique is it's departure from the
conventions of current film making in that people of faith and their
beliefs are respected throughout. In fact there are no easy stereotypes
-- humans and our ambiguous situations all around.Therein lies the
film's power.
     But what is especially worthy of comment is the path of redemption
the movie shows us. When Sister Helen (Susan Sarandon)agrees to serve
as the condemned's (Sean Penn) spiritual counselor during his last
days, the chaplain of the prison tries to dissuade her from a task for
which he judges her too soft. Hereminds her that sympathy and her
compassionate nature have no place among the condemned. What is needed
to usher him into paradise is having the sacrament administered in his
last hour. Sister Helen sees redemption made of more sturdy stuff:
confession and forgiveness. As the clock moves relentlessly towards the
midnight hour, the condemned, prompted by her stubborn love, finally
owns up to what he has done. His shell of victim-hood cracks and we
believe her when she calls him a childof God.
     Most powerful scene: Sister Helen's anguished prayer in the
bathroom just before he dies. Desperate for strength so that she can be
strong for him, she storms heaven and receives strength.
     The film clearly has its anti-capital punishment bias, "Kill'n 's
wrong, no matter who's do'n it." We do shudder at the cool procedure
with which the state processes the condemned.
     But then this: We see that it is the urgency of the looming hour
of death that both brings the killer's confession to the surface *and*
has Sister Helen so constantly at his side in the firstplace. It is
fair to wonder out loud: Is it the state and it'skilling of the killer
that is the needed catalytic agent to restore Biblical peace?  Integral
to the Biblical view of shalom or peace is balance. When injustice is
perpetrated, a correctivemust be applied, (most often in kind).
For more reviews by John Schuurman
http://www.mcs.com/%7Esjvogel/wcrc/movies.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I like a film that gives me questions rather than answers.  I like
a film that can show conflict without making one side the villain.  I
like a film that fairly shows two or more sides of an issue without
telling me which side I should choose.  There were two films like that
this year, curiously both about dedicated but independent-minded
members of the Catholic clergy who come into conflict with their
communities.  The earlier one was Antonia Bird's PRIEST and now comes a
film that is in some ways similar, Tim Robbins's DEAD MAN WALKING.  The
newer film is based on Sister Helen Prejean's 1993 book of the same
title, an account of her relationship with a Death Row inmate.
     Sister Helen (played by Susan Sarandon) is a nun who lives among
the poor of the St. Thomas Housing Project of New Orleans doing her
view of good.  Her order does not wear the habit in spite of occasional
disapproval and pressure from other members of the Catholic clergy.
Sister Helen receives a request from death row inmate Matthew Poncelet
(Sean Penn) to help him submit an appeal of his death sentence.
Poncelet was convicted of the murders of a dating couple committed
while he was under the influence of drugs and alcohol.  While taking a
dislike to the man's bigoted views, Sister Helen offers him help.  When
his execution date is actually scheduled, she agrees to be his
spiritual advisor and becomes the first woman ever to take on that role
in the prison.  But her support of Poncelet brings her into conflict
with the parents of the victims of the crime.  Sister Helen determines
to visit them, to try to offer them solace, and to try to understand
their point of view.  Only then does she get an understanding for the
degree of the damage that the crime has done.
     Sister Helen finds herself embroiled in more controversy.  To the
Catholic chaplain of the prison, her mission is to convince Poncelet to
take the holy sacraments.  She is startled to realize that this is what
the chaplain means when he talks about saving Poncelet and that her
definition of saving him is quite different.  The film has Sister Helen
follow the proceedings until they are resolved.  Her efforts to help
the racist are detested by the victims' parents and by the community.
     Tim Robbins, who scripted as well as directed, has captured many
different viewpoints in the film, an approach much more common in
documentaries than in narrative films.  He shows the effect the planned
execution has on the family of the of the inmate and the effect of the
crime on the families of the victims.  He shows the Church's
perspective and that of the community.  Occasionally there are little
digs at one point of view or another, but they are far more mild than
one would expect from the creator of the film BOB ROBERTS.  In the end
perhaps the strongest opinion he expresses is that capital punishment
does little to help the people who have been most hurt by the crime.
     Susan Sarandon is a good actor though not one of what I would
consider to be our first rank of powerful actors.  She does, however,
choose her roles carefully and wisely and then contributes a lot to the
films in which she is cast.  She has Orson Welles's ability to lend
respectability to a film just by being in it.  This role was not a real
stretch for her or for Sean Penn, but both play their roles with
genuine authenticity.  The real surprise is Raymond J. Barry as the
murdered boy's father who gives the most moving performance of the
film.  R. Lee Ermey, as the woman victim's father, can add one more
insensitive, angry male to his portfolio.  It is a part that he plays
well, but too often.  You may remember him yelling his way through the
first sequence of FULL METAL JACKET.  He played almost the same role in
the TV series "Space: Above and Beyond," as well as voicing the leader
of the little green soldiers in TOY STORY.  A few other cameos are
present, including Clancy Brown as a traffic cop who seems in the film
only to deliver one joke.
     DEAD MAN WALKING is a provocative, well-made film on a
surprisingly intelligent level.  Rate it high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Christopher Null
     A progressive nun living in the confines of rural Louisiana, and a
racist convicted murderer, waiting on death row.  The cast of next year's
hottest new sitcom?  No!  They're the leads of DEAD MAN WALKING, a somber
"inspired by true events" docudrama wherein the nun, Sister Helen Prejean
(Susan Sarandon), becomes the spiritual guide and confidant of the
criminal, Matthew Poncelet (Sean Penn).
     Poncelet (a hybridized, fictional character), along with a friend,
raped and murdered a teenage girl along with her boyfriend back in 1988. 
Poncelet was convicted and sentenced to death.  His execution rapidly
approaching, Poncelet struck out to find anyone who could help him file
his appeals and requests for pardon hearings.  Enter Helen Prejean and the
beginning of DEAD MAN WALKING.
     As Helen helps Poncelet through the legal circus, she tries to get
him to confess his sins and admit his guilt.  Poncelet forcefully refuses,
and Helen quickly finds herself as hated by the public as Poncelet is. 
Interacting with the slain teens' families takes her into their world,
filled with remorse and seething with anger.  And all the while,
Poncelet's execution looms closer and closer.
     Tim Robbins wrote and directed DEAD MAN WALKING, based on Helen's own
book of the same name.  While the film is flawed (it starts off slow, it's
talky and repetitive, and Robbins really isn't much of a director), it
really starts to grow on you as the relationship between Helen and
Poncelet becomes curiouser and curiouser.  At first, Poncelet appears to
be nothing more than a common hood, who isn't worth saving at all and who
evokes no sympathy.  But Helen takes this man and crafts him into
something that, while not quite "good," is genuinely remorseful and,
maybe, worthy of redemption .  By the end of the picture, the movie comes
together quite nicely.
     Sarandon and Penn are to be commended for their fine performances,
but the story itself is the real star, showing us the harrowing reality of
the execution process and the raw anger that it creates.  It probably
isn't for everyone, but DEAD MAN WALKING is a tale that needs to be heard
and that will likely provide material for hours of philosophical debate.
     And what's more fitting for the holidays than a good execution movie,
anyway?
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Edwin Jahiel
In "Sullivan's Travels," (1941), a masterpiece by Preston 
Sturges, a Hollywood director played by Joel McCrea suddenly 
gets the urge to stop making his usual lightweight 
entertainment movies and do instead something with social 
significance. Disguised as a hobo, he enters the world of 
have-nots, sees their life . . . and changes his mind. As life 
is no bed of roses, making escapist movies gives to the 
unfortunate, including prisoners, a few minutes or hours when 
troubles are forgotten.
I used to be a bit intolerant of the many moviegoers who 
looked first and foremost for film entertainment. Later I came 
to appreciate Joel McCrea's discovery. Applied to "Dead Man 
Walking" it means that this somber, serious movie cannot be 
everyone's cup of tea - but for others it ought to rank among 
the better productions of recent months.
The film adapts the real-life experiences of a nun, with some 
liberties, notably the character played by Sean Penn who now 
is a composite figure. Susan Sarandon, director Robbins's 
companion, plays Sister Helen Prejean who, coming from a 
rather high stratum of society, dedicates herself to good 
deeds. In New Orleans, she works among those who are poor and 
need of spiritual, material, psychological help -- and, above 
all, warmth. 
When Matthew Poncelet(Penn) writes her from the Death Row of 
his Louisiana prison, she pays him a visit. Poncelet and a 
friend, high on drugs and booze, had killed a young couple in 
a Lovers' Lane, after raping the girl. Poncelet was condemned 
to death, his companion to life. 
For years, Poncelet's execution was postponed while the man 
boned up on law books. He claims that he was only a bystander 
at the rape-killing. That's what he tells Sister Helen at 
their initial meeting, one of several.
That first interview is masterfully constructed, from the 
entrance of Sister Helen into the prison through her 
departure. Sarandon does not wear a nun's habit but street 
clothes, which make the prison's chaplain raise his eyebrows. 
I must stress that throughout, the film avoids Hollywoodisms 
fully yet not pointedly. Sarandon is never made sexy, though 
she could be, even at age 50.  Her make-up is a mere touch of 
lipstick. Her clothes are discreet. She is neither colorful, 
preachy or a do-gooder. 
Wasting no time, the Sister and the audience begin to see the 
mechanical, almost clinical procedures of the penitentiary, a 
series of standard operating procedures that follow one 
routine after another. They are dehumanizing. They are also 
necessary. So, enter the first batch of ambiguities that 
pervade the movie. Susan Sarandon handles her part with total 
credibility, her constant unease with ease. 
In the interview, Sarandon and Penn are on either side of a 
wire partition. Master cinematographer Roger Deakins gives it 
a look unlike that of other prison movies by keeping before 
our eyes both the faces and the wires of Penn's cage.
Penn seems to plays Poncelet as if to the role born 
--effortlessly, naturally,  as the embodiment of a low-lifer 
who'd rather be a lifer than a corpse. With his noticeable 
hair-do and eye-catching, pointed goatee, he is like 
Mephistopheles. Chained and chain-smoking, Poncelet can be 
defiant, surly, nervous, self-pitying, all at the same time.
Sister Helen, an ideal listener, leaves the prison determined 
to help Poncelet beat the death sentence. Does she believe 
him? Dopes she believe "in" him? Is it Christian charity? The 
belief in repentance and salvation? The "thou shall not kill" 
principle that goes against capital punishment, no matter what 
the crime?  Ambiguities pile up.
The nun enlists the help of lawyer Robert Prosky, a great 
actor who can play roles from sinister to sweet with equal 
conviction. We also see her in contact with her own family and 
those of the victims, both sets disapproving her efforts--in 
further ambiguous, even disturbing ways (note the performance 
by  Raymond J. Barry, the father of the slain girl).  
Poncelet's mother and brothers, at first suspicious, never 
become overtly grateful to Sister Helen, lachrymose or 
sentimentalized. Nor does Sean Penn in the increasingly 
complex rapport between the nun and the convict.
Relentlessly, realistically, the film proceeds to its bitter 
end, its grimness relieved by a major distraction, that of the 
questions raised for and by the film's people and the 
audience. There is a solitary humorous moment. Lost in her 
thoughts, Sister Helen speeds, is stopped by a cop. Seeing in 
her papers that she's a nun he becomes wary, tells her how he 
had ticketed an IRS man and gotten his (the cop's) tax return 
audited the following year.
"Dead Man Walking" is what the guards shout on the way to the 
execution chamber. By then, Poncelet has changed, in 
appearance, somewhat, in his heart ... who knows? There is a 
mea maxima culpa but, in another ambiguity, is this a 
redeemed, saved soul or (by necessity) an invalid 
transformation? And to what extent does the movie speak 
against capital punishment? I checked with a number of 
viewers. Some thought that this was a total indictment of 
state-sanctioned killing. Others were puzzled. One person, a 
liberal, not a conservative, took the position that between 
the living hell of life without parole, and death, execution 
was kinder and saved a great deal of public funds.  
The total anti-capital punishment position is far clearer in a 
major ancestor of this movie, "We Are All Murderers," (France, 
1952) by former lawyer Andre Cayatte. And the moral/ 
theological stance is clear in another French film,  "A 
Condemned Man Escaped," (1956), about a member of the French 
Resistance, jailed and condemned by the occupying Nazis. The 
great, Catholic, ascetic director Robert Bresson concludes his 
film with "All is Grace." The salvation of body and soul are 
stated in an immensely moving way. 
"Dead Man Walking" does have some flaws. When will filmmakers 
learn that superimposing opening credits on action and 
dialogue makes the audience miss parts of both? Why are there 
so many graphic flashbacks to the earlier crime?  As a 
counterweight to any pity we might feel for Poncelet this is 
unnecessary. What is accomplished by the painful, detailed, 
protracted description of an execution by lethal injection? 
No matter. " Dead Man" is strong and hard. Whatever its 
message about capital punishment, the familiar quote from John 
Donne is unarguably at the heart of the film: "No man is an 
island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the 
continent, a part of the main [...] therefore never send to 
know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee." 
CREDITS: Written and directed by Tim Robbins from the book by 
Sister Helen Prejean, C.S.J.  Produced by Jon Kilik, Robbins, 
Rudd Simmons. Photography, Roger A. Deakins. Editing, Lisa 
Zeno Churgin. Production design,  Richard Hoover. Music, David 
Robbins. Cast: Susan Sarandon (Sister Helen Prejean), Sean 
Penn (Matthew Poncelet), Robert Prosky (Hilton Barber), 
Raymond J. Barry (Earl Delacroix) and R. Lee Ermey (Clyde 
Percy). A Gramercy release. 120 minutes. Rated R (language, 
scenes of rape, murder and execution)
