Title
Review for Almost Famous (2000)
Number of Reviews
24

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/4b7b7d09beeaed148825695a004f6b0b?OpenDocument
When you enter into the world of entertainment journalism, you think
it's the coolest thing in the world.  Suddenly, doors are opened for
you.  You can get into movies free, or get books free, or get music
free.  You can meet directors or movie stars, see rock gods face to
face, and get to ask Kurt Vonnegut that question that has burned in your
gut for years.  For some odd reason, people call you names.  They call
you evil and the enemy, but you really don't care.  You just are
thrilled to be there, be part of this intangible "it" known as
celebrity.
Eventually, you have to choose between telling the truth and being nice.
You have to choose between playing the PR game and making a friend.  And
if you're like just about anyone else out there, this probably is the
first moral stance that you've ever really had to take.
Of course it doesn't help that you're functioning in an adult world, and
this is your experience of growing up.  It doesn't help if you lived
your life smarter than those that surrounded you only to find out that
when you come into your new world you are still an outcast.
And it doesn't help when you are presented with a true journalistic
challenge like Almost Famous, a movie that throws down the gauntlet at
press and asks it not necessarily to review it badly but to be honest. 
To try to have that ideal that we all remember with fondness and
longing to be objective.
In Almost Famous, William Miller (Patrick Fugit) is just a kid who wants
to be cool.  He's been skipped ahead two grades and entered first grade
a year early.  His mother is an eccentric college professor that
celebrates Christmas in September so it won't be commercialized.  And
his sister ran away to a tune of Simon and Garfunkel when he was 11.
In 1973, he meets up with the infamous rock critic Lester Bangs (Philip
Seymour Hoffman) who both warns him about going into the profession of
entertainment journalism and also assigns him to cover a Black Sabbath
concert for $35.  This quickly leads backstage with the (fictitious)
band Stillwater, because Miller is fan enough to be admitted into their
world.  The Black Sabbath article leads to a Rolling Stone assignment:
cover Stillwater's tour, where William must learn to enjoy life, make
the right moral choices, keep on the goods with his mom, save a girl
from a drug overdose here and there, and still try to be back in time
for graduation.
It's such a positivist message that if the movie weren't so damn good
I'd puke.
As a director, Crowe has done his job perfectly.  He has crafted a film
that is mutually entertaining to outsiders of the industry and insiders,
nostalgic without being patronizing, humorous, slick looking, and well
acted.  He has directed newcomer Patrick Fugit to an incredible debut
while providing solid material for Fugit to build upon.
As a writer, Crowe falters slightly.  Although Almost Famous works
incredibly well as a drama, its comic attempts tend to be more
contrived.  Certain scenes, such as one where the Stillwater is about to
crash in a plane, end up completely contrived to the point where my
rating dropped half a star because of it.  Yet the most curious part of
the film is not that Crowe has made minor flaws, but that he openly says
that he is ready to take flack for his flaws.
You see, towards the end of the movie Crowe makes a point of saying to
William (and, indirectly, to the press watching the movie), "Write what
you want."  He is effectively letting us off the hook, and placing
himself in the position to be criticized.  For that I both respect him
and Almost Famous all the more.
But as previously stated, Almost Famous does have its flaws.  Biopic or
spin pic, Almost Famous comes off as oftentimes a contrived comedy
injected like bad heroin into an otherwise thoughtful drama, and it
almost overdoses on this clichéd comedy more than a few times.  It's as
if Crowe challenges us to think, and then tells our brains to shut the
hell up as we watch Fairuza Balk slam headfirst into a concrete barrier
(and then ironically turn up on the bus the next day without a
scratch).  And while this blend of brain candy and food for thought
might be fine for most people, I'd rather Crowe had chosen one path or
the other, instead of having one that ends up striking the audience as
useless and unfunny.
It would have been great if Crowe focused more on the dynamic among
Penny Lane (Kate Hudson), Russell Hammond (Billy Crudup), and William,
instead of wasting time listening to Jason Lee do his best Chasing Amy
impression (ironically, there is a sort of homoerotic suggestion towards
the end a la the infamous scene in Chasing Amy), instead of giving us
more images about the funny stories of Rock 'n' Roll.  We've seen
rockumentaries before, gotten the scoop anecdotes, and heard all of the
stories about The Who time and again.  Almost Famous's pulling rock
stories out of its hat (or some other orifice) is akin to that kid
spoutning the annoying weight-of-the-human-brain statistic in Crowe's
last movie, Jerry Maguire.  Save us.
Still, Almost Famous is worth a watch.  You will either find it as drama
with comedic detritus or comedy with dramatic detritus, but will
probably come away smiling whichever way you look at it, and you will
probably gloss over the flaws in a matter of weeks, days, or even hours.
Director: Cameron Crowe
Producer: Ian Bryce, Cameron Crowe
Writer: Cameron Crowe 
Starring: Billy Crudup, Frances McDormand, Kate Hudson, Jason Lee,
Patrick Fugit, Anna Paquin, Fairuza Balk, Noah Taylor, Philip Seymour
Hoffman
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Cameron Crowe from his screenplay. Starring Patrick Fugit,
Kate Hudson, Billy Crudup. Running time: 126 minutes. Rated AA for coarse
language by the MFCB. Reviewed on October 9th, 2000.
"Almost Famous" is the sort of movie that really shouldn't work as well as
it does. The coming-of-age film is as overused a genre as any, seeming
pretty much tapped out. But "Almost Famous" does work, splendidly.
Writer/director Cameron Crowe has fashioned a semi-autobiographical piece
which, although adhering broadly to the expectations of the genre, has a
genuine, honest quality to it far outstripping its usual coyness and
artificiality.
Certainly, the closeness of Crowe to his subject matter is important to
the success of the film. Like William Miller in "Almost Famous", Crowe was
a teenaged reporter for music trade paper "Rolling Stone" in the 1970s. It
is not hard to imagine that he found himself in situations similar to many
of those depicted in "Almost Famous". While there has no doubt been some
manipulation for dramatic effect, Crowe has managed keep things
authentic. As a result, instead of a young character drifting through
clumsily-staged set pieces, "Almost Famous" features a young character on 
a believable journey. He is transformed and matured not in great bounds
but subtly and gently, almost without our realising it.
William (Patrick Fugit) is a preternaturally intelligent fifteen year-old.
William's university professor mother, Elaine (Frances McDormand),
struggles to nurture her son while protecting him from the vagaries of the
world. Her efforts have already driven away William's older sister Anita
(Zooey Deschanel), the last straw being Elaine's condemnation of rock and
roll (grabbing a Simon and Garfunkel album, she points at their eyes and
intones, "Pot"). Anita, though, leaves behind her record collection for
William, and this leads to his burgeoning interest in the rock scene and a
meeting with famed critic Lester Bangs (played by Philip Seymour Hoffman;
Bangs is a real person, one of several actual industry figures populating
the movie).
Bangs' encouragement of William's writing leads to a commission from
"Rolling Stone" editor Ben Fong-Torres, ignorant of William's age. With
Elaine's grudging permission, William goes on tour with up-and-coming band
Stillwater. Originally intending to spend only a few days with the group,
William soon finds himself going cross-country in pursuit of his story.
Along the way, he cultivates relationships with a number of unusual
people, including Stillwater guitarist Russell Hammond (Billy Crudup) and
an elusive follower, Penny Lane (Kate Hudson).
The crowning glory of Crowe's script is his characters. There is not a
throwaway role to be found; every individual is well considered and the
casting is universally inspired. Newcomer Fugit is a real find. William
could easily have come across as a pencil-necked geek or a precocious
naif, but Fugit hits all the right notes in all the right measures. His
William is unusually talented and uncommonly sheltered, but that selfsame
intelligence breeds adaptability. William is sensible enough to recognise
the cutthroat nature of the music scene: to Stillwater he is "the Enemy",
and while the band occasionally forgets that, William does not. He is an
innocent, but he is by no means stupid.
Also terrific is Hudson as Penny, William's tour guide of sorts in his
odyssey. Penny Lane, we learn from the end credits, was inspired by a real
person, but she seems as much derived from Elton John's "Tiny Dancer" --
"pretty-eyed, pirate smile". (It is probably no mere coincidence that this
song plays during one of the movie's more cathartic moments.) Penny is an
enigma, but a mostly benevolent one, and Hudson clearly delights in her
complex mannerisms and motivations.
Crudup is well-cast as Russell, and plays particularly well off Fugit and 
Jason Lee, who portrays bandmate Jeff Bebe. Russell is a musician
ill-prepared for fame, and consequently he seems sometimes arrogant,
sometimes carefree, sometimes self-destructive, sometimes simply lost.
Bebe, Stillwater's front man, accuses him of trying to usurp his authority
(Russell is supposed to be "the guitarist with mystique") but this not
entirely intentional on Russell's part. He is as much finding his way as
William -- and perhaps more so, because William can at least avoid the
limelight.
Finally, McDormand does a terrific job as the put-upon Elaine, struggling
with her dual responsibilities of encouraging William's interests while
shielding him from harm. Having already lost one child, Elaine abhors the
thought of repeating her mistakes, but at the same time is unwilling to
simply throw William to the wolves. Her inner conflict is in some ways the
movie's most absorbing.
Crowe has also assembled an excellent supporting cast, including Hoffman
as William's mentor (obviously having fun with his words of wisdom -- his
musings on the role of the critic and the reason why he's always home when
William calls are hilarious, but still ring true), Deschanel as the
rebellious Anita, and Fairuza Balk and Anna Paquin in small roles as
Penny's fellow "Band Aides".
Crowe's pacing is terrific, giving exposure to not only William's 
experiences but also the crises facing Elaine, Russell, Penny and others.
Not unexpectedly, Crowe has assembled an enjoyable soundtrack of Seventies
music (plus some Stillwater "originals") but this does not interfere with
the movie; it sits in the background for the most part, adding to the
ambiance.
Indeed, Crowe's only misstep is a clunky scene set on an airplane.
Intended to spark emotional climaxes between many of the characters, it
feels intrusive -- all the more so because the rest of the film is so
wonderfully un-stagy. This may have been intended as a parody of the many
aviation incidents which pepper rock history (certainly, there is a sharp
strain of satire running through "Almost Famous") but it is too
heavy-handed at such a critical juncture of the story. Even a bit of
levity at the end feels awkward.
Even this miscue cannot detract from the movie as a whole, however.
Wonderfully written and acted, "Almost Famous" is an incredibly 
entertaining and moving film, the sort of moviegoing experience which is
to be treasured long after the house lights go up. This is the best movie
of 2000 so far.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/AlmostFamous.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Jerry Saravia
Cameron Crowe is the Stanley Kubrick of rock n' roll cinema. Here is a man 
who takes his time to develop his stories before unveiling them to the 
public. Consider "Say Anything" in 1989, followed by "Singles" (his best 
film) in 1992, to the classic Tom Cruise comedy-drama "Jerry Maguire" in 
1996. Four years later, Crowe has created his most personal film by far, and 
certainly one of his most insightful. "Almost Famous" is an autobiographical 
look at an ambitious reporter who loves rock n' roll music, and decides to 
interview a reluctant band. The only catch is that the reporter is 15 years 
old!
Newcomer Patrick Fugit plays overachiever William Miller (based on Crowe's 
own days as a teen reporter), who lands an unusual assigment - Rolling Stone 
has asked him to cover a story on the up-and-coming fictional band 
Stillwater. Apparently, Rolling Stone is astounded by his in-depth story of 
the band in the magazine "Creem." Low and behold, the youthful, naive William 
now travels with Stillwater, on the road across the United States. He stays 
in hotels, loses his virginity to a few groupies, develops a crush on Penny 
Lane (Kate Hudson), a groupie who is in love with the band's lead guitarist, 
Russell (Billy Crudup), and in short soaks up their grungy atmosphere while 
trying to record their thoughts on fame and their band's future on tape. As 
Penny grows charmed by the young man, she lets him know that he is "too sweet 
for rock n' roll." And so he is, to the point where William is continuously 
called by his overprotective mother, a college professor (Frances McDormand), 
who warns him "Don't do drugs." 
There are many people that dominate William's life. The most significant is 
Russell, whom he develops a strong friendship with based on mutual respect. 
Penny is an even stronger friend who helps to get William laid, but she is so 
obsessed over her relationship with Russell that she forgets he may not love 
her. There is also the "uncool" rock journalist Lester Bangs (Philip Seymour 
Hoffman), who warns William that rock music's genesis, the need to lose 
control, is losing its potency and to be wary of rock musicians who will only 
use him to get a nice cover story. The last thing a band needs is negative 
press. 
"Almost Famous" floats by on Patrick Fugit's charm and elfish eyes - he has 
the sympathetic ooze and trustworthiness of Tobey Maguire. He is so enamored 
by this band that he is willing to take risks along with them. This also 
means that William has to abandon his school career and pending graduation. 
But who cares when you have sex, drugs and rock n' roll! Fugit is so damn 
lovable and likable that it is impossible to hate the film for having such a 
warm, fuzzy character at its center. 
Also worth mentioning is the up-and-coming actor Billy Crudup ("Jesus's Son") 
who shows a tempermental nature in Russell, particularly at a party where he 
does acid and begins to badger the kid.  Russell is also changed by William, 
and realizes his mistakes in his affairs. Kate Hudson, Goldie Hawn's 
daughter, is also quite good as the emotionally fraught Penny, affected by 
William's puppy-dog eyes and sweetness - her near-overdose scene is also 
effective as William tries to get help and admits his love for her. Philip 
Seymour Hoffman is delightfully witty and on-target as Lester Bangs - he has 
the best one-liners in the film and should get a deserved Best Supporting 
Actor nomination. Frances McDormand offers fine support as William's mother 
who has a disdain for rock music on purely immoral grounds. Also memorable 
are Jason Lee as the group's loud lead singer who considers William the 
"enemy", and Fairuza Balk and Anna Paquin as groupies who are there for the 
music. 
I could have lived without the tumultuous scene in a plane where everyone 
feels the need to confess to their sins or the far too tidy final scene, and 
yet there is nothing in "Almost Famous" that does not work. Every scene feels 
honest and truthful, and Cameron Crowe's gift is in keeping the camera static 
and observational. He has a gift for colorful dialogue and situations, and 
for bringing the appropriate mix of pathos and realism from his actors. My 
favorite scene is when the band is on a bus tour and they sing-along to Elton 
John's "Tiny Dancer." A scene like that might have been laughable or 
contrived under lesser hands, but Crowe manages to find a family connection 
between the members of the band and it pays off with poignance. Maybe someone 
like Paul Thomas Anderson might have shown the grittier, soulless side of the 
70's rock music era whereas Crowe's affection for his characters and his own 
tumultuous, personal connection to them does not allow for it. By refusing to 
be sentimental, Crowe has made o
ne of the livelier, soulful films about the 1970's that I've seen in quite a 
long time.   
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
Written and Directed by Cameron Crowe
     If you remember '70s rock, you'll swear you remember the band 
Stillwater and its Rolling Stone cover.  You may even have their album 
somewhere in your stack of yellowing, tape-patched LP jackets.  That's 
how real Cameron Crowe ("Jerry Maguire") makes the universe of his 
semi-autobiographical movie, "Almost Famous", with its improbable story 
of a 15-year-old rock critic touring with the band and writing a cover 
story for the 'zine of record of the record scene. 
     Improbable, but true.  Crowe was a teenage writer for Rolling 
Stone, he did tour with bands like Led Zeppelin and the Allman Brothers, 
and the stories and situations with which he packs this tender, 
romantic, and exhilarating love letter to a bygone era are drawn from 
life. 
     William Miller (Patrick Fugit) is young, younger even than he 
knows: his mother (Frances McDormand) has lied to him about his age as 
she pushes him forward in school.  An English professor of fierce 
intelligence and discipline, she won't even let rock records in the 
house ("Look," she says, confiscating a Simon & Garfunkel album from his 
older sister and pointing to their eyes on the cover.  "Drugs!")  But 
when his sister (Zooey Deschanel) runs away to become a stewardess, she 
leaves him her contraband cache of albums.  Leafing through the 
forbidden jackets, he discovers a minefield of exotic temptation.  He's 
sucked through the looking glass into the siren world of rock.
     His break comes when he meets the (real life) legendary rock critic 
Lester Bangs (Philip Seymour Hoffman), who fills his ear with sage 
advice ("Don't become close to them.  These people are not your friends. 
 Friendship is the booze they feed you") and hires him to write a 
concert review.  There he meets the lovely Penny Lane (Kate Hudson), a 
groupie who rejects that nomenclature ("We're Band Aides.  We inspire 
the music.")  He also meets Stillwater, with its charismatic guitarist 
(Billy Crudup) and lead singer (Jason Lee), and makes enough of an 
impression that they invite him to tag along to L.A.
     The story line of "Almost Famous" is neither complex or important.  
It's a coming-of-age story, a loss-of-innocence story, an end-of-an-era 
story ("You're coming along at a dangerous time for rock 'n roll," Bangs 
tells William.  "The war's over and they [commercialism] have won.")  
But Crowe's unerring feel for the personalities and the moments make 
this movie soar.  There is a scene on the bus of Stillwater's "Almost 
Famous" tour which begins with the group sullenly isolated from each 
other following an ego-fueled dust-up.  Elton John's "Tiny Dancer" is 
playing, and gradually, almost reluctantly, they all begin tapping, 
humming, and finally singing joyfully along.  It's a paean to the 
healing power of music.
     There are a few minor potholes.  A confessional scene in a plane in 
a storm serves its purpose but feels a bit forced, ditto a scene in 
Rolling Stone's office trashing William's story.  A few lines smack of 
"I couldn't resist" - a reference to Mick Jagger at 50, and a ponderous 
coy line about the early days of faxing.  But most of it is perfect 
pitch.  One of the best moments has McDormand on the phone with Crudup, 
admonishing him to take good care of her baby, and wiping the rock star 
smirk off his face. 
     Fugit's debut balances innocence and savvy, and grows in maturity 
across the film's arc.  Hudson is luminous as the not quite invulnerable 
groupie, and she captures a couple of the film's most indelible scenes.  
In a performance that should catapult him out of the "If we can't get 
Brad Pitt" category, Crudup radiates sex appeal, self-confidence, and 
self-doubt, and Jason Lee does a deft mix of rock star charisma and 
neurosis.  All the cast is outstanding, from the overqualified 
Band-Aides (Anna Paquin and Fairuza Balk) to the look-alikes playing 
Rolling Stone editors Ben Fong-Torres and Jann Wenner.  Best of all are 
the flexibly puritanical McDormand and the hiply uncool Hoffman in 
terrific supporting roles that merit Oscar recognition. 
     "Almost Famous" is about what's real and what isn't, about love and 
friendship and hero-worship, about the loneliness common to cool and 
uncool, about the transitoriness of style and the staying power of 
intelligence.  Cameron Crowe combines them all in a movie that really 
rocks.

Author
Faust667@aol.com
Cameron Crowe is the Stanley Kubrick of rock n' roll cinema. Here is a man who takes his time to develop his stories before unveiling them to the public. Consider "Say Anything" in 1989, followed by "Singles" (his best film) in 1992, to the classic Tom Cruise comedy-drama "Jerry Maguire" in 1996. Four years later, Crowe has created his most personal film by far, and certainly one of his most insightful. "Almost Famous" is an autobiographical look at an ambitious reporter who loves rock n' roll music, and decides to interview a reluctant band. The only catch is that the reporter is 15 years old!
Newcomer Patrick Fugit plays overachiever William Miller (based on Crowe's own days as a teen reporter), who lands an unusual assigment - Rolling Stone has asked him to cover a story on the up-and-coming fictional band Stillwater. Apparently, Rolling Stone is astounded by his in-depth story of the band in the magazine "Creem." Low and behold, the youthful, naive William now travels with Stillwater, on the road across the United States. He stays in hotels, loses his virginity to a few groupies, develops a crush on Penny Lane (Kate Hudson), a groupie who is in love with the band's lead guitarist, Russell (Billy Crudup), and in short soaks up their grungy atmosphere while trying to record their thoughts on fame and their band's future on tape. As Penny grows charmed by the young man, she lets him know that he is "too sweet for rock n' roll." And so he is, to the point where William is continuously called by his overprotective mother, a college professor (Frances McDormand), who w!
!
arns him "Don't do drugs." 
There are many people that dominate William's life. The most significant is Russell, whom he develops a strong friendship with based on mutual respect. Penny is an even stronger friend who helps to get William laid, but she is so obsessed over her relationship with Russell that she forgets he may not love her. There is also the "uncool" rock journalist Lester Bangs (Philip Seymour Hoffman), who warns William that rock music's genesis, the need to lose control, is losing its potency and to be wary of rock musicians who will only use him to get a nice cover story. The last thing a band needs is negative press. 
"Almost Famous" floats by on Patrick Fugit's charm and elfish eyes - he has the sympathetic ooze and trustworthiness of Tobey Maguire. He is so enamored by this band that he is willing to take risks along with them. This also means that William has to abandon his school career and pending graduation. But who cares when you have sex, drugs and rock n' roll! Fugit is so damn lovable and likable that it is impossible to hate the film for having such a warm, fuzzy character at its center. 
Also worth mentioning is the up-and-coming actor Billy Crudup ("Jesus's Son") who shows a tempermental nature in Russell, particularly at a party where he does acid and begins to badger the kid.  Russell is also changed by William, and realizes his mistakes in his affairs. Kate Hudson, Goldie Hawn's daughter, is also quite good as the emotionally fraught Penny, affected by William's puppy-dog eyes and sweetness - her near-overdose scene is also effective as William tries to get help and admits his love for her. Philip Seymour Hoffman is delightfully witty and on-target as Lester Bangs - he has the best one-liners in the film and should get a deserved Best Supporting Actor nomination. Frances McDormand offers fine support as William's mother who has a disdain for rock music on purely immoral grounds. Also memorable are Jason Lee as the group's loud lead singer who considers William the "enemy", and Fairuza Balk and Anna Paquin as groupies who are there for the music. 
I could have lived without the tumultuous scene in a plane where everyone feels the need to confess to their sins or the far too tidy final scene, and yet there is nothing in "Almost Famous" that does not work. Every scene feels honest and truthful, and Cameron Crowe's gift is in keeping the camera static and observational. He has a gift for colorful dialogue and situations, and for bringing the appropriate mix of pathos and realism from his actors. My favorite scene is when the band is on a bus tour and they sing-along to Elton John's "Tiny Dancer." A scene like that might have been laughable or contrived under lesser hands, but Crowe manages to find a family connection between the members of the band and it pays off with poignance. Maybe someone like Paul Thomas Anderson might have shown the grittier, soulless side of the 70's rock music era whereas Crowe's affection for his characters and his own tumultuous, personal connection to them does not allow for it. By refusing to !
!
be sentimental, Crowe has made o
ne of the livelier, soulful films about the 1970's that I've seen in quite a long time.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott

Almost Famous (2000)
Billy Crudup, Frances McDormand, Kate Hudson, Jason Lee, Patrick Fugit,
Anna Paquin, Fairuza Balk, Noah Taylor, Zooey Deschanel, John Fedevich,
Bijou Phillips, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Eion Bailey, Terry Chen. Written
and directed by Cameron Crowe. 122 minutes.
Rated R, 5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
I was 13 or 14 when I had my first rock and roll adventure. Two years
earlier, The Beatles made their initial appearance on the Ed Sullivan
Show and changed my life. From that night on, I devoured anything
connected with the British Invasion. Not content to wait for acts to
break on our shores, I bought the latest rock singles from England via a
mail order company I'd found in the back pages of Hit Parader magazine.
When I learned that a package tour starring Herman's Hermits and
featuring The Who and The Blues Magoos was scheduled for two shows at
the Indiana State Fair, my fevered adolescent brain went into overdrive.
After many phone calls, I received permission to meet the groups when
they arrived in Indianapolis. Armed with a Brownie camera and a flimsy
"Teen Press Card" purchased for 50 cents from Flip Magazine, I headed
for a private gate at Weir Cook Airport and watched the plane taxi to a
stop.
As the scruffy guys ambled down the steps, I ignored Herman's Hermits
and The Blues Magoos and made a beeline for The Who. Although the group
had yet to hit it big in the U.S., they were white hot in England,
courtesy of several amazing singles coupled with their habit of smashing
their instruments at the end of each concert. Taking a deep breath, I
introduced myself to the band and we chatted briefly. Then, to my utter
amazement, they invited me to join them for the shows.
My dad, bless his heart, put his wariness aside and allowed me to go.
The afternoon and evening was pure magic, as I hung in the dressing
areas and stood backstage during both incredible performances. The
highlight of the experience came between the shows, when Pete Townshend,
Keith Moon and I toured the State Fair Midway. Somewhere, I still have a
faded black and white photo of Moon and me on the Scrambler, snapped by
Mr. Townshend.
It was the greatest day in my young life.
"Almost Famous," the latest from writer/director Cameron Crowe ("Fast
Times at Ridgemont High," "Say Anything," "Jerry Maguire"), conveys all
the wonder I felt. The semi-autobiographical film, which chronicles the
life and times of a 15-year-old writer on the road with a rock band in
the early '70s, celebrates the majesty, the joy and the insanity of
those giddy days. With a first-rate cast and a flawless screenplay,
Crowe has crafted a wildly entertaining movie that effectively captures
lightning in a bottle. If rock music ever sent a shiver down your back,
this is the film for you.
Crowe became a journalist as a teen and William Miller (Patrick Fugit)
serves as his stand-in here. After writing several pieces for Creem
magazine and a local underground paper, the San Diego boy lands a plum
assignment over the phone from the editors of Rolling Stone, who have no
clue just how young the writer really is. William soon lights out with
Stillwater, an up-and-coming band, to gather material for a portrait of
the group. Days turn into weeks as the young journalist struggles to
remain objective while immersed in the lunacy of a rock tour.
The writer/band relationship begins with warnings all around. Stillwater
lead singer Jeff Bebe (Jason Lee) urges the group to remember that "this
guy is the enemy  he writes what he sees." William's mentor, legendary
journalist Lester Bangs (Philip Seymour Hoffman), cautions the boy to
keep a critical distance, because "these people are not your friends."
And Elaine (Frances McDormand), William's extremely fretful mother,
never misses a chance to call him and exhort "Don't take drugs!"
On the road, William becomes close to charismatic lead guitarist Russell
Hammond (Billy Crudup) and a stunning "band-aid" (a groupie with much
more class) who calls herself Penny Lane (Kate Hudson). In short order,
William learns that it is virtually impossible to remain a neutral
observer in the dazzling traveling circus.
While watching the film, I scribbled notes frantically before realizing
that the story was so well-written that I wanted to quote the whole
script. The acting matches the screenplay in quality. Jason Lee, who was
great in "Chasing Amy" and "Mumford," is a dynamo as the exuberant,
mouthy Stillwater frontman. The remarkable Philip Seymour Hoffman does
outstanding work as Lester Bangs, delivering a series of delicious
tirades, including a beaut on the value of being un-cool.
Patrick Fugit, making his feature film debut, anchors the film perfectly
as the naďve journalist. He is exceptionally good in his scenes with
Billy Crudup, who makes Russell appealing despite his many flaws.
"Fargo" star Frances McDormand continues her winning streak with a
crackling good turn as Elaine, who is less a mother and more a force of
nature. Finally, Kate Hudson, Goldie Hawn's daughter, gives the
production's most naunced performance as Penny Lane, a character radiant
in body and spirit.
Loose, funny, poignant and totally engaging, "Almost Famous" is a
valentine to the glory and madness of rock and roll. Some viewers may
find the goings-on too outrageous to be believed, but let me assure you,
both as the veteran of a rock band and as that wide-eyed kid walking the
Midway with The Who, it's all true.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Watching ALMOST FAMOUS by writer/director Cameron Crowe (JERRY MAGUIRE) 
is like enjoying one of those old vinyl LPs that are collecting dust in 
your closet.  As you kick back, you can remember your younger days, 
while listening to some great rock 'n' roll.
Our guide on this journey to the past is William Miller, a cherubic 
15-year-old high school senior about to graduate.  He not only looks and 
is much younger than his fellow classmates, he even seems younger than 
15.  In an inspired bit of casting, Patrick Fugit, a kid with sweetly 
penetrating eyes and an androgynous bowl haircut, plays William.  With 
his expressive little smile, he looks like a kid in a candy shop whose 
mother just gave him her credit card.  
Today's kids dream of becoming video game designers or dot-com 
zillionaires.  Back in 1973 being a music critic would rank second only 
to being a rock star.  With no apparent musical skills but with a gift 
for writing and a passion for listening to music, William sets his 
sights on a career writing about rock bands.  Whether anyone will take 
this boyish figure as a real critic seems questionable at best.
William's mother, Elaine (Frances McDormand), is a professor who warns 
her family against rock 'n' roll.  Even Simon and Garfunkel's music, she 
tells them, is just about "drugs and promiscuous sex."  Whenever she 
speaks to her son, she is just as likely to say, "Don't take drugs!" -- 
which he never does -- as she is to say, "I love you."  The 
good-spirited script softens Elaine's image so that we find her a 
strong, lovable character and not merely a cliché.
As a cynical music writer named Lester Bangs, Philip Seymour Hoffman 
plays William's brash mentor.  Lester tells William that it's too bad he 
missed rock's heyday and that it's all over now.  He generously gives 
William his first assignment -- a small piece writing about Black 
Sabbath.  William repeats Lester's writing advice like a mantra from on 
high: "Honest. Unmerciful."  Lester warns him about the pitfalls of 
writing about a band that he likes.  "Friendship is the booze they feed 
you," Lester admonishes him.
Although he can't even get past the stage door bouncer to see Black 
Sabbath, he does manage to strike up a friendship with Clearwater, who 
end up inviting him to join them on tour.  This lands him a writing gig 
with Ben Fong-Torres (Terry Chen) of Rolling Stone to interview the band 
on the tour, which is called the "Almost Famous Tour 73."  (The 
real-life Ben Fong-Torres was at our press screening, and he seemed 
quite amused by it all.)
Right away, the pixyish kid is adopted by the band like a mascot, and 
they take William (and us) into their world of concerts, bus trips and 
groupies.  They also provide enough quotes for our young scribe to fill 
several volumes.  "Rock 'n' roll can save the world!" Jeff Bebe (Jason 
Lee from DOGMA) tells William.  "And the chicks are great, right?"
Traveling with Clearwater are girls that call themselves "Band-Aids" 
rather than groupies since they don't have "sex" with band members, just 
oral sex -- where have we heard that one before?  The leader of this 
contingent is a girl who calls herself Penny Lane (Kate Hudson) and who 
says that she's about William's age.  She and William become best 
friends, but she is the mistress of Russell Hammond (Billy Crudup from 
JESUS' SON), the band's most popular member.  Russell, who bonds with 
William, explains that all of the band members have wives and permanent 
girlfriends back home so that he shouldn't write about the Band-Aids.
Crudup, who frequently seems so serious in his parts that you wonder if 
he's having any fun, clearly gets a kick out of his role this time.  
Russell knows that no matter how innocent William looks, he could still 
be the enemy if he writes something that trashes the band or reveals too 
many secrets.  Russell's a trippy philosopher ("In 11 years, it will be 
1984 -- think about it."), who is more profound sober than stoned.
The music is great, the concert footage is energetic and John Toll's 
cinematography is luscious.  A completely entertaining film, it manages 
to find a cathartic way to wrap it all up.  And it makes this film 
critic a bit jealous since William's assignment is like the job of a 
lifetime.
ALMOST FAMOUS runs 2:04.  It is rated R for language, drug content and 
brief nudity and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http:/www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ALMOST FAMOUS (director/writer: Cameron Crowe; cinematographer: John
Toll; editors: Saar Klein/Joe Hutshing; cast: Billy Crudup (Russell
Hammond), Frances
McDormand (Elaine Miller), Kate Hudson (Penny Lane), Jason Lee (Jeff
Bebe), Patrick Fugit (William Miller), Zooey Deschanel (Anita Miller),
Fairuza Balk (Sapphire), Anna Paquin (Polexia Aphrodisia) Michael
Angarano (Young William), Noah Taylor (Dick  Roswell), John Fedevich (Ed
Vallencourt), Mak Kozelek (Larry Fellows), Philip Seymour Hoffman
(Lester Bangs), Eion Bailey (Jann Wenner), Terry Chen (Ben Fong-Torres),
Liz Stauber (Russell's girlfriend); Runtime: 122; DreamWorks; 2000)
Cameron Crowe (Say Anything.../Singles/Jerry Maguire) is the
writer-director of his fourth film, an endearing and sleekly
fictionalized semiautobiographical coming-of-age rock 'n' roll film,
that also explores the ethical relationship of a young aspiring writer
to the musicians he covers. Crowe started out as a rock writer at 15 and
joined the staff of Rolling Stone when he was 16.
"Almost Famous" knows exactly what buttons to push to engage the
audience in its very gentle and touching tale of a 15-year-old
precocious San Diego native, the drug-free William Miller (Patrick
Fugit), and his flight from his overprotective though loving college
professor, mother, Elaine (Frances McDormand), whose role as mother is
to warn him not to take drugs. Her strictness chased his older sister
(Zooey) out of the house to become a stewardess in 1969, but she leaves
her rock collection behind with her brother, thus getting him interested
in the music. To explain her reasons for doing what she did, she plays
her mother a cut from a Simon and Garfunkel album: "I walked out to look
for America." For those with a sense of nostalgia for that period, it
was fun looking at how colorful those rock album covers were back then,
as William goes through his sister's collection, which includes the
artistically designed albums of Led Zeppelin, The Who, and Bob Dylan.
William scores a journalist deal with Rolling Stone magazine, after he
sneaks in with the help of some groupies to see Stillwater, after being
kicked out by the bouncer to see the real group Black Sabbath. Rolling
Stone asks him to write a story about the rising four-man band
Stillwater, with its leader, the guitarist Russell Hammond (Billy
Crudup) and singer Jeff Bebe (Jason Lee), on their cross-country 1973
tour. The film is not raucous rock, but offers a sweet view of the music
world, pointing out why its popularity is high among adolescents, while
also exploring its business side.
The casting was perfecto, not that the acting was necessarily arresting,
but it was that everyone seemed natural for their roles and gave
expression and a sense of truth to what was happening.
I always enjoy watching Philip Seymour Hoffman perform and was very
pleased with him in this role, here he has a small supporting role as
Lester Bangs, the wizened music critic of a rock magazine called Creem,
who acts as a mentor to William. He forms an uncool but smart guy pact
with him, warning that commercialism and uncritical journalists will
kill this music, which is really dead already but doesn't know it. His
caveat to William is: don't make friends with the performers, they are
just trying to use you. All you can do is write about them honestly.
That will be the mantra of the film and also its hardest attack on the
industry, but it is carried out to perfection by this great cast and
directed with a sure-hand for drawing out the comedy and whatever
goodness there is in the artists and the groupies who follow them.
A large portion of the film is about the groupies who hang around with
the musicians, smoking dope and balling them, as this film distinguishes
between groupies and "band aids", who claim they are devotees of the
music more than they are just in it for the thrill of sleeping with a
celebrity. But the film will go on to show that everyone connected with
the music is delusional, the musicians are not as serious about their
music as they pretend to be and the "band aids" are only fooling
themself if they think they're not groupies, as they stroke their
unsatisfied egos by basking in the glory of someone else. One such "band
aid" is the lovely teenager Penny Lane (Kate Hudson), who is Russell's
girl on the road, when his girlfriend is at home. Penny's relationship
with William and Russell becomes the focal point of the film, as she
lights up the screen with her rich presence and adorable charm.
What William sees on the rock tour is a fantasy world of drugs, easy
sex, and an aura of coolness in the band he writes about. He develops a
loving relationship with Penny Lane, trying to understand why she does
what she does, but is also overawed by the band accepting a square like
him into their cool world, which is the natural way for a teen to feel,
especially one who comes under the influence of the band'd charismatic
leader Russell. He, thusly, fails to heed Lester's advise.
The band considers the journalist the enemy and wish to compromise
William so that he will only write a story making them look cool, as
they give him access to their lives and expect him to come through for
them. While Penny looks to William as an ally, someone she can trust,
who is in the same fringe position with the group as she is. She along
with two other groupies deflower William, which brings him down to the
same level as they are.
This is not a provocative film, as it is a film of small observations as
seen through the youngster's eyes and heard on the tape recordings he
makes as he interviews them, as he goes backstage, sits with them in
their tour bus, swings with the groupies in their hotel, and goes to
their parties, witnessing how high they get on mind- altering drugs and
sees first-hand how insecure they are as performers. He also corresponds
with Rolling Stone, which is on about the same superficial level as the
band members as purveyors of hipness, thinking that rock 'n' roll will
change the world, though the magazine has the smug belief that they are
above the fray.
What I thoroughly enjoyed about the film was the casual way it let its
characters act and be themselves, even if it was rehashing characters
and rock music scenes played out in many such films, but here it seemed
to be very easy to absorb and take in without dissecting that 1970s
hippie scene. Instead, it let the story make whatever sense it could
without going overboard. I doubt very much if the film caught the
full-flavor of that period, but it did catch what it had to, and all the
characters avoided falling into being stereotypes.
Billy Crudup is a very fine actor and he is able to be different things
to different people in this film without making it seem as if he were
disingenuous. To Penny, he is her escape from reality, ditto for
William, but to the other band members he's part of their mealticket,
but they know that he is only out for himself, while to William's
mother, he's a bad influence, someone who advocates the drug music she
believes is destroying the younger generation.
The film might not have been flawless, with some mild lapses in
character development (groupies were thinly sketched) and the story
resolvement was not convincing (a contrived bumpy plane landing scene,
where the band fearing death confess what they really think of each
other), but the overall zeal of the film overtakes those gaffs and
allows the film to be much better than being merely a nostalgia film,
and much more entertaining than any serious rock film I have seen.
Cameron Crowe seems to have found a niche in making teen films that are
much better than teen films. He seems to have an ageless sympathy for
teenagers and for those who teens idolize, not categorizing them as
either good or bad people. Also, this film is suitable for both parents
and kids, R rating or not, which is not an easy chore to accomplish when
making a hip film. But moms should like it, as the Frances McDormand
characterization was more eccentric and mannered than one-dimensional,
and after all, the kid listened to her and didn't take any drugs (at
least it wasn't shown in the story). It should also be noted that the
director knows his rock music scene and even caught the scene at the now
defunct Max's Kansas City, a 1970s rock hangout that freaks like Lou
Reed and scores of rockers frequented as their holy shrine, it was one
of the famous places in NYC where rockers crossed paths with groupies.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Redman
Nostalgia, as the old saw goes, isn't what it used to be. Now that the
Boomers are aging, albeit as slowly as they possibly can, the country's
youthful memories are of sex, drugs and rock and roll. Certainly much more
interesting than Ozzie and Harriet.
Writer and Director Cameron Crowe's young years were what we aspired to in
our teenage years. If we couldn't be rock and roll stars, we wanted to be
rock and roll journalists. Now we can live them vicariously.
Fueled by his sister's legacy of albums left to him when she escaped home,
15 year old William Miller (a thinly-disguised Crowe played by Patrick
Fugit) wrangles a writing assignment from "Rolling Stone" magazine. He's to
tour with the bluesy grunge band Stillwater and it's everything you would
imagine rock journalism to be in the early seventies.
William falls into it all head over heels. With stars in his eyes, he can't
quite figure out how to write his story. He likes these guys, but how can he
tell the truth and not make them hate him?
Crowe does a commendable job of bringing his characters to life. Even the
jerks are real people who turn out not to be totally evil at all. Billy
Crudup as guitarist Russell and Fugit both are the real deal. Frances
McDormand is great as William's eccentric rock-hating mother. Philip Seymour
Hoffman chews up the screen as critic Lester "Rock Is Dead" Bangs from
"Creem" magazine.
But the soul of rock and this film is embodied by 16 year old Penny Lane
(Goldie Hawn's daughter Kate Hudson). The leader of the groupies make that
"Band Aids", Penny _is_ what rock and roll is all about.
If the early seventies had an "it" girl, she would be it. A combination of a
Greek muse and a teenage boy's wet dream, she doesn't walk, she dances and
skips and floats. She doesn't talk, she oozes poetry and life. She is the
memory of the girl every guy wanted...and probably still does.
The film works well. As it finds its way towards the end, it falters some,
dragging now and then. But then miraculously life is resurrected for an
improbable but tasty ending.
(And those who didn't become rock journalists, reviewed films. Email your
tales of early seventies decadence to redman@bluemarble.net.)
[This appeared in the 9/21/2000 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bluemarble.net.]
-- 
mailto:redman@bluemarble.net
Film reviews archive: 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Michael+Redman

Author
Michael Dequina
_Almost_Famous_ (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
        The term "almost famous" could apply to star Billy Crudup, who
has been touted by Hollywood as one of those "next best things" for the
past few years--yet hasn't even come close to making a popular
breakthrough.  _Almost_Famous_, writer-director Cameron Crowe's hotly
anticipated follow-up to his Oscar-winning _Jerry_Maguire_, has been
touted as the film that will finally make the top-billed Crudup a major
star.  Alas, he's going to have to remain "next best thing" for at least
a little while longer, for once again he has been nipped in the bud--if
the movie is anyone's "coming out" film, it's co-star Kate Hudson's.
        Which is not to say that Crudup doesn't do a superb job; in fact,
there isn't a single bad performance from anyone in the ensemble.  And
although a rock band on the cusp of fame in the 1970s lies at the center
of _Almost_Famous_, the film is not necessarily "about" the obvious
parallel with its cast of young, on-the-verge stars.  While they
certainly do contribute a large part to the film's success,
_Almost_Famous_ lingers in the memory because of the universality of
Crowe's semi-autobiographical tale.
        That fact is somewhat surprising considering how specific Crowe's
seriocomic story is.  William Miller (Patrick Fugit) is a precocious
15-year-old high school senior in 1973 who somehow manages to get a
writing assignment for _Rolling_Stone_ magazine and finds himself on the
road with Stillwater, an up-and-coming rock 'n roll band fronted by lead
singer Jeff Bebe (Jason Lee) and moody lead guitarist Russell Hammond
(Crudup).  Whatever manner of tension goes on within the group--Jeff's
jealousy of the attention lavished upon the hunkier Russell; their wild
party ways--will be nothing new to anyone who's watched a single episode
of VH1's _Behind_the_Music_ (or seen or read anything about the classic
rock 'n roll lifestyle).
        Thankfully, details such as that are not the main concern of
Crowe; rather, it is the universal search for a sense of belonging and
community.  This is not only embodied by William--an overachiever who had
skipped a few grades in school, he's been a perpetual loner and
outcast--but also by Penny Lane (Hudson), a self-proclaimed "Band Aid"
that travels with the band and gives them, in particular Russell, private
shows of support.  Setting her kind apart from groupies, says she, is her
genuine love of the band's music (and of Russell).  Of course, she's just
kidding herself, and her journey to self-realization--and her
non-romantic (though he has other ideas) friendship with William--makes
the film's most affecting thread, bolstered by the terrific rapport
between and work of Fugit and especially Hudson, who stands to gain the
most heat off of the film with her natural and poignant performance.  Not
to be outdone, however, the two old pros in the cast, Philip Seymour
Hoffman (getting all of Crowe's best lines as the legendary rock critic
Lester Bangs) and Frances McDormand (a lock for an Oscar nod as William's
well-meaning but prying mother) steal all their respective scenes.
        Crowe loses his way a bit in the final third, in effect making
the film a step or two away from true excellence; a comical near-death
experience that prompts a rash of soul-baring confessions is contrived,
and the film's tidy wrap-up is a fizzle.  But the themes and emotions of
the piece resonate; _Almost_Famous_ may be almost great, but that's more
than enough.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
John Beachem
At the tail end of the rock and roll era, 1973, William Miller (Patrick 
Fugit) has just discovered music. His mother, Elaine (Frances McDormand), 
wouldn't allow her children to listen to rock and roll for years because she 
claimed it encouraged drugs and promiscuity (She uses Simon and Garfunkle of 
all bands for an example). Despite his mother, William has made a name for 
himself writing music reviews for the school paper and underground 
magazines. His talents are discovered by Lester Bangs (the excellent Philip 
Seymour Hoffman), the editor of Creeme magazine, who hires William to write 
a review of Black Sabbath. While waiting for the band, William meets the 
members of another band, Stillwater. While first rejected, William soon 
endears himself by befriending the group's lead guitarist, Russell Hammond 
(Billy Crudup), and Russell's girlfriend (of sorts), Penny Lane (Kate 
Hudson). Actually, Penny and a small group of other girls are Stillwater's 
band aids. Band aids are similar to groupies, but they travel with the band 
so as to give the members encouragement. So, now a friend of the band, 
William is hired by Rolling Stone magazine to travel with Stillwater, get 
interviews with the band members, and write an article about them. What was 
supposed to be a four day trip soon turns into a month long journey.
Let me get one thing out in the open right now. I don't like the 70's. I 
don't like what they stood for, I don't like the fashions, I don't like the 
politics. That said, I love 70's music. Not necessarily what was sung, but 
the way it was sung. Now, please make note of this: if you don't like 70's 
music, stay far away from "Almost Famous". Classic 70's songs from Led 
Zepplin, Elton John, and dozens more I'm not even going to try to list are 
played constantly in this movie. I'm sure you're wondering about the film's 
humor more than its soundtrack, so let me set your mind at ease. "Almost 
Famous" is hilarious. I don't mean it's funny to those who are able to 
capture sly little in-jokes about the seventies, I mean nearly everyone 
should find this movie to be more than just funny. The dialogue is funny, 
the banter is funny, there are a few classic slap-stick moments, but none of 
it feels out of place. It's a tribute to writer/director Cameron Crowe 
("Jerry Maguire") that he was able to use so many types of humor yet keep 
the film feeling real (it is, after all, based on a part of his life).
Amazingly enough, there isn't one standout performance in "Almost Famous". 
You're probably thinking I've lost my marbles, but it's the truth. Every 
performance in the movie is so good that no one actor outshines another. 
Frances McDormand ("Fargo"), being the talented actress she is, manages to 
make a character who could have been detestable not only sympathetic, but 
even likeable at times. Philip Seymour Hoffman ("Magnolia") turns in his 
usual stellar performance, and it's unfortunate his screen time is so 
limited because he could easily have snagged an Oscar nomination otherwise. 
Billy Crudup ("The Hi-Lo Country"), who I'm usually not overly fond of, 
makes Russell into such a likeable character you'll actually feel 
embarrassed for him when he does stupid things (this happens fairly often) 
like stand on a roof-top, drugged up, screaming "I am a golden god!" Kate 
Hudson is simply magnificent as the object of William's affections. She has 
an excellent scene, which could easily have been made melodramatic, where 
William tells her Russell traded her off for a case of beer. Tears just 
barely come to her eyes, and she turns away for a split second. She looks 
back, her eyes red, but a smile on her face, and asks "What kind of beer?" 
It's enough to break your heart. Finally we have newcomer Patrick Fugit. If 
this boy doesn't get a nomination come Oscar time someone's going to hang. 
William Miller is easily the most endearing movie character not only this 
year, but in the past three or four years too. Part of this is due to the 
way he is written, but all the credit should still go to Fugit.
One of the things that really amazed me about this movie was that Crowe 
managed to keep it paced so well. Every time a dramatic moment would arise, 
I expected it to drag on far longer than was necessary. Imagine my surprise 
when Crowe would keep these moments just long enough to get his message 
across, before throwing us another really funny scene. Some of my favorites 
were the conversations people would have with Elaine. These scenes wouldn't 
seem half as funny if it weren't for one thing, the characters are so real. 
Take a scene where Elaine is talking to Russell on the phone. He starts off 
full of rock star bravado, telling her not to worry about her son. Ten 
seconds later, he's been reduced to saying "Yes Ma'am" to everything in an 
almost child-like voice. This wouldn't have been half as funny if we hadn't 
come to know Russell. Crowe's real gift is his ability to infuse even the 
most minor of characters with a distinct and endearing personality. In a 
lesser movie, a character like Lester Bangs would have been nothing more 
than a distant mentor to William. Here, even with his limited screen time, 
he comes to life.
Are there flaws in "Almost Famous"? Yes, but they're negligible. I suppose 
the primary one would be that a few characters don't get the amount of 
screen time they deserved. Jason Lee's lead singer, for example, may get a 
decent amount of screen time, but other than a few rants against Russell he 
doesn't say much. I guess this was supposed to parallel the situation his 
character is in, always playing second fiddle to Russell, but that doesn't 
explain poor Anna Paquin. Paquin is one of the most gifted young actresses 
in Hollywood, and here, just like in "Hurlyburly", her screen time as one of 
the band aids is almost non-existent. Okay, I don't want to complain about 
this great movie anymore. These minor complaints pale in comparison to what 
a great film Cameron Crowe has given us. In a year of mediocre films, this 
one deserves to be seen by everyone. While the film does run a full 122 
minutes, it doesn't feel nearly that long. I'd recommend "Almost Famous" to 
nearly everyone, unless you truly detest seventies music, and give it a well 
earned four and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Scott Renshaw
ALMOST FAMOUS
(DreamWorks)
Starring:  Billy Crudup, Kate Hudson, Patrick Fugit, Frances McDormand,
Philip Seymour Hoffman, Jason Lee.
Screenplay:  Cameron Crowe.
Producers:  Cameron Crowe and Ian Bryce.
Director:  Cameron Crowe.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, drug use, brief nudity, adult themes)
Running Time:  124 minutes.
     Cameron Crowe's ALMOST FAMOUS -- the writer/director's first film
since 1996's JERRY MAGUIRE -- tallies up its first simple yet thoroughly
inspired moment just seconds into the film, during the opening credits. In
a cute conceit connected to the story's protagonist, a 15-year-old
aspiring music journalist, we see a hand scrawling out the cast on a
yellow pad with a pencil. Among those names is "Frances McDormand," which
the writer initially spells "Francis" before quickly erasing the error and
flicking away the powdered rubber. Not a line of dialogue had been spoken,
and already I was hooked. To crib a line from Crowe's last film, ALMOST
FAMOUS had me at hello.
     Crowe has helmed only four films in his career -- SAY ANYTHING,
SINGLES, JERRY MAGUIRE and now ALMOST FAMOUS -- but I'm tempted to call
him America's most effortlessly gifted film-maker. He scores again with
his semi-autobiographical tale of William Miller (newcomer Patrick Fugit),
a precociously talented San Diego youth with dreams of writing for
national rock and roll magazines circa 1973. His enthusiasm lands him an
assignment for Rolling Stone to write about up-and-coming rock band
Stillwater, led by guitarist Russell Hammond (Billy Crudup) and singer
Jeff Bebe (Jason Lee). Against the better judgment of his over-protective
mother (McDormand), William heads out on a cross-country tour with
Stillwater. There he learns about "band-aids" like Penny Lane (Kate
Hudson) who lend inspiration to their favorite musicians, and about the
sex and drugs side of sex, drugs and rock 'n' roll. He also learns that
it's hard to be a journalist while you also a 15-year-old kid who wants
nothing more than to be thought cool by the members of a rock band.
     There's nothing particularly profound about a coming-of-age story
with a rock 'n' roll backdrop, nor does there need to be. Crowe isn't a
"statement" kind of guy, and it doesn't seem to hurt his films in the
least. ALMOST FAMOUS simply drops us into the world of rock in the early
'70s, and lets us observe through William's wide eyes. And it's a
splendidly rendered world, from the acerbic observations on the death of
rock 'n' roll from William's mentor, Creem magazine editor Lester Bangs
(Philip Seymour Hoffman), to the hotel room parties full of the requisite
mood-altering substances. Like Crowe's other films, this one seems to
amble along in no particular hurry to get anywhere, giving the characters
lots of room to maneuver, yet never feels unfocused or uninvolving. 
Occasionally the loose structure gets in the way, as it does when Crowe
fails to provide enough foundation for Stillwater's burgeoning popularity
either through their music or through their performances. Far more often,
the moment-to-moment experience is too enjoyable for anyone to notice.
     In large part, that moment-to-moment pleasure comes from Crowe's
uncanny ability to direct actors. As he has in his previous films, he puts
together a solid cast and makes magic. McDormand, though she remains a
too-mannered performer at times, is still entertaining as William's
intense mother; Fugit is likeable and innocent in a way that's never 
bland; Hoffman is yet again is so good you just want to throttle Hollywood
for not allowing him to be a star. And then there's the luminous Kate
Hudson (and "luminous" is not entirely metaphorical; she should hire John
Toll to photograph her for the rest of her life). Like William, Penny only
fools herself into thinking it's ever about the music; though she creates
herself as a sort of muse, she's just looking to fill an empty space with
rock 'n' roll's mythology of freedom. Penny is the story's anchor, and
Hudson's facial expressions are so perfect they're heartbreaking.
     As deftly as Crowe handles his story, there are still occasional
missteps. A broadly played scene during a bumpy flight on the band's
private jet veers into silliness, and Crowe never takes a moment to give a
personality to Russell's neglected girlfriend (Liz Stauber). Those tics
and a few others like it might have been more damaging in another film,
made by another film-maker, but ALMOST FAMOUS just seems to absorb its
flaws and roll on. There's something almost hypnotic about the grace with
which Cameron Crowe puts a film together, something that produces winner
after winner. It's not a life-changing experience, not a clockwork plot or
a joke-a-minute script. It's just the pleasure of watching a director who
can suck you in with the brush of an eraser.

Author
David N. Butterworth
"Almost Famous," writer/director Cameron Crowe's first film since 1996's
hugely-successful "Jerry Maguire," will be on a lot of ten best lists come
the end of the year and it will be on mine.  Come the beginning of next
year it might well have won the Academy AwardŽ for Best Picture into the
bargain.
Pretty much everything you've heard about the film is true, since
word on the street is that "Almost Famous" is Absolutely Fabulous.  It's
also everything you'd expect from a Cameron Crowe movie, and more.
First of all, it tells a story.  A very good, semi-autobiographical
story.  "Almost Famous" follows a '70's highschooler (newcomer Patrick
Fugit) who bluffs his way into covering a Lynyrd Skynyrd-type rock band for
"Rolling Stone" magazine only to learn that truth-in-reporting isn't as
easy as it sounds.
Secondly, like "Jerry Maguire" and those other Crowe projects ("Singles,"
"Say Anything"), the film is very finely cast and excellently acted by all,
including Philip Seymour Hoffman ("Magnolia") as an approving editor,
Frances McDormand ("Wonder Boys") as a disapproving mother (she only knows
three words: don't do drugs), and the less-well known Kate Hudson as the
groupie--sorry, "band-aid"--love interest.  Let's not forget Fugit though,
who's outstanding in the lead, and Billy Crudup and Jason Lee as,
respectively, the band's enigmatic lead guitarist and outspoken lead
singer.  Both impress, especially Crudup, whose star has clearly risen.
Third, this film is extremely well written and directed.  Why wouldn't it
be?  It's a Cameron Crowe movie.  They always say the best writers write
from experience and "Almost Famous" is a composite of many of Crowe's
true-life memories--at 16 he covered the Allman Brothers for "Rolling
Stone"--and the film rings true as a result.  A good story, fine acting,
and great writing.  Sounds like enough.  But "Almost Famous" goes beyond
that by being warm, genuinely touching, and very funny.
It's also scarily accurate and subtle beyond measure: Crowe excels at the
delicate imbalance, the casual observation, the nuance.  There are
scenes--many, many scenes--that just feel Right, be it in tone, in length,
in look.  The director knows when to use dialogue (well), and when to have
Fugit's William Miller simply observe (better).  For a film about sex,
drugs, and rock and roll, Crowe keeps the emphasis on the music.
Stillwater, the band Miller is following, is also a composite, an amalgam
of several '70's rock bands--Skynyrd, Zeppelin, the Allmans, Bad Company.
Crowe's trump card in filming the band on stage, however, is never to give
away too much.  All we hear are snippets of songs, snatches of guitar solos
from Russell Hammond (Crudup) and convincing posturing from Jeff Bebe
(Lee).  Wisely, we are never given time to critique the music itself.  But
it's there, in the forefront and in the background, just like the songs
Crowe uses on the soundtrack.  Not just throwaway '70's hits but
well-chosen numbers which skillfully augment the narrative.
The film never flags for a moment, even during sequences you think you've
seen before (the everyone-sings-along-to-a-song-on-the-radio scene, for
example).  Here Crowe manages to make his version (in which a busload of
band members and their entourage harmonize to Elton John's "Tiny Dancer")
appear unique.  In the trailer it looks corny; in context it hits a nerve.
It's easy to get caught up in the buzz, but it's just as easy not to want
to succumb to the hype.  If you're smart you'll see "Almost Famous" and
then you'll want to see it again.  In fact, coming out of the theater it
will almost feel like a requirement.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Cameron Crowe.
Cast: Patrick Fugit, Billy Crudup, Kate Hudson, Frances McDormand, Jason Lee, 
Noah Taylor, Zooey Deschanel, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Fairuza Balk, Anna 
Paquin, Liz Stauber, Bijou Phillips.
2000 - 120 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, nudity, and drug use).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, September 23, 2000.
In lesser hands, "Almost Famous" would have solely been an ode to '70s rock 
music. But director Cameron Crowe (1996's "Jerry Maguire"), who himself 
became a rock journalist for Rolling Stone magazine as an adolescent, has 
taken his past experiences and woven them into a deeply personal, 
semi-autobiographical look at the power of music, the joys and pains of true 
love, and that crucial time of wide-eyed innocence while right on the verge 
of adulthood. The picture is so much more than it outwardly presents itself 
at the onset, and in a story about the occasionally smutty decadence and 
dangerous excesses that become prominent in many musicians' lives, it is 
simply amazing how non-cynical and affectionate the film remains. Crowe 
clearly holds the story and distinct individuals found in "Almost Famous" 
near and dear to his heart, and his passion for the subject matter shines 
through at every turn.
15-year-old William (Patrick Fugit) has always lead a rather unconventional 
lifestyle. Entering school a year early, and then being instructed to skip a 
grade by his unconditionally loving, if eccentric, mother (Frances 
McDormand), he hasn't truly ever fit in with his peers, and never even 
discovered he was a year younger than he thought until age 11. That was how 
old he was when his rebellious 18-year-old sister (Zooey Deschanel) ran off 
to live out her dream as a stewardess. Leaving her countless rock records 
with William, in the next four years he grows a deep passion for music that 
he has never felt with anything else in his life.
Starting with a column for his school newspaper, William eventually manages 
to spark the interest of Creem magazine journalist Lester Bangs (Philip 
Seymour Hoffman), who gives him the assignment of doing a story on Black 
Sabbath. It is at one of their concerts where he has a chance run-in with 
their opening act, Stillwater, headed by lead guitarist Russell Hammond 
(Billy Crudup) and singer Jeff Bebe (Jason Lee). One day, William receives a 
call from Rolling Stone, who gives him the chance to write a piece on 
Stillwater for $1,000. Much to the chargin of his mother, before he knows it, 
William has set out on Stillwater's concert tour, circa 1973, putting his 
final year of high school on the backburner for this once-in-a-lifetime 
chance.
Walking into William's life at this pivotal point is 16-year-old Penny Lane 
(Kate Hudson), a so-called Band Aid that is currently acting as one of the 
muses for Stillwater, following them on their country-wide tour. She 
immediately bonds with William, who in turn grows to care about her very 
much, even as she continues to carry on an affair with the married Russell.
The moral question that is raised in "Almost Famous" is a journalistic 
controversy. William has always been nothing more than completely honest and 
accurate in what he has written, but as he becomes friends with Russell he 
witnesses more and more that begins to lean him towards a negative view of 
the band. Upon the request of the rest of the band's paranoia, Russell 
suggests to William that he paint them in a highly favorable light, and 
William debates this issue, even as it threatens to go against everything he 
has ever believed in in his writing.
Above all, "Almost Famous" is a loving tribute to a distinct era in time, 
told from the viewpoint of a quietly opinionated observationist. As played by 
fabulous newcomer Patrick Fugit, William begins as a shy young man who can 
more easily express himself through writing rather than in everyday life, and 
gradually comes into his own with every new experience he takes with him. By 
the end, William has been on an adventure that very few people his age could 
ever dream about, and through it, he has become wiser and exceptionally more 
worldly, holding onto memories that he will never forget as long as he lives.
As an ensemble, the film has been perfectly cast from top to bottom, with 
many fine performances shining through. Frances McDormand (1996's "Fargo") 
adds a great deal of depth and tenderness as William's mother, who is 
constantly scared for her son while he is on the road ("Don't take drugs" is 
her motto), but knows that it is something very important to, and for, him. 
Philip Seymour Hoffman (1999's "Magnolia"), as the self-proclaimed nerd 
Lester Bangs, is his usual impressive self, and has the picture's most 
thought-provoking and truthful line of dialogue, as he tells William over the 
phone that the most genuine conversations usually come from two people who 
have managed to strip themselves bare from all their delusions, content to be 
nothing more than two losers talking. Zooey Deschanel (1999's "Mumford"), as 
William's older sister, leaves a striking impression and radiates both heart 
and intelligence, while Fairuza Balk (1996's "The Craft"), as Band Aid member 
Sapphire, handles her mostly comedic role with aplomb, even becoming quietly 
poignant in a late scene as she mourns the fans' decreasing appreciation of 
just what makes music such a miraculous and powerful form of art and 
expression.
It is Kate Hudson (1999's "200 Cigarettes"), however, who single-handedly 
steals the movie. She literally becomes Penny Lane, a teenage girl seemingly 
beyond her years and full of confidence, but who has just as many hidden 
insecurities about herself and the direction in which her life is going. As 
the light and newfound inspiration in William's life, Hudson radiates both 
beauty and infinite kindness, striking every note exactly right. And in many 
scenes, as in one where William confronts Penny about her blindness to the 
fact that Russell doesn't really care about her, Hudson is astonishingly 
heartbreaking. Enough cannot possibly be said about this star-making 
performance, but in a word, it is extraordinary.
Coming approximately an hour into the film, there is a simple sequence that 
completely sums up the feelings that director Crowe wants his audience to 
acquire. While riding to their next concert destination, the entire tour bus 
erupts into a passionate sing-along to Elton John's touching "Tiny Dancer," 
and for that moment in each of the characters' lives, simply the act of 
expressing themselves through listening to that song suddenly evaporates all 
of their worries and conflicts. 
One could say that the film might have been slightly improved had it not been 
reportedly cut from 170 to 120 minutes, and some of the characters are 
arguably one-dimensional, but these should not be looked upon as criticisms, 
merely observations. "Almost Famous" is a great motion picture that is not so 
much about the story and characters involved, as it is about evoking a 
distinct mood and penetrating emotions. And that's all right.

Author
Laura Clifford
When he was just fifteen in the early 70's, writer/director Cameron Crowe
("Jerry Maguire") became a rock journalist , graduating to the staff of
'Rolling Stone' at sixteen.  In his new film, "Almost Famous," fictional
William Miller (newcomer Patrick Fugit) is a fifteen year old rock writer
whose meeting with his hero, legendary Creem editor Lester Bangs (Philip
Seymour Hoffman) results in an assigment that turns into a Rolling Stone
story on the road with his favorite band, Stillwater.
Clearly a labor of love, "Almost Famous" charts the maturation of a young
rock journalist amidst a world of conflicts.  William's single mother Elaine,
(Oscar winner Frances McDormand, "Fargo") an educator with unusual ideas,
has watched her eldest, Anita (Zooey Deschanel, "Mumford"), fly the coop in a 
fit of rebelliousness.  Now she overcompensates, fearfully allowing William 
to follow his dream, even though that will lead him into the clutches of rock 
and roll, which she knows is all about drugs and sex.
When William's met with resistance getting into the backstage area, he's
befriended by the BandAids ('we're not groupies, we're into the music'),
particularly the mysterious and worldly Penny Lane (Kate Hudson, "200 
Cigarettes").  Meeting Stillwater, particularly the charismatic Russell
Hammond (Billy Crudup, "Jesus' Son"), immediately catches William between
his true fan incliniations and Lester's advice to never become friends
with those you write about.  This intensifies when the group board the 'Almost
Famous 1973' tour bus and hit the road.  William will watch as his beloved
Penny disregards her own advice and falls deeply for the married Russell
while lead singer Jeff (Jason Lee, "Chasing Amy") fumes as Russell captures
the lion's share of their publicity.  Russell evades William's interview
attempts from one state to the next as Rolling Stone dogs him for material
and mom insists he return home for his high school graduation, constantly
reminding him 'Don't do drugs!'
Two shattering events finally force William to play his hand, report his
story and return home wiser and experienced, if disillusioned.  Crowe
neatly manages to heal both of William's families, the one he was born to
and the one he adopted, at the crossroads of Penny Lane.
"Almost Famous" is a well acted ensemble piece without a single lackluster
note.  Fugit anchors the film as the intelligent innocent abroad who faces
ethical challenges beyond his years.  Kate Hudson gives a starmaking
performance as the naively experienced Penny Lane, a sixteen year old earth
mother, a worldly babe-in-the-woods.  Crudup is startling good as the
gorgeous rocker who tries to do right in the face of too much temptation.
Crudup's really coming into his own with this performance following "Jesus'
Son" and "Without Limits" and should cease to be mistaken for Johnny Depp.
Frances McDormand provides most of the film's humor as the relentlessly
protective mom who terrifies hotel managers and quotes Goethe to a cowed
Russell long distance.  Jason Lee adopts the proper rock star slouch and
swagger as Stillwater's lead singer and the ever brilliant Philip Seymour
Hoffman embodies the 'uncool' Bangs.  Fairuza Balk makes an impression as
stylishly hip yet caring BandAid Sapphire while Anna Paquin only makes
any impression at all when her character is utilized to impart early, important
information to William.
Crowe and his team, cinematographer John Toll ("Braveheart"), art directors
Clay A. Griffith and Clayton R. Hartley ("Jerry Maguire"), and costume
designer Betsy Heimann ("Jerry Maguire") capture the look and feel of 
the early 1970's.  Crowe's wife Nancy Wilson (formerly of the band Heart)
provides the score which is complemented by rock standards of the time.
Peter Frampton acted as technical consultant, teaching the members of
the fictional Stillwater how to play like a real rock band on stage.
"Almost Famous" is a warm, human and true rite of passage that will bring
baby boomers back to times of incense and peppermints while introducing
younger generations to a golden era on the fringe of corporatization.
Following the tremendous success of his last film, "Jerry Maguire,"
writer/director Cameron Crowe digs back into his own past to tell the
quasi-autobiographical story of 15-year old William Miller (Patrick Fugit).
It's 1973 and rock music is in transition. William, a passionate fan of music 
and damn fine writer for a kid, gets a gig with Rolling Stone magazine to 
interview an up-and-coming band - Stillwater. Much to his mom's (Frances 
McDormand) consternation, he takes the assignment and hits the rock tour 
circuit in "Almost Famous."
Helmer Crowe has had an eclectic career in the entertainment industry from his
early days as a teen reporter for such underground and mainstream publications
as Creem, Rolling Stone, Playboy, and The LA Times. He was only 16-years old
when he made editor at Rolling Stone and published his best-selling novel, 
'Fast Times at Ridgemont High', at the tender age of 22. Crowe was tapped to 
write the screenplay of his book and, in 1982, the highly popular film 
adaptation was released. Since then, he has busily worked in the film industry, 
receiving major kudos for "Jerry Maguire" in 1996. The writer/director utilizes 
his own past experience as a rock and roll journalist to create the story for 
"Almost Famous."
Crowe's alter ego, William, is a remarkably bright kid who loves the music of
his day. His writing talent really impresses legendary rock 'n' roll journalist
Lester Bangs (Phillip Seymour Hoffman) who helps publish the youngster's
articles. This friendship, with Bangs acting as William's muse and mentor,
results in a golden opportunity for the young writer and the chance to write a
feature article for Rolling Stone magazine - at the tender age of 15! William
chooses a favorite band, Stillwater, as his subject and, with expense account
in hand, joins the band while on tour.
The tale begins slowly as baby-faced William tries to use his credentials as a
journalist for Rolling Stone and is denied access backstage for an interview. A
pretty, young "Band-Aid" - devoted followers of Stillwater - named Penny
Lane (Kate Hudson, "200 Cigarettes"), only 16 herself, takes the bewildered
William under her wing and introduces him to the band. Stillwater's leader,
Russell Hammond (Billy Crudup, "Jesus' Son"), takes a liking to William and an
uncertain bond is formed between journalist and band.
For William, the experience is a coming of age that impacts him both personally
and professional. His mentor, Bangs, had advised him from the start not to make
friends with the rock stars. Doing so would only cause the budding journalist
to compromise his work. William also has to contend with a loving, protective
mother who doesn't want to let her boy go out into the cold, cruel world. And,
along with the inevitable friendship that does grow between William and the
members of Stillwater, he falls for Penny. All of these crises and
considerations are tough for a teen, but, in the end, William overcomes every
obstacle.
Even though it's based on Crowe's real-life experiences, "Almost Famous" is a
true fantasy tale with William entering a dream world populated by the
music-makers he has idolized all of his young life. But, there is more to the
story as we watch the rise and fall and resurrection of an American rock band.
And, because of the wonderful Frances McDormand, we see the impact on the
family as she unwillingly sends her babies go off into the world. Plus, there 
is romance, rivalry, rowdiness and recklessness, too.
Newcomer Patrick Fugit is the picture's anchor from the start. The fresh-faced
youngster is not deterred by the presence of the veteran actors around him and
has an incorruptible sweetness about him that makes his William a likable kid.
Of those supporting William, McDormand shines out. Her Elaine Miller is a
single parent, intelligent and educated, who suddenly hits that crossroad of 
life where her chicks leave the nest and there is nothing she can do to stop 
it. She tries to keep hold of William, from long distance, and advise him, 
repeatedly - and, to very funny effect - "DON'T DO DRUGS!" There is a warmth 
and richness to McDormand's performance that really fleshes Elaine into a real, 
loving, caring and intelligent parent and person.
Kate Hudson gives a star-making turn as the irrepressibly buoyant, yet
pragmatic leader of the Band-Aids. Penny treats her devotion to the band of the 
hour with an almost reverence. Her particular closeness to Stillwater's leader, 
Russell, causes a friction between William and the band as the writer falls 
deeper and deeper for the vivacious Penny. Billy Crudup carries himself well as 
the handsome rock star in the making. The actor is not just a pretty face and
provides depth to his performance of the near-hedonistic guitarist.
Jason Lee ("Chasing Amy") plays the band's lead singer, Jeff Bebe, and, while
not given a great deal to do off stage, he cuts a convincing swath as a rock
musician when on stage.  Fairuza Balk ("The Waterboy") and Anna Paquin 
("X-Men") play two of the Band-Aids and Noah Taylor ("Shine") is unrecognizable 
as the band's manager, Dick Roswell.) Philip Seymour Hoffman is, once again, 
terrific in his pivotal role as William's muse, Lester Bangs. The more I watch 
this actor, the more I think that he is developing into one of the greats in 
his field.
Two-time Academy Award winner John Toll ("Legends of the Fall" and
"Braveheart") gives a crisp look to the photography, especially the concert 
footage. Art director Clay A. Griffith ("Jerry Maguire") provides the right 
look to the 70's period design without ostentation. Nancy Wilson (from the rock 
band Heart) provides a score that fits in with the 70's mood of the film. Rock 
classics from the 60's and 70's - Simon and Garfunkel, Elton John, Joni 
Mitchell, the Allman Brothers, Stevie Wonder and others - give just the right 
and familiar note for the time.
The quasi-documentary feel of "Almost Famous" gives the film an edginess as we
watch the slow disintegration of the band while, simultaneously, their fame
begins to build. We see things through the same rose colored glasses as William
and we, too, become disillusioned with the star machine and what it does to its
members. By film's end, William is a wiser young man, but one whose innocence
is now a thing of the past.
"Almost Famous" may be looked upon as an indulgence by auteur Crowe, but there
is an honesty and reality to the film that make it a worthwhile flick to catch.
I give it a B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Last fall, Dreamworks released a film with `buzz' barely detected by the
entertainment industry's radar.  Upon its release, American Beauty was
extremely well-received by critics and, while some people couldn't quite
grasp the idea of its widespread acclaim, it went on to cut a wide path
through Hollywood as it took home four major Academy Awards.
Almost exactly one year later, the studio unleashes Almost Famous, and,
while it remains to be seen if the public snuggles up to the film, it's
already pulling in some of the best reviews of the year.  Is Famous,
which boasts no major stars and tells a highly personal story, going to
be an Oscar contender?  I'm not sure, but it does have a scene with a
blonde girl and a rose, so you've got to like its chances.
Famous opens in 1969 San Diego, where single schoolteacher Elaine Miller
(Frances McDormand, Wonder Boys) is struggling to raise her two children
in a time when drugs and free love were guaranteed to anyone that wanted
them.  Her oldest, daughter Anita (Zooey Deschanel, Mumford) is a lost
cause, fleeing the home and her mother's overprotection for San
Francisco's happening scene.  This, of course, focuses all of Elaine's
well-meaning energy, as well as her restrictions on everything from
sugar to rock music, on her youngest son, William (Michael Angarano).
A precocious eleven-year-old, William discovers his sister's abandoned
record collection, and falls in love with the likes of Led Zeppelin, The
Who and Bob Dylan.  Flash to 1973, where William (newcomer Patrick
Fugit) abandons notions of fitting in with his older classmates (he
skipped a grade and started school a year early) and instead spends his
time writing for his school newspaper, as well as an underground rock
rag.  Through his perseverance and his skills as a writer, Creem
magazine editor Lester Bangs (Philip Seymour Hoffman, The Talented Mr.
Ripley) tells William to give him a 1000 word article on the Black
Sabbath show coming to San Diego.
William's inexperience and youthful looks keep him from getting to
Sabbath, but he does manage to strike up a friendship with a group of
fans that follow Sabbath's opening band, Stillwater.  Adamant in her
denial that her friends aren't groupies, Penny Lane (Kate Hudson,
Gossip) becomes William's link to a subject he can both obtain access to
and write about.  His piece for Creem opens the door for a bigger and
more lucrative offer from Rolling Stone magazine, but also entails
missing school to follow the band on a portion of their `Almost Famous'
bus tour of the country.
Trying to heed the words of both his mother (`don't do drugs') and his
Creem mentor (`don't make friends with rock stars'), the wide-eyed
William sets out to write an unbiased article about the band.  His
attempted detachment is constantly challenged by his close relationship
with Stillwater guitarist Russell Hammond (Billy Crudup, Jesus' Son) and
soon, William begins to act as an intermediary between Russell and his
road girlfriend Penny.  His article, if he's ever able to find the time
to write it, could be a hypnotic tale of a band on the verge of stardom
dealing with management changes, pyrotechnic problems and a quiet power
struggle within the group.  But he can never get any of the band members
to sit down for a proper interview.
Famous was written and directed by Cameron Crowe (Jerry Maguire), who,
as you may know, became an editor for Rolling Stone when he was just
sixteen.  The film is a semi-autobiographical tale of his years spent
traveling with some of the country's top rock acts.  Stillwater is a
blend of Led Zeppelin and The Allman Brothers (among others), and the
relationship between William and Russell is supposed to have been based
on Crowe's personal interviews with Jackson Browne.
The ending of the film starts to get a little tedious, but it ultimately
pays off.  Crowe's fly-on-the-wall direction gives the film a bit of a
documentary feel, but without the shaky, handheld camera work that we've
seen in biopics like Private Parts.  John Toll's (Braveheart) glowing
cinematography and Nancy Wilson's (from Heart - she Crowe's wife) score
add to the almost hypnotic pace of the film.
The unknown Fugit is perfectly cast as the ingenuous teen, and Crudup's
rock swagger is mesmerizing (I still think he was channeling Kurt Cobain
in Jesus' Son).  It would be tough to imagine Famous with its original
casting choices  Brad Pitt playing Russell and Sarah Polley tackling
the role of Penny Lane.
Famous has one of the year's best opening sequences, where William
handwrites the credits on a yellow legal pad with a pencil (making one
hilarious mistake).  His writing is broken up by shots of his bedroom,
which is covered in rock posters.  There are also several shots of a
desk drawer full of concert ticket stubs and backstage passes, which
Crowe provided from his own personal collection.  The film's musical
consultants were Pearl Jam manager Kelly Curtis and Peter Frampton, the
latter of whom provides a cameo as well.
2:05  R for adult language, mild sexual content and drug use

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
My ability to relate to this film's protagonist has exponentially grown over
the past few months, as I too have recently been given the opportunity to
interview some of the stars whose films I end up reviewing for my website,
JoBlo's Movie Emporium (http://joblo.com/). It was, and continues to be,
quite strange to balance my task as a so-called "movie critic" and "movie
fan", since my love of movies ultimately surpasses my interest in film
criticism. Having said that, despite not being paid for my reviews or
reporting to any editor (I run my own site), I do take my task of writing
film reviews very seriously and always report the truth, no matter how nasty
(or great, as in this case!). I've always maintained this personal motto of
truth in my own life as well, and honestly believe that you ultimately do
your counterpart a favor by presenting them with the reality of the
situation, as you see it.
Now I'm sorry about this little personal preamble before my review, but I
think it's important for my readers to know where I'm coming from before
reading some of my criticisms, especially when it hits so close to home. In
the end, my goal is to remain the "joblo" of film criticism, and I hope that
I can continue to achieve that down-to-earth quality throughout all of my
reviews. Thanks for tuning in.
PLOT:
A precocious high school boy gets the opportunity to write an article about
an up-and-coming rock band, by joining them on the road for a few days.
Along the way, he struggles with the concept of reporting the truth vs his
friendship with the band members, and meets a pretty girl who also likes to
hang out with the band.
CRITIQUE:
An entertaining movie from top to bottom: an interesting story, superb
actors, rockin' soundtrack, well-developed characters, a strong message, a
nice love story, top-notch directing, humor, drama and two star-making turns
in Billy Crudup and Kate Hudson. Think about whatever it is that you
generally look for in a movie, and it will be in this one! A tribute to the
music that is rock 'n roll, this film lets you ride along with various
participants of the game, checking out the different sceneries along the
way. It gets behind the music, behind the fans, behind the band, behind
everything! It will definitely bring back a flood of memories to anyone who
actually lived through those times, and certainly connect to anyone else who
has ever been a major fan of any rock band or ever wanted to be a musician
(rock star) themselves. It's nice to see that in a year of film mediocrity,
a movie such as this can still come out and remind us all why we love movies
so much in the first place. This one takes you away for a couple of hours,
tells an interesting tale through several interesting characters, and
certifies its participation in the year-end Best Picture race by wrapping it
all up in a wonderful bouquet of entertainment. And despite a little bit of
over-romanticism of the music and the times, this film still manages to
present us with some great insight into the main players of the music biz
including the musicians themselves, the fans and the reporters who cover it
all.
And with a solid script as its base, this film takes off to another level
with the excellent performances shot forth by its lead actors. Billy Crudup
has been tooling around Hollywood for some time now, but this film will
undoubtedly catapult him off the charts. I hope that this film does to him,
what GLADIATOR did to Russell Crowe. And where the heck did Kate Hudson come
from? Brought into this world by actress Goldie Hawn, known primarily for
her pranky roles in easy comedies, Hudson takes on this lead role with the
edge of a pro, and the charisma of a newfound sensation. Two more
nominations for awards should be reserved for these two well-deserved
thespians at the year-end ceremonies. And tag those great roles on to
several other smaller showings, including Frances McDormand, perfect as the
over-protective mom, who can't help but look out for her children, Jason
Lee, coming into his own as the pseudo-Jim Morrison like lead singer, and
Philip Seymour Hoffman, who remarkably cannot seem to pick any bad roles in
movies, and you've got yourself an all-around rock-solid cast. This film
puts rock 'n roll on a pedestal but that's not all it does. It's really a
journey about finding yourself. Characters all floating around their lives,
unsure of who they are or what they stand for, until their day-to-day
interactions eventually help them find their true selves. See it for the
music, if you like. See it for the great performances or see it simply
because of its greater entertainment value, but the bottom line is that this
movie is one of the best films of the year, and no matter why you think you
want to see it, just see it, dammit! Who knows, maybe it'll help you "find
yourself", too.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Much like this film's protagonist, William Miller, writer/director Cameron
Crowe got his start as a rock journalist at the age of 15. In 1973, when he
was just 16, he joined the staff of "Rolling Stone" magazine, where he
eventually became an associate editor. While still in his teens, he managed
to profile many of the era's most influential artists, including Led
Zeppelin, Bob Dylan, David Bowie, Joni Mitchell and Eric Clapton. In 1979,
Crowe, then 22, returned to high school to research a book, which resulted
in the best-selling novel FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH, which was eventually
written into a screenplay by him, and directed into a movie with Amy
Heckerling at the helm.
Lester Bangs, the character portrayed by Philip Seymour Hoffman and the
editor of Creem magazine, was in actuality a very influential person in
Cameron's own life as well.
If you stay tuned to the entire film credits at the end of the movie, you
will note the unusual disclaimer about the character of Penny Lane actually
having been "based on an actual individual". Cameron Crowe appears to have
given us an insight into his own muse...
Other than Billy Crudup and Jason Lee, the two other members of the group
Stillwater are real-life musicians, Mark Kozelek and John Fedevich.
Billy Crudup made his feature film debut in 1996 in Barry Levinson's
SLEEPERS, starring Robert DeNiro and Brad Pitt, and was then featured in
Woody Allen's EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU.
Actor Patrick Fugit makes his motion picture debut in this picture. He was
chosen for the role of William Miller over hundreds of other young actors.
And pay close attention otherwise you might miss the unrecognizable
performance put forth by SNL cast member Jimmy Fallon, as the "new manager"
about 2/3 of the way through the movie.
A certain "William Mapother" plays the "bartender" role in this movie. Tom
Cruise's real name is Thomas Cruise Mapother. Not sure what his connection
to Tom is, but he is definitely related. Tom Cruise starred in Cameron
Crowe's last picture entitled JERRY MAGUIRE. They remain good friends.
Besides being a technical consultant on this movie, singer Peter Frampton
makes a cameo appearance as "Reg", the road manager for Humble Pie. He first
came to prominence as a member of the actual group Humble Pie.
This film was initially titled STILLWATER and SOMETHING REAL.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  Sex, drugs, rock 'n' roll. Burhanuddin Rabbani understands
the power of this troika, which is why he keeps his Taliban
morals squad combing Kabul with whips and chains to take
care of any woman who dares show her left eyebrow in
public, keeps an ear out for degenerate music, and may not
be too sure that coffee is not the Devil's brew.   The picture
of America imprinted on Rabbani's brain like a tattoo on a
with-it American girl's ankle could be that of the bygone era
in which the beards sported by our country's youth
symbolized anything but the religious fanaticism of today's
fundamentalists.  
   Where have those liberated times of the late sixties and
early seventies gone now that the cell phone is our country's
soundtrack, the personal computer the hallucinogen of
choice, and Wall Street replaces the sack as the instrument
of getting off?  No wonder that Cameron Crowe's
autobiographical character in "Almost Famous," William Miller
(played by the heretofore unknown Patrick Fugit), could
keep not a semblance of objectivity when asked to write an
unbiased journal article about the fictitious rock group known
as Stillwater.
   Cameron Crowe, whose blockbuster hit "Jerry Maguire"
dealt with a sportscaster's crisis of conscience, takes on a
similar theme with this work.  This time a 15-year-old kid,
asked write objectivley about a rock band in 1973, must
tackle his guilt as he decides to cast aside a journalist's
detachment and replace neutrality with passionate
partisanship.  In the role of a 15-year-old prodigy about to
graduate from high school, the bright, curious, eager William
Miller (Patrick Fugit) is assigned by a second-tier magazine to
knock out an article about the explosive rock scene during
the still robust days of student rebellions a couple of years
before the U.S. withdrew its forces from Vietnam.  A virgin in
many ways--never been kissed, never been out of San Diego,
not the sort to fit in with the regular guys in his high school,
William is full of anxieties and excitement as he tries to get
through the back door of a Black Sabbath rock concert but is
shunted aside as a novice.  But when he suddenly impresses
members of the band with his knowledge of their background,
Russell Hammond (Billy Crudup) and Jeff Bebe (Jason Lee)
invite him to join them backstage.  Fortuitously gaining an
assignment from Rolling Stone magazine editor Ben Fong-
Torres (Terry Chen) and smitten by Russell's adorable
mistress Penny Lane (Kate Hudson), William gets far more
than he bargained for.  Not only does he capture the spirit of
this effervescent but occasionally confrontational group with
their women followers (known as band-aids because they
serve as the group's muse): he joins them on their
nationwide bus tour as they knock the crowds dead wherever
they perform, gets as intimate a view as is possible for a non-
member of the players, and is introduced, wide-eyed as a
pug in heat, to a bevy of women just a couple of years older
than he.  All the while he is pursued by a profusion of phone
calls from his stern but loving mom, Elaine (Frances
McDormand) whose way of saying "I love you" is her
repeated mantra, "Don't take drugs."
   Though the band is seen through William's eyes, the face
that decks the posters on almost every bus in New York City
is that of Kate Hudson, who performs in the role of Penny
Lane, who is captivated by Russell and uses the 15-year-old
William as a liaison between her and her main man.  Teased
and bewitched by this lovable beauty--who even playfully
urges him to join her on a trip to Morocco--William is all but
ready to sell out and to write a puff piece about his
experiences rather than a take-no-prisoners account of the
ensemble's vehement in-fighting and marital infidelities.  
   "Almost Famous" is an enticing surprise, a major studio
release coming on the heels of a summer of the usual
dumbed-down Hollywood rubbish. Splashy, loud, and full of
itself, Cameron Crowe's autobiographical coming-of-age
film looks more like a beautifully photographed, gloriously
scored, effectively realized project that could win the
affections of both the popcorn set and fans of the
loosely-structured panoramas of a Robert Altman.  Though
admittedly a stretch, "Almost Famous" is this year's
"Nashville," which critic Leonard Maltin called "full of cogent
character studies, comic and poignant vignettes, done in
seemingly free-form style."  Yet you could be disappointed if
you expect "Almost Famous" to give you greater insight into
the meaning of rock music, the wherefore of its hold on so
many of the world's young people who'd lift their arms,
swaying and rocking and caught up in its ecstatic grip which
is often fueled by hallucinogenic substances.  Many of the
songs on Nancy Wilson's soundtrack are secondary,
completely unknown by those who are not denizens of the
scene... strains that include performances by Led Zeppelin in
"Bron-Yr-Aur," Deep Purple's "Burn," and Todd Rundgren's "It
Wouldn't Have Made Any Difference."  The music is not the
thing, any more than it was in Crowe's well-received "Jerry
Maguire."  
   Instead, this is primarily a slice of Cameron Crowe himself,
informed by his 1975 interview with Led Zeppelin in which he
asked such penetrating questions as "When you wear the
makeup, how does it make you feel?"  We get the idea that
the impressionable lad's excitement in taking in the essence
of rock-band ambiance is matched by the band's own
devotion to an interviewer who makes them feel even cooler
than could an entire room of dancing devotees.   When
Crowe interviewed the singer-songwriter Jackson Browne in
1974, Browne was talkative with the young Crowe in
speaking of his record of youthful delinquency and sexual
exploits.  Through this film we feel the pain of Billy Crudup's
Russell Hammond, who is the stand-in for Jackson Browne--a
man who treated the cub journalist like a little brother and felt
betrayed by the kid's all-too-honest exposure in the magazine
piece.  "Almost Famous" does not give us enough of the
spirit of the times, of the world outside the cocoon of rock
concerts--the rebelliousness, the antiwar protests, the
excitement and vigor of an age less wrapped up in money
concerns than our own.  But the movie has more appeal for
an audience not a part of the rock world than other greats
and near greats, satiric or otherwise like "This is Spinal Tap"
and "Stop Making Sense" because it is told from the point of
view of a kid we all wish we could have been.  And to the
bliss of those of us who spend our time writing about the
movies, few other films glorify the critic as much as Cameron
Crowe's.
Rated R.  Running time: 122 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Homer Yen
"Almost Famous" is like sneaking a peek inside
someone's diary and taking a glimpse into their life. 
Diary entries, however, don't usually make for
compelling reading.  And, rarely does it fascinate
enough to joggle your imagination.  It is, after all,
a series of brief observations and perhaps a few
poignant lessons learned.  But if you're glimpsing
into the life of Cameron Crowe (writer/director of
this film who also wrote "Jerry Maguire"), you may
find it to be an interesting chapter about his life
when in 1973, he was an adolescent that was able to do
a few things that most similarly aged boys could only
dream about.
In this pseudo-autobiographical film, Crowe is William
Miller (played by newcomer Patrick Fugit), a 15-year
old prodigy who has a love for rock and roll.  He's
not the kind of wild-eyed teen who praises it by
singing its songs or mimicking its stars.  Rather, his
homage to it comes in the form of articles that strive
to explain what it's all about.  His writing ability
garners the attention of Lester Bangs (Phillip Seymour
Hoffman), a powerful editor within the music
journalism circle.  Impressed with William's level of
insight and concerned about his impressionable youth,
he counsels the star-struck kid about the realities
and ethics that underlie the business.  He warns him
not to make friends with rock stars.  "They make you
feel cool," he imparts. "But I've met you.  And, you
are not cool."  Above all, Bangs urges him to be
honest and unmerciful.
William is well on his way and eventually catches the
eye of Rolling Stone magazine.  They ask him to write
a cover piece about Stillwater, a (fictitious) band on
the cusp of stardom.  With his boyish appeal and his
arsenal of music knowledge, the young reporter
immediately makes a connection with the band members
and they welcome him as part of the family.  Of
course, William is about to enter an environment
totally foreign to him, full of compromised values and
the allure of fame, giddy girls and drugs.  It will be
a tough journey ahead as he tries to complete his
article, find his moral bearings in his strange New
World, and hold on as he is rapidly ushered forth
towards adulthood.
During his time with the band, he experiences dramas
that no 15-year old is equipped to handle.  The
largest issue involves him, a fan named Penny Lane
(Kate Hudson) and Stillwater band member Russell
(Billy Crudup).  There is a love triangle brewing
here, although it never reaches soap opera
proportions.  But the theme runs throughout the film. 
There's also a drama about the Stillwater band itself
as it struggles through its period of growth and
increasing popularity.  There's another dilemma about
William's responsibility to report truthfully and the
fondness he has for the group.  And there are other
milieus that arise here and there as the story winds
its way to a close.  
"Almost Famous" will be more warmly received by
critics than by the general movie-going audience, like
me.  It has several interesting and charming segments.
 But, it didn't quite achieve the emotional
highpoints.  I could not fully buy into the emotions
that the band probably felt or even the wonderment
that young Williams experienced.  It just lacked a
needed dimension of eagerness.  And oddly, the film
seemed to want to open itself to much grander ideas
such as the tenderness of young love, the zeitgeist of
that turbulent era, or the evolution of rock. 
However, it remained in a bloated state of
self-absorption.  The pace is never quicker than a
stroll and the payoff merely satisfies (thanks
primarily to Frances McDormand's role as William's
rational mom, who anchor's everyone back to reality). 
But, the film doesn't gratify.  We certainly deserved
more.  

Author
Ron Small
Starring: Patrick Fugit, Billy Crudup, Kate Hudson, Frances 
McDormand, Jason Lee, Phillip Seymour Hoffman, Faizura Balk, Anna Paquin, 
Noah Taylor
After his tremendous success with JERRY MAGUIRE, writer\director Cameron 
Crowe was given a reasonably big budget, final cut and major studio backing 
to make ALMOST FAMOUS, the most personal of his films. It's a situation 
similar to the one Paul Thomas Anderson found himself in after BOOGIE NIGHTS 
(which was more of a critical darling than a huge success). Anderson chose to 
follow that up with MAGNOLIA, a film that displayed the fervency and scope of 
his earlier picture but was also granted leeway to include some artistic 
gambits that might've been frowned upon by studio heads. Some of them worked 
(I kinda dug the frogs, so sue me) and some of them didn't quite work (the 
musical interlude for instance, though I know people who disagree) but even 
the worst of his stratagems were sorta interesting for you could so clearly 
see the passion brimming behind them. With all that freedom Cameron Crowe has 
constructed a movie that's like the filmic equivalent of a classic rock song 
by Led Zepplin or The Doors. It's rambling, warm, whimsical, observant, and 
with a tinge of melancholy, though nothing that rudely announces itself via 
PATCH ADAMS-like obscene sentimentality.
ALMOST FAMOUS is Crowe's semi-autobiographical story of a fifteen year old 
prodigy, William Miller (newcomer Patrick Fugit, standing in for Cameron) 
who, on the encouragement of rock critic Lester Bangs (played with throaty 
charm by Phillip Seymour Hoffman), sets out to pursue a career as a rock 
writer. He manages to wrangle a freelance job with ROLLING STONE MAGAZINE and 
is sent on tour for several days with the about-to-hit rock band STILL WATER, 
headed by a low key Jim Morrison-type, Russell (Billy Crudup). Actually the 
lead singer is Bebe (Jason Lee, looking like Charles Manson's kinder, more 
docile brother), a whiny runt upstaged by Russell, the guitar player whose 
"looks are becoming a problem". Among them are the hanger ons, or groupies, 
seemingly led by uber-flower child Penny Lane (a sleepy eyed Kate Hudson).
The camera is just daffy over Hudson, or more likely Cameron is, for he 
trains it on her incessantly, caressing her pert, wide-open face as if it 
were an endangered monument. Penny comes with a bright all-knowing 
countenance, as if she were chock full of wisdom, though it's mostly an act 
to get Russell's attention. I'm not sure if this was the intent but I found 
Hudson's character to be more pathetic than loveable, though it hardly 
matters; she's an innocent seeking to meld herself with an image of cool. She 
is, of course, being used by Russell (who sleeps with her, then tosses her 
away like a used condom), which she may or may not be aware of. Penny chooses 
to see herself as something of a muse; it's her sex that inspires Russell to 
make the music she adores. A delusion, but a lovely one at that.
Other groupies include Faizura Balk as a scary-cool hipster and the apple pie 
Anna Paquin who says "lets deflower the boy" (referring to Fugit's William) 
and they do. Fugit is as doe eyed as they come, cherubic and cute though he 
doesn't make much of an impression but that's okay since he mostly serves as 
a tour guide to the other, more stimulating characters. Though still, the 
film suffers an itsy bit because it isn't endowed with a strong central 
character a la JERRY MAGUIRE or SAY ANYTHING. In the latter film, Crowe 
created a complete original with Lloyd Dobler (brought wonderfully to life by 
John Cusack), the oddly charming, hyper verbal sweetie that Cusack has been 
aping in some way or another his entire career (though I can hardly fault him 
for it, he does it so well). Fugit isn't nearly as memorable; in fact I'd 
probably have forgotten him had I not had to think about him in order to 
write this here review.
Hudson is a better character, an oxymoronic combo of giggly fangirl and 
blossoming independent; she's Crowe's most intriguing female creation. 
Meanwhile Russell, accurately played by Billy Crudup (JESUS' SON) as a 
regular guy inching towards the spotlight, (he's half prima donna, half "guy" 
guy) is more of a periphery character, as is Frances McDormand's mother and 
the quirkily named Zooey Deschanel the expressive actress who shows up in two 
scenes as William's older sister, rumpling his hair and cooing to him "Don't 
worry, someday you'll be cool". Even less a periphery character is the wildly 
charismatic Lester Bangs, played lovingly by Hoffman as a cynical dork 
savant. I would've loved to see a movie with this wily fellow as the 
protagonist, but he remains a brief, delightful presence, his screen time 
hardly totaling in at 5 minutes.
Nevertheless, those complaints are of mere crumbs amid a beatific cake; it's 
to Crowe's credit that he has us wishing we could spend more time with nearly 
every minor character. And ALMOST FAMOUS works to an equal to or greater 
degree than his past projects, none of which have been any less than good. 
(Even his much-derided SINGLES offered some insight into Gen X-ers, and I 
can't think of any other movie that came close to suggesting that this 
particular Generation was anything more than ironic, pop culture obsessed lay 
abouts).
ALMOST FAMOUS is as fun as JERRY MAGUIRE, but less muddled and without all 
that pesky soul searching. It has the infectious sweetness of SAY ANYTHING, 
though is visually much more confident. And there's also that zeal, the buzz 
you get when a filmmaker expresses his passions with the sure hand of a 
crackerjack veteran. Crowe is the rare mainstream director who loves his 
characters the way Paul Thomas Anderson loves his, and he's practically 
protective of them, as we become. For instance, the complete affection in 
which he gives us William's overprotective mother (whose mantra is "don't do 
drugs") is refreshing considering the adults in youth movies tend to be 
authoritative dolts. The character (played by Francis McDormand in pretty 
much the opposite of a shrill Shelly Winters performance) is a kind 
intellectual who wants her kids to read Shakespeare, and forbids them to 
listen to rock music because she desperately wants them to trek through life 
un-corrupted. As played by McDormand she's real hard not to like. Compare 
that to the hideous chain smoking, god loving, anti-rock caricature of a 
mother Lin Shaye played in DETROIT ROCK CITY, which, by the way, is similar 
in many respects to ALMOST FAMOUS except in how awfully stupid it is.
Here is a movie that loves its audience while most flicks come with barely 
concealed contempt for their audiences. And it also loves its music and the 
glorious, sometimes tragic effects of those melodies on the fans whose best 
memories are the amplified ones. Cameron captures this in a heartbreaking, 
silent ten seconds; he trains his camera on a prancing Kate Hudson, twirling 
about in a cleared out stadium amid floating litter. It's as if she just has 
to squeeze every last bit of energy she can from the showâŚeven well after its 
end. Crowe has made a movie that cheerfully greets us with open arms as if to 
say "Welcome to the party". And what a party it is.
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
Ross Anthony
"Almost Famous" is almost fantastic. Superb dialogue, outstanding direction,
acting and casting; unfortunately this near perfect script is marred by a
single pivotal scene.
The film opens in the year 1969 with William's eighteen-year-old sister
dropping the needle on a Simon and Garfunkel record as she steps out the
door, "This song explains why I'm leaving home to become a stewardess!"
William, after recently discovering that he's only eleven and not thirteen,
explores the mother-forbidden albums left behind by his sister: The Who, Led
Zeppelin, Cream.
Fast-forward four years, the nerdy adolescent William finds himself assigned
to write a story on the up-and-coming rock band "Stillwater."
Patrick Fugit (William) does a major chord job of staging that awkwardly
wonderful adventure of maturing in the wild circus around him. Kate Hudson
(the woman in the poster) plays groupie (sorry, that should be "band-aid")
Penny Lane warmly and whimsically. "One day, you'll be cool," She says with
her hands on William's shoulders. Shot with the camera point blank between
her eyes ... we feel like she's resting on our shoulders and speaking
directly to us.
Then there's Billy Crudup (guitar player Russell Hammond). Just before the
film a fellow reviewer friend mentioned that he was supposed to be the next
best thing ... for the past five years. "Almost Famous," I thought.
Actually, enjoying his performances in several less than great films, I
expected fame from him as well. He's "incendiary" ... in a low-key, gentle,
kind of way.
Frances McDormand as William's "Don't do drugs" mom is also smashing. You'll
remember her from her other awesome performance in "Fargo."
The film progresses behind the scenes of a rock concert tour that had me
just waiting for that final rock chord crescendo so that I could stand up,
cheer and light my lighter (if I had one). But I didn't have a lighter, and
then that one flawed scene just seemed to fly out of the clear beautiful
blue sky like a stalled jet plane striking the screen like nails on a
chalkboard; ultimately deflating my ovation to grin.
Interestingly enough, teenage rock journalist Cameron Crowe
(writer/director) tagged along after quintessential rock star Peter Frampton
back in the day, who was gracious enough to coach the "Stillwater" players.
Frampton chuckles, "I remember sitting with Cameron in the studio - just
like William with his notepad in the film - we were fast friends from then
on. And now I'm working for him."
Almost one of my top ten titles for the year, this imperfect diamond still
has much to enjoy.
Almost Famous. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Billy Crudup, Patrick Fugit, Frances McDormand, Kate Hudson, Jason
Lee, Zooey Deschanel, Michael Angarano.
Written and Directed by Cameron Crowe.
Produced by Cameron Crowe, Ian Bryce at Dreamworks(C)2000.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Susan Granger
   Cameron Crowe's first film since "Jerry Maguire" is so
engaging, entertaining and authentic that it's destined to become a
rock-era classic.  Set in 1973, this slightly fictionalized,
semi-autobiographical, coming-of-age story revolves around a
baby-faced 15 year-old (Patrick Fugit) prodigy whose intelligence and
enthusiasm land him an assignment from "Rolling Stone" magazine to
interview Stillwater, an up-and-coming band. With the help of Penny
Lane (Kate Hudson), a bewitching "Band-Aid," he meets the charismatic
lead guitarist (Billy Crudup) who invites him to join the tour, much
to the dismay of his mother (Frances McDormand) who relentlessly
repeats, "Don't do drugs!"  Soon he's part of the inner circle of the
band he idolizes, disregarding the caution of his rock critic mentor
(Philip Seymour Hoffman): "Friendship is the booze they feed you to
make you feel cool." Eventually, of course, the rookie reporter
becomes disillusioned, honest and unmerciful. What's so compelling is
Crowe's infallible casting which doesn't have a single discordant
note. Patrick Fugit embodies innocent bewilderment, revealing one
layer of surprise after another. Billy Crudup is dynamite, a superstar
waiting to happen. Kate Hudson (Goldie Hawn's real-life daughter)
gives a captivating, flamboyant yet hauntingly poignant performance.
Frances McDormand is bracingly funny, playing with perfect
pitch. Philip Seymour Hoffman is mesmerizing, exploding like a land
mine. Finally, Crowe, cinematographer John Toll, art directors Clay
A. Griffith & Clayton Hartley, and costume designer Betsy Heimann
cleverly capture the sense of time and place.  On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Almost Famous" is a soaring, spirited 10. I loved
it! I haven't had such a good time at the movies in ages.

Author
R.L. Strong
DREAMWORKS PICTURES AND COLUMBIA PICTURES PRESENTS
A VINYL PICTURES PRODUCTION  OF  A CAMERON CROWE FILM
"ALMOST FAMOUS"   BILLY CRUDUP   FRANCES McDORMAND   KATE HUDSON
JASON LEE   PATRICK FUGIT   ANNA PAQUIN   FARUZA BALK   NOAH TAYLOR and
PHILIP SEYMOUR HOFFMAN
MUSIC SUPERVISOR  DANNY BRAMSON   SCORE BY NANCY WILSON
EXECUTIVE PRODUCERS  MARTY P. EWING   SCOTT M. MARTIN   STEVEN P. SAETA
EDITED BY  MARTIN APPLEBAUM
DIRECTOR OF PHOTOGRAPHY JOHN TOLL
PRODUCED BY CAMERON CROWE  IAN BRYCE
WRITTEN AND DIRECTED BY CAMERON CROWE
The 1970's were a time of passage for a lot of us. Cruising with our
friends, going out on our first date, and learning the ins and outs of
too many vices were all part of that passage. Not all of us experienced
the same things. But one thing that we all did have in common and that
was Rock and Roll. Cameron Crowe, the writer of the seminal teen comedy
"Fast Times at Ridgemont High" and Writer, Director of the charming "Say
Anything" and "Jerry McGuire", give us a touching and humorous peon to
youth, love, and most importantly music.
William Miller (Patrick Fugit) is an intelligent young man of 15.
Already in his senior year of High School (thanks to his mother's
skipping two grades, claiming the school system is too limiting). Elaine
Miller (Frances McDermont) is a college professor who is raising her
children on her own (William's father died when William was only 6).
Elaine's fear of modern society creates at atmosphere of repression
around the home, with drugs being the ultimate danger. This leads
William's sister, Anita (Zooey Deschanel) to leave home with her
boyfriend for California. In an effort to expand her little brother's
horizons, she leaves him her album collection, giving him strict
instructions to listen to The Who's "Tommy" with a candle burning, "and
you'll see your future".
William becomes fascinated with the music. Being a gifted child, he
starts to write. Soon he is submitting articles to national magazines
which leads to his meeting famed Cream Magazine critic, Lester Bangs
(Philip Seymour Hoffman). Bangs burned on the industry's homogenization
of music. But he is taken by Williams's innocents and creativity, so
offers the young man an assignment. Interview Black Sabbath and write a
700-word article about the band. William is excited and nervous as his
Mother drives him to the concert. Unable to get past security, Williams
befriends Penny Lane (Kate Hudson); leader of the famed Band Aid troop
of fans (groupies that claimed not to have sex with the bands) and the
band Sweetwater.
Russel Hammond (Billy Crudup) is taken by the young man and gives the
boy a chance at a new gig, interviewing Sweetwater and travelling with
them on their latest tour. This leads to William being approached by
Rolling Stone Magazine to cover the tour and write an inside piece on
the band.
Cameron Crowe is one of the best writers of characters and character
interplay working today. While not having a poetic style like David
Mamet, Crowe's characters speak with a personality and believability
that seems unscripted. This naturalness is most appealing here. All of
the characters are finely drawn and believable in their behavior and
attitudes. And that same quality leads to some very funny and
heartbreaking moments.
Patrick Fugit, in his first film steals the picture with his wide eyed
innocent portrayal of William. His passion for the music and the shear
joy in which he follows the band are just infectous. This is one of the
best debuts by an actor in years. This is a young actor to watch.
Frances McDermont is vivaciously droll as Elaine Miller. So concerned
with her son's upbringing, she constantly reminds him of the dangers of
drugs, while urging him to read the works of Poe, Isben, and Goethe. She
is a strong willed woman who loves her children but refuses to stand in
the way of their future. This is McDermont's best performance since
"Fargo" and is as touching and funny.
Of course, the real showcase performances of the film belong to Billy
Crudup and Kate Hudson. Billy Crudup as Russell Hammond, guitarist for
the band Sweetwater is a young adult dealing with his own fame and his
growing dissatisfaction with his band. His performance is charmingly
naďve. Here is a man who would just as well be sitting with a beer at a
house party, as he would work on his career. His is a funny, touching
and completely believable realization. And Kate Hudson is absolutely
charming as the love interest Penny Lane. Her love affair with Russell
and her growing affection for William is just a joy to watch. Again, the
naivete of the character is the most notable quality here. Hudson
manages to make Penny Lane both a silly little girl, dreaming of love
and trips to Monaco and a woman who knows that this life style is only
transitory and that her real life lies elsewhere.
The other cast members are all equally fine. In fact, I can't think of
another recent film as perfectly cast and performed as this one this
year. Most notably are, Jason Lee as Jeff Bebe (Sweetwater's lead
singer), to the other members of Band Aid, Anna Panquin as Polexia
Aphrodisia and Faruza Balk as Sapphire are all wonderfully crafted
performances. These are just damn good character performances, and while
never really center stage always remain in the periphery of the film,
adding just the right subtle touches of character and depth to bring
this film its believability.
And foremost throughout the film is the music. The section of songs
ranging from Lou Reed's "Waiting for the Man" to Led Zeppelin's
"Tangerine" is just marvelously chosen, rivaling the soundtrack to
Stephen Feares' "High Fidelity".  And the score by Nancy Wilson (of the
70's group Heart) is equally enjoyable in both its simplicity and its
detail. Wilson also penned two songs for the fictional band, Sweetwater
that will make audiences everywhere searching for more material from
this group.
At the close of the movie, both William and his Family have reconciled
and have grown into adults. And the film will have an equally marvelous
effect on those who see it. A film steeped in charm, nostalgia and joy
for a time when innocents was both painful and blissful, and nothing to
be looked down upon. "Almost Famous" is one of this years best films.
Š 2000 R.L. Strong
Nothing in this article may be copied or re-written without the
expressed permission of the author.
THE CORNUCOPIA OF FILM
http://www.geocities.com/rs080455

Author
Chad Polenz
There's a scene towards the end of "Almost Famous" wherein the main 
character, William, is sitting at his typewriter with a terrible case of 
writer's block. He's just been on a great adventure touring America with a 
popular rock band and even with all the experiences he's gone through he 
still can't figure out how to begin to write about it.
I'm kind of in the same position myself. I've put off writing this review for 
two weeks, due partly to the fact I'm a lazy schmuck. Then again, a lot of it 
has to do with the fact "Almost Famous" is a film that makes you think about 
it for quite a while after you've seen it (both the flaws and the good 
points).
The movie tells the story of a 15-year-old boy named William Miller who's an 
accelerated student and is a natural writing wiz. The setting is San Diego in 
1973 and he's a huge rock and roll fan who's witnessing first-hand the 
changes the music is undergoing at the time. He's hired by Lester Bangs, the 
editor of Creem Magazine, to cover a Black Sabbath concert. His work is so 
impressive an editor at Rolling Stone offers him a high-paying job to do an 
in-depth piece on an up-and-coming rock band named Stillwater. William takes 
the job (much to his mother's refusal) and proceeds to experience the music 
lifestyle very personally. In a few weeks he gains more life experience than 
some people do their entire lives.
Writer and director Cameron Crowe made this film as a sort of 
autobiographical piece. He was writing for Rolling Stone when he was a teen 
and toured with some big bands in the early 70's. You certainly get that 
feeling of authenticity when it comes to the rock lifestyle. But this is also 
a commercial dramedy and character study plays a major role in how it works. 
There is no real plot to speak of, just experiences. I'm not sure what stuff 
actually happened to Crowe and what has been plugged in for the sake of a big 
Hollywood movie, but for the most part it all works well.
Crowe's films all have an emotional center to them, and "Almost Famous" 
certainly doesn't stray from that formula. Not one major character or major 
characteristic dominates - it's a push-and-pull, give-and-take, yin-and-yang 
amalgam. 
William is the straight guy for the majority of the film, trying to be a true 
journalist and staying out of the story but it's impossible to do that 
completely. He meets Penny Lane, a teenage rock groupie who truly loves the 
music and isn't out to be the dish all the rockers fall for. She's shallow in 
some respects but quite deep in others. She reminds me of the Jenny character 
from "Forrest Gump" - a slave to the flesh's desires and temptations but she 
still has some heart and truly cares about those close to her. There's 
Russell Hammond, the lead guitarist for the fictional band Stillwater who 
likes Penny a lot but doesn't have a lot of direction in his life. He thinks 
he's better than his bandmates and doesn't seem to appreciate a lot of things 
he should.
Not surprisingly there's a sort of love triangle going on between these three 
characters. Penny is a mysterious and charming girl, it's easy to see why 
William likes her but why Russell does isn't explained very well. This is one 
of the film's biggest flaws. One of the major plot arcs involves Penny and 
her other teenage friends who go with Stillwater everywhere. You have to 
wonder why these men in their late 20's like having teenage girls around so 
much (they don't come off as perverts or anything). You also wonder what the 
girls' home lives are like that they would leave their families to be with 
rock stars. Chalk it up to the fact it's the early 70's and it was just part 
of the time, or that teenage girls have always loved celebrities and would 
probably do anything to be with them. I'll take that as a given but I think 
Crowe could have explained this just a little better (the closest we get is a 
scene in which Penny tells William her real name).
The majority of the film revolves around William's adventure with the band. It
's a backstage look at what it's like to be in a struggling rock band. 
They're doing what they love but they haven't "made it" yet (hence the 
title). They live the rock lifestyle so perfectly it's a cliche, but the 
scenes are so genuinely good it's forgivable. Yup, there's quite a lot of 
references to alcohol, drugs, promiscuous sex and the sheer decadence of it 
all. Surprisingly it's not as abrasive as you would think - probably because 
Stillwater is a progressive rock band, not a hardcore metal band or anything 
like that. They are basically normal guys who happen to play music for a 
living.
And that's what "Almost Famous" is really about - the music. More 
specifically, the great prog-rock of years gone by. Crowe is a huge rock fan 
and has used it well in all his previous films, here it's a film all about 
rock and none of it is gratuitous. I felt like this film was made just for me 
and my friends who love "classic rock" (no references to Pink Floyd or Rush - 
my favorite bands!). Crowe simply basks in the beauty of the music. An 
excellent example of this is the final sequence that closes the film. Led 
Zeppelin's "Tangerine" is playing in the background when the scene ends and 
the screen fades to black. Instead of cross-fading to a different song or 
abruptly ending it, the screen remains black for a good 10 or 20 seconds so 
that the piece may finish - THEN the credits roll. This is also the first 
movie EVER to feature a Led Zeppelin song on the soundtrack (four of them 
actually), that tells you how authetic it must be if Robert Plant and Jimmy 
Page okayed the use of their music.
Not that this film is perfect, upon seeing it a second time I noticed many 
flaws. The scene in which all the band members reveal their secrets seems 
contrived and forced. I also noticed a lot of unnecessary little scenes and 
shots and some of the editing appears choppy. Newcomer Patrick Fuqit is 
pretty good as the innocent William but the scenes in which he has to express 
true emotion are awkward especially since Billy Crudup, Kate Hudson, Phillip 
Seymour Hoffman and Frances McDormand are so excellent in their roles. 
Still, there's a lot of great things to say about "Almost Famous." It's 
enjoyable from start to finish, refreshingly original and funny and dramatic 
at the same time. It IS about the music, man!
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-1959-7332A0C-39D95601-prod1
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.
