Title
Review for Theory of Flight, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Sanford

THE THEORY OF FLIGHT (Fine Line)
Directed by Paul Greengrass
 There's a certain curiosity whenever real-life lovebirds team up onscreen,
and inquiring minds will always want to know if the pairing will sizzle like
Bogart and Bacall, or fizzle like Madonna and Sean Penn. In "The Theory of
Flight," Kenneth Branagh and Helena Bonham Carter generate enough good will
to keep aloft a charming bit of whimsy that probably would crash and burn
with lesser talents at the controls. "Flight" is fluff but the actors,
particularly the spellbinding Carter, give it an aura of elegance.
 Richard Hawkins' screenplay brings eccentric painter/inventor Richard
(Branagh) and wheelchair-bound Jane (Carter) together when Richard is
sentenced to do community service after trying to fly off the top of a
London office building in a homemade glider. As it so happens, the generally
bitter Jane only comes to life when she's on the flying swing ride at the
local amusement park. Though both deny it, they know they're two of a kind.
 Though most of the people around her try to convince her otherwise, Jane
knows she's in the last stages of a muscular deterioration disease, and she
has one very specific last wish she'll need Richard's help to fulfill.
Hawkins' writing is at its best when it addresses the condescending attitude
the public tends to take towards the disabled, a stumbling block that
threatens to keep Jane from achieving her goal. Jane acknowledges that "a
long time ago my body and me separated," but she refuses to have anything to
do with those folks who assume that her often garbled speech implies that
she's losing her mind as well.
 Carter taps into Jane's rebellious passion for life and creates another in
her gallery of striking portraits of unconventional women. This performance
is easily as brave and incisive as her Oscar-nominated turn in last year's
"The Wings of the Dove," as the actress undercuts any possible pathos with a
sly naughtiness and dry wit. When Richard tells her he stopped painting
because he thought he lacked the talent, Jane sneers, "Lack of talent never
stopped anyone."
 "jasanfor"It's also pleasing to see Branagh, free of the tics that infested his
performances in "Celebrity" and "Mary Shelley's Frankenstein," relax into a
role as he does here. It's his most ingratiating work since "Much Ado About
Nothing" and a reminder of what a refreshing presence he can be when he's
not striving to hit some new histrionic high.
James Sanford

Author
Scott Renshaw
     If it's December or January, it must be time for "triumph over
illness/handicap" films.  They spew forth during Oscar season like colored
hankies from a magician's sleeve, playing to the Academy's time-honored
tradition of tossing nominations at anyone who hops into a hospital bed,
or occupies a wheelchair, or otherwise tackles physical or mental
adversity.  Into this crowded field comes THE THEORY OF FLIGHT, a quirky
comedy-drama of romantic friendship starring Kenneth Branagh as Richard
Hawkins, an artist so flighty that he actually does try to take
flight...right off the roof of a building.  For his trouble Richard is
sentenced to community service, which takes the form of assisting Jane
Hatchard (Helena Bonham Carter), a young woman stricken with ALS (better
known in the U.S. as Lou Gehrig's Disease) and confined to a wheelchair.
She wants only one thing from Richard:  for him to help her realize her
life's dream before she dies.  Cue soaring music and inspirational
message.
     Well, not exactly.  It seems that Jane's life's dream is to lose her
virginity.  None-too-keen on doing the deed himself, Richard instead
decides to rent her a gigolo for one night.  And none-too-wealthy, being a
flighty artist, he decides to rob a bank to pay for it.  Thus unfolds a
singularly odd sort of film, at once a dark comedy, an unconventional love
story and, yes, a triumph over illness/handicap film.
     The strange thing about THE THEORY OF FLIGHT is that it's not always
clear whose triumph over a handicap will be the focus of the film.  As the
narrative progresses, it becomes ever more clear that Richard is the real
protagonist of the piece, the character who is supposed to learn and
change through this experience.  Unfortunately, he's also the character
who is least interesting, and makes the least sense.  There's something
emotionally amiss with this fellow, that's for certain; exactly what that
something is, not so much.  Kenneth Branagh (apparently still suffering
side effects from channeling Woody Allen in CELEBRITY) is all neurotic
discomfort and goofy twitches.  The character's intense desire to follow
through on the bank robbery falls somewhere between melodramatic
affectation and sincere-though-misguided expression of resolve, when only
one or the other would truly clarify things.
     Meanwhile, Helena Bonham Carter continues to act circles around most
of her contemporaries.  Jane is a superb piece of characterization, never
merely the self-pitying, hard-on-the-outside-soft-on-the-inside person
with a handicap that has become such a cinematic cliche.  There's wicked
self-deprecating humor in the character -- she posts a message to an
Internet personals board stating "Hideously crippled young woman seeks
sex" -- but also an innocent wistfulness.  Though it's a challenging bit
of physical acting for Bonham Carter to wrap her mouth around Jane's
slurred speech and adopt the distinctive movements, her finest moment is a
silent one -- a pleading glance at Richard as her voice synthesizer plays
her recorded request.
     It's the clash between our interest in those two characters which
prevents THE THEORY OF FLIGHT from soaring to the highest possible level.
While Richard's awakening to his own self-indulgence may be the point,
it's still tedious watching him indulge himself when watching Jane is so
much more interesting.  Perhaps the problem is that there is too much
high-concept to this tale, too many silly little bits of business to
distract from genuine interaction between the two principal characters.
It's hard for a love story to be great when you want one of the lovers to
end up happy, and the other just to end up an adult.  You have to commend
THE THEORY OF FLIGHT for taking a slightly different flight plan towards
soaring inspiration.  It just can't quite get there on only one good wing.

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Theory_of_Flight_ (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
As part of a community service sentence, Richard (Kenneth Branagh)
becomes the caretaker of Jane (Helena Bonham Carter), a headstrong young
woman stricken with ALS, the degenerative neurological disease better
known as Lou Gehrig's Disease.  It sounds like a garden variety
disease-of-the-week TV movie, but director Paul Greengrass and writer
Richard Hawkins have managed to come up with something fresh and offbeat,
focusing not on Jane's illness, but her desire to lose her virginity
before she dies.  This is not, however, to suggest that the film is a
downer; in fact, the tone of the film is quite light and never sappy,
thanks to the eccentric characters and often comical situations they get
themselves into.
But it's one thing to be offbeat and unconventional and quite another to
be unbelievable, and what keeps the film from truly taking flight is that
too much of Richard's behavior falls under the latter category--namely,
his scheme to rob a bank to buy a gigolo's services for Jane.  In fact,
his main character quirk--to achieve flight with a homemade plane pieced
together from unwanted articles from his past--is also a bit hard to
swallow.  Nonetheless, the film does achieve some emotional resonance,
due to solid performances by the leads (Bonham Carter is especially good,
barely recognizable and completely convincing) and their effortless
chemistry.
Michael Dequina
Chat Forum Host, The Official Michael Jordan Web Site
http://jordan.sportsline.com
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown


Author
Harvey S. Karten
    When you pass somebody who seems quite a bit different
from the usual passersby--perhaps a homeless man with
unkempt hair and dirty clothes, maybe a person who is just 3
feet tall, could be someone who is not only in a wheelchair
but breathing with a the aid of a tube--you are likely to
believe that this individual is wholly distinct from all others on
the street.  You may be correct.  But  you may also be
overlooking two other factors. 1) The person with the strange
appearance may have sharp mental functions totally
unaltered by his or her physical condition; and 2) The
accompanying person who looks wholly ordinary may in fact
be the one with unorthodox mental functioning.  
   In "The Theory of Flight," Paul Greengrass makes use of 
Richard Hawkins's wholly original script to unfold a comedy of
offbeat proportions between two such individuals.  Jane
(Helena Bonham Carter) is a woman of just twenty-six years
who'd likely get a wide berth from others.  She is wheelchair
bound, suffering from terminal Lou Gehrig's Disease, a
severe neurological condition which does not affect her
intellect or her ability to feel but restricts her physical
movement and slurs her speech almost beyond
comprehension.  Richard (Kenneth Branagh), looks
reasonably average but has a Peter Pan complex, a refusal
to grow up, which leads him at one point to go literally over
the edge.  One day, after suffering a mini nervous
breakdown, he perches with a pair of wings on the edge of a
London building and takes flight--right into a net provided by
the police.  Winding up in court, he is sentenced to 120 hours
of community service and assigned to a rehab center to be
Jane's companion.
  If you can accept the premise that a court would
commission a handsome but troubled young man to escort a
virtually paralyzed young woman about, you can embrace the
oddities in the rest of the film.  As the two get to know each
other, the usually untrusting Jane gradually warming up to
her escort's infantile dreams of taking flight, Jane asks a
favor which serves as the story's bombshell.  She is a virgin,
having suffered symptoms of deterioration at the age of
eighteen, and is obsessed with erotic fantasies.  Jane spends
most of her time glued to a computer, has been exposed to
porno films, sees advertising on the tube that plays up sexual
fantasies to sell products, and observes the influence that sex
plays in the stories she watches as well.  Carefree that
Richard may be, he cannot bring himself to satisfy what is far
more than a passing whim of this woman, a person who is
treated like a child by so many others and who therefore can
relate to Richard's own, self-created immaturity.
   "The Theory of Flight" has a modicum of comical and
sentimental scenes alike.  One involving Richard's hiring of a
strikingly handsome gigolo for his unfortunate friend is a gem
with both farcical and tragic import, while the schemes of
Richard's ex-girl friend Julie (Holly Aird) play up the
restraining, even joyless nature of the down-to-earth life.  
   Ultimately the film does not soar.  Director Paul Greenglass
does what he can to liberate the two from all that is holding
back their enjoyment of human existence, but though he films
much of the comedy on the rolling hills of Bristol, "The
Theory of Flight" has the imprint of staged play: two
frustrated oddballs turning their backs on society to work out
their defeats and disappointments.  Helena Bonham Carter,
who has studied the movements and attitudes of people with
severe neurological challenges, is convincing, making the
audience listen closely to understand her speech.  Kenneth
Branagh still belongs, in my opinion, to heroic roles, and
should avoid cloning Woody Allen as he did to some extent in
this film and in "Celebrity" before it.  His stuttering is irritating
enough: his frequent use of the adolescent expression "you
know" is dispiriting, just as Woody Allen's was in the latter's
"Full Tilt Boogie."  The performers and director do realize the
writer's contention that you may have a disease, but the
disease needn't have you, but do so in such a feathery
manner that the movie lacks a sufficient sense of comedy,
catastrophe, or convincing eccentricity.
