Title
Review for True Crime (1999)
Number of Reviews
26

Author
Wil Tirion
True Crime, Clint Eastwood's 41st starring role and 21st film as a director
follows the done-to-death storyline of a prisoner on Death Row. Isaiah
Washington is Frank Beechum, a black man in the wrong place at the wrong
time who suddenly finds himself convicted, sentenced and forgotten for a
convenience store robbery he never committed.
Six years later he is due a lethal injection at one minute past midnight.
What he actually gets is a cliché. The cliché arrives in the form of Steve
Everett (Clint) an ageing - and I do mean ageing - alcoholic and the kind of
stereotypical movie journalists who wakes with a fag and a bottle of Jim
Bean every morning in a cesspool apartment; the kind who can best be
described as a hard-nosed, well lived-in maverick who makes up the rules as
he goes along; the kind who could as easily be a long divorced,
turned-to-the-bottle hard nosed maverick cop, or a downtrodden turned-to-
the-bottle hard-nosed maverick private eye, or any number of other one
dimensional hard-nosed maverick characters from a 70s thriller movie.
His boss at the Oakland Tribune is James Woods and here your heart begins to
lift, you wonder if this might be the saviour of the movie. But no. Woods'
character is such a cliché himself (cold-hearted, loud-mouthed, hard-nosed,
seen-it-all editor-in-chief,   with a real dislike for mavericks) you find
yourself wondering if in making the film Eastwood and his team of writers
didn't actually use the Reader's Digest Book of Failsafe Hollywood Formulas
to contrive the whole deal. Indeed the film and its characters seem like a
parody of themselves and James Woods' appalling overacting only contributes
wholeheartedly to this impression.
When Everitt becomes convinced of Beechum's innocence, Woods gives him one
last chance - allowing him just 12 hours to come up with some hard evidence,
save an innocent life and get the scoop, thus presumably saving himself from
the next step in the evolutionary life of the alcoholic reporter/cop/private
eye, that of unemployment and a chance to really hit the bottle with some
vigour.
In all fairness you can't blame Clint for the dull plot. Andrew Klan, author
of the original book must shoulder that particular responsibility. What you
can blame Clint for, and blame I shall, is the evident gallon-load of
Eastwood-ego he has poured shamelessly into the film. To be frank, Clint is
passed it. He looks his age (69) and he certainly can't carry off the role
he has awarded himself in True Crime, without looking decidedly out of
place.
Think back to In the Line of Fire where he played an ageing bodyguard barely
capable of keeping up alongside the President's car as it ambled along at a
steady 2MPH, and you'll recall thinking you were watching Clint's last
action role, his farewell to those glory-days of guns n' babes with an
amusing send-up of his own debilitating OAP status. Unfortunately Clint
seems far from ready to hand in his sex symbol status and bidding a sensible
farewell to the glory days of guns n' babes is evidently the furthest thing
from his mind.
Washington is the movie's only plus, carrying out his role as the sentenced
convict with dignity and shrewd depth. You might suspect Denis Leary would
add a credit or two to the film as well as some light relief, but sadly the
strange bluntness of Leary's unsubtle humour and the serious racial
undertones of the main plot mix as well as you'd expect. i.e. not atall.
So at the end of the decade we see another of life's unhappy events unfold -
a man long past his sell-by-date refusing to go out gracefully. To my mind
only Brando ever successfully accomplished such a feat and Eastwood is
certainly a long way from entering that particular class of actor. Lets just
hope, if he must return again with another film like this, its as director
only. Like I always say, liver spots and action thrillers simply don't mix.

Author
Jamie Peck
Rating: **1/2 (out of ****)
Warner Bros. / 2:07 / 1999 / R (language, sexuality, brief violence)
Cast: Clint Eastwood; Isaiah Washington; Denis Leary; Lisa Gay Hamilton;
James Woods; Diane Venora; Bernard Hill
Director: Clint Eastwood
Screenplay: Larry Gross; Paul Brickman; Stephen Schiff
The big crime committed by "True Crime" is one of excess, but it's
rarely severe enough to be labeled as wretched. This stately Clint
Eastwood thriller suffers from both an overlong running time and
eventually overcooked story elements, undoings that have also jumbled
recent directorial outings "Absolute Power" and "Midnight in the Garden
of Good" and Evil, and even suffers a bit from the Aging Matinee Idol
Factor - at 68, Eastwood's self-exuding machismo sometimes comes across
like a weird parody of itself, and the actor is way too old to doff his
shirt for a sex-aftermath scene. Still, he's in better shape than some,
a statement that also rings true for "True Crime."
Those who have seen the coming attraction and are aware of the whole
death row storyline know that "True Crime" looks about as promising as
"Dead Man Walking" with our man Clint in the Sister Helen Prejean role.
But surprise, surprise: Portions of the movie really hit home, even if
its ambitions are diametrically opposite to that deep, thoughtful
rumination on capital punishment. Dramatic sparks do occasionally fly as
Eastwood's Steve Everett, a newspaper reporter sorting through his share
of nasty personal problems (most involving a voracious lust for women),
maneuvers through a most difficult assignment - to chronicle the last
hours of life spent by a convicted killer.
Of course, this being a Clint Eastwood film, the set-up isn't as
meditative as it might sound. Everett is handed the article with little
prep time, just after the writer slated to take it dies in a sudden car
accident, but immediately senses that things aren't quite kosher. So,
with less than 24 hours left until the execution, he sets out on an
all-out quest to find out what really happened in this seemingly random
convenience store murder. Adding fuel to the fire is that the alleged
perpetrator (noble Isaiah Washington) maintains his innocence yet has a
double-strike criminal record and questionable ties to the victim, only
circumstantial evidence exists, and witness testimony is faulty at best.
Can clues and leads overlooked for six years be unearthed in time to
save a condemned man who very well might be innocent? Maybe not in the
real world, but there's probably a serious dearth of living journalists
with Eastwood's rough, squinty-eyed determination - an attribute that
serves both his character's plight and his dedication as a filmmaker to
deliver the goods. Here, those include a fine attention to detail and a
full-fledged sense of humor that often borders on surprising; most of
the laughs come from subplots involving the bickering between Everett
and his high-strung superior (James Woods). So good is this material
that you occasionally wish it were "True Crime"'s main focus.
Too bad most of the other discursions don't gel as well. Much is made of
the fact that Everett is fooling around with the wife of his aware
section editor (Denis Leary), but this aside provides little more than
prolonged manly glaring. Everett's failing marriage is also given
generous (and often questionable) coverage, bogging the narrative down
further, while random sidetracks involve penitentiary workers on a lunch
break, a randy homeless man whose footage seems cut from a completely
different movie, and Michael McKean as a intrusive prison chaplain. What
the latter is doing here is anybody's guess, especially since his comic
talents aren't rewarded with any kind of a payoff.
But as long as "True Crime" sticks to Eastwood's dealings with
Washington and/or Woods, it cranks out a fine flow of strong scenes,
even when they involve twists and revelations best described as
suspension of disbelief-reliant; this must be the first cinematic
mystery, for example, to hinge upon the location of a rack of potato
chips, while a key clue turns up with "something fishy here" literally
_inscribed_ on it elsewhere. Swallow goofiness like this and "True
Crime" ranks as serviceable matinee fare, as cool and cozy as it comes.
It could be Eastwood's relaxed-as-blue-jeans ardor paired with the overt
plot familiarity, but this must be the most comfortable
race-against-the-clock scenario ever.
Š 1999 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit The Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/
"There is possibly an audience for this movie, but I have the oddest
feeling that on opening night the people in the theater will all be in
black and white. See Pleasantville' if you wonder what I mean. In fact,
see Pleasantville' anyway." -Roger Ebert on "I'll Be Home for
Christmas"

Author
FilmFan16@aol.com
Directed by Clint Eastwood.
Cast: Clint Eastwood, Isaiah Washington, Lisa Gay Hamilton, Denis Leary, 
James Woods, Diane Venora, Francesca Fisher-Eastwood, Michael Jeter, 
Mary McCormack, Frances Fisher, Lucy Alexis Liu.
1999 - 127 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and violence).
Reviewed March 21, 1999.
As with 1995's "The Bridges of Madison County" and 1997's "Midnight in 
the Garden of Good and Evil," actor-director Clint Eastwood has 
successfully adapted a well-recieved novel to the screen, this time it 
being Andrew Klavan's "True Crime." Although unread by me, this film 
version is a taut, if somewhat overstuffed, suspense-drama, that is 
worlds better than a similar Eastwood picture that was also adapted from 
a novel, 1997's "Absolute Power."
Eastwood stars as crackerjack newspaper reporter Steve Everett, a man 
pushing his late-60's who nonetheless is always getting involved with 
much younger women, and cheating on his wife, Barbara (Diane Venora). 
When a well-liked young colleague of his (Mary McCormack) is in a car 
accident after drinking-and-driving and is killed, Everett finds himself 
getting her original job of interviewing Frank Beachum (Isaiah 
Washington), a black man on death row for a crime he claims he didn't 
commit, only hours before his planned execution that night. Looking 
through the case records, Everett finds that there were two witnesses 
during the fateful day when Frank allegedly went into a convenience 
store and shot and killed the female worker there, who happened to be 
six months pregnant. One of the witnesses only saw Frank run out of the 
store, while the other walked in to only see him holding the gun, but 
neither heard the shot. While investigating the store, Everett discovers 
that the witness' story of seeing Frank with a gun was impossible since 
there was a large stand of potato chips blocking his view. Convinced 
Frank really is innocent, Everett only has a small number of hours to 
find out what actually did happen, so that Frank will be saved from his 
impending death.
As with the superior "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil," one of 
the delights in "True Crime" is Eastwood's, as well as screenwriters' 
Larry Gross, Paul Brickman, and Stephen Schiff, effortless handling of 
the wide array of character, from those already mentioned, to Beachum's 
grieving wife (Lisa Gay Hamilton), Everett's precocious, neglected 
daughter (Eastwood's real-life daughter, Francesca Fisher-Eastwood), and 
Everett's fast-talking editor (James Woods) and edgy co-worker (Denis 
Leary). The treasure of watching these characters is in the writing, 
which might only give some of the people a handful of scenes, but is 
able to develop each one enough so that we feel we know them. On the one 
hand, the many characters and stories swarming around occasionally 
become slightly unbelievable since the movie takes place within a 
24-hour period, but on the other hand, they are very well-done. One of 
the unexpected subplots that snuck up on me and acquired a heartbreaking 
pay-off involved Everett's rocky relationship with his wife, played by 
Venora in an assured, precise turn. All performances, in fact, are 
memorable, but the others that stand out include Washington, who doesn't 
make one false note in portraying a man terrified of dying, and yet 
knows he must be strong for his wife and daughter; Hamilton, who was 
also wonderful in last year's "Beloved"; and Michael Jeter, as one of 
the witnesses who firmly believes Beachum was holding a gun...or does 
he?
At the center of everything is Eastwood in his first screen appearance 
in two years, and he really is very good here, although I did have some 
problems with the way his sex life was portrayed. Portrayed as 
irresisitible to all women, even those still in their teenage years, 
Eastwood has significantly aged recently, looking even slightly older 
than his actual age of 68. Unlike Robert Redford, who is now in his 70's 
and still could pass for a good-looking fiftysomething, Eastwood holds 
no such scrutiny in a plot contrivance that I could have done without.
Another irksome matter, though one that might have stood out even more 
in the hands of a less-professional filmmaker, is the story itself. So 
many similar movies have been made recently about the exact same subject 
(1995's "Dead Man Walking," 1996's "Last Dance," 1996's "The Chamber") 
that there could virtually be a new film genre invented. Even if 
intelligent and effective, Eastwood might have been better off choosing 
a more original premise for a movie he was going to spend at least a 
year of his life on.
Despite its commonplace storyline and a few small qualms, "True Crime" 
is a respectable film, particularly in its unequivocal details involving 
the characters and genuinely unpredictable outcome (even though the very 
last scene didn't quite sit well with me). Clint Eastwood is a true 
craftsman, as he usually proves with each of his directing jobs, and it 
is due largely to his expertise in character and dialogue that "True 
Crime" rises above its tried-and-true plot outline.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Warner Bros./Zanuck Co./Malpaso production
 Director:  Clint Eastwood
 Writer:  Andrew Klavan (novel), Larry Gross, Paul Brickman,
Stephen Schiff
 Cast: Clint Eastwood, Isaiah Washington, Denis Leary, Lisa
Gay Hamilton, James Woods, Penny Rae Bridges, Frances
Fisher, Bernard Hill, Michael Jeter, Lucy Alexis Liu, Mary
McCormack, Sydney Poitier, Diane Venora
   You may think that movies which depend on the hero's
racing against the clock are juvenile.  For the most part
you're probably correct.  After all, the bomb always gets
defused with two seconds remaining on its clearly marked
clock, and an investigation into the character of the
participants is irrelevant to the action.  In "True Crime," Clint
Eastwood's 21st film as director, Eastwood plays a reporter
who believes a convicted murderer is innocent and has just a
twelve-hour window to stop the poor guy's execution.  While
the competition against the clock does work the audience up
as an edge-of-the-seat nailbiter against its own best attempts
to resist, the sprint to save a life is not the principal theme of
"True Crime."  Eastwood's movie is primarily an analysis of
character made all the more compelling because the hero's
makeup is contrasted unfavorably with that of the prisoner. 
The alleged killer is a born-again Christian with a loving and
responsible attitude toward his wife and daughter, while the
reporter is a drunk and at the age of sixty-eight an
unreconstituted womanizer who ignores even his basic
obligations toward his small daughter.
   Eastwood, one of the world's most popular screen
performers, got his start with spaghetti Westerns by Sergio
Leone, making big box office bucks with such Italian cowboy
operas as "A Fistful of Dollars" and "For a Few Dollars More,"
and contributed his share of violence to the medium as "Dirty
Harry."  He acquired new prestige with the critics for his
revisionist Western "Unforgiven" just seven years ago, taking
a best-picture Oscar.  What's more he joins such notables as
Robert Redford and Warren Beatty in making age irrelevant
to sex appeal, though with "True Crime" he may stretch
credibility a tad by his ability charm women of twenty-three
while neglecting his wife, presumably because she had
reached the ripe old age of thirty-five.
   "True Crime" sets its tone in the very beginning by
centering not on Eastwood's role as a reporter eager to stop
a man's execution, but on his capacity to seduce women
forty-five years his junior.  As Steve Everett, a drunk who had
lost a job in a major daily and now works for an Oakland,
California paper under editors Bob Findley (Denis Leary) and
Alan Mann (James Woods), he works his wiles on a fellow
journalist, Michelle (Mary McCormack) in a local bar.  When
the twenty-something Michelle successfully rebuffs the man's
advances only to die in a tragic auto accident, Everett is
assigned to take Michelle's place and to interview convicted
killer Frank Beachum (Isaiah Washington) at San Quentin
prison just eight hours before Beachum's scheduled
execution.  Beachum was convicted of the murder of a
twenty-three year old clerk in a convenience store on the
testimony of just one witness, who testified that he saw the
man holding a gun and standing over the bloodied corpse. 
Though the exchange is to lead only to a human-interest
sidebar in the paper, Everett's keen sense informs him that
the man is probably innocent.  As he puts it to the convict in
the death house, "The nose is all I have...If it does not work I
might as well drive off the cliff.  The nose tells me you're
innocent."  
   As both actor and director, Eastwood milks the story for
both humor and pathos.  The most amusing scene finds his
boss, Bob Findley, phoning his own wife in order to get in
touch with the reporter, as the paper's honcho is convinced
that Everett is currently in bed with Findley's spouse, Patricia
(played with spirit and wit by Laila Robins).  Following up on
this tryst, chief editor Alan Mann appears to chew the
womanizing reporter out only to ask four or five times--in the
standard James-Woods manner--whether Patricia was good
in bed.
   Director Eastwood is at his best when contrasting the
deteriorating relationship between Everett and his wife
Barbara (Diane Venora) with the nurturing connection that the
condemned man enjoys with his spouse, Bonnie (Lisa Gay
Hamilton) and small daughter, Gail (Penny Rae Bridges).  As
the clock ticks down the final moments before the
treacherous chemicals leak into Frank Beachum's veins,
we're reminded of a similar scene in "Last Dance," but
sharper acting, a wittier script, and clever surprises peppered
throughout the drama make "True Crime" more compelling,
credible and whimsical than the 1996 vehicle for Sharon
Stone.  "True Crime" may not turn proponents of capital
punishment into abolitionists, but together with Viagra, it gives
considerable hope to aging men that they can find compliant
women simply by turning on the charm that their callow
competition simply has not developed.

Author
Walter Frith
The last time Clint Eastwood made a movie as a director that was under two
hours was 1990's 'White Hunter, Black Heart' in which he played a variation
on movie director John Huston who was on a quest to get 'The African Queen'
made.  Based on the novel by Andrew Klavan and written for the screen by
Larry Gross, Paul Brickman and Stephen Schiff, 'True Crime' has the usual
stamp of an Eastwood directed film.  It's long, and has a somewhat corroded
and protracted structure but Eastwood manages to land on his feet the way he
usually does --- by making it absorbing.  You would expect to find a quiet
and somewhat muted tone to a film that is a suspenseful take on the
execution of a possibly innocent man.
In 'True Crime', Eastwood plays Steve Everett, a seemingly washed up
investigative journalist who is one of those guys that cheats on his wife,
drinks and smokes too much, has little or no money, constantly fights with
his superiors, and through it all, is also great at his job.  As the film is
in its early stages, Everett is seen sleeping with the wife of one of his
editors (Denis Leary) who later finds out about the affair and upon
confronting Everett about it, both of them find that cooler heads prevail.
The same can't be said, however, for Everett's senior editor (James Woods),
who is hilarious and has some of the film's best scenes of dialogue in his
conflicts with Everett.
At San Quentin prison, a death row inmate named Frank Beachum (Isiah
Washington) is about to be executed on the day a young female journalist
from Everett's newspaper is supposed to do a human interest story about the
event.  She is killed on in a car wreck on the infamous Dead Man's curve and
the assignment goes to Everett.  He is told to do some straight reporting
and naturally he doesn't listen and the more he thinks about it and observes
the facts of the case, the more he finds out that the prisoner may be
innocent and he is on a last minute crusade to save his life.  Isiah
Washington is excellent in this film as Beachum and he accepts his fate in a
very calm manner.  The guards at the prison during his final hours are
polite and make things as easy for him as possible and Beachum refuses to
show any remorse for the crime to the prison chaplain since he insists he's
innocent.  His wife and little girl visit him (assuming its the last time)
and it's a very emotional scene.
Everett tries to balance his coverage of the story with his personal life
and had, on this day, promised to take his little girl to the zoo.  Never
one to balance his personal and professional life in proper perspective,
Beachum neglects his duty as both father and husband and pursues the story
which should be his first priority after all since a man is about to die.
In addition to being a taut and nail biting dram, 'True Crime' also succeeds
at being an very interesting rap of social commentary on both sides of the
death penalty.  It offers an explanation that at the time of lethal
injection, two guards push the button setting off the machine to inject
poison into the prisoner's system but a computer scrambles the motion of
events so each guard doesn't know who really administered the deadly
punishment.  Sort of like the theory of a firing squad where 6 men open fire
on their prey but only one has live ammunition.  The film also shows the
doubts and fears that prison officials have with carrying out their duty.
Unfortunately, the film takes wild an unexpectedly bizarre turn into
degrading its final twenty minutes into becoming an action picture.
Eastwood makes the film seem like it will throw you a curve ball at the last
minute and while waiting for the inevitable to happen, Eastwood is able to
keep the audience on the edge of their seats as things may turn out
differently than expected.  And Clint even uses slow motion at one point,
something he's long been against and I can't remember the last time he EVER
used it!  Through it all, the movie is well worth a look for the most part,
but waivers from being a potential classic and is instead another
installment in the Clint Eastwood director's library where his style is
becoming too typical.  How many times can you direct a film with pace and
feeling of jazz music, Eastwood's favourite form of musical rhythm which
doesn't always work in his movies!
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Clint Eastwood decides to support some of his own, including his daughter,
wife and ex-girlfriend, in a film that he directs, produces and stars in.
Based on the novel of the same name, this movie runs approximately 125
minutes.
PLOT:
An ex-drunk, wife cheater, bad father and newspaper reporter Everett, gets
assigned to a human interest story covering the execution of convicted
killer Frank Beachum at midnight. With a nose for the truth, Everett slowly
begins to uncover holes in the man's conviction, and sets out to prove his
far-fetched theories.
CRITIQUE:
No suspense. No tension. Little drama. This film provides us with believable
characters, great actors, and another super gruff-and-tumble performance by
the charismatic Clint Eastwood, within the confines of a snails-paced plot,
overly predictable development, and a hilariously convenient conclusion. If
you're looking for an interesting mystery that unfolds with intrigue,
obstacles and queries all around, this film is not the one for you. If
you're looking for a Clint Eastwood film, featuring him playing another
extra-cool character with very little redeemable qualities, and a pace which
provides you with extremely limited progress as it moves along, I would
suggest this film to you wholeheartedly.
Eastwood is charming, and there is no doubt about that. If it was anyone
else in this role, I might've conked out during the early chapters of this
floater. James Woods is also effective as the no-nonsense editor, and Isaiah
Washington as the poor, convicted sap, with the rest of the cast punching in
their time clocks with precision. Ultimately, there just isn't enough
happening in this movie, to recommend it as an entertaining piece of cinema.
Also, the complete 180 degree "change of heart" from a crucial character in
the film seemed falsely created, and left a bad after-taste in my mouth. The
whole film felt like a long day at a baseball game where the teams go into
extra innings tied at zero-it's that feeling when you know that you've been
there long and that time has passed you by, and yet the score is still tied
at nothing. In the end, the film downshifts into your typical "race for the
clock" scenario, and adds a taste of suspense into a film that could've used
much more early on. All in all, a great performance by Eastwood, in a
predictable, slow-moving, character study, disguised as an engaging,
crime-solving mystery.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Clint Eastwood's real-life daughter plays his cute-as-heck daughter in this
film. His ex-lover, and mother of one of his five children, actress Frances
Fisher, also has a cameo, as well as his current wife, Dina Ruiz, with a
small part.
Actor Sidney Poitier's real-life daughter also plays a role in this film.
Ironically, her real name is also Sydney Poitier.
Clint Eastwood got his first acting role in Rawhide while visiting a friend
at the CBS lot when a studio exec spotted him because he "looked like a
cowboy." He wore the same poncho, without ever having washed it, in all
three of his "man with no name" western movies.
MORE COMING SOON on JoBlo's Movie Emporium

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
         Clint Eastwood's an insightful director and an often
underestimated actor but he needs a more believable story to work with
than "True Crime" - along with a more appealing character to
play. He's a cynical, amoral reporter on the Oakland "Tribune" who
can't keep his pants zipped. In the first scene and in the final
scene, he's hitting on 23 year-old girls. In between, he's wallowing
in a muckraking melodrama about a noble black man (Isiah Washington)
who's bravely facing execution on Death Row in San Quentin for killing
a pregnant white convenience store clerk. The guy's obviously not
guilty and Eastwood - who was given the story as a last-minute fill-in
- is determined to prove his innocence within a 12-hour span to get a
reprieve before the warden can administer the lethal injection. It's
far-fetched but he finds exonerating evidence, plus a witness, that
the cops, lawyers, and other reporters haven't unearthed over six
years. Meanwhile, he's boffing the wife of the city editor (Dennis
Leary) and bantering with the editor-in-chief (James Woods). Actually,
the scenes in which Eastwood and Woods trade sardonic zingers are the
best in the film. Several extraneous characters are just irritating -
like a foul-mouthed panhandler and a pontificating prison
minister. There are also the Eastwood family players - remember how he
featured his daughter Alison as a singer in "Midnight in the Garden of
Good and Evil"?  This time, his former girl-friend, Frances Fisher,
plays an attorney; his current wife, Dina Ruiz, is a TV reporter
(since she is in real-life, it's not a stretch); and his love-child
with Fisher cavorts as his daughter (she's adorable).  On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "True Crime" is a trite, contrived, tedious
4. It's a crime of excess, filled with people with whom you'd never
want to spend one hour, much less two.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
An early Wednesday evening at home.  Walk in the door, open a bag of chips,
check e-mail.  Nothing interesting, much.  Change clothes, put on running
shoes.  Walk outside.  Raining too hard.  Walk back inside.  Decide to wait
and see if rain stops.  Turn computer monitor back on, pull up game for a
few minutes.  Rain gets heavier, thunder gets louder.  ZOT!!!  Power goes
off.  Power stays off.
Hunger builds, dinnertime approaches.  No microwave, no oven, no
refrigerator, even.  Dry cleaners close at seven.  Walk to car in driving
rain, start engine, get to dry cleaners five minutes before close.  Still
hungry.  Stop by Chuy's, get chicken enchiladas in green chile sauce.  Have
to stop eating like this.  Diet starts soon.
Rain stops on drive home.  Check mailbox on way in.  Get electric bill.
Chuckle at irony.  Get dry cleaning out of car.  Rain stops.  Walk in door,
power still not on.  Open window, read paper until too dark to read
anymore.  Power still not on.
True Crime starts in twenty minutes at dollar theater.  Clint Eastwood
stars and directs.  Better than sitting around in dark room.
Drive to movie theater, arrive as previews start.  Trailer for The Mummy
looks cooler than expected.  Never Been Kissed trailer looks stupid.
Wonder who would ever want to go back to high school.
Movie starts.  San Quentin Prison, exterior scene.  Didn't know San Quentin
was on the Pacific.  Scene where warden talks to condemned criminal.  Blah
sort of scene.
Here is Clint, at a bar, with a young girl.  Clint drinks a tall drink with
a stalk of celery in it.  Wonder how much celery a bar goes through in a
week.  Clint chats up the girl, tells her he stopped drinking, hits on her
a little.  Girl feels uncomfortable, leaves bar, drives away.
Girl is driving drunk in the rain.  Worse yet, girl decides to change radio
stations.  Girl comes up on Deadman's Curve, spins out, dies in horrible
preventable car crash.  Yet another innocent life sacrificed to make a
corny plot point.  Wonder when we will ever learn from these tragedies?
Clint is needed to replace girl on story about imminent execution of
condemned criminal from first scene.  James Woods and Denis Leary talk bad
about Clint behind his back.  Woods actually looks like he's doing a Denis
Leary impression.  Denis Leary glowers a lot, not wanting to upstage Woods
while he's doing his Denis Leary impression.
Clint comes into newsroom and is shocked and horrified over girl's death
for about two minutes.  Clint starts to investigate story, asking questions
about murder that the condemned man allegedly committed.  Clint stops to
light up cigarettes over protests of co-workers and to have a boring
conversation with his secretary about sexual harassment.  Wonder if anybody
ever told Dirty Harry Callahan to stop smoking.
Clint also calls his wife, who is Diane Venora, who was pretty good in The
Jackal, which was otherwise pretty bad.  Clint's wife reminds him to take
his daughter to the zoo.  Clint intersperses investigation into innocence
of condemned man with family life, doing neither well.  Dirty Harry
Callahan never would have stopped to take anyone to the zoo that he wasn't
feeding to the tigers.
Scenes go in in prison in the meantime.  Michael McKean plays a
smarmy-looking prison chaplain who gives a bad name to chaplains
everywhere.  The warden and the prison guards are nice enough people, doing
their jobs.  The condemned man shares some awkward moments with his
family.  He decides to have steak for his last meal.  Would choose some
more of those chicken enchiladas myself.
Clint drives around Bay Area, confronting people.  Eventually, he confronts
the condemned man (Isaiah Washington), who explains why he is not guilty.
Clint believes him, so he must not be guilty.  Can Clint save him before
time runs out?  Remind self that Clint is the director and the producer and
Clint can pretty much do what he wants.
Finish watching movie.  Marvel at silliness of ending.  Wonder if this is
just a potboiler for Clint to make other, better movies.  Hope that this is
indeed the case.  Respect the quality of Clint's acting, and the good work
of the supporting cast, but wonder what the screenwriter was thinking.  Ask
self if this was really better than sitting alone in a dark room waiting
for the power to come back on.
Leave theater disappointed.  Drive home.  The power is back on!  Write
review, reset clocks, go to sleep.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Steve "Ev" Everett (Clint Eastwood) is a bad-boy reporter who
refuses to follow any rules.  Right now he is holding back on his
drinking, but he is smoking and, oh yes, sleeping with his editor's
wife.  This does not make for good relationships around the office, but
Ev carries on (in several different senses).  When a fellow reporter is
killed in a (gratuitously spectacular) car accident, Ev picks up her
responsibilities including the interviewing and writing a human
interest sidebar about Frank Beachum (Isaiah Washington), a Death Row
inmate scheduled to be executed the next night at midnight.  But in
reviewing the trial from six years earlier Ev starts questioning
whether the story makes sense.  There appear to be problems in the
trial testimony.  But Ev now mistrusts his own once powerful talent to
"smell out" when there is something suspicious with a story.  And as he
traces the story he sabotages his own effectiveness by not following
anybody's rules but his own.
     Eastwood creates more believable characters for the minor roles
than the character he creates for himself.  But then going back to THE
OUTLAW JOSEY WALES he has frequently done the same thing.  Bernard Hill
plays the role of Luther Plunkett, the prison warden.  It would be
cliche to play him as officious and unfeeling.  Instead he turns out to
be a genuinely caring person.  On the other hand Isaiah Washington has
been getting some favorable press as the condemned Frank Beachum.  We
see a lot of him, but he plays the simon-pure innocent to the hilt.
Where an actor should have personality he has only virtue.  Though his
character was not always so, we see him he is the perfect husband and
father. The film intentionally contrasts his ultra-perfect family
values with those of Everett which have ripped apart Everett's family.
We feel for Beachum, but other than in his moments of greatest pain it
is more for his predicament than for his character.  His family is just
a little too wholesome.  James Woods plays Eastwood's boss at the
newspaper in a role only a little less slimy than his usual.  Woods is
one of the few actors who can steal attention away from Eastwood.
Other familiar actors include Anthony Zerbe and an almost
unrecognizable William Windom as a bartender.
     Clint Eastwood is really a very good director in a very controlled
film. However he has the same Achilles Heel that Woody Allen has.  He
has to paint himself as being the great lover.  His character seems to
be able to seduce any woman he wants.  The problem is that he is
getting on in years.  His youthful good looks have given way to an
older chiseled look.  Eastwood seems to be doing his locker room
bragging on the wide screen.  His even raspier voice is now a sort that
lost actors careers when sound came to films.  Perhaps Eastwood, the
gifted director, should consider if he needs a better star than
Eastwood, the actor.  On the other hand playing the character himself
thematically gives the film one big advantage.  Eastwood almost
invariably plays the outlaw.  He is Kurosawa's samurai Sanjuro, a law
unto himself, transplanted to America.  But in his younger spaghetti
Western and Dirty Harry days he has played that character as hero.  As
he has aged Eastwood has begun to look at that character more deeply
than Kurasawa ever did.  In UNFORGIVEN he began re-examining the hard
man who was this character he had created on the screen.  He began
questioning on film if the violence that was the former screen
persona's daily bread did not exact a toll.  Was the man with the big
gun not dehumanized and desensitized by carrying and using that weapon.
In TRUE CRIME Eastwood shows us how that character gets to middle age
and can no longer make his personal relationships work.  In this film
he clearly envies the man who, though once a criminal, has reformed and
built a strong family, even if that relationship turns out to be only
temporarily.
     Just as an aside, an interesting visual allusion is used.  When Ev
is interviewing Beachum, Eastwood has himself shot through the bars
recreating the poster from his ESCAPE FROM ALCATRAZ.  It is a reminder
of the days when Eastwood was building his reputation and his films
were just solid entertainment.  TRUE CRIME is certainly a good film,
but lacks the fun of his earlier work.  Still I would give it a 7 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        I'll admit that I had high hopes for "True Crime," which may
partially explain the disappointment I feel after screening it.
Andrew Klavan's novel intrigued me, and seemed an ideal choice for
conversion to the big screen: it contains only a handful of major
characters, a great deal of tension, a riveting storyline, and
a number of thought-provoking questions about racism, guaranteed to
stick in the reader's mind.  Granted, it also includes lengthy
passages of exposition that, while perfectly suited to a book, would
only impede a cinematic adaptation.  I knew the conversion would be
a challenge for any screenwriter: he or she would have to be unafraid
to prune Klavan's chatty prose down to something that could be
reasonably covered in a two-hour film.  Even while reading the book,
I imagined how *I* might convert the novel into a screenplay: by
keeping the emphasis on the mystery, jettisoning the exposition, and,
above all, keeping things moving briskly.
        Clint Eastwood's adaptation of this involving novel does not
succeed in any of the above categories: rather than keeping the focus
on the story as a whole, we are repeatedly detoured into the rather
pathetic life of the story's protagonist, Steve Everett (played with
immense weariness by Eastwood himself).  Everett is a newspaper
reporter assigned to cover the impending execution of Death Row
convict Frank Beachum (Isaiah Washington), a black man accused of
murdering a white convenience store clerk over a $96.00 debt.
Beachum, however, has always claimed to be innocent, and something
about his story leads Everett to think he may be telling the truth.
Everett decides to investigate the case further, but time is not on
his side: Beachum faces a lethal injection in less than twelve hours.
        Sadly, Beachum is not the focus of the story, and that's
part of the problem.  I would've liked a better glimpse into the
convict's mind as he sat waiting to be executed for a crime he
claims he didn't commit.  The few scenes we get of Beachum coming
to terms with his fate (like when he tells his wife and daughter
goodbye) are haunting.  If only the tone had remained this honest
and intimate, "True Crime" could've been one of the year's most
touching and emotionally involving films; instead, we get far too
many scenes of Everett annoying nearly everyone he comes into
contact with as he bumbles through his investigation, culminating
in two well-worn staples of detective movies: a car chase involving
the hero and the police, and repeated close-ups of a clock on the
wall, counting down the seconds until Something Significant
happens.  By focusing on these items, the screenwriters have
sacrificed drama for cliche'.
        Clint Eastwood is a fine director, but as is often the case
when filmmakers star in the movies they're directing, he seems
reluctant to cut any scene in which he appears, even if these scenes
add nothing but length to the film.  We already know the film is on
a tight deadline, but the story is repeatedly placed on hold to
explore irrelevant tangents involving Eastwood's character: his
alcoholism, his failed marriage, his infidelities, his relationship
with his daughter, his poor work environment, etc.  I'm willing to
bet that Eastwood the actor overruled Eastwood the director during
the editing stages; why else would such a time-intensive story spend
so much of its length exploring Everett's backstory, rather than the
more time-critical issues at hand?  On more than one occasion I
wanted to reach into the screen, give Eastwood a firm shake, and
urge him to get on with it already.  In this film, he's not so much
Clint Eastwood as Clint Deadwood.
        "True Crime" is a thoroughly forgettable thriller that
begins to fade from the brain immediately after the end credits
roll.  Why in the world anyone thought we needed to see this much
of Steve Everett's life when the much more fascinating character of
Frank Beachum is right there on the screen, practically begging for
acknowledgement, is far behind me.  As is so often the case, the
most interesting components of this tale are rejected in favor of
formula details.  "True Crime" isn't just this movie's title: it's
also my opinion of the way this material was handled.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TRUE CRIME (1999) **  Directed by Clint Eastwood.Written by Larry 
Gross, Paul Brickman and Stephen Schiff, based on the novel by Andrew 
Klavan.Photography, Jack N. Green. Editing, Joel Cox. Production 
design, Henry Bumstead. Music,Lennie Niehaus. .Cast: Clint Eastwood 
(Steve Everett), Isaiah Washington (Frank Beachum), Denis Leary (Bob 
Findley), Lisa Gay Hamilton (Mrs. Beachum), James Woods (Alan Mann), 
Diane Venora (Barbara), Bernard Hill (Warden Luther Plunkitt), 
Michael McKean (Reverend Shillerman),  Francesca Fisher-Eastwood 
(Kate Everett), Laila Robins (Patricia Findley), Mary McCormack 
(Michelle Ziegler), et al. Produced by Eastwood, Richard D. Zanuck 
and Lili Fini Zanuck. Released by Warner Brothers.  127 minutes. This 
film is rated R (violence, sex)
"True Crime" is about two lady-killers. Frank Beachum, a black man, 
was found guilty of murdering a pregnant convenience-store employee. 
to rob the place of less than one-hundred dollars. He is in San 
Quentin's death row.
The other lady-killer is Steve Everett ( 69-year old Eastwood), a hot 
shot  NYC reporter. His exposes of corruption in high places had made 
him enemies. Worse yet was his compulsive womanizing. This crested 
when he had sex with a minor ("I thought she was 18") who was the 
daughter of his newspaper's owner. Expulsion followed, and a period 
of heavy drinking. Now on the wagon, he is working for the Oakland 
Tribune.
We meet him in a bar where he consumes non-alcoholic beverages. Why 
does he go to a watering spot for those?. One rationale might be that 
he has separated from his wife and does not like drinking alone, even 
Dr. Pepper. On the other hand, the now sober Steve has not sworn off 
sex. At the bar he chats up a colleague, Michelle, a cub reporter at 
the Tribune. She cooperates in the flirtation even though she is 
young enough to be his granddaughter.
After a few drinks Michelle leaves the bar. "Drive safe" says Steve 
in one of those phrases that substitute adjectives for adverbs. It's 
night, it's pouring felines and canines, the windshield wipers are 
working overtime, Michelle drives at over 60 mph in the driving rain. 
Is an accident being telegraphed to the audience? You bet. Michelle 
perishes on the unimaginatively named Dead Man's Curve.
The next day, or rather night, on the stroke of 12 Beachum. will be 
executed. The Tribune had assigned Michelle to interview the man in 
his last hours. What bad taste!  How cynical! Now, with the girl 
gone, Steve gets that job. Right away he senses a miscarriage of 
justice. He has special doubts about the reliability of sole witness 
who claimed to have seen Beachum, smoking gun in hand. Steve 
investigates...
Clint Eastwood as justice-maker, righter of wrongs or crusader is 
nothing new. Nor is the film genre of trying to save an innocent man 
from execution. Almost certainly the first example of this was in 
D.W.Griffith's classic, 4-stories epic "Intolerance" (1916).
The death penalty has been, and still is, a major, controversial 
issue, in great part because some people on death row might be 
innocent.
In his twenty-first film as a director, Eastwood tackles as heavy and 
upsetting subject as can be. But what also upsets me is the number of 
persons saying or writing  that "True Crime," is "entertaining," 
"enjoyable," or "fun." Are we so desensitized?
At the paper, Steve gets strict orders from above to stick to the 
formula and try no tricks. The regulations are set by city editor Bob 
Findley (Denis Leary) and editor-in-chief Alan Mann (James Woods).
Bob is dull fellow who is not exactly enamored of Steve. He just 
found out that Steve had been sleeping with Madame Findley. (She had 
perversely  cued her husband by leaving traces of Steve's passage. 
And Steven had been with her earlier, before going to the newspaper).
Alan is by very far the most attention-holding, lively and 
interesting person in the movie. His behavior, lines and actions are 
pure over-the-top James Woods, one of the most fascinating performers 
in Hollywood, even if his presumed politics are wrong.
Undaunted (as Clint is, perpetually), Steve sets to prove the 
innocence of Beacham. What? Can he do this in just, merely, hardly, 
only a dozen hours  (if that many) before the execution?
That's a bit thick. This thins the plot. What a pity that the 
ludicrousness of it all detracts from the seriousness of a situation 
replete with human pain, anti-capital punishment messages, 
anti-racism, and the injustice of justice gone wrong.
Conveniently and artificially stressing the suspense is the fact that 
with  every minute counting Steve's estranged wife practically 
bullies him to take, on that very day, their 5 1/2 year-old girl to 
the zoo, as previously arranged.  Absurdly, the strong Eastwoodian 
character obliges. (The girl is Eastwood's daughter with Frances 
Fisher. This and other aspects shown seem to be self-references to 
Clint's own womanizing)
Artificially, far too neatly, there's a stress on parallels between 
Steve's failed family and the strong bonds in Beacham's. The latter's 
desperate wife and their little girl visit him for the last time ever.
In artificially and most inappropriately tacked on black humor, the 
San Quentin. prison's chaplain is a smug, unfeeling prig who brings 
phony and wrong "consolations" to Beacham, irritates him as well as 
all others.. It's in terribly bad taste, yet the clergyman is very 
well played by another actor who is on my list of favorites:.the 
superbly versatile, chameleon-like  Michael McKean who, like that 
most hyper of thespians, James Woods, has enhanced many a movie and 
TV series (e.g. "Dream On")
The rest of the cast is good and performs soberly. Fine too are the 
production values, cinematography, and especially the depressing 
sounds of clanking prison doors and gates.
But the film is one of those time-watching affairs where clocks (as 
here) or other types of countdown timers keep approaching inexorably 
the fatal H-hour. It's been used, misused and overused in  movies 
about executions, war, terrorism, heists and practically all other 
genres, comedies included (e.g. Kubrick's "Dr. Strangelove") The best 
application of this, one that transcends gimmickry, is in "High Noon."
Given the impossible time-frame, Steve's instincts are more like 
powers of divination than detection.. His laser-sharp eyes that zoom 
on  crucial clues add to the unrealism,. Steve's movie-traditional 
(i.e. deja vu cliche) last minute mad drive to get to the Governor on 
time to save Beacham is ridiculous.
I do appreciate the portrait of Steve as a superanuated Don Juan for 
not trying to redeem him. However, the under-12-hours cliffhanger 
gets more unlikely by the minute. While the subject is strong,  its 
treatment is wrong. It's patchworky, as if the three scriptwriters, 
rather than collaborate, made  separate contributions which were 
cobbled together in an unreal and unsubtle manner.
The "de rigueur" song that goes with the end-credits is, as usual, 
bad, irrelevant and dumb.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Michael Redman
We'd like for our heroes to be saints. In the complexity of our world, it
would be wonderful if something were simple. We want the good guys to gallop
up, wear white hats, rescue fair damsels, always tell the truth and fight for
truth, justice and the American way. The ability to leap tall buildings in a
single bound is a bonus we expect.
Of course it's not always like that. In truth, it's probably never like that.
Bill Clinton is demonized because he had an affair with a younger woman.
Picasso often wasn't a pleasant person. John Lennon was criticized after a
drunken night in a bar. Kurt Vonnegut can be a grouch.
Obsession sometimes leads to excellent work, but it doesn't necessarily lead
to "nice."
"Oakland Tribune" editor-in-chief Alan Mann (James Woods) puts it best when he
describes Steve Everett (Clint Eastwood) as an [expletive deleted] but a great
reporter. Everett isn't an admirable guy. He keeps getting kicked off of
newspapers for sleeping with the editors' wives and daughters. He doesn't have
much time for his family. He's an alcoholic, just two months sober. He ignores
his boss's orders. Worst of all, he smokes in the office.
When a woman assigned to write a human interest article about an execution is
killed in a car wreck, Everett's editor Bob Findley (Denis Leary) phones his
own wife to locate him. Luckily he was there, next to her.
Everett is known for going overboard on his stories and Findley warns him that
they just want a puff piece. A couple of minutes after receiving the
assignment, the reporter decides that something is wrong and he's going to
find out what it is.
Frank Beachum (Isaiah Washington) is scheduled to be put to death in 12 hours
so Everett doesn't have much time.
Although the film resorts to a number of time-worn devices, it's done with
style. There's a clock counting down the minutes, but fortunately it not a red
digital one superimposed in the corner of the screen. It's fairly obvious that
Beachum is innocent. The action is intense in the last few minutes. These are
formulaic but the audience is on the edge of their seats despite it all.
The reporter and the convict have a lot in common but they are completely
different. Everett's estranged relationship with his wife and daughter is
directly contrasted with the warmth exhibited when Beachum's wife and daughter
visit the condemned man.
Eastwood has become known for taking chances during recent years. He doesn't
shoot anyone here, but he's not a kinder gentler Dirty Harry. Everett is a
jerk, but he's our hero. Eastwood isn't afraid to display his character or his
own weaknesses. Although he's in good shape, a nude scene for a man in his
sixties shows courage.
Some of the best bits are between Eastwood and Woods. The characters are
buddies, both with respect for a good story. When Mann is chewing Everett out
for sleeping with Findley's wife, he asks several times how she was. During a
showdown between the three newspaper men, Mann dismisses the rules-and-regs
Findley and sides with the rogue.
Early in the film when Everett is told of the female reporter's death, he says
the right words: "I was just with her yesterday." "That's too bad." But
there's no hint of feeling behind them. What at first appears to be poor
acting is actually an insight into his personality. There appears to be no
emotion because there is no emotion.
He's a hard man. Everett explains to Beachum that all he has is his nose for
news. Without that he is nothing. He has given up his personal life for his obsession.
Like a number of films, the major problem is the last five minutes. Eastwood
had me in the palm of his hand with the well-constructed film until he decided
to put a bow around it. The film could end just before Everett goes toy
shopping. If Eastwood had abandoned the feel-good finish, it would have been a
much more powerful experience.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years and admits a certain
admiration for obsession. Email confessions of your obsessions to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 3/25/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
Y2K articles: http://www.indepen.com/

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
The decade of the '90s has not been infinitely wonderful for
Clint Eastwood. The Hollywood icon followed "Unforgiven" with "In
The Line Of Fire", then did some sub-par films like "Absolute
Power" & "Midnight In The Garden Of Good And Evil". Those first
two films are much, much better than the second two or even "A
Perfect World". So it's safe to say that Eastwood has slipped in
the latter part of the decade after a couple of near-brilliant
pictures. The decade ends with his latest, "True Crime", a
thriller with plenty of ups & downs. Not quite a top-notch
effort, this film is watchable more for Eastwood's fine acting
than his acceptable, yet standard, directing.
Eastwood stars as Steve Everett, a crack reporter for the Oakland
Tribune who is long in the tooth and living on reputation. To
give this movie a nice dose of humanity, Everett is written as a
thoroughly flawed character (aren't we all thoroughly flawed
characters?). He's a recovering alcoholic who cares only about
himself in his quest for self-fulfillment. Despite having a
wonderful family--an attractive wife & an adorable daughter--he's
a philaderer too. Basically, he's a real person with real
problems. And he's a person who has his own journalistic
standards. After all, Everett resigned from a prestigious
newspaper when his bosses wouldn't print some juicy details he
digs up about the mayor while working in New York. Eastwood plays
this character very well, making us like him even though he's
such a selfish rascal.
Everett is rumbling through life in Oakland, carrying on in an
affair with his editor's wife and also trying to score with a
young female reporter. After that young reporter dies in a car
accident, Everett is assigned to fill in for her and do a fluff
interview with a young black prisoner, Frank Beachum (Isaiah
Washington), in San Quentin. Beachum is scheduled to be put to
death by lethal injection that night for the shooting murder of a
white pregnant woman in a convenience store. Editor Bob Findley
(Denis Leary) phones his own home to discover Everett just
dressing after a tryst with Bob's wife. He gives the assignment
to the notorious old reporter, partly hoping Everett will screw
up and get himself fired. And going against orders by not just
writing a low-key human interest piece, the man with the "nose"
snoops around to see if young Beachum really is guilty or not.
On his odyssey of fact-finding, Everett has an unfortunate
incident with his cute little daughter at the zoo, interviews a
key witness who has dubious information about the murder, and
struggles through the tense situation at work. Meanwhile, Beachum
sits on death row, awaiting a fate he may or may not deserve. He
claims he's innocent of the murder, but cannot offer any evidence
to clear his name. In fact, only Everett and Beachum's family
even care about whether or not this man is innocent since Beachum
has been sitting on death row for 6 years. It's old news to most
people, including the lawyers and witnesses involved. Everett's
snooping reveals surprises and other clues, eventually leading
him to believe that maybe Beachum is indeed innocent. His only
task is to find some kind of proof. In a bubble-gum, car-chasing,
action finale Everett races to try and beat the clock and find
that elusive proof.
"True Crime" is a manipulating film. It tugs at the heartstrings
by making us like a man who may in fact be a murderer. It makes
us like Everett too, even though he's not an upstanding citizen
and everything he does is either selfish or rebellious. Even the
prison employees are likable since they are not portrayed as
typical movie monsters who inhumanely brutalize the criminals.
The most obvious heartstring puller, though, has to be the
portrayal of both Beachum's daughter and Everett's daughter. Who
can resist such innocence and sweetness? These young girls
provide a direct contrast to the ominous task of a (legal) murder
that is looming at 12:01 that night. So the manipulating is
tolerable because it isn't overly sentimental, yet Eastwood dares
you to dislike the likable main characters.
The script is solid, if predictable. It provides a good analysis
of the whole death penalty process. Also, we get a small glimpse
into the fast-moving politics of a newspaper office. James Woods
plays the Senior Editor, Alan Mann, in his typically dynamic way.
He's got the best lines and gets some good laughs. The only major
contrivance is that this one reporter could discover so many
clues that no one else could find after 6 years! He may be a good
reporter, but if a team of detectives and lawyers can't figure
out some of the things that Everett does, maybe we need a brand
new justice system! I can't reveal an even bigger contrivance in
the picture because it would give away the ending. Still, the
script delves pretty deeply into these characters considering
that the majority of the movie takes place in a 24-hour period.
Call this a day-in-the-life of a scoundrel reporter and a nice
guy "murderer".
Eastwood's direction is okay, but to call this a walk in the park
would be understating it. It's verrrrry deliberate pace almost
undermines the script and its characters before the long-awaited
climax. It's a long 2 hours to watch this film, but a fulfilling
2 hours all the same. Perhaps an extra few seconds comes from
Eastwood's use of slo-mo a couple of different times. This is
notable because he said he didn't like slo-mo during the American
Film Institute's "100 Years, 100 Movies" show last year and
rarely uses the technique. It's also ironic that this is set in
Oakland because Eastwood has set so many films in the city right
across the bay--San Francisco.
Since "True Crime" is a quiet thriller with "whodunnit"
overtones, it isn't for all tastes. I predicted the final result,
but I still had plenty of thinking to do along the way. It's a
thinking man's movie. Along with some social commentary about the
death penalty, Eastwood has crafted a film that doesn't claim to
have all the answers--mostly about marital and work troubles.
Eastwood should also be commended for not stereotyping the black
"murderer" or Beachum's family. Isaiah Washington is muted and
doesn't exactly remind one of Denzel Washington, but he's
sympathetic and likable in his role. Ultimately, the final
pay-off isn't monumental and that keeps this film from being an
instant Eastwood classic. "True Crime" is a solid film with
interesting characters--a pretty nice counter to all those teen
films out there right now!
USELESS TRIVIA--Clint Eastwood's daughter in "True Crime" is his
real daughter as well. The adorable girl's mother is Frances
Fisher (who also appears briefly in this film). Mother Fisher
appeared in "Unforgiven" with Eastwood. Make the connection...
THE RYAN RATING SYSTEM SAYS...
10/10--absolutely outstanding
 9/10--excellent
 8/10--pretty darn good
 7/10--sure, go on and give it a peek
 6/10--so-so; ye ol' recommendation point
 5/10--not quite worth the dollars
 4/10--only if you have a free pass
 3/10--don't go, PLEASE don't go
 2/10--avoid even if you DO have a free pass
 1/10--"Showgirls" territory; truly crappy
 0/10--bang your head off a wall instead
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY:  http://www.sick-boy.com
Clint Eastwood is back both in front of and behind the camera in this
dreadful adaptation of the Andrew Klavan novel.  In Crime, he plays
Steve Everett, a ballsy newspaper reporter best known for taking down
the Mayor of New York City, but, because of his penchant for bedding the
wives and daughters of his editors, finds himself writing metro stories
for the Oakland Tribune.  He's also married, has a young daughter and is
a recovering alcoholic.
After one of his colleagues is killed in a car crash, Everett is
assigned to write a `human interest' sidebar on Frank Beachum (Isaiah
Washington, Out of Sight), a man scheduled to be killed by lethal
injection for allegedly shooting a pregnant convenience store employee
in the chest over $96 and a bottle of steak sauce. After briefly
reviewing the facts (and I'm talking about thirty-seconds-briefly),
Everett decides that they have the wrong guy and immediately begins an
investigation into the incident.  Of course, nobody believes him and he
only has twelve hours to right the wrong made by our judicial system.
Unfortunately, these twelve hours seem like they are filmed in
`real-time.'
Unlike every other film about wrongly accused death-row inmates, Crime
doesn't concentrate on the condemned prisoner, but rather on Eastwood,
who plays a very unlikeable role.  He grits his teeth and utters each
line like it has some deep meaning, but they just don't.  And Father
Time hasn't been kind to Mr. Eastwood, either.  He looks like a ghoul.
Ned Devine looked more alive than Clint.  And there was one scene where
they show a close-up of his hand, which was as wrinkled and gnarly as
the root of a 500-year-old tree.  Dirty Harry?  Not anymore.
Incontinent Harry?  Probably so. (R  2:05 for violence, adult language
and situations and brief nudity)

Author
Jamey Hughton
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:   http://welcome.to/movieviews
Veteran actor Clint Eastwood has never looked as grizzled as he does in
True Crime, his latest directorial effort. When Steve Everett (his
newest character) gets angry at someone, he glares them down with those
famous Dirty Harry eyes, furrows his brow and frowns like a grizzly bear
who's just lost his cubs. Eastwood has played some particularly
despicable characters in his time, but Everett could just take the cake.
He gets my vote, at least, partly because `Ev' is a drunken
affair-a-week womanizer who has many relationship problems, very few of
which are with his wife (Diane Venora). When his colleague at the
Oakland Tribune is in an ugly car wreck and dies, Everett must take over
for her at a vital interview session. The interview is with Frank
Beacham (Isaiah Washington), a death-row inmate set to die at midnight
for the murder of a pregnant convenience store clerk. Eastwood furrows
his brow.
As Everett gradually finds information, he realizes that Beacham could
very well be innocent. He interviews a key witness (Michael Jeter), who
claims that he burst in the door at Pocum's Foods because his car had
overheated, only to see Beacham standing over the dead woman's body,
blood on his suspenders, gun in hand. But Everett protests: how could he
have seen the gun, which was lowered by his side, with the potato chip
rack in front of him? Jeter doesn't know what he's talking about.
Eastwood furrows his brow.
Crinkled expressions and all, Clint is the centre of  energy of True
Crime. The film is by no means a standard action/suspense yarn, but a
thoughtful human story in which the characters come before the
shoot-outs. Isaiah Washington has a break-out performance as Frank
Beacham, and scenes with him and his weary wife (Lisa Gay Hamilton) are
truly heartfelt moments. But the best scenes are ones that feature
Eastwood duking it out with those in authority over him. Denis Leary, as
Everett's editor and boss, has more than a few memorable moments of
restrained anger (you see, Ev is sleeping with his wife). But hands
down, the most enjoyable segments of the film are when James Woods is on
camera. Playing the big boss Alan Mann, Woods and Eastwood create
amusing chemistry and laugh-out-loud punchlines.
When True Crime opts for a high-speed chase to the Governer's house at
the finale, the quality of film-making takes an abrupt nosedive.
Eastwood was so successful with colorful character portraits that he
didn't need to switch lanes. True Crime is a tension-building,
intriguing drama showcase for the talented director and star. This is a
road block he could have easily dismissed (I furrow my brow).
...........................
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:   http://welcome.to/movieviews

Author
wchamber@netcom.ca
TRUE CRIME **˝ (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers ( truecrime@filmfreakcentral.net )
(For more film and DVD reviews, visit FILM FREAK CENTRAL -
http://filmfreakcentral.net
Bring some chip dip and a couple of hot ladies.)
starring Clint Eastwood, Isaiah Washington, Denis Leary, Diane Venora
screenplay by Larry Gross, Paul Brickman and Stephen Schiff, based on
the novel by Andrew Klavan
directed by Clint Eastwood
True Crime is a clock movie. Its hero has less than 24 hours to prove
a death row inmate's innocence, and we are reminded of his deadline
throughout by various shots of clocks that grow more ominous as the
film wears on. The clock movie subgenre has had its ups (High Noon)
and downs (D.O.A.-the Quaid/Ryan version); True Crime is a
mixed bag-its leisurely pace (curiously) works for it. Its lack of a
meaty and seamless plot is what robs the film of urgency. 
Eastwood stars as Oakland Tribune scribbler Steven Everett, a
womanizing lout who relocated from New York after a sexual tryst with
the wrong girl (the daughter of his employer). He has inherited a
"human interest sidebar" piece from recently deceased colleague
Michelle (Mary McCormack): to cover the final day in the life of
convicted killer Frank Beachum (Washington). Because his nose tells
him he smells something rotten, Everett pulls a Dick Tracy, and
reinvestigates the case; he turns up evidence that lawyers and judges
overlooked after six years of trials and appeals. (Thankfully his boss
Alan (James Woods) points out the implausibility of such an
occurance.) Few have faith in Everett: not Bob (Leary), a coworker
whose wife is sleeping with Steven; not his own wife or daughter, both
of whom he neglects; and certainly not the people directly involved in
Beachum's case-they believe Everett's accusations are the ramblings of
a man who has tumbled off the wagon. 
True Crime solves its great big puzzle-we are treated to (ineffectual)
Rashomon-style flashbacks that eventually spell out what really
happened that fateful day when Beachum supposedly murdered a
convenience store clerk. But a number of questions it raises remain
frustratingly unanswered. Why, for instance, did Michelle leave behind
all her paperwork on her story filed neatly in a box in her home? Was
she expecting to die in a car accident, and for Everett to break into
her place looking for information instead of, say, her desk at the
Tribune office? Why does James Woods' character defend his fierce
loyalty to Everett by stating, "I've worked with him for three and a
half years!"? In newspaper time, this seems like nothing-surely not
long enough for an editor to go out on a limb and risk public
embarrassment. And how is it that a lone ranger properly solves the
Beachum mystery in mere hours, anyway? (Said solution is, alas,
irritatingly simple.) 
However, what I really want to know is how Everett scores so many
young chicks! True Crime marks the first time Eastwood looks genuinely
old onscreen. When frail Steve prances around shirtless, it's the
singularly most unsexy moment Clint's ever had on screen. I suspect
True Crime would have been a better vehicle for Jeff Bridges or
Michael Douglas-actors used to seeking redemption onscreen, and whose
physical appeal is still plausible. 
What True Crime has going for it is a few brilliant sequences.
Eastwood's game of "speed zoo" with his daughter sums up in two
minutes everything that's wrong with the career-oriented parents of
America, circa 1999-it's also the most rousing bit of action in the
film. Michael McKean as a cheeky prison priest provides some genuinely
uncomfortable moments-and a strategically placed lens flare during his
final scene is the movie's best joke. (The picture's symbolism doesn't
end there: prison signs are written in the same font as the Oakland
Tribune banner; a little girl crayons pictures of "greener pastures";
and so on.) Washington's relationship with his family is as potent
as Penn's in Dead Man Walking (though I couldn't shake the feeling
that True Crime's final scene had been more than inspired by Walking's
wrenching conclusion-even if it was photographed in vintage Eastwood
style, by veteran lenser Jack N. Green). And the performances are
generally terrific-particularly Venora, adding depth to essentially
the same woman she played in Heat. Unfortunately, Leary is robbed of
his profanity, a weapon he wields better than any working comedian
right now. 
Eastwood started off the decade so well, with the one-two punch of
Unforgiven and the vastly underrated A Perfect World (a mainstream
film so unformulaic it confused audiences-it's Clint at his most
relaxed as both director and costar). He has a late career desire to
adapt books, but translating bestsellers (such as Absolute Power and
Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil) for the big screen hampers
his lyricism and jazzy improvisational style. 

Author
Matt Williams
It is sad to see a movie like True Crime go so horribly, horribly wrong.
It has a good director and a very talented cast, all of whom are doing
their utmost to enliven the routine story.  But at each and every turn,
they are thwarted by a horrific screenplay.
Clint Eastwood directs and stars as reporter Steve Everett.  Steve is a
train wreck of a man with a penchant for cheating on his wife with very
young women (particularly those who are close relatives of his
employers). He's a recovering alcoholic with only one thing to rely on:
his nose for news.
On what may be the last story of his career, Steve is assigned a puff
piece detailing the last day of a man on death row.  The man, Frank
Beachum (Isaiah Washington), was convicted of killing a pregnant store
clerk over a minuscule debt.  He protested his innocence, but two
witnesses
But as Steve conducts the routine interviews, he gets one of his
trademark hunches:  Frank is an innocent man.  But there are fewer than
twelve hours until Frank's execution.  Is Steve right?  And, if he is,
how can he prevent Frank's death if he can't ever do anything right?
True Crime is a movie filled with great actors, and some good scenes.
But, even with those plusses, it is one heck of a terrible movie. The
problem is the screenplay, pure and simple.  It sets up one
jaw-droppingly bad situation after another.  Just when you think the
film can't get any more ridiculous, it manages to top itself yet again.
And it truly is a pity.  The interplay between Clint Eastwood and his
editor-in-chief (played with relish by James Woods) is a delight and
deserves to be in a much better movie than this.  In fact, nearly all
the actors in the film are able to deliver much more innovation than
their cardboard characters deserve.
In fact, the film is almost (I repeat, almost) watchable on the basis of
the actors alone.  But, every time when you are just about to forgive
the screenplay for its countless sins, it deposits out of the blue yet
another terrible line of dialogue, a completely ridiculous plot twist,
or a jarringly obvious cliche.
All of this wasted potential makes True Crime absolutely painful to
watch. Usually, movies this bad will numb you over time.  But, with True
Crime, you are always able to see the brilliant movie that is just out
of reach...and the experience is devastating.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Alex Fung
TRUE CRIME (Warner Bros. - 1999)
Cast: Clint Eastwood, Isiah Washington, Denis Leary,
      Lisa Gay Hamilton, James Woods
Screenplay by Larry Gross and Paul Brickman and Stephen Schiff
Produced by Clint Eastwood, Robert D. Zanuck and Lili Fini Zanuck
Directed by Clint Eastwood
Running time: 127 minutes 
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   Clint Eastwood's latest picture, the death-row drama TRUE CRIME, is a
   carefully deceptive one; given its core elements -- a man condemned to
   die for a murder he denies committing, a stubborn reporter hot on the
   trails of "discrepancies" in the case -- the obvious expectation is
   that of an urgent high-octane mystery thriller, and indeed, we're
   subjected to all the generic trademarks of the film genre: the
   meaningful shots of ticking clocks, the final walk to the death
   chamber, the lingering image of the direct line to the governor.
   Still, under Eastwood's characteristic quiet authority, the film
   distinguishes itself from the pack by being decidedly more of a
   character study than a potboiler, and despite its beat-the-clock
   scenario, the movie seems almost defiantly leisurely-paced.
   The central characters, journeyman newspaper reporter Steve Everett
   (Eastwood) and convicted murderer Frank Beachum (Isiah Washington),
   are introduced in parallel storylines kept so determinedly separated
   that they encounter each other but twice throughout the entire film.
   Nonetheless, there's a certain intimacy created as the picture closely
   observes their minutiae over the span of a fateful 24 hours.
   A somber dread permeates Beachum's narratively familiar storyline,
   which follows the doomed inmate through the hours leading up to his
   scheduled execution.  Convicted for the murder of a pregnant
   convenience store clerk, a hollowed Beachum steadfastly maintains his
   innocence but seems resigned to his fate.  While the scales are tipped
   a bit too far by painting him as a selfless born-again Christian, the
   thread is sufficiently poignant and affecting, and Beachum's final
   farewell scenes with devastated wife Bonnie (Lisa Gay Hamilton) and
   especially his confused little daughter are powerful and moving.
   Meanwhile, upon the untimely demise of a colleague, Everett inherits
   her piece.  Assigned to interview Beachum for the so-called "human
   interest" beat, he's immediately convinced that something's amiss with
   the capital case, and to the protests of the paper's editor-in-chief
   (James Woods) and exasperated city editor (Denis Leary), insistently
   delves into the story.  What follows is largely a routine
   investigatory procedural, as Everett visits the scene of the crime,
   wades through old case files, interviews witnesses and leeringly
   insinuates "But how could you see over the potato chips?"
   All standard fare for the typical clock-is-ticking thriller, to be
   sure, but where TRUE CRIME departs from the formula, and where, I
   suspect, Eastwood's interest truly lies, is with the loving
   construction of wily Everett as a fully-realised three-dimensional
   character with all his flaws and idiosyncracies intact; this is a
   picture whose fascination with character outweighs intrigue with its
   story.  Few have played flawed heroes more regularly than Eastwood,
   and he's in familiar territory as Everett, an aging womanizer and
   recovering alcoholic whose self-destructive behaviour inflicts
   suffering to those around him.  A washout as a husband and a father,
   and with a tendency to get on the bad side with his editors, Everett's
   life is a complete mess, punctuated by an endless series of casual
   (and not especially discreet) infidelities, broken promises and
   familial neglect.  We've seen this sort of character before, but
   rarely in a film which freely diverts from the storyline to indulge in
   illumination his ruefully thoughtless manner so attentively, and never
   in a thriller which gladly stops dead in its tracks to depict our hero
   racing carelessly through the zoo with his young daughter (Eastwood's
   own adorable child, Francesca Fisher-Eastwood) so that he can rid
   himself of her companionship.  While there's an obvious parallel
   between the film's two leading characters -- both of them have special
   relationships with their daughters and are in need of redemption --
   Eastwood makes the point with trademark subtlety.  With a refreshing
   novel-like emphasis on rich characterization, the film's appeal lies
   with observation of Everett's own personal struggles.
   While the film isn't afraid to address ethical issues involving
   capital punishment -- it's a conceptual challenge to develop a film
   where the hero has to rescue a man from death row which remains
   apathetic to the material -- it's not overly concerned with the topic
   either.  While leaning towards an anti-death penalty position, we're
   not browbeaten with rhetoric -- indeed, a surprisingly gentle and
   sympathetic eye is cast on the kindly prison guards and compassionate
   warden, who carry out their duties with stoicism and professionalism.
   If anything, what's vilified in the picture is narcissism; all of the
   dislikeable characters in the film are essentially self-serving, and
   the most unpleasant one reveals himself by the way he attends to his
   coif.
   Eastwood elicits typically solid performances from his ensemble cast,
   particularly from Washington, who turns in a reserved performance
   vastly different from his work as a violent would-be rapist in OUT OF
   SIGHT; he lends Beachum a nobility and dignity that renders his
   momentary emotional lapses especially stirring.  As always, it's great
   fun to watch Woods in action, but his gesticulating and animated
   facial expressions produce an energy level which are at odds with the
   tone of the rest of the film; something more subdued would be in order
   here.
   Loose but never slack, TRUE CRIME feels like a throwback to
   old-fashion filmmaking, before the days when testosterone narrative
   jolts replaced inexorbable accumulation of tension.  Eastwood oversees
   the proceedings with a cool confidence and, being the jazz fan that is
   he, freely riffs the picture with interesting moments which appear
   narratively cryptic but, in their own quiet way, reveal a great deal.
   There's an ostensibly pointless scene of a vagrant pestering female
   pedestrians with lewd behaviour.  In most pictures, the hero would
   knock some sense into the crude lowlife; TRUE CRIME is the sort of
   movie where the hero gives him ten bucks.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"X-FILES fans come up to me in malls expecting me to be able to fill them
 in on the whole conspiracy.  Half the time I have no idea what they're
 talking about." - Martin Landau

Author
Greg King
TRUE CRIME (M).  
(Warner Bros/Village Roadshow)
Director: Clint Eastwood
Stars: Clint Eastwood, Isaiah Washington, Lisa Gay Hamilton, Denis
Leary, James Woods, Diane Venora, Bernard Hill, Michael McKean,
Michael Jeter, Mary McCormack, Hattie Winston, Frances Fisher, Anthony
Zerbe, William Windom, Penny Bae Bridges
Running time: 129 minutes.
Clint Eastwood seems to be choosing vastly different material,
moving away from the straight forward action adventures in which he
established his reputation to far more interesting, intelligent
character driven pieces.  His latest offering is True Crime, a rather
conventional crime drama that takes us onto death row and a race
against time to prevent an execution.  We've been down this path
before, most recently with James Foley's The Chamber, Bruce
Beresford's Last Dance, and Tim Robbins' powerful Dead Man Walking.
However, Eastwood brings an unexpected emotional depth to the material
which makes for gripping viewing.
Like his last few movies, True Crime has also been adapted
from a best selling novel.  Writers Larry Gross (48 Hours, etc), Paul
Brickman (Risky Business, etc) and Stephen Schiff (the recent
controversial adaptation of Lolita, etc) bring a rich emotional
texture to the multi-layered drama.
Eastwood plays Steve Everett, a stereotypical hard-drinking,
womanising rogue journalist whose private life is careening out of
control.  He finds one last chance at redemption when assigned to take
over a human interest story about Frank Beachum (Isaiah Washington), a
convicted murderer due to be executed later that night by lethal
injection.  Beachum, a black mechanic, was accused of murdering a
pregnant, young, white shop assistant who owed him money.  Everett
discovers that Beachum may in fact be innocent, and sets out to prove
it.
True Crime primarily explores how justice is sometimes blind.
This is a more low key and surprisingly restrained film from Eastwood,
but he directs with his usual assurance and no-nonsense, economical
style.  Eastwood turns up the suspense in the film's latter portion as
he deftly intercuts between Everett's desperate search to uncover the
vital evidence that will prove his claims, and the prison, where
Beachum is being prepared for execution.  This injects a potent
emotional punch into the material.
The film also draws a nicely ironic contrast between Everett's
chaotic domestic life and Beachum's family, which brings an added
dimension to the drama.  However, some of the scenes in which Everett
attempts to spend quality time with his daughter (played by Eastwood's
real life daughter Francesca) do not add much to the drama, and only
serve to slow down the film.  Eastwood injects some light humour into
the film through Everett's heated clashes with his editors (a
wonderfully edgy Denis Leary and a gruff James Woods).
Eastwood himself delivers a solid performance as the cynical,
determined reporter, a role that perfectly suits his laconic screen
persona.  In one of his more subtle performances he gives the flawed
Everett a certain credibility.  Washington is superb and lends dignity
to his portrayal of Beachum, while Lisa Gay Hamilton (recently seen in
Beloved) is touching as his wife.  Bernard Hill (last seen as the
captain of the doomed Titanic) brings a sense of compassion to his
role as the prison warder.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
During the making of his film-biography of jazz musician Charlie
Parker, BIRD, Clint Eastwood said that America has produced only two
original artforms. Western movies and jazz. Everyone knew that Clint
had and would continue to make his mark on the former (DIRTY HARRY,
UNFORGIVEN), and with BIRD, he unforgettably touched upon the
latter. After reflecting upon the two original American artforms, what
was Eastwood to do? After UNFORGIVEN, the quality of his work
decreased bit by bit as he decided not to take as many risks as he
once did. His latest, TRUE CRIME, doesn't offer much in the way of
originality, but it still provides the viewer with a solid, satisfying
drama.
TRUE CRIME tells the story of Steve Everett (Eastwood), a journalist
for the Oakland Tribune. Ev, as he is known to his friends, is an
unscrupulous, womanizing former drunkard who's colleague (Mary
McCormack) is killed in a car crash just moments after having a drink
with him. In the aftermath, Ev is told by his editor (Denis Leary),
with whose wife he is sleeping, that he must take his colleague's
place covering the story of a convicted murderer named Frank Beachum
(Isaiah Wasington), who is set to be executed that night. Ev's boss
(James Woods), with whose wife he also claims to be sleeping, explains
to him that this is merely a human interest story about life before
execution. But Ev finds something fishy in this case in which Beachum
was convicted of shooting a pregnant woman working a cash register in
a small market. After a meeting with Beachum and a key witness in the
trial, Ev is convinced that Beachum did not commit the murder. In the
hours leading up to Beachum's planned execution, Ev ends up losing his
job and his marriage, but never his composure.
For most of its 2-plus hour running time, TRUE CRIME is a cut above
the competition. It keeps the viewer engrossed, wanting to know every
detail about what's going on. But the last 15 minutes of the film keep
it from being the riveting thriller it wants to be. The ending of TRUE
CRIME is totally unconvincing, and makes you think that maybe this
isn't the leisurely paced drama you were watching for the past two
hours.  The film's ending happens to quickly to digest, and makes you
leave the theater unable to realize what point the film was trying to
make. Maybe part of the problem was the fact that TRUE CRIME used
three screenwriters to adapt Andrew Klavan's novel, and each writer
seems to want to take the film on a different trip. Eastwood uses
clever restraint throughout most of the film, but the ending seems to
be too much to handle.  But TRUE CRIME is a film definitely worth
seeing, especially for a great perfromance by Isaiah Washington, as an
accused man approaching death. I'm glad to see that Clint has decided
to give his own American touch to a conventional storyline, because
leaving this film in the hands of someone else would be a true crime.
review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic 
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film


Author
Christian Pyle
After "Unforgiven," Clint Eastwood declared that he would no longer star in the
movies he directed.  Since then, he's starred in only one movie he didn't
direct ("In the Line of Fire" -- maybe working for Wolfgang Petersen made
Eastwood rethink his plan) and directed only one without sticking his craggy
puss in front of the camera ("Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil").  His
latest effort, "True Crime," demonstrates the problem of having a
director/producer/star:  who's gonna tell him he's miscast?
Eastwood plays Steve Everett, a broken-down, womanizing, recovering alcoholic
reporter who is one screw-up away from oblivion.  When another reporter dies in
a car crash, Everett is assigned her story:  a "human interest sidebar" on an
execution taking place at midnight.  Despite warnings from his editors to keep
his piece simple, Everett seizes on the story as his chance for redemption and
quickly becomes convinced that Frank Beachum (Isaiah Washington), the man about
to be lethally injected, is innocent.
He is innocent, of course.  I write that without fear of spoiling the movie
because the skeleton of this movie's plot is so rigidly formulaic that there's
never really any doubt in the viewer's mind that Beachum is innocent.  The
ending is so overwrought in its last-minute rush to stop the execution that it
comes off as cheesy.  But hanging on the bones of this predictable plot is the
unrealized potential for a much better film.  Everett is an interesting
character because he is difficult to like.  He cheats on his wife with his
editor's wife, he accidentally injures his daughter because he's in a rush to
pursue a lead, he's a cynical burn-out with little respect for anyone's
feelings.  In his single-minded pursuit of the truth, he plows through people's
lives like a runaway train.  This role, a cousin to Paul Newman's character in
"The Verdict," deserves an actor who could explore the complexities and
contradictions of this deeply selfish man who fights so passionately to save
Beachum's life not because of the value of that life but because proving his
hunch was right will validate his worth as a reporter.  
Eastwood is more a professional icon than an actor.  His range is limited, and
his choice of roles usually takes that into account.  Any number of actors
could have done more with the role of Everett than Eastwood did; my wife
pointed out that the movie would have been served well if Eastwood and James
Woods (who plays Everett's senior editor) had switched roles.
Another element in "True Crime" that cries out for further development is the
questions raised about the death penalty and about biases in the criminal
justice system.  Beachum is a poor black man quickly convicted on the word of
two middle-class white witnesses.  Before Everett bursts in like Henry Fonda in
"Twelve Angry Men" and exposes the rush to judgement, no one -- not even
Beachum's lawyer -- questions the inconsistencies in the case.  Yet when one
character brings up the possibility of racial bias in Beachum's conviction,
Everett dismisses it, and the audience is inclined to follow his lead.
One thing True Crime does well is to attack the attitudes of the press. 
Everett is not supposed to seek the truth; he is only supposed to present a
moving "sidebar" for the morning paper.  Local TV reporters discuss the method
of execution with the same blithe detachment they have talking about the
weather.  In brief moments like these, Eastwood offers devastating satire about
an institution that is content to report rather than investigate.
The case includes several familiar faces.  Woods is very funny, and his
chemistry with Eastwood is terrific. Michael Jeter is excellent as the state's
mousy star witness.  Denis Leary stretches his acting wings a bit.  He plays
Bob, the news editor who assigns Everett to write the sidebar to promote a
liberal point-of-view yet cares little about whether Beachum is actually
guilty.  Bob is distinctly different from Leary's stand-up persona, and Leary
gets some challenging emotional scenes (it's his wife that Everett is
boinking).  But his performance comes off bland.  Another comedian who flops at
drama in True Crime is Michael McKean; he plays a slimy prison chaplain who
(like everyone else in the movie) wants to use Beachum to promote a personal
agenda, but he overplays the part so broadly that he seems to think he's in a
comedy.
Bit of trivia:  Everett's daughter is played by Eastwood's real-life daughter
Francesca Fisher-Eastwood.  Francesca's mother, Frances Fisher of Unforgiven
and Titanic, also has a cameo.
All things considered, True Crime is an uneven film that could have been
worthwhile if Eastwood had recognized its undeveloped potential.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.wpd.net/madreview/

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: March 19, 1999
Starring: Clint Eastwood, James Woods, Denis Leary, Isaiah Washington,
Diane Venora, Sydney Poitier, Mary McCormack
Directed by: Clint Eastwood
Distributed by: Warner Brothers
MPAA Rating: R (language, some violence)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/truecrime.htm
Clint Eastwood never changes. He does not age in a linear fashion, as
most men do, but instead on some radical quadratic curve. On the screen,
he's always been and always will be a dog. Cultivating a
rough-on-the-edges, heart-of-gold personality, he knows no other ground.
And this recycled demeanor is only the beginning of an atmosphere of
déjŕ vu that surrounds Eastwood's latest crime drama, TRUE CRIME. 
TRUE CRIME is a mystery of sorts, and its primary setting is the death
row cellblock of San Quentin. This is familiar ground for most viewers,
as Hollywood cameras have been in and out of prisons on countless
occasions. John Grisham films in particular are regular introspectives
into the lives of the men and women on both sides of the bars. The
mystery surrounds a wrongfully convicted man and a race against his
midnight execution date, which is another familiar story for movie
watchers. Toss in the typical character finds of the washed-up ex-drunk,
the boss looking for an excuse to can him, the wife looking for an
excuse to leave him, and the occasional companion who still wants to
trust him, and TRUE CRIME is looking like a painfully familiar movie. 
Specifically, Eastwood gives us, step-by-step, the final day of Frank
Beachum (Isaiah Washington). Beachum has been convicted in the shooting
death of a convenience store clerk; Steve Everett (Eastwood), a reporter
assigned to the incident only in the last twenty-four hours, smells
something wrong and decides to investigate. Everett is famous for his
"hunches," and his boss (Denis Leary) warns him several times not to go
looking for anything but a simple human interest sidebar story.
Nevertheless, Everett starts his own investigation, if only to save his
own career. 
In the end, however, it's Eastwood's adventurous direction that saves
this movie from being a case study in recycled film. The ancient
entertainer is easily more skilled behind the camera now than he is in
front of it, and once past his seedy character stereotype his fluent
direction is easily visible. Although the movie is a bit longish,
Eastwood has a very determined style of filmmaking, keeping the movie
straight from start to finish. Plot twists are nicely contained, and the
movie never once spins out of control. 
The supports also help to keep this movie above water. James Woods and
Denis Leary are outstanding, providing the movie's comic relief against
Eastwood's boring stoicism. Isaiah Washington, as the condemned man of
the lot, gives a very subdued performance here, which conveys a much
greater sense of power. 
The only flaws to be found in TRUE CRIME are its gravitation toward the
familiar and its mass of forced emoting. Neither of these help what
could have been a truly provocative motion picture, in the way that DEAD
MAN WALKING was. Instead, it's just another mediocre product of only
relative worth. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
TRUE CRIME
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Clint Eastwood, Isaiah Washington, Denis Leary, James Woods,
Diane Venora, Lisa Gay Hamilton.
Screenplay:  Larry Gross and Paul Brickman and Stephen Schiff, based on
the novel by Andrew Klavan.
Producers:  Richard D. Zanuck and Lili Fini Zanuck and Clint Eastwood.
Director:  Clint Eastwood.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  126 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In Robert Altman's film industry satire THE PLAYER, an earnest young
screenwriter pitches a death penalty "issue" drama called HABEAS CORPUS,
which he insists should have "no stars" and a downbeat ending, because
"that's reality."  The studio buys the story and turns it into an action
thriller in which Bruce Willis races in at the last moment to save Julia
Roberts from the gas chamber, quipping "Traffic was a bitch" as he carries
her to safety.  Capital punishment had been reduced to a plot device for a
by-the-numbers crowd-pleaser.  In Hollywood, _that's_ reality.
     On the surface, TRUE CRIME appears to be something a bit more
highbrow, but it's still a frustrating gloss over a sensitive subject.
Clint Eastwood directs himself as Steve Everett, an Oakland newspaper
reporter with a shambles of a life -- he's an alcoholic only two months on
the wagon, a married inveterate philanderer, and a gung ho investigative
journalist with a history of gung ho-ing too far.  When his editor (Denis
Leary) hands him a puff-piece human interest assingment on convicted
murderer Frank Beachum's (Isaiah Washington) last day before his
execution, Everett can't help poking around in the facts.  Those facts
suggest to him that a key witness couldn't have seen what he claimed to
see, and that Beachum may be an innocent man.  With the execution set for
midnight, Everett has only twelve hours to save Beachum's life.
     And, we assume, to save his own personal and professional soul in the
process.  TRUE CRIME is naturally more Everett's story than anyone else's,
which might lead you to expect that he's the character who will learn,
grow and change, especially since he has enough character flaws to fill a
week's worth of Jerry Springer episodes.  Instead, Eastwood doesn't even
pretend that Everett's crusade is about anything more than salvaging a
shred of his professional dignity.  He's a self-absorbed, flirtatious
irresponsible cuss in his first scene, and he's a self-absorbed,
flirtatious, irresponsible cuss in his last scene.  The role is
surprisingly flat, leading to a narrative where all that matters is the
plot progression towards Beachum's midnight deadline.
     It's in their dealing with Beachum that Eastwood and his writing team
throw TRUE CRIME into the most confusion.  Beachum's final hours with his
wife and daughter are given a lot of screen time -- perhaps to deflect the
perception that this is yet another movie about a white man finding
salvation through helping anonymous non-white characters -- yet those
scenes serve primarily to tangle the film's themes.  If we're watching
Beachum's torment simply to give Everett's story a face, it's a
trivialization of that suffering.  If we're watching to gain a greater
understanding of the emotional anguish faced by death row inmates, in
effect making TRUE CRIME a death penalty "issue" drama, then Everett's
pursuit of the story is trivial.  And if we're watching to build sympathy
for an innocent man, than a late twist which suggests Beachum might be
guilty is a manipulative cheat.  The film plunges us into one side of the
capital punishment debate when it serves its purpose, then tiptoes around
the edges of the issue at other times to avoid the appearance of making a
controversial statement.
     Ironically, it's only the fact that TRUE CRIME is a slick Hollywood
star project that makes it fairly watchable.  Eastwood once again gathers
wonderful technical support -- cinematographer Jack N. Green, composer
Lennie Niehaus, production designer Henry Bumstead -- to create impressive
atmosphere.  He also draws a slick supporting performance from James
Woods' as Everett's crass editor-in-chief, a role which makes you wonder
whether Woods and Denis Leary accidentally swapped scripts but the result
turned out perfectly.  The buildup to Everett's down-to-the-wire race to
find exonerating evidence will probably work on you in spite of your
resistance, but ultimately it's clear that Eastwood's craftsmanship is
disguising a genuinely weightless story.  TRUE CRIME is true Hollywood, a
disposable entertainment that toys with earnest respectability before
turning into a chase thriller where the traffic is a bitch.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Clint Eastwood.
Cast: Clint Eastwood, Isaiah Washington, Lisa Gay Hamilton, Denis Leary, 
James Woods, Diane Venora, Francesca Fisher-Eastwood, Michael Jeter, 
Mary McCormack, Frances Fisher, Lucy Alexis Liu.
1999 - 127 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and violence).
Reviewed March 21, 1999.
As with 1995's "The Bridges of Madison County" and 1997's "Midnight in 
the Garden of Good and Evil," actor-director Clint Eastwood has 
successfully adapted a well-recieved novel to the screen, this time it 
being Andrew Klavan's "True Crime." Although unread by me, this film 
version is a taut, if somewhat overstuffed, suspense-drama, that is 
worlds better than a similar Eastwood picture that was also adapted from 
a novel, 1997's "Absolute Power."
Eastwood stars as crackerjack newspaper reporter Steve Everett, a man 
pushing his late-60's who nonetheless is always getting involved with 
much younger women, and cheating on his wife, Barbara (Diane Venora). 
When a well-liked young colleague of his (Mary McCormack) is in a car 
accident after drinking-and-driving and is killed, Everett finds himself 
getting her original job of interviewing Frank Beachum (Isaiah 
Washington), a black man on death row for a crime he claims he didn't 
commit, only hours before his planned execution that night. Looking 
through the case records, Everett finds that there were two witnesses 
during the fateful day when Frank allegedly went into a convenience 
store and shot and killed the female worker there, who happened to be 
six months pregnant. One of the witnesses only saw Frank run out of the 
store, while the other walked in to only see him holding the gun, but 
neither heard the shot. While investigating the store, Everett discovers 
that the witness' story of seeing Frank with a gun was impossible since 
there was a large stand of potato chips blocking his view. Convinced 
Frank really is innocent, Everett only has a small number of hours to 
find out what actually did happen, so that Frank will be saved from his 
impending death.
As with the superior "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil," one of 
the delights in "True Crime" is Eastwood's, as well as screenwriters' 
Larry Gross, Paul Brickman, and Stephen Schiff, effortless handling of 
the wide array of character, from those already mentioned, to Beachum's 
grieving wife (Lisa Gay Hamilton), Everett's precocious, neglected 
daughter (Eastwood's real-life daughter, Francesca Fisher-Eastwood), and 
Everett's fast-talking editor (James Woods) and edgy co-worker (Denis 
Leary). The treasure of watching these characters is in the writing, 
which might only give some of the people a handful of scenes, but is 
able to develop each one enough so that we feel we know them. On the one 
hand, the many characters and stories swarming around occasionally 
become slightly unbelievable since the movie takes place within a 
24-hour period, but on the other hand, they are very well-done. One of 
the unexpected subplots that snuck up on me and acquired a heartbreaking 
pay-off involved Everett's rocky relationship with his wife, played by 
Venora in an assured, precise turn. All performances, in fact, are 
memorable, but the others that stand out include Washington, who doesn't 
make one false note in portraying a man terrified of dying, and yet 
knows he must be strong for his wife and daughter; Hamilton, who was 
also wonderful in last year's "Beloved"; and Michael Jeter, as one of 
the witnesses who firmly believes Beachum was holding a gun...or does 
he?
At the center of everything is Eastwood in his first screen appearance 
in two years, and he really is very good here, although I did have some 
problems with the way his sex life was portrayed. Portrayed as 
irresisitible to all women, even those still in their teenage years, 
Eastwood has significantly aged recently, looking even slightly older 
than his actual age of 68. Unlike Robert Redford, who is now in his 70's 
and still could pass for a good-looking fiftysomething, Eastwood holds 
no such scrutiny in a plot contrivance that I could have done without.
Another irksome matter, though one that might have stood out even more 
in the hands of a less-professional filmmaker, is the story itself. So 
many similar movies have been made recently about the exact same subject 
(1995's "Dead Man Walking," 1996's "Last Dance," 1996's "The Chamber") 
that there could virtually be a new film genre invented. Even if 
intelligent and effective, Eastwood might have been better off choosing 
a more original premise for a movie he was going to spend at least a 
year of his life on.
Despite its commonplace storyline and a few small qualms, "True Crime" 
is a respectable film, particularly in its unequivocal details involving 
the characters and genuinely unpredictable outcome (even though the very 
last scene didn't quite sit well with me). Clint Eastwood is a true 
craftsman, as he usually proves with each of his directing jobs, and it 
is due largely to his expertise in character and dialogue that "True 
Crime" rises above its tried-and-true plot outline.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Ross Anthony
Clint is at it again. Imperfect reporter (i.e.: ex-drunk, current womanizer,
unable to feel compassion) has nose for the truth. When the newswoman
assigned to a "human interest" death row case dies before the convict --
Clint and his hunch are given less than 24 hours to pick up the pieces and
free the wrongly accused man (Isaiah Washington). Can it be done?
This is the old gritty Clint -- the "Do you feel lucky punk?" Clint. Extra
camera time is given to cigarette lighting and snuffing to remind you that
this is the tough Eastwood of yesteryear.
I was liking it, then it was getting boring, then it got exciting and
interesting and even got me all choked up. Then, in a last minute ditch
effort to save a life, a completely inebriated Eastwood walks his red nose
into the bar door on his way out, drives as fast as he can on a rainy night
(with an innocent passenger), pulls his emergency brake on a particularly
dangerous piece of road in order to set two trailing squad cars spinning
(Dukes-of-Hazard style). I mean, I'm there routing for him to save the death
row guy -- but come on, not at the expense of whacking a couple of officers,
and a jogger in his drunken stupor.
Other than that, some text book foreshadowing in the form of a green crayon
and crying child could have used some toning down.
Oh, and James Woods is absolutely wonderful as Eastwood's Chief Editor. He
plays the same hardball, yet light-hearted, lovable character that he played
in "Hercules" the animated feature.
Starring Isaiah Washington, Clint Eastwood and James Woods.
Directed by Clint Eastwood.
Produced by Richard & Lili Zanuck at Zanuck/Malpaso and Warner Brothers.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
In order to get you started, your first assignment will be something
simple.  You are to write one of those canonical thrillers in which the
old reporter searches almost in vain for leads.  You can use that old
plot device of a clock that counts down the hours.  This will provide
some pseudo-tension to make up for any shortcomings in your script.
Make it look like the protagonist has found almost no useful clues until
the last act, when near miracles can occur.
Let's say we have a man on death row.  Give the reporter less than a
dozen hours to solve the crime in hopes that you'll at least have some
of the audience on the edge of their seats.
Now focus all of your creative energy on that obligatory big scene
toward the end in which the obviously innocent man is about to be
executed.  Think of all of the ways that you can manipulate the viewers'
emotions.  If you can get them to cry, you've got 'em hooked.  Anyone
who cries during a movie feels duty bound to recommend it.  Don't worry
that the critics will call the scene manipulative and maudlin; they
don't buy the tickets.
If you are lucky, your agent will get you a novel to work from, "True
Crime" by Andrew Klavan, for example.  And if you're really fortunate,
your agent will find you some big name stars to act in the movie, say
Clint Eastwood as the reporter.  If they get Clint, he'll probably want
to direct it as well. Isaiah Washington would be perfect as the black,
born-again-Christian who has been identified in a line-up as the
murderer of a young, white, pregnant woman.  Make the crime be over some
trivial amount, say $96.
Clint, in his full laid-back mode, can sometimes put audiences to sleep,
so hope that they'll cast some edgier actors against him.  Denis Leary
would make a good no-nonsense boss for Clint.  If you can get him, James
Woods as Leary's boss would certainly add explosive and humorous power
to every scene he is in and would likely steal the movie.
The studio will probably assign other writers to the project to "help"
you.  Whatever you do, don't be too disappointed with the results.
Don't forget that your script is just the score, and you have no control
if the director decides to conduct it too slowly.  Finally, with a
strong enough cast, the movie will be entertaining even if far from
memorable.  Next time, you can tackle something a little more
challenging, like say a teen comedy.
TRUE CRIME runs 2:07.  It is rated R for profanity and some violence and
would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
