Title
Review for Nobody (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

NOBODY (director/writer: Shundo Ohkawa; cinematographer: Hiroshi Ogata;
editor: Yoshio Kitazawa; cast: Masaya Kato (Taki), Jimpachi Nezu
(Detective Karaki), Riki Takeuchi (Nanbu), Hideo Nakano (Konishi),
Hiromi Nakajima (Rika), Yumi Nishiyama (Reiko); Runtime: 100; Phaedra
Cinema; 1999-Japan)
A bloodthirsty revenge film based on a childish incident in a nightclub,
where three yuppie office workers make fun of the way three men at the
next table are dressed. The director has gone after style and has thrown
substance out the window, as the film follows this war of words as it
escalates into an ugly scene of macho posturing and then into gore. The
three stylishly-dressed ad executives are: Taki (Kato), who is prone to
wearing Hermes ties and acting cool; Nambu (Takeuchi), who is the most
bellicose; and, Konishi (Nakano), who is bespectacled, fearful and
pudgy. They leave the bar after the other table answers their taunts
back, and when Konishi returns to get his umbrella, he is set upon and
has a broken bottle smashed over his face, causing him to be
hospitalized.
The film takes this childish revenge-fantasy film into an unbelievably
crude depiction of gun fights, arrow attacks, knife and fist fights, and
a scissor attack. All the fight scenes were choreographed and looked as
phony as Confederate money. The film was a clear imitation of a Hong
Kong action film. The protagonists were three unlikable snobs, concerned
with their image, talking about name-brand products as if someone was an
idiot who didn't adhere to their tastes, and getting into the tussle
because they were loudly attacking the other table for being tacky.
This unoriginal film has nothing to say about these faceless executives
or their counterpoints, who up the dissing into physical violence. The
mystery is supposed to be sparked by guessing if the antagonists are
office workers, yakuza, or police. The paranoid thriller is callibrated
to show how the men feel when their masculinity is being questioned.
Not able to forget the attack on Konishi, even after he is released from
the hospital and is walking with his pals down an alleyway, the men
recognize the Rolex watch guy and pounce on him, supposedly beating him
to death. Things take a harrowing turn for the men, as they each receive
phone calls threatening revenge for the death of their friend. But to
their surprise, no body is ever reported found, and the police are not
looking for them. The menacing caller tells them, he is not concerned
about telling the police, he'll take care of the problem.
Poor Konishi is severely worked over and sent to the hospital again,
this time with scissor wounds to the stomach, when he agrees to meet the
threatening caller. Nambu is attacked with arrows and slain, while Taki
picks up a girl on the rainy road, Rika (Hiromi), with whom he has a
quickie. He is supposedly serious about his workplace girlfriend Reiko
(Yumi), but finds time to play, probably to take his mind off those
coming after him.
With the death of Nambu, Taki becomes frightened and goes to the police,
telling them the truth. But they can't help. The main villain, the guy
with the Zippo lighter, meets up with Taki and they have one of those
ridiculous Hong Kong gunfights. Zippo is one of those villains who just
can't seem to die (I suppose he's supernatural!). The awkward story
moves on its pointless and bloody way, clearing nothing up by the end,
though it tried when it had Detective Karaki (Nezu) say that the
attackers are part of a new Japan, where punks who used to become part
of a yakuza crime family now become businessmen.
Shundo Ohkawa's direction is meant to be glossy, high-tech, but suffers
from being amateurish and outdated, overrun with trick camera shots to
capture the violence. The director's color scheme was nightmarish and
depressing, some scenes were smothered in metallic blue shadings.
The film was about as uninspiring as reading GQ. The only fun in the
film, was in the opening scene, watching the two tables trade
smart-alecky digs at each other, other than that this film was as much
fun as watching someone get hit over the head with a bottle.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Toshimichi Ohkawa.
Cast: Masaya Kato, Riki Takeuchi, Hideo Nakano, Jinpachi Nezu.
1999 - 100 minutes.
Not Rated (equivalent of an R for violence, profanity, sexual situations, and 
blood).
In Japanese with English subtitles.
Opens in limited release 8/20/99.
Reviewed August 2, 1999.
Watching filmmaker Toshimichi Ohkawa's Japanese film, "Nobody," it struck me 
several times that this picture could be scripted and made in the same exact 
fashion as an American revenge thriller, although here it includes a 
no-nonsense, assured style that is rarely found in the U.S. mainstream. 
Tautly filmed and tightly developed without getting side-tracked with a bunch 
of needless subplots, the film includes three flawed heroes, easily 
discernible villains, mucho action sequences, and even a few clever, if 
somewhat cliched, plot twists. Moving at a brisk pace and highly entertaining 
for the genre, "Nobody" ultimately falls apart in its last five seconds, 
which does not solve the film in any way, but instead adds another conflict 
that makes you question what the point was to begin with.
Taki (Masaya Kato) and his two friends, the hard-edged Nambu (Riki Takeuchi) 
and weak Konishi (Hideo Nakano), are everybody businessmen in Japan enjoying 
themselves in a bar when they wrongfully are caught talking negatively about 
three mysterious men at the table next to theirs. When the three men pick a 
fight, their confrontation ends anticlimactically, but later, while going 
back to get the umbrella he left inside the bar, Konishi is severely beaten 
up. This means war for Taki and, especially, Nambu, who become set on finding 
out the three mens' indentities and hunting them down. Just when they begin 
to realize they probably will never see them again, they unexpectedly come 
into contact with one of the culprits and beat him up in the same manner that 
they did to Konishi. Receiving a threatening telephone call the next day, 
however, they are told that the man died, and they are not going to get away 
with what they have done.
"Nobody" is a conventional action-thriller that works particularly well 
because of director Ohkawa's expertise in stylish filmmaking, with a noir 
undertone and a collision of effective, chic elements, including moody 
camerawork, a memorably creepy music score, and thrilling action setpieces. 
There is very little in the way of character development or multi-layered 
plotting, aside from an unsatisfactorily realized subplot in which Taki's 
girlfriend discovers he has cheated on her, but that doesn't matter too much, 
just as long as the film is able to sweep you up in its basic, simple 
storyline, which it does.
A substantial amount of suspense is mustered up in many masterful scenes, 
including one in which Konishi foolishly meets the two remaining villains in 
a restaurant, expecting to simply talk with them, and another in which Nambu 
has a confrontation with an unidentified man in a black car that takes a 
violent turn. The color scheme of the film only adds to the atmosphere, as 
the night scenes are lit in varying shades of blue and black, while the day 
scenes are painted as gloomy and rather pallid. Accordingly, the climax is 
appropriately grisly and somewhat unpredictable.
Unfortunately, "Nobody" becomes problematic in its cheap conclusion and 
wrap-up section, which includes a terribly-performed, artificial scene 
between Taki and his girlfriend, which, to begin with, is an inadequately 
developed relationship that has not earned the right to be as emotionally 
rewarding as it's supposed to be. Worst of all is the film's last few 
seconds, which are a complete and utter letdown that shows Taki has not 
actually won anything. He's practically back where he started at the film's 
ten-minute mark, and therefore, proves that in the ninety minutes that 
followed, he solved nothing. It is difficult giving a recommendation to a 
film that asks you to devote your time with it, only to add a final twist 
that is in no way justifiable. Perhaps this would not be such a severe flaw 
in a horror movie, where a sequel is almost inevitable, but in a Japanese 
thriller, it is doubtful we will be seeing a "Nobody Part 2" in the future. 
Still, "Nobody," Part 1, is a prime example of style over substance (which 
there is very little of), and its one major blunder does not erase the 
success that the rest of the film achieved.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman.
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
