Title
Review for Goat on Fire and Smiling Fish (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Los Angeles is the city of angels, where the sun
always shines and the stars walk the streets; where
earthquakes and riots do little to phase the happy
lives of the smiling citizens.  But, according to two
new romantic comedies, the fair city has its share of
lonely young folk.  Whether they're single and looking
or stuck in dating hell, these twenty-somethings are
all searching for something better.
Valerie Breiman's Love & Sex is a
semi-autobiographical story of life in L.A.'s dating
game.  Famke Janssen plays Kate, a tall, attractive
magazine journalist who is forced to write a woman's
guide to love and sex in one day.  So, of course, Kate
turns to her own experiences for inspiration.
She has had her share of men, from a sixth-grade
sweetheart to a married maniac to her high-school
French teacher.  But only one lover ever has a real
impact upon Kate.  His name is Adam (Jon Favreau); an
artist with everyday looks and cozy charm.  Having
slept with only three women, he is intimidated by
Kate's sexual experience, but that is part of what
makes him her ideal man.  Soon, the two settle down
for what is the most genuine, meaningful and tough
relationship of Kate's life.
Love & Sex is not unlike many other recent
romantic-comedies, including the superior High
Fidelity.  But the film has a special charm because it
portrays the everyday moments of the lives people in
love.  For example, Kate isn't above farting in front
of Adam, and Adam doesn't mind making fun of her
abnormally large feet.
Famke Janssen, a former Bond-girl, is terrific as
Kate, proving to be as adept at humor as she is at
action (she also starred in this summer's X-Men).  Jon
Favreau makes an affable love interest, using his
everyman demeanor to its full effect.  And, after
helming a couple calamitous 80's T&A flicks ("Going
Overboard" and "Bikini Squad"), former actress Valerie
Breiman seems to be headed in the right direction. 
Love & Sex isn't quite as witty or insightful as
Favreau's own Swingers, but, thanks to wonderful
performances by two young stars, it's an ideal date
flick.
Smiling Fish and Goat On Fire, on the other hand, is
an ideal movie for anyone, anytime, anywhere.  It was
shot in twelve days for a measly $40,000, but the film
has enough heart to make any low-budget limitations
invisible.  Smiling Fish could be this year's The
Brothers McMullen.
The title refers to the two names given to brothers
Chris and Tony, by their Native American grandmother,
to emphasize their contrasting personalities.  Chris
(Derick Martini) is a moody and often serious
accountant, earning the title Goat on Fire.  Tony
(Steven Martini) is a fun-loving, out-of-work actor;
always a Smiling Fish.
Chris' relationship with a long-time girlfriend is
disintegrating when he meets Anna (Rosemarie Addeo), a
beautiful Italian animal wrangler with whom he is
smitten.  He also befriends his boss' 80-year-old
uncle Clive (Bill Henderson), a retired sound man from
the glory days of the original African-American motion
picture studio.  With his knowledge of romance and
lessons of life, Clive becomes the emotional center of
the film.
Tony can't seem to go a day without attracting new
women, but his string ends when he falls for Kathy
(Christa Miller), his mail-carrier.  A single mother
with an outspoken young daughter, Kathy plans to move
back to Wyoming if her daughter doesn't get the role
on a TV show; a show that Tony is also trying out for.
Of all the relationships in the film, the strongest is
between Chris and Tony.  They live together in a nice
home, and share a strong bond that their romantic
relationships have never seemed to break.  Siblings
Derick and Steve Martini (who also co-wrote the film)
play off their real-life brotherhood wonderfully.
Smiling Fish and Goat On Fire, which is being
"presented" by longtime independent film supporter
Martin Scorsese, won the Discovery Award at the
Toronto Film Festival, and has been riding a wave of
deserving applause ever since.  It's a warm,
life-affirming film, which is more than can be said of
most so-called romantic comedies.    
-Akiva Gottlieb 
http://www.pictureshow.8m.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
SMILING FISH AND GOAT ON FIRE is a sweet little slice of life story 
about three guys in search of love.  The first two are brothers, Chris 
and Tony Remi, played by real-life brothers Derick and Steven Martini.  
The Martini brothers share the writing credits with the film's director, 
Kevin Jordan.  
The third man on a romantic mission is Clive Winter, played with the 
most charisma in a consistently likeable cast by veteran actor Bill 
Henderson.  Over a half-century older than the twentysomething Remi 
brothers, Clive hopes, with a little help from some killer sweets, to 
join his long-time love in heaven.  In the meantime, Clive preaches the 
gospel of "the potential for magnetic perfection." Once a soundman on 
old Paul Robeson pictures, Clive sees everything through the magic of 
sound, treating it with spiritual reverence.
Clive's character, as fascinating and original as it is, is relegated to 
the side ring.  The movie is about the brothers, who were named Smiling 
Fish and Goat On Fire by their grandmother, who was half Italian and 
half Native American.  (Tony is Smiling Fish, and Chris is Goat On Fire.  
Or is it the other way round?  It doesn't matter if you can't keep them 
straight since the story barely mentions the nicknames.)
As the movie opens, the brothers, who live together as best friends, are 
both in the process of being dumped by their girlfriends.  Tony's 
girlfriend, Nicole (Heather Jae Marie), leaves in a huff, believing that 
Tony has been cheating on her.  More complicated is the situation with 
Chris's girlfriend, Alison (Amy Hathaway).  A recent weeper during sex, 
she claims that her proclivity to vomiting doesn't mean she's pregnant.  
She starts to tell Chris what is on her mind, only to stop in 
mid-thought and clam up entirely.
Girlfriendless, the two handsome guys find love with others.  Tony, an 
unemployed actor, hits it off with his postal carrier (Christa Miller) 
and her little daughter (Nicole Rae).  The daughter and Tony audition 
together for different parts in the same movie.  Any story that uses a 
female mail carrier as an object of romantic desire deserves some extra 
credit.  Name another movie where that has happened.
Chris meets and falls for a fetchingly beautiful Italian named Anna 
(Rosemarie Addeo), who is an animal wrangler of chickens for a music 
video -- the film is set in a short-sleeved L.A. during the Christmas 
season.  An accountant, Chris finds himself accidentally using the worst 
come-on line in the book on Anna.  "Come on by," he tells her.  "I'll do 
your taxes."  He is completely embarrassed by his lack of grace as soon 
as the words leave his mouth.  If there were an undo function for 
speech, he would have selected it immediately.
The good-spirited movie is likeable although forgettable fluff, but its 
charm easily wins you over, even if its script is a bit thin.  Its most 
lasting result, however, is that it makes you want to see more of 
everyone associated with the production.
SMILING FISH AND GOAT ON FIRE runs a fast 1:30.  It is rated R for 
language, some sexual content and brief drug use and would be fine for 
most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
 It's an ultra low-budget film about male siblings so, of course,
everyone is comparing Goat on Fire and Smiling Fish to The Brothers
McMullen.  And from some people's reaction to McMullen, that may not
really be such a good thing.
I liked McMullen, and Goat on Fire is pretty similar, both in terms of
story and unpolished look.  I saw the film as part of the Toronto
International Film Festival's Film Discovery Program (for best first
film), where it took home the top prize.  That's not really saying much
- I was there and the competition was as fierce as a de-clawed kitten.
>From what I remember hearing in Toronto, Goat on Fire was kind of
hurriedly transferred to 35mm for festival submission and, as a result,
the sound was a mess.  Hopefully this can and will be cleaned up for the
film's theatrical release.
Now onto the title, which you have to worry will scare off many a
potential viewer.  `Goat on Fire' and `Smiling Fish' are the nicknames
given to the film's two main characters by their Native American
grandmother (those of you that saw Smoke Signals, don't panic - Goat on
Fire isn't an `American Indian road movie').  Chris Remi (Derick
Martini) was dubbed `Goat on Fire' because he was a very serious,
uptight baby.  His brother Tony (Steven Martini, Derick's real-life
brother) earned the name `Smiling Fish' on account of his carefree,
fun-loving attitude as a kid.
But that was years ago.  As adults, Chris and Tony live together in a
modest L.A. home that they inherited from their parents, who died some
years ago in a car crash.  Chris, a tax accountant, is caught in a
horrendous relationship.  At least they tell me that it's a bad sign
when your girlfriend cries during sex.  Meanwhile, Tony is still an
untroubled, happy-go-lucky guy, living his life like he's still in high
school and struggling to find acting work.  Like when they were
children, Chris and Tony remain opposites as adults.
However, as the film progresses, Chris and Tony find their lives
abruptly altered by the introduction of new women into their lives.
Chris falls for an Italian animal wrangler named Anna (Rosemarie Addeo),
while Tony becomes involved with his mail carrier, an older single mom
(Christa Miller, The Drew Carey Show) with a nine-year-old daughter. And
- you guessed it - Chris learns how to become more easygoing, while Tony
is forced to learn how to settle down.
Goat on Fire was directed by Kevin Jordan, who co-wrote the script with
Derick Martini.  The original story was conceived by both Martini
brothers, with Derick producing and Steven providing the film's (often
annoying) narration.  It was shot in twelve days on a Blair Witch-sized
budget and, like McMullen, was filmed on location in the Martinis'
actual home.
Jordan's talent as a director is the standout star of Goat on Fire. Both
Martini brothers come off pretty likeable as actors, and Miller shows
that she can play more than `Kate' on Drew Carey.
Although it has nothing to do with my like or dislike of the film, I
have to point out that there were several `plants' in the audience
during the press/industry screening in Toronto.  Yeah, the film was
funny at times, but there were at least two people (strategically
located within the theatre) that laughed maniacally like DeNiro in Cape
Fear during the entire film.  The plants were often funnier that what
was happening on the screen.
1:30 - R for language, some sexual content, mild violence and brief drug
use
