Title
Review for Save the Tiger (1973)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
As a testament to questionable business ethics, 'Save the Tiger' works.  As a
testament to the most extreme of human conditions, 'Save the Tiger' works.
 As a testament to some of the finest screen acting ever, 'Save the Tiger'
works magnificently.  Don't mistake it as a preachy, self-indulgent guilt
trip on the part of its main characters.  What the film is really about is
one man's longing for the past to a happier time in his life as he sees his
marriage crumble, his business decline and his sanity tested.
Jack Lemmon who has been a shining example of screen acting in its purest
form won a Best Actor Oscar for this film which has all the subtlety of a
traffic jam and twice the ulcer inducing lifestyle of a common businessman.
 Lemmon stars as Harry Stoner, a clothing manufacturer facing bankruptcy,
foreclosure and the most important moral decision of his life.  He and his
partner (Jack Gilford) have to decide whether or not to hire the services of
a professional arsonist to set fire to their main building in order to
collect badly needed money from an insurance settlement for a corporate
diversion of funds.
Locked in a heated exchange of moral justification for their opposite
positions, Lemmon and Gilford are a great pair of actors looking at times as
if they are acting in a stage play and making the most of their roles.
 Lemmon is in favour of torching the building while Gilford is not.  Lemmon's
secret desire as we find out in the course of the film was to be a big league
baseball player.  As a veteran of war, there is one emotionally gut wrenching
scene where Lemmon is delivering a speech before a large audience and in his
mind sees the combat beaten bodies of soldiers in the crowd instead of the
real people who are there.  While his wife is away, he has a brief fling with
a young hippie flower girl who is the complete opposite of his cultural
perspective on life.  
'Save the Tiger' is a film that doesn't jump all over the place.  It has
focus and is set primarily over the course of two days in the life of a
tormented individual who is very human, a little bit sad and even though he
is going to commit a criminal act to save his business, a strange sense of
sympathy is generated for his character.  Written by Steve Shagan and
directed by John G. Avildsen ('Rocky'), 'Save the Tiger' is a film that
doesn't strain its convictions, it presents them honestly.  
