Title
Review for Singles (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz
SINGLES (director/writer: Cameron Crowe; cinematographer: Ueli Steiger ;
editor: Richard Chew; cast: Bridget Fonda (Janet), Matt Dillon (Steve),
Campbell Scott (Steve), Kyra Sedgwick (Linda), Sheila Kelley (Debbie),
Jim True (David Bailey), Bill Pullman (Dr. Jamison); Runtime: 99; Warner
Bros.; 1992)
The singles scene in Seattle, the reputed java capital of America and
where the grunge rock scene is flourishing, is the setting for this
youth oriented sitcom movie. The film's subject is the search for ideal
love. It is the second feature of writer-director Cameron Crowe (Say
Anything . . .), as it highlights six singles who are aged somewhere in
their twenties, some living in the same apartment complex. It shows
their bitter-sweet relationships at work and at play, with some having
bad reactions to being single even though they are attractive and have
good personalities. They all also have good jobs or  plans to get the
job they want, and have possibilties for some kind of relationship.
Their singles situation is not that desperate.
This fluff film fails to be absorbing because it is so sugary and
forgettable, but with that being said, it still had a few tender moments
that seemed worth while.
The featured couple is Campbell Scott and Kyra Sedgwick. He works as a
city planner, trying to promote his idea for a Seattle rapid-transit
system to alleviate traffic congestion, while she works for an
environmental group. These two nice yuppies seem a perfect match, but
the timing of their meeting at a music concert comes at a time when Kyra
was just hurt by a smooth-talking Spaniard university student and
Campbell has had hard luck with his former girlfriends, and they are
both reluctant to trust someone else. There was nothing special about
their up and down relationship, as it was very predictable. When they
get through playing games of showing each other that neither one wants
to be the one getting dumped, they find that they really like each
other.
Bridget Fonda and Matt Dillon are a more interesting pairing. She
aspires to be an architect, but is working as a coffeehouse waitress. He
is the long-haired singer with a punk rock band, who has an inflated
opinion of his singing abilities, which is not shared by the music
critics. He is hoping for a bigger break while he works in the coffee
shop and as a flower deliverer, and his band performs in the local
nightspots. They live in the same apartment complex, and their romance
is one-sided, with Bridget falling head over heel over the self-absorbed
rocker. He takes her love for granted, surrounded by groupies, taking on
the image of a laid-back musician who can get any woman he wants by
being cool and indifferent. When she can't understand why he is not
taken with her, her neighbor Campbell tells her, it is probably because
he likes busty women. She decides to enlarge her breasts, but the
plastic surgeon (Bill Pullman) tells her that her breasts are fine, as
he uses computer-generated graphics to give her a modest breast
enlargement, but she argues for the x-large variety. He finally
convinces her to get her boyfriend to like her the way she is. Their
eventual rekindling of their relationship also moves along predictable
lines, as she mentions she wants a man who will at least say 'God Bless'
you, when she sneezes. By the film's conclusion, after Matt gets to know
what it feels like chasing a girl who ignores him, he comes to his
senses and says the magical words of 'God Bless' you, when she sneezes,
so that they can get together again.
Sheila Kelley's stock character is sketchy and dull, of one who will do
anything to get a man. In her most amusing scene, she decides to go to a
dating service and make a videotape of how she wants to present herself.
The videographer  is "Batman" director Tim Burton. He will produce a
video that is guaranteed to attract the kind of man she is not looking
for, as she changes her hairstyle and wardrobe and winds up with a
completely different look than the real person she is.
The grunge rock scene was fun to watch, the characters were more likable
than not, there was a lot of tenderness shown for those who get hurt in
relationships, and the film is emotionally as sweet as pie. The director
is good at getting at light comedic moments, but has nothing much to say
that is more serious. This is not an engaging film, and its whimsical
story and cliché characters did not hold my interest. The film was just
too mild in attitude and tame in spirit. It is really a youth oriented
film, with trite sayings which sound terribly out of place, such as when
one of the characters says, "Being alone, there is a certain dignity to
it." The film could be best enjoyed for its soundtrack, which includes
the music of Soundgarden, Mudhoney, Alice in Chains and Pearl Jam in the
background.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Bernie Rauscher
     I saw the move SINGLES last week, and I liked it ... as
entertainment.  I though the cosmetic surgery CAD (Computer Aided
Design) station was a blast.  I really liked the main characters keeping
their word on the "water date."  I thought the rock club scenes really
hit home with it being *impossible* to have a discussion, and the
characters being just a little bit out of it in the sea of obviously
just a tad over 21 crowd.
     All that aside, though, I thought the group of characters were an
interesting mix, --that wasn't exploited at all.  In Chicago, the
waitress-and-musician crowd and the suit-and-tie crowd are like oil and
water.  It's the same in Washington D.C. and New York.  Yet, both
groups come from very similar middle class backgrounds (to myopicly
focus on the class depicted in the movie).  Some of the rift is a simple
matter of money, i.e., Fonda's and Dillon's characters shouldn't have
been living in the "nice" part of town.  But, part of the rift is a
matter of choice and what people want out of life.  Given that the
characters were deciding what they were going to do with their lives, it
would it would have been interesting to see what went into those
choices.
     Also, given that they'd been living with these choices for a few
years, they could have explored the pros and cons of each.  The working
characters should have obviously had less free time and more constraints
on their lifestyle than their "non-working" friends.  The "non-working"
friends should have been obviously poorer in very real ways (like not
having their own roommate-less upscale apartments).
     The working characters had the life style one would expect, which
is the usual payback for a "professional" job.  But, Dillon was
talentless and Fonda was adrift.  This is not usually the case.  It
would have been better to have given either Fonda or Dillon some real
(though not necessarily marketable) talent.

Author
Chad Polenz
Singles
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1992, PG-13, 100 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Campbell Scott (Steve), Kyra Sedgwick (Linda), Bridget Fonda
(Janet), Matt Dillon (Cliff), produced by Cameron Crowe, Richard Hashimoto,
written and directed by Cameron Crowe.
The problem with dating is that it can be great for some people, but torture
for others. It's hard to meet someone that's both good looking and genuinely
interesting, and "Singles" is a good, funny film that plays up the anxiety of
this dilemma.
First there is Steve and Linda (Campbell, Sedgwick), who meet cute and are
attracted to each other, but must go through the typical flirting games. The
way this is shown is both typical and original: typical because scenes like
these happen all the time, but original in the way it is portrayed here with
the actual flirting games. You really believe these are two, actual people
because they don't have perfect chemistry, but we can tell there's potential.
There are other characters with problems like Steve and Linda's, but the
film does not become a gratuitous mess of whining and complaining, instead
it's a funny, romantic, character study. Janet (Fonda) is a waitress who
dates a struggling rock star named Cliff (Dillon). Their problem is
commitment: Cliff doesn't want to commit to one woman, although Janet has
essentially decided they are, in fact, a couple. She even goes as far to
visit a plastic surgeon to get breast implants to save the relationship, but
eventually realizes it's the little things that count. Cliff's not worth the
trouble... or is he?
Although we don't get to know the characters as well as we could, it's hard
not to care about them. Steve and Linda's relationship becomes quite rocky at
times, but we still hope they'll stay together because we can sympathize with
their conflicts. I'm sure this film will remind everyone of a relationship
they had - you're not sure where it is going, who is the one afraid of
commitment, or who is the problem. And thankfully, we don't get sappy
apologies and predictable make-up scenes. There are no piss-off scenes or
tear-jerkers, it treats a breakup in a more believable way than most movies
of the sort.
The only problem I had was the fact the film seemed to have an identity
crisis: Is it a commercial comedy, a serious romance, or an offbeat,
light-hearted drama? Nevertheless, it is still  interesting to watch because
of its originality and sweet charm.
You could say "Singles" concludes with a happy ending, and it seems
appropriate. Crowe has done what only a few mainstream filmmakers are able to
do; tap into the mind of Generation X and portray their true feelings and
emotions in a believable way. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz
