Title
Review for Magic in the Water (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MAGIC IN THE WATER is a boring Oreo cookie commercial billed as a
feature-length movie for kids.  We have the dad, Jack Black (Mark
Harmon), forcing himself against his will to spent four weeks in the
wilderness with his children, fourteen-year-old Joshua (Joshua Jackson)
and 10 year old Ashley (Sarah Liscette Wayne).  To make up for lost
time at work he carries four cellular phones.  At least two of them
ring in all the early scenes and the running joke is where is his lost
cellular phone.  Nearly split my side I was laughing so hard at that
long series of jokes.
     The whole script by Icel Massey and Rick Stevenson is firmly based
in boredom with a little stupidity and cliches thrown in every now and
then for variety.  Among one of the many typical lines is Joshua's who
describes his camping goals as "I'm doing the man thing here.  Study
death in the face.  Stuff like that." Don't you wish you had children
so eloquent?
     The premise of the movie is a recycling of the Loch Ness monster
tale.  Dr. Wanda Bell (Harley Jane Kozak) plays a psychologist who
counsels a group of men who have seen the monster, Orky, and have
thereby done a mind meld with him and become docile lunatics.  The
therapy sessions are a direct rip off from that equally awful movie,
COLOR OF NIGHT, staring Bruce Willis.  If you are going to copy, copy
the worse I guess.
     Orky, whose diet is almost exclusively the insides of Oreo
cookies, is arguably the most pathetic recent example of special
effects.  The effect is anything but special.  In the water he is a
small toy that you could buy for fifty cents.  Out of the water only
his head moves, and his head looks like a piece of blubber which moves
like molasses.  Too bad this movie was not made as a parody.
     Mark Harmon can do serial killers, and he should stick to what he
knows.  Harley Jane Kozak has had small parts in many other movies.
She may want to rethink her acting career after she sees her
performance here.  And last, but not least, what did first time
director, Rick Stevenson, think he was doing?  Did he realize how bad
it was?  Why didn't the other producers (Tony Allard and Matthew
O'Connor) stop him?
     There is a medicine man that wanders through some of the scenes at
random.  Sometimes there is talk of a toxic waste dump.  The writers
seem to throw in a little bit of everything in the hopes that something
will work.  They even have the dad try to dig a hole to China in his
yard - now that's original.  Although MAGIC IN THE WATER is ridiculous,
it still manages to scare the kids needlessly in some of the scenes.
Finally, the ending is an unstructured mess.  Surprise.  Surprise.
     MAGIC IN THE WATER meanders along at 1:38 due to sloppy editing
(Allan Lee).  It is rated PG for a few frightening scenes and a little
profanity.  I recommend one mile as a safe distance, i.e., I recommend
that neither you nor any of your family get within one mile of this
movie.  If dying of boredom was possible, this movie would be lethal.
I do not give it any stars.  Avoid it at all costs.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 17, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sarah Wayne, Mark Harmon, Joshua Jackson, Harley Jane Kozak,
      Frank Sotonoma Salsedo
Director: Rick Stevenson
Producers: Matthew O'Connor and Rick Stevenson
Screenplay: Rick Stevenson and Icel Dobell Massey
Cinematography: Thomas Burstyn
Music: David Schwartz
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     On its way to being the Loch Ness Monster's answer to ET, MAGIC IN THE
WATER has trouble staying afloat.  Director/co-writer Mark Stevenson's heart
is in the right place, but his screenplay stumbles trying to find the right
mix of magic and realism.  The result loses too much of its enchantment
amidst failed attempts at a FISHER KING subplot and an underwater
"adventure" sequence.  Nevertheless, one area where MAGIC IN THE WATER is an
undisputed success is in the casting of its young lead actress.  Newcomer
Sarah Wayne is nothing short of radiant.
     The '90s have featured a number of impressive child actress' debuts.
Anna Paquin garnered an Oscar for her turn in THE PIANO.  Tina Majorino,
late of WATERWORLD, has won raves for several films.  And Kirsten Dunst
opened eyes with her roles in INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE and LITTLE WOMEN.
More luminous than any of these, however, is Sarah Wayne, who singlehandedly
rescues MAGIC IN THE WATER from turning into something unbearably cheesy.
Wayne's portrayal arrests the viewer's attention even when the scene is
silly.  She has a winning smile, a fresh demeanor devoid of artifice, and is
able to successfully convey a wide range of emotions.
     Wayne plays Ashley Black, the pre-teen daughter of talk radio shrink
Jack Black (Mark Harmon).  Ashley's parents are divorced, and she and her
teenage brother, Joshua (Joshua Jackson), live with Mom.  This summer,
however, their workaholic dad has agreed to take them on an extended
vacation to Glenorky, British Columbia, home of the mythical, Loch Ness-like
"Orky."  The problem is, Jack brings along his cellular phones and portable
PC, and once he gets to Glenorky, he shuts out his kids and starts working.
When Ashley finally gets her father's attention by claiming to have seen the
fabled lake monster, Jack is understandably skeptical... until he has a
visitation of his own -- one that changes the way he sees life and relates
to his children.
     The ET element of the story works fine, and even offers a nicely-
framed, politically correct message about the evils of environmental
pollution.  Had MAGIC IN THE WATER concentrated its efforts on this plot
element, it might have been more satisfying, but the film spends an
inordinate amount of time chronicling Jack's transformation from self-
centered work addict to carefree, loving father.  Not only is this part
scripted with a distinct lack of flair, but Mark Harmon's performance comes
across as more childish than child-like.  Add to that a completely
unnecessary climax featuring an underwater rescue, and MAGIC IN THE WATER
ends up with too many bad subplots clinging to its central premise.
     Needless to say, given the PG rating, this is family fare, although the
screenplay has a little more of an edge than some of the summer's tame
entries.  It's certainly not a good film, and I can't give it even a
lukewarm recommendation, but there are isolated moments when the film works
as well for adults as for kids.  Above all, however, there's Sarah Wayne,
MAGIC IN THE WATER's most noteworthy asset.  She may not be enough to lure
many people into the theater, but once they're there, her performance will
be enough to keep most of them in their seats.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
