Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
Number of Reviews
27

Author
Phil Brady
The year is 2047, and spaceship Lewis & Clark is on its way to
Neptune. Upon arrival, the search-and rescue crew finds out that they
are looking for the Event Horizon, an exploration vessel that supposedly
exploded seven years earlier. A tag-along scientist who built that ship
explains that the cover story concealed the ships's sudden
disappearance..it was actually an experiment in faster-than-light
travel. Now radio signals from Neptune suggest it's back.
The ship is found in a decaying orbit, and things don't look good.
The inside temperature is too cold to support the crew, and scans for
life prove inconclusive. Boarding the ship, the rescue crew finds grisly
remains of a few EH crewmen, but the rest is a mystery. Soon, the
hallucinations start, attacking the deepest fears of the rescuers. Now
the evanescent life readings make sense: this spaceship is alive, and
it's  not clear whether it is scaring them off or playing with them. The
Event Horizon proves to be a more malevolent cousin of the Hotel
Overlook, from The Shining.
"Infinite Space, Infinite Terror." That's your basic setup..the movie
starts like Alien or 2001, but finishes like The Shining or Hellraiser.
Along the way, you can see borrowings from those films and others. That
could show a lack of originality, but director Paul Anderson shows that
he has learned from those movies, and he has crafted something
altogether his own. The production shows great imagination and the art
direction is nothing short of brilliant.
The Event Horizon has an odd look, like something out of Jules Verne
in the 19th century. The interiors appear medieval (in fact, much of it
was copied from the ancient cathedral of Notre Dame). Surfaces look like
they are made of unfinished iron, and the engine room has ugly studs and
spikes..this ship can hurt you. The cross shape of the ship doesn't look
like a crucifix, because "elbows" make the ship look more like the
victim of a crucifixion.
Laurence Fishburne does a good job as the hard-nosed captain of the
rescuers. Both he and Kathleen Quinlan (as a medical tech) are making
their first sci-fi film and their first horror film. Sam Neill was a
good choice for the enigmatic scientist. He was the center of 1995's
Lovecraftian "In the Mouth of Madness." His intelligent, dark look keeps
you guessing. You never quite know what secrets (and/or madness) are
rattling around in there. The rest of the cast is filled out with other
capable actors who make their characters distinct, much like the Alien
ensemble. And I have to say that I wasn't distracted by any of the
normal idiocies, where a character does something incredibly stupid,
just to advance the plot. Only the most compelling illusions drive them
to their demise. 
With all this in the plus column, the movie is something of a dud.
The sci-fi front end would have looked cool on a real sci-fi story, like
Stormship Troopers, but we go to all the way to Neptune for what?
Another visit with Hellraiser's Pinhead. Why bother? What's wrong with
rending good old Terran flesh? Tarantino's Dusk 'til Dawn did a better
job, merging bankrobber killers with a vampire flick. For me, Event
Horizon just didn't deliver.

Author
Rick Ferguson
Starring Laurence Fishburne, Sam Neill and Joely Richardson
The year is 2047.  The weary crew of the salvage and rescue vessel "Lewis
and Clark" return to Earth only to learn they have to postpone shore leave
for another mission: find and explore the experimental starship "Event
Horizon", which disappeared seven years earlier and which has now
mysteriously returned in low orbit around Neptune with no sign of
survivors.  Captain Joe Miller (Laurence Fishburne) doesn't like it one
bit, and he doesn't like his new passenger Dr. Wier (Sam Neill), who
designed the "Event Horizon" and who seems to know more than he's letting
on.
The crew set course for Neptune and hop into their stasis tubes for the
journey.  A couple months later, they emerge in Neptune space.  From Dr.
Wier they learn that the "Event Horizon" is more experimental than they
knew- it's designed for deep interstellar flight.  Its "gravity drive" in
essence creates its own black hole and then slips through it, thereby
allowing it to travel to any point in the known Universe instantaneously. 
Seven years ago the ship vanished on its maiden voyage; now it's back. 
Where it has been is anyone's guess.  When the "Lewis and Clark" crew dock
with the Horizon and board her, they discover only corpses, and a copy of
the ship's log on CD which may hold the answers to the fate of her crew.
The easy shot against this picture is that it's yet another ALIEN rip-off;
on the surface this is certainly the case.  You have the same band of
misfits who grudgingly function as crew, you have the derelict spaceship
and the claustrophobia and fear which mount as they realize that Something
Else is on board.  The spaceships are grungy and retro (this look owes more
to the "Millennium Falcon", which came first, than to the "Nostromo", which
followed), the crew members chain-smoke and could use a bath.  Same old
story.  But EVENT HORIZON isn't a monster movie- it's a ghost story.  The
crew find not venom-spewing aliens in the deserted vessel, but rather
physical manifestations of their own inner demons.  Captain Miller sees the
crewman he left behind to die in a zero-G fire on his previous assignment. 
Wier sees his wife, who committed suicide.  Peters (Kathleen Quinlan) sees
her dead son.  Suffice it to say that nobody sees any trippy lights or
groovy acid flashbacks.  The ship knows their weak spots, and knows how to
exploit them.
This plot too is nothing new; as other critics have pointed out, it's been
done in outer space before in the 1972 Russian sci-fi film SOLARIS, and
underwater in shameless hack Michael Crichton's SPHERE (also now a major
motion picture, due in December).  HORIZON's twist is to propose that the
ship in question literally went to Hell and back- and has returned
sentient, and hungry.  It needs new souls upon which to feed.
Despite a sketchy set-up and a cast of characters to which the term
"two-dimensional" is a compliment, I rooted for this picture, and pretty
much stuck with it to the end.  This was due in no small part to the
stunning visual effects, which did a lot to overcome my doubts.  I try not
to recommend a film strictly on the basis of its value as eye-candy, but
this summer I've done it twice: first for THE FIFTH ELEMENT, the
lame-brained plot of which is overcome by its HEAVY METAL visual appeal;
and now for HORIZON.  The set design and special effects are staggering in
their beauty.  The clouds of Neptune are awe-inspiring, the spaceships
elegant and majestic, both inside and out.  The core of the "Horizon", in
which is housed the giant concentric rings of the gravity drive, looks like
a medieval torture chamber.  If it is possible for a spaceship to look
evil, then production designer Joseph Bennett has succeeded admirably.
But does the film deliver in the scare department?  Well, yes and no.  The
pernicious influence of Oliver Stone rears its ugly head again in Director
Paul Anderson's use of rapid-fire subliminal editing techniques to deliver
most of the shocks.  No expense is spared in the gore department; when X.O.
Starck (Joely Richardson) finally decodes the ship's log, the images of
what transpired with the former crew will raise the hackles on the most
jaded of Clive Barker fans.  But there is precious little edge-of-your seat
suspense.  Movies like ALIEN and HALLOWEEN scare so efficiently because
they delay the payoff and leave the carnage mostly to the imagination. 
HORIZON trades suspense for shock value.  While the gore is creative and
some of the scenes harrowing to watch, the result is a film of lesser
quality. 
Even so, I kept watching.  The premise of the film grabbed me, and the
visuals kept me hooked even as the execution proved disappointing.  Sadly,
the film looks pared to the bone, as if some crazed editor crept into the
studio at night and hacked off about a third of the footage.  Despite
sturdy work from the cast, particularly Fishburne and Richard T. Jones as
Cooper, the gung-ho security officer, none of them are given enough screen
time to flesh out the characters.  The key transformation of one character
from good guy to villain is handled so abruptly that we're left wondering
exactly when it happened, or why.  The climax occurs twenty minutes too
soon.  When the lights came up I was left wanting more- which is normally a
good thing, but in this case it's not that I wanted the film to go on, I
just wanted to go back and flesh out the film I'd already seen.  Too bad. 
A little more suspense, a little more hellfire and damnation, and EVENT
HORIZON might have become a horror classic.  Still, if great set design and
dazzling special effects are your bag, then it's close enough for jazz.
Grade: B-
Please visit the Film Geek website at:

Author
Craig Good
"Event Horizon" manages to raise the notion of "preposterous" to new
heights.
What starts out as a promising premise, that of a derelict space ship
on the edge of the solar system which has returned as a ghost ship from
parts unknown, degenerates into an incomprehensible mess.
A rescue team led by Larry Fishburne is joined by the nightmare-prone
scientist, Sam Neil, on a mission to rescue the Event Horizon and any
surviving crew. For seven years the ship had been Somewhere, after
trying out a new gravity drive which is supposed to use loopholes in
relativity for effectively faster than light travel.
The ship seems to have been to hell and back, literally, and is now a
flying haunted mansion that evokes nightmarish visions of hell in the
rescue crew. All of that sounds like it should work. It doesn't.
The dialogue is by turns forced, silly, on the nose, or pure
exposition. The plot devices have blinking red lights on them so you
can't miss them. The "science" in this science fiction film is
annoyingly stupid. (How about a guy in a space suit, floating outside a
window, yelling and being heard from inside?)
The movie is nearly devoid of content and has to rely on cheap tricks
in an attempt to startle the audience. Laughably loud edits and buckets
of fake blood are but desperate band-aids over the holes through which
air from the theatre is rushing in to fill the void. I got the
impression more than once that it was made by people who as children
stuck their friends' hands in buckets of cold spaghetti and peeled
grapes on Halloween.
Here is your official "Event Horizon" sound designer guide:
As a fitting finish, the closing credits run over something that was no
doubt performed by people who would describe themselves as musicians,
but who managed only to produce an unpleasent noise apparently designed
to drive the remaining stragglers from the theatre.
Somone in the parking lot elevator after the movie said, "Maybe we
should have seen 'George of the Jungle' instead."

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I have heard it observed that any film that starts out with an
aerial view of a city is not a film worth seeing. That may be helpful
on cable, but not for films in a movie theater.  I guess I would claim
that any film whose publicity uses the word "terror" is a film well
worth avoiding. I saw a coming attraction for EVENT HORIZON and thought
that it looked pretty good.  At the time I did not realize that I knew
the rule about the word "terror."  I knew but knew not that I knew.  I
only realized that I knew when I looked up some information about this
interesting looking film on the web and saw the word "terror" in the
ad, that I realized it had to be a bad film and I knew that only on the
basis of seeing that one word.  PSYCHO is one film that could be said
to produce terror, but the ads did not use the word.  Hitchcock never
claimed to be a master of terror; William Castle made that claim.  As a
rule of thumb, if you are terrified by a William Castle film you should
wait five or six years until you hit puberty and try it again.
     EVENT HORIZON is essentially a haunted house film in space that
rather artfully uses scenes and touches from a lot of different films
to tell a new story.  There is a lot of ALIEN and a lot of HELLRAISER
with bits of THE HAUNTING, FORBIDDEN PLANET, 2001, STAR TREK VI, MARY
SHELLEY'S FRANKENSTEIN, THIS ISLAND EARTH, and probably others I
missed.
     These days too many films tend to have a great look but not very
much content.  It is the music video aesthetic.  This is a film with
great visual images, but the plot is really basically the haunted house
film in space.  The film shovels images at the viewer so fast that it
is difficult to interpret just what has been seen, and really it may
not matter.  When you find out what is really going on, it is a real
letdown.  This has to be one of the least intriguing concepts possible
for a film.  I will not give it away, but this is more a Clive Barker
sort of horror film in a science fiction setting than it is a science
fiction film.  The title is the most intriguing thing about the film,
but "Event Horizon" is just the name of a spacecraft, and there is no
internal evidence that anyone involved in the production knew even what
the term meant.
     This film is really a good cast wasted.  Sam Neill and Laurence
Fishburne are, of course, major actors.  I suspect they will take the
money and run.  But what makes the casting particularly unusual is the
inclusion of Kathleen Quinlin of I NEVER PROMISED YOU A ROSE GARDEN.
She is an actress who always added a certain fragility to her roles.
She is sort of the anti-Bette-Davis.  Here that quality is not just
ignored, it is plastered over and she is nearly unrecognizable.  She is
cast against type and brings nothing special that is usable to her
role.
     This is a film that needed a writer with vision, but instead had
one with a high concept.  I would rate this letdown a -1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Boyd Petrie
Event Horizon (1997)
Rated R for violence, terror, language, and brief nudity
Starring Sam Neill, Laurence Fishburne, Kathleen Quinlan
***1/2 of ****
Laurence Fishburne was in last year's "Othello."  Kathleen Quinlan was
in this year's "Breakdown," and Sam Neill was in "Jurassic Park."
Now, all these respected actors come together in a film that got
dumped on by many critics, and won't make much money at the box
office.  The only way the film could make more money is by word of
mouth, which is exactly what it might do.  Last year, a film came out
which was very scary the first half, and then turned into a comic
suspense thriller.  That film was "Scream."  By word of mouth, that
film became the highest grossing horror film ever.  Hopefully, that
word of mouth will spread onto Event Horizon, the new sci-fi/horror
film from director Paul Anderson.
Whatever occurs at the box office or with critics, Event Horizon will
be the scariest film that I have seen since "Nightmare on Elm Street"
(Actually, "Arachnophobia" scared me more than any film ever made).
The film is so scary that it will have you on the edge of your seat,
waiting for another surprise.  And don't worry, there are many "jump"
moments in this film.  Event Horizon begins with the overused computer
narration which types the summary onto the screen.  We learn that a
ship disappeared in 2040, and seven years later, she has returned.
The Event Horizon was rumored to have been destroyed in space,
becoming the worst space disaster ever.  Now that she has reappeared,
a crew is brought in to salvage what is left of the crew and ship.
This crew consists of Captain Miller (Fishburne), Dr. Weir (Neill),
who designed and built the ship, Starck (Joely Richardson), Peters
(Kathleen Quinlan), and four other crew members.  In fact, this film
only has about nine actors who show up on screen.  This crew sets off
into deep space; their destination: Neptune.  When they arrive, about
57 days later, they find the ship void of human life.  What happened
to the crew, and where did the ship go?  All these questions are
shoved into Dr. Weir's face because he designed it.  Blood is found on
the wall, and a recording is heard in Latin.  The ship's log isn't
much help either, because the part they need to see is jumbled and
blurry.  However, soon, the crew begins experiencing strange
occurances, and Justin (Jack Noseworthy, also from "Breakdown") is
sucked into the "heart" of the ship.
This "heart", as explained by Weir, is what made the ship vanish for
seven years.  It folds space and allows the ship to pass through a
black hole, instantaneously travelling to somewhere far, far away.
Justin, however, tries to commit suicide (in a very graphic and bloody
way), and Captain Miller wants to know what happened to him.  Dr. Weir
isn't able to answer any of the questions, and the film quickly turns
into a horror film.  Explaining any more of this film would ruin all
the suspense, and believe me, there is a lot of it present in Event
Horizon.  And one of the best things about the film is that while most
of the "jumps" come from the skilled filmmakers who know how to time
the music and silence, most of the scariness comes from the plot and
story.  Unfortunately, the only downside to the film is the number of
cliches that are used, and how many other films it steals from (Alien
and Hellraiser are the most notable).  Well, the ending of the film
sucks too.
On the plus side, while the film is riddled with cliches, the
filmmakers have put new twists to them, making them seem original
again.  The hero-outruns-the-fireball cliche is one of the best
because while it uses the cliche, it also uses the story to make it
seem possible.  Basically, Event Horizon is a sci-fi haunted house
film.  Nothing is as it seems, and this is the frightening aspect of
the story.  What is real?  And what is just part of the imagination?
Is the ship alive?  Or is the mind playing tricks as a result of the
isolation of the crew?  The outcome is more terrifying than what is
expected, and this provides an utterly frightening experience.  This
is one of those films that you will see once, and then tell all your
friends about, and then take them to see it just so you can laugh at
how scared they are.  
The filmmaking is probably the best part of the film itself.  Director
Paul Anderson knows exactly how to scare you.  He uses great sets with
shadows and dark corners.  Sounds seem to come from nowhere, and
things appear and disappear constantly.  Composer Michael Kamen uses
music to great effect here, making the music fade into silence, and
then playing a very loud chord just when something on screen happens
(many of film's "jump" moments are caused by this).  Cinematographer
Adrian Biddle uses all the common camera angles for horror films, but
somehow they all seem to make the film more scary.  The special
effects are very well done, especially some of the computer generated
ones.  All of the effects are well done, and some are quite amazing.
The effects are done by Cinesite, an ILM rival, and with this film,
they prove that they can hold their own against bigger companies.
The acting is well done (with the exception of Noseworthy).  Fishburne
gives a terrific performance, if not a bit recycled itself.  Still, he
has a great presence on screen, and his scenes are some of the best.
Sam Neill steals the film with a great performance as the designer of
Event Horizon.  His performance is the key to the film, and he handles
it extremely well.  Kathleen Quinlan gives a nice and almost low-key
performance, but her character isn't given much to do.  Joely
Richardson is very good, although she doesn't get much to do either.
Noseworthy is usually good throughout the film, but sometimes he just
got on my nerves.  The rest of the cast supports very well, but again,
they aren't given much to do.  It's mainly Fishburne and Neill's film.
Event Horizon is rated R for graphic violence and gore, some nudity,
and language, with quite a bit of terror.  This film is definitely not
for the faint of heart, and the atmosphere itself could scare some
people.  Even the most proud people will show signs of fear during
this film.  All of the technical elements are put together extremely
well, providing one of the scariest films to come along in a long
time.  Not many films give me nightmares at night, but Event Horizon
did just that.  I will say it again, just in case you didn't get what
I am trying to tell you: Event Horizon is an EXTREMELY scary film.

Author
C.J Hill
This is a good year if you want plenty of sci-fi on your multiplex.
>From the comedies Mars Attacks and Men In Black, to Luc Besson's
powerful The Fifth Element, and to this, sci-fi/horror that is Event
Horizon.  (More is on the way with Contact and Alien:Ressurection being
released later this year.)
The story is thus:  In 2040 an explorer ship called The Event Horizon
tests out a newly invented gravity drive. A device that enables a craft
to travel anywhere in the universe, instantaneously.  This is achieved
by creating a gateway, infact, a black hole, between the craft and it's
required destination.  In this case, from near Neptune to Proxima Prime.
However, when the Event Horizon attempts this, it dissappears, without
trace, leaving two searches for it fruitless.
Seven years later, it reappears, transmitting a distress signal and this
is where the film starts.
A search and rescue ship is sent out to investigate.  The team is led by
Laurence Fishburne, and joining them is Sam Neill who plays the
scientist that invented the gravity drive.
As the team search the Event Horizon, they find no trace of the crew but
plenty of blood lying around.  Not a good sign...
To make matters worse, as they search the ship, they find themselves
being subjected to a series of illusions based on their own individual
inner secrets and worse, some very bloody events start to occur as they
slowly piece together the events that transpired on the ship seven years
ago.
It soon becomes apparent that, wherever the ship went, it bought
something back with it.  Something very, very evil...
The first thing you'll notice in this film is it's incredible visual
effects.  They really are eye popping, with some great models to boot.
The acting is quite good, with some occasional witty moments.  Sam Neill
does a good job as the scientist that increasingly becomes more and more
disturbed as the search continues, but a tip of the hat goes to Laurence
Fishburne who leads the team, in a cool, calm, take no nonense manner.
It is his acting skills that help hold this film together.
The idea behind Event Horizon is certainly a good one.  It starts off
incredibly well, but the middle section becomes quite confused and
sometimes muddled, leaving the viewer unsure on just what the reasons
are behind some of the bloody and bizarre events that occur.
However, the closing 20 minutes of the film more than make up for this,
producing one the most nail biting (or in my case, straw of my drink
biting!) climaxes i've recently witnessed.
Overall, Event Horizon is a smart film indeed.  It's very enjoyable and
has some amazing visuals.  But be warned, the horror scenes, despite
being very brief are very, very, gory.  Not for the squemish!

Author
Jamie Peck
Paramount / 1:37 / 1997 / R (mucho gore, violence, language, nudity)
Cast: Laurence Fishburne; Sam Neill; Kathleen Quinlan; Joely Richardson; 
Richard T. Jones; Jack Noseworthy; Jason Isaacs; Sean Pertwee; Holley 
Chant 
Director: Paul Anderson 
Screenplay: Philip Eisner 
A traditional ghost story dressed up in spiffy sci-fi trappings, "Event 
Horizon" plays like a patchwork assembly of the "Alien" films with a 
spooky demonic presence in place of the nasty outer-space monster. In 
fact, it's so derivative in pretty much every imaginable way, that it 
makes "Mimic" -- another new release that heavily incorporates bits and 
pieces from the afore-mentioned trilogy -- look like a complete 
original. "Horizon" isn't ever the movie event it aspires to be, but, 
boy, it does have its weird moments. 
If being something of a copycat is a hefty drawback, then at least 
"Event Horizon" is successful in setting up its terrifying atmosphere. 
Director Paul Anderson (who made the awful "Mortal Kombat") and 
production designer Joseph Bennett kick off the creepy proceedings 
incredibly well; that even the slightest detail -- in one scene, a lone 
drop of water -- seems menacing is a testament to that. But after a 
stable first hour or so, it becomes all too clear where Philip Eisner's 
screenplay is getting ready to go. 
The film takes its title from a prototype spaceship that mysteriously 
turns up somewhere off the crust of Neptune in 2047 following a 
seven-year disappearance. Event Horizon inventor Dr. William Weir (Sam 
Neill) and emergency team leader Captain Miller (Laurence Fishburne) 
head a crew aboard a search-and-rescue craft to intercept the Horizon 
and find out what happened to those on board. A radio transmission gives 
Weir and company little hope -- distinguishable among the mass screaming 
is "Liberate me!", a Latin plea for help. 
Their perspectives don't improve after climbing aboard and finding what 
appears to be blood and entrails caked on the walls. Miller's corps -- 
who include Kathleen Quinlan, Richard T. Jones ("The Trigger Effect") 
and Joely Richardson ("101 Dalmatians") -- make several other disturbing 
discoveries, one of them being a surprise confession from Weir and a 
video tape of ship goings-on that becomes suspiciously snowy at one key 
moment. Before long, there appears to be an evil visitor lurking in the 
Event Horizon's core, something that is capable of turning the team's 
worst fears against them. It first preys upon Miller's engineer Justin 
(Jack Noseworthy). 
Every twist "Event Horizon" takes, the less involving it becomes, 
finally degenerating into an exceedingly silly, endlessly gory climax 
where Fishburne gets to wallop a nude, scabby Neill and the blood flows 
like cherry Kool-Aid -- literally. A rule stating the less that's shown, 
the more horrifying it can be is certainly true in this case. For 
instance, one of the movie's "huge scares" (when we're shown what 
exactly is on the security tape) made me laugh so hard I nearly fell out 
of my seat -- it looks like a kinkier, more explicit Marilyn Manson 
music video (although it might be worth focusing on if you've ever 
wondered what it looks like when someone's intestines are pulled out 
through their mouth). 
I never found "Event Horizon" unwatchable, but it is disappointing that 
what starts out so strong finishes up like "Alien" by way of Clive 
Barker and David Lynch. The movie tells us too much too fast, and as a 
result, exactly where the ship has been is pretty easy to figure out. 
Also, "Horizon" treats the obvious villain somewhat ambiguously, so it's 
no shock when he wields a Ginsu and carves up victims in an icky manner 
that would impress Hannibal Lecter. Other characters are
shakily developed, too. Fishburne is excellent, but Miller is low enough 
on personality so that you never quite root for him, and Brooks just 
hangs around to provide unnecessary comic relief. Quinlan and Noseworthy 
-- both of whom starred in last May's "Breakdown" -- are the real 
standouts here. 
So while at least half of "Event Horizon"'s substance is problematic, it 
does a fantastic job with visuals and ambience. The seemingly dynamic 
hand of effects supervisor Richard Yuricich molds some really exciting, 
dazzling sights, and it's also interesting to see science-fiction that 
focuses on religious nuances rather than slime-dripping creatures, even 
if "Contact" did beat it to the punch (and do a far better job). The 
movie covers fascinating, absorbing territory for a while, but when the 
Event Horizon goes to hell, so, in many areas, does the film. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Shane Burridge
   It's not that EVENT HORIZON isn't well made.  It's just that I've
   been there before.  In fact, I'm hard pressed to think of another
   film more entirely fabricated of quotes from other movies.  Barely
   five minutes into the story I found myself sidetracked with
   references from obvious candidates like ALIEN, LIFEFORCE, and 2010,
   but the quotespotting soon brought forth non-SF films such as DON'T
   LOOK NOW and THE SHINING, and culminated with SOLARIS and, God help
   me, Disney's THE BLACK HOLE.
   Why is it - pardon the pun - that black hole movies always suck? 
   It's a fascinating subject that still hasn't been treated right by
   Hollywood.  In this case, the Event Horizon is not the rim of a
   black hole, but the name of a spaceship that reappears in Neptune's
   orbit after a seven year absence.  But maybe it's really a
   non-Event Horizon.  It's a Marie Celeste in Space scenario, the
   kind of story that early STAR TREK episodes bought the patent on
   years ago.  To be fair, the opening scenes are writ large upon the
   screen, at least proving once again that SF cinema was the reason
   that Panavision was invented.  The actors - Laurence Fishburne and
   Sam Neill head the cast - are all fine, the sets are great, the
   budget is big, there is some legitimate haunted-house atmosphere, a
   couple of gripping sequences, and at least one moment that made me
   laugh (when Fishburne decisively announces they're vacating the
   ship).  But there are still holes in the plot, and I don't mean the
   black kind either, that keep the film from being solidly grounded:
   the abandonment of all scientific rationale (even Neill's pragmatic
   Doctor gives up) shows that the film-makers were less interested in
   explanation than effect.  And, come to think of it, isn't there a
   crew member unaccounted for at the end?
   It may not be the movie's fault.  I guess I was expecting something
   more purely science-fictional, and instead got that SF-horror
   hybrid that seems to have consumed the genre of late.  If I had
   seen EVENT HORIZON fifteen years ago I would have no doubt loved
   it.  But you can only jump out of your seats from the same shock
   effects so many times, and after that there's not a lot left for a
   story to go on.  Which is a shame, because I wanted to enjoy this
   film more than I did.  Contrary to its title, EVENT HORIZON didn't
   take me into unchartered territory.  The most unexpected thing
   about the ending was hearing a song by the Prodigy played over the
   final credits.

Author
Choo Eng Aun, Jack
No, it is not a bad film, in fact it is so good in achieving its =
purpose, I actually wished for the film to end itself quickly. EVENT =
HORIZON is not your run-of-the-mill sci-fi film, I'm sure many who have =
watched this will agree with me. It is not even original in that sense, =
and it does borrow heavily from films like ALIEN, HELLRAISER and even =
BLADE RUNNER. The magic of this film lies in its unorthodox setting and =
methodical build-up that makes it wonderfully horrifying.
The story brings us to the year 2050, where space travel have since =
enormously progressed. The EVENT HORIZON is actually a ship built for a =
secret experimental purpose; it has the ability to fold time and space =
thus making it possible for travelling distances not reachable in a =
man's lifetime. The ship disappeared as soon as it went into operation =
but after 7 years, it reappeared again within the orbit of Neptune. A =
search and rescue team led by Miller (Fishburne) is given the task to =
check for survivors of the EVENT HORIZON. The designer of the ship, Dr. =
Weir (Neill) follows along to satisfy his curiosity on what actually =
happened to his otherwise technologically impressive ship.
EVENT HORIZON is a sci-fi horror film, much truer to the word than say, =
ALIEN would ever be. While in ALIEN, the crew has to cope with a =
ferocious creature while encased within tight spaces, in EVENT HORIZON, =
the forces which goes against the crew is undefined but yet so powerful =
and horrifying. The story unfolds itself slowly and the suspense buildup =
is superb, up till the point where I really felt like saying out loud =
`enough! I can't stand this anymore!'. There are more than enough jolts =
to send your adrenalin pumping overtime. The story in itself is not =
exactly something very exciting and also, the acting is only at most, =
average by most commercial standards. Even so, the essence of horror is =
carried out very well in this film, thanks to its well-paced =
storytelling, disturbing set designs and some really gory sequences =
(which incidentally, has been quite generously removed by our censorship =
board).=20
Director Paul Anderson (who did MORTAL KOMBAT) and his team of =
`atmosphere' creators have done well in keeping EVENT HORIZON within the =
bounds of the term `horror'. This picture did not do very well in the US =
box-office most probably for the dread-factor impact it has on most =
audiences; people will not see it again and not many would recommend =
their friend to watch this. Although on the face of it, EVENT HORIZON is =
mostly molded for mass-entertainment; many thrills, spills and suspense =
to keep audiences in focus. However, the offbeat horror element which it =
ultimately convey audiences is very disturbing. My friend and I could =
not say a word to each other for quite a while after going through the =
`experience' of EVENT HORIZON. I guess it was just the immense feeling =
of dread which the film had cast upon us.
Be forewarned, this film is not for the faint-hearted nor for pure =
entertainment. Be prepared to be disturbed if you should decide to watch =
this film! EVENT HORIZON is highly recommended=85=85but at your own =
risk! It has been a long time since good-horror embraced the big screen, =
and EVENT HORIZON is one.
------=_NextPart_000_01BDB37A.450CF120--

Author
James Sanford
In astronomical terms, an "event horizon" is defined as the point in the
boundary of a black hole at which light or matter cannot escape being pulled
in. In cinematic terms, "Event Horizon" almost immediately grabs the
attention with lavish sets, first-rate special effects and an intriguing
premise, only to end up chucking its careful set-up and resorting to a
blood-drenched finale better-suited to a "Nightmare On Elm Street"
installment. It's a classic exmplae of many admirable parts added up to an
unsatisfying whole.
 In its first hour, "Event" is startlingly beautiful and compelling,
borrowing heavily from the influential 1977 Russian film "Solaris," in which
an investigator looking into the cause of mental breakdowns among the crew
of a space station finds himself haunted by images from his past.
 "Event Horizon" revolves around a prototype superspaceship of that name
that mysteriously vanished near Neptune in 2040. Seven years later it
reappears, and Dr. William Weir (Sam Neill), the designer of the vessel,
joins the mission to salvage the ship. What made the Event Horizon special
was its "heart," a gravity drive that could fold time and space, allowing
the craft to travel at speeds faster than light. But now, the gravity drive
appears to have developed an evil mind of its own, as Weir and his teammates
are terrorized by vivid hallucinations and spooked by manifestations of
their own memories.
 Director Paul Anderson is often heavy-handed, frequently trotting out the
old false-scare-accompanied-by-a-burst-of-shrieking-music to jolt his
audience. Even so, the film has some genuinely chilling moments and
memorable visuals. The passageway through a revolving tunnel that looks like
a giant meat-grinder is a brilliant setting, and the gravity drive itself,
with its multiple rotating rings, is a thing of creepy beauty.
 The impressive cast -- Laurence Fishburne, Kathleen Quinlan, Joely
Richardson, etc. -- play out Philip Eisner's script without a hint of
campiness or condescension, although Neill's initial restraint finally gives
way to shameless hamminess.
 Likewise, "Event" deteriorates in its last half-hour into a gore-drenched
free-for-all, with images of Hell that seem to have been lifted directly
from a Nine Inch Nails video and numerous gruesome murders and
self-mutilations: One character is even forced to put out his eyes with his
own thumbs. By the time Richardson is swept through the corridors of the
ship on a tidal wave of blood, you'll realize that's a pretty apt metaphor
for what's happened to the film itself. Once "Event Horizon" goes
off-course, it never regains its bearings.
James Sanford

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 8/15/97 (wide)
Running Length: 1:37
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, gore, profanity, brief nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Laurence Fishburne, Sam Neill, Kathleen Quinlan, Joely Richardson,=20
      Richard T. Jones, Jack Noseworthy, Jason Isaacs, Sean Pertwee
Director: Paul Anderson
Producers: Lawrence Gordon, Lloyd Levin, and Jeremy Bolt=20
Screenplay: Philip Eisner
Cinematography: Adrian Biddle
Music: Michael Kamen
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     I went into EVENT HORIZON expecting an ALIEN clone.  However,=20
although this film has successfully recaptured some of the look and=20
claustrophobic feel of Ridley Scott's science fiction classic, that's=20
where the similarity ends.  Because, while ALIEN was tautly paced and=20
deftly scripted, EVENT HORIZON is a mess.  This is one of the most=20
chaotic movies that I have seen since 1996's nearly-incomprehensible=20
MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.  Half of what's going on is never explained, and=20
what is explained, doesn't make much sense.  And that's just the=20
beginning of the problems encountered in director Paul Anderson's=20
(MORTAL KOMBAT) poorly executed endeavor=85
     August is traditionally the month when studios dump their least-
attractive summer prospects into the market, so EVENT HORIZON has plenty=20
of company.  This is the kind of motion picture that would be killed in=20
a direct competition against a LOST WORLD or CONTACT, but stands a=20
chance against such second-rate opponents as SPAWN and MIMIC.  And,=20
because the film is extremely light on intelligent dialogue and heavy on=20
gore-laden action and superficial shocks, it should play well in a=20
dubbed version overseas, so the producers have a chance to make back=20
their money.=20
     EVENT HORIZON takes us to the year 2047 and onto the deep space=20
rescue craft LEWIS & CLARK as it departs from Earth orbit on a two-month=20
journey to Neptune.  On board are the usual suspects, a group of outer=20
space military veterans:  Captain Miller (Laurence Fishburne) and=20
crewmembers Starck (Joely Richardson), Peters (Kathleen Quinlan), Cooper=20
(Richard T. Jones), Justin (Jack Noseworthy), D.J. (Jason Isaacs), and=20
Smith (Sean Pertwee).  There's also the mysterious and elusive Dr.=20
William Weir (Sam Neill), who's the only one aware of what's truly going=20
on.
     The primary mission of the LEWIS & CLARK is to go into a low orbit=20
around Neptune and make contact with the deep space research vessel=20
EVENT HORIZON, which was initially thought destroyed seven years ago. =20
The would-be rescuers are to search for survivors and salvage anything=20
that's reclaimable, but no one is prepared for the horror that lurks=20
deep within the dark corridors of the dead ship.  The crew of the EVENT=20
HORIZON may have had their innards splattered over the bulkheads, but=20
something aboard the ship is very much alive.
     Sadly, despite what seems to be a promising premise (a haunted=20
house in space), EVENT HORIZON misfires badly.  Those who thought the=20
minor technical slip-ups in CONTACT were egregious will be floored by=20
the slipshod "science" embraced by this film, where "miniature black=20
holes" are created with little effort and ships are sucked through=20
singularities without even the slightest bit of gravity distortion. =20
When it comes to labeling EVENT HORIZON as a science fiction film, put=20
the emphasis heavily on the "fiction" portion of the term.
     For movies like this to work, we have to develop a rooting interest=20
in at least one member of the crew, otherwise the film becomes a=20
pointless exercise in watching men and women get cut down one-by-one. =20
ALIEN was effective because we cared about Sigourney Weaver's Ripley. =20
Here, however, none of the characters are remotely sympathetic or=20
interesting.  They're a bunch of familiar types thrown onto the screen,=20
most of whom have neither past nor future.  We are given some background=20
information about a few of these individuals (one lost a wife, another=20
has a son she left back on Earth, and another made a tragic command=20
decision that cost a life), but it's hardly enough to flesh them out. =20
Even a solid actor like Laurence Fishburne (Ike Turner in WHAT'S LOVE=20
GOT TO DO WITH IT?) can't rescue such a poorly-developed character.  The=20
likes of Joely Richardson (the live-action 101 DALMATIANS), Kathleen=20
Quinlan (BREAKDOWN), and Sean Pertwee (the son of the third DR. WHO, Jon=20
Pertwee) blend into the background.  Sam Neill manages to develop the=20
semblance of a personality, but that's because he's given a little more=20
to work with than the others.  The most memorable performance belongs to=20
Richard T. Jones (THE TRIGGER EFFECT), whose eccentric Cooper provides=20
most of the comic relief.
     There are a few means by which it's possible to relieve the tedium=20
of sitting through a screening of EVENT HORIZON.  The first is to=20
identify rip-offs of other horror and dark science fiction films (most=20
notably THE EXORCIST, THE SHINING, and the ALIEN series).  The second is=20
to count the number of times that the film uses a nightmare sequence to=20
"shock" us (with a plot device as overused as this one, even once would=20
seem to be too much).  Another possibility would be to start a betting=20
pool for which of the cardboard cut-out characters will die first.=20
(Note: blood gushing out of certain orifices does not count as "dead"=20
unless the heart stops pumping.)  The bottom line is that EVENT HORIZON=20
isn't particularly effective as a horror, adventure, or science fiction=20
film, and, to enjoy it, you're going to have to resort to something more=20
creative than sitting passively in your seat and absorbing the=20
atmospheric confusion that transpires on screen. =20
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Martijn van Turnhout
Sommige mensen zullen het ook nooit leren. Paul Anderson heeft al
eerder de film "Mortal Kombat" gemaakt, gebaseerd op het
computerspel. Het was een onverwacht succes in de Verenigde Staten,
maar bij ons belandde deze film al snel in de videotheek.  Gelukkig
maar, want "Mortal Kombat" was (en is nu nog steeds) echt
waardeloos. Ondanks veel kritiek besloot hij door te gaan met z'n
volgende project, waarmee hij met acteurs als Laurence Fishburne en
Sam Neill kon werken. Het resultaat is "Event Horizon", een film die
zich in de ruimte afspeelt. En tientallen liters bloed bevat.
Het ruimteschip 'Lewis & Clark' staat voor een moeilijke taak: het
opsporen en terugbrengen van het ruimteschip 'Event Horizon' dat zeven
jaar geleden verdween. De bemanning, onder leiding van kapitein Miller
(Laurence Fishburne), wordt in hun zoektocht bijgestaan door dr. Weir
(Sam Neill). Weir, die zelf de 'Event Horizon' ontworp, legt aan hun
uit waarom dit schip zo belangrijk is. De 'Event Horizon' blijkt het
eerste ruimteschip te zijn dat sneller dan het licht kan reizen, door
middel van het ruimte-tijd-continuum in tweeën te vouwen.
Eindelijk, na 56 dagen, wordt het beruchte ruimteschip ontdekt. Het is
groot, wel 2 kilometer lang. Kapitein Miller neemt een kijkje aan
boord en ontdekt dat er niemand zich op het ruimteschip
bevindt. Paniek alom dus. De rest van de crew wordt nu ook
nieuwsgierig en besluit om naar de 'Event Horizon' te gaan. Dat konden
ze maar beter niet doen, want de bemanning van de 'Event Horizon' is
dood, maar het ruimteschip zelf is nog springlevend...
"Event Horizon' begint ijzersterk. We zien de spanningen tussen de
bemanningsleden hoog oplopen als dr. Weir eenmaal aan de boord van de
'Lewis & Clark' is gekomen.  Kapitein Miller is de koele kikker van de
bemanning, een man die weet waar z'n grenzen liggen. Drie fascinerende
kwartieren volgen voor de bioscoopbezoekers.
Dan gaat het fout. Net nadat regisseur Anderson de film zo spannend
gemaakt heeft, trekt hij alle clichés uit de kast en probeert de
horror-fans te bevredigen met tientallen liters bloed, wat dus totaal
mislukt. Het verhaal neemt dan een onverwachte wending, die net zo
apart als ongeloofwaardig is. Neem dan ook nog het gehaaste einde en
je hebt een film die erg goed kon zijn. Let wel op dat woordje 'kon'.
E-mail us at: mailto:janvanturnhout@pi.net
'Filmpje!' is located at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/
where you can also subscribe to my mailing-list!

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Laurence Fishburne, Sam Neill, Kathleen Quinlan, Joely
Richardson,  Richard T. Jones, Jack Noseworthy, Jason Isaacs, Sean
Pertwee Director: Paul Anderson Screenplay: Philip Eisner
This movie works on pure horror and special effects. Both of which score
zilch when the mind is continually bombarded by wave upon wave of
shocking graphic gore. Is there a story line? Yes and no. YES, it is the
tale of an exploration ship known as the "Event Horizon", capable of
travel through a self-generated Black Hole. After being missing for
seven years, it reappears. Apparently the ship has been to Hell and
back, and NO it shouldn't have made a re-appearance.
There seems to be no limit to the human imagination when it comes to
horror. Sam Neil's face is mutilated to the point where Freddy Kruger
could be mistaken for Ronald McDonald in comparison. The simple scarred
face is no longer shocking enough. The eyes must also be gorged out for
added effect. Why not go all the way and remove the nose and tongue as
well. That way we would be spared the mumbo jumbo dialogue, and the
putrid stench that this movie creates. Let me mention a few horrific
moments of wasted movie time.
The "Silence of the Lambs" scene. This time the female gender is spared
the skinning process. Instead we have an average sized Caucasian male
who is skinned alive, before his carcass is poetically sprawled on the
butchering table. The rest of him dangles on a hook above the body,
giving "hung and dry" a new meaning.
The "Carrie" scene - a simple bucket of blood has become cliche. This
time we have a torrential river of crimson red, which floods and
submerges its characters. This is definitely what the blood bank needs.
Now for something not seen too often in Mainstream cinema. The "Body
Mutilation Orgy Scene", which was unsuspectingly thrown at the audience.
We have the naked, mutilated bodies of the missing crew running about
the ship, ripping each other's insides out; and I don't just mean the
eyes. I figured that this must have been the substitute sex scene, cause
the actors get to take their clothes off.
I won't forget to mention the "Blow the boy from the inside out" scene.
Where once again we watch a nice young man having his eyes and veins
explode in a pressure lock. There we go with the eyes again. Fetish,
fetish. fetish.
Now tell me, was I meant to enjoy the movie, or merely gag in the aisle
where I was sitting. I'm not a great connoisseur of food, but I guess
what is considered one man's vomit, is another man's creme de la creme.
Believe me, this movie leaves a very bitter taste in the mouth.
Are the actors worth mentioning? No. After portraying such used and
abused characters, whose bodies have no less been put through a meat
grinder, anonymity would be the kindest option. As for the director Paul
Anderson, enough with the exploding eyes and bloody torrents, we have no
wish to view the best left unseen effects of playing "Mortal Kombat" - a
much better movie if you ask me. If I wanted to scare myself, I could
have stayed at home and played "Peek-a-Boo" with a one year-old child.

Author
Roger Rubio
After a long hiatus, The Snapman returns.
Something was missing in this film.  Something that would have really
screwed me up, as some of the best horror movies have done in the past.
The visuals were stunning, the cast talented, the writing decent; so
what was missing?
EVENT HORIZON takes place in 2047.  The crew of the Search & Rescue ship
Lewis & Clark has been sent to the planet Neptune to search for
survivors of the Event Horizon, a ship which mysteriously disappeared
seven years ago.  Dr. Weir (Sam Neill) explains to Captain Miller
(Lawrence Fishburne) and the crew of the Lewis & Clark the secret of the
Event Horizon: the gravity drive.  The gravity drive creates a black
hole which folds two points in space-time close together which are
normally very far away.  The ship then hops the shortened distance
through a "dimensional gateway" and returns space-time to normal.  When
the Lewis & Clark arrive at the Event Horizon, they find the crew dead
and some very disturbing things going on.  Apparently the trip brought
back something it shouldn't have.  Requisite horror movie misadventures
ensue.
The dimensional gateway the Event Horizon went through is never really
explained in great detail.  All you know is that it uses a black hole to
create a dimensional gateway.  The gateway apparently opened up a hole
in our universe to a dimension of pure chaos.  Okay, fine, I can deal
with that; but why didn't it open a hole up to another universe instead
of another dimension?  Is there a whole dimension of pure chaos
enveloping the universe as we know it?  Does traveling through the
gateway take you to a specific location, or just a dimension in general?
As a techie-type, these are the kind of geeky questions I found myself
asking about this story.  If the story is going to go as far as
explaining the space-time relationship and the folding of space, why
doesn't it go as far as to explain the whole enchilada?  And another
thing: why did the ship come back?  Just to get another crew so that
they would promptly go back and die horribly in the dimension of hell? 
Unless Hollywood plans a hundreds EVENT HORIZON sequels to explain all
of this, these issue will remain unclear.
EVENT HORIZON relies heavily on its stunning visuals and impressive
production design.  All of it floored me; I give great kudos to the
production crew for some great vision.  But the writing is not exactly
sure where it wants to go.  Regular horror movie gimmicks find their way
into a movie that is trying hard to be different from all the others. 
The idea of a spaceship going to hell and coming back is an interesting
one, but this concept is awkwardly executed.  This script is not very
sure if it is trying to be an ALIEN crew-monster movie (the "evil" of
the ship), THE SHINING spook-house movie (instead of the hotel
"shining," the ship is "alive"), or a combination of both.
If this movie wants to shock and disturb, it succeeds very well. But it
resorts to in-your-face "jolt" scenes, where bursts of sounds and
disturbing visuals will hopefully scare you out of your seat.  Such a
scheme for disturbing the audience only works when there is no sound
accompanying the visuals.  Otherwise the intent of the filmmakers is too
obvious.  And the flashes of pure chaos do not seem to be focused on any
of the characters in general, just on the audience.  The audience gets
scared when the characters get scared.  It is clear (or should I say,
unclear if) the ship is not trying to scare the crew; it's trying to
scare the people sitting in the audience in the movie theater.
In ALIEN, the characters were scared to death of the monster running
around the ship.  In THE SHINING, Jack Torrance was the immediate object
to be scared of, but in the end it was the hotel itself to stay away
from.  In EVENT HORIZON, we are not sure what to be scared of; the ship,
the dimensional gateway, the supposed evil behind it all, or what? 
Great visuals, good special effects, and good acting can't fill in what
was missing from this movie: genuine suspense.

Author
Laurence Mixson
Starring Laurence Fishburne, Sam Neill, Joely Richardson, Kathleen
Quinlan.
Review by Laurence Mixson (jarls@datasync.com)
        Event Horizon really fools you for a while. For about the first third
of the movie, I thought it was going to be your average, run-of-the-mill
late-summer release, basically a straight-to-video release put into the
theaters. I was wrong.
        The movie sets up the plot rather quickly: seven years ago(it takes
place in the year 2040-something)a spaceship named the Event Horizon,
designed to explore the vast caverns of space, dissapeared. Now, in the
present(although, technically, it's the future, but let's not get into
that), the ship suddenly reappers with no apparent crew on board. A
rescue ship crew, headed up by Captain Miller(Fishburne)to explore the
event horizon. Accompanying he and his several man crew is Dr.
Weir(Neill), who designed the Event Horizon. He lets them in on a secret
rather early into the picture: the Event Horizon was not
actually a space exploration ship, but a top-secret time-travel ship,
designed to create a black hole and use it to travel from one end of the
universe to the other. 
        Miller's crew boards the Event Horizon and discovers that none of the
Event's crew is present, all though lots of neat gore and blood splatter
is everywhere. Eventually, they begin having hallucinations, and things
start to get more violent, and Weir is cracking up...
        Event Horizon owes more than a little to both The Shining and
Hellraiser which it gracefully rips off; and even ups them, in
some cases. The special effects, while not cutting edge, are very good;
they're the best when showing off graphic displays of gore. Like a man
being cut open, having his insides dumped out, and hung from hooks on
the ceiling. Did I mention this is a well-rounded, family movie as well?
        All though it's probably too late now to see it at the theaters, Event
Horizon is a definite must-see video. Which, I suppose, makes it a good
direct-to-video picture. Except it's better than that. Except that's not
the point. Or is it? Aww, forget it...

Author
Walter Frith
As the medium of film grows larger with each passing year, movie audiences
are left with fewer original movies but as long as a film can still
entertain, it can still be called good.  In the case of 'Event Horizon', this
is a movie that isn't necessarily a copycat of past science fiction/horror
films but rather it has been influenced by them.  There are shades of
'Alien', 'The Exorcist', 'The Shining', '2001' and '2010' all mixed together
in one very collective blend to shock and electrify you and is not for the
faint of heart.  There are extreme moments of graphic violence mixed in with
a very loud and thunderous soundtrack and the special effects and art
direction/set decoration are eye catching to say the least.
Set 50 years in the future in the year 2047, 'Event Horizon' deals with a
group of space explorers led by Laurence Fishburne who travel to the far
reaches of Neptune to investigate a space ship launched from Earth 7 years
earlier which disappeared without a trace.  It is found and a doctor along
for the ride (Sam Neill) is the one who helped build and design the ship and
scientific technology has allowed him to create the outer space atmosphere
around it.  The exploration team discovers that the ship itself is now
possessed by a lifeforce of its own and it feeds on the fears and secrets of
humans who encounter it.  Sound like a 'B' movie plot?  Perhaps, but read on.
To understand and appreciate this movie you have to stretch the boundaries of
your imagination to a limit that perhaps may be a little too illogical and
there is no doubt that director Paul Anderson has gone over the top at times
but I still found the movie frightening, compelling and it has been a very
long time since I jumped up in my seat while watching a film.  Its religious
overtones may offend some and its tone is sharp but the film is evenly paced,
solidly edited (perhaps a bit too much at times) and technically efficient.
 If you enjoyed the movies I mentioned in the first paragraph of this review,
then 'Event Horizon' will satisfy your craving for this kind of
entertainment.  Don't see this one if you feel faint at the sight of blood
and it is not recommended for anyone that's ever covered their eyes during a
movie.

Author
Choo Eng Aun, Jack
No, it is not a bad film, in fact it is so good in achieving its purpose, I
actually wished for the film to end itself quickly. EVENT HORIZON is not
your run-of-the-mill sci-fi film, I'm sure many who have watched this will
agree with me. It is not even original in that sense, and it does borrow
heavily from films like ALIEN, HELLRAISER and even BLADE RUNNER. The magic
of this film lies in its unorthodox setting and methodical build-up that
makes it wonderfully horrifying.
The story brings us to the year 2050, where space travel have since
enormously progressed. The EVENT HORIZON is actually a ship built for a
secret experimental purpose; it has the ability to fold time and space thus
making it possible for travelling distances not reachable in a man's
lifetime. The ship disappeared as soon as it went into operation but after
7 years, it reappeared again within the orbit of Neptune. A search and
rescue team led by Miller (Fishburne) is given the task to check for
survivors of the EVENT HORIZON. The designer of the ship, Dr. Weir (Neill)
follows along to satisfy his curiosity on what actually happened to his
otherwise technologically impressive ship.
EVENT HORIZON is a sci-fi horror film, much truer to the word than say,
ALIEN would ever be. While in ALIEN, the crew has to cope with a ferocious
creature while encased within tight spaces, in EVENT HORIZON, the forces
which goes against the crew is undefined but yet so powerful and
horrifying. The story unfolds itself slowly and the suspense buildup is
superb, up till the point where I really felt like saying out loud `enough!
I can't stand this anymore!'. There are more than enough jolts to send your
adrenalin pumping overtime. The story in itself is not exactly something
very exciting and also, the acting is only at most, average by most
commercial standards. Even so, the essence of horror is carried out very
well in this film, thanks to its well-paced storytelling, disturbing set
designs and some really gory sequences (which incidentally, has been quite
generously removed by our censorship board).
Director Paul Anderson (who did MORTAL KOMBAT) and his team of `atmosphere'
creators have done well in keeping EVENT HORIZON within the bounds of the
term `horror'. This picture did not do very well in the US box-office most
probably for the dread-factor impact it has on most audiences; people will
not see it again and not many would recommend their friend to watch this.
Although on the face of it, EVENT HORIZON is mostly molded for
mass-entertainment; many thrills, spills and suspense to keep audiences in
focus. However, the offbeat horror element which it ultimately convey
audiences is very disturbing. My friend and I could not say a word to each
other for quite a while after going through the `experience' of EVENT
HORIZON. I guess it was just the immense feeling of dread which the film
had cast upon us.
Be forewarned, this film is not for the faint-hearted nor for pure
entertainment. Be prepared to be disturbed if you should decide to watch
this film! EVENT HORIZON is highly recommendedŕŕbut at your own risk! It
has been a long time since good-horror embraced the big screen, and EVENT
HORIZON is one.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
A movie review by Michael J. Legeros
Copyright 1997 by Michael J. Legeros
     The title refers to the name of a derelict spaceship that is dis-
covered in 2047, some years after it disappeared on its maiden voyage.
Laurence Fishburne, Kathleen Quinlan, Richard T. Jones, Joely Richard-
son, Jack Noseworthy, Jason Isaacs, Sean Pertwee, and Sam Neill play the
search and rescue team that investigates the vessel, and to whom bad
things begin to happen.  Without revealing too many plot particulars,
think of EVENT HORIZON as a big boo-house with some splatter movie
tendencies.  (ALIEN meets HELLRAISER, if you will.) Jolts a-plenty
(strobes, sound effects, dream sequences, etc.) plus buckets of blood,
ranging from clawed-out eyes to the gleefully grisly sight of a fully
disemboweled human body.  (You'll laugh, you'll heave.) The art
direction and special effects are breathtaking and certainly a world
more impressive than anything having to do with plot, dialogue, or
character.  (You *do* get to see the ship's navigator, the lovely Ms.
Richardson, emerge from a "gravity immersion tank" wearing nothing but
shorts and a jogging bra.  Does that count as character development?)
Directed by Paul Anderson (MORTAL KOMBAT), who pulls one or two memor-
able sequences out of his butt:  a hull breach, the restoration of
gravity in zero-G, and a very cool example of how to rescue someone who
isn't wearing a space suit when the airlock opens.  Magnetic boots on.

Author
Michael Redman
To be perfectly blunt: this movie sucks. And in the worst way.
Although heavily influenced (to be kind) by "Alien", the film starts off with
great promise. The fine cast combined with first rate effects and dynamic art
production sets the mood for what looks to be one of the few science fiction
films with thought and soul. Then it turns into a cinematic disaster.
Unexpected story twists and surprise changes in plot are not necessarily bad
things, but "Event Horizon" takes so many bewildering left turns that it
should have picked up a Triple A trip map before it began. Perhaps then it
wouldn't have ended up completely lost. 
Starting off in Alienland with a short journey to Stargateville and a
stop-over at The Shiningtown, the movie travels to CliveBarkerburg and then
makes a rapid descent into the bad side of ThirdRateSlasherville. It's a long
strange trip that ends up nowhere.
In 2047, the crew of the Lewis And Clark head off to rescue a top secret ship
that supposedly was destroyed seven years before. Now it has turned up in the
upper atmosphere of Neptune. Neptune was obviously not chosen by chance by the
filmmakers. Ask your local astrologer: it's the planet of deception, illusion
and blurring the edges of this dimension and the next.
Upon coming out of stasis, the secret is revealed. The ship was designed to
create black holes and travel through them effectively moving faster than the
speed of light. It had disappeared when the engine core was engaged only now
to emerge in the lightning storms of one of the outer planets. The rescue
ship's mission is to recover the inter-universe drive and hopefully rescue the crew.
The crew of the Event Horizon turns out to be a lost cause as they have been
turned into bloody shredded beef strewn all over the ship. When the rescuers
began having vivid hallucinations and recover the lost ship's video log
showing the crew violently attacking each other, it is obvious that something
has gone horribly wrong.
The first half of the movie has its problems. It's too derivative of "Alien"
and creates startling moments by loud noises rather than suspense, but it
still looks good. The ancient future art direction (ala "Stargate") is
fascinating. The strong casting of Laurence Fishburne, Sam Neill and Kathleen
Quinlan is certainly a step in the right direction. The computerized special
effects are some of the best crafted ever seen on the screen.
Then it all falls apart. After leading us into the false sense of security
that we are in for a film of value, the producers decide that height of
filmmaking is "Friday The 13th" and pour more and more blood on the sets. When
you hear the ship's scientist explain that the EH has opened a gateway into a
"dimension of unimaginable evil", you know that all hope is lost. After that,
little makes sense. The plot is thrown out the window and substituted by
boring gore.
It would take hours to go through all my complaints about this piece of trash.
The actors, effects and artistic vision are all completely wasted when the
film jumps off the cliff into its ocean of mindless carnage. The auspicious
beginning only creates a stronger sense of betrayal as the movie collapses
under the weight of blood and guts and gorged out eyeballs.
If you want to see some extraordinary visuals, go and walk out after about an
hour. You won't have missed a thing.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 21% of a century and rarely
has he seen a film that was such a disappointment.  Email notes of sympathy to mredman@bvoice.com)
[This appeared in the 8/22/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Choo Eng Aun, Jack
No, it is not a bad film, in fact it is so good in achieving its purpose, I
actually wished for the film to end itself quickly. EVENT HORIZON is not
your run-of-the-mill sci-fi film, I'm sure many who have watched this will
agree with me. It is not even original in that sense, and it does borrow
heavily from films like ALIEN, HELLRAISER and even BLADE RUNNER. The magic
of this film lies in its unorthodox setting and methodical build-up that
makes it wonderfully horrifying.
The story brings us to the year 2050, where space travel have since
enormously progressed. The EVENT HORIZON is actually a ship built for a
secret experimental purpose; it has the ability to fold time and space thus
making it possible for travelling distances not reachable in a man's
lifetime. The ship disappeared as soon as it went into operation but after
7 years, it reappeared again within the orbit of Neptune. A search and
rescue team led by Miller (Fishburne) is given the task to check for
survivors of the EVENT HORIZON. The designer of the ship, Dr. Weir (Neill)
follows along to satisfy his curiosity on what actually happened to his
otherwise technologically impressive ship.
EVENT HORIZON is a sci-fi horror film, much truer to the word than say,
ALIEN would ever be. While in ALIEN, the crew has to cope with a ferocious
creature while encased within tight spaces, in EVENT HORIZON, the forces
which goes against the crew is undefined but yet so powerful and
horrifying. The story unfolds itself slowly and the suspense buildup is
superb, up till the point where I really felt like saying out loud `enough!
I can't stand this anymore!'. There are more than enough jolts to send your
adrenalin pumping overtime. The story in itself is not exactly something
very exciting and also, the acting is only at most, average by most
commercial standards. Even so, the essence of horror is carried out very
well in this film, thanks to its well-paced storytelling, disturbing set
designs and some really gory sequences (which incidentally, has been quite
generously removed by our censorship board). 
Director Paul Anderson (who did MORTAL KOMBAT) and his team of `atmosphere'
creators have done well in keeping EVENT HORIZON within the bounds of the
term `horror'. This picture did not do very well in the US box-office most
probably for the dread-factor impact it has on most audiences; people will
not see it again and not many would recommend their friend to watch this.
Although on the face of it, EVENT HORIZON is mostly molded for
mass-entertainment; many thrills, spills and suspense to keep audiences in
focus. However, the offbeat horror element which it ultimately convey
audiences is very disturbing. My friend and I could not say a word to each
other for quite a while after going through the `experience' of EVENT
HORIZON. I guess it was just the immense feeling of dread which the film
had cast upon us.
Be forewarned, this film is not for the faint-hearted nor for pure
entertainment. Be prepared to be disturbed if you should decide to watch
this film! EVENT HORIZON is highly recommendedbut at your own risk! It
has been a long time since good-horror embraced the big screen, and EVENT
HORIZON is one.

Author
Jeff Walters
      Man, this was one wierd movie. Similar to Conspiracy Theory in
that it couldn't decide which genre it is. The first hour is your
standard stock Aliens clone, which nicely created an eerie atmosphere
about the ship. The last half hour? This was when the makers blew the
script out the airlock and just decided - "Screw it, let's just kill
everybody". From then on - forget Sci-Fi...this movie becomes 100%
horror.
           What really dissappointed me about this movie was that it
tried to scare you in entirely the wrong way. Instead of using
clever tricks or trying to build up to a scare - this movie just uses
loud noises, sudden camera shifts and short quick bursts of
gore.....yawn....everyone's seen it all before and knows when to
expect it. The one thing that was done well was the lead up to
finding out about what happened to the previous crew. There are
skeletons lying around mangled and mashed, but what did this?
Then finally after being painfully restored - the new crew views the
video.
         The acting isn't too bad at all.....considering what the
actors had to work with anyway, as there is no complex or interesting
dialogue to speak of. There was some very nice camerawork in certain
sequences though, like when the hull near the bridge of the Event
Horizon is breached and the camera pans back to follow specific
objects as they bounce across the deck and are sucked out into space.
      This movie could have been so much better. It had a good
experienced cast who deserved more to work with. There was just
nothing new here that any of us haven't seen before in Aliens or
Hellraiser. 

Author
Doug Skiles
EVENT HORIZON
Starring: Laurence Fishburne (Captain Joe Miller), Sam Neill(Dr. William
Wier), Kathleen Quinlan (Peters)
Directed by: Paul Anderson
Written by: Phillip Eisner
The event horizon is the boundary of a black hole... and, in the future,
it's also the name of a spaceship that vanished when it tried to go
faster than the speed of light by traversing through its own portable
black hole.  Naturally, this is the setup for the other EVENT HORIZON...
the movie.  When the ship suddenly appears at the point that it vanished
at, just outside of Neptune, the crew of the ship called the "Lewis and
Clark" has to go to investigate, and Dr. William Weir, the creator of
the "Event Horizon," gets to come along for the ride.  If you've glanced
at a poster for this movie, you know that, supposedly, what follows is
"Infinite Terror." Well, I don't know about the "Terror" part, but
"Infinite" certainly seems to qualify... 
EVENT HORIZON is a mean-spirited, gory, sick excuse for a film.  It
starts off as an ALIEN rip-off, and then degenerates into a pointlessly
bloody slasher flick after about 40 minutes.  At least for those first
40 minutes it's an *interesting* rip-off of ALIEN.  That's a lot more
than can be said for the rest of them movie, which seems to go on
forever.  It not a scary monster movie, nor is it a psychological
thriller.  It is simply a movie which tries again and again to make the
viewers feel sick to their stomach at the site of extreme gore.  You've
seen this kind of movie before.  The HELLRAISER series had plenty of
scenes containing this sensibility.  This is a kind of movie for which I
have no respect, a kind of movie which I had hoped died out years ago.  
It is quite possible for a movie to frighten or shock its audience
without resorting to nothing more than gore, but EVENT HORIZON takes the
low road, and the viewers pay the price.  There are many good,
respectable performances, from Fishburne and Neill most noticably.  Paul
Anderson's direction is impressive, as it was in MORTAL KOMBAT.  There
are many nice special effects, mostly dealing with numerous common
objects floating around in zero-gravity.  The sets are beautiful to gaze
upon.  And Richard T. Jones' character (Cooper) is hilarious and
extremely likable (more so than most characters I've seen in recent
movies) for the little screen time that he has.  And none of this can
save the movie from being a D-grade level of film.  The idea of a ship
that has some sort of life within its walls, a life that knows the fears
and inner skeletons of the human passengers, is a promising one.  A
haunted house story in space isn't such a bad idea.  But the final
execution is extremely disappointing.
That's not to say that Philip Eisner (here making his feature
film-writing debut) doesn't have talent.  For those first 40 minutes, he
manages to make a tired premise interesting, adding in aspects of unique
flavor into a rip-off story, and that's something that not too many
writers can do.  He even has one scene that, though it also tries to
sicken the audience, has a honestly tense feel to it (the scene in
question deals with one of the crew being in an airlock while others try
to save him from floating into space).  He definitely has something of a
gift, but it's not fully on display here.  I certainly will look forward
to seeing more from him, and I hope that his future work fully explores
his talent and the story possibilities of the premise.  But because of
what this movie degenerates into, I have little or no respect, and got
little or no enjoyment, out of it.  If this is what we have to look
forward to in the future of film, then I agree with Laurence Fishburne's
sentiment - "God help us."

Author
John Eung Soo Kim
If you love being scared out of your pants, this is the movie you've
been waiting for.  In the year 2040, the space ship Event Horizon was
lost near Neptune.  Publically, it was stated that Event Horizon had
exploded.  Privately, it was a special experimental ship that allowed
faster than light space travel by folding space.  It is now 2047, seven
years after what was called the biggest space disaster ever recorded and
a beacon has been discovered near the orbit of Neptune.  Dr. Weis (Sam
Neil of Jurassic Park) is sent with the rescue ship Lewis&Clark which is
captained by Lawrence Fishburne to attempt to salvage the crew and ship.
There were only two plot points that disturbed me but they proved to be
minor.  The first was the scientific explanations for the experimental
space folding process but  remember Star Trek?  During its initial
television season 90% of its audience was unable to understand one full
episode due to its heavy usage of up to date scientific theories and
hypotheses.  We figure this point can be forgiven since an explanation
had to have been made and it's very much appreciated that they don't
come back to any more science and concentrate on the story.  The next
point is slightly more critical.  The survivors.  They weren't the ones
that we rooted for.  In fact, they had the least amount of screen time
and the least amount of contact, save one, with the entity within Event
Horizon.
Aside from these slight hitches, the movie was brilliantly done.  The
special effects were amazing, except for some of the floating space
debris which was clearly computer generated, the editing was tight and
moved the story quite nicely, the sound and score was perfect, never
overpowering and perfectly underscoring the visuals and the story! 
Whew!  The most amazing aspect of the film was that it had a fierce
story with tension starting at the first five minutes and never
relenting afterwards.  The plot was well developed and the sub-plots
added to the eerieness of the whole project.  One bit of warning, Event
Horizon is not for the squeemish.  There is enough gore to make you spew
so don't buy the extra large popcorn!  Be especially wary of the hell
scenes, which by the way screams with Clive Barker influences.

Author
Steve Kong
"Wow!" and "Potential" are the words that popped up in my mind during the
first 20 minutes or so of Event Horizon. Then the phrases "Ugh" and "It had
potential" started to creep in.  In the opening 20 minutes of Event
Horizon, we are treated to some well-done special effects along with some
pretty good ideas for a sci-fi movie. But after we are introduced to these
ideas, we are sent on a path to a typical horror film.
The premise to Event Horizon has so much potential; A ship, Event Horizon,
is built with a special Gravity Drive that will let it tear holes in the
space-time continuum and let it travel across galaxies without any effort.
It does this by first tearing a hole at the two points, the origin and the
destination. Then the Gravity Drive "folds" space-time so that the ship can
be transported to the destination instantaneously. Sam Neill, plays William
Weir, the creator of the Gravity Drive, he explains how the Gravity Drive
works much better in the film. With this kind of start, and this kind of
premise, there is infinite potential on a good solid sci-fi film. But,
screenwriter Philip Eisner lets the script wander to the standard horror
genre, and turns this film into nothing more than a gory not-scary film.
It seems that seven years after the Event Horizon disappeared; it has not
reappeared in orbit around Neptune. A team is dispatched to rescue any crew
onboard the Event Horizon, salvage the Event Horizon, and find out what
happened to the Event Horizon. The team is led by Captain Joe Miller
(Lawrence Fishburne). The team is filled with stock two-dimensional
characters, including one for comic relief. None of the characters are
memorable. Sam Neill's William Weir is tagging along with the team to
advise them. With the look of the film and the strange make up of the team,
it looks almost like the Space Marines from James Cameron's Aliens. But,
unfortunately, the casting for the team is not as strong, and the writing
for the team is not up to par. The Event Horizon it seems has gone to Hell,
or some evil place, and come back. The ship is now haunted, and it has a
new crew to play with, and kill.
As a horror film, Event Horizon does what it can. Using a lot of the
turn-around-to-see-a-scary-thing technique to try to scare the audience. It
also uses very short flashes of images and burst of sound to try to scare
the audience. Most of these work, but after a few of them, I was wondering
if the director was running short of inventive ways to scare the audience.
The good thing about Event Horizon is the look of it. Director Paul
Anderson, who's last film, Mortal Kombat, also looked great, creates a
world that is dark, dingy and scary. The special effects are well done,
these include some long shots of Neptune, complete with whirling storms.
The spacecrafts look great and the interiors of Event Horizon and The Lewis
and Clark are also great. But, all of the looks are lost to a boring,
uninspired, horror film that hardly does what it sets out to do: Scare the
audience.
Sam Neill gives a decent performance as Weir, the smart and somewhat crazed
scientist. Laurence Fishburne is below par, and looks as if he is as bored
with the film as the audience is. The rest of the crew gives forgettable
performances, and I really think that Kathleen Quinlan's (Apollo 13)
talents are wasted in this film.
Event Horizon a film that can be missed in the theatres and on video. It
has a wonderful setup, but does not go through with it. Though it is
visually spectacular, the story is just not there to support it's eye
candy. A definite miss, save your money. Event Horizon has gone to Hell and
has come back, but it seems as if all the fun has been striped of it in Hell.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     There is a typically cheesy moment in EVENT HORIZON when the
scientist on board explains how he cheated the law of physics and
designed a craft to effectively go faster than the speed of light.
Taking a nude pinup from the crew's quarters, he folds it together and
pokes a hole from one side to the other to illustrate how the craft was
able to jump across the time-space continuum via an artificial black
hole.
     Ignore the trailers and the handsome special effects of EVENT
HORIZON, for it is not a science fiction movie.  This is an expensive
horror film that is pure schlock.  It does have a glossy sci-fi
wrapper, a la ALIEN, but the quality of the underlying production is a
pure B movie exercise in terror.
     The year is 2047.  Seven years earlier in the greatest space
disaster ever a ship called the Event Horizon was lost while on a
mission to explore deep space.  The ship has suddenly reappeared, so
the U.S.A.C. Lewis and Clark is sent to find out what happened and
whether anyone survived.
     The movie has a talented, but completely wasted cast.  The
scientist, Dr. William Wier, is played almost like a zombie by Sam
Neill.  The head of the Lewis and Clark, Captain Joe Miller, is played
by Laurence Fishburne in a fit of anger.  Why the captain has such a
bad attitude is never explained.  Perhaps Fishburne was mad at his
agent for signing him for this hopeless film.  Other members of the
crew include Joely Richardson as Starck and Kathleen Quinlan as Peters.
     First-time writer Philip Eisner's fatuous script includes a stream
of inane lines including retreads ("Smoke 'em if you got 'em"), overly
cute ones ("You know the rules people.  Someone drops the ball, we get
the call."), and the brutally obvious ("What are you telling me?  This
ship is alive?").
     Director Paul Anderson, who last blessed the cinematic world with
MORTAL COMBAT, stages EVENT HORIZON with nary a subtle moment.  His
style of overdirecting can best be seen when the rescue crew finds the
derelict ship.  Way out in space, it has the name "Event Horizon" in
lights so bright that it would do any Broadway musical proud.  The
crew, which makes some pretty foolish moves later, at least does not
miss this floating billboard.
     Once inside the EVENT HORIZON, the horror show gets into full
gear, right down the obligatory child endangerment scenes.  The
audience gets to witness massive amounts of blood and nauseating
special effects.  People's bodies explode from within, and in the
film's piece de resistance, characters rip out their own eye balls.
"Where we're going, we won't need eyes to see," an eyeless Dr. Wier
assures the captain.
     This slickly produced bad movie has superlative special effects.
Objects, especially liquids, float in space with a eerie realism.
Still, the net effect of all of the gore in this disturbing film is apt
to leave many movie goers wanting to head for a shower.  Some pictures,
ALIEN and ALIENS being the best examples, can make an apocalyptic
vision fascinating.  EVENT HORIZON, on the other hand, is merely
disgusting and watching it is about as much fun as staring at car
accidents along the highway.
     EVENT HORIZON runs just 1:35 but feels like it will never end.
The movie is rated R for frequent profanity, massive violence and
gratuitous nudity.  The show would be acceptable for mature teenagers,
but I do not recommend it to anyone.  I give it * for the wasted
special effects and the talented cast.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
EVENT HORIZON
(Paramount)
Starring:  Laurence Fishburne, Sam Neill, Kathleen Quinlan, Joely
Richardson, Richard T. Jones.
Screenplay:  Philip Eisner.
Producers:  Jeremy Bolt, Lawrence Gordon and Lloyd Levin.
Director:  Paul Anderson.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, gore, adult themes, brief nudity)
Running Time:  95 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Give this to the makers of EVENT HORIZON:  as wholesale rip-offs of
ALIEN go, this one is remarkably thorough.  With the assistance of copious
captions, we learn that it involves a small space ship crew, headed by
laconic Captain Joe Miller (Laurence Fishburne), which is sent on a
somewhat mysterious search-and-rescue operation.  When one advance team
member returns to the ship in a catatonic state, the rest of the crew
begins worrying...and, shortly thereafter, begins dying.  To make matters
worse, one member of the crew may be working for the other side.  The only
chance for the surviving member(s) of the crew is to blow up one part of
the ship while using the rest as an escape pod, going into hyper-sleep and
waiting for a rescue.  Only a computer named Mother and a cat named Jonesy
are missing to complete the picture
     The original twist to that familiar scenario -- and where EVENT
HORIZON is concerned, "original" is used advisedly -- is that the object
of the search and rescue operation is the Event Horizon, a prototype
spacecraft created by Dr. William Weir (Sam Neill) with the ability to
bend space-time for the purpose of deep-space travel.  Unfortunately,
instead of travelling to another galaxy, the Event Horizon appears to have
travelled to another dimension, one inhabited by a chaotic life force
which drives people mad with intense, hallucinatory visions.  In that
sense, the malevolent entity a bit more efficient than the predatory
stowaway of ALIEN -- instead of tearing out your organs, it makes you want
to tear them out yourself, or tear out those of your fellow crew members.
     EVENT HORIZON, on the other hand, is not nearly so efficient.  ALIEN
grabbed its viewers with one graphic, horrific moment and a whole lot of
creepy atmosphers; EVENT HORIZON counters with a little creepy atmosphere
and a whole lot of graphic, horrific moments.  Not a single violent image
is left to the imagination, not when special effects can render a
character coughing up blood in zero gravity, or a body ripped open and
hung like a side of beef.  There are certainly a few scares in EVENT
HORIZON, but director Paul Anderson (MORTAL KOMBAT) rarely earns them.
Give me a roll of film, a dark room, a scary mask and a burst of dissonant
strings, and even I could get an audience to jump every time.  EVENT
HORIZON doesn't build a sense of dread, because it's easier to settle for
shock and disgust.
     The truly disappointing thing about Philip Eisner's script is that,
for a while, it looks like it's headed somewhere interesting.  The idea of
characters defeated by their own demons is infinitely more compelling than
characters defeated by real demons, which gives EVENT HROIZON a creepy
tension while there's still some mystery about what's going on.  But
Eisner doesn't follow through on enough of his characters' dark secrets;
whenever someone doesn't have a closeted skeleton to rattle, he just
throws a bucket of blood at them.  Even when he does follow up on a
character's motivations, they end up making very little sense.  Weir's
motivations in particular -- which initially seem perfectly logical --
disintegrate near the film's climax, right about the time EVENT HORIZON
becomes a parade of explosions, slow-motion and lovingly photographed
corpses.
     EVENT HORIZON boasts some genuinely impressive technical credits,
including imaginative production design by Joseph Bennett, but that
doesn't explain what a cast this talented saw in this project.  ALIEN was
the kind of memorable film which launched careers.  EVENT HORIZON is the
kind of re-cycled nonsense which can end careers.  Remember, in space, no
one can hear you scream, but in a movie theater, you can hear everyone
groan.

Author
Kevin Patterson
EVENT HORIZON is the latest entry into the sci-fi/horror sub-genre of
Movies About Weird Stuff Happening In Deep Space. With its ominous-looking
visual design and its setting on a spaceship trapped inside the atmosphere
of the planet Neptune, it aspires to be a claustrophobic piece of isolation
and fear in the tradition of ALIEN. But while ALIEN can lay claim to a
reasonably well-developed story and interesting characters to engage the
audience's attention, EVENT HORIZON cannot: its screenplay is vague and
undeveloped, and it is populated by one-dimensional figures who are there
mainly to run around, scream in fright, and bleed profusely.
As the film begins, we learn that it is the year 2047, and a deep space
research ship known as the Event Horizon, having disappeared without a
trace seven years ago, has now reappeared near Neptune and has sent out a
garbled message to Earth. The Event Horizon has the capability to move
faster than light through a sort of dimensional jump initiated by a
"gravity drive" designed by Dr. Weir (Sam Neill), who is now assigned to a
military team led by Captain Miller (Laurence Fishburne). Their mission is
to recover the ship and determine the fate of its crew. When they
eventually reach the ship, they discover that everyone on board is dead,
either killed or driven to suicide by some sort of otherwordly force that
has occupied the ship during the attempted dimensional jump: "save
yourselves from Hell," an Event Horizon crew member has recorded over the
ship's log. The force is still present, and it soon begins wreaking havoc
on Miller's crew.
This mix of science fiction and supernatural horror is on tenuous ground
from the beginning. Science fiction normally lends itself to strange and
fantastic events that are nevertheless explainable, at least according to
some sort of movie pseudoscience. But Philip Eisner's screenplay seems to
posit that the evil forces of EVENT HORIZON are demonic, or at least
non-corporeal, which raises the question of why these demons would suddenly
decide to pick on the crew of an experimental spaceship, as opposed to your
average Joe Earthling. A ship moving faster than light could easily find
itself on the wrong side of the universe, but I'm not sure why it would
wind up in Hell. Unfortunately, the movie doesn't seem to know the answer,
or at least it never lets the audience in on the secret.
In any case, this concept is handled somewhat inconsistently by the
filmmakers. If you're going to make a horror movie with a paper-thin story,
you might as well at least concentrate on the more frightening aspect of
it, which in this case would be the supernatural. But this demon, or
demonic alien, or living hell-ship, or whatever it is, spends an awful lot
of time using a possessed crew member to blow stuff up and shoot at the
others when it has already proven that it can drive someone to suicide with
hallucinations. Of course, it never actually does anything to help its
cause, like deactivating life support or disabling the auto-destruct system
(perhaps it was too busy filling a corridor with blood at the time). There
is also one action sequence, in which a crew member is thrown thousands of
miles into outer space, but returns to the exact point where he left using
propulsion from his spacesuit's air tanks, that is so implausible that I
literally shouted, "Oh, come ON!" at the screen. It's as if the filmmakers
thought it was sufficient simply to create on-screen mayhem even if most of
it makes very little sense.
The screenplay supplies some of the characters with guilt complexes or
conflicts of one sort or another, but they are of relatively minor
significance and are nothing we haven't seen before (Weir mourns his dead
wife, Miller remembers another officer whom he was forced to let die,
another crew member misses her child, etc.). Miller's conflict with Weir,
whom he resents because his team was called off leave for this mission,
seems pretty unprofessional and is something I might have expected from one
of the junior team members instead of the captain. Cooper, a foul-mouthed,
cocky young officer, supplies some comic relief, but his personality
contrasts so much with the others that he sometimes seems like he
accidentally wandered in from a Quentin Tarantino movie. And none of this
much matters in the first place, because the characters rarely get a chance
to think about what's happening or engage in much dialogue before there's
another explosion or another hallucination or another blood flood.
That's not to say that EVENT HORIZON isn't at least partly effective: the
apparitions and hallucinations are genuinely scary. And while director Paul
Anderson is stuck with a pretty bad script, he at least manages to conjure
up some claustrophobia and dread with the movie's remote setting, and this
setup invests a certain chill into a series of gruesome confrontations that
otherwise might have been merely disgusting. (And lest anyone think I was
being facetious in my earlier comments about blood, these scenes are indeed
gruesome: I don't think I've seen this much blood in a movie since
FANTASTIC VOYAGE.) Something pretty frightening is happening in this movie,
though it's anyone's guess as to exactly what.
EVENT HORIZON gets a passing grade as a horror flick, but that's about all
it gets: the plot is a mess, and even the scares rely too heavily on shock
and gore. The isolated outer space setting and the ambitious, extravagantly
creepy design of the ship's interior are really all that's noteworthy about
this film. The rest of it could have been made by any horror hack with a
camera, a few actors, and large quantities of fake blood.
