Title
Review for Anastasia (1956)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael Turton
This film is wonderful!  Superb acting by Helen Hayes and Ingrid Bergman (who
won an Oscar in a comeback role) brings out the best of a clever and powerful
script.
The story centers around the efforts of a con man, Bounine (Yul Brynner),
once a Russian prince, to pass off a lovely refugee (Ingrid Bergman) as the
Princess Anastasia, last of the Romanovs.  As the story progresses, however,
an interesting twist emerges: she may actually be the real Anastasia. As the
pair head to Denmark to meet the Dowager Empress (Helen Hayes) in hope of
obtaining recognition for Anastasia, a furtive, unacknowledged love affair
blossoms between the brooding, imperious Prince and the confused yet
vivacious Princess.
Three pillars of strength hold this story up: strongly-drawn characters, a
restrained, witty script and exceptional acting. Despite its dependence on
universal themes of love, family and identity, the film never lurches into
the vulgar or obvious. Yul Brynner, always a treat, does a sterling job
portraying a man caught in an emotional undertow. Helen Hayes is especially
delightful as the crusty, suffer-no-fools Dowager Empress. There are some
truly exquisite scenes. The recognition scene between Bergman and Hayes is
tremendous, two fine actors at the top of their game. The scene in which the
Prince informs the Dowager Empress of his feelings is also quite moving. The
ending, which could have been incredibly mawkish and sentimental, is handled
with such grace and understatement that it leaves the viewer completely
satisfied without feeling stuffed.  I'd give this one 5 out of 5, good
offbeat fare for those nights when you're pacing the aisles at Blockbuster
and nothing looks very interesting.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Brian Koller
Ingrid Bergman won the Oscar for Best Actress for her
role in "Anastasia", which cemented her Hollywood
comeback following her scandalous affair with
Italian director Roberto Rosellini.  The film was
based on the Marcelle Maurette play, and also provided
good roles for bald-headed, fiery-eyed Yul Brynner
and noted stage actress Helen Hayes.
Anastasia, youngest daughter of Czar Nicholas II,
was murdered by the Bolsheviks following the Russian
Revolution.  Or did she somehow survive?  Someone
apparently believes so, or they wouldn't have a
ten million dollar trust fund waiting for her to
show up to claim it.
It is the early 1920s, and Brynner is conspiring with
Akim Tamiroff and Sacha Pitoeff to produce a credible
Anastasia so that the account can be defrauded.  Bergman,
a woman without an identity who bears a physical
resemblance to Anastasia, is rescued from a suicide
attempt by Brynner.  He then coldly trains her to pass
as Her Majesty.
But there are many skeptics, and to succeed Bergman
must convince Anastasia's still-living grandmother (Hayes).
Along the way, it becomes obvious that Bergman really is
Anastasia.  She also must choose between two suitors,
pleasant rogue Prince Paul (Ivan Desny) and imposing,
abrupt Brynner.
The best thing about "Anastasia" is the dense script.
There are many clever lines that reveal the
idiosyncrasies of the characters.  Bergman, Hayes
and Brynner are well cast.  The biggest problem
with "Anastasia" is the ending; there is no romantic
chemistry between Bergman and Brynner, and it is
difficult to believe that Brynner would forgo his
hard-won jackpot and that Bergman would pass up a
chance to play Princess.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
