Title
Review for Shadow Hours (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/830e8df669aa4a6a8825691d001be340?OpenDocument
Bad movies described as "a swift descent into sinful pleasure, decay,
and debauchery" are hard to watch.  Bad 2000's movies that resemble bad
1980s films are even harder to watch.  Shadow Hours falls into the
latter category, a mish-mashed train wreck of B-movie actors (including
Michael Dorn, aka Star Trek's Worf), an uninteresting plot, vain
attempts at capitalizing on the "underground" scenes of seedy Los
Angeles, and really, really bad directing and horrendous music
video-esque ballistic editing that was taught to me in film school right
before I decided to drop out.
The film revolves around the life of Michael Holloway (Balthazar Getty)
who is trying to restart his life with his one-dimensional wife Chloe
(Rebecca Gayheart) after a nasty bout of drug and alcohol addictions. 
Michael takes a job of working the graveyard shift at the local gas
station and is bombarded by the ugliness and weirdness of the nightlife
of L.A.  One night, he meets a strange gent named Stuart (Mr. Buckaroo
Banzai, Peter Weller). He drives a Porsche, smokes French cigarettes,
and drones on about life, eventually coaxing Mike into exploring the
"underbelly" of L.A. together, a tour of punk bars, S&M clubs, and
bare-knuckle fights.
The film then throws in a murder mystery with a cop played Peter Greene,
acting like he wants to get the chance at a reprisal of his role in The
Mask 2. The film then simply dissolves into a cheap rip-off of Dante's
Inferno mixed with an old Stephen J. Cannell television pilot.
The pace of the film is jarring and utterly without focus.  Other
horrors include the endless montages of people pumping gas and the
Charlie Sheen, Johnny Depp, Richard Grieco-esque acting of Balthazar
Getty.  Peter Weller clearly knows his career is completely gone and
doesn't give two shits about it.  And after the cheap exploitation of
bondage clubs, dance clubs, and brothels - damn, isn't anyone safe any
more from the ugly eye of Hollywood!?
Way back in 1984, a great but crazy director named Abel Ferrara made his
worse film and called it Fear City.  Shadow Hours reminds me of an
almost perfect sequel.
Director/Writer: Isaac Eaton
Producers: Peter Alevey, Andrea Mia, Shon Greenblatt, Balthazar Getty
Starring: Balthazar Getty, Peter Weller, Rebecca Gayheart, Peter Greene,
Frederic Forrest, Brad Douriff, Michael Dorn
1 star out of five stars [LOWEST RATING]
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When I was in the fourth grade, my teacher told the class,
"Don't go to night clubs.  They're bad places."  I hadn't the
foggiest idea what she was talking about.  Years later my
mother advised, "Don't go to night clubs.  They'll take your
money and you'll have nothing to show for it" (as though
goods and not services were the only thing worth spending
money on).  I never did become much of a night-club fly but
my teacher and my mom could never have imagined what
goes on in some of these dark and evil places nowadays in
big bad cities like L.A.  For others who have rarely if ever
descended into the abyss of an Ayatollah's nightmare,
"Shadow Hours" is an education, and a far cry from what
you'll learn from your Sociology 101 textbook.  This noir
movie, written and directed by Isaac H. Eaton, has the quality
of David Lynch's "Lost Highway" with a touch of David
Fincher's "Fight Club," plus an assortment of characters that
would put a scare into Fellini.  "Shadow Hours," which
emerged at a recent Sundance festival, is a modern morality
fable whose sound track and rapid-fire banter give the movie
an absorbing edge without the enigmatic quality of the
aforementioned "Lost Highway."
   Interpreted in a psychological vein, we could say that
"Shadow Hours" dramatizes a favorite expression of the
Freudians and their ilk--those who say that the patient cannot
begin to make progress toward a cure until he has
descended to the depths and, absent of defenses and
horrified by his torment is ready to make the painful
transition to a healthier life.  Eaton's film features a weak
individual, Michael Holloway (Balthazar Getty of "Lost
Highway"), who has just cleaned himself up after a long bout
with alcohol and drugs, has settled into a miserable, $7.50-
an-hour graveyard shift at an L.A. gas station, and worries
alternately about the bums surrounding his office and his
pregnant wife whom he can barely support.  He meets Stuart
Chappell (Peter Weller), who drives a sleek new Porsche and
describes himself as an author who could use Michael's help
in researching a book he is writing on L.A.'s sordid night life. 
While their relationship could remind you of that between
"Fight Club"'s Tyler and Jack, Stuart is not Michael's
corporeal alter ego but rather a combination of devil and
guardian angel who serves as the young man's escort into
the ignoble life of L.A.'s night people.  
   Throughout the story, images abound of masochism in the
guise of freakish performance artists, gambling joints where
the stakes are bets on bouts of Russian roulette, and a
genuine fight club--all among the conceptions laid out by
Eaton in this Gorkian lower depths, all taking place during an
investigation by Det. Steve Andrianson (Peter Greene) into a
murder that may or may not have been committed by the rich
and debonair stranger.
   Despite the film's desire to present a morality tale of one
man's struggle to extricate himself from a despondent life of
poverty, drugs and alcohol, Eaton may be happy enough
simply to confront his viewers with an eerie sequence of
impressions unwittingly confirming 92-year-old author
Jacques Barzan's thesis in his current best-seller, "From
Dawn to Decadence."  We could, I suppose, read into this
theme the notion that we human beings, having reached the
depths of depravity following the world's most brutal century,
have nowhere to go but up.  But I suspect that titillation is
this picture's principal aim, and insofar as this succeeds in
captivating its viewers, "Shadow Hours" is not a bad choice to
make when faced with alternatives like "The Adventures of
Rocky and Bullwinkle."
Rated R.  Running time: 95 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
