Title
Review for Down Periscope (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This cornball combo of CRIMSON TIDE and STRIPES plays far better
than it deserves to.  Television star Kelsey Grammer-- known to millions
as the beloved Sideshow Bob on "The Simpsons"-- makes his feature-film
debut as an unorthodox military officer who must win a war game to prove
that he's worthy of his own command.  Sound familiar?  (Among other
things, he must whip a misfit crew into shipshape shape.  Yawn.  The
same plot is used in Jonathan Lynn's SGT. BILKO, which stars Steve
Martin and opens later this month.)
     DOWN PERISCOPE takes about 45 minutes to get up to laugh-out-loud
speed.  Grammer's subdued performance is hard to fathom at first, but an
extended "silent running" sequence-- near the middle of the movie--
marks the transition from "mildly amusing" to "infectious fun." The
bland ensemble cast finally begins to gel over a couple of good sonar
gags and one hilarious bit of flatulence.  (Some semi-serious submarine
stalking is also fun, despite the obvious stock footage.  Think Tom
Clancy lite.)
     Grammer considerations aside, the rest of the cast is exceptionally
unexceptional.  Even Rip Torn's Admiral doesn't add much, though he
*does* get to growl the memorable line: "I want a man with a tattoo on
his dick!" (Don't ask; it's a plot point.) The jokes directed at Lauren
Holly-- as the lone female crew member-- are equally non- PC, but who
can argue with a movie that has the chutzpah to include both a rallying
rendition of "Anchor's Aweigh" and a music video of Kelsey Grammer and
the Village People singing "In the Navy?"
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kelsey Grammer, Lauren Holly, Rob Schneider, Bruce Dern, Rip Torn, 
      William H. Macy, Harry Dean Stanton, Toby Huss, Harland Williams
Director: David S. Ward
Producer: Robert Lawrence
Screenplay: Hugh Wilson, Andrew Kurtzman, and Eliot Wald
Cinematography: Victor Hammer
Music: Randy Edelman
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     DOWN PERISCOPE is the big screen's answer to MCHALE'S NAVY.  With 
Kelsey Grammer in command of the USS Stingray, you can be sure that this 
isn't a drama.  Unfortunately, it's not much of a comedy, either.  There 
are occasional laughs, but, as with most movies that think they're 
funnier than they actually are, most of the jokes fall flat.  What we're 
left with is the tired, overused storyline of a bunch of mismatched 
underdogs coming together as a team in time to overcome their 
adversaries.  
     The best thing about DOWN PERISCOPE (in fact, just about the only 
good thing) is Kelsey Grammer's relaxed performance.  Although best 
known for his role as TV's FRASIER, Grammer exhibits a big screen 
presence.  He doesn't appear to be a great actor, but, unlike so many 
stars making the TV-to-movie switch, his likability doesn't get lost in 
the transition.
     Grammer plays career Navy man Thomas Dodge, the proverbial loose 
cannon.  After serving his country for more than twenty years, Dodge is 
finally awarded his first submarine command -- the old diesel rust 
bucket USS Stingray.  His crew is comprised of the usual misfits, 
including a female officer (Lauren Holly, whose film career has taken 
off), a hyperactive second-in-command (Rob Schneider, looking a lot like 
Emilio Estevez), an electrician with an affinity for getting shocked 
(Toby Huss), and a sonar operator who does a credible whale imitation 
(Harland Williams).  Many of these characters have personal and 
professional problems that are resolved during their stay on the 
Stingray.
     Dodge is supposed to lead his boat on a mock assault of two East 
Coast targets.  It's the Stingray against the U.S. Navy.  One admiral 
(Rip Torn) thinks that a diesel sub can still pose a threat to the 
United States, while another (Bruce Dern) is convinced that today's 
nuclear vessels represent an impenetrable barrier.  The war games are 
designed to decide the issue.  At stake for Dodge is his future in the 
Navy -- if he succeeds, he gets a permanent command; if he fails, he 
gets a desk job.
     Undoubtedly, the most entertaining part of DOWN PERISCOPE comes 
during the end credits, when various cast members "let down their hair" 
to join the Village People in a lively, campy rock video for their '70s 
hit, "In the Navy."  There's a lot more energy in this four-minute 
segment than in the hour-and-a-half that precedes it.
     There are quite a few submarine movies available -- certainly 
enough to provide material for a decent satire.  Unfortunately, DOWN 
PERISCOPE is more interested in regurgitating formulas that we've seen 
literally dozens of times before.  (THE BAD NEWS BEARS under water?)  
Other than briefly lampooning the XO's mutiny from CRIMSON TIDE, this 
picture fires duds, relying on cheap sex jokes and slapstick gags to 
garner laughs.  Down and out with DOWN PERISCOPE.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Even the best comic actor is at the mercy of his or her 
material, as this subpar submarine comedy proves. DOWN 
PERISCOPE stars Kelsey "Frasier" Grammer as an inept Navy 
captain who is given command of his own ship as part of a corrupt 
officer's (James Coburn) plan to get him out of the Navy. Like any 
lame emsemble comedy, the officer assigns him to a group of misfits 
like the guy who wants to be kicked out, the fat guy who eats all the 
time, the beautiful woman who doesn't belong there (Lauren Holly), 
the second-in-command who does everything by the book (Rob 
Schneider), the crazy old guy who freaks everyone out (Harry Dean 
Stanton) and so on.
        Then comes the transparent plotline. First Grammer has to 
fix up the delapidated Korean War ship the Navy has given him, 
and that comes courtesy a sad sight gag montage that includes a 
guy with a mop knocking Schneider overboard. After the ship is 
fixed up come the early drills, where everyone seems completely 
inept, like the electrician who can't connect wires so instead lets 
the current run through himself every time Grammer gets on the 
phone.
        Finally, and this covers the final hour of the movie, 
Grammer has to lead his men (and Holly) to overcome the other 
ships in a wargames exercise. And he has to be a clever rebel to 
do it, in scenes that stretch all levels of believability. First they're 
singing "Louie Louie" like a bunch of drunk sailors to throw the 
radar of the other ship off, then thirty minutes later, they're making 
whale mating noises to throw the radar of the other ship off. The 
whole while, Evil Captain Coburn is overacting underwater, 
cursing Grammer (as most people watching the movie probably 
are too).
        It's all predictable without any original humor to redeem 
it. The jokes are right out of "McHale's Navy" and other cut-rate 
sitcoms of the past. There's one scene where Schneider looks 
through the ship's pantry in disgust, holds one food can up and 
announces, "This expired in 1966!" I yelled back at the screen, 
"So did these jokes." I watched this movie with the whole family 
and everyone hated it. My mom was so bored she brought out 
the coupon book midway through and, around the start of the 
second hour, I started writing my will.
        The blame can't really be placed on the stars, though. 
Kelsey Grammer is good in this, he just doesn't have anything 
to work with. His character is said to have gotten so drunk one 
night that he had "Welcome Aboard" tatooed on his penis. Grammer 
probably did something even worse -- got really drunk and agreed to 
appear in a movie he knew nothing about. Same for Holley (save the 
penis part), who is likeable in DOWN PERISCOPE just because 
she's so gorgeous. As for Schneider (whose character is downright 
annoying), there was nowhere to go but up after SURF NINJAS, 
although he's still in the depths of the comedy ocean after jumping 
the "SNL" ship.
        My theory is that DOWN PERISCOPE is one of those 
movies that got the green light before the script was even written 
as a formula comedy ("Okay, it's POLICE ACADEMY in the Navy 
with Frasier at the helm and the chick from DUMB AND 
DUMBER.") and after everyone was signed on turned into a 
disaster. Judging from the video box, most other movie critics 
agree with me. The only quote the DOWN PERISCOPE copy writers 
could dig up came from the Prevue channel's Jim Ferguson. I guess 
even Jeff Craig from "60 Second Preview" (who said TANK GIRL 
"kicks butt!" without ever seeing it) didn't like this.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!
