Title
Review for Priest (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Linus Roache, Tom Wilkinson, Robert Carlyle, Cathy Tyson.
Screenplay:  Jimmy McGovern.
Director:  Antonia Bird.
     To tell you far more about myself than you ever really wanted
to know, I am what is known in the parlance as a lapsed Catholic.
Why would I make that information known?  It certainly wouldn't be
to promote the perception of objectivity in my evaluation of PRIEST;
one might believe that I was inclined to look favorably on a film so
roundly condemned by the Catholic Church sight unseen.  Such is not
the case.  I explain that I am a lapsed Catholic because the themes
in PRIEST are extremely familiar to me, and I believe that there is
a story in those themes which would make a fine film.  PRIEST could
have been a compelling character study which respected the
complexity of modern Catholicism, but instead it is, in its own way,
just as dogmatic as it accuses the Church of being.
     PRIEST stars Linus Roache as Father Greg Pilkington, a Catholic
priest newly assigned to a parish in working class Liverpool.  A
potential conflict arises when the very orthodox Father Greg learns
that another parish priest, Father Matthew (Tom Wilkinson), is not
only a free-thinking and free-speaking social liberal, but is also
cohabitating with their housekeeper Maria (Cathy Tyson).  However,
it soon becomes clear that Father Greg is living a double life of
his own, frequenting the city's gay nightclubs.  Father Greg
struggles to reconcile his homosexuality and his vocation, but an
even greater challenge to his faith comes when he is told in the
confessional by a young parishoner (Christine Tremarco) that she is
being sexually abused by her father--information a priest cannot
divulge.
     For much of the film, powerful acting and an intriguing
character keep PRIEST on the right track.  Roache, who resembles a
young Gabriel Byrne, is convincing as the devoted Catholic who
believes so strongly in the rules of his faith that he does nothing
to prevent the abuse he knows is taking place, and denies communion
to his lover Graham (an effectively subdued Robert Carlyle).  At the
same time, he finds himself unwilling or unable to deny his
sexuality, violating both the celibacy required of his order and the
Church's teachings on homosexuality.  It is the kind of selective
observation of Catholic dogma which is common among comtemporary
Catholics, and evidence of a skewed set of priorities.  Meanwhile,
Father Matthew has come to terms with what he believes are the
essentials of the faith, and lives a much happier life.  Director
Antonia Bird does a fine job of making iconography omnipresent;
crucifixes appear everywhere, most brilliantly in a shot where a
crucifix is placed between Father Greg and a reflection of himself,
a concise visual summation of the two parts of his personality
divided by the Church.
     Unfortunately, what begins as a measured examination of
religious hypocrisies turns into a kind of tirade.  Screenwriter
Jimmy McGovern apparently doesn't trust the audience to get his
point from the events in Father Greg's life, so he turns the last
half hour of the film into a series of sermons, philosophical
discussions and exchanges of scripture passages.  Not only does the
film become pedantic at this point, it simply becomes dull, and
crawls toward its emotional climax.  The flawed but human characters
whose conflicts seem real become little more than mouthpieces.
     Perhaps it is most difficult to digest the message of PRIEST
because it makes so little effort to treat the opposing point of
view with any respect.  The only priests in the film who are not
alcoholics or having sex are scowling, hateful and cadaverous; there
is not a single character who supports orthodoxy who is treated as
anything but an ogre.  Whether or not the Catholic Church is
deserving of criticism is not even the point.  This is an
examination of doctrinal morality as Oliver Stone might have done
it, too full of homilies and too lacking in an understanding that
issues are usually shades of grey.  There are probably Father Gregs
and Father Matthews in many parishes around the world, and that is
an issue deserving of attention.  By sensationalizing Father Greg's
story, however, the makers of PRIEST end up preaching almost
exclusively to the converted.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     PRIEST is the story of the Roman Catholic Church as evil
personified and of a gay priest who likes being a priest, but is
trapped by the Church's restriction against gays.  The people in it all
suffer from major depression and ultimately the theme is their
unfulfilled quest to break the chains of their miserable lives.  I keep
thinking to myself as I watched it, this is all hogwash, but it is so
well crafted, I am glad I came to see it.
     From the get go, the movie hits you over the head with its
anti-religious theme.  It starts with an older priest, Father Ellerton
(James Ellis), who looks like a wino, carrying a huge crucifix,
battering ram style.  He hates his bishop (Rio Fanning) for sacking
him, so he is going to break out the stained glass window the bishop is
standing in front of.  Later this same bishop wishes the gay priest
dead and in general seems to be playing the role of the devil.
     The new priest, Father Greg (Linus Roache), arrives to replace
Father Ellerton.  When Father Greg first walks in, the other priest in
the parish, Father Matthew (Tom Wilkinson), is lecturing his
congregation.  The sermon sounds rather reminiscent of a Socialist
Workers speech.  This irritates the much more traditional Father Greg.
He tells Father Matthew to stick to religion and leave the politics
out.
     Father Matthew, as does everyone in the movie, has some major
problems to deal with.  At the rectory he has a live in girlfriend,
Maria Kerrigan (Cathy Tyson), he is sleeping with.  Father Greg
lectures him severely over this egregious sin.  Father Greg explains
how it is okay since he has been done it before.  Now, there is a
convincing argument.
     Soon we find that Father Greg is gay, and he falls in love with
someone he picks up in a bar, Graham (Robert Carlyle).  Next we have a
father (Robert Pugh) and a daughter (Christine Tremarco) tell Father
Greg in the confession booth about their incest.  He wants to help but
is bound by his oath of secrecy.  He is a good person trapped in a job
which ill suites him.
     All of the above is merely the setup for this complex picture.
There are numerous characters each with their own anguish to share with
us.  The one message that come across loud and clear is that the church
is to blame for much of the misery in the world.  At one point, Father
Greg starts screaming at a crucifix and telling Jesus what a lousy job
he is doing.
     Although the plot is 180 degrees from my personal beliefs, I
thought the director (Antonia Bird) and the writer (Jimmy McGovern)
fashioned an extremely compelling and thought provoking movie.  The
movie was carefully cast.  The acting was good, and the part by Linus
Roache was outstanding.  He was able to convey a wide emotional range
by just his pensive set of looks.  His speech was careful and
controlled except the yelling scene mentioned above.
     The cinematography (Fred Tammes) was dark and gray.  It added to
the movie and never overpowered it.  He was especially adept at the
extreme close up shots of which there are many.  It was filmed in poor
neighborhoods in Liverpool and Manchester which fit the script well.
     My only major problem with the show, other than ridiculous
depiction of the church, was the ending.  Some will undoubtedly like
the symbolism of the ending.  For me, it was too overblown and
manipulative.  On the other hand, I found myself, while I was watching
PRIEST, wondering how they would try to end such a strange show.  I had
no good ideas then, and I have no suggestions now.
     PRIEST runs a well edited 1:43.  It is unrated but would be a hard
R.  There is more male French kissing in it than all of the other
movies I have seen combined.  There are several extremely explicit
homosexual sex scenes albeit without any nudity.  We also have incest
and tons of blasphemy.  Other stuff too to get it an R or perhaps an
NC-17.  I do not think it is appropriate for children, period.  If you
are interested in serious, well acted movies that discuss highly
controversial albeit extremely depressing subjects, then I recommend
PRIEST to you.  I give it a thumbs up and award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Meek
     PRIEST is the second movie I've seen recently ending with "You'll
Never Walk Alone" swelling onto the soundtrack.  In HEAVENLY CREATURES,
the Mario Lanza version plays over the credits as a wonderfully ironic
grace note to a stellar film--the selection fits perfectly.  In PRIEST,
which is merely a very good movie, a rather tepid version of the song
plays out as a banal reflection of the action.  The song's appearance
in PRIEST isn't inappropriate, but neither is it inspired, as it is in
HEAVENLY CREATURES.
     That sort of difference sums up my attitude towards PRIEST.  It's
a very good movie, but not an inspired movie.  The director, Antonia
Bird, and screenwriter Jimmy McGovern give us a film about Father Greg
(Linus Roache), a rigidly traditional young priest assigned to a parish
in Liverpool.  He joins Father Matthew (Tom Wilkinson), a liberal
priest more interested in the spirit of religious law than the
letters.  The two immediately clash, with Father Greg objecting to a
sermon by Father Matthew in which the latter points a heavy finger at
societal institutions.  When he finds out that Father Matthew and the
parish housekeeper, Maria Kerrigan (Cathy Tyson), have been involved in
a long-term sexual and romantic relationship, he writes off Father
Matthew as completely hopeless.
     Father Greg, however, has some secrets of his own: he's gay, and
he cannot keep from breaking his vow of chastity.  He dresses in
leather and bicycles down to a pub to meet a sexual partner.  To his
credit, Father Greg realizes his hypocrisy, but he cannot admit it to
Father Matthew or anyone else.  He cannot bring himself to break the
seal of the confession, however, even when a fourteen-year-old
parishioner confesses that her father "makes me do things."  Father
Greg has her tell her father that "I say it has to stop."  He is wholly
unprepared for the father's response, however: an eloquent,
cold-blooded justification for acting upon his incestuous desires.
     Father Greg spends the film discovering that while he's quite
willing to be a Martyr, to wage Holy War on Sin and Evil, he lives in a
world where he must instead make sacrifices, and do what he can to
struggle against sin and evil.  He tells his lover that in seminary
school, he *knew* the answers to hypothetical problems--if someone
confessed before a service that he'd poisoned the altar wine, Father
Greg would martyr himself for his vow, drinking the wine anyway.  He is
utterly flummoxed, however, when confronted with his own desires, which
seem ludicrous when articulated in terms of absolute good and evil; and
when confronted with a reasoned, unrepentant evil that is utterly
human, though utterly life-destroying.
     PRIEST is crammed full of more plot lines and character
development than nine or ten average summer blockbusters.  It does
Catholicism the (usually unwelcomed) favor of taking its tenets quite
seriously.  Critics who object to the film seem to feel that their
faith is being mocked, that priests shouldn't be portrayed as sinning
human beings.  While Bird and McGovern make no secret of their liberal
bias, however, no viewpoint in the film is presented unchallenged, and
no absolute distinctions are made between good and bad Catholics.  The
filmmakers do not mock those parishioners who cannot forgive Greg his
sins and feel that his presence before them is mockery at best and
blasphemy at worst.  The filmmakers don't agree with their position,
but they do take it seriously.
     The seriousness with which everything is taken is, in fact, its
main fault.  There are very few really lighthearted moments in the
film.  Although it is obvious that Father Greg lives to be a priest, we
never see the joys or satisfactions that the position must offer, at
least in theory.  The profession is not condemned, but neither is it
celebrated, and so Bird and McGovern present to the audience characters
whose dilemmas are never fully believable because you're never sure why
they're dilemmas in the first place.  Father Greg utterly rejects the
idea of leaving the priesthood to free himself to love whom he pleases,
and it's obvious that being a priest means as much (or more) to him as
being gay, but there's never any sense or explanation of what motivated
him to become a priest in the first place.
     This puts the whole movie in the rather awkward position of being
an obvious hypothetical situation arguing the folly--or even the
sin--of mistaking hypothetical situations for real life.  Bird and the
other filmmakers seem to respect Catholicism as the question it, but
don't show any evidence of feeling the paradoxes and dilemmas of faith
in the core of their being.  PRIEST is a very good film, a very worthy
film; ultimately, however, it never makes the final, alchemical leap,
transforming good acting, a good script, and strong direction into a
really powerful, moving motion picture.

Author
Christopher Null
     The controversy surrounding PRIEST has been forefront in much of
the cinematic trade literature for weeks now.  Miramax, the film's
distributor, actually had the guts to release the movie, a powerful
criticism of Catholic doctrine, on Good Friday.
     PRIEST is the story of Father Greg (Linus Roachel), an idealistic
young priest in Liverpool.  The problem is that the young priest is
gay, and he's torn between his hidden, inner desires and his faith in
the church.  Add to this his mentor, Father Matthew (Tom Wilkenson), an
unconventional, karaoke-singing priest who is also breaking his vow of
celibacy, and a teen-aged girl who confesses to Father Greg the
incestuous abuse she experiences at the hands of her father.  Greg is
the victim of classic Catholic dilemmas:  whether or not to break the
seal of confession; whether or not to entertain his passion; whether or
not to remain a member of the cloth.
     The film is unrelenting in its prodding at the darker side of
religion, showing in painful detail the hypocrisy of many of its
tenets.  It's enough to make you seriously question what you think you
know, whether you're Catholic or not.
     While PRIEST is a jaw-dropper overall, it is lacking on a number
of levels that often make it frustrating.  The erratic pace of plot
development, stereotyping, and a substandard score make the film
sometimes awkward and forced.  Also, the characters seem to become
close friends (or lovers) for no reason at all.  Surprisingly, and to
much relief, PRIEST involves a huge amount of comic relief, such as a
funeral conga line, to break the omnipresent tension.
     Be warned, PRIEST is a graphic and taboo-breaking film.  It is a
forceful blow to the centuries of Catholic history, and tells a story
that is unique in every way.  Be sure you know what you're getting in
to if you go.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This is the film that is being bashed by the Catholic heirarchy
despite their not having seen it.  Boycott of advertisers, Miramax and
Disney have been declared.  For me, it was a fascinating film which I'd
like to recommend.
     Liverpool is one of the more difficult cities for the Church to
work in because of its impoverished parishes.  Father Ellerton (James
Ellis) has found it too much for him; Young Father Greg Pilkington
(Linus Roache) is sent to replace him.  Pilkington is a sincere,
devout, ethical Catholic.  Before long he is beset with problems he,
too, is unable to handle.
     For one thing, he is astonished and disturbed when he finds that
Father Matthew Thomas (Tom Wilkinson) has given up on his vows of
celibacy and is sharing the bed of his housekeeper, Maria (Cathy
Tyson).  In the confessional, where the priests are not permitted to
divulge what has been told to them by the "sinner," a fourteen-year-old
Lisa (Christine Tremarco) reveals she is being sexually abused by her
father.  How is Father Greg supposed do deal with that?
     Among the many other questions Father Greg must face is that of
homosexuality.
     PRIEST is a film about honesty and toleration of others' actions,
of compassion for those for whom desire outweighs the behavior the
Church would espouse.  Beautifully done.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release beginning 3/24/95  
Running Length: 1:40 
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, sex) 
Starring: Linus Roache, Tom Wilkinson, Cathy Tyson, Robert Carlyle, 
          Christine Tremarco, Robert Pugh, Lesley Sharp, James Ellis 
Director: Antonia Bird 
Producers: George Faber and Josephine Ward 
Screenplay: Jimmy McGovern 
Cinematography: Fred Tammes 
Music: Andy Roberts 
Released by Miramax Films 
     The Catholic community's outcry against PRIEST has already begun, 
and it will doubtlessly become more intense before it abates.  One of the 
most disturbing elements of any organized protest of this sort is that 
most of those involved will not have seen the picture in question.  
Another equally unfortunate byproduct is that, as was the case with THE 
LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST, the movie itself may get lost somewhere in the 
resulting polarization.  If that happens, it will be a shame, because 
PRIEST has a lot to say, and doesn't deserve to be hamstrung by those who 
miss the point or have no idea what they're talking about. 
     The main character is Father Greg Pilkington (Linus Roache), a
by-the-book, straightlaced Roman Catholic priest who is new to a rural 
parish in Great Britain.  Father Greg is the sort who believes his job is 
to give moral advice, not act as a social activist--a charge he levels 
against fellow priest Father Matthew Thomas (Tom Wilkinson).   
     While trying to serve his flock, however, Father Greg has his own 
personal demons to wrestle.  Not only is he unable to keep his vow of 
celibacy, he breaks it with another man--something many of his less
tolerant parishioners would surely view as an "abomination" if they 
learned of it.  Even as he struggles with his sexual identity and its 
implications, Father Greg is forced to endure an additional crisis of 
faith when a fourteen year old girl (Christine Tremarco) comes to him 
under the seal of confession and admits to being sexually molested by her 
father. 
     There is nothing in PRIEST that hasn't appeared in recent newspaper 
accounts, which makes the Catholic League's opposition to the film 
somewhat ludicrous, not to mention hypocritical.  Perhaps they feel 
threatened by PRIEST's depiction of men of the cloth as flawed human 
beings rather than as icons.  Certainly, the men who don the collar here 
are not perfect, but neither are they lunatics, Epicureans, or devils. 
     Jimmy McGovern's script does an excellent job of dovetailing the two 
main elements of the film--Greg's homosexuality and Lisa's sexual
abuse--into a compelling whole, often using unexpected bursts of humor to 
keep the level of tension from becoming too intense.  Arguably, the more 
stirring story centers on the priest's battles with his conscience over 
how to help Lisa, but this film wouldn't have the same emotional 
resonance without the other pieces.  In fact, the final scene 
incorporates several threads into a moment that, while perhaps a little 
overdone, is nonetheless powerful.   
     PRIEST addresses both social and religious themes.  At its core, 
however, is the question of absolute certainty versus faith.  There is, 
of course, no answer to most of the questions that Greg agonizes over, 
but these--such as how Christ could expect him to keep silent when that 
silence condemns a girl to continued suffering--are presented for the 
audience's consideration.  It is by his reaction to the issues that 
Greg's true character is slowly revealed.  It doesn't take long for us to 
realize that our first impression of the man is as false as his facade. 
     Linus Roache gives a multi-layered portrayal of Father Greg, 
presenting a character we can accept equally as a spiritual advisor and 
as the tortured man beneath the collar.  Tom Wilkinson is more 
understated, but no less real, at Father Matthew, the older priest who 
accepts Greg's confidences without judging him.  Christine Tremarco is 
chillingly believable as Lisa, and Robert Pugh radiates menace as her 
father--a man who gives a horrifyingly logical explanation for his 
activities.   
     Provocative films like PRIEST rarely arrive without creating some 
sort of controversy.  By not compromising her vision (which is similar to 
that of fellow British film maker Ken Loach), director Antonia Bird has 
fashioned a picture that not only stirs up a hornet's nest of timely and 
volatile spiritual issues, but faces up to homosexuality and incest with 
a frankness which few films dare.  PRIEST is effective not only because 
of all the ground it traverses, but because the final turn brings closure 
without excess. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Even the most idealistic laws can be only an approximation of
justice.  Criminals who hurt other people can hide behind the Fifth
Amendment of the Constitution.  They are given that right by the law so
that the law can be used to prevent larger injustices.  In A MAN FOR
ALL SEASONS the character Sir Thomas More puts it extremely succinctly
by saying, "I give the Devil benefit of law for my own safety's sake."
(That is a great scene, by the way.  I consider it the best single
scene in any film I know.)  What is true of the laws of this country is
also true of the laws of the Catholic Church.  It is a terrible
responsibility to have to allow in the name of a law a very bad evil to
continue in order to serve a greater good.  And that is the
responsibility that nearly destroys the young and idealistic Father
Greg in Antonia Byrd's PRIEST, a film from a powerful screenplay by
Jimmy McGovern.
     Father Greg (played by Linus Roache) is a young and high-minded
priest sent a rough Liverpool parish.  He is there to replace an older
priest who was fired when he fell from favor with his superiors.  "Time
to move on, old son," they told him insensitively.  His replacement is
Father Greg, who has little sympathy for priests or parishioners who do
not live by the rules of the Church.  This immediately puts him into
conflict with Father Matthew (Tom Wilkinson), the other presiding
priest of the parish.  Matthew is more worldly and more tolerant of
failure and sin.  The two priests immediately have philosophical
differences effectively over whether to follow the letter or the spirit
of church law.  But any chance Matthew might have in convincing Greg is
lost when Greg discovers Matthew is sleeping with the housekeeper,
Maria Kerrigan (Cathy Tyson).  This is just the sort of decadence that
Father Greg abhors, but he cannot completely condemn, knowing that
secretly he himself has desires that would make him a sinner in the
eyes of the Church.  Greg, who came to Liverpool reasonably confident
that he has all the answers, finds to his shock that there are
questions deeper than his answers go.  Like the main character in
Nathaniel West's MISS LONELYHEARTS, Greg is unprepared for the real-
world problems of the people around him.  Soon all this is overwhelmed
by his learning in the confessional of a terrible evil going on.  He
cannot take action without breaking his vow to protect the seal of
privacy of the confessional.  His choice of protecting the Church at
the expense of one of his parishioners, combined with his knowledge
that he is breaking other Church rules, places him in the jaws of a
crushing moral dilemma.
     The cast of PRIEST is mostly unfamiliar--the exceptions being
Cathy Tyson of MONA LISA and John Bennett, a veteran of 70's horror
films and episodes of "Doctor Who," here playing a priest so straight-
laced and old school he insists on speaking in Latin over dinner.
Still the acting is magnetic with especially good performances from
Roache and Wilkinson.
     It is perhaps ironic that members of the Catholic Church should
choose this film to protest.  McGovern's script could easily have made
the Church appear entirely wrong.  A lesser writer might have done
that.  Most American films make it obvious which side is correct in any
conflict.  But the dilemma in this film really is a dilemma and there
are good arguments on each side.  McGovern leaves it to the viewer to
decide whether Greg has done the right thing or not.  That is genuinely
refreshing.  I give PRIEST a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.
