Title
Review for Animal, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Revolution Studios/ Happy Madison Production
 Director: Luke Greenfield
 Writer:  Tom Brady
 Cast: Rob Schneider, Colleen Haskell, John C. McGinley,
Michael Caton, Guy Torry, Louis Lombardi, Edward Asner
   The creationists had it wrong and now I'm not so sure
about the Darwinians.  We human beings did not simply
evolve from animals: we ARE animals.  If the silly but often
funny comedy from Joe Roth's Revolution Studios has any
major idea to convey, it is the well-worn verity that beneath
our thin layer of civilized skin lies a thick mess of animal
instincts itching to emerge but kept down, so to speak, by the
rules of polite society.  In Tom Brady's screenplay--which is,
thank goodness, only mildly vulgar, always remembering that
polite society has dropped into the theater with kids to watch--
Marvin (Rob Schneider) represents both the nerdy exterior so
common to many of us and the libidinous urges that we
sublimate and compensate for whenever we go to work or
play a quick game of pick-up (basketball).    
   Marv's with forensics in the police force of a small town and
though he's not a uniformed cop, he dreams of becoming
one.  After going beyond the call of duty in pursuit of felons,
he has a terrible accident which knocks him out, but his life is
saved by a mad scientist, Dr. Wilder (Michael Caton), who
patches him up with the organs culled from his lab collection
of goats, dogs, cats, horses and chimps.  After detecting
heroin by sniffing the rear of a passenger at the airport,
Marvin is lionized, inducted into the police force as a full
officer, and now possesses the confidence to introduce
himself to a cutie running an animal shelter, Rianna (Colleen
Haskell in her debut role).  From then on, Luke Greenfield
directs the human beast into a series of skits that could have
been gleaned from Saturday Night Live, giving Schneider a
chance to show off his considerable comedic talents.
   Besides proving that we people are all animals, the movie
demonstrates that human beings are not at all superior to our
brothers and sisters in our own kingdom.  When Marv takes
on the dimensions of a seal, he saves the mayor's son; a
dog, he sniffs out drugs and runs sixty miles per hour; a
chimp, he swings from branches like Michelle Yeoh, eluding
the cops, particularly his hostile and envious partner Sgt. Sisk
(John C. McGinley).
   If you like girl-next-door types as I do (Renee Zellweger for
example,) you'll fall big for Colleen Haskell and in general
you'll realize that when physical comedy stays within the
bounds of reasonable decency, it can begin to approach the
merits of the screwball comedies of the thirties that make the
world forget the Depression for a while.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 83 minutes.  (C)2001,
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Luke Greenfield's THE ANIMAL, starring Rob Schneider (DEUCE BIGALOW: 
MALE GIGOLO), is a comedic takeoff on the old Frankenstein legend.  The 
hilarious "kill the monster" ending, which is the only time the movie 
follows the traditional Frankenstein story, is one of only two good 
parts to the movie.  The other is an adorable Colleen Haskell from the 
original "Survivor" series, who plays Schneider's human love interest.  
As you watch her being delightful in a movie which is awful, you find 
yourself eagerly awaiting her next picture, which has to be better.  
The story, which is explained in detail in the movie's abysmal trailers, 
concerns Marvin Mange (Schneider), a loser of a man whose body is 
reconstituted out of animal parts after a car accident.  This causes him 
to have a never ending stream of animal urges.  Peeing around his 
restaurant table in order to mark his territory is one such animalistic 
behavior.  Another, in a Tom Green moment, has him masticating a worm so 
that a baby turkey vulture can peck the remains out of his mouth.  
Are you laughing yet?  You aren't?  Well, how about a man who sniffs 
other men's butts?  A man who lusts after every tail -- of whatever 
species -- in sight?  A man who barfs up hairballs?
The movie's tagline nicely sums it up: "He wasn't much of a man. ... Now 
he's not much of an animal."  Well, this much can be said in THE 
ANIMAL's defense.  It isn't the worst movie of the week.  By a nose, it 
loses this dubious distinction to another juvenile comedy, WHAT'S THE 
WORST THAT COULD HAPPEN? 
THE ANIMAL runs, thankfully, only 1:23.  It is rated PG-13 for some 
crude and sexual humor and would be acceptable for kids around 12 and 
up.  
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave the picture just a single *.  He said it 
was plotless slapstick that had only a few funny moments.  
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, June 1, 2001.  
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century 
theaters.  
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A loser of a man who can't make it as a cop, dies in a horrible car 
accident, only to be brought back to life by a nutty doctor who replaces 
many of his organs with animal parts. The result is a man who is 
seemingly controlled by his animal urges. Hilarity ensues?
CRITIQUE:
Before you read my review, you really gotta know that I loved DEUCE 
BIGALOW, it honestly cracked me up throughout. But when I saw the 
trailer for Rob Schneider's latest cinematic odyssey, it didn't 
particularly strike my fancy (i.e. I didn't think that it was funny). 
And now that I've seen the entire picture, I still don't think that it's 
all that funny. Sure, the concept itself does sound like something that 
might generate a gaggle of laughs, but the sight of Schneider licking 
his sack, swimming like a seal and jumping around from branch to branch 
like a monkey...just didn't make me laugh. It's that simple. The whole 
thing just felt like another dumb "Saturday Night Live" movie based on 
one joke, a joke in which unfortunately, I didn't find much hilarity. 
Now I don't know exactly why I didn't think any of it was funny, but I 
guess that has to do with your own personal sense of humor. My buddy 
next to me was cracking up at plenty of the same scenes which I didn't 
think were amusing, so who knows, maybe you'll like it too, but then 
again, he also thought that the trailer was pretty funny, so I guess 
that has something to do with it. One thing is for sure though, if 
you've seen this movie's trailer and didn't think that it was all that 
comical, skip this movie all the way because pretty much all of the 
"big" jokes are in there, and if you didn't roll with it then, I doubt 
that you're gonna dig it now that it's up on the big screen.
So why am I giving it a 4/10? Well, I generally do find at least "some" 
things in all movies that give it a little bit of worth. This time 
around, the positives in this film were actually pretty obvious to 
figure out. First of all, John C. McGinley's character is hilarious. 
He's the tough as nails cop with veins popping out of every muscle in 
his body and he doesn't like Schneider. McGinley plays the character to 
a tee and he steals every scene that he is in. I also drooled over one 
particular scene of a lovely lady sauntering down a sidewalk in a mini 
white dress or skirt or whatever. Not exactly sure what happened after 
that, because as soon as she bent over...so did I! I'd also like to 
throw some props out to the one ongoing joke that "worked" for me in 
this movie and that was the "black guy" joke. I won't ruin it here but 
the theory itself was quite funny. And last but certainly not 
least...Colleen Haskell. Aaaaaaaah, Colleen Haskell. Aaaaaaaah, I say 
again...Colleen Haskell. Just adorable! Put that girl on the screen for 
85 more minutes and I'm there! Aaaaaaah...Colleen Haskell. Harumph, but 
enough about her. Okay, so there were a couple of things that I did 
appreciate about this movie, but don't misinterpret that as a positive 
review. Overall, I didn't think that anything that Schneider did in this 
film was funny, and I guess that really is the bottom line. If you think 
that seeing Schneider acting like different animals is entertaining, 
well, then I guess you might enjoy some of this. If not, forget this 
movie every happened and rent DEUCE BIGALOW again...now that's a funny 
movie! "You can do it!"
PS: Oh yeah, I also dug the fact that they kept the "You can do it!" gag 
going in this movie as well (for Sandler fans, you know what I'm talking 
about). It's also interesting to see who says it in this film (but I 
won't ruin that for you here either).
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Big Daddy (7/10) - Billy Madison (7/10) - Deuce Bigalow (8/10) - Freddy 
Got Fingered (5/10) - Happy Gilmore (9/10) - Joe Dirt (5/10) - The 
Ladies Man (6/10) - Little Nicky (6/10) - Lost and Found (4/10) -The 
Waterboy (4/10)

Author
Max Messier
It's always a shame when good comedic talent goes bad, and a pleasant
surprise when that finally lands a decent role in a funny film.  Nothing
has been expected of Rob Schneider since his departure from the hellhole
of mind-numbing roles like the Copy Guy Richmeister and the Weed Guy on
Saturday Night Live, as well as bit parts in ridiculous Muppet Movie
sequels and Adam Sandler comedies.  But Rob Schneider is a funny man.  I
remember watching him at the Improv in San Diego when I was 12 years old
and laughing my ass off at his brilliant portrayal of Elvis on a
fishhook.  I was 12, but what the hey?
Modern comedy comes from its ability to not take its story or its
characters seriously.  The Farrelly brothers and Woody Allen have taught
us that.  Recent failures like Joe Dirt and Schneider's last film Deuce
Bigalow: Male Gigolo owe themselves to a seriousness they try to create
by treating their main characters as martyrs for the audience to
sympathize with and pity.  The Animal does no such thing, avoiding this
common mistake totally and developing into an enjoyable and hilarious 90
minutes.
Our tale: Marvin Mage (Schnieder) is a loser to the tenth degree.  He
makes Screech from Saved by the Bell look like a romantic lead in a
Shakespearean tragedy.  Stuck with the lowly job of file clerk for the
local police force, Marvin longs for the glory and honor of becoming a
real police officer like his dearly departed father.  When Marvin
answers a 911-robbery call, he ends up in one of the funniest car
crashes ever imprinted on celluloid.  A deranged scientist (Michael
Canton) rescues Marvin from the wreckage, rebuilds his body
RoboCop-style with animal parts (refugees from a traveling Mexican
circus), and Marvin's newfound animal instincts naturally kick into full
effect when he's released back into the general population.
Stupid?  Yes.  I just never would have thought a cross-dressing monkey
doing the moonwalk would be so damn funny.
Marvin meets and falls in love with the chick from the first season of
Survivor (Colleen Haskell), uses his extra-keen sense of smell to sniff
out drugs from perpetrators' rectal areas, rescues a drowning boy
Flipper-style, consumes enough Slim Jims to keep Macho Man Randy Savage
happy, humps a mailbox, and tries to make sweet love to a goat in heat. 
Again: Stupid?  Yes.  But the bizarre situations dreamed up by
screenwriters Schneider and Tom Brady work, and Schneider sells it for
all he's worth.  Trust me --it's funny.  Very funny.  I'm almost ashamed
that I laughed out loud so much.
The only real problem is that it all falls apart in the end, a good idea
stretched way beyond its limits.  The script degrades with too many plot
twists, relying on cameos from Norm Macdonald and Adam Sandler for comic
relief in its last 20 minutes.  In the end, it's, ahem, beating a dead
horse.
With The Animal under his belt, Schneider demonstrates that the innate
comedic talent I witnessed years ago is still down there somewhere. 
Let's just hope this isn't a fluke for the Richmeister.
Director: Luke Greenfield
Producer: Barry Bernardi, Carr D'Angelo, Todd Garner
Writer: Tom Brady, Rob Schneider
Starring: Rob Schneider, Colleen Haskell, Michael Canton, John C.
McGinley, Ed Asner
http://www.mediatrip.com/theanimal/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
SSG Syndicate
   "America's Sweetheart" Colleen Haskell didn't outlast Richard Hatch on "Survivor," but the plucky 24 year-old emerges from this crazed catastrophe unscathed - unless you count Rob Schneider's running his tongue across her face. Schneider plays Marvin Mange, a mousy, mild-mannered police department file clerk who is the victim in an awful automobile accident. While unconscious, he's reassembled by a weird scientist (Michael Caton) who gives him organs from various animals.  So the once-physically challenged dork awakens from a coma with the speed of a cheetah, the olfactory sense of a dog, and the sexual drive of a goat. At the local airport, he's able to sniff out heroin and nab a drug smuggler and, as a result, is immediately welcomed on the police force by the grateful Chief (Ed Asner), much to the chagrin of his bullying, muscle-bound sergeant (John C. McGinley).  He discovers he can outrun a man on horseback and swim like a seal. (All of the best clips were in t!
he "Coming Attractions.") Since he has no idea about the implants, he attributes his amazing physical prowess to a disgusting beverage called Badger Milk.  But his feral instincts prove a definitive distraction in his courtship of a vegetarian environmentalist (perpetually smiling Colleen Haskell) who runs the local animal shelter, not to mention the tufts of coarse hair sprouting from his buttocks. And I won't even delve into his  barnyard flirtation with a female goat in heat.  Produced by Adam Sandler, this behavioral  fable was co-written by Rob Schneider with Tom Brady and directed by Luke Greenfield, who is obviously a novice. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Animal" limps in with a crass, crude 3. Think of a dumb and demented "Island of Dr. Moreau" Saturday Night Live spin-off.

Author
Homer Yen
"The Animal" is a marginally inspired comedy that only
manages to lumber along, generating just enough
momentum to keep it from stalling.  It's clunky and
slow, like watching an 18-wheeler trying to accelerate
up a hill.  There are certainly better things you can
do with your time.
Actually, if you've seen the trailer, then you already
know the plot and have seen its funniest moments.  The
story centers on bland Marvin (Rob Schneider), who is
an Evidence Clerk at the local police department that
yearns to be a real officer.  But he's afflicted with
Loser-itis.   Dogs attack him, neighbors torment him,
children bully him, and his co-workers ignore him. 
Truthfully, with his bad haircut (seemingly modeled
after Weird Al Yankovic, Little Richard, and giant
poodles) and his unenthusiastic demeanor, we'd
probably throw tomatoes at him just for fun.  This is
actually bad because you can't like a character if you
can't develop sympathy for him.  We never do, and it
may be just as well that he drives off a cliff and
plummets to the canyon floor.
However, Marvin is found by an eccentric doctor
(Michael Caton) who uses a radical and experimental
procedure to save him, implanting our doofus with
various animal parts and organs.  As a result, Marvin
develops heightened senses and increased agility and
speed.  He can smell drugs hidden anywhere on a body,
swim with the speed of a dolphin, and can run as fast
as a cheetah.  Imagine the comedic possibilities that
arise from this operation.  With his enhanced
abilities, he could now reap vengeance on all those
who have shunned him.  
However, the spirit of the film takes a raunchy turn,
and instead, Marvin spends most of his time trying to
subdue or satiate his voracious appetite and his
animalistic, sexual urges.  Goats beware!   He also
chases cats, urinates to mark his territory, or growls
at his enemies.  What he should've done was stick his
head in the sand like an ostrich.  
Equally tenuous is its other running joke, which
involves one of his friends (Guy Torry) who constantly
complains that everyone is treating him TOO nicely
because he's black.  "It's reverse racism," he
declares as he blows smoke into the faces of strangers
but none of them says anything.  This element doesn't
work the first time it's mentioned, and it becomes
increasingly trite with every recurrence.
You don't have to be as wise as an owl to realize that
"The Animal" is tame.  If there's any reason to see
this film, it's to see Colleen Haskell who makes her
big screen debut.  Remember her?  She was voted off in
week 11 of the 13-week program, "Survivor."  Here, she
plays Marvin's sunny love interest.  While her role
required very little actual acting, she seemed very
comfortable (even when Marvin licks the side of her
face like a lapping dog...yuck!).  With her adorable
disposition, radiant smile, and playful innocence, she
could be a Meg Ryan in the making.  It's too bad that
she's in such a mediocre offering


Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Luke Greenfield.
Cast: Rob Schneider, Colleen Haskell, John C. McGingley, Michael Caton, Guy 
Torry, Louis Lombardi, Edward Asner.
2001 - 83 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for violence and bathroom humor).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 2, 2001.
Rob Schneider's last starring vehicle, 1999's "Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo," 
was an at times uproarious, sunny comedy that proved his talents could easily 
rival that of Jim Carrey and Adam Sandler. In contrast, Luke Greenfield's 
"The Animal" is just plain lame. While the overall premise has definite comic 
possibilities, everything about the finished product screams, "tiresome!" 
The aptly-named Marvin Mange (Rob Schneider) is a crime evidence protector 
who dreams of becoming a police officer, if only he could pass the obstacle 
course section of the test. Following a freak car accident that leaves his 
body mangled, he is saved by mad scientist Dr. Wilder (Michael Caton) by 
being replaced with spare internal animal parts. Returning to his daily life 
without any memories of what has happened to him, his newfound keen sense of 
smell helps him to peg a man at the airport carrying a bag full of heroin. 
Marvin soon finds himself becoming a cop, but his extreme animal urges are 
beginning to get the best of him.
No matter how hard screenwriters Tom Brady and Rob Schneider try to extract 
constant gags out of "The Animal," it just isn't very funny. Excessively 
juvenile and with only one witty ongoing joke, involving "reverse racism," a 
theory which Marvin's black friend, Miles (Guy Torry), creates, the film is a 
by-the-numbers effort from start to finish. At only 83 minutes, at least it 
is short.
Rob Schneider remains a likable personality, sort of a kinder, gentler Adam 
Sandler. He's a capable actor, and as "Deuce Bigalow" proved, can be quite 
funny when the material is strong. As his inevitable love interest, 
"Survivor" contestant Colleen Haskell plays Rianna, a feisty animal-lover who 
finds Marvin's similarities with her beloved animals endearing. It's 
difficult to say whether Haskell is a good actor; her thin role only requires 
that she smile a whole lot, and she does that well.
There isn't much else to say about "The Animal." I sat there for the duration 
of its running time unimpressed and without much to find amusing. Hopefully, 
Schneider will try a little harder his next time at bat, because with another 
movie as bad as "The Animal," he may be in danger of turning into Pauly 
Shore. And we all know what he's doing now. Or, on second thought, we don't.
    - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
      http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/dustinputman.htm
http://us.imdb.com/reviewsby?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com
