Title
Review for Visions of Light (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Directors:  Arnold Glassman, Todd McCarthy, and Stuart Samuels
Producer:  Stuart Samuels
Written by Todd McCarthy
Released by Kino International
     Often, one of the most overlooked elements of a film is its
cinematography.  Paradoxically, it is also the most important, whether
specifically noticed or not.  Movies are a visual medium where the
pictures shoulder the lion's share of the burden.  A movie can have a
good director, accomplished actors, and a riveting script, but if the
photography is done poorly, the production is doomed.
     VISIONS OF LIGHT is a fascinating film that will enthrall lovers
of movies and photography buffs alike.  For those that happen to fall
into both categories, it's a rare and wondrous treat.  VISIONS OF LIGHT
gives an insider's view to the job of the cinematographer, interviewing
dozens of today's most accomplished directors of photography, examining
their work, and looking back on the great productions of the past.
     I defy anyone who sees this movie to emerge with an unchanged
attitude towards the movies and the role of the cinematographer.
Likely the next film you see after this one, you'll be far more aware
of the role of the camera in the process of creation.  As a side
benefit, those that go into VISIONS OF LIGHT unclear about why
colorizing old films is such a taboo subject among movie-lovers, will
come to understand the reasons.
     VISIONS OF LIGHT states that cinematography is the art of light -
blending it so it enhances the director's vision of the film.  Much
time is spent discussing this subject as well as various other
technical aspects of the craft (the role of close-ups, the importance
of showing a performer from a certain angle, and the advantages and
disadvantages of certain shots).  If all this sounds dry, be assured
that it isn't.  There are clips from over a hundred movies to revel
in--everything from CABINET OF DR. CALIGARI to GOODFELLAS.
     The film is roughly divided into three sections.  The first, and
shortest, traces the early days of Hollywood and the importance of
camerawork in silent films.  Several of the interview subjects lament
the introduction of sound into the movies so early, feeling that
another decade of silence could have advanced their craft by leaps and
bounds.
     The second section deals with the black-and-white era after the
introduction of sound.  Covering roughly the years between 1930 and
1960, much attention is paid to the role of contrast and shadow (gray
versus black, for example) in these movies.  CITIZEN KANE is given a
lengthy treatment with its many photographic innovations discussed at
some length.
     Finally, color movies are presented.  From GONE WITH THE WIND to
films of the 1980s, the various techniques used by color photographers
to achieve moods and portray emotions are detailed.  During this part,
time is spent on movies such as ANNIE HALL, JAWS, BLUE VELVET, and the
aforementioned GOODFELLAS, which features a discourse on the genesis of
one of that film's most unusual shots.
     VISIONS OF LIGHT is somewhat didactic and doesn't attempt any
ground breaking documentary techniques.  But its mixture of information
and film clips keeps the pace reasonable.  This film will add a
dimension to the knowledge of those familiar with the work of
cinematographers, and give an appreciation of a different facet of
filmmaking to those who are not.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Shane Burridge
Superlative collection of movie scenes and interviews with
cinematographers was directed by Arnold Glassman, Todd McCarthy, and
Stuart Samuels, and won the 1993 Oscar for Best Documentary.  While it
may seem a little nepotistic of the film industry to give an award to
a documentary about the film industry, it is in this case well
deserved.  The stars of the show are the directors of photography who
have  contributed to movies over the last hundred years.  VISIONS OF
LIGHT reads like a Who's Who of cinematographers:  Nestor Almendros,
Vilmos Zsigmond, James Wong Howe, Gordon Willis are among the cast 
list enthusing and reminiscing about the images they and others 
have created.
Documentary traces the evolution of cinema chronologically, but what
makes it unique is seeing developments such as the advent of sound and
color exclusively through the eyes of the cinematographers (although I
find it odd that the invention of new lenses is never acknowledged at
any time).  The DPs come across as a closely-knit club - it's fun
hearing them talk about their work and admiration for their
contemporaries, friends, and heroes.  As one captivating film sequence
follows another you'll feel you are at their sides, flipping through a
family album of cinematic treasures. How could anyone not want to rush
out and see all of these films on a big screen afterwards? 
Films of every genre and era are ably represented, and what's
admirable is that there are few of the usual 'classic' scenes that
always appear in films of this type (one exception is the crane shot
of the wounded in GONE WITH THE WIND).  VISIONS OF LIGHT wisely
emphasizes the feeling of discovery - unexpected or forgotten moments
of film are unearthed and rediscovered from start to finish.  You
won't be anticipating segments from ROSEMARY'S BABY or IN COLD BLOOD. 
Other works like SUNRISE and McCABE AND MRS MILLER are impossible to
ignore.  Film packs a lot in for its 90 minutes.  You may have some
fun with friends later discussing what was left out (personally, I'd
like to know why BARRY LYNDON's breakthrough
photography-by-candlepower wasn't included).  A must for anyone
seriously interested in cinema.

Author
Brian Koller
"Vision of Light" is a documentary about cinematography.
It is well conceived and executed.  Many appropriate clips from
important and innovative films are shown.  There are interviews
with many of Hollywood's best cameramen.  Different techniques
are described and demonstrated.  Certainly the documentary
is interesting and educational.
Cameramen see films differently than the rest of us.
I have seen "Sunrise" (1927) and didn't particularly like 
the movie, due mostly to direction and character
development.  But in this documentary, "Sunrise" is
a cinema classic, due to its innovative cinematography.
Many people could find "Eraserhead" (1976), directed by David Lynch, 
to be an unwatchable film (admittedly I haven't seen it).
>From a cameraman's perspective, however, it is a great project
because of the freedom to use bizarre camera techniques.
One cameraman says that he would walk out of any movie
that consistently uses a certain camera technique,
as if the rest of the movie elements aren't relevant.
The advent of sound in the late twenties is treated as
a disaster.  This reduced the importance of camerawork,
and the actors were restricted to the range of their
microphones, causing a lot of fixed shots.  Advantages
of sound, such as naturalistic acting and much deeper 
dialogue, are ignored because it's not cinematography.
The decline of black and White films is also considered a 
tragedy.  Black and White is a perfect medium for
lighting contrasts, which convey mood.  The great movies
of the 1940s, from "Rebecca" to "The Third Man", would have 
a different feel had they been filmed in color.
Still, I didn't connect with the documentary.  Perhaps I
downgrade the importance of cinematography, in favor of
script, plot and characters.  Some movies, like "2001: A Space
Odyssey," have little script and rely almost completely
upon visuals to tell the story.  "2001" is a great movie,
but it isn't covered here, only a clip is shown at the end
without narration.  Other Kubrick projects, such as "Barry Lyndon" 
which only used natural lighting, and "A Clockwork Orange"
are ignored altogether.  Also ignored are Sergio Leone's
great spaghetti westerns of the 1960s.  Of course, in a 90 
minute documentary, only so much territory can be covered.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
