Title
Review for Company Man (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Classics/Intermedia
 Director: Peter Askin & Douglas McGrath
 Writer:  Peter Askin & Douglas McGrath
 Cast: Douglas McGrath, Sigourney Weaver, John Turturro,
Anthony LaPaglia, Ryan Phillippe, Dnis Leary, Woody Allen,
Alan Cumming
   When I reviewed the worst comedy of the year 2000--"An
Everlasting Piece," a political satire like this one--I received a
nasty e-mail from its scripter and principal actor, Barry
McEvoy, who said: "I'm disappointed.  What I wanted to do
was to make a film that was original.  I wanted to make a film
that dealt with the issues in Northern Ireland in a way that
was brave and unlikely.  Obviously what I was getting at was
either a complete failure or wasted on you."  "An Everlasting
Piece," whose writer uses humor purportedly to show the
irrationality of friction between people of different ethnic
groups, may have had his heart in the right place, but
virtually every sally fell flat, mired in its utter banality and
predictability.  Now along comes a film that purports to
satirize American politics in the way Mr. McEvoy sent up the
politics of Northern Ireland. "Company Man" exceeds even
McEvoy's work in its pointlessness, its vapidity, its
unequivocal grade-school humor.  Not a single gag works. 
"Company Man" must simply have been an embarrassing
experience for the fine ensemble of actors who look so
confounded by its emptiness that one hopes they at least had
a good time clowning around with its frantic physicality and
witless waggery.  Incredibly, the screenplay was co-written by
a man from whom we expected more, Douglas McGrath, who
also penned the rich and stunning 1994 bauble "Bullets Over
Broadway," about a serious 1920s playwright who sells out
when offered a chance to direct his latest work on Broadway.
   Nothing's wrong with the premise.  "Company Man" intends
to deride the travesty of the U.S.-sponsored Bay of Pigs
invasion designed to overthrow the Castro government during
the early 1960s and even to segue into the Vietnam debacle
to prove that in the of foreign policy our government hadn't
learned from experience.  But the punch lines are so ungainly
that audience members who are good sports enough to sit
through the mercifully brief picture might actually hope for
some TV-style laugh track to save the actors the chagrin of
pausing and hearing only silence to reward their aspirations
to amusement.  Would you find the statement coming from a
high government official "good press is more important than
human life" particularly striking and original?  Or, when Alan
Cumming in the role of ex-Cuban president Batista, talks
about materials used to decorate his palace which came from
the Shah of Iran, says, "Do you know the Shah--very nice
man," do you congratulate yourself for being clever enough to
catch the inside political humor?  If so, this could be the
picture for you.
   The plot revolves around the CIA's hiring of a milquetoast,
Greenwich Connecticut high-school grammar teacher
(Douglas McGrath in the role of Allen Quimp) to head up a
plot to assassinate Fidel Castro.  He is retained because--as
he himself realizes--he would be the least likely person to be
identified as a spy.  Unfortunately, because of his need to
impress the community with his importance, he reveals his
secret identity to his wife Daisy (Sigourney Weaver) who in
no time informs everyone in the town.  Daisy, a bourgeois
matron who longs for a bigger house and a restaurant table
that is not adjacent to the kitchen, sees a chance for her own
15 minutes of fame.  She will write a scathing novel based on
her husband's heroism in his battle against the forces of
Communism that have overtaken Havana.
   Attempts by Denis Leary as a cynical officer stationed in
Cuba and by Ryan Phillipe as a Russian dancer who is able
to defect when a high school student in a drivers' education
program zooms away from a KGB agent do nothing to save
this movie.  John Turturro, acting in his standard macho role
by repeatedly rehearsing his plan to eradicate the Cuban
leader, mirrors Mr. McGrath's customary correction of the
grammatical errors of the colleagues he meets in his new job
in the Central Intelligence Agency.  Feel free to skip the film
and get your evening's superior entertainment by parsing sentences.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 81 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Ross Anthony
This little film sure tries hard to be silly. Unfortunately, most hits 
strike wide of funny bone central. It's a Marx brother's script with a 
Stan Laurel where a Groucho should have been. 
Breaking onto the screen with "Secret Agent Man" rocking the sound 
track, the mood is set for a 1960's spy spoof. Mild-mannered 
schoolteacher Allen Quimp stumbles into spy mode in an attempt to quell 
his hounding spouse who has much higher aspirations for him than 
grammar. Sigourney Weaver does an average job of playing her Olive Oyl 
role with a bit of a sting, "Everything would be better if you just, I 
don't know, died." 
Early on, Quimp bumps into, and haphazardly aids in the defection of, a 
famous Russian gymnast very well played by Ryan Phillippe for about 3 
minutes before he defects from the film, "You want to leave Russia just 
when you're winning the space race?" This event Forest Gumps Quimp into 
actual assignments with the CIA. Eventually, Quimp finds himself smack 
dab in the middle of the Bay of Pigs, Cuba. 
I'm not quite sure why this film misses, it moves well and has high 
energy; perhaps it's the casting. I'd have recruited Paul Giamatti from 
"Duets" for the lead and Shelly Duvall as the pushy wife. Perhaps Jon 
Favreau or someone really dangerous like Harvey Keitel (or even Denis 
Leary) could have nailed the crazed "kill communism" soldier role. 
Leary is fine as an intermediary agent, "I've only started one sentence 
since you've been in town and you've been correcting it ever since!" 
Good lines like that get buried in throwaways like, "Just because you're 
a revolutionary, doesn't mean you have to be revolting." 
Lots of energy and movement, unfortunately little amusement. 
Company Man. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Douglas McGrath, Sigourney Weaver, John Turturroj, Alan 
Cumming, Anthony Lapaglia, Ryan Phillippe, Heather Matarazzo, Denis 
Leary. 
*  Directed by Peter Askin and Douglas McGrath. 
*  Written by Peter Askin and Douglas McGrath. 
*  Produced by John Penotti, Rick Leed, James Scotchdopole at 
Intermedia/wind dancer. 
Grade..........................C+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Max Messier
I have to admit something before I write this review.  I am a die-hard
conspiracy nut who loves the outrageous claims of betrayals and
back-stabbing that the CIA and other governmental agencies have been
dealing out like drunken blackjack dealers at Circus Circus for the past
40 years.  The only problem is that people like Oliver Stone, Chris
Carter, and Christopher Hitchens have basically ripped apart all the
really good conspiracy theories already.
What we really need is a satire of those good conspiracies from the
1960s.  With that in mind, Company Man, a brazen new comedy by Douglas
McGrath and Peter Askin, supplies that swift kick in the confidential
files of the CIA, the FBI, the NSA, and even the Boy Scouts.  It's a
quick-witted, grammatically correct, and often hilarious satire aimed
dead center at the conspiracy nutcases and their shining theories.
Meet Allen Quimp (Douglas McGrath), a high school grammar
teacher/international spy who knows the difference between 'who' and
'whom' and its correct usage in a sentence.  During a congressional
hearing regarding the CIA's involvement in the Bay of Pigs invasion in
the 1960s, Quimp recalls the CIA's attempts in overthrowing Fidel Castro
by himself and a variety of characters working for the CIA.
Quimp's story begins when he lies to his nagging, socialite wife Daisy
(Sigourney Weaver) about a phoney position at the CIA as an
international spy so she'll leave him alone to write his masterpiece,
The Grammar Crisis in the English Speaking World.  Word of Quimp's
secret life quickly spreads via Daisy's gossip, and soon he's famous in
the underground.  Befuddled and bewildered, Quimp accidentally helps a
Russian ballet dancer (Ryan Phillippe) defect to the U.S., whereupon the
CIA really recruits Quimp into their ranks, dumping him into Cuba to
subdue the Communist uprising led by Fidel Castro (Anthony LaPaglia). 
Working with a lunatic bunch of CIA cohorts, Quimp attempts to overthrow
Castro himself and stop the revolution.
I just don't understand how the Bay of Pigs invasion could have been
re-tooled as the basis for a comedy vehicle and be successful.
Company Man is funny.  Damn funny.  The film draws inspiration from the
great Woody Allen comedies of the sixties and seventies - Sleeper,
Bananas, What's Up Tiger Lily -- and watching it, I was reminded of
another wonderfully absurd spy movie, The In-Laws.
McGrath, looking like a cross between Kevin Spacey and Matthew
Broderick, does an amazing job in all departments of co-writing,
co-directing, and acting.  Using actual conspiracy theories of how the
CIA tried to overthrow Castro, McGrath and Peter Askin have written a
deft and clever script.  Combined with an amazing ensemble cast of Woody
Allen, Anthony LaPaglia, Ryan Phillippe, Denis Leary, Sigourney Weaver,
John Turturro, Alan Cumming, and Jeffery Jones, the film burns bright in
its spare 90 minutes.
Company Man is clever, quick, over-the-top, and filled with memorable
comedic moments.  It's only a shame that most American audiences will
probably miss the boat on this one small gem.
Director: Douglas McGrath, Peter Askin
Producer: John Penotti
Writer: Douglas McGrath, Peter Askin
Starring: Douglas McGrath, Woody Allen, Anthony LaPaglia, Ryan
Phillippe, Denis Leary, Sigourney Weaver, John Turturro, Alan Cumming,
Jeffery Jones
http://www.paramountclassics.com/company_body2.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Max Messier
I have to admit something before I write this review.  I am a die-hard
conspiracy nut who loves the outrageous claims of betrayals and
back-stabbing that the CIA and other governmental agencies have been
dealing out like drunken blackjack dealers at Circus Circus for the past
40 years.  The only problem is that people like Oliver Stone, Chris
Carter, and Christopher Hitchens have basically ripped apart all the
really good conspiracy theories already.
What we really need is a satire of those good conspiracies from the
1960s.  With that in mind, Company Man, a brazen new comedy by Douglas
McGrath and Peter Askin, supplies that swift kick in the confidential
files of the CIA, the FBI, the NSA, and even the Boy Scouts.  It's a
quick-witted, grammatically correct, and often hilarious satire aimed
dead center at the conspiracy nutcases and their shining theories.
Meet Allen Quimp (Douglas McGrath), a high school grammar
teacher/international spy who knows the difference between 'who' and
'whom' and its correct usage in a sentence.  During a congressional
hearing regarding the CIA's involvement in the Bay of Pigs invasion in
the 1960s, Quimp recalls the CIA's attempts in overthrowing Fidel Castro
by himself and a variety of characters working for the CIA.
Quimp's story begins when he lies to his nagging, socialite wife Daisy
(Sigourney Weaver) about a phoney position at the CIA as an
international spy so she'll leave him alone to write his masterpiece,
The Grammar Crisis in the English Speaking World.  Word of Quimp's
secret life quickly spreads via Daisy's gossip, and soon he's famous in
the underground.  Befuddled and bewildered, Quimp accidentally helps a
Russian ballet dancer (Ryan Phillippe) defect to the U.S., whereupon the
CIA really recruits Quimp into their ranks, dumping him into Cuba to
subdue the Communist uprising led by Fidel Castro (Anthony LaPaglia). 
Working with a lunatic bunch of CIA cohorts, Quimp attempts to overthrow
Castro himself and stop the revolution.
I just don't understand how the Bay of Pigs invasion could have been
re-tooled as the basis for a comedy vehicle and be successful.
Company Man is funny.  Damn funny.  The film draws inspiration from the
great Woody Allen comedies of the sixties and seventies - Sleeper,
Bananas, What's Up Tiger Lily -- and watching it, I was reminded of
another wonderfully absurd spy movie, The In-Laws.
McGrath, looking like a cross between Kevin Spacey and Matthew
Broderick, does an amazing job in all departments of co-writing,
co-directing, and acting.  Using actual conspiracy theories of how the
CIA tried to overthrow Castro, McGrath and Peter Askin have written a
deft and clever script.  Combined with an amazing ensemble cast of Woody
Allen, Anthony LaPaglia, Ryan Phillippe, Denis Leary, Sigourney Weaver,
John Turturro, Alan Cumming, and Jeffery Jones, the film burns bright in
its spare 90 minutes.
Company Man is clever, quick, over-the-top, and filled with memorable
comedic moments.  It's only a shame that most American audiences will
probably miss the boat on this one small gem.
Director: Douglas McGrath, Peter Askin
Producer: John Penotti
Writer: Douglas McGrath, Peter Askin
Starring: Douglas McGrath, Woody Allen, Anthony LaPaglia, Ryan
Phillippe, Denis Leary, Sigourney Weaver, John Turturro, Alan Cumming,
Jeffery Jones
http://www.paramountclassics.com/company_body2.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
To unsubscribe from this group, send an email to:
critic-unsubscribe@yahoogroups.com
Your use of Yahoo! Groups is subject to http://docs.yahoo.com/info/terms/ 

Author
Steve Rhodes
Psst.  If you can keep it a secret, I can now reveal some of what really 
happened just before the infamous Bay of Pigs.  I found out the inside 
story at COMPANY MAN, an over-the-top comedy that is so intentionally 
"bad," it's hilarious.  Think of it as the movie that BATTLEFIELD EARTH 
should have been.  Or, perhaps more aptly, think of it as a history 
lesson in the deliciously wacky AIRPLANE! style.  
Whatever it is, the movie, jointly written and directed by Douglas 
McGrath (EMMA) and Peter Askin, will have you laughing loudly and often.  
More sophisticated viewers will undoubtedly engage in a bit of 
revisionist history afterwards as some critics did at our screening, 
claiming that it was actually a terrible movie and that their laughs 
were merely those of derision.  If a comedy rates high on my 
laugh-o-meter, that's enough for me.  I don't care what devious means it 
employees to produce the guffaws.
As the story opens in 1962, the worlds most pedantic grammarian, Allen 
Quimp (McGrath), is testifying behind closed doors to a select 
congressional committee led by an incredulous senator (Jeffrey Jones 
from FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF).  Congress wants to know how an English 
and Driver's Ed teacher was sent to Cuba as an undercover agent for the 
CIA.  (Remember, you're sworn to secrecy.)
Although Allen is the author of the 854-page book modestly titled, "The 
Grammar Crisis in the English Speaking World," he needs something else 
to impress his relatives, which include a Nobel Prize winner and an 
astronaut, so he decides to be a "company man" at the CIA.  Since he 
"knows a little Russian" -- not the language but a small Russian man -- 
he figures that he is the right guy for the CIA.  The Russian turns out 
to be none other than world-renowned Russian ballerina Rudolph Petrov 
(Ryan Phillippe), who tells Allen, "I wish to defecate -- I mean 
defect."
Allen ends up being inducted into the CIA and shipped off to an obscure, 
third world island, Cuba, where his superiors figure that there is no 
chance that he could get into any trouble.  Once there, his obsession 
with perfect syntax and semantics drives fellow agent Fry (Denis Leary) 
nuts.  "There's no use in winning the war against Communism if we lose 
the war against the double negative," Allen admonishes Fry.  About to go 
stark raving mad, Fry tells him, "I've only said one sentence since you 
arrived, and you've been correcting it ever since."
Indicative of the wild level of the comedy is the casting of Woody Allen 
as the CIA station chief.  The producers managed to find a cryogenically 
frozen Woody from his wonderfully crazy, early comedies like BANANAS and 
defrost him.  No signs of the angst-filled later Woody are present.  
Also along for the ride is Sigourney Weaver, showing off the comedic 
talent that she displayed as the computer operator in GALAXY QUEST.  
This time she plays Daisy Quimp, the agent's wife, who is planning on 
getting rich by writing a book about their time in the CIA.  When Fidel 
Castro (Anthony LaPaglia) starts his revolution against General Batista 
(Alan Cumming), she wants her husband to overthrow the revolution in 
"the most readable way possible."  The superlative cast for COMPANY MAN 
never seems to stop.  I half expected Tom Cruise to pop by the set for a 
cameo.  Everybody else seems to have dropped by.
The press kit details some of the actual failed attempts by the CIA 
against Castro.  The writers use variations on them in the script.  My 
personal favorite involves a scheme in the movie to spike Castro's 
shampoo in order to "defoliate his face."  Nothing like a defoliated 
face to demoralize a revolutionary.
COMPANY MAN runs a fast 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for brief sexual humor 
and drug content, but it is so mild that it's basically PG.  With the 
exception of one ribald scene during the ending credits, the film would 
be acceptable for almost all kids, but kids probably need to be 11 or 12 
to be able to appreciate the film's humor.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
