Title
Review for Killer: A Journal of Murder (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Killer: A Journal of Murder" is a laborious, clear-studied case in excess: it
is relentlessly overdone with bad acting, bad direction, and laughably
pretentious dialogue to boot. All I could keep asking myself was: why did
Oliver Stone serve as one of the executive producers of this junk? 
The "killer" of the title is Leavenworth convict Carl Panzram (James Woods), a
real-life murderer who killed every person or thing that crossed his path
without hesitation. Carl is a thoroughly repellent, remorseless, amoral human
being with no redeeming values or virtues whatsoever, except that he's a
brilliant writer and an intellectual. Oh, really? Apparently, a Jewish prison
guard (Robert Sean Leonard) takes an interest in this killer, and brings him
writing supplies and a notepad so that Carl can write his life, er death,
stories. Harold Gould plays the prison guard as an old man as he narrates the
story of Carl, who in turn tells us his side of the story, the basis for the
"journal," in amateurish flashbacks complete with badly edited newsreel
footage. 
Director Tim Metcalfe has no idea how to steer such unpleasant material so he
takes the Peckinpah approach: he throws everything up in the air without
sorting any of the details or characters (Metcalfe dedicates the film to Sam
Peckinpah). For instance, why would a Jewish prison guard be interested in a
character like Carl? What about the other inmates? And why is Carl depicted as
devoid of human feeling only to turn into a compassionate, saintly figure by
the end of the film? And why is Lili Taylor's cameo so much more effective than
anything else in the movie? 
"Killer" is ambiguous, dull, and uninteresting; the narrative structure is so
sloppily fragmented that it will give you a migraine. The actors give forced,
listless performances, especially the unconvincing Robert Sean Leonard ("Dead
Poets Society"). For a look at Woods's more subtle, less maniacal roles, check
out "True Believer," "Cop" and "The Boost." Anything's better than this tripe.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, concerns, or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Writer and first time director Timothy Metcalfe takes one of the
original books on serial killers by Thomas E. Gaddis and James O. Long
and turns it into a dreary tale of the friendship of a vicious murderer
and a big hearted guard.  If you can focus on the story itself and
ignore the plodding pacing, at its heart KILLER: A JOURNAL OF MURDER is
a fascinating tale.
     In a true story set in the Leavenworth federal penitentiary in
1929, the great and explosive actor James Woods plays Carl Panzram.  In
the 1920s Carl was arguably the era's most vicious killer.  He
slaughtered twenty-one men, women, and children and spent his entire
life in and out of prison.  Since some of the places where he killed
people did not have the death penalty he managed to escape so he could
kill again.  Not until he killed a federal prison guard did he get the
hangman's noose.
     In a film where Oliver Stone is the executive producer, you may
not be surprised to find that the victims in this movie get short
shrift.  The inhumane treatment that Carl gets is featured instead.
The focus is on Carl and the young Jewish guard Henry Lesser played by
Robert Sean Leonard.  Henry's father taunts him with, "Whoever heard of
a Jewish prison guard?"
     As soon as Carl enters Leavenworth, he and his new fellow inmates
are lectured by the warden with, "I didn't send for you.  I don't like
you and I don't want any more of you." The guards, except the new guard
Henry, are out to get Carl from the beginning.
     Henry has an unfailing belief in the inner goodness of everyone,
even Carl.  He even goes into Carl's cell and puts down his nightstick
which irritates Carl since he thinks that it is such reckless behavior
in front of someone with his proclivity to senseless violence.
     Carl is not permitted to have a pencil and paper, but Henry
smuggles them in and out every night so that Carl can write his
autobiography.  The film tells in flashback the story of Carl's past
life intertwined with his current predicament.
     When the story moves back to Leavenworth, it bogs down in Henry's
little pious pronouncements about how society is to blame for the men
in the prison and how reform is possible.  Carl will have none of this,
and he asks Henry if he is a red, to which Henry nods yes but keep it
quiet.  Carl believes in the inner meanness of some man regardless of
any reform.  The flashbacks have him more a victim that a criminal, but
do show some of the damage he has done.
     Perhaps the best sequence in the show is when Carl is at a prison
earlier in his career when a reform minded warden comes in to whom the
inmates give the nickname of Spud.  Spud is full of lofty experiments.
He lets Carl out of the prison during the day solely because he is
reputed to be the worse prisoner there.  You can take a guess as to the
success of that little experiment.
     The acting by Woods is quite good, but far from his best.  Leonard
seems out of his depth and gives a lackluster and never convincing
performance.  The other characters are all caricatures.  Notice, for
example, how all of the wardens are beefy guys who smoke big cigars,
and the guards all sinewy.  Only Henry looks like a wimp.
     The main problem with the show is the surprisingly slow pace set
by the director.  How he takes such naturally controversial material
and a high spirited actor like Woods and manages to craft such a low
energy show is a conundrum.  The only answer I have is that he views
the book on which it is based so reverentially that he wants his
audience to have the time to fully ponder the subtleties in its every
meanings.
     My favorite part of the show is the CATCH 22 style paradox about
executing serial killers.  If they demand to be killed by the state,
they risk the chance of being declared ipso facto insane, and,
therefore, unfit to have their wish carried out.  As Carl puts it, "I
don't want to be alive.  I want out of these clothes.  I want out of
this body.  I want out of this world."  Later he goes on to say, "You
created me.  Now, you kill me."
     KILLER: A JOURNAL OF MURDER runs 1:31, but trust me, it feels like
a three hour movie.  It is rated R for brutal violence including one
scene of a guy's skull being crushed where most of the audience had to
look away.  There is also bad language and a rape scene.  This show
would be okay only for quite mature teenagers.  Although the story is
interesting and Woods gives a compelling performance, watching it all
is such an arduous task that I can not bring myself to recommend it.
For Woods' work in it, I do give it **.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 13, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Vince Waldron
This worthy effort from star James Woods slipped in and out of theaters so
quickly that many of you will probably assume it's a straight to video
release when it finally pops up on Blockbuster's new release shelf, which
should be any day now.  But I suspect the film's low profile has more to
do with the unfortunate timing of its release than anything else; as the
third death row drama to hit the nation's screens in year when we'd
already suffered through Sean Penn and Sharon Stone's long walk down the
last mile, it's no surprise that this somewhat more modest movie would
come and go without hope of reprieve.  Which is too bad, since the movie's
premature demise deprived filmgoers of a catching a great unbridled turn
by James Woods on the big screen.  A nicely-realized period piece set in
the years leading up to the depression, "Killer" purports to tell the
story of America's first bona fide serial killer, related through the eyes
of an unusually principled prison guard who befriends the outcast con
throughout the years of his death row incarceration.  And though "Killer"
bears perhaps too many similarities in theme and plot to the year's two
previous death row dramas--Tim Robbins' "Dead Man Walking" and the one
that starred Sharon Stone, the name of which eludes me right this
instant--it has by far the most driving narrative of the three, as well as
a central relationship that struck me as a far more plausible dynamic than
that explored in either of its more high-profile precursors.   But see
this one for the performance of James Woods, an actor who consistently
makes such interesting choices that he could well develop into one of
America's most accomplished actors as he matures, assuming he doesn't
accidentally become some kind of Hollywood institution along the way.
