Title
Review for Mallrats (1995)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Kevin Smith follows up the insane success that he had with his first
film CLERKS (8.5/10), which incidentally he had personally financed for
about $27,000, with a $6Million Disney financed
pop-cultured-teenage-boys-wet-dream movie starring the 90210-famed
Shannon Doherty and skateboard sensation Jason Lee. This movie features
everything from video games, comic books, movie references and
GenX-based thoughts and dialogue, to early roles by big Ben Affleck and
Claire "I'm working with Brad Pitt now" Forlani. All that, and clean
boob shots of both CHASING AMY (7.5/10) star Joey Lauren Adams and
Terri from TV "Three's Company". Wow, what a man!
PLOT:
Best friends Brodie and T.S. both get dumped by their girlfriends on
the same day, and attempt to rejuvenate their lives by spending another
empty day in the nearby mall. The mall gives them plenty of time to run
into friends, trouble and get arrested, as their plans to win back
their girlfriends begin to crystallize. 
CRITIQUE:
Excellent written dialogue, plotless plot, and sporadically weak acting
qualify this film as a mediocre overly-juvenile teenage addition to the
umpteen better films made in its very homage. I will be absolutely
honest with you, and tell you that I hate to not love this movie
because I am actually a huge personal Kevin Smith fan, but I cannot
pretend that I enjoyed this flick much more than I really did. I will
admit that as per Kevin's usual style, his dialogue was impeccably
written, but spoken at too fast a pace by many of its actors, with too
many inside jokes for anyone to grasp within that time. Add that to the
fact that the Jay and Silent Bob roles seemed written just for the sake
of physical gags, and I can't say that this follow-up to the film that
inspired me to take my personal screenwriting seriously (CLERKS) is
worthy of much more than a late Sunday afternoon rent session. Although
the scene with the boys and the Easter Bunny is to die for!
Having said that, I did love the acting job by Jason Lee, who seemed to
relish his role of Brodie with great anger and furious appreciation.
You could tell that he really loved his delivering his lines, like one
of my favorite exchanges between him and his girlfriend Shannon
Doherty:
Doherty: "I've never met a person who lives in as much fear of his
mother as you do."
Lee: "You want I should tell my mother what we do in here at night?"
Doherty: "What...that you play video games and I fall asleep
unfulfilled?"
Classic Smith. Having said that, I thought the other main character in
the film as portrayed by Jeremy London was boring and played rather
unsuccessfully by said London. Forlani was also poor in her role as the
"always looking nervous" girlfriend, while Affleck pulled off his dance
as the macho A-hole magnificently. Now, despite the film having plenty
of funny lines, it did also contain many duds, while others seemed
scripted or just too literate to be uttered by the dudes in this film.
Having said all that, I did enjoy most of the lines, and the boatload
of movie homages (Off the top of my head, there were tender pokes at
JAWS, BATMAN, GODFATHER, STAR WARS, APOCALYPSE NOW, and many
others....) but was eventually bored by the ultimately anti-climactic
dating game show ending, and the lack of consistency in the movie. Fans
of Kevin Smith should check it out for fun, but others should watch it
only if they enjoy well-written dialogue, comic books and movie
references galore! Otherwise, get out there and rent one of the
funniest and best-written films of all time...CLERKS!!!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Kevin Smith once personally helped me get going with one of my scripts
in Hollywood. On top of being a cinematic genius, the man is also a
generous human being. What else could you ask for?
Kevin Smith had auditioned over 600 hopefuls for the role of Brandi,
before he saw Claire Forlani. He was immediately taken with her spot-on
impersonation of a callow American youth, and promptly offered to hire
her. Only after they'd sealed the deal did he learn that the actress
whose mannerisms and delivery had so impressed him was British.
This film was shot on location in the Eden Prairie Center in Minnesota.
Producer Scott Mosier played a character named Roddy in this film.
Ethan Suplee, the fat kid who can never seem to see the images within
those 3D pictures, also starred as the fat skinhead in 1998's fine
motion picture AMERICAN HISTORY X (8/10).
The two main characters are named Brodie and Quint, an obvious
reference to 1975's JAWS (7.5/10).
The background music when T.S. and Hamilton are waiting for the
elevator is the same as in the elevator in THE BLUES BROTHERS.
T.S. Quint's initials were taken from T.S. Garp, the character Robin
Williams played in THE WORLD ACCORDING TO GARP (6/10). 
It was soon after this film that Kevin Smith and Joey Lauren Adams
started going out. Their relationship ended soon after the release of
CHASING AMY (7.5/10), in which she starred.
Kevin Smith thanks a lot of people at the end of this movie, but here
are some of my favorites:
"God- for another opportunity to tell my stupid stories."
"Jim- (producer James Jacks) for treating us like the Coens as opposed
to the twenty-something know-nothings we really are."
"Bob- (Miramax co-chairman Bob Weinstein) for laughing during the
pitch."
And lastly..."John Landis and John Hughes- for giving me something to
do throughout my youth on Friday nights."

Author
Will FitzHugh
Some will invoke the dreaded 'Sophomore Slump' shorthand review they
learned in Movie Criticism 103 and there's some truth to it, I
suppose.  Kevin Smith follows up his mesmerizing, no-budget debut,
'Clerks', with this coming-of-age drama about two boneheads, Brodie and
T. S., who get dumped by their girlfriends and go to the mall to put
the pieces of their shattered lives back together.
Most disappointing is the fact that with a bigger budget Smith could
not find better acting talent.  The aforementioned boneheads are played
by Jason Lee, who takes a page from the Brian O'Halloran (reprising his
archetypal Jay role from 'Clerks' in a cameo) school of acting and
yells all his lines, and Jeremy London, who reminds me of a younger,
duller (now that's dull) Brendan Fraser.  Shannen Doherty is a welcome
breath of professionalism as Brodie's ex-girlfriend and Michael 'Serial
Killer' Rooker slips a bit from previous roles but still impresses as
the other ex-girlfriends' manipulative father.
Still, this is the second-best movie I've seen that takes place almost
entirely in a mall (first would be 'Dawn of the Dead').  See, Smith is
expanding on his vision of the two-store strip from 'Clerks' and
creating a whole world to play with.  The protagonists' inane
discussions of what does and does not constitute a food court skewer
the absurdity of our modern pop culture.  There's lots of comic book
references, a cameo by Stan Lee and some topless fortune telling.
Silent Bob and Jay fill the Shakespearian fool roles and provide some
hijinks as they try to wreak havoc with mall security.
Kevin Smith seems to have had a bit of trouble in the transition from
no-budget to low-budget, but no matter.  Slick is not always better and
I for one will take some flaws with my entertainment.  The longer he
can stay away from Hollywood (and if he keeps this up, it might be
while), the longer he can produce these warped, slice-of-New-Jersey
visions of a broken America.

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1995, R, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Jason Lee (Brodie), Jeremy London (T.S.), Shannen Doherty (Rene),
Claire Forlani (Brandi), Michael Rooker (Mr. Spenning), produced by James
Jacks, Sean Daniel, Scott Mosier, written and directed by Kevin Smith.
There have been a lot of movies about GenXers that try to be realistic by
placing them in their "natural surroundings." But the movie execs forget that
GenXers love to hang out at the malls (the bigger the better), and this is an
entire movie exploiting that. Newcomer Kevin Smith has once again captured
the spirit of youth by making a funny and wholly original movie that is
virtually without plot, yet is very entertaining and hilarious.
First there is Brodie (Lee), a typical apathetic fanboy who also has a very
nice girlfriend, Rene (Doherty), who he likes, but doesn't know what to do
with. His problem is he treats her like one of the guys and this is why she
dumps him. Then there is T.S. (London), who is also dumped by his girlfriend,
Brandi (Forlani), after the two get into a fight over her appearance on her
father's dating game show at the mall.
And so the two buds, both dumped on the same day, try to find pleasure at
that little Heaven on Earth - The Mall. 
The mall is packed with interesting characters, among them are: the preppy
bully who has a grudge against Brodie because he hates "mallrats;" the idiot
who stares at the 3-D poster all day trying desperately to see the image; and
then there is Jay and Silent Bob (Jason Mewes, Kevin Smith). These two
troublemakers have even less to do than anyone, so why not not do nothing at
the mall? 
Smith knows how to work the element of friends who don't seem like they
would be friends, which is must have been difficult to script, and perhaps
even more difficult to act out. Brodie is a comic junkie who doesn't
understand the preppiness of T.S. Why the two are friends is a mystery, but
they do have a great sense of comradery between them. They talk about their
guy stuff like sexual conquests and whether or not Lois Lane could carry
Superman's baby, which isn't the kind of dialogue usually recited in such
films, and it's very funny.
Eventually T.S. confronts Brandi's father, Mr. Spenning (Rooker), about how
he is just trying to keep him away from Brandi, and Spenning acknowledges it
with great pride. Then the film becomes a parody of zany commercial comedies.
There are chases scenes and topless fortune tellers. And of course a
sit-com-esque turn of events that might be a bit cheesy, but is still funny.
The ending a huge, overly climatic scene, and everything that had been a
problem before is resolved. It's predictable, but it's a satire - it doesn't
try to be something to take seriously.
A lot of action happens in "Mallrats," but in the end everything is back to
normal. It's just been another Saturday at the mall, only a bit more wild.
(3/31/96) (2/2/97) (5/20/97) [see also: "Chasing Amy," "Clerks"]

Author
Jerry Saravia
The sophomore slump for most first-time independent directors continues at a
steady rate. There was Steven Soderbergh's fabulous debut "Sex, Lies and
Videotape," which he followed up with the somber, deadening "Kafka." Robert
Rodriguez showed himself off to gross injustice with "Desperado," a terrible
sequel to his acclaimed "El Mariachi." If you give the first-time director more
money for his next effort, failure seems to seep in. Kevin Smith made an
astonishing splash in 1994 with his hilarious comedy "Clerks" - a film made on a
shoestring that has more laughs, insight and sharp one-liners than most
Hollywood comedies about Generation X-ers. "Mallrats," however, is an utterly
obnoxious, stupid and unworthy picture coming from someone who displayed such
promising potential. 
The film stars Jason Lee as Brodie, a loser with a grand collection of comic
books who would rather play Sega games than fondle his impatient girlfriend
(Shannen Doherty). She thankfully dumps him, thus Brodie takes out his
aggression by going to the mall with his best friend (Jeremy London), who also
got dumped on by his girlfriend (Claire Forlani). A big televised dating game
contest is taking place at the mall, and there are also some delicious cookies
to eat there as well. 
"Mallrats" begins as a comedy-of-manners between twenty-year-olds and ends up as
an insipid movie about losers with no direction or ambition in life. Yes, so was
"Clerks" but that had some fundamental truths and pointed humor. All you will
find in "Mallrats" are obscenities galore with not a shred of wit or comic
potential for any of the actors to play off of. There are two very good jokes -
one about the holographic paintings where the image is supposed to gradually
appear if you look long enough, and the other is about an Easter Bunny who is
mistakenly beaten up. Jokes about the "Star Wars" trilogy are tenuous and dated
at best. 
Kevin Smith's cumbersome, lazily written screenplay gives nothing for the
audience to chew on, and it doesn't help that there is a surprisingly lame cast
of actors. Firstly, Jason Lee (who has improved in later years) is so annoying
to watch on screen that I was waiting for him to drop dead. The wasted Shannen
Doherty is given nothing to do except smile, yell, and have sex with Jason Lee
in an elevator - Doherty was terrifically funny in "Heathers" if anyone cares
about her comic potential. A bald Michael Rooker is wholly miscast as the
producer of the dating game contest who vomits continuously through the last
third of the picture. This is supposed to be funny? The best bits are supplied
by "Clerks" returnees, Jay and Silent Bob (Jason Mewes and Kevin Smith), but
even they grow tiresome. A cameo by Marvel Comics creator Stan Lee shows
desperation rather than creativity. 
Kevin Smith is capable of making a funny comedy and he proved he was a talent to
watch for in his debut "Clerks." "Clerks" was a sharp, on-target look at wasted
youth yet it possessed a degree of intelligence. In "Mallrats," Smith unkindly
shows contempt for these idiots...and the audience. Sometimes, it is better to
laugh with the characters than to laugh at them.   
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Robert Workman
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
Is there life after Clerks?  Kevin Smith answers that question with this
comedy regarding the misadventures of two mallrats (Jeremy London and
Jason Lee) trying to get back the girls who broke up with them (Claire
Forlani and Shannen Doherty).  Along the way, they encounter plenty of
good and bad characters, like Jay and Silent Bob (Jason Mewes and Smith
himself) and a crusty mall cop named LaFours.  Oh, and Stan Lee's in
here somewhere, too.
A lot of people seem to look at this movie and think it's a wasted
effort when reflected upon against the likes of Clerks, but, hey,
considering it's really Smith's second studio effort, it's a good show.
There's plenty of snappy conversation about, not to mention interesting
characters and situations.  Where else are you going to see Ben Affleck
act as a snotnose tough working at a FASHION STORE?
True, it's not as good as Clerks, but I think Smith was trying for
something different but same with this effort and hit the bullseye.
London and Doherty only deliver average performances, but Lee is a riot
throughout, Forlani is sexy as always, and, of course, Mewes and Smith
score as Jay and Silent Bob.  "Fly, fatass, fly!"  If you've seen Clerks
then you'll fully want to soak in the Mallrats, and if you haven't,
well, something's very wrong with you...

Author
Ben Hoffman
     With a name like MALLRATS what kind of a dumb movie would you
expect?  That's what I thought, too, until I noted it was written and
directed by Kevin Smith who did the delightfully offbeat CLERKS, and
that while CLERKS was made on that proverbial shoestring, this one had
some money to back it.  It was worth every cent.
     Like the wacky CLERKS, MALLRATS is way out.  It is also full of
surprises that are as raunchy, to use a mild term, as anything you have
ever seen.  Somehow, none of it can be characterized as "porno."    As
an example, one of the young men puts his own feces on his hand, talks
his girlfriend's father (Michael Rooker) into eating it by telling him
its his favorite chocolate-covered cookie, and then shaking hands with
him so that the remainder will stink for days on his hand.   While one
weird occurrence follows another at a rapid pace, the feces one is the
most outrageous (but among the most hilarious). Director Kevin wanted
to go all out and he did.
     The film takes place in a mall where 2 young men who have lost
their girlfriends (little wonder) spend the entire movie trying to win
them back.  On the way they visit a nude psychic (from the waist up)
who, to their surprise, has three nipples.  And on and on as the action
becomes fast and furious but remaining funny.
     Smith reprises his role of Silent Bob (in Clerks).  Others in the
cast are Brandi (Claire Forlani), Ivannah, the psychic (Priscilla
Barnes), a host (Art James) at a game show at the mall, Brian
O'Halloran (who was Dante in CLERKS) as well as Rene (Shannen Doherty)
among others.
     Teenagers will howl with delight but adults, too, should find it
very entertaining and ... different.  Leave the little ones at home.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     The most imaginative part of MALLRATS comes with its opening
credits, which are blatantly sexual comic book pictures--and that's
not too imaginative either.
     The biggest laugh in MALLRATS, from an audience of 11-12-year-olds
assembled in rows 15 and 16, came when the two protagonists-buddies
consult a fortune teller who bares her top and exhibits three nipples.
(Number Three, of course, is a fake, but the boys are taken in).  Even
then, it was only size 4 or 5 laughter on a scale of 1 to 10.
     The view of American youth in MALLRATS tries to be funny, which it
isn't.  It might have been a satire of slackers and mall culture but it
isn't that either.  It's plain dull and just a series of nails in the
American coffin.
     The filmmaker is Kevin Smith, whose feature writer-director debut
was CLERKS, an original, plotless comedy of people in and around a
convenience and a video store.  The absurdist, slice-of-life,
desultorily conversational and pointedly scatological CLERKS was a hit,
though I had my reservations about it.  MALLRATS, done in the same
spirit and with some of the same actors (Smith himself playing Silent
Bob), is a flop.
     It has something of a plot, vague and disjointed.  T.S. (notice
the scatology of the name) (Jeremy London) has been dumped by his
fiancee Brandi (Claire Forlani) for reasons too dull to mention.
Brodie (Jason Lee), has been dumped by his girl Rene (Shannen Doherty)
because, in bed,  he is more interested in video-games than in sex.
(Let's not even talk about love).  The two men (men?) find solace in
doing what any red-blooded idiots will do.  They go to the Mall.
There, a subplot has them trying to sabotage that day's forthcoming
game show, a kind of Dating Game, which is produced by Brandi's father,
a youthful but bald creep.
     The movie's comedy is below sitcom level, the dialogue, action and
characters are of no interest, except perhaps to people under twenty
with a mental age under six.  Since those people neither read film
reviews nor put any credence in adult judgments, MALLRATS might just
have a career, even though it is exceptionally thin and dull in every
way.
     The best that can be said is that, at the mall, Smith places a fat
young man who stares at a sort of pointillist painting which, looked at
with concentration, reveals a sailboat.  But the poor fellow stands
there and stands there and can't see a thing.  Not a bad gag, though
thoroughly milked.
     Another "funny" item is about a fifteen-year old girl who is
presumably so bright that she's a senior.  She is writing a book about
orgasms and researches by sleeping with men right and left and
videotaping the activities.  Her language is raunchy even by  Kevin
Smith standards, standards that use the alphabet from the A-word to
perhaps some Z-word, though the N-word is not heard.
     The fun and games are uncoordinated and slipshod.  The film might
have used updated Marx Brothers strategies instead of applying a
para-CLERKS style which relies on frail crutches instead of tempo,
energy or the occasional witticism.
     There are also other inconsistencies.  In her letter of
resignation, so to speak, Brodie's girl lists his defects.  Brodie
thinks that "callow" is the only nice thing in the letter, yet he will
occasionally use a hi-fallutin' word.  We also think for a long time
that Brodie and Co. are high-schoolers, but are told at the end that
they are college students.
     Somehow, comic-book author and icon Stan Lee shows up, gives sage
advice to Brodie.  It might have been amusing, it is merely
artificial.  And here and there are tentative take-offs, but these do
not take off.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jeremy London, Jason Lee, Shannen Doherty, Claire Forlani,
      Ben Affleck, Joey Lauren Adams, Priscilla Barnes, Michael Rooker,
      Jason Mewes, Kevin Smith, Renee Humphrey, Brian O'Halloran
Director: Kevin Smith
Producers: Sean Daniel, Jim Jacks, and Scott Mosier
Screenplay: Kevin Smith
Cinematography: David Klein
Music: Ira Newborn
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     As promised, Jay and Silent Bob are back.  The quirky duo who hung
around in the background of Kevin Smith's 1994 debut feature, CLERKS,
have returned to the screen for the followup, MALLRATS, the middle
picture of the so-called "New Jersey Trilogy."  (Although ostensibly
taking place in the Garden State, MALLRATS was filmed almost entirely in
Los Angeles and Minnesota.)  In many ways, this new movie is a less
original, not-as-funny, full color redressing of CLERKS.  Despite a
broad range of effective comedy and a decent laugh-per-minute ratio,
MALLRATS is likely to be a moderate disappointment for anyone who
guffawed their way through the previous film.
     The only returning characters are Jay (Jason Mewes) and Silent Bob
(Kevin Smith).  Their role here is a little more prominent than in their
previous outing, and about half of MALLRATS' best humor is centered
around them.  They're involved in quite a bit of Road Runner/Wylie
Coyote slapstick which, while obviously juvenile, is still hilarious.
Their failed attempts to bring down a game show stage are a comic
highlight.
     The main characters are a pair of college-age men, T.S. (Jeremy
London) and Brody (Jason Lee), who are spending a day at the mall to
soothe broken hearts and wounded egos.  T.S. has been dumped by his
intended fiancee, Brandi (Claire Forlani), and Brody's girlfriend, Rene
(Shannen Doherty), has decided that she's had it with his ignoring her
in favor of his Sega game system.  Not surprisingly, both women also
show up at the mall, along with an assortment of other oddballs,
including a fifteen year old girl doing research for a sex book (Renee
Humphrey, who was fabulous in last year's FUN), a fat guy who spends all
day staring at posters with hidden images (Ethan Suplee), and the
legendary comic book creator Stan Lee.
     The script for MALLRATS is rather disjointed and episodic.
Although Smith's knack for insightful comic dialogue is much in
evidence, many of the lines aren't the equal of those in CLERKS for
cleverness or humor.  And, the less funny the dialogue is, the more
stilted and unnatural it seems.  There are several painfully awkward
"dead spots" in MALLRATS where nothing works--not the dialogue, the
acting, or the direction.  Unfortunately, the film opens with one of
these as T.S. and Brandi argue about their breakup.
     Pop references abound with as much regularity as the jokes
(sometimes they are the jokes).  These range from nods to classic movies
(Sundance in BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID), STAR WARS, and '80s
teen farces (such as those directed by John Hughes) to comic book
characters, "The Dating Game", and (inevitably, given Shannen Doherty's
presence) a certain current TV show with a zip code in the title.  Smith
is aware that there is a niche audience for MALLRATS--the under-30
crowd.  As a result, the film plays almost exclusively to this group,
and comes across as a grungy, male version of CLUELESS.
     There is such a thing as the "sophomore jinx" for film makers.
Recently, it has hit the likes of Allison Anders, Robert Rodriguez, and
now Kevin Smith.  Smith freely admits that he toned down the script and
broadened the comedy in a quest for wider appeal, and allows that
MALLRATS is a far less "cerebral" film than CLERKS.  However, he
promises that his next two features (CHASING AMY, which goes into
production in January of 1996, and DOGMA, which is still on the drawing
board) will be grittier and wittier.  Time, of course, will tell, but as
long as Jay and Silent Bob are around, future efforts can't be all that
bad--or, for that matter, all that deep.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Christopher Null
     Well, the long-awaited MALLRATS is here at last, and sadly, the
perfect twentysomething romantic comedy has still yet to be made. 
Writer/director Kevin Smith follows up his hilarious first film, CLERKS,
with this, the second in his so-called New Jersey Trilogy.  It's second
not only in sequence, but a distant also-ran in quality, too.
     MALLRATS tells the story of two mostly-losers, T.S. (Jeremy London)
and Brodie (Jason Lee), who manage to lose and regain their respective
girlfriends, Brandi (Claire Forlani) and Rene (Shannen Doherty), in one
long day at the mall.  Along the way, the pair has a series of big
adventures with cops and security guards, a game show organized by
Brandi's dad (Michael Rooker), comic book creator Stan Lee, and the
returning characters of Jay (Jason Mewes) and Silent Bob (Smith himself). 
Where all this was supposed to go, I'm not too sure.  But I *think* it was
supposed to be about relationships, and I think it was supposed to be
funny.
     For the most part, it's not.  Surprisingly, it's Jason Lee (who moves
into his first acting role from a career as a professional *skateboarder*)
who has all the good lines, and those are few and far between.  Gone is
Smith's witty and smartly lascivious dialogue from CLERKS.  Instead, the
MALLRATS script often sounds more like mindless smut with only a few
bright moments of real farcical entertainment.
     MALLRATS probably wouldn't be so painful if I didn't know what Smith
was capable of doing (and with a lot less funding, to boot).  This film
comes off as little more than random bits of plot and failed attempts at
humor:  Doherty parading about in her first appearance outside the 90210
ZIP code, Smith's strange homage to Stan Lee, Silent Bob's magic coat,
slapstick, sex jokes, and a completely inexplicable orangutan.
     I don't know what Smith was thinking when this project came together,
but let's just hope this is just the proverbial Sophomore slump.  Kev, I
know you can do better than this.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Andrew Hicks
        MALLRATS is the follow-up to Kevin Smith's acclaimed 
unrated extravaganza CLERKS and it left me with two prevailing 
impressions -- this guy's a genius but he's also a sellout. The beauty 
of his debut film was that it didn't adhere to all the conventions of 
popular cinema. MALLRATS, on the other hand, is driven by formulaic 
Hollywood romance rules, even down to the cheesy keyboard music 
featured in the background during serious dialogue. As far as that 
aspect of the plot goes, we've been there, done that plenty of times 
and know exactly what's going to happen ahead of time, but 
MALLRATS at least partially redeems itself by integrating the 
worn twentysomething romance theme with Smith's truly unique 
humor and Tarantinoesque dialogue.
        MALLRATS is centered around that pillar of modern 
American society, the shopping mall, where Generation X'ers with 
nothing better to do go to hang out. That's how you know it's a 
movie, because in real life, mall demographics are at least 75% junior 
high kids sneaking cigarettes and kicking off every sentence with the 
phrase "Oh... my... God!" Here we have slackers like T.S. (Jeremy 
London) and Brody (Jason Lee) wandering around the mall after 
being dumped by their girlfriends, who both conveniently turn up at 
the mall. T.S.' ex, Brandi, was in love with him but was pressured into 
the breakup by her game show host father. Brody's ex, Renee 
(Shannen Doherty), broke up with him because all he ever did 
was read comics and play Sega games.
        The plot revolves around the taping of Brandi's dad's game 
show at the mall (another interesting coincidence) and the sabotage 
thereof by CLERKS holdovers Jay and Silent Bob. Renee, meanwhile, 
is being wooed by a mall manager who finds women on the rebound 
and "screws them in an uncomfortable place." ("The backseat of a 
Volkswagon?") As with any wacky comedy, though, the plot is 
secondary to a series of wacky situations, including an assault on the 
Easter bunny, an appearance by Marvel Comics artist Stan Lee, and a 
topless fortune teller, along with those Tarantino-inspired dialogues 
about everything from how Superman could impregnate Lois Lane to 
Brody's "smelly palm" trick. These sequences are original and funny 
and make the movie worth watching, even if the reliance on a 
conventional formula to tie it all together ultimately brings the 
viewing experience down. MALLRATS is an unusual marriage 
between creativity and cliche.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Jason Overbeck
Clerks was a big hit with the critics and film festivals and Smith was
entered into cult status.  Then Mallrats was released, the second of his
Jersey trilogy, and the critics smashed it with a sledge hammer.  It
managed to generate bad reviews from just about everybody, Smith later
even apologized for it at the 1995 Independent Spirit Awards.  I found
it a larger, yet less succsessful film than Clerks, but funny in its own
way.  
Quentin Tarantino said that he didn't want people to compair Jackie
Brown to Pulp Fiction, it may have helped if Smith had done the same
with Mallrats.  This film has some very funny moments, a fresh cast and
a minimalist setting.  Most of the film takes place in a shopping mall,
where Mallrats T.S. (Jeremy London) and Brodie (Jason Lee) hang out,
and  concieve of ways to get their girlfriends back, with the help of
Jay and Silent Bob, whom have a bigger role here than Clerks.  There are
moments of sparks along the way but the refuses to catch fire, even in
the hilarious climax on an old fasion Dating Game show, where they screw
up T.S. former girlfriend's father and she falls back for him.
This is no doubt the lowpoint of the Jersey Trilogy BUT not a bit as bad
as all the critics said.  Most of the humor here is visual and grossout,
and there are mixed efficent and absurdly dumb scenes of characters set
up for just a single joke.  Overall a mixed feeling from me, and overall
a very slight recomendation if you liked Clerks or Chasing Amy.
