Title
Review for Cape Fear (1991)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  How can you go wrong with a crime
     thriller directed by Martin Scorsese, photographed by Freddie
     Francis, with credits by Saul Bass and a score (virtually) by
     Bernard Herrmann?  You do it by trying too hard to make the
     ultimate thriller and taking things just too far.  Had this
     film been tied up twenty minutes earlier, it would have been
     rated better than a low +2 (-4 to +4).
     There seem to be a lot of different groups who were involved with
making CAPE FEAR.  There was Steven Spielberg's Amblin Entertainment, there
was Cappa Films, and there was Tribeca Productions.  Martin Scorsese
directed.  But somehow at the heart of this film is Steven Spielberg.
Though his name appears no place in the credits, what is good about this
film and what is bad about it has Spielberg's name written all over it.
Spielberg seems intent on going from one genre to another making the
ultimate film of that genre and then overpowering it with excess.  What 1941
was to wartime comedies, what RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK was to action
adventures, what POLTERGEIST was to the ghost story, that is what CAPE FEAR
is to the crime-suspense film.  This was supposed to be a tense suspense
film in the tradition of NIGHT OF THE HUNTER and the original CAPE FEAR.
And it succeeds beautifully.  Robert DeNiro's Max Cady is a brilliant and
implacable stalker.  For maybe eighty or ninety minutes, this is one of the
great suspense films.  Then some place--I'd say it is a trick Cady is able
to pull off with a belt--CAPE FEAR crosses the line from tense but realistic
film into monster movie.  And if a monster movie has tension at all, it is a
different kind of tension.  From that point on, the identification value is
gone and the viewer just watches two opposing forces chew away at each
other.  This is one film where less would have certainly been more.
     Fourteen years ago public defender Sam Bowden (played by Nick Nolte)
intentionally hid evidence that could have freed his illiterate client Max
Cady.  He had known his client was guilty of rape and did not want to see
Cady go free.  Sent to prison for fourteen years, Cady taught himself to
read, then educated himself to understand the law.  He also built his body
into a tower of strength.  And once he learned of his lawyer's betrayal, he
dedicated himself to making Bowden pay for hiding evidence.  In fourteen
years, Cady has made himself a supreme strategist preparing for the war with
Bowden that Cady knew was coming.  Cady's attacks will tear apart Bowden's
family life and will destroy Bowden's career.  While Sam Bowden flounders to
find the best way to defend himself, Cady will make one brilliantly
considered move after another.
     Robert DeNiro's Max Cady is an excellent screen villain.  Behind the
hair slicked back with black grease and the big obnoxious cigar is the agile
mind of a chess master.  He can be vicious like a force of nature or he can
be seductive like a snake.  In the longest scene of the film he turns his
seductive power on fifteen-year-old Danielle Bowden.  This is a particularly
powerful and disturbing scene.  It is the centerpiece of the film and it
shows how Cady manages to turn every human frailty to his advantage.
     Another example of the excesses of this film, incidentally, are Cady's
religious tattoos.  A nice touch from NIGHT OF THE HUNTER (and perhaps from
the original CAPE FEAR--I do not remember) is that Robert Mitchum covers his
psychotic behavior with a veneer of fundamentalist religious piety.  We are
never really sure whether or not he really believes his viciousness is
fulfilling God's will.  However, he takes the piety to the point that he has
tattooed himself with religious messages.  In this film, DeNiro's Cady has
the same religious fervor and has become a veritable illustrated man, with
more than a dozen religious tattoos.
     This is a film that spared little expense to create its effects.  On
top of a good cast--Robert DeNiro, Nick Nolte, Jessica Lange, and Joe Don
Baker--the film throws in cameos of three actors from the original film--
Robert Mitchum, Gregory Peck, and Martin Balsam.
     Technical credits are equally well cast.  Title sequences are done by
Saul Bass.  For those unaware, Bass really pioneered the idea of making the
titles into films that stand on their own and comment on the rest of the
film.  Many of the classic films that had striking credit sequences show his
work.  These include AROUND THE WORLD IN EIGHTY DAYS, VERTIGO, THE BIG
COUNTRY, ANATOMY OF A MURDER, NORTH BY NORTHWEST, and NINE HOURS TO RAMA.
The tension and the bizarre visual effects start in the opening credits,
which are superbly crafted by Bass.
     From there the visuals are carried by Freddie Francis--also one of the
greats in his field, moody photography.  Francis's work includes THE
INNOCENTS, THE FRENCH LIEUTENANT'S WOMAN, THE ELEPHANT MAN, and DUNE.  This
year he did THE MAN IN THE MOON.  To have both Bass and Francis on the same
film seems to indicate someone went out with a very large wallet and a
determination to buy the best.  The one visual out of place is the use of
super-dramatic storm-cloud skies, uncharacteristic of Francis, but almost a
trademark of Spielberg.
     The original CAPE FEAR and many of the best of Alfred Hitchcock's
thrillers had scores by the late Bernard Herrmann.  Herrmann, of course,
could not do this score, so Elmer Bernstein was hired to rework Herrmann's
original themes from the first CAPE FEAR and in general to write in
Herrmann's style.  So one more expensive but tasteful decision was made.
The new CAPE FEAR essentially has a Bernard Herrmann score, full of the
master's dramatic dissonances, even if Herrmann was not around to write it.
     Of all the choices of who would work on the film, the only one that was
really questionable is Martin Scorsese to direct.  And it may have been the
biggest mistake.  Scorsese's forte is realistic crime.  His one foray into
horror fantasy, AFTER HOURS, works mostly because it needed exactly what
Scorsese could give it: a feel of realism.  Here that same feeling of
realism stands him in good stead as long as it can, but when Cady crosses
the line into monster and super-villain, Scorsese has mothing more to
contribute.  The film goes into auto-pilot and Scorsese just films his
scenes.  The film shows Freddie Francis's art but loses any Scorsese feel.
One more reason that the last part of the film was ill-considered.
     CAPE FEAR is a very good thriller that saves almost all of its mistakes
for the last part of the film.  I would give it a low +2 on the -2 to +2
scale.

Author
John Locke
     Coming on the heels of GOODFELLAS, a film destined for the Hall of
Fame, I expected Scorsese's CAPE FEAR to check in at a notch or two
below.  Boy, was I shocked.  CAPE FEAR is the first Scorsese film I've
seen that I would describe as downright bad.  It has some of the
director's cinematic panache and it's minimally competent.  The acting
is fine.  DeNiro, in particular, gives great cretin, but that's no
revelation.  The soundtrack is great, a rework of Bernard Herrmann's
from the original CAPE FEAR.  But here's where the film falls apart:
    * Overall, the plot assaults you with improbabilities at every
      turn.  Very little rings true here.  However, there are some nice
      characterizations--the teenage daughter, for one--that would
      have been at home in a better picture.
    * DeNiro's near indestructible psychopath, Max Cady, is absurd.
      He's more like the Terminator than a man, programmed to destroy
      and impossible to stop.  Scorsese seemed to be copping the James
      Cameron style of false endings and phoenixes.  Cady is beat up
      with pipes and chains, doused with boiling water, lit on fire,
      thrown into a a raging river, and he just keeps coming back for
      more, as if none of it mattered.  This works if you're using
      monsters; with a man it's just stupid.  I couldn't wait for the
      damn thing to end.
    * Nick Nolte plays the Dustin Hoffman character from STRAW DOGS, or
      maybe one of Charles Bronson's revenge freaks.  He's the educated
      man who has to come to grips with his own savage potential in
      order to defend his family.  Utterly unoriginal.  Scorsese tries
      to dignify the pulp by making psychological connections between
      Nolte's lawyer and Cady.  The effort is strained in the context
      of the ridiculous story.
    * This movie loses big by coming out so soon after THE SILENCE OF
      THE LAMBS, a vastly superior thriller.  Both films aim for the
      same kind of psychological intensity.  The difference is this.
      You can retroactively analyze SotL and realize that Lector is
      perhaps an impossible character, but while the movie is running
      he takes over the screen.  He's completely compelling.  But Max
      Cady doesn't deliver enough intensity.  He seems ridiculous and
      impossible while the movie is going on. (One of the tricks in
      CAPE FEAR was very similar to a trick in THE SILENCE OF THE
      LAMBS--when Cady disguises himself as the maid.  Because the trick
      was so effective and memorable in SotL, I saw it coming from a
      mile away in CAPE FEAR.)
Rating: $1.50 on the $0.00 to $6.25 scale (popcorn not included).

Author
Brian L. Johnson
135 min., R, Horror/Suspense, 1991
Director: Martin Scorsese
Cast: Robert DeNiro, Nick Nolte, Jessica Lange, Juliette Lewis,
      Gregory Peck, Robert Mitchum, Martin Balsam, Joe Don Baker,
      Fred Dalton Thompson
     Years ago Nolte was the lawyer for illiterate DeNiro who brutally
raped a sixteen-year-old girl.  DeNiro went to prison on a lesser charge
of battery.  Now DeNiro has gotten out of prison and has moved into the
town where Nolte lives with his wife Lange and their fifteen-year-old
daughter Lewis.  DeNiro starts terrorizing Nolte and his family but in
such a way that the law can't touch him.
     CAPE FEAR, like the film DEAD CALM, is more of a suspense film
than a horror film.  I found CAPE FEAR to be a very good, suspenseful,
film.  Part of the impact of this film is seeing it on a large screen.
For instance in the film there is a storm scene which will not be nearly
as spectacular on a television set.  For this reason I highly suggest if
you are one of the few people who hasn't seen this film that you go to
see it at a theater, if any theaters in your area are still playing it.
On a scale of zero to five, I rate CAPE FEAR a four.  CAPE FEAR is rated
R for graphic violence, explicit language, and adult situations.
     CAPE FEAR was in most of the large theaters near the end of 1991
and it had a long theatrical run before leaving most of the theaters in
early 1992.  Small theaters, like the one I saw it in, are now getting
CAPE FEAR, and it will be coming out on video soon.  
     The photography, using reverse (negative) images in the beginning
and at the very end of the film is well done.  It added an arty aspect
to the film, although in the middle of the film they used the reverse
image in a scene and that didn't fit in as well.  The opening credits
for the film were also well done with the water rippling and the
pictures superimposed.
     For the most part the script for the film was well done.  The one
part that I really didn't like about the script was how indestructable
Robert DeNiro's character was.  I don't think that prison could really
have toughened him up enough to just come walking back after some of the
things that happen to him in the film.  I don't want to mention the
things here so that I don't give away parts of the film for those of you
who haven't seen CAPE FEAR.  Juliette Lewis's character was especially
well written, and well acted.  I found that she did a very convincing
job.  Nick Nolte and Jessica Lange did a very spectacular job of the
sometimes fighting husband and wife.
     CAPE FEAR is based on a 1962 black-and-white drama also called CAPE
FEAR by J.  Lee Thompson.  It starred Gregory Peck, Robert Mitchum, and
Martin Balsam, all of whom have cameos in this film.  I haven't seen
the earlier version of CAPE FEAR so I can't comment on how closely
related they are.  Both versions are based on a novel by John
D. MacDonald [titled THE EXECUTIONERS  -Moderator].

Author
Frank Maloney
     CAPE FEAR is a film directed by Martin Scorsese.  It stars Robert
DeNiro, Nick Nolte, Jessica Lane, and Juliette Lewis.  Rated R for
excessive violence.
     CAPE FEAR is a remake of J. Lee Thompson's 1962 Southern gothic
thriller.  Elmer Bernstein has adapted Bernard Herrmann's original
score, and three of the stars from the original have small roles in this
version: Gregory Peck, Robert Mitchum, and Martin Balsam.  This building
on the past may be one of the reasons why this version is such an
interesting film, not a film without problems, but a wonderful movie for
talking about.
     First, there are the remarkable performances by the principals, as
well as some excellent character acting by the likes of Joe Don Baker.
Most viewers may well dwell on Robert DeNiro's performance, and I'll
have something to say about DeNiro, too.  But the actor who impressed me
beyond any other in this movie was newcomer Juliette Lewis, who plays
the 15-year-old daughter of Nick Nolte's character.  She gave us a
letter-perfect teenage girl, totally convincing, psychologically real.
Her body language, her not-quite-beautiful prettiness, her speech
patterns, these were the stuff of flesh-and-blood teenagers, not
Hollywood stereotypes.  If Lewis can keep up this kind of quality, she
will have a good crack at being a major star in the next few years and
beyond.
     Then there's Jessica Lange, who plays Nolte's wife, Lewis's mother,
a woman on the verge of a nervous breakdown, a chain-smoking commercial
artist, a font of bitter zingers and violent rage.  I haven't seen Lange
in a long time and it was grand to see her turn in a first-rate
performance.
     Nick Nolte, looking fitter and handsomer than I've seen him in years,
reverses my expectations and plays the "good guy", a successful lawyer
who's made some mistakes in the past, playing a little too loosely with
the rules of the law and of marriage. His is a very difficult role; we
have to see that he is a victim, but one who has to some degree only
brought his troubles on himself. We sympathize, but we don't really
approve of or like him. It's only that the bystanders, his victims as
much as DeNiro's, who suffer, too, that let's us extended a sympathy to
him fully. Nolte, to his credit, pretty much pulls it off. He walks a
narrow plank and seldom loses his balance.
     Okay, DeNiro.  DeNiro is America's most distinguished, most
intense, most dedicated scenery-chewer, an actor who has no concept of
moderation or resting on his laurels.  The energy of the man is
awe-inspiring.  And the role of Cady, the ex-con who has come "to help"
his ex-lawyer, gives the fullest possible play to DeNiro's willingness
to overwhelm with excessiveness.  The most powerful, chilling parts of
CAPE FEAR are when Cady is only a threatening eminence, when the story
itself confines DeNiro's larger than life interpretation of a nearly
impossible character.  When script shifts into its ultra-violent second
half, DeNiro's Cady slips slightly into incredibility and loses a certain
Hannibal-Lectorish attractiveness.
     Far and away, the best scene in CAPE FEAR, the one that is sure to
remain when all other memories of the movie fade is the extended meeting
of Lewis and DeNiro in a darkened college theater on whose stage is a
Hansel and Gretel set of the witch's gingerbread house.  The lurking,
the expectations of unspeakable acts, the absurdity of the setting, the
appalling innocence of Lewis, the manipulative genius of DeNiro, and
above all the thumb, all these created a scene of tension and shuddery
apprehension that made it a stand-alone triumph.
     On the other hand, once the mayhem was well and truly underway, I
began to lose something of my involvement, a bad situation in any movie,
but especially a thriller.  Cady shows himself to be not only a genius
of manipulation and strategy, but physically indestructible.  I cannot
believe that any human, no matter how driven by his obsessions and no
matter how physically strong could have pulled off some of the stunts
Cady is supposed to have survived.
     The psychology of CAPE FEAR is fascinating and the real center of
the movie's successes.  And the moral questions that the story raises
are the center of its worthiness of being seen.  Unfortunately the movie
loses interest in these as it succumbs to a blood lust that all too
common in contemporary films.  The psychology, briefly put, involves the
relationships of the principal characters, the sorting out of
responsibility, of blame, of what's of real value.  The morality
concerns how we face up our responsibilities, what we have to do to
atone for our humanness.
     I recommend CAPE FEAR, but suggest you will get more of bang for
your buck by taking in a low-cost matinee.  It will grip you, but it may
leave you more dissatisfied than disquieted.

Author
The Phantom
     The Phantom was pleased to see that the classic "psycho stalks
innocent family" potboiler is alive and well in 1991; CAPE FEAR's 1962
plot still creaks like a porch swing in the wind and its dialogue is
still as wooden as the porch itself, but with his very up-to-date
remake, Martin Scorsese has done for the thriller what Brian DePalma did
for gangster films with his remake of SCARFACE: he's made a somewhat
tongue-in-cheek, fairly scary, and very enjoyable film that gives its
audience exactly what it wants and expects.
     Although Scorsese sticks pretty close to the original film (and
even scatters a handful of references to it throughout his version), the
new CAPE FEAR has been updated enough that it no longer feels like
something you might catch on late-night TV when the only alternatives
are program-length commercials and pitches for 900 "chat" lines.  Though
at times CAPE FEAR's plot gets bogged down under the weight of its own
unlikely machinations, it generally zips along from one predictable
scene to the next, moving quickly to an equally predictable climax and
denouement.  None of this is bad, mind you -- CAPE FEAR is hardly food
for thought, shot through though it is with enough references to
philosophers and famous authors to keep the conversations at three
pretentious art houses rolling long into the night.  It wasn't intended
to make people think thirty years ago, and Scorsese certainly hasn't
done anything to change that.  What it *was* intended to do was give
people a frightening situation and sympathetic characters with which to
identify, and a satisfying conclusion a little under two hours later so
that they could all go home a little bit happier than they arrived,
ready to face their own personal demons and dilemmas with renewed
confidence and vigor.
     Doing so is even easier now that Robert DeNiro plays the psycho,
doing things that likely never even crossed Robert Mitchum's mind in the
original.  He at times comes close to the lunatic performance he turned
in for Scorsese's 1976 classic TAXI DRIVER, though ultimately Max Cady
is a much less psychotic and a much more human character than was Travis
Bickle.  Max is a menace from first scene to last, and the fact that
Scorsese has made the family he stalks a little less perfect than
Gregory Peck's family was in the original does nothing to lessen the
empathy we feel for them.  In fact, it does just the opposite; in the
complex world of the 90s, it would be difficult for audiences to believe
that such a perfectly innocent family could possibly exist, and who
knows -- they might even start rooting for Max.
     Rooting for Max, though, is still a problem, as DeNiro is easily
the best thing in the film.  Unlike THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, wherein
audiences were awed by Hannibal Lector but ultimately rooted for Clarice
Starling, CAPE FEAR presents us with one very interesting villain and
one very uninteresting family.  Try as he might to spice up Sam Bowden's
family, Scorsese can't take what is essentially an unbalanced film and
turn it into something it was never intended to be.  By making Cady such
an impressive character (and by allowing DeNiro to start gnawing at the
scenery more than a few times), Scorsese gives us no other point of
focus, and when the film returns to Nick Nolte and his family, we feel
like counting the minutes until Cady's next appearance.  The film truly
revolves around him, rather than around Sam Bowden and his besieged
family, and that's just one of CAPE FEAR's fundamental problems.
     Another is that Scorsese piles on the directorial flourishes that
he's always used in moderation to enhance his other films.  In
GOODFELLAS and RAGING BULL, the camera work and editing helped pull the
audience into the film, where they discovered that there was more to
each of these films than just what was apparent from a casual viewing.
But in CAPE FEAR, the nervous camera work, flashy editing, and excessive
and obvious tricks of cinematography are all for naught -- once we get
past them we discover that this film has no deeper meaning, no reason to
exist beyond what is apparent to us on the surface.  By the third time
he shows us the Spielberg-esque roiling skies over the troubled town,
it's difficult to think of anything other than POLTERGEIST and half a
dozen bad horror films.  Scorsese also seems obsessed by the meaningless
and distracting trick of turning color into black-and-white negatives;
once would have been visually interesting, though rather portentous, but
as with every other cinematic effect in the film, Scorsese overuses it.
All those negatives did serve to remind the Phantom that he was overdue
for his annual dental checkup, but beyond that it is painfully obvious
that the effects are in the film simply to be in the film.  By the end
of CAPE FEAR, the Phantom had new respect for the work of the Coen
brothers, whose flashy but similarly empty BLOOD SIMPLE is a far less
overwrought and a far more successful film.
     Having said all this, however, the Phantom should hasten to add
that CAPE FEAR was still a lot of fun to watch, especially if one
doesn't go into it expecting Scorsese's typically excellent work.  This
film doesn't hold a candle to GOODFELLAS, and truth be told it's really
one of his lesser efforts.  Still, there's a lot to be said for sitting
back, relaxing, and watching DeNiro become one family's worst nightmare.
And then there's his accent, which in the Phantom's opinion certainly
gives Al Pacino's hilariously bad Cuban accent in SCARFACE a run for its
money as the least plausible accent in modern film history (this is true
only if we discount Kevin Costner's performance in ROBIN HOOD: PRINCE OF
THIEVES; Costner is without a doubt the Tony Curtis of our time, and
just as Curtis brought his unique Brooklyn accent to every one of his
roles, so too does Costner bring a little bit of California with him
into Sherwood forest where he is the least well-spoken in his band of
merry men).
     That accent -- and whatever it is that DeNiro constantly does with
his mouth -- brought a smile to the Phantom's own mouth more than a few
times; it also served to keep the Phantom from trying to read too much
into the somewhat loopy goings-on in the film.  As long as CAPE FEAR is
taken as pure, predictable entertainment, it works fairly well.  That
was the spirit in which the Phantom saw CAPE FEAR, and taken thusly, the
film is good for a solid two hours of fun.  Scorsese's overwrought (but
well executed) special effects will likely lose a lot on the small
screen, and Elmer Bernstein's adaptation of the wonderful score for the
original CAPE FEAR will similarly suffer when squeezed through the
2-inch speaker in your Sony, so the Phantom recommends seeing CAPE FEAR
while it's still in theaters.
     And now, because the Phantom's review is a little short this time,
here's an example of what "professional" reviewers can sometimes get
away with.  The Phantom's occasionally excessive alliteration typically
can't hold a candle to the delightful examples that Vincent Canby slips
into his film reviews for the New York Times every so often.  Here's
Vincent Canby on CAPE FEAR:
    [...]  Though their "Cape Fear" is no more realistic or socially
    significant than Mr. Thompson's, it moves with the same merciless
    melodramatic momentum as Mr. Scorsese's "Goodfellas."  The film is
    sleight of hand of high order and, at carefully calculated moments,
a
    blunt shocker.
    Unlike the original, this "Cape Fear" doesn't pretend to be a
picture
    of paradise in peril.  It is apparent from the beginning that all is
    not well [...]
     For all his faults, the Phantom has always been a phan of Canby's;
now if only someone would volunteer to pay the Phantom for his own
efforts he'd be able to quit his day job and attend more matinees.  Nice
work if you can get it...

Author
shannon houston
     I finally saw it, CAPE FEAR, what I believe to be one of the best
thrillers for a long time.  Granted my expectations were high, but the
movie *was* everything it was made out to be.  I do not claim to be an
expert movie critic, but from the eyes of an ordinary person, it seemed
pretty damn good!  The key to enjoy the movie is to go see it with
intentions to enjoy it, not critique it.  Keeping this in mind, the
movie is a "four-star," satisfaction guaranteed!
     The movie's cast all gave remarkable performances.  It stars Robert
DeNiro, Nick Nolte, Jessica Lange, and Juliette Lewis.  Once again
DeNiro gave his usual outstanding performance.  He portrays his
character flawlessly, and believably.  Nick Nolte and Jessica Lange
have been in the background for a while, but they appear to be back,
better than ever!  Newcomer Juliete Lewis seemed very real in her role
and shows great promise to being a major star in the future.  The whole
cast was great!
     I will not venture into describing the plot.  Do keep in mind that
the plot was unusual, and be in store for a psychological roller
coaster.  The movie is a thriller that is easily enjoyed.  It is
directed flawlessly.  The movie will be much more satisfying if you just
watch it and don't try to evaluate each and every detail.  Have fun for
a change and give the analizing part of you brain a well deserved rest.
     The movie is a good one..................................ENJOY!
...Friendly tips from someone just like you.............Erica Quirein
