Title
Review for Cold Comfort Farm (1995) (TV)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
David N. Butterworth
A film review by David N. Butterworth
Copyright 1996 David N. Butterworth/The Summer Pennsylvanian
On paper, to use a decidedly British turn of phrase, the movie version of
Stella Gibbons' 1932 novel COLD COMFORT FARM had all the potential for a
wickedly funny comedy of manners: a splendid ensemble cast, delightful
source material, and an accomplished director at the helm (John
Schlesinger, who made MIDNIGHT COWBOY and MARATHON MAN).  On screen,
however, this made-for-British-television adaptation falls flat on its bum.
With the current rash of Jane Austen translations making the movie circuit,
American audiences are especially receptive to Anglophilic period
pieces-the COLD COMFORT crowd at the Ritz were in hysterics!  While not in
the Austen mold, Gibbons' novel was a classic comedic send-up of the
larger-than-life romantic dramas penned by Thomas Hardy and D.H. Lawrence,
and Malcolm Bradbury's screenplay is peppered with Gibbons' deliciously
deranged dialogue.  But ultimately the ruin lies in the production's
attempt to turn dry satire into broad farce.  What went wrong is not
exactly clear, but at the very least a comedy of manners should be funny.
Someone should have told the Channel Twelvers that a British accent isn't
enough.
The story starts out with our meticulously proper heroine Flora Poste (Kate
Beckinsale, the ingenue in Kenneth Branagh's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING)
recently orphaned and left to subsist on a pittance.  This strong-willed
London sophisticate is forced to turn to her rural Sussex ancestors for
support, the dark and dingy Starkadders of Cold Comfort Farm.  This
unglamorous assortment of singularly British eccentrics go about their
business quite without the social graces to which Miss Poste is accustomed.
No problem there, though; Flora-a young woman obsessed by "higher common
sense" and zealous tidiness-simply spreads her influence to educate and
modernize the occupants of this cursed homestead, wherein lies the bulk of
our story.
The able-bodied performers do what's expected of them with, as British
humor dictates, endless repetition: the gloom-laden Ada Doom (Sheila
Burrell) gets excess mileage out of her "I saw something nasty in the
woodshed" mantra, which has kept her attic-bound since childhood; Adam
Lambsbreath (Freddie Jones) makes full use of his reference to Flora as
"Robert Poste's child."  And everyone, regularly and in unison, reminds
each other that "there have always been Starkadders at Cold Comfort Farm."
Rounding out the cast is Eileen Atkins as Judith Starkadder (who looks like
she might be Lou Reed's mom), and Ian McKellen as Amos, a
fire-and-brimstone preacher whose sermons invariably include "something
about burning."  Joanna Lumley (best known for her role as Patsy in the
acerbic British television import, ABSOLUTELY FABULOUS) plays Flora's
socialite friend, Mrs. Smiling, tsk-tsk'ing and raising her eyebrows at
everything bucolic.  And the ever-affected Stephen Fry (PETER'S FRIENDS)
puts in a token appearance as Flora's unrequited love interest, the smitten
Mr. Mybug.  As hamming it up down on the farm goes, this movie gives BABE a
run for its money!
And then there's Beckinsale, pretty and charming and unflappable as the
influential Flora amidst all this chaos.
=46lora wishes to learn about Real Life, collecting material for the novel
she is writing.  She labors over her humorously clich=E9d prose-"The golden
orb had almost disappeared behind the interlacing fingers of the
hawthorne"-while around her the bumpkin cousins spout poetry
unconsciously-"I expect there'll be a little beetle soon now that the
sukebind is flowering."  For Flora, even natural orders such as pregnancy
seem "untidy."
It seems harsh to criticize a film as amiable as this one, especially with
the incessant spate of mean-spirited, violent excuses for entertainment
that arrive at one's Octoplex each weekend (Schlesinger's career is no
exception; his last picture was the egregious vigilante thriller, EYE FOR
AN EYE).  But when the sum total of big laughs fails to make up for all of
its contrivances, COLD COMFORT FARM remains as it started out: a good idea
on paper.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Gramercy)
Starring:  Kate Beckinsale, Eileen Atkins, Rufus Sewell, Ian McKellen,
Joanna Lumley, Freddie Jones, Ivan Kaye, Sheila Burrell, Stephen Fry.
Screenplay:  Malcolm Bradbury.
Producers:  Richard Broke, Antony Root.
Director:  John Schlesinger.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     COLD COMFORT FARM is directed with such sparkle and confidence that I
almost couldn't believe John Schlesinger was behind the camera...at least
not the John Schlesinger whose recent contributions to the cinematic canon
were suspense misfires like PACIFIC HEIGHTS, THE INNOCENT and EYE FOR AN
EYE.  Even in his glory days of MIDNIGHT COWBOY, THE DAY OF THE LOCUST and
MARATHON MAN, one would hardly say that "light-hearted" was an adjective
applicable to his work.  Yet here we find Schlesinger tackling the
much-beloved Stella Gibbons novel, a parody with a giddy and irreverent
tone, and nailing it.  COLD COMFORT FARM is thoroughly entertaining and
consistently surprising.
     Our heroine is Flora Poste (Kate Beckinsale), a young woman of the
cultured class who finds herself orphaned.  With only a modest income left
by her parents' estate, Flora begins searching for a relative willing to
take her in.  She finds one in cousin Judith Starkadder (Eileen Atkins),
who seems eager to have "Robert Poste's child" come to Cold Comfort Farm
in Sussex to right a wrong done to her father.  There Flora finds a
singularly odd collection of relations:  Judith's husband Amos (Ian
McKellen), a fire-and-brimstone preacher; lusty, Hollywood-obsessed cousin
Seth (Rufus Sewell); and Aunt Ada Doom (Sheila Burrell), the mysterious
and domineering matriarch who once saw "something nasty in the woodshed."
To Flora, however, they are simply a challenge, as she sets herself to the
task of bringing a bit more life to bleak Cold Comfort Farm.
     Stella Gibbons' novel took aim at the over-wrought potboilers which
proliferated in the late 20s and early 30s, as well as Gothic tales in the
_Wuthering Heights_ mode.  A literary satire is a real challenge to film
-- it's like trying to pull the humor out of that annual contest to
duplicate Hemingway's prose style and put it on screen -- but screenwriter
Malcolm Bradbury has come up with the clever premise of following Flora's
budding writing career.  Grasping at the perfect metaphor for a sunset
(she can never quite figure out what "the golden orb" is supposed to do)
over her open D. H. Lawrence novels, Flora allows us a bit of insight into
the florid writing Gibbons was winking at.
     But COLD COMFORT FARM is even more successful at turning the
conventions of those genres' plots upside down.  Ordinarily, you would
expect to find the main point of a story like this to be Flora's nosing
into the family secrets until she finds out what wrong was done to her
father, and what that "something nasty" was that Aunt Ada saw in the
woodshed.  Those secrets turn out to be red herrings; it doesn't matter
_what_ they are, only that everyone at Cold Comfort Farm is living under
the weight of those long-past events, waiting for someone like Flora to
come along and push each of them in the direction of the one thing that
will make them genuinely excited.  The result is some hilarious moments
and sharp performances, as we watch Amos improvising a sermon before his
Church of (literally) Quivering Brethren, and Seth grabbing his chance at
big-screen stardom, and the characters are rendered with a refreshing lack
of concern over whether they are being condescended to.
     That is a criticism some detractors have leveled against COLD COMFORT
FARM, and I think they are missing the point.  COLD COMFORT FARM is a
parody, and the characters are _supposed_ to be exaggerated the literary
types they represent:  the maid's daughter is always pregnant, Seth is
always shirtless and randy, and Aunt Ada and Judith are always making
ominous pronouncements.  But Schlesinger and Bradbury show Gibbons'
characters with an eye to the basic desire for happiness which Flora is
trying to uncover.  They're not sneering at rural folk; they're sneering
at the literary conventions which turned them into mournful eternal
victims.  Flora brings a breath of life to Cold Comfort Farm, and
Schlesinger's COLD COMFORT FARM brings a breath of life to a decidedly
musty film season.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     With the death of her father, the thoroughly-modern Flora Poste
(played by Kate Beckinsale) must find some other relatives off of whom
to live.  Little knowing what she is letting herself in for she chooses
to live with her Aunt's family at dark and mordant Cold Comfort Farm.
She hopes to collect enough experience to write a novel.  The farm is a
queer and moody, dirty place with many a dark secret left too long to
fester.  And as the smoky vortex of black emotion reaches out to engulf
the poor, innocent Flora, with a knowing smile she effortlessly stamps
it flat.  The plot, based on the 1932 novel by Stella Gibbons, is
basically one elaborate joke.  It says that all the Gothic evil as
described in the old potboilers is no match for the spunk and pluck of
a modern woman.  Nevertheless, though it is obvious early that that is
where the film is headed, it does tell its particular joke with a great
deal of style and wit.  The film is a co-production of the BBC and
Thames television, a remake of the BBC's memorable 1971 production
which starred a terrific Alastair Sim as Amos Starkadder, the apparent
master of Cold Comfort Farm and self-styled hellfire preacher of the
local sect of "Quiverers."  In this version no less an actor than Ian
McKellen takes the role, but sadly falls considerably short of (at
least my memories of) the original performance.  The real head of the
Starkadder household, however, is Flora's Aunt Ada (Sheila Burrell) who
stays hidden, never leaving her room, as she broods endlessly about an
incident in her youth when she saw "something nasty in the woodshed."
That incident and the effect it had on the Starkadder family hangs over
the entire film.  There is clearly a collision course shared by this
iron matriarch of the household, determined to maintain her power,
letting nothing change and her young niece Flora determined to set the
household right, at least right by her own definition.
     This is a somewhat surprising film to come from John Schlesinger,
best known for directing thrillers like MARATHON MAN, THE BELIEVERS,
and PACIFIC HEIGHTS.  Here he has great fun poking holes in the
melodrama created by writers like the Brontes and Thomas Hardy and even
by his own film, FAR FROM THE MADDING CROWD.  On the other hand, his
high society London scenes smack a little more of the elegant vacuity
of the upper crust in P. G. Wodehouse's stories.  Notable also in the
cast are Eileen Atkins as Ada's perpetually fretful daughter Judith and
Rufus Sewell as her handsome and overly-lusty son Seth Starkadder.
Even on the wide screen, this film has the look and feel of a
television production and it has it even more so for having already
been produced by the BBC once before.  Nevertheless, it feels like a
quality TV production and Schlesinger manages a wry wit throughout.
American audiences may have some trouble understanding the thick
British accent in which most of the dialog is spoken.  I give it a high
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     COLD COMFORT FARM is a comedy of manners and quirky country
bumpkins set in the 1920s.  It overflows with overly droll English
comedy.  Although there are some nice lines in the film, I suspect that
unless you are a fan of this genre of British comedy you may be as
unmoved as I was.  For people who like BBC TV shows like "To the Manor
Born", this may be just your cup of tea, but for me, I need more than
overdrawn bizarre characters with thick accents to like a show.
     Although I found some of the script by Malcolm Bradbury and Stella
Gibbons interesting, I did not laugh once.  Not a good sign for a
comedy.  The large audience I was in laughed a lot during the physical
comedy like the mass twitching heads scene, but generally was pretty
silent for a comedy.  I started to say they laughed during the really
stupid parts, but decided that was too much of a value judgment, but
notice like a good lawyer, I managed to say it anyway.
     Flora Poste (Kate Beckinsale who was Hero in MUCH ADO ABOUT
NOTHING) leaves the city to go and live on Cold Comfort Farm.  Let me
say right now that her acting is the bright shining star in this dismal
film.  As soon as she arrives, the skies become overcast and the
cinematography (Chris Seager) is suitably dark and foreboding.  The
farm looks like a sixteenth century farm that has been neglected.  The
make-up (Dorka Nieradzik) is of the let's cake on a quarter of an inch
of dirt on everyone on the farm variety.  The farm is populated by
several generations of Starkadders, and grime seems to be their middle
names.
     Typical of the comedy is the guy who washes the dishes on the
farm.  He washes the old wooden bowls they eat from by swishing the end
of a stick in the bowl while filled with dish water.  He refuses modern
implements like cloths or sponges.  Another is that the Starkadders
never call Flora by her name, rather they refer to her only as "Robert
Poste's child."  Typical lines are "Robert Poste's child, your dinner
is ready," or "Where is Robert Poste's child?"
     Great-aunt Ada Doom (Sheila Burrell) is a hermit who lives in a
bedroom upstairs because she, "saw something nasty in the woodshed"
decades ago, presumably having to do with the aforementioned Robert
Poste.  I did not like Sheila Burrell at all in this role save her good
scene at the end.
     Robert Poste's child is obsessed with tidiness which is a
challenge on this pigsty of a farm.  As she puts it, "Nature's all very
well in her place, but there's no reason to be untidy."  She is a
budding author who keeps trying to write her big novel.  It has
quintessential bad writing with lines including, "From the stubborn
interwoven strata of his unconscious ..."
     One of my favorite minor characters appears in my least favorite
scene.  When the local preacher Amos Starkadder (Ian McKellen) warns
his congregation that, "There's no butter in heaven," all of their
heads begin twitching as if there is a sudden massive outbreak of
spastic paralysis.  Later he explains his new mission as, "I'm going to
go all about in a Ford van.  Like the apostles of old, I'll go about
the land."  In this same religious vein, a character named Charles
observes, "We are all purified by suffering."
     The film is a cornucopia of strange characters.  We even have a
film producer Mr. Neck (Harry Ditson) who drops by the farm and
describes the sorts of actors he is looking for as, "I don't want
sissies.  It's red meat time in the movies."  There is even a takeoff
on the ending of GONE WITH THE WIND, which I think is the funniest
scene in the show.  The sweet ending of the picture is well done and a
bit of a surprise.  Finally, if you wonder, like me, where you saw
Maria Miles who plays Elfine Starkadder before, she played Anna in
KAFKA, but I think I have must have seen in other things as well.
     COLD COMFORT FARM runs 1:44, but I would have been preferred a lot
less.  It is not subtitled, but the extremely thick Sussex accents are
frequently unintelligible.  I've been to Sussex several times, and I
though I was fluent in the language.  The film is rated PG-13.  There
is some sex, no nudity, no violence, and fairly mild language.  I think
the show would be fine for kids over say 9 or 10.  If you like this
brand of droll English comedy of manners, then you may like the show,
but I did not so I can not recommend it.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kate Beckinsale, Eileen Atkins, Rufus Sewell, Ivan Kaye, 
      Ian McKellan, Freddie Jones, Maria Miles, Joanna Lumley, 
      Christopher Bowen, Stephen Fry, Sheila Burrell
Director: John Schlesinger
Screenplay: Malcolm Bradbury based on the novel by Stella Gibbons
Cinematography: Chris Seager
Music: Robert Lockhart
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     Over the last several years, director John Schlesinger, who once 
released fabulous films like MIDNIGHT COWBOY and SUNDAY, BLOODY SUNDAY, 
has developed an unfortunate tendency to make movies that border on 
unwatchable (PACIFIC HEIGHTS, EYE FOR AND EYE).  With COLD COMFORT FARM, 
a feature originally produced for British TV, Schlesinger has chosen a 
lighter, less demanding story that results in one of his most successful 
productions in recent memory.  There's nothing deep or meaningful to be 
unearthed in this feel-good comedy, but it nevertheless makes for solid 
entertainment.
     Using an almost-apologetically gentle satire, COLD COMFORT FARM 
parodies Merchant-Ivory films and their ilk.  Transpiring in the 1920s, 
the movie takes us to the dilapidated rural estate of Cold Comfort Farm, 
where recently-orphaned Flora Poste (Kate Beckinsale) has come to stay 
with distant relatives.  In some way, the Starkadders, who inhabit Cold 
Comfort, owe a debt to her father, but, while no one will say what it 
is, they agree to give her free room and board.  For her part, Flora 
intends to organize the untidy farm, as well as the lives of everyone 
who call it home.
     The residents of Cold Comfort Farm are a strange lot.  There's 
Judith Starkadder (Eileen Atkins), a middle-aged widow who continually 
prophesies disaster for her family.  There are her sons, Seth (Rufus 
Sewell), who loves movies, and Reuben (Ivan Kaye), who loves farming.  
Judith's brother, Amos (Ian McKellan), is a fire-and-brimstone preacher.  
Her mother, Ada Doom (Sheila Burrell), the Cold Comfort matriarch, 
remains locked in her room.  Also living in the house are Elfine (Maria 
Miles), a beautiful-but-flighty young woman who wants to marry a member 
of the gentry, and Adamsbreath (Freddie Jones), the family's faithful 
retainer.
     With comic efficiency, Flora sets to work giving each member of the 
Starkadder clan what they want.  There are no real characters here -- 
each member of the cast plays a certain period piece type to good 
effect.  We sympathize with the men and women of Cold Comfort Farm 
largely because of strong performances, not because they're written with 
any depth or breadth.  As is often true of satire, the people don't 
matter as much as the situations they're placed in.
     COLD COMFORT FARM is not a vicious lampoon.  The script cares about 
its characters and doesn't want to distance the audience.  Some of the 
best satire comes near the end, while the various subplots are reaching 
happy conclusions.  Schlesinger uses "Tara's Theme" from GONE WITH THE 
WIND to put the hilarious punctuation on a very funny scene.  This 
sequence, the movie's comic highlight, had me nearly doubled over with 
laughter.
     Kate Beckinsale, who made her movie debut as Hero in Kenneth 
Branagh's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, sparkles as Flora, bringing life and 
energy to this one-dimensional ersatz Jane Austen heroine.   The 
supporting performers are all good, with special mention going to Ian 
McKellan.  Here, acting the part of a preacher who speaks of nothing but 
hellfire and damnation, McKellan is both mesmerizing and undeniably 
funny.
     With its comic refrains, takeoffs on Hollywood happy endings and 
stuffy British storylines, and feather-light tone, COLD COMFORT FARM is 
an excellent source of late spring entertainment.  As was true of 1992's 
ENCHANTED APRIL,  this is the kind of movie that offers a vacation from 
the seriousness of reality and other, more "important" motion pictures.  
There may not be intellectual enrichment forthcoming, but there's 
undeniable pleasure to be gained from watching Flora bring warmth to 
COLD COMFORT FARM.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     John Schlesinger, of all people, directs this hilarious BBC and
Thames Television-produced comedy about a tidy society girl (Kate
Beckinsale) who moves to the country, to stay with relatives at a
ramshackle family farm.  Recently orphaned, Miss Flora Poste has chosen
Cold Comfort Farm as the place to begin collecting "life experiences"
for use in a novel that she hopes to write.  ("One as good as
'Persuasion'," she notes.) And, much like another Austen heroine, Ms.
Poste is soon imposing upon her backwoods brethren the standards of
style, manners, and hygiene.  (In a letter to London, she pleads "Send
fashion magazines!")
     Though, at times, it tries too hard to be funny-- Eileen Atkins'
Cousin Judith glares as if she were starring in a sequel to YOUNG
FRANKENSTEIN-- this haughtier episode of "The Beverly Hillbillies"
ultimately warms from within.  We're drawn into the characters and are
soon laughing with them, as well as *at* them.  And laugh you will.  A
scruffy Ian McKellan (RICHARD III) preaching fire-and- brimstone to a
quivering country congregation is alone worth the price of admission.
Also good is a GONE WITH THE WIND reference that happens later in the
film. 
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>
