Title
Review for Twelve Monkeys (1995)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Uni)
Directed by    Terry Gilliam
Written by     David Webb Peoples and Janet Peoples, inspired by the
               film LA JETEE by Chris Marker
Cast           Bruce Willis, Madeleine Stowe, Brad Pitt, Christopher
               Plummer, Frank Gorshin, David Morse
MPAA Rating    "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Running Time   130 minutes
Reviewed at    General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh, NC (3JAN96)
     This wild, weird time-travel tale is equal parts fantasy and 
figment.  Once again, director Terry Gilliam (BRAZIL, THE FISHER 
KING) is charting the waters of madness.  Both in his vision of a 
decimated future-- where 99% of the human race has perished in a 
plague, forcing the survivors to live underground-- and in his 
portrayal of a man sent from that future to save what's left of the 
human race.  The man in question is Cole (Bruce Willis), a convict 
from 2035 who is sent to present-day and, upon arrival, is promptly 
placed in a mental institution.  Sound familiar?
     Writers David and Janet Peoples-- working from Chris Marker's 
1962 short LA JETEE-- have written a strapping sci-fi saga that 
wouldn't be out of a place as a TERMINATOR sequel.  Terry Gilliam, 
of course, isn't interested in simple, slick story mechanics.  He has 
something else in mind.  Literally.  Gilliam takes us *inside* of 
Cole's head, to watch as he becomes increasingly disoriented by his 
continued trips between "realities."  What is real?  The question 
is a recurring theme in 12 MONKEYS, and one that is ultimately left 
to the discretion of the viewer.  Even after the dust of a dynamite 
finale has cleared, all the answers do *not* stand revealed.
     The challenges of this movie are numerous.  In addition to the 
paradoxes of the plot, there's the shock and disorientation from 
stepping into Gilliam's "distorted reality."  Skewered camera 
angles and exaggerated close-ups are the norm, here.  With the 
exception of Bruce Willis, the actors all play human cartoons.  
Madelene Stowe transforms from a short-skirted psychiatrist to 
Cole's raving accomplice.  Brad Pitt is a marvel of twitches and 
tics as a cross-eyed mental patient.  Even old pro Christopher 
Plummer, as a virologist, gets to play with a preposterous Old 
South southern accent.
     The barrage continues with an array of film clips, pop songs, 
Hitchcock allusions, and other symbolism.  Blink and you'll miss 
something spectacular-- such as the shot of a department-store 
angel rising behind Stowe.  Gorgeous.  With a superb production 
design and stunning art direction-- based, apparently, on the color 
of mucus-- it all adds up to a welcome assault on the senses.  In 
an era when motion picture have become too safe for their own good, 
it's nice (and downright exciting) to see a movie that goes in so 
many directions at once, and still lands on its feet.  Thank God 
for Terry Gilliam. 
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit the MOVIE HELL site http://www-nvision.com/hell/>

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Much ado about something, but what? Terry Gilliam's latest
offering builds and builds towards some kind of incredible payoff, and
gives us much to look at and adsorb along the way, but only burps instead
of exploding.
Terry Gilliam is a rare bird: possibly gifted by genius, but at the same
time hampered by far too much *near*-genius for his own good. TWELVE
MONKEYS is a good example of this, a film of near-genius that has many
moments of greatness but never quite finishes what it starts.
In one of his best performances, Bruce Willis is a member of a hive-like
commune of criminals who live far underground in a future world that's been
decimated by a mysterious disease. The scientists who run the place (all of
whom look like mutant versions of the War Room staff in DR. STRANGELOVE)
want to send Willis's character back in time to gather clues about how the
disease was propagated. Willis's character also remembers something from
his own childhood, a death in an airport at around the time of the
outbreak, that he is itching to resolve. He is a lonely, longing fellow,
one whom it turns out to be far easier to feel empathy for than we
initially think.
Willis appears in Baltimore, 1990, and meets several intriguing characters.
When thrown into an asylum, he meets Brad Pitt (in another excellent acting
job), a certifiably insane fellow with more ideas than his head can
possibly do justice to. He also meets Madeline Stowe, a doctor who takes a
very strange and persistent interest in Cole. Beyond that, I'd be loathe to
reveal any more -- and in fact, it'd be difficult to do so without
extensive notes. The script becomes incredibly thorny and complicated at
times, but Gilliam is an expert at making those convolutions seem clear and
self-explanatory, especially in a nightmare flashback that changes every
time we see it.
What makes the movie unsatisfying are two things. One, Gilliam's lack of
on-screen restraint is legendary. He seems compelled to include things that
aren't really thematically essential -- or at least he doesn't make their
thematical need visible -- such as the extended insane-asylum sequences. I
got the feeling they wound up in the script because Gilliam is a sucker for
insane asylum sequences and the attendant over-acting. And two, the movie
has a totally closed-ended ending -- meaning that everything gets tied up
so completely that we sit there wondering, "Was that it?"
That, indeed, seems to have been it. If that's the point, then the setup
was leading us astray. And while the movie is enjoyable to watch and never
insulting or confusing, it doesn't quite fulfill its promise.

Author
John Robertson
Directed by: Terry Gilliam
Starring: Bruce Willis, Madeline Stowe, Brad Pitt, Frank Gorshin, 
Michael Malone, David Morse, and Christopher Plummer.  
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for this film is is a 
person with an appreciation for Terry Gilliam's sense of style, a 
lover of science fiction, and The Twilight Zone as well as the top 
three stars of the film.  The Perfect Person would probably give this 
film a 10 out of 10.  
Twelve Monkeys is a remake of the film La Jetee (1962), and although I 
have not seen the original, I think I understand what it is about, and 
have a new appreciation for it.  Twelve Monkeys has a plot that we 
have seen before, though not often in a Hollywood film.  
Bruce Willis plays a man from a horrible future, where mankind has 
almost been wiped out by a virus which ravaged the earth in 1996.  A 
convicted felon, he is volunteered to perform a mission in the not so 
distant past, to try and find the origin of the plague so scientists 
of his time can create a cure in their time.  
Willis' time travel is slightly off the mark, and he ends up arriving 
in 1991 instead of 1996, and to make matters worse, he assaults a 
policeman and finds himself in an insane asylum after babbling about 
his "mission" to find the Army of the Twelve Monkeys and stop a virus 
that will wipe out humanity in six years.  
Madeline Stowe is Willis' psychiatrist, and Brad Pitt is a fellow 
resident of the insane asylum.  After several days of treatment, 
followed by a return to the future and several trips back into several 
pasts, Willis, Stowe and Pitt's lives become intertwined in a web of 
causality, flashbacks and flash forwards, and questions about just who 
is insane and who isn't.  
All three main actors give surprising performances, particularly Pitt, 
who although not shy about taking non-leading man, non-beefcake roles 
in the past, plays a role that is something of a departure for him.  
Twelve Monkeys is a fine film and I recommend it highly to anyone who 
comes close to the Perfect Person profile above.  Although there are 
holes in the film, what time travel film is without them?  

* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to 
give the reader a new way of understanding my rating.  Rather than 
give a film a score, either overall, or on several attributes, the 
Perfect Person Rating tries to identify the type of person would enjoy 
this movie the most.  Since a reviewer is by nature someone with a 
great deal of experience in what they are reviewing, their experience 
may not be the same as someone who is less informed, less jaded, or 
more attuned to the subject.  Hopefully the Perfect Person Rating will 
go further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a simple rating 
scale.  Comments are appreciated.  

Author
Kevin Patterson
"5 billion people will die from a deadly virus in 1997. The survivors will
abandon the surface of the planet. Once again the animals will rule the world
. . ."
-Excerpts from interview with clinically diagnosed paranoid schizophrenic,
April 12, 1990 - Baltimore County Hospital 
With this caption begins TWELVE MONKEYS, the most recent of director Terry
Gilliam's many excursions into the realm where reality and fantasy often seem
to intersect, overlap, and sometimes collide head-first. This time, the
vehicle for his protagonist's confusion is time travel. The year is 2035 and
the last of the human race have been driven underground by a dangerous plague
unleashed, apparently, by a terrorist group known as the Army of the Twelve
Monkeys. Seeking to develop an inoculation and reclaim the surface, a group of
scientists decide to send a prisoner named James Cole (Bruce Willis) back to
the year 1996 in order to collect samples of the virus in its original,
un-mutated form from before it was released on the population. 
The script was penned by David Peoples (of BLADE RUNNER fame) and his wife
Janet, and with the help of Gilliam (BRAZIL, THE FISHER KING), one of the most
accomplished fantasy directors in modern cinema, they take the issue of time
travel and explore it, far-fetched as it may seem, in an intelligent and
thoughtful manner. One avenue that the script takes is to examine the
practical uses of time travel and the problems that time travelers might
encounter. The famous physicist Stephen Hawking once commented that time
travel will probably never be invented for the reason that we, in the present
day, are not being visited by time travelers from the future. After seeing
TWELVE MONKEYS, I found myself speculating that if we were, they might all be
locked away in mental institutions, for this is Cole's fate on his first
journey to the past. TWELVE MONKEYS also follows a different route than the
usual return-to-the-past-to-change-the-present routine that is common to
science fiction movies (and often results in a story riddled with paradoxes).
Cole is not trying to avert the spread of the virus, and he even says as much
when he confronts the man who he believes is responsible for its release: all
he is trying to find is a sample. 
TWELVE MONKEYS is divided neatly into three acts. In the first, Cole is
mistakenly sent to Baltimore in 1990 instead of 1996, where he is immediately
taken into police custody and diagnosed as delusional by Dr. Katherine Railly
(Madeline Stowe). The resulting scenes at the mental institution, in which a
hyperactive patient named Jeffrey Goines (Brad Pitt) constantly stirs up
trouble and seems to allude vaguely to the impending disaster, are at once
amusing and eerie, capturing Cole's strange experience of being immersed in
human civilization at a time that he knows is only six years before its
destruction. 
He is subsequently recalled to 2035, where he explains the malfunction to the
scientists, who, this time, manage to send him to 1996 as planned. Desperate
to complete his mission, he seeks help from Dr. Railly, who now works in
Philadelphia; although she is frightened by him at first and tries to convince
him that he is still "mentally divergent," she gradually begins to trust him
after some of his predictions about the future seem to come true. These scenes
are marked by a sort of innocent abandon on the part of Cole, who, for the
first time since his childhood, finds himself able to enjoy things like music,
open air, and streams in the forest. 
In the final act, after another recall to the future, Cole returns once again
to 1996 Philadelphia, this time only three weeks before the unleashing of the
virus. Once again, he seeks out Railly, who is now beginning to believe his
story (just as he himself is beginning to think that he may be delusional
after all), as the two of them realize the trust and attraction that had been
growing between them and begin to wonder if the disaster really is just around
the corner and whether or not the Army of the Twelve Monkeys are the real
culprits. Meanwhile, Cole ponders the meaning of a recurring dream which
echoes an experience from his childhood, in which he sees a man shot by an
airport security guard as a woman calls after him. It's never clear exactly
what is coming next in TWELVE MONKEYS, but the twists in
plot and character, however intricate and complex, never seem contrived or
phony: the script flows naturally, especially for a fantasy film, and the way
in which Cole's dream finally fits into the big picture is both logical and
quite poignant. 
Gilliam's vision of both present and future is about as bleak as they come.
What we see of human society in 2035 seems devoid of any vitality and is
instead surviving by nothing more than a sort of plodding inertia under a
vaguely authoritarian structure (the scientists "volunteer" Cole for their
experiments against his will, and among his criminal charges are violations of
the "Permanent Emergency Code"). The present doesn't fare much better, from
the dilapidated, chaotic Baltimore mental hospital to urban Philadelphia,
where Cole and Railly encounter violent thugs in abandoned buildings,
countless homeless people inhabiting the run-down streets, walls covered with
graffiti, and a strange man who assaults them and claims that their hotel room
is his "territory." One gets the feeling that, had a lethal virus not been
unleashed into this society three weeks later, it might have eaten itself
alive in a few more years anyway. 
Still, TWELVE MONKEYS does not insist on fear and despair to the exclusion of
everything else: even in the face of the present and future (or, from his
view, past and present) horrors he has witnessed, Cole's enjoyment of the
simple things like the open air or a pleasant song on the radio is honest and
genuinely innocent. One of the best scenes comes near the end, when, for a
reason I won't reveal here, a group of wild animals escape the zoo and run
across buildings and freeways: it's sort of like the last gasp of humor and
amusement before the impending onslaught of the virus. Aside from general fear
and confusion, this is probably the most pervasive emotional motif in the
film: the beauty of these simple things, even in the face of pervasive
insanity and destruction. Perhaps the strongest testimony to this is that
towards the end, Cole actually begins to hope that he is delusional, because
he and Railly might have a future together in this world and in the absence of
the virus. 
If there's anything wrong with TWELVE MONKEYS, it's that it tries to do a few
too many things at once. The question of how society decides someone is insane
is raised several times, but Gilliam and the screenwriters seem to have
forgotten about it by the end: nowhere in the last half hour or so is it even
acknowledged. Similarly, the way the script leaves it ambiguous as to whether
or not the film's events are real or are taking place in Cole's imagination
amounts to little more than a distraction. The film would have worked
perfectly well as a drama with a science fiction backdrop without introducing
the possibility of an unreliable first-person viewpoint. Gilliam is a talented
director, but even he seems to find his hands full when trying to do science
fiction, drama, mystery, romance, and satire all at once. 
Whatever its minor flaws, the film is sophisticated and poignant and surely
deserves to be remembered as a science fiction classic - no less than what one
would expect when the creative minds behind BRAZIL and BLADE RUNNER join
forces. I can't quite give it four stars, but I can say this: TWELVE MONKEYS
is probably the best 3-1/2 star film I have ever seen. 

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1995) ****1/2 - C:Bruce Willis, Madeline Stowe, Brad Pitt, Christopher
Plummer, David Morse, Frank Gorshin.
A very entertaining science fiction story about a man from the future
(Willis) who is sent into the past to gather information about a virus which
virtually wipes out the world's population. The plague forces the survivors
to live underground while animals take control of the earth's surface. Now
those people have developed the ability of time travel and aren't trying to
prevent the virus from starting, but simply to find information about it's
beginnings to develop a cure for themselves.
What makes the film so good is that it's completely different from 99% of
the films Hollywood churns out of its cookie cutter factory. Most films are
linear, and you know exactly where the film is going and what will happen
when it gets there. But not "12 Monkeys". This film is all over the place,
bouncing from World War I to 1990 to 1996 to the future, and not necessarily
in that order. BUT, not in a way that's confusing. As long as you give the
film your full attention, it will make sense.
I also liked the fact that their time travel system was far from perfect.
Willis is sent to a couple of incorrect time periods before finally reaching
his objecive, and even those mistakes figure into the plot. Now as far as
the theory of time travel goes, about what if you can change the past by
blinking because you weren't supposed to be there to blink in the grand
scheme of things, etc. etc. I don't even want to jump into that type of
discussion. But my main argument in defense of time travel films is that
time travel has never been accomplished, so no one can argue about how it's
supposed to work. So until time travel is made possible (which is doubtful,
especially in my lifetime), sci-fi films can use it almost anyway they wish
and they'll get no argument from me.
I was immensely entertained by "12 Monkeys". It kept me guessing, it was
original, and that's good enough for me. Brad Pitt received a well deserved
Oscar nomination and won a Golden Globe award for his performance as the
deranged son of a scientist, who may or may not be responsible for the
spread of the virus.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Time travel is a fascinating, confusing, very complex subject. That's one
reason movies about time travel are, in theory, fascinating, confusing, and
very complex. TWELVE MONKEYS is a prime example of these attributes . . . an
*excellent* example.
In the 2020's, a date never specified but pretty conclusive, James Cole
(Bruce Willis) is an underground prisoner. Yes, a *literal* underground
prisoner. You see, most of the Earth's population, 99% to be exact, was
eliminated by a mysterious virus about thirty years earlier; a virus that has
forced the survivors to forever live in an underground, hellish sanctuary.
Forever, that is, unless thru the use of unwilling "volunteers", they can
discover the beginning of this virus and learn how to destroy it.
The "volunteers" are prisoners, used like guinea pigs and thrust back in time
with orders to gain information about the plague. Cole is chosen by the
dictator-like group of scientists as a very promising candidate. One problem:
time travel is still a shaky form of transportation, and when Cole is meant
to go back to November of 1996 (one month before the deaths began), he is
instead sent to April 1990.
1990 proves to be too early for Cole to gain any information about the virus.
Instead, he is found to be insane and locked up in an institution. During all
this we are introduced to two crucial characters: Dr. Kathryn Railly
(Madeleine Stowe), the psychiatrist in charge of Cole's evaluation, and
Jeffrey Goines (Brad Pitt), a patient in the asylum and the son of a Nobel
Prize winning scientist. Cole miraculously escapes the institution, traveling
back "home" to tell the scientists what he has learned, which is nothing.
But, while he's back in the 21st century, we do learn that Goines is the man
behind the Army of the Twelve Monkeys, a militant radical group believed to
spawn the virus that destroys mankind. So, in just a matter of minutes to us,
Cole is sent back, this time correctly to 1996 (via World War I - see the
movie to find out why).
In 1996, Cole quickly locates Railly and abducts her, reminding her that she
had promised six years ago to help him out. Railly is a compassionate, albeit
frightened woman who wants to help Cole, but can't be convinced of his absurd
tales of time travel and apocalyptic prophesies. Eventually, pieces of the
puzzle start falling into place just as two conflicting elements come to
pass: Cole begins to believe he *is* insane while Railly begins to believe he
isn't!
We're almost as messed up in the head as Cole as we try to figure out who's
who, what's what, and even when's when! We don't know who to trust and we
don't know what's behind a lot of things, but it all starts to unravel and,
like a good time travel story, wrap around so the beginning and ending blend
into one and we're stuck in an M.C. Escher-like mind trip.
TWELVE MONKEYS is an awesome flick that explores time travel with a
surprisingly believable approach. They're not trying to prevent the past.
Everything that has happened *has* happened and there's no changing it. They
are merely observing it with hopes of a better future. Willis has proved
himself quite a good actor with roles like this and in PULP FICTION. He's
good at action roles because unlike Segal and Van Damme, Willis has depth,
not just muscles and a chiseled chin. Stowe does a fine job, but the real
performance here is by Pitt. As scrutinized as he can be, Pitt is an
excellent actor who caters to a variety of characters. He very much deserved
the Best Supporting Actor nomination he got for this role.
TWELVE MONKEYS isn't the light-hearted time travel movie we're used to
seeing. This ain't no BILL & TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE (thankfully). It's not
a comedy, but you couldn't call it an action film either. It's more of a
brutal psychological thriller that's so mentally captivating and intriguing
that one can't help but sit wide-eyed thru every scene, ears perked so as not
to miss a crucial bit of information. Trust me, there's a lot of them. TWELVE
MONKEYS is enjoyable enough to sit through several times. In fact, if you're
ever going to figure out this film, you just might have to! Then again,
that's part of what makes this film so fun.

Author
Meera Srinivasan
I will admit time-travel movies are difficult to do. It is 
tough to balance disrupted time sequence with coherent story line. This 
movie does a fair job of it. Yet it is a strange movie with a lot of 
overacting. Bruce Willis is a disappointment as always (if only someone 
can wipe the smirk of his face). Madaline Stowe is the neurotic 
psychiatrist who jumps from caring behavior to thrashing about in fury. 
She plays your typical Hollywood professional woman in distress. Pitt, of 
course, is original but againg very overdone. The kid is clearly a 
lunatic. What's with the facial tics and gestures. 
The psychiatric hospital, portrayed in the film, would put the 
entire health care system to shame. 
Many of the scenes are very predictable. The convict suspected of 
being a Schizo is sent in time.Bruce Willis is this chose guy. 
The system abuses him and you know you can't trust anyone. The whole city 
looks blue in the entire movie with gothic style architecture. The movie 
does not keep you in the hot seat. It is difficult to say whether this is 
an action movie as there are many fighting scenes or a thriller. The only 
statement in the movie that was creative and original was when Stowe as 
psychiatrist says in frustration, "that psychiatry is like any religion. 
People in it decide who is insane and who is not" (paraphrased).
Maybe if the director had chosen some other actors or if the 
characters in the movie were not so caricatured it would be little 
better than pass. 
   

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Bruce Willis, Madeleine Stowe, Brad Pitt, Christopher Plummer, 
      David Morse
Director: Terry Gilliam
Producer: Charles Roven
Screenplay: David Peoples and Janet Peoples, inspired by LA JETEE
Cinematography: Roger Pratt
Music: Paul Buckmaster
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     Any film that enters the realm of time travel does so at its own 
peril.  You need look no further than last year's disastrous TIMECOP to 
understand why.  Even James Cameron's TERMINATOR films treaded 
uncertainly through the minefield of paradoxes created by people 
venturing across the landscape of their own pasts.  Thus, it's a 
refreshing to encounter a movie with a logical, intelligent approach to 
the dangers of zipping through time.  While I won't claim that TWELVE 
MONKEYS has a decisive solution (how can anything be "decisive" when 
it's so firmly grounded in fantasy?), this approach makes sense, 
primarily because the time trippers here aren't trying to change the 
past (hence, wiping out reality), but are instead observing it to make a 
better future.
     As it is, though, that future looks pretty bleak.  On December 13, 
1996, in Philadelphia, a malignant virus was let loose.  Months later, 5 
billion worldwide were dead.  The few survivors were relegated to living 
underground in germ-free cellars and tunnels.  On the surface, Earth was 
ruled by animals, insects, and vegetation.  Mankind's legacy to the 
planet was its slowly-decaying cities.  Witness one of TWELVE MONKEYS' 
early scenes, where bears and lions roam the deserted streets 
surrounding Philadelphia's snow-encrusted City Hall.  It's a chilling, 
almost gothic, sequence that perfectly establishes the film's dark mood.
     James Cole (Bruce Willis) is a 21st century convict living in a 
hellhole prison sometime in the 2020s.  In order to reduce his sentence, 
or even obtain a full pardon, he "volunteers" to travel back in time to 
the 1990s to obtain a pure sample of the virus so that modern science 
can analyze it.  Cole's trip takes him to 1990, where he is incarcerated 
in a Maryland asylum under the care of psychiatrist Kathryn Railly 
(Madeleine Stowe).  One of Cole's fellow inmates is a totally off-the-
wall nutcase named Jeffrey Goines (Brad Pitt), the son of renowned 
virologist Leland Goines (Christopher Plummer), a man whose name is 
featured prominently in future headlines.
     TWELVE MONKEYS spans four time periods:  1917 in the trenches of 
World War One, 1990 in Maryland, 1996 in Maryland and Philadelphia, and 
the 2020s deep beneath Philadelphia.  Like director Terry Gilliam's 
previous efforts BRAZIL and TIME BANDITS, this movie is saturated with 
atmosphere.  The grim, gray film has two tones:  somber and apocalyptic.  
Those in search of feel good escapism would do better to check out MR. 
HOLLAND'S OPUS.
     For the most part, TWELVE MONKEYS is a maze of plot twists and 
turns.  Yet, despite all the hiccuping through time, the story is 
neither exceptionally obtuse nor hard to follow.  In fact, it's possible 
to make shrewd guesses about some of what's going to happen.  Even a 
movie as complex as this doesn't want to lose its audience along the way 
-- at least not for too long.
     One of the most unsettling aspects of TWELVE MONKEYS is that the 
story is told from the perspective of an unreliable narrator, even 
though it's ostensibly third-person point-of-view.  There are multiple 
interpretations for the entire picture.  It can be viewed as a somewhat 
atypical science fiction adventure, a black comedy/social commentary, 
the paranoid nightmares of a deluded madman, or some combination of all 
three.  It's up to each individual to determine which is the most likely 
"truth", and this storyline ambiguity, more than anything else, makes 
TWELVE MONKEYS a consistently engaging motion picture.
     Although the movie as a whole is open to interpretation, certain 
elements of Gilliam's film are straightforward.  TWELVE MONKEYS uses a 
rapier-sharp wit to skewer both sides of the animal rights' movement, as 
well as the general conscience of society.  The scenes of wild animals 
running amok might recall JUMANJI to some, but Gilliam's sense of style 
makes for more startling and lasting images.  If anything, these 
sequences underline the ephemeral nature of humanity's supremacy on this 
planet.
     While script, settings, and production design are obvious strengths 
of TWELVE MONKEYS, acting is not.  Bruce Willis and Madeleine Stowe are 
adequate (and, at times, perhaps a little moreso), but neither does 
anything noteworthy here.  Brad Pitt gives a deliciously over-the-top 
performance that, while derivative of Jack Nicholson's more memorable 
roles, is nevertheless enjoyable -- enjoyable, but not superlative.  
Supporting players like Christopher Plummer and David Morse (who 
outacted Nicholson in THE CROSSING GUARD) are hardly worth mentioning.
     Those looking for a perfect winter double feature might consider 
matching TWELVE MONKEYS with Jeunet and Caro's THE CITY OF LOST 
CHILDREN.  While each motion picture maintains its own identity, there 
are numerous similarities, the most obvious being a darkly twisted view 
of an apocalyptic future.  The films compliment each other, and it's 
plain that the directors have precise visions that are effectively, and 
sometimes spectacularly, realized.  Best of all, both movies challenge 
the mind -- something that too few productions can be accused of these 
days.

Author
Marie Niemec
     If you've seen the trailers or commercials, it's rather difficult to
really figure out what this movie has in store.  Well, it's hard to tell
after watching the movie as well.  
Bruce Willis is a resident of the future, and it is a rather bleak
future.  The world's population had disintigrated into a mere 200,000 and
is no longer ruled by humans but animals.  The reason?  In 1995, an
organization called the army of the 12 monkeys contaminated the world with
a pure virus, thus wiping out practically the world's population in a mere
month.  Bruce Willis' character is one of the surviving few, but is
enslaved by scientists, as are most of last living humans.  They barter his
freedom by sending him on an assignment and having him do the ultimate
task: Go into the past, find the leader of the army of the 12 monkeys, and
kill him.
Well, this explanation didn't come easy.  Although the movie is very
thought provoking of us as a people, our future and the evilo in the world,
as a story it is very confusing.  And dragging.  I know a movie isn''t
keeping my interest when I fidget in my seat or feel the need to look at my
watch only to find that it's only been an hour passed.  Terry Gilliam has a
certain style that I realize many appreciate, and I haven't watched his
previous work Brazil, but this movie felt like it took too long to tell and
yet when one realizes the end is near because it is very easy to figure
out, you wish it were more complex, and not to mention that the movie is
depressing is the only reason why it did invoke emotion from me.  

Author
Richard Haridy
       Terry Gilliam is certainly an original director. All his films
have had the unique Gilliam stamp, from "TIME BANDITS" to "THE FISHER
KING". You either like them or hate them. Up till "12 MONKEYS" I did
not like Gilliam's movies. The movie his fans call his 'masterpeice',
"BRAZIL" I think is a boring mess. I was not impressed by Gilliams
writing skill either. The only movie I faintly liked was "THE
ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN" which was fun but let down by a
confusing ending.
       "12 MONKEYS" is complex, to be sure, the ending is confusing
also but unusually satisfying for a movie of this type. I don't like
talking about plot so I'll just briefly describe it.
      Bruce Willis is James Cole. A prisoner in the future. It seems
almost everyone died from a virus in 96-7. Cole is sent back in time
to get information. Thats about all I'll say about the plot as it is
just one of the elements that make this film fantastic.
    Bruce Willis is great ( that feels weird saying ) and Brad Pitt is
fantastic ( this guy is turning into a very good actor apart from a
few major duds. You could make up a nice list of films he's done,
SEVEN, KALIFORNIA, and this )  The major problem of this film ( and
that isn't really that big ) is Madeleine Stowe. It could be her
acting and it could be just that the part is written rather blankly
but there is something that I don't like about the charcter.
     Apparently Gilliam gave Willis a list of "Bruce Willis Acting
Cliches" to keep the film from becoming more run-of-the-mill. These
are the type of cliches that plagued Willis in "PULP FICTION". Gilliam
really used Willis unusually in this movie, from drool running out of
his mouth ( this actually happens a fair bit ) to him being drugged
out of his mind in a mental asylum.
    I have seen this film three times now and each time I see it I
feel differently about it. The first time I saw it I didn't like it. I
was frustrated at the complexity of it and when a film outsmarts me I
get pissed off and attack it. So on video I saw it a second time and
willed myself to give this film the finger and understand every little
thing. Well that is impossible of course but I was much more
enlightened about it. I took a page out of Roger Ebert's book and
changed my opinion of it. Hereby I urge people to see it again. For it
is a film that you will want to talk about with your friends
afterwards. I mean there is a lot to discuss ( Time loops, the
insurance lady, the fate of the future, and much more)
    I don't put a rating on films I just recommend them and I very
much recommend this one.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     If you are of the school of thought that movies like medicine can
only be good if they are painful to endure, then do I have a movie for
you, TWELVE MONKEYS.  It is a dark, depressing and ugly science fiction
mystery involving time travel and schizophrenia.  It is a movie that is
about as much fun to watch as getting your teeth pulled, and yet the
mystery is so compelling that your mind will not let your feet walk out
of the theater early no matter how hard they try.
     When the movie opens, it is the 21st century.  As any Hollywood
writer will tell you, in the next century we are all going to revert to
acting like animals and our technology will be more like the past than
the present plus most of the equipment will be covered in grime.
Screenwriters David and Janet Peoples's script based on another one by
Chris Marker tells of a future that is full of angry and mean people.
It goes on to show a present and past that is equally mean spirited.
In a set by Jeffrey Beecroft that is a cross between BRAZIL and ALIENS
3, we find a filthy and ugly world.  In this movie the sets for the
present and the past are equally sinister and morose.
     It seems that in 1996 someone, believed to be "the army of the
twelve monkeys", unleashed a virus on the world that killed ninety-nine
percent of the humans on the planet.  The few survivors went
underground, and the surface thereafter became inhabited only by wild
animals.  James Cole (Bruce Willis) is a prisoner who is picked out of
his tiny cage by a crane and sent first to the surface in the present
and later to the past to uncover hints as to exactly what the original
virus was so that the 21st century scientists can get a clue as to how
to make an antidote.
     The 21st century scientists use old fashion devices more
mechanical than electrical, and their time machine is not very
accurate.  First, James is sent by mistake to 1990 and then to the
French trenches in World War I.  Eventually they get it right, and he
lands in 1996 right before the virus is unleashed.
     Since the people in 1990 think he is schizophrenic and is making
all this future plague and pestilence stuff up, he is sent to a mental
institution where he meets fellow patient Jeffrey Goines (Brad Pitt).
Jeffrey is the son of a famous virologist named Dr. Leland Goines
(Christopher Plummer).  Jeffrey is most certainly nuts, and James
begins to think that he is too and that he is making it all up in his
mind.  While at the hospital he meets and forms a relationship with his
psychiatrist, Dr.  Kathryn Railly (Madeleine Stowe).  Since the mystery
is the only thing good about this disgusting but innovative show, I
will not describe the plot more.  Suffice it to say that it is
convoluted, and there is lots of it.
     The cinematography (Roger Pratt) is full of dark grays and
contrasting bright white lights to create a somber and desolate feel.
The sets in the past, present, and future are all depressing and
apocalyptic.  James's make-up has him extremely bloody and full of
scars, and he drools constantly.  His keepers kept him high on drugs so
he spends most of the movie, not only dripping blood and drooling, but
also stoned out of his mind.  I found the bleak and lugubrious images
of the show infectious.  As I left the theater, I felt terrible -
hopeless and depressed.
     Director Terry Gilliam puts a strong stamp on a movie.  I loved
his BRAZIL, but hated his THE FISHER KING.  Although I was intrigued by
the TWELVE MONKEYS story, I was angry at myself for not having the good
sense to walk out of it.  Many times I started to leave since I was not
enjoying myself at all and was finding the images painful to endure,
but I kept wanting to know the resolution of the mystery, which I must
admit is wrapped up nicely.
     Besides the intriguing plot, there is some good acting even if the
movie is pretty unbearable.  Brad Pitt proved to me that he is more
than just a pretty face.  Willis, whom I frequently dislike, is quite
good, but hard to watch.  Stowe, whom I always like, is good and is one
of the few characters in this movie that you not only like, but
actually care about.
     TWELVE MONKEYS runs way too long for my taste at 2:09.  It is
correctly rated R for gore and violence and a vision of the world that
could give you nightmares for a long time.  There is male nudity, but
no sex.  Do not let teenagers see this show unless they are quite
mature.  This is an ugly film that I wish I had never seen, and I
certainly would not wish it inflicted on others.  I am giving it a
single * for some good acting and an intriguing mystery.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The virus attack that started in December of 1996 has killed all
but a small remnant of civilization who live in 2035 in underground
hi-tech steel bunkers.  In the bunker under Philadelphia it is like
living in a prison for everyone but prisoners.  Convicted criminals are
kept caged in steel boxes and moved in and out by cranes when they are
chosen to "volunteer" for hazardous tasks.  Prisoner James Cole (Bruce
Willis) is picked to volunteer to collect biological samples on the
surface.  This mission leads to a more important mission, being sent
back in time to 1996 to collect fresh virus samples.  Instead, through
miscalculation, he ends in 1990 where he is almost immediately thrown
into a mental institution.  His doctor is psychologist Dr. Kathryn
Railly (Madeleine Stowe), an expert in of all things, prophecy.  He is
put under the mentorship of a hyperkinetic schizoid Jeffrey Goines
(Brad Pitt) whose most harmless delusions are of being the son of a
famous man.
     12 MONKEYS is a film of great flaws and of at least moderate
virtues.  There are far too many places where the film wanders far
beyond the realm of believability.  In one scene Railly goes visiting
dangerous and unstable men in prison wearing a provocative short skirt.
Admittedly the character had not planned for this at the beginning of
the evening, but it is unlikely she would do it, even so.  Some of the
coincidences that move the plot along are incredibly contrived.  This
is a film that even for strong science fiction film fans will be one
that is better to have seen than to be seeing.  Director Terry Gillium
made BRAZIL a downbeat film to watch, but at least one with its
whimsical side.  For this film he has removed just about all the charm
and created a nightmarish past and present, and an especially bleak
future.  His images grate like steel claws scratching on a blackboard.
The entire film is an assault on the emotions and the senses.  For
example, this is just the film for all those people who have been
waiting years to see Bruce Willis drool, bleed, spit, and eat spiders.
That is just the kind of film it is.  Much of the story takes place in
mental institutions or alleys of homeless schizophrenics.  There is
little that is uplifting or exciting about the film, though there are
some intriguing science fictional ideas, particularly about causality
and time travel.  There are several nice ironic time travel paradoxes.
The screenplay is provided by David Peoples (who co-authored
BLADERUNNER) and Janet Peoples.  Rarely does a film bear a credit for
being inspired by another film, but 12 MONKEYS is inspired by Chris
Marker's 29-minute film "La Jetee," which originally ran on a double
bill with ALPHAVILLE.
     Willis and Pitt each give disturbing performances.  Willis is not
a great actor, but he is better than he often appears.  And this film
certainly gives him more opportunity than most of his action films to
create a character.  Mostly this film gives him an opportunity to show
bewilderment.  Brad Pitt has been getting some attention for his wildly
gesticulating mental patient.  He is adequately strange, but nothing
world-class.  Madeleine plays someone considerably more normal than the
two male leads and as a result has a much less flashy role.  She is
much harder to notice by contrast, proving than in an insane world a
sane person appears not insane but only unmemorable.
     12 MONKEYS is a pretentious and self-indulgent piece of oppressive
and cheerless filmmaking, but for mavens of time travel stories it
delivers the goods.  I rate it a low +2 on the -4 to 4 scale.
     Spoiler...Spoiler...Spoiler...Spoiler...Spoiler...
     "La Jetee" is a short film made up almost entirely of still
photos.  The following is a synopsis:
     It is a post-holocaust Paris in which survivors live underground.
The underpinnings of reality and causality have been blown away.  H is
haunted by the image of a woman's face that he cannot get out of his
mind.  It becomes an obsession.  Because it has weakened his hold on
the present, a scientist thinks that he can actually send H traveling
in time (similar to SOMEWHERE IN TIME).  H goes back in time to an
incident in his past where he thinks he may have seen the woman on a
jetty.  Something bad (I forget what) happens while he is on the jetty,
and he is killed.  The last thing he sees before his death is the image
of a woman's face, the same image that brought him to his death.

Author
Bryant Frazer
I've just about herniated my brain in the days since I saw TWELVE MONKEYS.
Like most other stories that dabble in time travel, it presents a cracking
conundrum having to do with the relationship of history to the future and
the feasibility of someone traveling back to the past in an attempt to
influence the formation of their own present. But unlike those other
stories, TWELVE MONKEYS is the creation of auteur Terry Gilliam, the
irrepressible fantasist in charge of the similarly temporal shenanigans of
TIME BANDITS, the urban pain and redemption of THE FISHER KING, and the
lobotomized despair of his great suffocating masterpiece, BRAZIL. 
        That means that the machinations of an uncommonly intelligent
script, sharply convoluted by the husband-and-wife screenwriting team of
David and Janet Peoples, are only part of the sheer expressive power of
this very unconventional production. While the story is more carefully
constructed than anything Gilliam has previously attempted, the film bears
the undeniable hallmarks of one of his peculiar creations, and TWELVE
MONKEYS is unique in its capacity to bring the audience into the same
frame of mind as its desperate protagonist. What I've realized is that I
simply have to see the film again, armed with a knowledge of what's going
to transpire that can help me interpret the events on screen. But time
spent deciphering the twists and turns of the plotline, pleasurable though
it may be, is strictly secondary to the film's tremendous emotional
resonance. 
        Here's what I'm sure of: In the year 1997, some five billion
people are wiped out by a deadly virus that renders the surface of the
planet uninhabitable, driving the few survivors underground. Some 30 years
hence, researchers living underneath Philadelphia have concluded that the
virus may have been deliberately introduced by an underground organization
calling itself the Army of the 12 Monkeys. Serving a life sentence,
convict James Cole (Bruce Willis) is chosen to travel back in time to
gather information about that organization in an attempt to pinpoint the
origin of the virus, which remains incurable. Cole is forced to
"volunteer" for this disorienting assignment mainly because he has an
extraordinary memory.  That memory has also wrapped itself around a
traumatic vision from Cole's childhood -- of a man being gunned down at an
airport -- that manifests itself as a recurring dream. 
        Advised that he can spy on the past, but can't tamper with fate,
Cole is first zapped back to Baltimore circa 1990, where his mission is
abruptly complicated by his immediate incarceration in an insane asylum.
Bruised, bloody, and nearly incoherent, he fits the part of a raving
madman. But while his arrival seems random (he was supposed to land in
1996), the contacts he makes are significant. He meets up with fellow
inmate Jeffrey Goines (Brad Pitt), a charismatic nut case who will later
be seen to play a pivotal role as the leader of a group of animal rights
activists. He also attracts the attention of psychiatrist Kathryn Railly
(Madeleine Stowe), who could swear that she's seen Cole somewhere before.
(She's right, but we won't figure out where until later.)
        It's the interaction of all these characters, as well as the
subtle ways that Cole's dream changes over the course of the movie, that
fuel the film's prevalent uncertainty about cause and effect. At one point
Cole is convinced that he himself is responsible for unleashing the virus
by suggesting that it might be a keen idea for Goines to hijack a plague
from his virologist father. At another, we're deliberately left unsure
whether Cole is responsible for a grisly killing as a key scene unfolds at
length. And just when Dr. Railly starts to believe that Cole really is
telling the truth about his mission, Cole goes rational on her, insisting
-- just as she had tried to convince him previously -- that his visions of
the future are delusionary, and that he really is just a madman in need of
her help and guidance. 
        LA JETEE, the French film on which TWELVE MONKEYS is based, is a
science fiction story, the most famous work (and the only fiction film) by
famed documentarian Chris Marker. The story is told through a succession
of still frames with voiceover narration, and in only one brief shot does
this motion picture actually move. Gilliam claims in interviews that he
has never seen LA JETEE, but there seems to be a direct reference to its
unusual style in a scene where Dr.  Railly narrates a slide show about a
delusional soldier in World War I.  And when Railly and Cole take refuge
in a movie theater that happens to be showing Alfred Hitchcock's VERTIGO
(an important influence on Marker and LA JETEE), we're forced to consider
suddenly, almost subconsciously, the many interesting ways that film is
this film's doppelganger. It may be true that it takes a passing
acquaintance with film history to truly appreciate TWELVE MONKEYS;  the
most overwhelming shot in the film may be the moment when Bernard
Herrmann's love theme from VERTIGO wells up inexplicably on the
soundtrack, at exactly the point where Cole and Railly begin their
incognito rush toward destiny. 
        Of course, the actors are instrumental in grabbing the audience's
sympathy for a tale this far removed from everyday life, and Gilliam's
performers really come through for him. Willis' Cole is a burly, tragic
Everyman, a tough guy who looks like he's too often on the verge of tears. 
We've seen Willis take a pounding in the DIE HARD films, but he's never
looked this vulnerable -- in one of the film's early scenes, his face is
battered and bloody, with a thick line of drool strung off his lower lip.
If our big-budget hero embodies the film's core humanity, heartthrob Brad
Pitt is the off-kilter comic axis. Apparently urged to run with his most
hyperactive instincts, Pitt plays Goines as an unpredictable loon who
hammers his fast-talking points home with quick, neurotic gestures (his
charm is undercut by the possibility that he will be responsible for five
billion murders). As Dr. Railly, Madeleine Stowe has comparatively little
to do, though her presence is key as the only rational observer in the
film. Balancing her reactions between incredulity and blind faith, she's
the center holding the film's increasingly disparate elements together. In
fact, in the last scene of the film, the camera holds on her face, where
it seems possible that the entire contradictory spectrum of human feeling
is in evidence. 
        Until now, character has never been Gilliam's forte, and it's no
surprise that the films from his oeuvre that deal significantly in human
transformations -- THE FISHER KING and TWELVE MONKEYS -- are the ones he
had no hand in writing. It's as though the presence of a tight script
frees him from the more obsessive demands of following his bliss. (Among
screenwriter David Peoples' previous credits are BLADE RUNNER and
UNFORGIVEN, two fatalistic films that look long and hard at the static
nature of their heroes' respective identities as probable Replicant and
once and future gunslinger.) In Gilliam's films, of course, apparent
madness is often the only escape route from brutal, demanding reality. In
similar fashion, TWELVE MONKEYS plays wicked games with notions of
madness, perspectives on reality, and its protagonist's hopes and dreams. 
        After going over the film in my head time and time again, I'm
still not sure how all of the puzzle pieces fit together, and I start to
wonder what I really saw in certain scenes. But this is not a liability,
because the up-front emotional wallop packed by TWELVE MONKEYS makes the
niggling pleasures of deciphering the script's layers and loopbacks
strictly secondary. A second viewing is definitely in order, just to put
my mind at ease. And at the very end of a year when many film fans claimed
to relish repeated viewings of THE USUAL SUSPECTS -- a movie that actually
negates itself in its final scene -- I'm pleased beyond words to find a
movie that cares deeply for its characters even as they fall under the
wheels of destiny, instead of killing them just to be clever. 

Author
Billy Bud Vermillion
Twelve Monkeys, a film by Terry Gilliam
starring Bruce Willis, Madeline Stowe, Brad Pitt, 
and(hee-hee!)Frank Gorshin
        I've always been a great admirer of Terry Gilliam's films. His 
dark, often humorous, always edgy vision of the world has had  me 
enthralled since Time Bandits(one of my favorite films--favorite as 
opposed to those films which I acknowledge as great; it just has that 
certain magic which grabs me). 
Twelve Monkeys, in a lot of ways, is sort of a follow-up piece to 
his other films. He manages to incorporate the idea that insanity is 
relative(seen in The Fisher King), the concept of a dystopian future 
where one cannot trust anyone else(Brazil), and, the death of loved 
ones(seen in Time Bandits--though they weren't really so well-liked in 
that case, The Fisher King, The Adventures of Baron Von Munchausen, and, 
in a weird kind of reversal, Brazil). In fact, Twelve Monkeys seems to 
place Gilliam in the position of reworking many old ideas, often those of 
other people(La Jetee is mentioned as source material, and Vertigo is 
actually paid tribute to in the narrative, itself). 
This aside, the film is very much Gilliam's own novel work. He 
has created a strikingly original time travel movie, drawing some fine 
performances out of Bruce Willis(wow, I didn't use to think this guy 
could act!)and Brad Pitt(who, for a welcome change, isn't playing a dumb 
bohunk in this one, but rather an intelligent lunatic). 
Time travel movies tend to be difficult for filmmakers to present 
in realistic ways, the paradoxes involved often clouding up viewers minds 
to the point of numbness. Gilliam doesn't elude this bugaboo, though he 
does throw some interesting tricks into the mix. I especially enjoyed the 
ambiguity Willis felt towards his perceptions of reality. At the end, we 
are left wondering whether Willis' character, James Cole, caused the end 
of the world or not. 
Lemme explain: sometime in the future, Cole is sent back in time 
by a group of scientists to learn about the Army of the Twelve Monkeys 
who, in 1996, allegedly let loose a virus capable of destroying the 
world.He is sent back to 1991, however, where he meets Pitt and Madeline 
Stowe, a psychiatrist. He's incarcerated in a mental institution(Gilliam 
may be making a strong statement of social and moral outrage at the state 
of mental health care by his depictions of the hospital). He tries to 
warn them about the future, but it only helps in cementing his status as 
"insane." He is then brought back to the future, sent back to 1996, where 
he kidnaps Stowe(who has written a book on lunatics with end-of-the-world 
theories, shuttles back and forth a few more times, becomes convinced 
he's crazy, gets shot in 1918, Stowe ends up believing his story, they 
search for the Army of the Twelve Monkeys, etc. etc. Kinda confusing, but 
the confusion is necessary for Gilliam to keep his form consistent with 
his intentions. Did Cole, by going back in time to 1991, cause Stowe to 
write her book, which was read by a virologist/nutbar,which in turn led 
to the unleashing of the plague and the endanger-ification of mankind? 
Don't know the answer to that one. Gilliam gives us a few clues, but no 
hard and fast answers. The film's final shot is touching and provacative 
and is the best pseudo-answer available: a boy's eyes, staring up into 
the sky, weeping. The boy is Cole(woops, gave it away!sorry to those who 
ain't done seen it)and this scene seems to suggest a circularity to time, 
that the future has ramifications for the past and present and vice 
versa. 

Author
Christopher Null
     Avant-garde director Terry Gilliam, absent from the screen since
1991's THE FISHER KING, has at last returned.  The turn of 1996 brings us
12 MONKEYS, Gilliam's holocaust/time travel picture about a man, his
psychiatrist, and a fiendish plot to decimate the human race...I *think*. 
Gilliam is a visual mastermind, but as far as putting together a cohesive,
accessible film, he's coming up a little short.
     Over the 130-minute running time, a few facts about the plot emerge. 
You're advised to enter the theater as well-armed with information as
possible.  He's the lowdown:  Bruce Willis is James Cole, a prisoner in
the year 2035, when 99 percent of humankind has been eradicated thanks to
a virus propagated in 1997.  Neo-urban myth traces this virus to a radical
group known as the Army of the 12 Monkeys.
     Living underground to escape the deadly surface air, science has
somehow progressed to make time travel a possibility, just not a very
accurate one.  Cole is "volunteered" to be a guinea pig, and after
scouting the frozen surface in that clear bubble suit you've seen on TV,
he is sent back to 1996 to find a non-mutated sample of the virus from
which a cure can be made in 2035.
     That's the plan, anyway.  Turns out, the scientists miss, sending
Cole to 1990, when he is quickly captured and put in a mental hospital,
hooking up with the maniac Jeffrey Goines (Brad Pitt) and psychiatrist
Kathryn Railly (Madeleine Stowe).  At first, Goines appears to be a
harmless wacko, but his involvement in the 12 Monkeys soon becomes
suspect.  Railly, of course, patiently dismisses Cole's stories as
delusion, only to find the evidence continually mounting on his side.
     Cole bounces through no fewer than three time jumps plus a recurring
flashback to his youth, interspersed with several trips back home to
2035.  If you can follow all of this, you're doing well.  Actually putting
the pieces together takes a lot more work, and to really be satisfied with
this film you're expected to do it.
     Many people will probably leave 12 MONKEYS perplexed, but Gilliam
devotees won't want to miss this movie, nor will fans of any of the
principal actors.  Pitt also deserves special recognition (and has already
garnered a Golden Globe nod) for his enigmatic prophet of doom.
     And despite my beef with the interminable convolutions of 12 MONKEYS,
the film has one major thing going for it:  put simply, it's very, very
cool.  Gilliam's nightmarish underground world is comparable in grandeur
to the one he created in his masterpiece, BRAZIL, and it also reminds us
of screenwriter David Peoples's BLADE RUNNER.  The time travel element
updates these classics, mainly through showing us the constructs of the
present--mental hospitals, tenements, crack houses--and soberly reminding
us that "the distant future" may not be too far off.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Jim Potter
This motion picture is a synthesis of Dante's Inferno, "Blade
Runner" and Diary of a Death Foretold.  It begins with the dream
of a prisoner, James Cole, played by Bruce Willis. In the dream
James is a child at an airport who watches as the police gun down
a man running through the terminal. The man then dies cradled in
the arms of his lover, a young woman, played by Madeleine Stowe.  
The dream sequence, shot in slow motion has the eerie feel of
deja vu and recurs throughout the picture.  It becomes the
leitmotif of inevitable disaster that underlies the film. The
prisoner then awakens. He is in a cage deep in the bowels of the
earth.  Visually stunning, this prison consists of stacks of wire
cubes, such as one would find in a laboratory, each inhabited by
a single prisoner with only a hammock to sleep on.  Prisoners are
shuttled in and out of their cages by mechanical arms which
transport them to their various "volunteer" assignments.
On its most basic level, 12 Monkeys is a riveting sci-fi
action thriller.  It recounts a future society's efforts to
escape subterranean exile by intercepting a deadly virus that has
conquered the earth's surface in an earlier era. Prisoners are
drafted for specimen gathering topside and to travel in time back
to the point of contamination.  The scientist/jailers who send
them out on their coerced quest have discovered that the surface
contamination occurred in 1996. However, they have not yet
learned the precise cause of the catastrophic viral release.
Therefore, they enlist prisoners to make the perilous journey and
force them to detect the original virus before it mutates out of
control. This is a dangerous task because time travel is full of
surprises.  At one point James is arrested and placed in a mental
institution where he meets the woman who appears in his dreams.
She is a staff psychiatrist at the hospital with a special
interest in the deranged Cassandras who have predicted world
plague at various points in history.  She is intrigued by James
and ambivalent about his presumed insanity.  At another juncture
James finds himself naked, projected into the middle of a World
War I battlefield. He is mistaken for a German infiltrator by
French soldiers, and is shot and wounded.  Survivors of such
misbegotten time travels are sent out repeatedly if they are
lucky enough to be retrieved.  Some never return.
The 12 Monkeys of the film title refers to a motley guerilla
band of animal lovers led by a scientist's deranged son, played
by Brad Pitt, who gives an unforgettable performance.  The 12
Monkeys are outraged by the inhumane treatment of laboratory
animals subjected to grisly and painful experiments. Scientists
of the future suspect that this group of romantics caused the
release of the virus by freeing laboratory monkeys.  Willis'
assignment is to find this group and report back to his keepers. 
He faces many obstacles along the way and is finally assisted in
this project by the female psychiatrist whom he kidnaps. They
eventually fall in love and try to escape after Willis, in an act
of self-mutilation, painfully removes his own teeth which contain
the electronic leash that presumably allows his retrieval through
time.
On another level, the film is about postmodern consciousness: the
feeling that fascism is inevitable, our lack of a political
compass to combat it, and our impotence in influencing the
rapidly advancing course of events. Scenes of blood, water,
encapsulated nakedness, and cyclical rebirth mark each journey on
the time machine.  Willis is merely a laboratory animal doomed to
suffer repeated experiments and then be returned to his cage. 
Each trip to the past ends in frustration when the hero returns
to his subterranean Hell where he faces his Judges and
Interlocutors time and again.  There is no way to change this
cycle.  His only hope is to escape.
Past, present and future are so interchangeable that they are
conflated into a collage of the remembered present.  But the
remembered present is as fragmentary and disjointed as the image
in a broken mirror. The real and the artificial become
indistinguishable and the line between sanity and insanity is
blurred. There is no coherent future, no linear past and every
moment is on the edge of contingency.  In short, the film aptly
describes the present human condition throughout the advanced
capitalist world.  It is a world rocked by economic dislocation,
rapidly shifting capital, wild swings in the market, and a sense
of uncertainty and chaos.  These insecurities translate into a
consciousness in which humanity has lost its bearings and is
rocketing down the rails to a destination that can only be
disastrous.  No one seems to have the answer anymore. 
Science, once the hope of humanity, has become an instrument of
oppression.  In the past of 1996 it is used to subjugate and
torture animals for crass commercial gain rather than for the
good of humanity or to save the biosphere.  In the futurist
world, man has become the guinea pig.  Fascism has triumphed.
This film explores the emptiness of the postmodern condition. 
The Enlightenment Project posits that history unfolds in a way
that can be comprehended by human reason and which follows a
progressive trajectory toward ever increasing freedom. The
Enlightenment teaches that man can control his own destiny and
change his world for the greater benefit of all.  We can learn
from history because it has meaning. Postmodernism on the other
hand, has lost this faith in progress, abandoned the project, and
become mired in impotence. It sees all change as superficial and
cyclical and sees man as a victim rather than an agent of change. 
There is no longer cause and effect on a societal scale.  The
problems are too monumental. Our ability to make change occurs
only on the most basic interpersonal levels.  Therefore,
concerted human political action has no consequence; it is
futile.
12 Monkeys captures this mood of postmodernist despair.  The
future is devolution.  Man has become animal.  Human
consciousness loses its higher order function and sinks into the
primary consciousness of the animal world, the consciousness of
the remembered fragmentary present.  The animals may as well rule
the world because Man has become incapable of doing so.
12 Monkeys is a serious warning about the nature of our time. 
Unless collective action led by an organized social movement is
resurrected as a pole around which humanity can rally to build an
alternative culture and society, the world may sink into the
Fascist despair of late capitalist collapse.

Author
John Paul Powell
Starring: Bruce Willis, Madeleine Stowe, Brad Pitt and Christopher Plummer.  
Directed by: Terry Gilliam. 
Screenplay by: David Peoples and Janet Peoples.  
Produced by: Charles Roven.  
A Universal Pictures release.  
I can hear the faint moaning and groaning. A time travel picture? Have to 
think...Brain hurts...Smell smoke...Is something burning?...System overload...
Migraine coming on...Fading to black...Nighty-night...> 
What a revolting development! Filmmakers encouraging you to exercise your 
grey matter? Where do they get off? They deserve forty lashes! Step By Step and
Baywatch. That's quality. Television mind candy that doesn't require brain 
cells to produce or to watch.  
Mongoloid tube-heads bearing the attention spans of a box of stale donuts and 
whose usual reading material is... 
Beverly Hills, 90210 (cc) 1:00 
Brandon flosses his teeth while David smokes crack. Donna, the retard, attends
a self-help seminar and figures out how to operate a door knob. Valerie beds 
Steve, David and the California Angels starting lineup. Kelly is stalked by a 
serial rapist, sexually harassed by a co-worker, shot at by a street gang, 
kidnapped by an ex-boyfriend, blackmailed by the Mob, abducted by a UFO and 
gets a trendy haircut. Nat joins a Columbian drug cartel.  
...shouldn't be mentally taxed by 12 Monkeys if they cling to my handy TV 
references. 
Bruce Willis (David on Moonlighting) is a prison inmate in the year 2035 
(before Star Trek but beyond Melrose Place). The screws buzzed Bruce's 
cranium (Kojack, Capt. Picard), tattooed his prisoner number on it and 
deposited him in a cage. That's right, a CAGE not a cell. Hard ass dive 
this future world. Everyone's cranky since the holocaust.  
In 1996, a mutant virus devoured 99 per cent of Earth's population. The toxic
surface atmosphere drove mankind underground. Immune to the contagion, animals
(Flipper, Lassie) rule the planet. 
Scavenging Beta vcrs, gum wrappers, paper clips and duct tape from above
ground, the surviving scientists built a time machine (as in Dr. Who's 
Tardis) to send someone back to prevent the apocalypse. That "someone" is 
Willis. He's got a photographic memory. He ain't too sharp and he's haunted by
a childhood memory that could unlock the secret of the 12 Monkeys (the 
Egghead's solitary clue to who or what ignited the plague). He's got the job.
At least they didn't choose Pauly Shore or Jim Varney. Thank God for small 
miracles.  
The Eggheads botch the first expedition. Willis beams in too early and 
the local fuzz arrest him. His 12 Monkeys and apocalypse ravings land his 
sorry ass in the nut house. Incarcerated, he meets Jeffrey Goines (Brad Pitt),
the unstable son of a famous scientist and Dr. Kathryn Railly (Madeleine 
Stowe), a shrink and writer. Being tugged in and out of the present 
(therefore existing in two time frames) erodes Willis' sanity. The 
doomsday clock takes a lickin' but keeps on tickin' as Willis screws his
head on straight.  
The universes director Terry Gilliam conceives routinely bend and contort 
as if projected through fun house mirrors. People, places and things 
don't have rhyme, reason or a determined purpose (The Adventures Of Baron 
Munchausen, Brazil, The Fisher King). His experience as a cartoonist 
(Help! Magazine) and animator (Monty Python's Flying Circus) help and 
hinder Gilliam in the filmmaking process. His boundless imagination give 
genesis to eye-catching visuals. By the same token, the incessant flights 
of fancy stretch and snap continuity. 
Finally with 12 Monkeys, Gilliam has cleared his personal hurdle. Production 
designer Jeffrey Beecroft (Dances With Wolves) and cinematographer Roger Pratt
(Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, Batman) maintain the fabulous optics but the 
script is tight. There's structure. There's direction. We don't get lost 
in the shuffle. That is unless your idea of a weekly mental workout is 
whether Fraiser or Home Improvement wins out on Tuesday night.  
12 Monkeys is rated U for Unusual. Frank Gorshin (The Riddler on TV's Batman) 
x nitro-injected Brad Pitt - a slow midpoint + Pitt's naked butt - Willis' 
naked butt (twice) x spectacular set design x no convoluted time travel 
paradoxes + off-kilter camera angles + spottings of Monty Python humor x 
Gilliam's restraint = bad title, good film.  

Author
Andrew Hicks
        12 MONKEYS is the latest from bizarre science-fiction 
director Terry Gilliam (BRAZIL), a thoroughly interesting time-travel 
epic starring Bruce Willis and Brad Pitt... So where are the other ten 
monkeys? Just a joke, you guys. Pitt has finally earned my respect in 
12 MONKEYS as the psychotic millionaire's son whom Willis comes 
from the future to stop (an Oscar-nominated performance, by the way). 
Life in Willis' time is confined to the underground, a deadly virus 
lurking above the surface. He is sent back to 1990 to get a sample of 
the stuff so the doctors of the future can immunize themselves and see 
the light of day again.
        His mission backfires when he is committed to a mental 
hospital. No one believes his story about the imminent destruction of 
humanity by the terrorist group Army of the Twelve Monkeys, 
particularly not psychiatrist Madeline Stowe (go figure). After a couple 
days associating with the nuts (including Pitt) and trying to escape 
from the hospital, Willis disappears from his cell, to everyone's 
surprise and dismay. He winds up in the year 1955, where his mom 
falls in love with him and Christopher Lloyd can't fix the DeLorean... 
Sorry, I always use that joke when reviewing time travel movies.
        Willis actually ends up in his time, with the society leaders 
who sent him cursing him for a failed mission. He convinces them to 
give him one more chance and they send him to the year 1996, six 
years after he disappeared from the mental hospital. He kidnaps 
Stowe, who remembers his mysterious escape from the hospital six 
years ago, but she refuses to help him, still thinking he's nuts and of 
course you can't blame her for that. Predictably, she slowly comes to 
realize he actually has been sent from the future, about the same time 
Willis becomes convinced he's insane after all.
        This all escalates to the airport climax, with more twists than 
one of those donuts with all the twists (you know what I'm talking 
about here). The movie's ending leaves a lot of details open-ended, as 
the paradox of time travel dictates, while also leaving other details 
open to interpretation. The whole movie, though, is fast-paced and 
exciting, and possibly a little confusing for the less abstract thinkers in 
the audience. Gilliam adds his uniquely original directorial style to 
this uniquely original story to make a uniquely original movie for 
thriller and science-fiction movie lovers alike.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America for over 1/50th of a century!

Author
Michael Redman
Terry Gilliam's latest is a slam bang science fiction tour de force. Drawing
from the same deep swirling pool of inspiration that he did for "Brazil", the
former Monty Python member has another winner  at least for some of us.
Like most of his films, this is one of those `love it or hate it's. Some will
find it brilliant, dark but dazzling. Others will find it tedious, dark but
dazzling. 
I've heard the plot referred to as confusing by some, but to anyone who's
well-versed with time travel story lines, the themes are familiar. Bruce
Willis is incarcerated in a hell hole of a prison in the future where the
entire human population lives underground because of a deadly virus that
covers the planet surface. `Volunteering' (more like being chosen by a giant
grab-a-toy-with-the-claw machine) to be sent into the past, he gets a chance
at freedom.
His mission is to return to 1996 and find a pure strain of the virus so the
scientists of the future can return the people to the surface. Their time
travel device, like many of the futuristic artifacts (which look as if they
were borrowed from Brazil), isn't exactly high tech and only gets him to
the right time after sending him first to 1990 and then W.W.I. During his stay
in 1990, he is thrown into a mental institution where he meets Brad Pitt.
Finally making it to the right time, he finds that Pitt is head of the animal
rights group Army Of The 12 Monkeys, the organization thought to be
responsible for unleashing the virus.
Bouncing back and forth from the future to our time and back again, Willis
follows clues from incomplete historical records trying to find the virus only
to discover that he, himself is the cause of most of the clues. 
Come to think of it, the plot is somewhat convoluted, but in the end
everything makes sense. Well, almost everything. The real key to the ending is
the insurance salesperson sitting next to the red-haired scientist on an
airplane. Which time period is she from?
There has been much talk about how this is a new groundbreaking role for
Willis. In truth, it's not. He plays the same character that he has for years:
tough guy beaten down time after time only to rise back up, bloody and broken,
to go after the bad guys once again. The difference here is that he is even
better at it than ever before. Willis may only play one role, but he's got
that one down cold.
The surprise is Brad Pitt. Looking nothing like the Fabio clone from previous
films, he is masterful as the insane prisoner turned ecoterrorist mastermind.
Maybe he's more than just a pretty face after all.
[This appeared in the 1/17/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
