Title
Review for This Is Spinal Tap (1984)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  When it comes to mockumentaries and comic
documentaries, no one can beat Michael Moore--whose
"Roger and Me" takes aim at the CEO of General Motors for
downsizing his workers and "The Big One," which further
exposes corporate greed and political corruption.  Perhaps
the best known mockumentary of the 1980s, "This is Spinal
Tap," has been digitally re-released with an expected
September 2000 delivery of a VHS and a DVD with extra
minutes of interviews.  But extra minutes of interviews and
TV appearances are not what this movie needs.  It could
instead use some pruning, because with its totally improvised
script, redundancies, and downright unfunny takes on the
rock music industry, some in the audience may feel like
taking an epidural to relieve the pain.  I am admittedly the
guy who is more irritated by the use of that awful speech-
filler, "you-know," than anyone else in the world, and this
expression is used by every musician in the cast--even by
the interviewer who is filming the comic action--more times
than I've heard it said in any other film.  Considering that 50
hours of celluloid was used to extract its 82 minutes of hardly
priceless material, you'd think that director Rob Reiner could
have paid his editor a little extra to delete some of these
inflaters, but flaws in speech are just one of the problems of
a movie that has only intermittent humor going for it.
   What does work in Rob Reiner's mockrockumentary is that
everything is played straight.  No one winks or grins at the
inanities and stupidities on display.  Instead all characters
speak in their own natural ways, oblivious to the vacuousness
of their homespun philosophies and analyses of the
ensemble's vision.  The characters, Christopher Guest as
guitarist Nigel Tufnel; Harry Shearer as bass
player Derek Small; Michael McKean as lead singer and
guitarist David St. Hubbins; David Kaff as keyboardist Viv
Savage; and R.J. Parnell as drummer Mick Shrimpton are all
musicians in their real lives, giving the film an added feeling
of integrity.  And since Rob Reiner, in the role of
mockumentarian Marty DiBergi, is the production's actual
director, the verisimilitude thickens.
   The waggery, which is sit-comish, relies on an ever-
increasing number of gaffes and misdirections by the rock
ensemble known as Spinal Tap, or just Tap, a group which is
seen in England just before it is to make a major North
American tour beginning in New York--where it receives a
rousing reception by the youthful, mostly male audience. 
Why the lack of women in the following?  One of the band
explains that their "equipment"--actually cucumbers placed
inside their pants at an appropriate location--scares the girls
away.  In one of the few situation gags that work, bass player
Derek Smalls is stopped at the airport check-in booth when
despite removing all the metal from his pockets, the
bewildered security guard needs to run a portable detector
across his body.  When the gadget hums at exactly the spot
that produces that sound on Tim Allen's body in Harold
Ramis's "Galaxy Quest," the offending cucumber, wrapped
presumably in tin foil, is removed, and the flight continues.
   As the aging group goes on a downward spiral, its
audience contracting from the 10,000 that would appear at its
apex and is now down to 1,500 at best, arguments break out. 
Artie Fufkin (Paul Shaffer), is blamed for non-existent
promotion while the record company owner, Sir Denis Eton-
Hogg (Patrick Macnee), objects to a sexist cover on the
album, depicting a greased girl on all fours being led by a
man with a leash who extends a glove to her to be smelled. 
An adolescent gag about one member's dying by choking on
vomit (not his own vomit, but since vomit is not dusted, no
one knows whose) is followed by yet another wisecrack,
allegedly written by music reviewer for a theologically-
decorated album cover, "On what day did the Lord create
Spinal Tap, and could not He have rested on that day too?"
   The movie, surprisingly enough, is best when the musicians
are allowed to strut their stuff, giving us entertaining music
with deliberately banal lyrics.  In the movie's most prescient
quip, Ian Faith (Tony Hendra), the group's manager,
dismisses the idea that the band is losing favor with the
masses.  "The fans are just becoming more selective," in
Faith's view.  "This is Spinal Tap" is likely to be picked up by
just such a "selective" fan base when it re-appears in
theaters on September 1.
Rated R.  Running time: 82 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
THIS IS SPINAL TAP, the original mockumentary being re-released to 
theaters and with a new DVD out, has been called one of the funniest 
movies ever made, an accolade with which I wouldn't argue.  Still, it 
has a wonderfully droll sense of humor that may not appeal to everyone.  
Audiences at the film's initial test screens back in the early 1980s 
were quite negative.  They didn't understand that the film was 
satirizing rock documentaries, so they complained that the filmmakers 
should have found a better band or a less obscure one.  Of course, the 
band, which mimics bad-boy groups like KISS, is a fictional one, not an 
obscure one, and it is supposed to be awful.
Directed by Rob Reiner, who plays fictional documentarian Marty DiBergi, 
THIS IS SPINAL TAP is a deliciously witty comedy that mocks the world of 
rock.  Reiner shares the writing credits with Christopher Guest and 
Michael McKean, who play lead guitarists Nigel Tufnel and David St. 
Hubbins, and with Harry Shearer, who plays bass guitarist Derek Smalls.  
The entire film is an ensemble piece with a terrific supporting cast 
which includes Billy Crystal, as a loquacious mime, and Fran Drescher, 
as a pompous party hostess.  Guest, of course, went on to become the 
king of mockumentaries as the writer and director of WAITING FOR GUFFMAN 
as well as his most recent effort, the marvelously funny BEST IN SHOW.  
THIS IS SPINAL TAP includes some hokey old black-and-white television 
clips of the band when they were just a bunch of dorky boys with bowl 
haircuts, light-years from their current long-haired sophistication.  
Quite an informative documentary, we learn that the group's first name 
was "The Originals" until they found out that some other group had that 
name.  They changed their name to "The New Originals," so as not to 
conflict, but the original Originals changed their name too.  And so 
forth.  (I saw the movie at a theater across the street from a 
restaurant called "Original Joe's," but let's not go down that path.)
The movie follows the band on a disastrous tour of the United States, as 
cancellations abound.  Playing in tiny halls, the group's manager, Ian 
Faith (Tony Hendra), does his best to put a positive spin on low 
attendance.  "The band's appeal is becoming more selective," he explains 
to Marty.
The beauty of the acting is the way everyone treats the story with 
deadpan seriousness.  When shown music critics' reviews of their work 
that include words like "ponderous," "pretentious" and much worse, their 
only reaction is that their detractors are just "nit-picking."
In a film this funny it is hard to pick out favorite parts, but two have 
become comedy classics.  When asked the secret of their success, Nigel 
points to the band's amps.  Known as the loudest band around, Spinal Tap 
has amplifiers whose dials go to 11, whereas others only go to 10.  
Marty tries to point out the logical flaws of this to Nigel, but he 
might as well have been talking to the proverbial wall.
The other incident of monumental merit involves a little known 
scientific fact about human combustion.  For some reason the band's 
drummer position is jinxed.  Their first drummer died in a tragic and 
mysterious gardening accident that the police recommended against 
investigating.  Their most dramatic drummer death occurred on stage, as 
the lad exploded, leaving only a small stain behind.  Calmly and 
earnestly, David tells Marty, "Dozens of people spontaneously combust 
every year, it's just not widely reported."  Quite a science lesson.  
It's too bad they didn't make a sequel.  The band sketched out some of 
their plans for the future with the centerpiece being a rock opera about 
Jack the Ripper.  It could have been even bigger and "better" than 
"Springtime for Hitler" from THE PRODUCERS.
THIS IS SPINAL TAP runs a fast 1:22.  It is rated R for language and 
would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
