Title
Review for Non, ou a Vă Glória de Mandar (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A group of Portuguese soldiers are on their way to the front at the war
in Angola, in 1974.  On the way, they discuss patriotism, nationalism,
and colonialism in the context of Portuguese history.  Flashbacks are
used to illustrate Portugal's history.  Although parts of this film are
interesting, much of it is dry and even tedious.  Rather disappointing;
not as good as Manoel de Oliveira's last film.
Portugal (English subtitles), color, 1990, 110 minutes.
Director/Writer: Manoel de Oliveira
     The plot is very simple.  A group of Portuguese soldiers are in
Angola, in 1974.  They are in the back of a truck which is driving them
to the front lines, where they will join the battle against the
guerillas fighting for an independent Angola.  On the way, they have
long discussions about Portugal's ancient history, its colonial period,
and how nationalism and patriotism relate to colonialism and their
history.
     Flashbacks are used frequently to illustrate the Portuguese history
the soldiers are discussing.  Some of the flashbacks include: tribal
chieftain Viriato, in Roman times; King Afonso and the dream of a
combined Iberian Empire with Spain (12th Century); battles with the
Moors in Africa.  Most of the discussion centers on wars and colonial
conquests, and the utter futility of it all, the "vain glory of
command," of the film's title.
     The story continues as the soldiers arrive in a staging area, where
they await orders for field operations.  The discussion and flashbacks
continue, as the soldiers prepare for battle....
     Although the film does convey a message -- the futility of
colonialism and foreign military adventures, it does so in a dry,
rambling, and slightly incoherent way.  This was surprising and
disappointing to me, as my expectations were rather high for this film.
The last film by the Director, Manoel de Oliveira, was much better (THE
CANNIBALS, a black humor parody of opera, in which a bunch of stuffy,
pretentious opera singers accidentally engage in cannibalism).
     Although the film was disappointing, it does have some good
moments.  Although some of the historical flashbacks are quite dry,
there is one (far too brief) battle scene that looks like it was done by
the Three Stooges.  Also, one of the flashbacks deals with a visit of
Portuguese explorers to an island populated with beautiful, naked nymphs
and little cupids.  That flashback is quite silly and illustrates Manoel
de Oliveira's delightful (and slightly warped) sense of humor.  My
complaint is that there isn't enough of his wonderful humor in the film!
Also, part of the soldier's discussion is interesting, though I suspect
many viewers will find little of interest in their discussion.
     Manoel de Olivieira, who is 83 years young, is currently working on
his next film.  I look forward to his next film with interest (to be
released next year?).  As for the current film, I think it might appeal
to those with an interest in Portuguese history and/or modern
perceptions of colonialism.  I don't recommend it to a general audience
-- instead, see if you can find de Olivieira's film THE CANNIBALS on
video instead.
Print Source: Portuguese Film Institute; R.S. Pedro de Alcantara 45, 1;
1200 Lisbon; Portugal
