Title
Review for From Hell (2001)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
During a 10-week span in London in the fall of 1888, Jack the Ripper, a man
whose identity was never uncovered, committed five ritualistic, grisly murders
of prostitutes. This film is based on the graphic novel which assembled a theory
behind the century-old mystery. 
CRITIQUE:
Awesome! I love dark movies, I love stylish movies, I love good mysteries and I
love Johnny Depp...so yes, I really dug this movie! The Hughes Brothers are back
with a vengeance, out to show the world that they are directors to be taken
seriously, and this movie, my friends...is very serious! In fact, it's also very
gruesome and bloody and morbid and creepy and black as hell. It ain't for the
kids, I'll tell you that much. And if any of those recent hack directors of
two-bit SCREAM-esque slasher flicks want some advice on effective "kill scenes",
do not look any further, because each one committed to this film is a cinematic
stunner, especially when compared to their generic slice-and-dice contrivances.
In fact, most of this film's structure is very creative, the actors, all solid,
the atmosphere and "feel" of the picture, remarkably real (gotta love those
"unfortunates"), and the descent into darkness, well honed by the filmmakers.
You can almost taste the seediness off the screen and quickly come to appreciate
the politics of the time. But it's also an impressive mystery film, based on the
true-life tale of Jack the Ripper, a man whose identity was never discovered.
The theory in this film is based on the graphic novel "From Hell" written by
Alan Moore and presents a compelling story, which despite being a little Oliver
Stone-ish, did manage to tie up all of its loose ends quite nicely, and present
us with an entertaining bowl of mayhem, sexual depravity, drug usage, insanity,
murders and love? Yes, the Brothers even managed to slip a little "love" story
in here, and despite not truly being developed, I guess it could've been much
worse and taken up more time than was provided already. That's right, there's no
real need to put any "romance" in a film about a mass murderer! But that aside,
you gotta give up the props to actor extraordinaire Johnny Depp, who once again
possesses the strength in character and flawless acting abilities, to center
this movie all the way through. Sure, he's just playing a less goofier version
of his Ichabod Crane character from SLEEPY HOLLOW, but he does it so well and
even added a Michael Caine accent to his mixed bag of tricks in this one. I was
also surprised at how little Heather Graham annoyed me in this film (I was sure
that her presence would ruin this movie, but she was fine) and how little the
dreams/fantasies of Depp's character had to do with the film's development (from
what I had seen in the trailer, I thought the filmmakers were going to make this
the crux of the story, but thankfully, it wasn't).
On the downside, the film doesn't really explain the whole Freemasons cult
organization real well and lacks character development. But then again, a story
about the most mysterious serial killer of all-time is probably not the ideal
spot for character refinement. I mean, the less I knew about each person, the
more suspicious I became of each one's motives, reasons, etc... In fact, I was
actually quite surprised by who was presented as the killer in the end, and that
was in part, due to the distance to which I'd been held from the film's
characters...or am I giving the filmmakers too much credit for something that
might not have been their intention? Perhaps. Overall, this is an extremely
creepy production, with glorious cinematography (reminiscent of Coppola's
DRACULA and Burton's SLEEPY HOLLOW), a grim score and solid acting. But it's not
for everyone. Some may be utterly repulsed by the gory particulars of these
tragic events, and even though the murders aren't shown as graphically as you
might think, there's enough here to send the squeamish right out the doors. But
I for one love movies that blend their eclectic visual style with an interesting
mystery and palpable, gothic atmosphere, and this flick is just that and plenty
more! And God knows that I will certainly not be surrendering the burnt image of
Jack the Ripper's haunting cape silhouette and gleaming silver knife from my
mind anytime soon...brrrrr!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Crow (9/10) - Dark City (9/10) - Dracula (7/10) - JFK (9/10) - The Nightmare
before Christmas (10/10) - The Ninth Gate (8/10) - The Others (9/10) - Quills
(8/10) - Shadow of the Vampire (6/10) - Sleepy Hollow (8/10)

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Films adapted from comic books have had plenty of success, whether they're
about superheroes (Batman, Superman, Spawn), or geared toward kids (Casper)
or the arthouse crowd (Ghost World), but there's never really been a comic
book like From Hell before.  For starters, it was created by Alan Moore (and
Eddie Campbell), who brought the medium to a whole new level in the mid '80s
with a 12-part series called The Watchmen.  To say Moore and Campbell
thoroughly researched the subject of Jack the Ripper would be like saying
Michael Jackson is starting to look a little odd.  The book (or "graphic
novel," if you will) is over 500 pages long and includes nearly 30 more that
consist of nothing but footnotes.  In other words, don't dismiss this film
because of its source.
If you can get past the whole comic book thing, you might find another
stumbling block in From Hell's directors, Albert and Allen Hughes.  Getting
the Hughes brothers to direct this seems almost as ludicrous as casting
Carrot Top in, well, anything, but riddle me this:  Who better to direct a
film that's set in the ghetto and features really violent street crime than
the mad geniuses behind Menace II Society?  The ghetto in question is, of
course, Whitechapel in 1888 London's East End.  It's a filthy, sooty place
where the whores (called "unfortunates") are starting to get a little
nervous about this mysterious psychopath who has been carving through their
profession with surgical precision.
When the first stiff turns up, copper Peter Godley (Robbie Coltrane, The
World is Not Enough) calls in Inspector Frederick Abberline (Johnny Depp,
Blow) to crack the case.  Abberline, a widower, has prophetic dreams he
unsuccessfully tries to quell with copious amounts of absinthe and opium.
Upon arriving in Whitechapel, he befriends an unfortunate named Mary Kelly
(Heather Graham, Say It Isn't So) and proceeds to investigate the horribly
gruesome crimes that even the police surgeon can't stomach.
I don't think anyone needs to be briefed on Jack the Ripper, so I won't go
into the particulars here, other than to say Moore and Campbell have a
unique and interesting theory about both the identity of the killer and the
reasons he chooses to slay.  In the comic, they don't bother cloaking the
identity of the Ripper, but screenwriters Terry Hayes (Vertical Limit) and
Rafael Yglesias (Les Misérables) do a good job of keeping him hidden from
viewers until the very end.  It's funny to watch the locals blindly point
the finger of blame at Jews and Indians because, after all, an Englishman
could never be capable of committing such ghastly acts.  And From Hell's
ending had me whistling the Stonecutters song from The Simpsons for days
("Who holds back the electric car/who made Steve Guttenberg a star?"). Don't
worry - it'll all make sense when you see it.
Now onto From Hell's appearance:  It's certainly dark and bleak enough, and
it's surprising to see how much more it looks like a Tim Burton film than
Planet of the Apes did (at times, it seems like Sleepy Hollow 2).  The print
I saw wasn't completely finished (both color and music had not been
finalized, so no comments about Marilyn Manson), but cinematographer Peter
Deming (Don't Say a Word) ably captures the dreariness of Victorian-era
London and helped make the flashy killing scenes remind me of the crazy
flashbacks in Twin Peaks, even though the violence in the film pales in
comparison to that in the black-and-white comic.  Oscar winner Martin
Childs' (Shakespeare in Love) production design turns the original Prague
surroundings into one creepy place.
Even the acting in From Hell is solid, with the dreamy Depp turning in a
typically strong performance and deftly handling a British accent.  Ians
Holm (Joe Gould's Secret) and Richardson (102 Dalmatians) log in great
supporting roles, but the big surprise here is Graham.  I cringed the first
time she opened her mouth, imagining her attempt at an Irish accent, but it
actually wasn't half bad.  The film, however, is all good.
2:00 - R for strong violence/gore, sexuality, language and drug content

Author
Steve Rhodes
"One day, men will look back and say, I gave birth to the twentieth century,"
Jack the Ripper brags in the opening credits.  FROM HELL, directed by the Hughes
Brothers, Albert and Allen Hughes, whose previous films (AMERICAN PIMP, DEAD
PRESIDENTS and MENACE II SOCIETY) were light-years away from English costume
dramas, offer us intriguing, if far fetched, answers to the questions of who
Jack the Ripper was and why he mutilated all of those prostitutes  
The movie is absolutely mesmerizing with the images equally gross and
engrossing.  Martin Childs's deliciously diabolical production design and Peter
Deming's dramatic cinematography give the picture a stunning look that one hopes
the Academy will remember when it comes time to vote.  The London skyline lit
with hellish colors as ominous clouds move overhead is the best of the movie's
many memorable visuals.
The always amazing Johnny Depp plays the lead role of Inspector Frederick
Abberline, a drug addict who likes a little poison in his brew to get that extra
kick he needs to get his dreams in gear.  His prescient nightmares, as well as
his Sherlock Holmes detective skills, enable him to solve unsolvable crimes.
Heather Graham, plays Mary Kelly, the lady of the night to whom the inspector
takes a shine.  But, hey, she's Heather Graham, any man past puberty would go
for her.  In a profession in which the women look like scullery maids and mud
wrestlers, Mary is the only one who looks like she just finished shooting a soap
commercial.  But you didn't really want to see a dirty looking Graham when you
could see her in all her cream-skinned glory, did you?  Mary looks to be on
Jack's short list unless the inspector can stop him first.
Jack's crimes are so heinous and disgusting that even the coroner pukes, and
frequently.  Jack likes to slice up his victims quite professionally, taking
various internal organs home for souvenirs.  This leads the inspector to suspect
someone other than a working class bloke, which draws scorn from his superior,
Police Commissioner Sir Charles Warren (Ian Richardson).  "An educated man?" Sir
Charles says, "That's preposterous!"  
It was a time when the police didn't protect, and the doctors practiced
quackery.  One kindly, old surgeon, Sir William Gull (Ian Holm) comes to advise
the inspector.  When the surgeon worries that certain revelations may prove
dangerous, the inspector reassures him, "I'm well past the point of safe
return."
Robbie Coltrane ("Cracker") is excellent as the inspector's sergeant.  Sometimes
the case scares the sergeant, especially when he begins to sense where it is
leading.  "I don't know what you're thinking, and I don't care to know," he
tells the inspector.  Trust me, you're going to want to know.  And you're going
to be on the edge of your seat, waiting to find out all of the details, even
though you'll quickly guess major parts of the mystery.
FROM HELL runs 2:01.  It is rated R for "strong violence/gore, sexuality,
language and drug content" and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 19, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 20th Century Fox/Underworld Pictures 
 Director: Albert Hughes, Allen Hughes
 Writer:  Terry Hayes, Rafael Yglesias from a graphic novel by
Alan Moore and Eddie Campbell
 Cast: Johnny Depp, Heather Graham, Ian Holm, Robby
Coltraine, Jason Flyming, Ian Richardson
 Screened at: AMC, NYC, 10/11/01
   The Hughes Brothers' new movie, once again filmed in their
favorite location--the ghetto--gives new meaning to the song from 
"Most Happy Fella," "You've Gotta Have Heart."  In this case, the
principal villain (for there are a great many bad people in this
story, which comes from a graphic novel by Alan Moore and
Eddie Campbell), wants not only the body's principal pump but is
even more into cutting out his victims' ovaries and kidneys.  Jack
the Ripper, who in this version has committed himself ritually to
kill five prostitutes, was in real life never caught, which explains
the freedom that directors and novelists have had in concocting
their own fantasies about the serial killer.  Both Alfred Hitchcock
and John Brahm created works about "The Lodger," about a new
tenant in a turn-of-century London boarding house who may be
Jack the ripper, both films stressing atmosphere as does the
Hughes Brothers' version.  Nicholas Meyer's "Time After Time,"
however, is the most fanciful adaptation, that one of H.G. Wells
following Jack the Ripper from Victorian England to the America
of 1979 in his time machine.
   But Albert Hughes and Allen Hughes' version is surprisingly
conventional, despite the occasional, limited use of surreal
imagery to add to the damp and dreary atmosphere of London's
Whitechapel district where all the murders occurred. 
Whitechapel featured many of the attributes of a modern
American slum--prostitutes working for drug money or even for
mere survival, muggers, gangsters and the like--which is
probably what gave the directors the incentive to take the project
on after having made two ultra-violent ghetto films, "Dead
Presidents" and "Menace II Society."  
   The story opens on a couple of low-life criminals from the
Nichols gang, who are self-appointed pimps and so-called
protectors of the fairly large community of street hookers in
Whitechapel's mean, cobblestone streets.  They are insisting that
each of the women hand over a poundstrerling per week (worth
more in 1888 than it is now), and they lean particularly on the
surprisingly clean and well-attired Mary Kelly (Heather Graham). 
After photographer Peter Deming shifts his lenses to a live
demonstration in a medical school of a prefrontal lobotomy, a
crude method of destroying the aggressive parts of a psychotic's
brain, we are introduced to a bloody scene as Jack the Ripper's
dagger streaks into the gloomy streets, polishing off yet another
victim.  
   Police chief Sir Charles Warren (Ian Richardson) has assigned
Inspector Fred Abberline (Johnny Depp) to bring Jack the Ripper
to justice with the assistance of Sgt. Peter Godley (Robbie
Coltrane).  Straight-arrow Godley is regularly disturbed by the
idiosyncratic inspector who, having recently lost his wife and
child takes refuse in opium--which gives him some limited
psychic powers such as those enjoyed by Ted Brautigan in Scott
Hicks's "Hearts in Atlantis."  
  In the tradition of Hollywood paranoia pictures that point the
finger regularly at people high up in government as the fomenters
of criminal acts, "From Hell" indicts not only the low-life hoodlums
like The Ripper and the vicious Nichols gang but suggests that a
conspiracy at the highest levels of British government, namely,
Queen Victoria, may be involved in directing the exceedingly
bloody acts of murder against the prostitutes.  Since the killings
remain unsolved for a length of time, people in seats of power
are ready to scapegoat minorities, particularly Jews, as the
perpetrators of the offenses, which gives a modern audience yet
another example of a technique that began long before the 20th
century's bloodlusts and ethnic cleansings.
   Johnny Depp, though in his usual eccentric role, is
disappointing in that his character does not deviate a whole lot
from the conventional. Even Samuel Taylor Coleridge, whose
contributions to the world include two major poems "The Ancient
Mariner" and "Kublai Khan," was fond of opium, as displayed
through Julien Temple's more imaginative film, "Pandaemonium,"
and in this story Depp does not approach the bizarre nature of
his Gilbert Grape of Ed Wood or Edward Scissorhands.  His
character's passion for Mary Kelly, his wish that she can leave
the ghetto and go off to live with a family in a countryside cottage,
is unconvincing given his lack of chemistry with the hooker, who
is for some reason far cleaner than her street comrades and
bears a surprisingly healthy skin.
   "From Hell," then is part slasher movie, part atmospheric film
(the Hughes' Brothers made good use of Prague and especially
of a set designed at the famous Barrandov studios), and part
Stephen-King supernatural yarn.  The narrative is broken up too
often, and the story takes too long getting down to a cadence, but
on the whole is a decent enough contribution to the never-ending
fascination with a serial killer whose crimes may come across as
misdemeanors when set against the more perversely energetic
executions of recent times.
Rated R.  Running time: 123 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
