Title
Review for Life of Brian (1979)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dragan Antulov
Monty Python, legendary British comedian troupe, usually
divides people into two very distinct camps. Some consider
them comedic geniuses and literally worship all their
incarnations - all episodes of BBC show, songs, books and
movies. Other simply can't digest their rather strange, dark
and twisted sense of humour and, accordingly, can't fathom
what was so special about them. The author of this review
belongs somewhere in the middle. I first encountered Monty
Python in late 1980s, when former Yugoslav television aired
BBC show. Initially, I was somewhat disappointed - some gags
were truly funny, some were hard to understand. Later, when
I watched the entire show for the second time, I learn to
appreciate their humour a little more, but I still don't see
them as undisputed kings of comedy. That notion is
strengthened with my experiences with Monty Python films
that turned to be disappointments. The only exception is
LIFE OF BRIAN, directed in 1979 by Terry Jones. Before
watching I had entire film spoiled thanks to my friend who
happened to be most enthusiastic Monty Python fan. The
resulting lack of surprises didn't prevent huge outbursts of
laughter when I watched LIFE OF BRIAN for the first time.
Interestingly enough, LIFE OF BRIAN is somewhat obscure
chapter in recent film histories. It could be explained with
the fact that it tackles subject which is rather sensitive
for too many people around the world - religion, or to be
precise, fundaments of Christian religion. The movie
protagonist is Brian of Nazareth (played by Graham Chapman),
ordinary bloke from Judea who just happened to be born few
blocks away from Jesus. He doesn't like the fact that he is
bastard son of Roman centurion, and his hatred of Romans
leads him to join People's Front of Judaeo, group of rather
idle revolutionaries. Their attempts to overthrow Roman yoke
are mostly unsuccessful and in the process, Brian not only
brings the attention of the authorities, but also of the
masses that see long awaited Messiah in him.
For me, LIFE OF BRIAN is the best Monty Python film because,
unlike in all the rest, Monty Python jokes are held together
with more or less coherent plot. But that doesn't mean that
the film is conventional in any other sense. For example,
all members of Monty Python team are playing different
characters, yet in doing so they give each of them something
unique, so even those viewers who are unfamiliar with Monty
Python's unconventionality won't notice it. It is hard to
single out the best one among that multitude of characters
and incredible performances, but Graham Chapman as Brian is
probably the best answer. His performance is especially
touching when we take into account that the actor died few
years after the finishing of the film. Other good episodes
also stand - like Terry Jones as Brian's mother Mandy, John
Clues as revolutionary leader Redge, Michael Pallin as
Pilate, Michael Pallin as Ex-Leper and Eric Idle as Stan who
wants to be called Loretta. Even Terry Gilliam, the least
recognisable part of the team, has impressive role of
Jailer, and the other actors are fine too, including Sue
Jones-Davies as Judith, the only real girl among
revolutionaries.
Jokes in this film aren't just verbal, but visual too. The
film is directed by Terry Jones, whose latter record wasn't
that impressive (ERIK THE VIKING). But, in the barren and
simple settings of Tunisia provide quite adequate setting
for the whole story, and Jones is doing fine job. Gilliam's
animation is used only in opening titles, so it is not too
distracting. Members of Monty Python team also used greater
creative freedom of feature film, and provided this film
with enough quantities of four-letter words, blood and gore.
Graham Chapman entered movie history as the main participant
in the most spectacular film scene that involves full
frontal male nudity.
Some Christians, naturally, didn't like this film. It was
considered blasphemous, theatres showing it became favourite
target of picketing Christians, and Norway banned it. Those
who see this film as an attack on Christianity and Judaism
may have some point, although the film authors defended
their work as satire not on religion itself, but the way
religion is presented to the masses. Some jokes in this film
are hard to understand without familiarity with biblical
movies; members of Monty Python team probably noticed that
people in such movies hardly talk in behave in the way
normal people would. Jesus (who appears in a cameo role
played by Kenneth Colley) is mostly left out of picture, and
film concentrates on his contemporaries, but some parallels
with biblical events are impossible to ignore (miracles,
crucifixion etc.). Movie could be viewed as an attack not on
religion itself, but on its most absurd and dangerous forms,
like blind faith and fanaticism that accompanies it. The
criticism of fundamentalism and traditionalism on the right
is nicely contrasted with the way this film takes stabs at
radicalism on the left side of political spectrum. People's
Front of Judaea and their rivals in the Judaean political
underground could be viewed as author's commentary on
various extreme left-wing groups drowned in self-destructive
factionalism and even more irrationalism acts of terrorism
that marked 1970s. Some humour in this film is less
ambitious, like farcical and surreal scene of UFO abduction,
which could be seen as authors' comment on STAR WARS
crazyness. But even in such jokes, humour is great, although
some, like the one involving wall graffiti, require benefits
of the classical education. Some jokes, on the other hand,
aren't very funny or that effective.
But, despite those flaws, LIFE OF BRIAN remains one of the
best underapreciated films made in last hundred years. Time
would silence its critics, and new generations would watch
it, laugh and think about its messages. Probably the best
homage to LIFE OF BRIAN happened in 1982, during Falkland
War. Same as the film's protagonist, surviving crew of HMS
Sheffield, sinking British warship, found comfort and
encouragement in the ending song and its immortal lyrics
"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life".
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I've heard this movie condemned as one of the most 
blasphemous pieces of Satanic filth ever put on celluloid. I'd say it's 
just not that funny. When you're taking on the dominant religion of 
your culture, you'd better have some pretty dynamite material, but 
that can't be said when the funniest part of the movie has your 
"chosen one" singing "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life" 
while being crucified. The Monty Python troupe managed to turn 
death and the afterlife into something hilarious in THE MEANING 
OF LIFE, but when trying to satire the life of Jesus, they more or 
less strike out.
        Their focus isn't on Jesus Himself but on a lesser known 
contemporary, Brian, who lives a normal life until one day a bunch 
of people just start following him for no reason. He is soon hailed 
as the Messiah, even though he insists he's not. And eventually, he 
ends up on the cross singing "Always Look on the Bright Side of 
Life." A skimpy plot summary, yes, but so is the plot itself. I only 
saw this two days ago but can scarcely remember anything about 
it other than the impression that only a few of the jokes were 
funny. It would have taken a miracle from God to save this 
movie, but obviously the Pythonites aren't on His good side 
anymore.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Oystein Brekke
Director: Terry Jones
With: Graham Chapman, John Cleese, Eric Idle, Terry Jones, Michael Palin,
Terry Gilliam
In the BBC's satirical show "Not the 9 o'clock news", there was a sketch in
which an anglican bishop has to defend himself from accusations that the
general synod's latest movie "Life of Christ" is a blatant parody on Monty
Python. The Life of Brian stirred up some controversy when it first came
out, in Norway it was initially banned for blasphemy, and only released in
1982. What was all the fuss about? The second full-length motion picture
from the English comedy-group Monty Python (Chapman, Cleese, Idle, Jones,
Palin and Gilliam). 
Their first film, "Monty Python and the Holy Grail" tackled the Arthurian
cycle from the Middle Ages. For this one, they turned to the new testament.
A brilliant idea, and one certain to raise controversy. Some people will
always think that the Bible simply shouldn't be a topic of comedy. Monty
Python thought differently, and the result was a hilarious movie that is -
at least to my mind - free of any real blasphemy. Christ himself is never
treated with disrespect, indeed he is only a peripheral figure in this
film. The comedy is mainly at the expense of ordinary people, in high
places or in low, and the things that they do. And some of it is just plain
crazy.
As one would expect, the film is basically one long sequence of sketches,
tied together by the story of Brian (Graham Chapman). Brian is born in a
stable in Bethlehem in the year 0. (Not _the_ stable though, that's the one
next door!) His life is completely ordinary, until he joins the People's
Front of Judea, an extreme terrorist organization, devoted to driving the
Romans out, toppling the Roman Empire and then taking over the world.
Romani ite domum! Eventually he is captured by the Romans, escapes and,
completely randomly and involuntarily, gains a large following of people
who believe he is the Messiah. And all he ever wanted to do was make an
impression on the beautiful Judith...
Monty Python's style of comedy is one that you either love or hate. More
precisely, you either become a fanatical devotee, and start tracking down
tapes of all the TV-shows and movies, or you just don't understand what's
so funny. The latter group seems to be in a minority though, and
understandably so. Monty Python's comedy has something for all. One part
physical comedy (John Cleese hopping, Terry Jones naked), one part verbal
humour and word-plays, ("Blessed are the cheesemakers. Well, he was
obviously referring to makers of dairy-products in general!") gently
sprinkled with Terry Gilliam's crazy animations. And the diversity of
characters: everything from the snobbish Romans to the dominating mother,
to the haggling shopkeeper, to the would-be revolutionaries - all
character-types we can instantly recognize from our own lives or our own
societies.
Who should see this film: Anyone who has ever laughed, or wanted to laugh,
at a comedy. A note to Christian fundamentalists: Remember that crucifixion
_was_ a common punishment in the Roman Empire.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Graham Chapman, John Cleese, Micahel Palin, Terry Gilliam, Eric
Idle, Terry Jones. Director: Terry Jones Written: By the cast.
At first there was 'The Life of Christ'. Who can forget 'The Sermon on
the Mount', 'The Feeding of the Five Thousand', and 'The Last Temptation
of Christ'. Ooops, did I say that? Must have misplaced a page out of
Scorsese's books. Then there is the 'Life of Brian'. Who can forget the
'Gourd of Life', the 'Missing Slipper' and the 'Miracle of the Berry
Tree.'
"Brian child prodigy, the creation of mistaken identity, who had the
misfortune of being born on Christmas day, to forever be compared to the
greater man. His gifts of Myrrh, Gold and Frankincense snatched away at
birth by three wise men. Not as stupid as haggard looked. His mother in
great need of shave, with voice so deep a frog prince one could almost
mistake her be. Grew up in town of Bethlehem, nay carpenter or humble
slave, but rising member of 'Judean People's Front'. To see the Pharisee
of Cleese organise let's stone 'Jehovah' speech, to watch women with
camel beards, pick up rocks in furious vent their anger be on that
stupid Pharisee. Next of note, on Graffiti paint. The walls of
Jerusalem, not 'All Hail Mary' or 'Hail King David', but one hundred
times from dusk till dawn, poor Brian slaves with picture words to pen
'Hail Caesar' not in one, but three Hebraic, Greek and Aramaic. Thus his
life goes on to forever be, remembered as Christ's prodigy. Where 'Bigus
Dickus' brings laughs bigger than 'Fall of Rome'; to mercies feet,
Brian's fate rests on Pontius Pilate's mouthy lisps with 'evewy Wobert,
Wichard and Bwian'. To end up crossed not with nail to hand, but rope to
arm and platformed feet. To die for cause J.P.F., P.L.O., and I.R.A. His
dying words nay 'Father forgive them for they know not what they do.',
but hey 'Always look on the bright side of life.'"
     From 'The Chronicles of Monty Python Snippets' by TMT Voon.
Technically speaking how can one criticise 'Monty Python' when in truth
they are a mockery of themselves. One cannot take the talents of Cleese,
Idle, Palin and the others and expect Shakespeare, Keats, or Wordsworth.
Confusing in many parts i.e. the kidnapping of Brian by a space craft, the
use of the same actors to play multiple characters. This irreverent
comedy pastes together not a script or a plot, but various stand up
situations of issues relating to the Christian faith. Most notably
'Blind Faith', and the unquestioned acceptance of miracles. However, the
definition of faith is one which does not have it's roots imbedded in
explanation or logic, so in truth faith is blind. As with every Monty
Python movie, the sets, the costumes, the entire film is always
secondary to the jokes and the actors. So what we have is a lot of
adolescent school boys having plenty of fun playing with themselves in
Jerusalem.
