Title
Review for Tea with Mussolini (1999)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Jonathan Richards
     Franco Zeffirelli's reminiscence of his formative years in
Mussolini's fascist Italy is pretty irresistible, in spite of a
persistent shallowness of story and a touch of weakness for self-
glorification.  What it has going for it is Zeffirelli's reliable
bonfire of surface vanities, including a nice evocation of period and
glorious camerawork by David Watkin ("Out of Africa"); and best of
all, a cast of actresses as delicious as the ice cream sundae
disparaged by one of their number as an American vulgarism.
Dame Maggie Smith is Lady Hester, widow of the former British
Ambassador and the doyenne of a clutch of pixillated British lady
expats in Florence known as the Scorpioni.  Lady Hester is a full-bore
snob, and when she snorts "Americans!", of course we love it.  Among
her circle are Arabella, a dotty romantic artist played by Dame Judi
Dench, whose career was crowned with a Tony this week, and Mary (Dame
Joan Plowright), secretary to a philandering Italian businessman.
Mary finds herself with the care and feeding of young Luca (Charlie
Lucas), the motherless and unwanted illegitimate son of her boss.
Luca, the end titles tell us, "grew up to be an artist and helped with
the making of this picture."  A degree in rocket science will help you
understand that Luca is Zeffirelli himself.
Rounding out this bevy of talent is that American vulgarism
herself, Elsa (Cher), a former showgirl who marries rich old men and
gives them a bang for their buck before they go on to their next
reward ("He's an angel," she confides of the latest, "or soon will
be....")
The Scorpioni are at tea in an elegant hotel dining room when
their protected world is rudely interrupted by shouting blackshirted
hooligans smashing the stained glass windows and letting in an
unpleasant whiff of the real world outside.  Troubled, the
ambassador's widow travels to Rome to see Mussolini, who smarmily
reassures her over tea that she has nothing to fear.
But of course she does, they all do, though when war breaks out
they stubbornly refuse to leave the country that is, after all, their
home.  They're rounded up as enemy aliens and incarcerated, though
they are soon moved to hotel quarters in San Gemignano -- courtesy,
Lady Hester is sure, of her friend and protector Il Duce.  At this
point the teenage Luca (Baird Wallace) returns from school in Austria,
where his father had sent him to learn to be a good Nazi.  Instead, he
devotes himself to the ladies and to the Resistance, and eventually
the war turns out well.
Smith and Dench reprise their characters from "A Room with a
View", but these ladies are so good that you gladly accept the
type-casting.  Best of all is Joan Plowright, who plays a lovely scene
with young Luca and a puppet stage that anticipates his future
calling.  Cher in her best scenes reminds us what a wonderful and
charming actress she is, and dazzles us with what can be truly called
a sculpted beauty.  Lily Tomlin is good in a smaller role.
It's an up-and-down ride, but it would be a shame to miss a movie
that offers such pleasures just because of a few shortcomings.  Take
"Tea" and see.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Centering on a group of feisty women yet too arty to be
called a chick flick, with its subjects too old to designate this
a date movie, "Tea With Mussolini" is an opulent production
that typifies its director's craftsmanship. This sentimental and
autobiographical work features frequently witty dialogue and
superb acting by a team of true professionals with solid
insight into the minds of people so set in their ways that they
refuse to recognize the realities of the political turmoil
encircling them.  "Tea With Mussolini" is a filmed version of
the first three chapters of film director Franco Zeffirelli's
autobiography, adapted for the screen by scripter John
Mortimer--whose expertise about Italy during the 1930's
serves the project well.  We come away from the picture with
a better understanding of how childhood influences affect a
director's output.  Zeffirelli's entire yield--his lush, innovative
filmed versions of such Shakespearean plays as "Romeo and
Juliet, "The Taming of the Shrew," "Hamlet" and "Othello"--
might not have been possible had not a group of women
known as the Scorpioni (for the their biting wit) stamped their
influence on him early on.  Making bold use of his
imagination--particularly in casting two outrageously
handsome young men as his youthful stand-ins and in
implying that he was a member of the Italian resistance
against the German occupation force--Zeffirelli paints an
ambivalent portrait of a circle of English and American
women who arrogantly stand up to Italians with whom their
countries are at war.  Refusing to heed warnings to go home
before war is declared, they emerge a few years older but
none the wiser for their troubles.
   The women, eccentrically diverse, form a community in the
Florence of the 1930's, and include the group's doyenne,
Lady Hester (Maggie Smith), the widow of the British
ambassador to Italy; Arabella Delancey (Judi Dench), who
copies frescoes in the Uffizi Gallery and is followed
everywhere by her beloved dog; Mary Wallace (Joan
Plowright), who does secretarial work for the clothing
manufacturer who has fathered a boy, Luca, out of the
wedlock; the stunning and fabulously rich American Elsa
Morganthall (Cher), who is in Florence to collect modern art;
and Georgie (Lily Tomlin), who is in Italy on a dig and is an
out-of-closet lesbian decades before this was fashionable.
   The film opens in 1935 as war clouds hover over Europe
and ends with the liberation of Florence from German
occupiers by Scottish troops.  Loosely plotted, the story
begins in the office of a clothing manufacturer who refuses to
take responsibility for Luca (Charlie Lucas), his out-of-
wedlock son who is cared for by the industrialist's secretary
and translator, Mary (Joan Plowright).  Through Mary, who at
one point builds a miniature set with puppets representing
Romeo and Juliet, Luca gains a thorough appreciation for
Shakespeare.  Lady Hester (Maggie Smith), the de facto
center of the group of English expatriate women, is confident
that she and her circle would always be safe in Italy, because
she had been invited to tea with Mussolini, who promised that
no harm would ever come to her and her friends.  In a
surprisingly low-key and often weepy role, Judi Dench plays
the part of a mediocre painter of frescoes while the most
flamboyant presence is Cher, who performs in the role of
Esta, a boorish American yet benevolent art collector who
believes she is entitled by her affluence to possess a
particular painting of Picasso.  Esta's gaudy presence serves
as a catalyst for some of the movie's wittiest lines, as Lady
Hester, noting the sky-high concoction of desert that she
purchases for Luca, remarks "The Americans even vulgarize
ice cream."  
   When Italy opportunistically declares war against France
and England in June 1940, the women are rounded up and
herded into a one-room hovel, but Elsa secretly pays the bills
at a nearby hotel, enabling the circle to live as though the
war does not exist.  The entire story of these "biddies" comes
to us through the eyes of Luca (Baird Wallace as the Zeffirelli
stand-in at age 17), a mature young man who has come to
love the women who have befriended him and in a couple of
instances secretly delivers passport to the hands of those
who desperately need to get out of Italy.  
   "Tea with Mussolini" is exquisitely filmed by David Watkin--
whose previous work includes cinematography for "Out of
Africa."  Sites include Florence, Rome and the medieval town
of San Gimignano--which retains the ambiance of 14th
century Italy.  Perhaps the most positive feature of the epic
work is the insight we are given into the psyche of its
director, while at the same time we bear witness to
performances by some of the great actresses of our
generation.  The principal flaw is the overly sentimental
treatment Zeffirelli furnishes of the Italian fascisti--who treat
the "enemy" women with deference, even fearing their sharp
retorts and condemnations. Even the German occupiers are
soft-pedaled.  As the subjugating troops retreat from Florence
and prepare to blow up a historic tower, the women chain
themselves to the wall, forcing the Germans to back way and
decline the planned destruction.  After all, though, most of us
look back to our childhoods remembering the good times and
censoring the adverse.  Franco Zeffirelli shows us a good
time indeed.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Although it's been 30 years since the release of his cinematic
masterpiece, ROMEO AND JULIET, Franco Zeffirelli's name on the screen
can still cause flutters.
As TEA WITH MUSSOLINI opens to the skyline of Florence lit by the warm
glow of the early morning sun, Zeffirelli's name appears first in the
credits.  His name alone cause hushed oohs and aahs throughout our
packed early screening.  Whether it was anticipation or whether the
crowd didn't realize who the director would be, the excitement in the
theater was palpable.
With a Merchant Ivory look, although it's not Merchant Ivory film, TEA
WITH MUSSOLINI never quite delivers on the promise of its look or the
director's name.
The script by John Mortimer and Zeffirelli is based on a single chapter
from Zeffirelli's autobiography.  One assumes the adaptation is a
loosely based and highly romanticized one.  Otherwise, Fascist Italy
must have been a fairly hospitable place for foreigners after all.  The
Black Shirts strut around a lot and there are rumors of the ill
treatment of Jews, but this story gives it the pleasant gloss of a fairy
tale.  All the little old ladies need do to stop the bad guys is speak
harshly to them, and they cease and desist forthwith.
Starting in 1935 and going until the end of the war, the movie tells the
story of Luca, played by two exceedingly handsome actors.  Charlie Lucas
is the young Luca, and Baird Wallace is the teenage Luca.  Luca lives at
an orphanage until his father, who doesn't acknowledge him, pawns Luca
off on the father's English secretary, Mary (Joan Plowright from
ENCHANTED APRIL).
In addition to Plowright, the ensemble cast includes Cher (MOONSTRUCK)
as the rich American Elsa, Judi Dench (SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE) as the
fresco restorer Arabella, Maggie Smith (ROOM WITH A VIEW) as the
aristocratic and stubborn Lady Hester and Lily Tomlin as the outspoken
archeologist Georgie.  These fine actresses get to have a high old time
as they chew up the scenery.  The minimal story suffers from a lack of
depth as it encompasses Luca and his 5 caretakers.  The characters are
about as substantial as one of those tiny tea cakes that the ladies
favor.
(A smoking incident at our screening, which caused a small mini-drama as
the ushers did due diligence in trying to catch and evict the scofflaw,
was much more exciting and interesting than the movie.  Nevertheless I
am duty bound to set up the plot for you.)
At one of the obligatory, elegant teas, some Fascists outside start
breaking the expensive, cut-glass windows.  Inside one man wags his
finger, shouting "Shame on you!" in English to the vandals.  Another man
sips away without wavering.  And still another man sits bleeding
profusely from a large gash in his head.
Lady Hester is aghast.  She knows her beloved Mussolini would never
permit such improper behavior if he knew about it.  Soon, she is sharing
tea with Il Duce, who promises her his personal protection forever
after.  Her belief in the man who could get the trains to run on time
remains intact for an unbelievable length of time.  This faith will be
tested as the women stay in Italy even though their countries are at war
with Italy.  You see, they have to save the paintings, etc.
Although some of the incidents possess a certain cuteness, the movie was
a laughfree experience for me.  And given the shallowness of the
characters, there was nothing to take away save the memories of a few
picturesque piazze.  One rightfully expects more from a movie,
especially if Franco Zeffirelli's name is on the marquee.
TEA WITH MUSSOLINI runs too long at 1:58.  It is rated PG for a few
mature themes and would be fine for any kid old to be interested.  Be
warned, however, that most kids -- and many adults -- may find the
material produces the same effect as a large cup of warm chocolate.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Greg King
TEA WITH MUSSOLINI (PG).  
(Universal/UIP)
Director: Franco Zeffirelli
Stars: Joan Plowright, Maggie Smith, Cher, Judi Dench, Baird Wallace,
Lily Tomlin, Charlie Lucas, Massimo Ghini, Paolo Seganti, Paul
Checquer, Tessa Pritchard, Claudio Spadaro, Paula Jacobs, Michael
Williams. Mino Bellei
Running time: 120 minutes.
Tea With Mussolini is something of a romanticised memoir of
director Franco Zeffirelli's early life growing up in Florence during
the 1930's and the reign of Mussolini.
The scorpioni were a group of eccentric, expatriate English
ladies living in Florence, largely oblivious to the gathering clouds
of war.  Lady Hester Random (Maggie Smith), the widow of a former
ambassador, is the unofficial leader of this group, who keep alight
the flame of empire and carry the torch of tradition.  In 1935, Mary
Wallace (Joan Plowright), the secretary to a local clothing merchant,
introduces her employer's illegitimate son Luca into this circle.
Luca, fetchingly played by Charlie Lucas and Baird Wallace, is
a thinly disguised, fictional version of the young Zeffirelli.  These
remarkable women take time out to educate the young Luca in fine arts,
Shakespeare, and English, and help shape the boy into the man that he
would eventually become.  Caught between two cultures, Luca comes of
age during the war when he helps the ladies, who were eventually
interned in the nearby walled city of San Gimignano.
Tea With Mussolini is easily Zeffirelli's most personal movie
to date.  With plenty of humour and compassion, the film lovingly
explores those early forces that shaped his love of arts and
literature, which adds a remarkable personal resonance to the tale.
The film spans some ten years, and the narrative occasionally seems to
lack focus.
John Mortimer, creator of Rumpole, brings a touch of sardonic
humour and quaint touches of English eccentricity to the script.  The
dialogue crackles with some witty repartee and wonderfully acerbic
asides, which the superb cast deliver with relish.
Zeffirelli has assembled a superlative cast of fine English
actresses and Oscar winners, and their classy performances enrich the
film.  Smith is superb as the imperious and haughty Lady Hester, while
the always reliable Plowright brings compassion and understanding to
her role.  Judi Dench is fine as Arabella, the eccentric bohemian
artist Arabella, while Cher delivers her best performance for some
time as the flamboyant, vulgar but generous Elsa, an American
entertainer who unexpectedly proves to be the saviour of the group.
Newcomer Wallace, who apparently bears a striking similarity to the
young Zeffirelli, is wonderfully appealing as the teenage Luca, even
though his accent sometimes wavers.
This remarkable tale of courage is also something of a homage
to the beauty and rich history of Florence itself.  Oscar winning
cinematographer David Watkin (Out Of Africa, etc) captures the
beautiful Tuscan landscape, and he imbues the film with a gorgeous,
glossy visual surface.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated PG
MGM/G2 Films
starring Cher, Judi Dench, Joan Plowright, Maggie Smith, Lily Tomlin, Baird
Wallace, Charlie Lucas
based on the autobiography of Franco Zeffirelli
screenplay by John Mortimer and Franco Zeffirelli
directed by Franco Zeffirelli
In the past year or two, there has been no shortage of World War II
based films. Viewers have now seen the war from many unique
perspectives, and can form their own account of what happened. This
time around, acclaimed director Franco Zeffirelli, who is best known
for his 1968 black-and-white version of "Romeo And Juliet", shares
with us his true story of being raised in Italy during World War II.
In the film, Zeffirelli goes by the alias Luca (Charlie Lucas as a
child, Baird Wallace as a teen).  Luca's Italian father has remarried
to a woman who for some reason despises the child, and Luca is sent
off to live with his English caretaker, Mary (Joan Plowright). Mary is
part of the Scorpioni, a group of mostly arrogant, wealthy, conceited
English women who happen to be living in Florence for the time
being. Hester (Maggie Smith), the leader of the clan, has recently had
tea with Mussolini, the leader of Italy, and he has assured her that
the women will be kept safe in case of any war.
When Elsa (Cher), an elegant, audacious American Jewish woman arrives
into the city, the threat of war seems to come with her. But the women
keep their poise and the oncoming war seems to do nothing to stop
their rich lifestyle. Luca is then sent to Austria by his father so
that he can learn the Nazi ways, and the Englishwomen are told that
they are no longer welcome in Italy. The orders work to no avail.
"Tea With Mussolini" starts off nicely, but the pace soon slows and
the film becomes less interesting as it succumbs to World War II
cliches instead of telling Luca's own story. The livelier moments are
dragged down by the dry patches.
The film does feature a first-rate cast, including Cher (in her first
film role since 1996's "Faithful"), Academy Award Winner Judi Dench,
and Lily Tomlin. All the actresses bring life to their characters, and
despite a clunker of a script, "Tea With Mussolini" at least has its
heart in the right place.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film


Author
Dennis Schwartz

TEA WITH MUSSOLINI (director/writer: Franco Zeffirelli; screenwriter:
John Mortimer/based on "The Autobiography of Franco Zeffirelli";
cinematographer: David Watkin; editor: Tariq Anwar; cast: Cher (Elsa),
Judi Dench (Arabella), Joan Plowright (Mary), Maggie Smith (Lady
Hester), Lily Tomlin (Georgie), Charlie Lucas (Luca as a child), Baird
Wallace (Luca), Paolo Seganti (Vittorio),  Paul Chequer (Wilfred), Tessa
Pritchard (Connie); Runtime: 117; 1999-UK/Italy)
"Tea With Mussolini" is based on the semiautobiography of the film's
director and co-screenwriter Franco Zeffirelli. It tells of a boy named
Luca (he is supposed to be the director), born out of wedlock to an
English clothing designer living in Florence. His mother is dead and his
married father doesn't want him, and the child can't stand being in an
orphanage, so he runs away. The British secretary in his father's silk
business, an elderly expatriate named Mary (Joan Plowright), takes a
liking to the kid and decides to raise him on her own to be a perfect
English gentleman, just as his father wishes.
The film opens in the Florence of 1935, at a memorial service for the
English poet Elizabeth Barrett Browning, who died in Florence in the
19th century. A group of expatriates pay their annual respects to her.
These English expatriates feel very comfortable to be in Italy, excited
by the civilizing nature of all the art around them. For them, Il Duce
is still the gentleman who makes the trains run on time and they
desperately want to be loyal to Italy, quite taken with the richness of
the art they are surrounded by. The old biddies are portrayed by a
collection of actresses well-adapted to being hams. Maggie Smith is Lady
Hester, the chief chewer of scenery, the de-facto leader of the group
and number one snob. Because of her biting tongue, she is known as the I
Scorpioni, a name that unfairly sticks to this gaggle of English ladies,
since Lady Hester seems to be the only one with acid on her tongue. Lily
Tomlin is the American in the group, a bold lesbian archeologist, in a
role that is inconsequential, she doesn't even have any funny lines, but
she's always smiling, dressed in pants, and sunburned (the reason for
her being so happy, is that she is probably daydreaming about some of
the better films she has been in). Cher is a wealthy and vulgar
Jewish-American named Elsa, an ex-Broadway actress who keeps trading in
old husbands who either die or she divorces. Either way her bank account
grows and she uses that money to collect art, she is especially
interested in collecting Picassos. Judi Dench is Arabella, a dizzy
painter and lover of the arts, in a role that gives her no room to be
anything but a stereotypical English old biddy, who has a corny zest for
what is on the canvas and what hangs in a museum. She has the most
embarrassing line in the film, as she explains to Luca why she remains
in Italy, "I have warmed both hands before the fires of Michelangelo and
Botticelli."
These old English ladies love to gather in Doney's Tea Room and at the
Galleria Uffizi and to be served tea at exactly 4 P.M., enjoyably
gossiping about one another and talking about their past. When Elsa
enters the group, Lady Hester puts her nose in the air and mentions how
much she detests her because of her sordid lifestyle. Lady Hester sets
the tone and proper standards for how this snooty group behaves.
Things abroad begin to get more tense due to Hitler's aggression and
Mussolini's pact with him, and even Florence seems to be getting less
friendly. Lady Hester has undying faith in Mussolini, and uses her
political influence from when her late husband was the British
ambassador to Italy, to secure a meeting with the head of the Brown
Shirts. Mussolini assures her that he personally guarantees the safety
of the English expatriates. The newspaper headline features a picture
with Mussolini and her having tea.
But when England enters the war, all things change and the expatriates
are rounded up and locked up in a barracks. The strangest scene in the
movie, is when Lady Hester's grandson (Paul Chequer) dresses up as a
woman so he can be with granny. He is finally so ashamed, he strips off
his dress and goes yelling in the street "I'm a man." He then joins the
resistance (Now what was that all about!). When Elsa hears of the
English ladies being jailed, she has Luca secretly arrange for the
ladies to be sent to an expensive hotel, where she generously pays the
bill. Lady Hester thinks Mussolini realized his mistake of putting them
in a barracks and is now responsible for taking care of them in such a
grand manner.
America declares war and Elsa is trapped in Italy. She has foolishly
fallen in love with her young chauffeur (Seganti), a weasel who sells
her fake art, tricks her into signing over all her money to him, and
then betrays her to the Fascists.
The film ends on a melodramatic note, and if this wasn't supposed to be
a true story, it would be one that was hard to fathom. For instance, how
could Cher playing a Jewess be so non-chalant about being a Jew in a
Fascist country and even more absurdly, fall in love with a Fascist and
trust him with all her money!
This was a ridiculous movie; it was an apathetic sudser with flat
dialogue, stiff characterizations, and if it didn't take place in
Florence, where art is a way of life, this film would be a feckless
fiasco. It is hard to believe that Luca is Franco Zeffirelli, he seemed
so out of it, the role seemed to have nothing to say, as if he wasn't
there when he was there, and his heroics as a 17-year-old with the
Resistance Movement seemed unconvincing. Also, the actor who played him,
Baird Wallace, was very stiff and made his presence felt in a very
awkward manner. Since the film is supposedly about the director
blossoming to become a great artist, I saw no evidence of this. This is
a fourth-rate production. It just had no spark to it, and the 10 years
of history it spans from 1935-45, seemed as if it was made up by a bunch
of snobs and dabblers in the arts who wouldn't know the difference
between a Mussolini and a Churchill unless they were thrown in jail by
one of them.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Sanford
 Like a story Grandma might tell about days gone by, "Tea With
Mussolini" takes its time to unfold and never leads to any great
earthshattering truths, but it's so quietly charming and engagingly
performed only the most callous viewers will tune out. Based on the
early chapters of director Franco Zeffirelli's autobiography, "Tea" is
set in the Italy of the 1930s and 1940s, a coming-of-age tale that's
more interested in its young hero's environment and influences than in
his adjustment to adulthood. Luca, played by Charlie Lucas as a child
and Baird Wallace as a teen, is a young Italian without a family, the
product of a brief liaison between a clothing tycoon and his mistress.
When the father's secretary and translator Mary (Joan Plowright) can no
longer stand seeing Luca being hidden away in a church-run orphanage she
agrees to look after him, enlisting the aid of her fellow "scorpioni,"
feisty Englishwomen who have settled in Florence to bask in the culture
and seemingly endless sunshine. "There are no illegitimate children in
this world," Mary insists. "Only illegitimate parents."
 So Luca becomes the surrogate son of the saintly Mary, the spirited
painter and would-be bohemian Arabella (Judi Dench) and the high-handed
Hester (Maggie Smith), a consummate snob who truly believes Fascist
leader Mussolini is a friend of hers since she's the widow of a British
ambassador. Outside this circle but destined to become a major force in
Luca's life is Elsa (Cher), a cheerfully brash American with a taste for
modern art, elderly millionaires and youthful lovers. When her latest
husband feigns a heart attack to halt another one of her spending
sprees, Elsa complains to her pal Georgy (Lily Tomlin) that "he's too
cheap to slip a poor girl a little Picasso."
 Though "Tea" doesn't have much in the way of a linear plot, the theme
of making sacrifices in the name of love is woven throughout its various
anecdotes. There's also a hint of "Cabaret" in the way the women ignore
the early signs of trouble in the late 1930s -- Fascist attacks on
citizens, the burning of foreign flags, mandatory registration of Jews,
etc. -- in the hope that soon everything will be back to normal and
their leisurely lives can begin again. Of course, that is not meant to
be; as Hester learns, just because one has taken tea with Mussolini does
not mean you're under Il Duce's protection.
 Plowright, Smith and Tomlin play to type quite effectively, while Dench
brings a subtle layer of pathos to Arabella, who's better at protecting
other people's masterpieces than she is at creating her own. Cher, in a
role ideally suited to her natural flamboyance, sparkles. In Elsa's most
telling moment, she's asked by one of her young Italian conquests if all
American women are as exciting as she is. "Alas," she sighes. "No." You
can say that again. James Sanford

Author
Mac VerStandig
Recently, there have been several movies using WWII as their background.
Three of the five films nominated for Best Picture at the 1998 Academy
Awards - Life is Beautiful, Saving Private Ryan, and The Thin Red Line - all
used this period as their political setting. Franco Zeffirelli's Tea with
Mussolini is the latest film to take place during this time frame. By using
a wonderful blend of plot and history, Zeffirelli proves that this backdrop
is still far from overused.
Much of Tea with Mussolini is a history lesson. The production begins in
Italy in 1935, continuing until 1942. The story takes place in Mussolini's
homeland the entire time. The film is careful to be as historically accurate
as possible, announcing several key dates as they occur during the seven
year span, and carefully portraying the various European political opinions
from the war. A fine example of this is when an Italian man dismisses the
rumors of Jewish suffering as "Pink Propaganda." This historic accuracy
allows for the all important backdrop of the film to be as smooth as
possible.
The protagonist of Zeffirelli's latest work is Luca Innocenti (Baird Wallace
as a child and Charlie Lucas as a teenager), a child born out of wedlock,
and therefore unrecognized by his father. Luca is cared for by his father's
employee, Mary (Joan Plowright) and her group of friends. Known as the
"Scorpioni," this group of eccentric women consists of Lady Hester (Maggie
Smith), Georgia (Lily Tomlin), Arabella (Dame Judi Dench) and the American,
Elsa (Cher). These ladies all look after Luca as he comes of age during the
film's seven year span. In addition, they look after themselves, all being
British with the exception of Elsa, and therefore enemies of Italy once the
nation enters into the war.
Tea with Mussolini features a rather impressive cast of proven actresses.
Unfortunately, Cher, one of the leads, fails to perform to her potential.
One such display of her substandard acting is in a scene that requires her
to be crying on her bed, in a state of hysterical denial. Not only is she
unrealistic, but her pathetic acting is almost comical at this key point of
the film, thus damaging the otherwise excellent production. Fortunately
though, Baird Wallace, who portrays the teenage Luca, is absolutely stunning
in his debut performance. Ironically, this is never more apparent than in a
part of the film where his character is alone in a room with Cher's
character, and is being asked to do her a favor. Not only does he carry
himself well enough to make the scene work, but his talent even manages to
make Cher look decent for that fleeting moment.
Don't be fooled by the big name studio behind this production. Although MGM
did make the film, it is far from a typical Hollywood work. Actually filmed
entirely overseas, Tea with Mussolini plays like an exceptional independent
film. The scenery is rich, the costumes are simple, and there are no special
effects in sight. Altogether, this gives the film a very warm and personal
touch for which Zeffirelli should be applauded.
Tea with Mussolini is a production well worth the price of a ticket. This
movie is not the greatest of 1999, and is injured by Cher's performance, or
lack thereof. But on the flip side, there is a wonderful plot interwoven
with history. Because of that history, and the marvelous setting it
provides, you realize that WWII certainly hasn't gone out of style, and Tea
with Mussolini may never.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
`Close the door and take off your shirt.'  It would be hard to fathom
Cher not saying that to a much younger man in any of her starring roles,
but in Tea with Mussolini, the single-monickered wonder actually doesn't
have a sexual motive.  Here, she plays Elsa, a snobby, art-collecting
American Jew (disguised, of course, as Morticia Adams) who finds herself
trapped in 1940's Florence as Mussolini quickly leads the country to the
brink of war with England and France.
The kid losing his shirt is Luca (Baird Wallace, in his film debut), a
teenage orphan that is, at first, an unwitting pawn in Elsa's attempt to
smuggle desperate Jews out of Italy - she tapes passports to the boy's
chest and tells him where to deliver them.  And with the look and feel
of the film, you almost expect Luca to bump into and run off with
Dominique Sanda's Micol from The Garden of the Finzi-Continis, the 1970
Best Foreign Film winner that shares an obviously similar subject with
Mussolini.  Or maybe see Roberto Benigni's Guido (from fellow Oscar
winner Life is Beautiful) crashing his bicycle into something.  Or maybe
even that dead guy from Il Postino.
Elsa's tea-drinking clique (nicknamed The Scorpioni) is an odd one.
There is fellow American Georgie (Lily Tomlin, Krippendorf's Tribe), a
lesbian archaeologist.  There's Mary (Joan Plowright, Dennis the
Menace), the warm, grandmotherly woman that raised the orphan Luca, who
is actually the son of the man she works for.  There's fragile and dippy
Arabella (Judi Dench, Elizabeth), a dog-rescuing artist.  But best of
all, there's Hester (Maggie Smith, Sister Act 2: Back in the Habit) the
blissfully ignorant widow of the former British ambassador to Italy.
She blindly trusts Mussolini's personal assurances that no harm will
come to her and her friends.  Come on - who would trust somebody that
looks like Mussolini?  He looked like Brando in The Island of Dr.
Moreau, for God's sake.
Among the rich vocal tones of Dench, Smith and Plowright, Cher's accent
is, at first, like a slap in the face.  Her character comes off as an
arrogant loudmouth, and it's no surprise that Hester finds her
obnoxious, whorish and a disgrace.  But truth be told, Cher is actually
fantastic.  She looks decades younger than her actual age (so would you
if you shot poison into your face to stop the aging process) and
invigorates every scene her Elsa is in.  But even though Cher gets top
billing (the filmmakers would have you believe that it's because stars
are listed in alphabetical order), her thunder is repeatedly stolen by
Smith's tight-laced Hester.  Her character is oblivious enough to not
notice the things happening around her, but also strong enough to berate
her captors into both knocking before they enter a lady's room and
saying goodnight when they leave one.
Directed by Franco Zeffirelli (Jane Eyre), Mussolini was written by
British novelist/playwright John Mortimer and is actually based loosely
on Zeffirelli's own life (as told in his autobiography).  While not as
heavy-handed as Finzi-Continis or as light as Life is Beautiful, it
successfully blends elements of both, and the result is one terrific
film.  (1:56 - PG for adult language, brief nudity and some mild
violence)

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "TEA WITH MUSSOLINI" (G2, an MGM Company release)
Based on Franco Zeffirelli's own childhood in Florence, this
comedy-drama tells the story of the five extraordinary women who care
for Luca, a boy born out of wedlock, while resisting the madness of
war that sweeps across Europe during the '30s and '40s. Known as the
Scorpioni, for their biting wit, these feisty British and American
expatriate females adore Italy and refuse to leave. Instead, they
arrogantly defy the mercurial officials, trusting in the autocratic
widow of the British Ambassador to Italy, Maggie Smith, who once had
tea with the Fascist leader who assured her that no harm would ever
come to her and her friends. As Luca's father's secretary/translator,
Joan Plowright is entrusted with the boy's care as a surrogate
mother. She works hard to make him "a proper English gentleman,"
teaching him about Shakespeare, while Judi Dench gives him an
appreciation of drawing and art. The Americans are an openly lesbian
archeologist, Lily Tomlin, and a wealthy, free-spirited art collector,
Cher, who was a friend of Luca's late mother. As England and America
enter W.W.II, the women become "enemy aliens" in their adopted
homeland. Scripted by John Mortimer, their story is colorfully
dramatized in lush settings and exquisitely photographed by
cinematographer David Watkin (Oscar winner for "Out of Africa"). The
only discordant note is Zeffirelli's overly sentimental depiction of
the Italian and German soldiers. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Tea With Mussolini" is an irresistibly joyous, opulent 9,
featuring insightful performances from some of the greatest actresses
on the screen today. The film is a delightful treasure.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
TEA WITH MUSSOLINI
Cast: Joan Plowright, Maggie Smith, Cher, Judi Dench, Lily Tomlin,
Charlie Lucas, Baird Wallace, Claudio Spadaro
Director: Franco Zeffirelli
Screenplay: John Mortimer and Franco Zeffirelli based on "The
Autobiography of Franco Zeffirelli"
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 stars
I gathered two meanings from the title "Tea with Mussolini."  The first
one refers to an actual, real-life event in which a character in the
film does indeed sit down and have a cuppa with the legendary Roman
leader himself.  The second, as I interpreted it, has a slightly
ironical overture.  The word "tea" brings to mind visions of calmness
and peace, and whist these are the overriding message of this film (it's
subtlety belt into your forehead by director Franco Zeffirelli), it
strives for more than just a story devoted to the kinship between its
central characters.  There's another message in the film that relates to
the political nature of war, as observed by a group of elderly,
respectable women.  Whilst Zeffirelli doesn't go wildly in depth into
war events - usually he shows a few clips of mild carnage and distress
then moves on - he does do it on enough occasions to jerk his narrative
out of flow, which leads to his one major misstep: he tries to cover too
much.  Unsatisfied by the breath of his lovable and beautifully
developed characters, Zeffirelli goes for a universal meaning, when
individual growth would have been good enough.
That's probably as cynical as I can get about this very likeable film,
and I've said it all in the first paragraph.  Although similar ground
was covered to greater affect in Roberto Benigni's much acclaimed 'Life
is Beautiful,' 'Tea with Mussolini' proves its right for theatrical
existence by first supplying quality production elements.  The film is
gorgeously shot by cinematographer David Watkin ('Memphis Belle') who is
privileged with the already stunning environment of Florence, and the
sixty-something actors all play their parts convincingly, bouncing off
each other with talent and authenticity that many years of experience
have given them.
Based on an autobiographical novel, the 'Scorpioni' were a small group
of eccentirc English ladies living in Florence.  The story begins in
1935, when Mary (Joan Plowright) brings a young boy, Luca (played as a
child by Charlie Lucas then later by Baird Wallace), into the circle of
friends.  Luca is encouraged to appreciate all kinds of art by Arabella
(Judi Dench), and is taken care of and loved by the members of the
group.  Lady Hester (Maggie Smith) is the undeclared leader of the
Scorpioni, whose dry humour and cynical comments at every corner keep
the group in stride.  All this is really just an inflated prologue, as
the centerpiece drama unfolds as World War II breaks out and, when Italy
sides with Germany, the Scorpioni find themselves in the wrong country
at the wrong time.
I suppose the surprise member of the cast is Cher, who plays a wealthy
and glamorous American (so far from reality, huh?) and fits in quite
nicely with the talent that surrounds her.  She proves that she is
strong enough, to live without music videos.  That said, Joan Plowright
is close to perfection as the lovable and wise Mary, and Maggie Smith
delivers her lines with a cool, dry wit that makes her one of the film's
most entertaining actors.  Judi Dench is also strong, but then again, so
is everybody.  'Tea With Mussolini' reassures us that, no matter how old
the protagonists of a film may be, basic characteristics of acting don't
change.  The film's characters are vivid and engaging, thanks purely to
these performers and, to a lesser degree, their dialogue, which flows
quite nicely and even contains some quaint English humour.
Tea With Mussolini looks, sounds and feels like an Oscar contender that
has arrived unexpectedly, and considerably earlier than usual (the
fierce competition usually begins in November or December).    I think
it's one of those films that most people will consider "good" but not
"great," it's a strong serve but it isn't an ace.  Zeffirelli, at times,
seems like he's taking his material a little too seriously, but that's a
problem that's pretty much unavoidable, considering the nature of the
picture, its context and its characters.  It's pretty serious stuff;
it's all about hope, and faith, and devotion, and togetherness, and
inspiration, and love andboy, this does sound like an Oscar contender.
Many of the heights in Tea With Mussolini occur when the picture relaxes
and allows its characters - rather than its setting, or its Place in
History - to interact with each other.  When this occurs, the film
soars.  If Zeffirelli had kept his narrative intimate and close but
still mildly threatening, this good film could have been a great one.
In his attempts to cover world history, Zeffirelli lessens the impact of
his skillfully etched characters, but still includes enough of the good
stuff to make Tea With Mussolini an entertaining and sometimes moving
picture that aspires to achieve a little more than it actually does.

