Title
Review for Zombie! vs. Mardi Gras (1999) (V)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Mike Lyddon, Karl DeMolay, Will Frank.
Cast: Dale Ashmun, Dudley Batchelor, Garth Currie, Jason Deas, Karl DeMolay, 
Loreli Fuller, Roy "Rusty" Jackson, Veronica Russell, John Sinclair.
1999 - 73 minutes.
Not Rated (equivalent of an R for violence, blood, profanity, and nudity).
Reviewed July 9, 1999.
The film studio's synopsis of the horror (in more ways than one) film, 
"Zombie! vs. Mardi Gras," goes like this: "A child grows up studying the 
occult and plotting vengeance after being brutalized and crippled by drunken 
Mardi Gras revelers. One stormy Lundi Gras night he performs a Sumerian 
ritual which unearths ZOMBIE! from his ancient sleep. ZOMBIE! prowls the 
streets of New Orleans on Mardi Gras Day, leaving a trail of terror and 
carnage in his wake!"
Thank goodness for small favors, for without this brief synopsis, I would 
have practically been at a loss for words on what exactly the movie is about! 
At least it got the 'terror' part right, as that was exactly the way I was 
feeling while sitting through this amateurish 73-minute piece of rubbish. 
Filmed in black-and-white on what looks like a budget of approximately ten 
dollars, the washed-out picture quality often makes you feel like you are 
watching a crummy student film from the 1930s or '40s.
"Zombie! vs. Mardi Gras" is inept on every possible filmmaking level, which 
is unfortunate since the setting of Mardi Gras would, no doubt, make for a 
reasonably creepy setting for a horror movie that had at least some type of 
merit. Not this time. Instead, what we get is a parade of scenes tacked on to 
one another, most of them portraying zombies walking around attacking people, 
that make very little sense, and every now and again we will be blessed with 
a scene or two of gratuitous nudity that has nothing to do with the 
characters or story (what there is of it, at least).
Without any rhyme-or-reason, all of the actors' voices have been horrifically 
dubbed, and although most of the ridiculous dialogue is supposed to be campy, 
I suppose, every line, and every scene for that matter, falls astoundingly 
flat. Mute three-year-olds could tell better jokes than the ones in this 
piece of wasted celluloid.
Although I can't be positive, I firmly believe that by the time "Zombie! vs. 
Mardi Gras" reached its forgettable non-conclusion, my IQ had dropped at 
least 50 points. And to top everything off, the end credits show a woman and 
zombie running through a field towards each other, until they finally meet in 
a warm embrace. But the zombies were evil...and I don't believe I had ever 
met that woman in the course of the film itself. I fear if I keep going, most 
of my brain cells are going to shrivel up and die, but I'll leave you with 
one final observation: the word, "idiotic," was created for "Zombie! vs. 
Mardi Gras."
* For more information on "Zombie! vs. Mardi Gras," contact Salt City Home 
Video, P.O. Box 5515, Syracuse, NY 13220; tel. 315-454-5608, web site: 
http://www.b-movie.com or webmaster@b-movie.com.
   - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
     Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
