Title
Review for Pump Up the Volume (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Age of Internet should be remembered as the first time in
history when those unprivileged, unpopular or simply ignored
got more or less equal opportunity to have their say in the
matters of this world. But even before this time, such
people had found ways to express themselves. One of such
ways was in the form of pirate radio stations. PUMP UP THE
VOLUME, 1990 teen drama by Canadian author Allan Moyle, is
dedicated to such media.
The hero in this movie is Mark Hunter (Christian Slater),
high school student whose parents brought him from trendy
megalopolis of New York to suburban Arizona. Without
friends, and feeling isolated, this nerdy student at day at
night finds comfort by operating pirate radio station
operating from his room. Every night at 10 PM he begins with
programme, playing rock music and uses the medium to express
his feelings and opinions about many things that bother
teenagers, including the oppressive administration of his
school. Gradually, his on-air personality of Hard Harry
begins getting the cult following, but when one of the
viewers commits suicide while listening to his programme, the
authorities become interested. Nora Diniro (Samantha
Mathis), one of the students at school, is also trying to
seek for Hard Harry and his true identity.
People who watch this film from today's perspective might be
tempted to conclude that the pre-Internet times used to be
the golden age of teen-adult relations. Teenagers were
simply being oppressed, and their rebellious rather seldom
expressed itself in violent or dangerous forms. But today, a
teenager that preaches rebellion and uses media to spew
anger towards world and injustice is more likely to cause
unease than sympathy, especially after some overhyped
examples of high school shootings in USA.
For Canadian author Allan Moyle, this film had a lot of
autobiographical elements and explored themes very similar
to his 1980s film TIMES SQUARE. Unfortunately for the
commercial prospects of the film, but fortunately for the
viewers who like the movies that make them think, Moyle took
this film and its subject seriously. Probably too seriously
for MTV crowd, that was too cynical or too scared to
seriously ponder about problems expressed in Hard Harry's
speeches. For some people, this film might also look sadly
outdated - teenagers in previous two decades became most
important target group of entertainment industry, and as
such, their rebellious instincts became suppressed in the
hedonism. On the other hand, outdated solution of the film
might be still compensated with the fact that it asks the
right question, in more ways than one superior to its much
more celebrated companion, 1989 black comedy HEATHERS.
Difference between contemporary and today's perspective of
the film and its topics can be seen through the different
perspective of Christian Slater, its lead. In the early
1990s Slater was promising bright star of teen movies. At
the end of the decade, Slater is bad boy of tabloid media.
However, in this film he really shines with his great acting
potential. Samantha Mathis also shows talent, and the
chemistry between the two is great (and it was repeated six
years later in BROKEN ARROW). Because of such chemistry, we
can almost forget the fact that it was used in rather
unnecessary romantic subplot that brought the taste of
commercialism into the movie that didn't need such
compromises.
However, despite its flaws, PUMP UP THE VOLUME is the very
good film that deserves praise because it makes people think
-something seldom seen in Hollywood these days.
