Title
Review for Keep the Aspidistra Flying (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Seth Bookey
Review of A Merry War (1998) (a/k/a Keep the Aspidistra Flying or Comstock
and Rosemary (1997))
Seen with on 29 August 1998 with Peter at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas for
$8.75Q
When does it become painfully clear that being middle class is not all
that bad? Well, for most people, settling comfortably into the bourgeoisie
is not a problem. But Gordon Comstock wants to be a full-time poet, so he
quits his job with New Albion Publicity and gets a low-paying job in a
bookshop and writes poetry at night at a respectable boarding house
nearby. Respectable, since there's an aspidistra in the window, and in his
room. He laments that while the greats wrote, "Tiger tiger burning bright"
he is writing ad slogans like, "Corner Tables takes his with BOVEX."
As seen in so many other British movies, class distinctions in British
society are alive and well here. Here, the delineations are done with a
wry wit and with a great love of language. Gordon benefits from having a
Fellow Traveller for a friend--who happens to be well-tanned, stinking
rich, and able to spend, as an envious Gordon points out, "have sex in the
afternoon."
Richard E. Grant, as Gordon, brings a comic sense that gives the movie its
entire character. His energy when delivering lines like, "Promise me we'll
have sex in the afternoon," and "I've been reduced to thruppence!" (upon
discovering his aptly named slim volume of poetry, "Mice," is selling for
three pence), is the difference between yet another lavish British costume
drama and sheer and utter joy. One of the funniest movies I have seen in a
long time, actually, with a good bite.
Grant alternates between disgust and joy, enlivening his forays into fancy
restaurants that don't believe he's the host, despite his ability to pay,
and Lamberth, a horrible slum he romanticizes as he shows it off to his
one-time fiance Rosemary (played by a very pale "straight man" Helena
Bonham Carter) while joking with the local working girls.
Basically, Grant's performance overshadows the other actors', but they are
all very good. Julian Wadham is the aristocratic Ravelston, who loves the
working classes, but from a distance that ensures he doesn't have to smell
them. Harriet Walter is the long-suffering sister; Lesley Vickerage the
wisecracking, sarcastic lover of Ravelston. Barbara Leigh-Hunt is the
stuffy bourgeois landlady, overly concerned with her aspidistra, while Liz
Smith as Mrs. Meakin, the landlady in his reduced circumstances, is
hilarity itself. That a publicized brawl in a pub ruins his career the
"good" bookstore is a comment on what Britain was like at the time, and in
many ways, still is. Grant makes the "ruination" far from tragic, but
redemptive, cleaning himself by rolling in the mud of the working class
and loving every minute of it.
There are a few things that will make you wonder, like, why do these
people around him stand by him and believe in him, even when he eschews
and insults them? Also, it's the height of the depression. Why is everyone
so happy, well-fed, and trouble-free?
It doesn't matter. It's well done and enjoyable. The cinematography is
also well done, BOVEX ads going up around both town and countryside, and
later, being picked at, are portentious of the inevitable conformity, the
certainty of an aspidistra coming into his life one way or another. There
is also some lovely original music by Mike Batt. Written by Alan Plater
and based on a novel by George Orwell.
Frankly, it's on my Best Ten List of 1998.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz

KEEP THE ASPIDISTRA FLYING (AKA: A MERRY WAR) (director: Robert Bierman;
screenwriter: from a George Orwell novel/Alan Plater; cinematographer:
Giles Nuttgens; cast:Richard E. Grant (Gordon Comstock), Helena Bonham
Carter (Rosemary), Julian Wadham (Ravelston), Lesley Vickerage
(Hermoine), Jim Carter (Erskine), Liz Smith (Mrs. Meakin), Harriet
Walter (Julia Comstock), 1997-UK)
Much ado is made about aspidistra in this comedy adapted from the
semi-autobiographical novel of George Orwell. It's a hardy houseplant,
used in the story to connote middle-class London respectability when
placed on the windowsill of a flat and in the lowclass Lambeth
neighborhood, it is offered to the impoverished bookstore clerk as a
sign of affection by his kindly landlady. The plant acts as a metaphor,
indicating that the confused young hero of the film can't escape his
middle-class destiny. His landlady in his middle-class, immaculate flat,
Mrs. Meakin (Liz Smith), is actually the most diverting one in the film,
her nose lifts upward in snooty sarcasm, capturing all you have to know
about the direction this film is heading, as she reacts to the poet's
one night drinking binge that got in the papers and got him fired from
his Hampstead bookstore job and kicked out of Mrs. Meakin's flat. The
aspidistra's in her place seem cold and hostile to the troubled young
poet. They show how stuffy and pretentious life is in a suburban
neighborhood, while in a slum the people have nothing to lose, so they
are free to speak their mind, and social restrictions are not as tensely
kept.
The upper-class are royally seen through the depiction of Ravelston
(Wadham), a wealthy publisher, who has the luxury of having sex in the
afternoon with his acid-tongued priggish girlfriend (Vickerage) and
living a care-free existence in his spacious townhouse. He even
considers himself to be a socialist, which is ridiculed by his stodgy
mannerisms and snobbish attitude.
There's a point to be made in this 1930s depression satire about money
counting for everything, and this point is hammered into every aspect of
the story, until it gets to be not only redundant, but outright
irritating to hear. The would-be poet Gordon Comstock (Grant), who is
unsatisfied with his success and promotion in an adverting firm, where
he is writing advertising slogans, impulsively quits his job when he
gets a good review in a London newspaper for one one of his poetry books
published by his friend Ravelston. He narcissistically dreams of
international fame and entry into the poetry world of Auden and T.S.
Eliot. His girlfriend and co-worker, Rosemary (Helena Bonham Carter),
does the graphic art for his slogans and is happy to be a petitioner of
middle-class values, which is what her boyfriend tells her he is
rejecting. Her role in the film is to wait for him to come to his senses
and join her willingly in matrimony, which he will do after he
experiences the harshness of poverty, tires of roaming the streets
composing banal poems, and accepts responsibility for making Rosemary
pregnant. His boss is Erskine (Jim Carter), who makes money from
Gordon's wordsmith skills, therefore is disappointed that he quit, but
leaves the job open for him if he wishes to return.
The story quickly makes its point, as valid as it might be in Orwell's
novel, here it seems trivial, that people delude themselves into
thinking that they are the next Shakespeare and spend a miserable time
living in poverty or doing what they shouldn't be doing, when they would
be much happier being accepted into the middle-class where they duly
belong. It's a fair enough point made, but the story has this nasty
habit of being saccharine to a point, where its sugary qualities could
be fatal to the viewer's heart. Even the scenes of poverty are
sugar-coated, making everything look so awfully nice. The film shows how
foolish the young man was in giving up his career work in which he shows
an aptitude for, and foolishly chooses something he was not born to do,
trying to be a William Blake, who was endowed with a rich poetical
imagination, therefore could live joyously in an indigent state in
Lambeth and still be creative. Something Gordon can't do. It also,
somehow, stretches the point of art and advertisement having much in
common, cynically stating there is little difference between how they
achieve their ends.
It just became dull watching all the clichés about the classes bantered
back and forth, with the picturesque view of Gordon descending into
poverty, working in a musty Lambeth bookstore, and the creamy richness
of his return to middle-class life when the film ends on a happy note,
as he returns to his former place of work to cheers from his colleagues
and into the warm embraces of his girlfriend and back into the good
graces of his stolid middle-class sister (Harriet), and back to his
eager boss who is only too glad to hire him again.
The message I got, as I watched this tepid middle-brow, so-called art
film, is that living in poverty can be stifling, and that kind of life
is not what makes an artist. What the film had to offer, was nothing
more than seeing a few artists names referred to, some inferences that
there is a merry war going on between men and women, some mild
invectives about class differences, and all of life's battle were
condensed to being about money matters. For a movie railing against
accepting bourgeoisie values - it instead becomes a movie that ends up
glorifying those values. Its final message is that there is no escape
from one's destiny.
If one looked hard enough, there can be found some wit in Gordon's
portrayal of a likable jerk with artistic ambitions and some charm in
his relationship with Rosemary. But this uninspired script cannot find
anything relevant to say to make this satire meaningful. In fact, it
makes a mockery of Orwell's intentions to sympathize with an artist who
is prepared to make his own way in the world...Orwell's "Down and Out in
Paris and London" offers a more interesting take he has on being poor,
as he worked for a time as a dishwasher and in a Hampstead bookstore as
a clerk. You'll get a better feel of what Orwell was trying to satirize
reading that book than you will by seeing this film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
Gordon Comstock, advertising copywriter par excellence, has just been
given a large raise -- more precisely a "rise" since A MERRY WAR is a
British film.  And when his boss offers to promote him to any title he
likes, Gordon chooses "Head of Creativity."
Still Gordon has a problem with which many will be able to identify.
He's got a well paying job, but it's not what he wants to do.  His
passion is poetry.  His poetry shows up in his advertising copy, but
that is not enough for Gordon.  Extolling the benefits of an
"invigorating drink" like Bovex is not how he wants to live the rest of
his life.
His boss is aghast.  "Poetry, advertising -- it's all the same words
only in different order," he argues.
Alan Plater's marvelous script for A MERRY WAR is based on George
Orwell's satirical novel, "Keep the Aspidistra Flying."  Written in
1936, a decade before Orwell's famous novels, "Animal Farm" and "1984,"
the novel is about a little published writer, which is exactly what
Orwell was at that time.  Orwell, who later became famous for political
polemics, in this early novel takes a thoroughly light-hearted look at
the world of business and love.
The enthralling movie has broad appeal from Dilbert fans to romantics.
The movie argues convincingly that we should all follow our hearts and
our passions when it comes to work and to love.
As the tenacious Gordon Comstock, Richard E. Grant shows the
frustrations and the joys of one embarking on a tricky journey, trying
to make money at something one really cares about.  Cynically, he
derides the values of the world. "Love, tenderness, money -- the
greatest of these is money," he complains in a twisted version of a
classical biblical aphorism.
Gordon has simple desires, and he wants to know why he can't have what
his upper class publisher has.  "I want to know why I can't have sex in
the afternoon," he asks his girlfriend, Rosemary.  As Rosemary, a
studiously cute and bespectacled Helena Bonham Carter, who works as a
graphics artist in the same advertising firm as Gordon, explains that he
can't have sex in the afternoon because they don't have any place to go
then.  (Orwell has the rich publisher be an avowed socialist, probably
reflecting his own conflicted state of mind. The press notes point out
that at the time the novel was written Orwell was torn between
conservatism and socialism.)
The bitingly funny script tells it like it is, while always displaying a
big heart.  When Gordon takes a job without prospects at a bookstore so
he can earn enough money to continue to write, the dour owner sets him
straight.  "Professionally speaking, you've entered a totally blind
alley."  Even if such jobs are common place, it isn't often that the
boss tells you this during the hiring interview.
Lovingly directed by Robert Bierman, the film contains wonderfully
evocative music by Mike Batt.  Inviting and magically happy, the music
with its warm nostalgic feeling matches perfectly the handsome, 1930s
sets and the golden cinematography.
The little story meanders delightfully like a small brook cutting
through lush fields.  Romantic, poignant, and exhilarating, the movie
always rings true.  One time Gordon laughingly complains that his mind
is "constipated with similes and metaphors."  With little laughs around
every turn the film is as easy to watch as it is subtly substantial.  It
is full of messages without ever seeming to have many.
Eventually our hero finds happiness in the worst part of town.  South of
the river, the area is so disreputable that "even the tomcats walk in
twos."
"Tuppence for a happy ending," Gordon chirps with a big smile to one of
his bookstore customers.  "You can't beat that for value."  And this
charming little movie gives full value from its beginning to its happy
ending.  "Remember," Rosemary reminds Gordon.  "You're a poet and a free
man."  Follow your dreams, argues the movie, and you will be free.
A MERRY WAR runs 1:41. It is not rated but probably would be PG-13 for
sexual situations. The film would be fine for kids around twelve and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Martin Rich
To George Orwell, an aspidistra was a sign of a bourgeois household.  
In this film derived from Orwell's (partly autobiographicl) novel, when 
George Comstock, played by Richard E Grant, is handed an aspidistra by 
his landlady in a seedy shared house in London, he knows that he has 
not left his bourgeois roots behind.
Orwell's novel forms the basis for this likeable romantic comedy.  It 
traces the fortunes of an advertising copywriter who, attracted by the 
idea of life as an impoverished artist, gives up his job in the hope of 
becoming a poet.  The film looks wonderful, and takes its 1930s look 
from the magnificent art deco office where the central character is 
employed at the start.  And the dialogue moves at a good pace, even if 
the social satire is neither as relevant nor as pointed as it would 
have been in Orwell's time.
Richard E Grant plays opposite Helena Bonham Carter, as his girlfriend 
Rosemary - who also works within the same advertising business.  The 
dynamic between the two principal characters is well portrayed - though 
at times one wonders why they bothered to stay in contact at all...  
The transition between affluent London and the slums of Lambeth also 
comes across well.  And while to contemporary Londoners such a contrast 
looks implausible, in the 1930s there was little gentrification around 
areas such as Lambeth.
'Keep the Aspidistra Flying' was criticised, as an opening film for the 
London Film Festival, for being insuffuciently bold an innovative.  But 
it remains an enjoyable and well-made and fine-looking film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Gordon Comstock, advertising copywriter par excellence, has just been
given a large raise -- more precisely a "rise" since A MERRY WAR is a
British film.  And when his boss offers to promote him to any title he
likes, Gordon chooses "Head of Creativity."
Still Gordon has a problem with which many will be able to identify.
He's got a well paying job, but it's not what he wants to do.  His
passion is poetry.  His poetry shows up in his advertising copy, but
that is not enough for Gordon.  Extolling the benefits of an
"invigorating drink" like Bovex is not how he wants to live the rest of
his life.
His boss is aghast.  "Poetry, advertising -- it's all the same words
only in different order," he argues.
Alan Plater's marvelous script for A MERRY WAR is based on George
Orwell's satirical novel, "Keep the Aspidistra Flying."  Written in
1936, a decade before Orwell's famous novels, "Animal Farm" and "1984,"
the novel is about a little published writer, which is exactly what
Orwell was at that time.  Orwell, who later became famous for political
polemics, in this early novel takes a thoroughly light-hearted look at
the world of business and love.
The enthralling movie has broad appeal from Dilbert fans to romantics.
The movie argues convincingly that we should all follow our hearts and
our passions when it comes to work and to love.
As the tenacious Gordon Comstock, Richard E. Grant shows the
frustrations and the joys of one embarking on a tricky journey, trying
to make money at something one really cares about.  Cynically, he
derides the values of the world. "Love, tenderness, money -- the
greatest of these is money," he complains in a twisted version of a
classical biblical aphorism.
Gordon has simple desires, and he wants to know why he can't have what
his upper class publisher has.  "I want to know why I can't have sex in
the afternoon," he asks his girlfriend, Rosemary.  As Rosemary, a
studiously cute and bespectacled Helena Bonham Carter, who works as a
graphics artist in the same advertising firm as Gordon, explains that he
can't have sex in the afternoon because they don't have any place to go
then.  (Orwell has the rich publisher be an avowed socialist, probably
reflecting his own conflicted state of mind. The press notes point out
that at the time the novel was written Orwell was torn between
conservatism and socialism.)
The bitingly funny script tells it like it is, while always displaying a
big heart.  When Gordon takes a job without prospects at a bookstore so
he can earn enough money to continue to write, the dour owner sets him
straight.  "Professionally speaking, you've entered a totally blind
alley."  Even if such jobs are common place, it isn't often that the
boss tells you this during the hiring interview.
Lovingly directed by Robert Bierman, the film contains wonderfully
evocative music by Mike Batt.  Inviting and magically happy, the music
with its warm nostalgic feeling matches perfectly the handsome, 1930s
sets and the golden cinematography.
The little story meanders delightfully like a small brook cutting
through lush fields.  Romantic, poignant, and exhilarating, the movie
always rings true.  One time Gordon laughingly complains that his mind
is "constipated with similes and metaphors."  With little laughs around
every turn the film is as easy to watch as it is subtly substantial.  It
is full of messages without ever seeming to have many.
Eventually our hero finds happiness in the worst part of town.  South of
the river, the area is so disreputable that "even the tomcats walk in
twos."
"Tuppence for a happy ending," Gordon chirps with a big smile to one of
his bookstore customers.  "You can't beat that for value."  And this
charming little movie gives full value from its beginning to its happy
ending.  "Remember," Rosemary reminds Gordon.  "You're a poet and a free
man."  Follow your dreams, argues the movie, and you will be free.
A MERRY WAR runs 1:41. It is not rated but probably would be PG-13 for
sexual situations. The film would be fine for kids around twelve and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
A MERRY WAR (aka Keep the Aspidistra Flying)
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 First Look Pictures
 Director: Robert Bierman
 Writer: Alan Plater, novel by George Orwell
 Cast: Richard E. Grant, Helena Bonham Carter, Jim Carter,
Harriet Walter, Lill Roughly, Julian Wadham, Lesley
Vickerage, John Clegg, Barbara Leigh Hunt
   The best chapter in a particular college textbook I was
assigned on the uses of the English language deals with how
the different social classes use words.  The upper and lower
classes are surprisingly alike.  Referring to a container for
flowers, uppers and lowers say "vayze" while the middle
classes use the more pretentious pronunciation "vahz." 
Uppers and lowers say "couch" while the middles say "sofa." 
These differences extend to possessions (within limits of
course) with the very rich and the rather poor driving plain,
older cars while those in the middle manuever late-model,
fashionable vehicles.  Why is this?  I suppose the reason is
that the really wealthy are well established: everyone knows
who they are.  They do not have to prove anything, to be
ostentatious.  As for the lower orders, as the principal
character in "A Merry War" reports, "They have nothing to
lose so they can always tell the truth."
   Which brings us to the movie.  "A Merry War," based on an
early (1936) novel by George Orwell called "Keep the
Aspidistra Flying," is somewhat autobiographical, based on
the young Orwell's wrestling with his own political and
philosophical beliefs.  "A Merry War" is actually about two
raging conflicts: one is between a young man and his woman
friend; the other is between the young man and...the young
man--an internal conflict.  George Orwell at the time could not
quite make up his mind whether he was a radical or a
conservative, so he converted his interior struggle to art.  In
the novel Orwell has the man debating with himself.  In the
movie, directed by Robert Bierman from Alan Plater's
adaptation of the novel, the interior struggle becomes an
ongoing debate between the man and a woman.  
   The film is an absolute delight, as the middle classes would
say (or would it be the uppers)?  Though it takes place in the
London of 1934, it is technically exceptional, splashing all the
color and ambiance of the great city photographed on some
unusually sunny, rain-free days.  Though its very subject is
political and philosophical, there is no mention of the rising
threat of Nazism just across the channel in Germany, nor is
there much sign that the Great Depression is having all that
much impact in England.
   The story centers on Gordon Comstock (Richard E. Grant),
a highly successful advertising copywriter whose boss,
Erskine (Jim Carter), tells him that his copy for a cereal
product has caused sales to rise 17%.  The graphics are
provided by Comstock's woman friend, Rosemary (Helena
Bonham Carter), who works with him in the same office and
whose art work gets along with the verbiage far better than
she with he.  One day Comstock decides that he has had
enough of this life as a sellout writing doggeral for banal
commodities and, determined to be a full-time poet and a
"free man," he quits his job, takes a thoroughly respectable
flat near his new job in a bookstore, and stares daily at the
uptight landlady's apidistra plant--which symbolizes middle-
class respectability, neatness, order, and conformity.  Though
his poetry is turned down by almost every publisher, he gets a
sudden windfall from a magazine in "our colony in California"
of $50 which he blows in one night of drunken partying with
Rosemary and a wealthy publisher friend, Ravelston (Julian
Wadham).  After a drunken scandal which lands him in jail for
a night, he is left pence-less, takes a filthy flat in the sordid
Lambeth district together with a job in a scuzzy bookstore,
and declares that he is happy living with friendly, but
sometimes violent people who are the antithesis of bourgeois
respectability.  
   Much of the film deals with an ongoing debate between
Comstock and Rosemary, a controversy that often scales
witty slopes that would make Oscar Wilde proud.  While
Rosemary, like most English women, would like to live a
respectable, middle-class life with a steadily employed man
and kids, she is constantly put off by what she considers her
boy friend's oafish insistence on being free, disreputable,
noncomforming and messy.  Their arguments are pursued in
Comstock's bug-infested digs, in the neat and clean office of
the advertising agency, in the publisher's pied-a-terre which
finds Comstock's friend frequently in the company of his
mistress Hermoine (Lesley Vickerage), and in a posh
restaurant where Comstock and Rosemary are amusingly
patronized by a haughty waiter.
    "A Merry War" is the antithesis of all-American
blockbusters like "Armageddon" and proves, as many a witty,
cultivated film can, that less is more.  You need not go to
London's fringe theaters or to New York's off-Broadway stage
companies to find such a regard for words as you'll get with
"A Merry War."  Here you're not dealing with high-priced
publicists that try to see you a movie that will knock your
socks off or scare you out of your wits.  Films of this nature
are not products which are doled out by commercial outfits
who are in the game only for the buck and who have
contempt for their audience which, they believe, cannot
separate the wheat from the chaff.  Apropos, during the
"slum" phase of Comstock's life, he praises one type of
commercial transaction where neither the seller nor the buyer
is getting ripped off, where each side knows exactly what it's
getting.  He relates the tale of the guy who collects horse
manure and sells it to people who use the stuff to make their
gardens grow.  "They're buying and selling shit," as he
describes this honest transaction.  "Nobody has any illusions." 
Utilizing excellent performers like Richard E. Grant in the role
of Gordon Comstock, Helena Bonham Carter as Rosemary,
and Harriet Walter as Gordon's put-upon sister Julia, director
Robert Bierman has done George Orwell proud by projecting
outward the novelist's inner conflict about class and caste,
fashioning an intriguing, quick, touching and sometimes
venomous movie.
