Title
Review for Fantastic Four, The (1994/II)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Sitting on a shelf, somewhere in Hollywood, is Roger Corman's
low-budget adaptation of "The Fantastic Four."  Produced last year, the
film was thrown into limbo after a certain Major Studio decided to
explore a bigger-budget version of the popular Marvel Comics comic
book.  Someday, maybe, the film will be released and that would both
delight and disappoint fans who have long known that decent adaptations
of Marvel Comics characters are few and far between.
     As any boy under sixty knows, the Fantastic Four are
super-scientist Reed Richards, his best-friend and former test-pilot
Ben Grimm, Reed's girlfriend Sue Storm, and her younger brother
Johnny.  Together, they take a ride in Reed's spaceship (don't ask)
until something goes wrong and they all get exposed to "mysterious
energies" before crashing back to Earth.
     Once on the ground, they discover they have "super powers." Reed
can stretch like, uh, Plastic Man, Sue can turn herself invisible, and
Johnny can fire fireballs.  Only Grimm gets the raw deal--he turns
into a super-strong, rocky-skinned creature affectionately known as The
Thing.
     Corman's film faithfully recounts their origin, as described
above, and even issues them costumes!  Finale has the FF battling
Dr. Doom, an armored villain threatening to destroy New York with
[insert eye-rolling] a giant laser.  Also on display is The Jeweler, a
Mole Man knockoff, whose presence has something to do with a
super-sized diamond that Reed has and Doom wants.
     With a few exceptions--such as Doom faking his own death after a
failed experiment with Reed!--the story rarely strays from the source
material.  Present and accounted-for include Alicia Masters, the Baxter
Building, and, yes, the Fantasticar.  (But where's Willie Lumpkin?)
     Credit writers Craig J. Nevius and Kevin Rock for a spartan
set-up that introduces each character without having to resort to an
overlong exposition.  They do err, though, in the origin of Doctor
Doom.  There is none.
     Director Oley Sassone (who?) keeps the superheroics to a bare
minimum.  Johnny throws a couple neat fireballs and "flames on" once.
Sue's invisibility "trick" is pretty cheesy--but she projects a
pretty-cool force field.  Reed is a bust; his "super stretching" is
used for a couple *really* long punches and that's about it.  And The
Thing gets to walk through a few walls.  Whoopee.
     With almost zero-budget for EFX, the burden of proof rests
squarely on the shoulders of the actors and, to their credit, they
perform their parts handsomely.  Only Joesph Culp is a wash--he's okay
as the pre-Doctor Doom Doom, but he doesn't have much to do after
getting encased in armor.  Bad speeches and overgesticulating do not a
character make.
     Too bad that the production design can't match the enthusiasm of
the actors.  The throne room of Castle Doom is bad, the interiors of
the Baxter Building are worse, and the inside of Reed's spaceship is
just plain awful.  Even bad sci-fi looks better than this stuff.
NOTE:   Film is neither available on video nor in the theaters.
