Title
Review for Separate Lives (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Job of the policeman can be extremely stressful and,
according to SEPARATE LIVES, 1995 thriller by David Madden,
at least some members of that profession contemplate
alternative ways to give their contribution to the welfare
of the community. One of them is David Beckwith (played by
James Belushi), police detective who left the force in order
to pursue new career of psychiatrist. However, in order to
receive the necessary degree he must attend classes held by
Lauren Porter (played by Linda Hamilton) who takes notice of
new student and asks his help in dealing with rather
embarrassing personal problem. Professor Porter suffers from
psychiatric problem of her own - multiple personality
disorder as a result of childhood trauma. Every now and then
mild-mannered intellectual Lauren transforms into Lena,
promiscuous and aggressive woman who frequents L.A. club
scene. Lauren fears that she has committed a murder during
one of those episodes and she wants to hire Beckwith to
watch over her. Beckwith agrees and he combines his
professional skills of detective with knowledge of
psychology in order to discover the real truth.
Despite not very original basic premise about split
personality, plot of SEPARATE LIVES looks like a good
material for at least passable thriller. Unfortunately,
director David Madden was not exactly up to the task, same
well as rather disinterested James Belushi. His partner
Linda Hamilton didn't put much effort in her acting job
either. Difficult dual role seems way over her abilities,
and the erotic overtones, which could have saved this film,
are missing. Actually, the entire film looks so anaemic that
only couple of four-letter words indicate feature film
instead of routine TV production. To make things even worse,
presence of Vera Miles, intended as some kind of homage to
PSYCHO, mother of all split personality thrillers, can only
remind us of the fact that SEPARATE LIVES is light years
away from quality cinema.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
