Title
Review for Stuart Little (1999)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Columbia TriStar on July 21, 2000; certificate U; 92 
minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Rob Minkoff; produced by Douglas Wick.
Written by Greg Brooker, M. Night Shyamalan.
Photographed by Guillermo Navarro; edited by Tom Finan.
Ever get the feeling that the whole world's gone mad, or is failing to 
recognise obvious weirdness? I did, during a pitch-black screening of the 
horrible new film "Stuart Little", where I was surrounded by kids sighing 
"Aaah... so cute!" at the screen, despite the fact that it was displaying a 
warped mockery of family entertainment. "Stuart Little" is about a family 
that adopt a talking mouse. Dad (Hugh Laurie) and mom (Geena Davis) go to an 
orphanage, look at all the kids playing, say to each other "How can we 
possibly choose? They're all so wonderful!", and then decide to go for the 
mutated little creature on the floor.
Stuart is voiced by Michael J. Fox, one of the most loveable of actors, but 
the only emotion I felt for the character was disgust. A few weeks ago I 
complained that the poultry in "Chicken Run" displayed implausibly human 
traits; that was nothing compared to "Stuart Little", in which everyone 
pretends that this grotesque rodent IS human. "Play with your new brother!" 
Laurie and Davis tell their biological son (Jonathan Lipnicki). At one point 
there is a family get-together, and nobody points out how odd the situation 
is. They all just say "You look wonderful together!"  I held out hope for the 
voice of reason when Lipnicki shouted "Are you people all crazy? That's not 
my brother! That's a mouse!"  But soon the boy is doting on Stuart just like 
everyone else, and they're best pals. Aaah.
Understand that this is not a comedy, a put-on, or a fantasy. It presents its 
situation as normal and plausible. It wants to be poignant. There is 
sentimental piano music playing throughout. Nobody ever seems surprised that 
they're seeing a talking mouse, or that it's being raised by humans. And even 
though the Little family are a bunch of freaks with glazed eyes, sickening 
grins and dopey voices, with archaic clothes that look like "Father Knows 
Best" hand-me-downs, the actors play them just seriously enough to dispel any 
hope that the movie could be intended as goofiness or satire.
It's an unbelievably sick and appalling picture. Even if we accepted the 
premise, which we'd have to be crazy to do, it would be hard to stomach the 
content, which does not involve a story arc or dramatic conflict, but 
basically consists of everyone marvelling at Stuart whenever he does little 
mousy tricks, and telling him how great he is. Before writing my reviews I 
usually sit and scribble down my thoughts in shorthand. Almost all of my 
notes for "Stuart Little" end with exclamation marks. It is a stroke of 
remarkable good fortune that they aren't stained with dribbles of vomit. 
Apparently, the book the film is based on had the Davis character GIVING 
BIRTH to a mouse. Thank God we were at least spared that.
The premise could have made amusing kiddie fare if it had been a deliberately 
bizarre screwball farce, with human characters pushed into the background and 
the focus on the interaction of the animals. To see what I mean, look at the 
amusing scenes featuring Nathan Lane as the family cat. When Stuart asks him 
"Shall I rub your tummy?", he replies "How would you like to rub it from the 
inside, mouse boy?"  The conversation progresses, and Lane sighs to himself 
"I can't believe I'm arguing with lunch!"
I smile when I recall that moment, but my face turns sour upon remembering 
anything else about this disaster. How interesting that this week there are 
only two movies opening ("Stuart Little" and "High Fidelity"), one of them 
among the best films I've seen, and one among the worst.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Brandon Herring
Starring: Geena Davis, Hugh Laurie, Jonathan Lipnicki, Michal J. Fox (Voice),
Jennifer Tilly (Voice), Nathan Lane (Voice), Dabney Coleman, Estelle Getty.
"Stuart Little" is one of the best family films to come out this year. It's a
cute, funny and very good-natured film that has nothing for parents to squirm
over except a few mild cusswords. Though I read the book a long time ago and I
really do not remember what it was about, I do know that this film does not
disappoint. Finally a movie gets released that is as good as the trailer makes
it to be, with a few surprising twists, some very funny moments, and a few
sentimental moments all mixed in to one great little movie.
Stuart Little is a mouse. He has finally gotten a new home after being put up
for adoption, he now lives with the Littles. A nice little (no pun intended)
family that lives in their apartment next to Central Park in New York City.
They have a little boy George (played by the adorable Jonathan Lipnicki) and
now they have a new son. At first Stuart takes a while but he finally adjusts
to being part of the family and even getting along with the pet cat. 
George doesn't take too well to having a mouse for a brother at first, but once
the two play together they instantly bond. Stuart however is missing something,
and he wants to know who his real parents are. The Littles try and find his
parents and one day they show up on the doorstep wanting Stuart back.
Hesitating the Littles know what's best for Stuart and so does Snowball the pet
cat, he and his friends try to get Stuart but in the end we find out the truth
about Stuart's past ending up to a sentimental and very heart-warming ending.
One thing I noticed about the film instantly was the fantastic special effects.
Just like in "Star Wars: Episode 1--The Phantom Menace" Stuart Little and his
family are all computer generated and they look fantastically real. From the
detail of their fur, to the detail of the way the walk; the special effects
team put a lot of time and effort on this $90 million dollar film and it shows.
Another movie that this has in common with is "Babe" with it's talking animals
and people understanding them. It has a family friendly atmosphere and is never
really scary or suspenseful enough to even scare the youngest of kids.
Michael J. Fox does the voice of Stuart himself and just like in the "Homeward
Bound" movies does a fantastic job and brings more out of Stuart than anyone
else could. He to me fits the character perfectly and ends up making Stuart
even more lovable. Another gem of the film is Nathan Lane as Snowball. When he
was Timon in 1994's "The Lion King" I would have sworn he was a comedian, and
now in "Stuart Little" he brings the most out of Snowball and makes him one of
those characters we love to dislike.
For the human actors Geena Davis who never gives a bad performance does not
disappoint here as well. She fits nicely in her character and there is a good
chemistry between her and Hugh Laurie who plays Mr. Little. Both make us
believe they are happily in love and married and Jonathan Lipnicki as their
song is even more adorable than he was in 1996's "Jerry Maguire". Even though
Stuart Little is completely CGI, the human characters and Stuart have a nice
chemistry together and even makes us believe they really do care for each
other.
"Stuart Little" is ideal family entertainment for this holiday season and will
not disappoint youngsters or adults for that matter. We get entertainment,
laughs, cries and more fun at the movies this season than probably any other
movie. Its nice to see a PG rated movie out at Christmas that everyone can see.
Even though it has a $90 million dollar budget I'm sure it will make over that
or just below it respectively. For all you parents out there trying to find a
good family movie, I have yet to see Bicentennial man as I write this but as
far as I know "Stuart Little" and "Toy Story 2" are by far the best family
films this year. A Winner. 
Reviewed by Brandon Herring December 15, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
Here's how E,B. White's sharply written yet slightly surreal "Stuart Little" 
starts:  "When Mrs. Frederick C. Little's second son arrived, everybody 
noticed that he was not much bigger than a mouse."
Director Rob Minkoff's film of the same name preserves the premise of a 
mouse being raised as part of a human family (though the movie Littles get 
their Stuart from an orphanage).  This premise, by the way, is virtually the 
only aspect of the novel that viewers will spot.  We are treated to assorted 
amusing adventures starring a very likable and cute computer-made mouse, but 
it is not E.B. White's story.
The Whites (Geena Davis and Hugh Laurie) bring home the striking addition to 
their family, only to discover that their real son George (Jonathan 
Lipnicki) rejects Stuart as his brother.  To make the mouse's new situation 
worse, the family cat Snowbell (voice of Nathan Lane) would relish killing 
him;  Snowbell is especially put off by the idea that he is the pet of a 
mouse who has become a member of the family.  Of course the humans have no 
clue about the conflict involving their jealous cat - and the unsavory cats 
that Snowbell involves himself with.  Mr. and Mrs. Little are caught up in 
Stuart's failure to adjust to their home life.  That is, until Stuart 
commences to encourage George to finish building a model boat, and to enter 
the boat in the Central Park race.
Bearing probably the closest resemblance to White's plot, the boat race 
scene sports some of the best action in the picture.  When the remote 
control for George's boat is broken, Stuart appoints himself pilot of the 
"Wasp," and goes against the boats controlled by several other little boys, 
particularly a dirty-playing snob who rams his "Lillian B. Womrath" against 
the boats of unsuspecting competitors.  This is the scene that brings Stuart 
and George into the bonds of brotherhood.
The main conflict reverts to the cat.  He enlists the help of the 
freeloading Monty, who in turn enlists a wicked city cat named Smoky (voice 
of Chazz Palminteri). Their object?  To "scratch out" Stuart.  The action 
engendered by this subplot occupies most of the second half of the film, and 
succeeds largely because of the mix of likable characters and top-notch 
computer animation.
One thing that does appear is White's sudden, lovable absurdity.  We accept 
that this mouse can carry on a cultured conversation, just as we accept that 
humans suspend their disbelief whenever they are around Stuart.  The film 
moves at a rapid clip, in the same way that E. B. White's prose style skips 
along fluently, albeit a bit absent-mindedly.
I say "absent-mindedly" because White's "Little" cannot hold a candle to his 
"Charlotte's Web"; both books are full of whimsy and character - which one 
can't say about most children's movies - but "Web" has a much more linear 
(and recognizable) plot.  So screenwriters Greg Brooker and M. Night 
Shyamalan had precious little to go on as they set out to convert this 
beloved, quirky story into what they hope is a popular money-making film.  
What they left out includes a major narrative catalyst:  the bird Margalo, 
who is saved by Stuart and who in turn saves Stuart, is gone from the story. 
  Instead Stuart spends more time with the family, mostly with "brother" 
George, and with the cats that are trying to tear him apart.
Oddly, the film succeeds despite its mixing of old and new plotting.  A lot 
of White's charm is still there, with the slight flavor of 1945 New York, 
the setting for the original.  This is not a literal 1940's background, but 
a mythical one, represented by Mr. White's tweed clothing, by the Little's 
tiny gingerbread house dwarfed by skyscrapers, and by the scent of gentility 
and manners that tints the characters' interaction.  The film is set in the 
present but not really.  And the elements added by Brooker and Shyamalan, 
along with director Minkoff (one half of the directorial team that crafted 
Disney's "The Lion King") serve as nifty twists and engaging - though 
frequently sentimental - spin.
As the voice of the mouse, Michael J. Fox gives a winning edge of character. 
  Stories about the making of the film tell how difficult it was to imbue 
Stuart with emotions - considering that mice do not have pupils!  Well, Fox 
lends wonderful inflection, while the computer animators construct amazing 
subtlety in all of the mouse's doings.  His facial muscles shape his eyes 
and smile with amazing emotive traits, while a computerized "skeleton" 
conveys life-like movements.
Jonathan Lipnicki is fine as the boy George.  He fulfills his role 
convincingly, though he occasionally seems to be waiting for cues.  As his 
mother, Geena Davis creates a typically protective mom, her face drawing 
tight into smiles or collapsing into tears at command.  Davis still has her 
off-center beauty, though it is tempered here by a modest hairstyle.  In 
many ways, Hugh Laurie resembles the father of "Dennis the Menace," both in 
his prim garb and in the rascally charges for whom he must provide a 
fatherly example.  Laurie again proves himself a dependable character actor.
Other voices include Chazz Palminteri as Smoky, the cat that commands a 
feline underground.  Bruno Kirby's mild raspiness flows smoothly from the 
lips of Mr. Stout, Stuart's fake father-mouse, while Jennifer Tilly does 
wonders for the big-hearted mouse floozy posing as Stuart's mother.  Nathan 
Lane loads any role with character, and his Snowbell brims with conflicted 
compassion.  Further, a band of familiar character actors playing Little 
relatives give the background a plush lining.
Bringing "Stuart Little" to the screen was a bold move, and the special 
effects are much of what make the film so watchable.  Who would not smile to 
see Stuart's broad smile?  It's like seeing a padded version of Garth 
Williams' masterly illustrations.  My eleven year-old read the book 
recently, and encouraged me to reread it:  this is another plus, by the way, 
of Hollywood adaptations of classic books - it gives them renewed life.  Who 
would enjoy this film?  Kids, first of all.  Then anyone else who enjoys 
classic conflicts and the latest in computer animation, down to amazing 
shadows, reflections and indentations caused by weight.  But if you are out 
for a strict interpretation of E. B. White, this film may not leave you 
pleased.


Author
Jamey Hughton
It's phenomenal how much F/X work has been dedicated to making the title
character of `Stuart Little' a realistic screen presence. Stuart, an
orphaned mouse with an entire wardrobe of CGI clothing, is so convincing
as a walking, talking entity that we tend to forget he's merely an
elaborate special effect. `Stuart Little' is one for the kids, but at a
time like Christmas, it will easily function as agreeable entertainment
for the entire family.
Heading into the Christmas holidays, there are two family features
opening at your local cinema: this live action adaptation of E.B.
White's cherished children's novel, and the Robin Williams android
comedy `Bicentennial Man'. While `Bicentennial Man' offers some thought,
this charming tale has more of the proper ingredients to serve as a
crowd-pleaser for all ages. With director Rob Minkoff (`The Lion King')
behind the wheel, `Stuart Little' is chock-full of talking rodents and
frantic felines, all weaving their way through cute situations that the
kids will be enthralled by. But there is fun for the adult group, too,
in spotting the voice talents of various Hollywood stars. Listen for
Nathan Lane, Steve Zahn, Chazz Palminteri, Jennifer Tilly, and Michael
J. Fox as the little man himself.
Mr. Little (Hugh Laurie) and Mrs. Little (Geena Davis) have decided to
adopt a younger child into their family. The sight of the undisciplined
hooligans running around and screaming at the orphanage, however, brings
them to an alternate decision: they will adopt a mouse instead. Stuart
is excited to become part of the Little family, but their son George
(Johathan Lipnicki) has trouble accepting a mouse as a younger brother.
This problem is fairly understandable. Meanwhile, Stuart must ward off
the vile and villainous kitty Snowbell (voice of Nathan Lane), who seems
intent on getting rid of the little fella before the next family photo.
For the most part, the human actors play second fiddle to the animal
characters. But I found this move acceptable, particularly given the
performance of Lane, who is wonderfully vibrant as the demure but
dastardly Snowbell.
Michael J. Fox is perfect for the bashful suitings of Stuart, deriving
certain emotions out of the character to a degree that few other actors
could match. The special effects work for the talking cats (which
resembles the F/X from `Babe') is seamless and enjoyable, but the
spotlight here is definitely on the awe-inspiring creation of Stuart
Little himself. The wonderful visual effects go behind the call of duty
with convincing the audience that Stuart is actually just a miniature
actor. The blending of computer animation and live action is
consistently excellent, particularly in a miraculous boat race sequence
that is executed in perfect perspective. And Stuart has his own little
car, of course. Like I say, this is one for the kids.
Not that adults can't laugh along too. The screenplay is, oddly enough,
co-written none other than M. Night Shyamalan - the brilliant mind
behind the huge blockbuster hit `The Sixth Sense'. The story Stuart is
pitted into is nothing special, but there are some clever nuggets of
humor for the parental units as well. I hate to admit it, but I have
never read the novel `Stuart Little', despite it's obvious favor among
the Grade 2 crowd. I know, shame on me. I can see the possibility of
certain fans of the book being disappointed with the film, which
contains a glowing heart but really never elevates itself past the
elementary level of cute talking animals. Nonetheless, kids of all ages
are bound to be taken by the charming story of `Stuart Little', and it's
harmless nature is almost guaranteed to please adults as well.
And that is why I commend this family outing. There is nothing
spectacular about the way it is structured, but `Stuart Little' is
succeeds on the level of innocent entertainment. It's the cream of the
Holiday crop, with a title character who is easily the most welcome
special effect of the entire year.
Cast Your Votes for "1999 FILM AWARDS"
http://apps4.vantagenet.com/zsv/survey.asp?GO=Vote%21&id=9122019309

Author
Ross Anthony
A stereotypical TV-50's couple adopts an orphaned mouse to muse their seven
year old son much to the chagrin of local felines.
Stuart is the personification (er, ah "rat"ificaton) of the word "charm."
Though the film's plot offers nothing new and the animal speak burrow's
"Babe" technology; Stuart's charismatic presence is alluring.
Stuart is the action figure of our youth come alive. Every step, every bow,
every smile fills us with amusement. The plot is circumstantial, secondary.
All we need is to see Stuart drive a toy car, navigate a remote boat, or
receive a kiss from his newly adopted mom -- and we're smiling too.
I wasn't crazy about Nathan Lane voicing Snowbell the cat, but Monty's
voice-sake did great as well as did Stuart's. The kid was exceptional.
Lastly, the art director created a nice cartoony feel to the entire live
action backdrop.
I'm a huge lover of "Babe," but was a bit let down with "Babe II" ... if you
agree with that, then "Stuart Little" is kind of like a "Babe 1.5."
Stuart Little. Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG.
Starring Geena Davis, Hugh Laurie and Jonathan Upnicki.
Directed by Bob Minkoff.
Screenplay by M. Night Shyamalan and Greg Brooker.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Once upon a time, good, old-fashioned kids' movies were released
regularly to the theaters.  But these days, Hollywood has increasingly
given up on their theatrical releases in favor of the cheaper
direct-to-video route.  Columbia Pictures, bucking the trend with their
good-spirited and unabashedly wholesome STUART LITTLE, offers something
that the whole family can love.
Many of the kids' movies that are released theatrically feature nothing
but walking product placements as in POKEMON: THE FIRST MOVIE.  The
live-action STUART LITTLE, starring a digitally created mouse, is so
sweet that it should appeal to everyone but card-carrying members of the
Bah Humbug set.
As the simple story opens, Mr. and Mrs. Little (Hugh Laurie and Geena
Davis) are off to an orphanage to adopt a sibling for their small son
George (Jonathan Lipnicki from JERRY MAGUIRE).  They end up choosing,
not a human child, but a mouse one, Stuart.
"We try to discourage people from adopting outside their own (pause)
species," the prim and proper director of the orphanage, the ironically
named Mrs. Keeper (Julia Sweeney), tells the Littles.  "It rarely works
out."  The picture has several really cute lines like these, which
unfortunately, are almost all shown in the trailers.
The beauty of the film's approach is that all of the characters try hard
to ignore the fact that Stuart is (whisper this part) a mouse.  Stuart
is treated as much a part of the family as George, their human
offspring.  Thanks to the special effects artists, Stuart is far cuter
than any real mouse imaginable.  The film's many real cats, with their
artificially moving mouths, are not nearly as successfully rendered, and
they are 99% real.
Michael J. Fox voices Stuart with wonderfully sweet innocence and spunk.
The rest of the voice casting is well chosen, especially Nathan Lane
(Timon from THE LION KING) as Snowbell, the Little's sassy cat.  Poor
Snowbell gets ridiculed by his buddies, who say that Stuart is "a mouse
with a pet cat."
Filmed by Guillermo Navarro in the brightly saturated colors of an old
1950's movie and filled with warmly nostalgic music, the film is a treat
for the eyes and ears.  The Littles live in an inviting old New York
City brownstone, set right on Central Park and between two skyscrapers
-- talk about expensive real estate.
The movie is loaded with handsome visuals of Stuart: cuddled up snug in
his human-sized bed, being partially swallowed by Snowbell, living
temporarily in a castle turret in an abandoned miniature golf course and
being chased in a scary, nighttime Central Park.
The delightful movie is directed by Rob Minkoff (THE LION KING) and
written by Gregory J. Brooker and M. Night Shyamalan (THE SIXTH SENSE).
One might say the script was based on the classic E. B. White books, but
that would be stretching the truth.  As my son and I discussed in the
car afterwards, the movie has the characters but little more.  Don't
take this as necessarily negative.  My son said he thought the story was
much better than the book.  I would not go that far.
References to other movies are featured prominently in the storyline.
As in ANNIE, some obviously fake, working-class parents show up to claim
Stuart.  And, as in LADY AND THE TRAMP, there are pampered indoor
animals that interact with battle-hardened outdoor ones.  The film's
best sequence is a takeoff on the chariot race from BEN HUR with Stuart
piloting a small sailboat in the big Central Park race as an evil, rich
kid uses his remote control to have his boat destroy the competition by
ramming them.
Sad, poignant and funny, the movie makes you care about the brave,
little rodent with human clothes.  Well, actually doll clothes.
STUART LITTLE runs a fast 1:25.  It is rated PG for brief language (a
single use of the word "damn" I think) and would be fine for all ages.
The only possible reservation is that the dark chase scenes in the park
might briefly scare those under 5.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, absolutely adored the movie, giving it an
enthusiastic ****.  He said it was "such a sweet, lovable story" and
that "it really kept you into it."
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
John Carroll
STUART LITTLE, featuring the voices of Michael J. Fox and Nathan Lane; starring
Geena Davis, Hugh Laurie, Jonathan Lipnicki, Julia Sweeney and David Alan
Grier.  Directed by Rob Minkoff.  1999.
   Ever since The Adventures of Roger Rabbit, the combination of live action
and computer generated grpahics or animation has always been a big ticket for
studios.  Stuart Little puts a computer generated mouse in the main seat,
voiced by Michael J. Fox, and while it may not be a great movie, it is still
solid and a good view...As long as you have already seen the wonderful Toy
Story 2.
   The curse a lot of "cute" movies suffer is that they are too cute, too fast.
 The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland suffered from this, but luckily, Stuart
Little manages to keep most of your interest by trying to play Stuart as funny,
not cute.  While these attempts at humor do not always succeed, it nonetheless
is much better than just flashing Stuart's face to get a few "awww"s from the
audience.  This one aspect alone keeps Stuart Little afloat.
   The main cast, aside from Stuart, consists of the Little family.  Mrs.
Little, played by Geena Davis, Mr. Little, played by Hugh Laurie and George
Little, played by Jonathan Lipnicki.  Considering it is a children's movie,
acting does not need to be impeccable.  The cast is sufficient enough,
especially considering that Stuart is on-screen most of the time, and
rightfully so.  The film drags when human interaction takes place, as sad as
that may seem.  Even so, the film moves along at a rapid pace, but still seems
to drag on despite its attempts.
   Michael J. Fox voices Stuart, and Nathan Lane voices Snowbell, the cat who
is Stuart's archnemesis for most of the film.  The interaction between these
two characters brings most of the laughs throughout the film.  The rivalry that
exists brings up some good jokes, and some off-beat humor for the children. 
The reason these interactions are so successful is becuase when humans enter
the scenario, the film takes itself way too seriously.  While most children's
films always have a lesson, this one misses a definite lesson, and tries to
play on your emotions.  Unfortunately, an emotional bond with the characters is
never devloped to extract this type of emotion, that is until the end, and at
that point, it seems the director, Bob Mikoff, just gives up trying.
   The blend of Stuart into his live action enviroment is decently done,
although it does seem very staged a lot of the time.  It is a very difficult
process to act with a ten-inch character who is represented by an "X" on the
floor, and at some points during Stuart Little, this is very noticable.
   Overall, Stuart Little turns out to be an average children's movie.  The
movie takes no children's issue at heart, and tries to be sentimental at the
same time.  As you watch Stuart Little, you want to feel some emotion towards
the characters, and aside from Stuart and Snowbell, all you feel is boredom. 
In the end, however, Stuart Little is a decent film for a rainy day.  Although
Toy Story 2 is the best film out there, and probably worth a second look,
Stuart Little can deliver on some levels, just do not expect the wit and
lessons of Toy Story 2.
The Movie Page- http://moviepage.hypermart.net/
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
Frankie Paiva
There are so many elements that must come together to make a family film. You
have to get things that will appeal to the young audience, so that they can
laugh and enjoy themselves. It's even more of a challenge for most filmmakers
to include stuff that adults will get, and find funny as well. There are even
some way out there directors and writers that will even include plot elements
to keep teenagers interested. One of the recent films to do this was Toy Story
2. Blending sophisticated humor for adults with stuff that will entertain the
kiddies, it topped itself with its unique computer animation, and instantly
became a hit. While a smaller success story, this is essentially the same thing
that happens with Stuart Little, except maybe the teenager factor. Around
Christmas time we usually get attacked with bad family films covered in cheesy
and sympathetic ooze, (cough Bicentennial Man cough) but this film just manages
to reach above that for something new.
Mr. (Hugh Laurie) and Mrs. (Davis) Little have decided to get their son George
(Lipnicki, the cute kid from Jerry Maguire) a new baby brother. They go to the
adoption agency and are thrilled by the amount of wonderful children who live
there. A special person catches their eye, a talking mouse named Stuart (voiced
by Michael J. Fox) tells them things about the children and how couples always
come in and talk to the children. Once you've met with the children you want to
adopt, you'll just know which one to choose. This strikes them by surprise, (A
talking mouse?) but they just know that it has to be him. 
So after some trouble with the adoption agency they get Stuart home. From the
beginning George was very excited to meet his new baby brother, but he's
extremely disappointed when his parents bring home someone who he says slightly
resembles a mouse. (Wouldn't you be?) Like all family films, there is an event
or situation that happens to make George love and form a bond with Stuart. (I
won't tell what happens, but if you are one of the freaks that haven't read the
book like me it's still pretty obvious what it is.) Just as this relationship
begins there is trouble in the household. Snowbell (voiced by Nathan Lane), the
family's cat, cannot stand living in a house with a mouse as a member of the
family. When a local cat spreads the word around the neighborhood that he lives
with a mouse he isn't eating, he decides to do something about it. What will
happen to our famed rodent hero? You'll have to dish out $7.50 to find out.
The seamless blend of computer animation and live action is the first amazing
thing to behold in Stuart  Little. The human actors interact well with their
computer counterparts and they all give good performances. Geena Davis makes
her comeback mark showing that (in the right picture) she can act well. Stuart
is computer animated, but most of the rest of the animal cast are the real
thing. The training with the cats (especially in the final scene) shows that
this film obviously had some serious animal trainers on hand. The animal's
world is like our world in many ways. There are people willing to do anything
for money, crime boss cats working for the feline Mafia, and loners who pick
off of what others do. There are some of the usual clichĂŠs, (there is no way
to escape them in a family film) but they are easy to ignore. 
Voice casting was very well done and thought out. Fox is perfect as Stuart and
while he says oh dear one too many times, he makes his character fun and
interesting. A brilliant casting move was done in Nathan Lane (who starred in
the nowhere near same plot, but rodent themed Mousehunt) as Snowbell the cat.
Most of Snowbell's jokes are unfunny and all come from other movies we've seen
before, but Lane manages to make them funny again. Other voices include Steve
Zahn, Jennifer Tilly, David Alan Grier, and Chazz Palminteri.
Since it was originally a book, how is the script you ask? We all know that
books turned into movies are almost always a disastrous experience. There is
good news here. Does the name M. Night Shyamalan strike any bells? If not, he's
the director and writer of last summer's scary ghost hit The Sixth Sense. Some
of the story is jumbled on its way to the big screen though. It's never quite
explained how Mr. and Mrs. Little think nothing out of the ordinary of a
talking mouse, and lots of other characters view it as nothing new. So I had to
ask myself, if Stuart can talk to humans, couldn't Snowbell? But that's
probably too much to ask for a children's movie.  
While I will admit that I have never read the book, (Is it my fault I liked
reading Berenstain Bear books when I was little?) the original Stuart was
published by E.B. White (famed author of Charlotteâs Web) sometime around
1974 (that was the earliest publishing date I could find, I'm sorry if I'm
wrong). It's surprising that it took so long for this children's classic to be
made into a full length feature film. If it had been made earlier however, it
probably wouldn't have been as cute, and it wouldn't have been nearly as much
fun.
Overall Grade: B          Rated PG for brief language
The Young-Uns: Despite some mild language, this film is aimed directly at them.
All Ages
A Review by Frankie Paiva
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit the Picture Show website (where I work :) at
http://www.pictureshow.8m.com/
You can also visit my personal website at
http://www.homestead.com/teenagemoviecritic/mainpage.html

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Rob Minkoff.
Cast: Geena Davis, Hugh Laurie, Jonathan Lipnicki, Jeffrey Jones, Connie Ray, 
Allyce Beasley, Brian Doyle-Murray, Estelle Getty, Julia Sweeney, Dabney 
Coleman, Harry Gould, Patrick O'Brien.
Voices: Michael J. Fox, Nathan Lane, Chazz Palminteri, Jennifer Tilly, Stan 
Freberg, Steve Zahn, Jim Doughan, David Alan Grier, Bruno Kirby.
1999 - 85 minutes
Rated PG (for the life of me, I have no idea why).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, December 17, 1999.
Based on the charming children's book by E.B. White, "Stuart Little" is one 
of the most joyless family films in a long time. Not the most annoying, or 
the most sloppy, or even the most problematic, but simply joyless in every 
aspect, from its acting to its storytelling to its screenplay. You sit there, 
watching aimlessly at the screen, and can't help but recall far superior 
films that were very similar in their approach (1993's "Homeward Bound: The 
Incredible Journey" comes to mind), but at least had a little substance to 
their characters and situations. The movie clocks in at a swift 85 
minutes--thank goodness for small favors, but I wish the favor had been 
bigger (not that I'm greedy or anything).
For reasons unknown, unless they are suffering from some sort of mental or 
psychological disorder, Mr. and Mrs. Little (Hugh Laurie, Geena Davis) visit 
an orphanage one day and decide out of the blue that they'd rather adopt 
Stuart, the sweet orphan mouse (voiced by Michael J. Fox), in place of a 
human child. The Little's young son George (Jonathan Lipnicki) is, at first, 
disappointed in his new brother, but finally becomes close friends with him 
until he learns it doesn't matter what species something is, as long as you 
love them and they love you. Before I go any further, let me take this time 
to make an aside:
[Since Mr. and Mrs. Little, no doubt, grew up in the '60s and early '70s, it 
makes perfect sense that they, perhaps, experimented with a few too many 
mind-altering substances in the past.]
The plot thickens when the house cat Snowbell (voiced by Nathan Lane) becomes 
jealous of Stuart, a lower life form, being treated as a family member, while 
he is looked upon as nothing more than a pet. With the help of a group of 
stray cats in the Manhattan area, Snowbell devises a plan to hire two other 
mice to pose as Stuart's long-lost parents so Stuart will have to part with 
the Little's, and he can once again garner all the attention.
If my criticism about Mr. and Mrs. Little seems overly harsh, particularly 
for a family film, let me also say that there is no excuse for "Stuart 
Little" to be as hopelessly banal and empty-headed as it is. My nitpicking 
about the parent characters is (1) due to the obvious idiocy of the 
screenplay, by M. Night Shyamalan (of "The Sixth Sense" fame!) and Greg 
Booker; and (2) results from the boredom that the picture provides. The 
writing, surprisingly, does not offer one witty line in its whole running 
time, and I believe I lightly, and briefly, laughed once. Don't ask me what 
it was I laughed at; I only recollect doing it.
Some might argue that certain movies are for children and no one else, but I, 
nonetheless, firmly stick behind my theory that the only really worthwhile 
"family films" are those that the entire family will enjoy and be satisfied 
with. Why else do you think "The Wizard of Oz" and "Willy Wonka and the 
Chocolate Factory" are classics, and why else will "Stuart Little" be 
destined to join the endless line of ho-hum garbage that litters the video 
store shelves? The aforementioned "Homeward Bound," and even 1995's "Babe," 
which also took the idea of presenting animal characters that could talk, 
were successful because they had a heart and a mind to go along with the 
children-targeted stuff. In other words, the makers of those films did not 
hold their audiences in contempt, spitting out half-baked ideas that couldn't 
have even looked good on paper. With "Stuart Little," that is what you get. 
There's no need to mention any of the actors that were unfortunate enough to 
find themselves trapped in this dead zone of entertainment, but I will 
pinpoint the top-billed thesp, and take this time to speak to her directly: 
Geena, honey, in 1989, when you won that Academy Award for "The Accidental 
Tourist," could you have possibly predicted that ten years later you would be 
the host of a disastrous Oscar Pre-Show, and the star of a movie called 
"Stuart Little?" And in 1991, when you came out with the superb road movie, 
"Thelma and Louise," did you really have 1995's godawful "Cutthroat Island" 
on your career plan? For someone who only works once or twice every two 
years, you sure don't know how to choose projects, do you? Maybe it is not 
Mrs. Little, but you yourself that took the drugs in the '60s or '70s. LSD 
has been known to have side effects many years down the road, so it is quite 
feasible.
Smaller kids may enjoy "Stuart Little," but I can't imagine anyone else 
coming away from this film happy. While only loosely based on E.B. White's 
book, perhaps director Rob Minkoff should have chosen to adapt White's more 
personal and sweet "Charlotte's Web" into a live-action movie. On second 
thought, maybe not. With the subpar level of filmmaking displayed here, they 
would have easily found some way to turn "Charlotte's Web" into a figurative 
train wreck, too.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Geena Davis, Hugh Laurie, Jonathan Lipnicki, Jeffrey Jones, Brian
Doyle-Murray, Estelle Getty, Julia Sweeney, Dabney Coleman, Allyce
Beasley, Harold Gould, Jon Polito, Jim Doughan 
Featuring the Voices of: Michael J. Fox, Nathan Lane, Chazz Palminteri,
Steve Zahn, Jim Doughan, David Alan Grier, Bruno Kirby, Jennifer Tilly 
Written by: M. Night Shyamalan and Greg Brooker 
Directed by: Rob Minkoff 
Running Time: 85 minutes 
George Little (Jonathan Lipnicki) wants a little brother.  After Mr. and
Mrs. Little (Hugh Laurie and Geena Davis) visit the orphange, they
decide to adopt Stuart, a talking mouse (voiced by Michael J. Fox). 
George isn't so fond of his new brother when Stuart arrives at the
Little house, and neither is Snowbell the family cat (voiced by Nathan
Lane).  George and Stuart eventually bond while preparing for a remote
control boat race, but Snowbell wants Stuart out of the house (he's
unable to live with the taunts of other neighborhood felines saying it's
ridiculous that a mouse has a pet cat). 
Stuart Little is a mix of live action and computer generated imagery
(CGI).  The character of Stuart, while obviously a computer generated
image, grows on you as the film progresses and you'll soon see him as
much more than a mere special effect.  There is also a great deal of
animal training involved with this film, as many of the "supporting
cast" are actual cats (with computer animated mouths so they can
speak).  It's fascinating to watch these cats give performances without
an actual mouse to interact with. 
Stuart Little is a charming family film.  There are some great laughs in
the movie (with a script co-written by The Sixth Sense's M. Night
Shyamalan no less!), some moments that can only be described as "too
cute" (the boat race sequence is what won me over) and even the majority
of the one-liners (common nowadays in children's films or films
featuring Nathan Lane) are tolerable.  Kids and parents will love this
one. 
Stuart Little is available on DVD from Columbia Tristar Home Video. 
There are two different DVDs on sale: one contains the film in full
frame, and the other presents the film in its original theatrical aspect
ratio of 1.66:1.  Both versions feature choices of either Dolby Surround
or Dolby Digital 5.1 audio.  Both versions also contain the following
extras (and hang in there with me here... there's a lot of them): a full
length audio commentary track by director Rob Minkoff and animation
supervisor Henry Anderson, a full length audio commentary track by the
visual effects supervisors, an isolated score track, an interactive
trivia game, an interactive featurette that goes step by step through
eight of the effects in the film, a making of documentary that
originally aried on HBO, and a Stuart Little read-along story (which you
can read yourself or have Stuart read for you).  
There are also three music videos, and six theatrical trailers (called
TheCATrical Trailers... get it?  It's funny!) for Stuart Little and five
other Columbia Tristar releases: The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland,
Madeline, The Nuttiest Nutcracker, Muppets From Space, and Baby Geniuses
(the only bad thing about this entire DVD... I did not want to be
reminded of the awfulness that is Baby Geniuses).  DVD-ROM features are
also on the disc, including web links and a demo of the Stuart Little
CD-ROM game. 
But wait... there's still more!  There's a section called "Basement
Treasures" where you will find the auditions of the film's animators,
six deleted scenes which you can select to view with or without
commentary from the director, a visual effects gag reel, a production
gag reel, and an incredible eight minute storyboard sequence detailing
the original concept for the boat race scene (with commentary from the
director). 
The first commentary track features director Rob Minkoff and animation
supervisor Henry Anderson.  They give insightful and detailed thoughts
about the film's production.  Minkoff likes to point out scenes where
other screenwriters came in and polished up the script, namely writers
like Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski (who wrote The People vs.
Larry Flynt and Ed Wood) and Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel (who wrote
Splash and Multiplicity, among others).  Anderson is very appreciative
of the animators who worked with him and often points out which
animator worked on each scene as they occur.  The second commentary
track features visual effects supervisors John Dykstra and Jerome Chen
who discuss more specific details of the effects in the film.  Movie
fans will enjoy the informative first commentary track, serious
animation buffs will love the second one. 
Now I know this is slightly off topic, but it is related specifically to
this DVD so I must voice this now.  One of the music videos on the disc
is for a song called "I Need To Know" by a group called R Angels.  This
video features four mid-teenage girls (the singers obviously) having a
slumber party.  The girls ask a Ouija board "I need to know... who to
do, who to do, who to do" as the song begins.  They then sneak out of
their house, and along the way they strike a pose and their slumber
party pajamas are magically transformed into middle class streetwalker
outfits.  Then they head to a party and dance suggestively with the guys
while singing lyrics like "I'll be your pleasure all the time... just
say the words that you'll be mine".  Um... what the hell?  What does
this have to do with Stuart Little?  How is this in any way a song
suitable for a kids movie, let alone a video suitable for a kids movie
on DVD?  When the video concludes, the words "to be continued" appear. 
Oh I can't wait to see who they've slept with when the Toy Story 2 DVD
comes out. 
Kids won't care about most of the special features on this DVD, but
those of us who can sometimes be turned into a "kid at heart" thanks to
a winning family film sure appreciate them.  This is the way to do DVD,
a good movie LOADED with great features at a reasonable cost.  The
Di$ney people could learn a lot from Columbia Tristar. 
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
James Sanford
         When Geena Davis won the Best Supporting Actress Oscar for her
role in "The Accidental Tourist" in 1989, she probably never dreamed
she'd one day be playing second fiddle to talking mice and chatty cats
in a children's film. Yet here she is in "Stuart Little," kissing a
rodent good-night and doing her best impersonation of Donna Reed.
 For some actors this would be considered a career low-point,
but truthfully, "Stuart" is one of the few decent movies Davis has
starred in during the last decade. Does anyone remember "Cutthroat
Island"? "Angie"? "The Long Kiss Goodnight"? Would anyone want to? For
Davis, this might almost be considered a comeback vehicle.
 Readers who cherish E.B. White's gentle novel about an
adventurous young mouse adopted by a human family may initially be
startled by the $90 million screen version, which often leans on
slapstick and noisy action sequences. Even so, they may eventually be
won over by the movie's technical wizardry -- as in the "Babe" films,
the animatronics are so convincing, you're never quite certain if you're
watching a genuine animal or a puppet -- and by the sense of wonder
permeating the story. This may not be the "Stuart" many of us remember
from our own childhoods, but it's likely to win over contemporary kids
-- and a lot of their parents as well.
 The first half of the screenplay by M. Night Shyamalan ("The
Sixth Sense") and Greg Brooker is reasonably faithful to the book,
following Stuart (a computer-animated wonder voiced appealingly by
Michael J. Fox) as he tries to adjust to life in the Little household.
The well-meaning newcomer almost immediately runs into problems with his
human brother George (Jonathan Lipnicki, the scene-stealer from "Jerry
Maguire") and the Little's snooty Persian cat Snowbell, who speaks in
the distinctively weary voice of Nathan Lane. The story's first act
climaxes with a rousing toy boat race on the river of New York's Central
Park, with Stuart adeptly skippering a model schooner.
 Just when it seems everything is falling into place however,
Snowbell decides to get rid of Stuart once and for all, with the help of
his less-than-brilliant buddy Monty (voice of Steve Zahn) and some shady
alley cats who are "mean, vicious and all hopped up on catnip."  The
crises and complications that follow should have young viewers on the
edges of their seats, while adults can savor the sterling special
effects work and the awe-inspiring sets. The production team has
stunningly recreated large portions of Manhattan in a studio so that the
Big Apple looks far brighter and more fanciful than it has in ages.
 Although its whiz-bang tone is typical of most big-budget
family films, "Stuart" does take a break every now and then for a
quieter moment. There's a wonderful interlude involving Stuart living in
a castle on a putt-putt golf course and several wry bits of humor
targeted at adult viewers. We learn Stuart was orphaned when his parents
were crushed in "a tragic Cream of Mushroom soup accident years ago"
("it's a very heavy soup," Stuart's caseworker sighs). The script also
provides some bright wisecracks for its feline villains, such as when
one kitty warns another "didn't your mother ever tell you not to go into
Central Park at night?" and his friend replies "my mother was the reason
why you didn't go into Central Park at night!"  James Sanford

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "STUART LITTLE" (Columbia Pictures)
It's family entertainment that's unabashedly sentimental but
it's difficult not to fall under the spell of this fanciful adaptation
of E.B. White's classic children's tale. In the book, of course, a
mouse was inexplicably born to a Manhattan family but, in the movie,
artfully written by M. Knight Shamalyan and Gregory J. Brooker,
directed by Rob Minkoff, teeny Stuart (cheerfully voiced by Michael
J. Fox) is adopted by Mr. and Mrs. Little (pensive High Laurie, perky
Geena Davis). They find him adorable, much to the consternation of
their older son, George (Jonathan Lipnicki, memorable from Jerry
Maguire), and the family feline Snowbell (hilariously voiced by Nathan
Lane), who has been warned that Stuart is now family "and we don't eat
family members." Affable and helpful, Stuart soon recruits George as a
friend but Snowbell's a different matter. After all, no one has ever
seen a chipper rodent with a fluffy cat as a pet!  Chagrined, Snowbell
consults the local alley cat (Chazz Palminteri) who enlists a couple
of malicious mice (Bruno Kirby, Jennifer Tilly) to pose as Stuart's
biological parents and claim him as their long-lost son, thus
kidnapping him and providing, for the cats, a picnic in the
park. Their comedic portrayals are eerily reminiscent of two similar
sleazy characters in the musical Annie.  Obviously, resourceful Stuart
is eventually reunited with his loved ones and the dastardly "bad
guys" get a well-deserved dunking in a cold stream. Technically, the
blend of the digital characters with humans is seamless and
superb. Stuart is minutely etched, along with his magnificently
tailored clothes and emotionally expressive whiskers. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Stuart Little is an engaging 8. This wee mouse
could roar, stealing your heart for family fare this weekend.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow

What astonishes me about Stuart Little is not its
aggressive cuteness (of which there is no shortage) but its
abundance of wit.  Works geared towards children are often
insultingly banal, both to the parents who are forced to
endure them and to the kids themselves.  (I remember
reading several "young adult" books while in elementary
school and wondering why the author was "talking" to me
like I was an idiot.)  I'm not sure who to credit for
the story's wit--the screenwriters?  The director?  The
actors, who convey the dialogue with such natural
rhythm that it sounds almost musical at times?  No matter;
I'm sure the film's charm is a sum of all these parts,
a feat made even more impressive by the fact that Stuart
himself was inserted into the footage weeks after the actors
had finished shooting their scenes and gone home.

Author
Eugene Novikov
 Starring Jonathan Lipnicki, Geena Davis, Hugh Laurie. Featuring the
voice talents of Michael J. Fox, Nathan Lane, Chad Palminteri, Steve
Zahn. Directed by Rob Minkoff. Rated PG.
Stuart Little is a wonderful movie, one of the year's best live action
family offerings and a great example of non-intrusive CGI. It's a fairy
tale from beginning to end, a story where logic is as irrelevant as in
Cinderella or in Little Red Riding Hood. E.B. White, who wrote the
beloved children's book on which this delightful yarn is based, was
clearly concerned with creating a world completely different from the
one we live in, and Rob Minkoff's movie succeeds in recreating White's
(who also wrote Charlotte's Web) vision.
The movie opens on the day when George Little's parents (Geena Davis
and Hugh Laurie; George himself is played by Jonathan "The Human Head
Weighs Eight Pounds" Lipnicki) are supposed to visit the local
orphanage and adopt a little brother for him. He's unabashedly excited,
but his bubble is burst when, upon his arrival home from school, he
finds that Mr. and Mrs. Little have adopted not a little boy, but
Stuart, a little homeless mouse. Stuart is voiced by that great animal
impersonator Michael J. Fox (see the Homeward Bound movies) and is one
talkative rodent.
Mr. and Mrs. Little treat Stuart as a beloved member of the family;
unfortunately, George refuses at first to accept a mouse as a brother
and the family cat, Snowbell, has an unreserved contempt for the thing.
Since Stuart is a member of the family, he is a mouse with a pet cat: a
fact very damaging to Snowbell's pride. In a daring, surprising plot
twist, the feline enlists the help of some cat gangsters to take Stuart
out of the picture.
Meanwhile, Stuart earns George's affections by helping him win a
miniature sailing race. From that point on, George accepts Stuart as a
brother and is horrified when he is taken away from him by a pair of
mice who may or may not be Stuart's real parents.
Stuart Little's chief delight is perhaps the extraordinarily witty
script written by the noveau riche The Sixth Sense scribe M. Night
Shyamalan. Not only is it chock full of awesome one-liners ("Didn't
your mother ever tell you not to go into Central Park at night?" "My
mother was the reason you didn't go into Central Park at night!") but
is also strikingly well-done; sentimental but not gooey, reasonably
complex but not convoluted.
The film's gimmick (for want of a better word) is that nobody in it is
one bit surprised to see a mouse that talks and walks upright. Nor does
anyone really question the Littles' decision to adopt a rodent, beyond
a cautionary "Inter-species adoptions tend not to work out." This helps
to create the impression that the events in the film are occuring in a
world nothing like our own. Stuart Little is similar to efforts like
Babe: Pig in the City in its creation of an enchanting parallel
universe.
Jonathan Lipnicki has not quite outgrown his cuteness, though he's damn
close to it, and he turns in a more than serviceable performance. The
role is a non-demanding one, but the kid handles it admirably; he's
appealing but not too cloying. Geena Davis and Hugh Laurie don't get to
actually act much as the parents, but they are effective in a cheesy
Brady Bunch sort of way. Michael J. Fox gives a great voiceover
performance as Stuart, really establishing the animal as a character;
making him a likable screen presence.
I really enjoyed Stuart Little. I think kids will get a kick out of it
and adults will like it just as much. It really is good: smart, clever,
funny, extremely entertaining; if not terribly profound. This is
one "boy and his [insert name of pet animal here]" story that's worth
checking out.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
An orphaned mouse gets adopted by two human parents. The real son of the duo
does not take well to the mouse at first, but eventually begins to
understand and appreciate him better, until one day, the mouse's real micey
parents show up to claim back their child. Who will Stuart, the cute little
mouse, end up with?
CRITIQUE:
I expected more fun and laughs from this cute mouse tale. It was an okay
movie, great special effects with the talking mice and cats blending right
into their human entourage, some fun moments including a mafia cat ring
looking out for revenge, but not enough punch to recommend with much
enthusiasm. In fact, I think the filmmakers went a little too far on the
sentimentality bit, chiming in with sad music during every conceivable
moment of uncertainty. Mrs. JoBlo also liked it but nothing more than that.
There just seemed to be something missing, something that could've been
there, should've been there, but in the end, just wasn't. Will kids dig it?
Yeah, I'm pretty sure they will but don't expect them to start dusting off
their shelves for a new spot next to their TOY STORY and BEAUTY AND THE
BEAST videos.
I did love the way the mice all happened to be accepted in modern day
society as a matter of fact, and the excellent close-ups of the cats talking
and emoting their feelings, but when all was said and done, most of their
jokes fell flat, and I suppose that after the amazing spectacle that was TOY
STORY 2 (8/10), most other kid movies have to seriously drum up their
bang-for-a-buck factor, in order to be appreciated by today's expectant
movie-going audience. It's really too bad because I was thoroughly impressed
by the superior computer-generated character of Stuart Little, whose cute
face and impeccable body movements certified him as a truly original film
personality. Unfortunately, the film lacked that slickness, that hipness,
that humor, that action-packed craziness that takes a kid's movie and rises
it above the rest. All in all, it was okay, a couple of funny moments, a
couple of decent action scenes, a quick runtime, one too many emotional
moments, but a fun time for most kids. See it just for the slick mouse
effects and all of the cats talking shtick...that is, if you're into that
kind of thing.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Michael J. Fox was born in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, but currently makes
his home in New York City with his wife, actress Tracy Pollan, and their
three children. Michael stands 5'4" and recently revealed that he was
diagnosed with Parkinson's disease in 1991.
Actress Geena Davis has been married to two really tall showbiz guys: actor
Jeff Goldblum and director Renny Harlin. She is also a member of the
geniuses-'R-us organization of MENSA, speaks Swedish and placed 24th out of
28 semi-finalists for the American Olympic Archery Team in 1999. Her full
name is Virginia Elizabeth Davis.
No doubt you all remember the cute boy in this film, Jonathan Lipnicki, from
the 1996 Tom Cruise film, JERRY MAGUIRE (8/10), which also happened to be
his big screen debut. Ironically, his endearing portrayal of Ray Boyd earned
the kid the "1996 Best Child Performance of the Year" award presented by the
National Broadcast Film Critics Association.
Many familiar guest voices make appearances as characters in this film
including Nathan Lane, Chazz Palminteri, Steve Zahn, David Alan Grier, Bruno
Kirby and Jennifer Tilly.
Screenwriter M. Night Shyamalan is the man behind one of the biggest movie
successes of 1999: THE SIXTH SENSE (8/10). He wrote and directed that film.
By the time he was sixteen years old, he had already completed his 45th
short film, and at the tender age of 17, he stood before his parents, both
doctors, surrounded by pictures of the other 12 doctors in his family, and
informed them that although he graduated cum laude and received academic
scholarships to several prestigious medical programs, he had instead decided
to attend the New York University Tisch School of the Arts to study
filmmaking. The rest, as they say, is history.

Author
Greg King
STUART LITTLE (G).  
(Columbia Tristar)
Director: Rob Minkoff
Stars: Geena Davis, Hugh Laurie, Jonathan Lipnicki, voices of Michael
J Fox, Nathan Lane, Chazz Palminteri, Steve Zahn, Jim Doughan, David
Alan Grier, Bruno Kirby, Jennifer Tilley, with Jeffrey Jones, Connie
Ray, Allyce Beasley, Brian Doyle-Murray, Estelle Getty, Harold Gould,
Dabney Coleman, Jon Polito, Taylor Negron, Julia Sweeney
Running time: 85 minutes.
Based on the popular children's book written by Charlotte's
Web author E B White, Stuart Little is an absolute charmer of a film
that will appeal to audiences of all ages.
When the Littles (Geena Davis and Hugh Laurie) visit the local
orphanage to find a brother for their only son George (Jonathan
Lipnicki, the terminally cute kid from Jerry Maguire, etc), they
return home with a cute, wise cracking little mouse named Stuart.
However, acceptance as part of the family is not quite so
easy, as initially George resents his new brother.  As does Snowbell
(voiced by Nathan Lane), the family cat, who feels neglected since
Stuart's acceptance into the family home.  He arranges with a pack of
alley cats (voiced by Chazz Palminteri and Steve Zahn, et al) to
dispose of the pesky Stuart.  The determined Stuart has to find his
way back home through the hidden dangers of a big city, least of which
is the treacherous Central Park.
Brilliant animatronics and computer generated imagery make it
seem as if the animals are really talking, and enable Stuart to
interact convincingly with his human family.  The clever script, from
M Night Shyamalan (the superb The Sixth Sense) and Gregory J Brooker,
taps into notions of family and that sense of belonging.  The clever
production design gives the movie some wonderful contrasts that
reinforce the fairy tale nature of the whole thing.
Michael J Fox is wonderful, and lends his cheeky presence and
superb sense of comic timing to the voice of Stuart, making him an
appealing, witty character who will easily ingratiate himself into the
audience's affections.  But some of the film's best lines belong to
Lane, who seems destined to always be hunting mice, as the mischievous
feline who plots to get rid of our hero.
Director Rob Minkoff (better known for his animated Disney
features like The Lion King) maintains a cracking pace throughout, and
brings to the material an astute mix of broad slapstick comedy and
pathos.
Although enjoyable enough, this genial little film about a
charming rodent is not in the same league as the wonderful Mouse Hunt.
Nonetheless, it is perfect family entertainment for the holidays!
While the younger fry will enjoy the antics of the animals and the
visual humour, older audiences will appreciate the intelligent
handling of some important themes.
