Title
Review for Shadow, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Mildly diverting Mexican horror film about an antique dealer who
stumbles upon the Cronos Device--a 400-year-old device capable of
bestowing immortality, among other nasty things.  Said dealer is
subsequently pursued by the nefarious nephew (Ron Perlman) of a
terminally ill industrialist.
     This very stylish film from director Guillermo del Toro won both
the Critic's Week Grand Prize at Cannes and the Mexican Academy Award
for Best Picture.  The occasional nods to David Cronenberg are fun, but
the story is both too slow and too simple to keep your butt from
joining the legions of the dead.
     Intriguing psychological drama about a super-successful young
architect (James Spader) on the rebound who meets, marries, and
     ultimately misjudges his so-called "dream lover" (Madchen Amick
from TV's "Twin Peaks").  Plot twists give plenty of pause, but the BF
(believability factor) is undercut by an awful make-up job that leaves
the leads looking way-too glamorous for this film.
     Third-rate SPINAL TAP spoof of ficitious rap group N.W.H.  The
jokes are okay, but writer/director/star Rusty Cundieff (HOUSE PARTY 2)
paints a terribly unflattering portrait of rappers by embracing the
very values that he's heckling.
     FEAR OF A BLACK HAT has a couple great gags--including the
hilarious explanation of why "the butt" is like society--but the
characters spend too much time pulling guns on each other to be truly
funny.
     Dreadfully dull romantic comedy about a Big Apple beat cop
(Nicholas Cage) who tips a waitress (Bridget Fonda) two million dollars
(from a lottery ticket that he split with her).  The atmosphere (New
York as New York) is great and Fonda is uniformly appealing, but Cage's
role is so ill-defined that he's neither a decent foil to Fonda nor a
solid center to the story.  Costar Rosey Perez is annoying as Cage's
annoying wife.
     Director Andrew Bergman once airlifted a planeload of flying
Elvises (Elvii?) in HONEYMOON AND VEGAS.  And wrote THE IN-LAWS.  Rent
those instead.
NOTE:  Film is third-tier on the Imitation Romantic Comedy scale, way
       behind SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE (second-tier) and not even close to
       WHEN HARRY MET SALLY (top tier).
     Woof!  Rob Reiner's first dog of his directing career stars Elijah
Wood as a well-to-do eleven-year-old who decides that he's tired of his
unappreciative parents.  The inexplicably named North finds a lawyer,
declares himself a "free agent," and begins traveling the world for a
pair of "perfect" parents.
     The super-huge cast is a super-waste.  NORTH stars Jason
Alexander, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Bruce Willis, Jon Lovitz, Alan Arkin,
Dan Aykroyd, Reba McEntire, Faith Ford, John Ritter, and, get this,
Kathy Bates, Graham Greene, and Abe Vigoda (!) as a trio of Eskimos.
Yow!  Believe it or not, only Willis emerges unscathed and that's no
small feat from a man who has buried more than one movie himself!
     Frankly, nearly everything that can go wrong in this film, does.
Period.  NORTH is not funny; NORTH is not charming; NORTH isn't even
interesting.
     Low-key, low-budget thriller about an out-of-work oilworker
(Nicholas Cage) mistaken for a hit man while drifting through a small
Wyoming town.  The quadruple-cross plot has Cage agreeing to kill a
man's wife (Lara Flynn Boyle), agreeing with *her* to kill her husband
(J. T. Walsh), and running into the *real* hitman (Dennis Hopper) on
the way out of town.
     The story is good and the pacing is right, but the film is
hampered by a half-effective cast.  Both Hopper and Walsh are worth
watching, but Cage is too intense.  He never lightens up enough to
infuse the story with the irony it rightly deserves.  Lara Flynn Boyle
is a loss.  Neither her character nor her chemistry with Cage are even
*remotely* believable.  Phew!
NOTE:  Film is also available on videocassette.
     Cross DICK TRACY with BATMAN, subtract $20-30 million, and you're
standing in THE SHADOW--the long-awaited update of the famous '30's
radio show.  The script is good--explaining both the character's origin
and his network of agents--and the cast is appealing.  The film could
use some richer characterizations, but only Penelope Ann Miller (as
Margo Lane) sticks out like a sore thumb.  She's awful.
     Other demerits include cheap FX, clumsy editing, and spotty
direction.  THE SHADOW *does* a great sense of humor, though.  After
all, how can film that costars Jonathan Winters, Peter Boyle, and Tim
Curry be all *that* bad?

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In this movie adaptation, however, THE SHADOW knows nothing,
because the movie, from start to finish, is just an exercise in style.
Now don't get me wrong, this is GREAT style.  Think of the feel of
BATMAN but without quite such depressing sets.  Think of BATMAN, but
with better special effects.  Okay, you have now successfully formed an
image of THE SHADOW in your mind.
     In the movie, THE SHADOW (Alec Baldwin) is fighting the last
living relative of The Great Khan called Shiwan Khan (John Lone) in New
York City.  THE SHADOW is aided in this by his sidekick (Penelope Ann
Miller).  All this having been said, none of it matters.  The director
Russell Mulcahy uses the plot in the movie only to display and enhance
the mood and the style of picture.
     It is set in the 30s, and high tech back then was a bunch of
pneumatic tubes.  All over The Big Apple, down buildings and between
buildings, THE SHADOW has strung these pneumatic tubes which no one
ever seems to notice.  His helpers send him messages through them as
the tubes all funnel back to his desk.  The E-mail of the 30s.
     Although the technical ideas above were quite innovative, the
script by David Koepp wasn't.  He should have worried some about
character development and not gotten so carried away with the gadgets.
     The lighting, especially the lights and THE SHADOWs (what else),
are terrific.  The cinematography (Stephen H.  Burum) is dark like
Batman, but here it is made to be more serious than depressing.  Lots
of great Art Deco sets (Joseph Nemec III).
     THE SHADOW gets a correct PG-13 rating and runs too long at 1:50.
Unless you are really into style and art decoration, I can not
recommend this show.  No one acts in it.  The actors and actresses are
all props merely to promote the mood.  For the style I give it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Alec Baldwin, John Lone, Penelope Ann Miller.
Screenplay:  David Koepp.
Director:  Russell Mulcahy.
     When it comes to action hero chic in the 90's, bleak is
beautiful.  BATMAN, of course, set the course with its Gothic Gotham
and tortured Dark Knight, and later films such as THE CROW have
attempted to capture the same moody atmosphere.  The latest challenger
for that murky throne is THE SHADOW, based on the radio character of
the 1930's and 1940's ... well, not much of a challenger, actually.
THE SHADOW is the kind of film that makes others in the genre look
better by comparison.  Warts and all, BATMAN and THE CROW were at least
consistent in their tone; THE SHADOW is messy, convoluted and plodding,
the work of a director without an ounce of vision.
     Alec Baldwin stars as Lamont Cranston, who as the film opens is a
brutal warlord in China.  After an encounter with a mysterious holy
man, Cranston renounces his evil ways, returning to New York with the
power to cloud men's minds and a new alter-ego--The Shadow.  While he
is successful dealing with petty hoods, Cranston discovers a bigger
threat on the horizon.  That threat is Shiwan Khan (John Lone), only
living descendent of Genghis Khan and a man with powers similar to The
Shadow's.  When Khan manipulates a government scientist (Ian McKellen)
to achieve his aims, the scientist's daughter Margo (Penelope Ann
Miller) joins The Shadow's team of operatives in an attempt to save New
York from the world's first atomic bomb.
     Director Russell Mulcahy's last film was the execrable Kim
Basinger exercise THE REAL McCOY, and if THE SHADOW proves anything it
is that Mulcahy hasn't learned much about pacing since then.  For an
adventure film, THE SHADOW moves like a truck through mud.  There is
promise through the film's opening fifteen minutes, as Mulcahy takes
advantage of some nifty special effects to make The Shadow's first
showdown with bad guys brisk and effective.  Then, just as quickly, THE
SHADOW slams into a wall (or maybe one of the many laughably bad matte
paintings which fill the film).  There is no tension or excitement to
any of The Shadow's confrontations with Shiwan Khan or his henchmen,
and the dialogue is lacking in any real wit.  When we see that
screenwriter David Koepp (JURASSIC PARK) has set the climactic scene
between The Shadow and Khan in a hall of mirrors, we see how truly
lacking in creativity was any aspect of THE SHADOW's production.
     It also appears that Koepp and Mulcahy couldn't agree as to
whether they were making a dark tone-y picture a la BATMAN or a more
traditional comic book adventure closer to THE ROCKETEER.  Like Batman,
The Shadow is a character with a dark side, and Koepp seems to want to
keep that dark side in focus.  But then, just when the tone seems
clear, Mulcahy will whip out an egregious crane shot or, in one of the
most pointless exercises in whiz-bang photography in recent memory,
follow a message through miles of pneumatic tubing.  Perhaps one of the
reasons THE SHADOW feels so stagnant is that writer and director are
pulling so hard from opposite ends that it ends up going nowhere.
     That confusion wastes the fine casting of Alec Baldwin in the
title role.  With his low, intense rasp, Baldwin has the perfect voice,
and his piercing eyes glow behind The Shadow's scarf.  Unfortunately,
he gets virtually no supporting help.  John Lone is much too low-key as
Khan, and doesn't seem to realize what a villain has to be in a film
like THE SHADOW, namely charismatic.  Penelope Ann Miller is once again
nothing but eye candy, perhaps the only actress on the planet who makes
Kim Basinger look talented.  Tim Curry literally froths at the mouth as
one of Khan's toadies, and poor Ian McKellen slums through his stock
absent-minded professor part.  When it comes right down to it, very
little in THE SHADOW works, because no one involved seemed to have
anything interesting to say or present visually.  Here's hoping that
Universal's marketing department doesn't have the power to cloud too
many minds into spending money on this one.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Alec Baldwin, John Lone, Penelope Ann Miller, 
           Peter Boyle, Ian McKellen, Tim Curry, Jonathan Winters 
Director:  Russell Mulcahy 
Producers:  Martin Bregman, Willi Baer, and Michael S. Bregman 
Screenplay:  David Koepp 
Cinematography:  Stephen H. Burnum 
Music:  Jerry Goldsmith 
Released by Universal Pictures 
     There seems to be a common failing amongst the last decade's
screen versions of the exploits of comic book-type heroes.  Most of
these genre movies--BATMAN, DICK TRACY, THE CROW, and now THE SHADOW -
have been visually impressive (stunning, even), but lacking in the
character department.  Who is Bruce Wayne, really?  Or Dick Tracy?  Or
Lamont Cranston?
     Given its due, THE SHADOW probably does the best of the
aforementioned movies in creating a personality for its title
character, but it still makes one yearn for the not-so-distant days of
Christopher Reeves' SUPERMAN, when there was more than the shell of a
man beneath the cape.  Alas, style has supplanted substance, and all
this sort of film seems to need is a brooding atmosphere into which the
avenging angel can swoop.
     THE SHADOW tries to say something about the human condition ("Who
knows what evil lurks in the hearts of men?  The Shadow knows."), and
it has an interesting reason for why its title character is who he is.
Back in Asia during the early 1930s, Lamont Cranston (Alec Baldwin) was
an evil drug lord, given to slaughter and debauchery until a priest
shows him the error of his ways and forces redemption upon him.
     By 1939, Cranston has returned to New York and, as the Shadow, is
busy cleaning up the city's criminal element.  However, while the thugs
and mobsters of Manhattan don't offer much threat to someone who can
"cloud men's minds," danger arrives in the person of Shiwan Khan (John
Lone), the last descendant of Genghis and Cranston's psychic equal.
Khan's stated goal is to conquer the half of the world that his
ancestor failed to, and in order to do this, he plunders the United
States' scientific laboratories, where he comes up with a pair of
brilliant scientists (played by Ian McKellen and Tim Curry) and sets to
work building an atomic bomb.  Meanwhile, not only is Cranston having
difficulty trying to locate Khan's hideout, but his identity has been
uncovered by Margo Lane (Penelope Ann Miller), the daughter of one of
Khan's captives.
     The most interesting element of THE SHADOW is understanding what
gives Cranston his powers: the harnessing of the evil in his own
heart.  With Khan, we get to see the antithesis--someone who allows
that evil free reign.  Ultimately, of course, the two must clash to see
which facet of power has the greater strength.
     THE SHADOW's problems have nothing to do with the basic premise;
rather, they are flaws in execution.  The setup promises something more
invigorating than it delivers.  The entire "use the atomic bomb to hold
New York hostage" plotline is trite.  There's nothing especially
interesting about it, or the man behind it.  As a villain, Shiwan Khan
lacks a certain flair.  Although John Lone's portrayal is anything-but-
understated, Khan still doesn't seem all that impressive or
threatening, even as he gets closer to achieving his desire.  He's just
another megalomaniac with unusual powers.
     Alec Baldwin's portrayal of the invisible avenger is suitably
creepy (although his makeup job could have been a little more
impressive), but his version of Cranston is dull.  Much as was true for
Michael Keaton in BATMAN, the costume seems to bring out the
performance.  Penelope Ann Miller looks very fetching in her gauzy 30s
costumes with their plunging necklines, but her role is essentially the
thankless one of the hero's love interest.  Tim Curry and Jonathan
Winters are kept relatively in check in supporting roles.  Veteran
British actor Ian McKellen is vastly underused.
     Will the Shadow be back?  As always, box office take will be the
determining factor.  If there is a next time, it might be intriguing to
further examine those dark forces prowling Cranston's heart instead of
having him chase around a warrior with delusions of godhood.  Or,
failing that, the producers could do something that would render plot
and all attempts at subtlety void:  bring in Jack Nicholson to play the
bad guy.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Who knows what evil lurks in the hearts of men?  Now let's not
always see the same hands.
     Back in the 30's and 40s, before there was television, one of the
great super-heroes of the radio-ways, pulps, and comics was Lamont
Cranston.  He was a variant on H. G. Wells' INVISIBLE MAN.  Cranston
could not actually make himself invisible, but using techniques he
learned in the orient he could "cloud men's minds so they cannot see
him."  With adventures that began in 1931, he was one of the earliest
popular American superheroes, and was perhaps the most popular superhero
on the radio.  The Shadow had already been a household name  more than
seven years when Superman first appeared and more than eight years when
Batman was first introduced.  To the radio's sinister strains of Saint-
Saens's "Omphale's Spinning Wheel" the invisible Shadow would stalk the
night looking for evil-doers to scare the bejeezus out of.  Over the
years there were many cast changes and many voices to The Shadow and his
sidekick, "the lovely and talented Margo Lane," including at one time
respectively, Orson Welles and Agnes Moorehead.
     Even though The Shadow lasted on radio twenty years, until 1956,
there was never (until now) a memorable version of The Shadow on TV or
in the movies.  Somehow the combination of atmosphere and special
effects necessary would have never been possible.  Also unlike other
superheroes, The Shadow had to be played by someone ugly.  The pulps,
which started publishing the character in 1931, always portrayed him as
a tall man with a long crooked nose, a fedora, and the lower part of his
face covered.  He was more frightening when you could see what he looked
like.  Victor Jory was nearly ugly enough and starred in a 1940 serial,
but could not match the phantom with the disembodied voice of vengeance
on the radio.  Today special effects are much more articulate on the
screen, even if actors often are not.  The menace of The Shadow is now
very possible to show on the screen.  In fact, while on the radio The
Shadow could only cloud men's minds and in later years read what he
clouded, the screen's new Shadow has an arsenal of psychic weapons, and
so do his enemies.  This provides opportunity for more visual
excitement.  But what current actor is ugly enough to play Lamont
Cranston, The Shadow?  Would you believe Alec Baldwin?  I would not
have, but this film manages to have a handsome Shadow without
compromising on the menace or the image.
     As far as I know, the radio plays never gave you much of a history
of how The Shadow got his peculiar talents.  I have been a fan of the
radio plays and they never went into any detail on the origins of The
Shadow except that in the Orient this hero learned the ability to "cloud
men's minds."  The film goes into much more detail.
     Our story begins in Tibet with Lamont Cranston anything but heroic.
As his first alter-ego Ying Ko, he is a mysterious drug lord of American
origin.  It is hard to believe that this villain will one day be the
great crimer-fighter I know from the radio series.  Seduced by the light
side of the force he goes to New York to make amends for the evils he
did in the East.  He gets one opportunity after a priceless sarcophagus
is sent, un-requested, to the New York Museum of Natural History.  The
coffin leads to murder and The Shadow finds himself fighting Shiwan
Khan, the last descendent of Genghis.  Khan is portrayed by John Lone
who played THE LAST EMPEROR and Khan is now determined to become the
next one.
     THE SHADOW probably does not use Baldwin to the fullest it could
since the demands of playing a superhero fall well short of those of
being one.  It at least gives him a chance to play someone a little
sinister and helps to shake off his clean-cut family man image.  Perhaps
out of place are his humorous one-liners after action scenes.  They were
funny when James Bond delivered them in the 60s, but they have become
much too common in action films and it is all wrong for the somber
Shadow to be making "Bondisms."  Penelope Ann Miller is attractive in
dresses featuring low cuts in front and lower cuts in back.  She has a
little more to do than the original Margo Lane--the original was little
more than a sounding board so the audience knew what The Shadow was
thinking--but still this is not a role that stretches someone's acting
abilities.  One way to tell this film had serious financial backing is
the name actors in parts that could have gone to unknowns.  Jonathan
Winters, in his most reserved role in memory, plays the police
commissioner actually fairly well.  Peter Boyle has little to do and
seems along only for the ride.  Andre Gregory is completely wasted as a
minor functionary in The Shadow's network.  Tim Curry makes a weird
villain, but doesn't that go without saying?
     But the real star of the film is New York City of the 1930s.  Not
New York as it was then or ever, but a beautiful, idealized, Art Deco
1930s New York City.  Director Russell Mulcahy, who gave us the great-
looking HIGHLANDER, gives us a stunningly idealized Manhattan of the
mind's eye.  In addition he give us small gratuitous surprises for the
camera including one subjective shot that is almost a roller-coaster
ride in itself.  And a Jerry Goldsmith score is always a plus.
     This may not be exactly the classic radio version of The Shadow,
but it may be more fun.  For the most part it does not contradict the
canon, but it places it in a larger context and fills in many of the
blanks.  There are some changes but there is a lot of filling in of gaps
in some very unexpected ways.  Lamont Cranston is given an evil past
that certainly casts The Shadow in a whole new light.  In fact it adds
complexity to his character over the one-dimensional do-gooder.  While
Batman is essentially out for vengeance against criminals in general,
Lamont Cranston had committed terrible evils and was driven by the need
to make amends.  I am not sure that this is what Walter Gibson had in
mind for his character, but it certainly works.
     The Shadow on radio was a little different from The Shadow in the
pulp magazines and The Shadow in the film is different from either.  I
do not remember any radio references to The Shadow having a network of
agents--I think there was more about them in the pulps.  Even on the
radio he did have his faithful cab driver Shrevie.  The Asian mysticism
that plays a big part in the film version was not usually apparent in
the radio series, though some of the pulps drew heavily on the Asian
origin of the The Shadow's powers.  Perhaps the most interesting
revision to the Canon is to give Margo psychic abilities also.  While
never explained it really adds interest to her relationship with Lamont.
     This may well be a piece of summer fluff, but I found it far more
engaging than the usual superhero film.  For once the power of the mind,
both psychic and reasoning, are as important to a hero as are his
physical powers.  And the image of the tall, crooked-nosed in Fedora and
cape whipping out guns will thrill rather than disappoint fans of The
Shadow.  This is the most I think I have ever enjoyed a "superhero"
film.  I give it a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.  (Oh, by the way, my
contact with The Shadow has been almost entirely in radio revivals of
the old series.  I am too young to have heard original broadcasts.)

Author
Dragan Antulov
Comic book superheroes are rather thankless material for
contemporary moviemakers. With few exceptions, like Richard
Donner's SUPERMAN or Tim Burton's BATMAN, film adaptions of
popular comic book serials usually turn out to be utter
disappointments or total stinkers (including the sequels of
aforementioned films). The Shadow, popular character of
1930s pulp novels and radio serials who had given
inspiration to the creator of Batman, is one of those who
couldn't escape such fate in its 1994 screen adaptation.
The protagonist of the film is Lamont Cranston (played by
Alec Baldwin), New York millionaire with the bloody past of
opium smuggler. Long time ago in the Far East a Tibetan monk
helped him to see the errors of his ways and taught him
psychic skills, including ability to "cloud people's minds".
Because of these skills he is virtually invisible and every
night he goes on the streets of 1930s New York in order to
fight crime and injustice under the guise of The Shadow.
Shadow's skills are shared by his archnemesis Shiwan Kahn
(played by John Lone) who comes to New York in order to
pursue his life-long dream of world domination. His plan is
to hold city to ransom with an atomic bomb built by nuclear
physicist Dr. Reinhardt Lane (played by Ian McKellen).
Shadow does everything in his power to stop him, but his
efforts are complicated by scientist's daughter Margot
(played by Penelope Ann Miller) who possesses psychic powers
of her own.
THE SHADOW, unlike most of the comic book adaptations, has a
screenplay that tries to give three dimensions to their
two-dimensional pulp characters of the original. The same
screenplay, written by David Koepp, somehow manages to
include squeeze multitude of the serials' characters and
most memorable situations. Production design by Joseph C.
Nemec III, aided by CGI, succeeds in creating vivid and
beliavable ambient of 1930s New York on L.A. sound stage.
However, screenwriting efforts in character development are
compromised by bad acting - Alec Baldwin seems rather
disinterested in his part, as well as John Lone, who
obviously feels uncomfortable in the role of comic book
villain (while others, like Tim Curry, turn to unnecessary
overacting). The impression is somewhat improved by the
charming presence of Penelope Ann Miller which gave some
erotic flavour to this film. Unfortunately, director Russell
Mulcahy, revered for his work on HIGHLANDER and infamous for
his work on the sequel, shows his tendency to base films on
non-stop action and cheap pyrotechnics, usually at the
expense of the characters and story which probably ended on
the cutting room floor. So, THE SHADOW, the movie that could
have been another BATMAN, ends like one of those forgettable
Hollywood films that gave such a bad reputation to comic
book adaptations in general.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
