Title
Review for Life (1999)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Jamey Hughton
Eddie Murphy has had his share of ups and downs during his career. Known
for his notorious late 80's slump, Murphy has still managed to bounce
back with a handful of hits in the past few years. With the exception of
the dreadful Holy Man, he appears to be on pace for a full-fledged
comeback.
Life was a great move on the part of Murphy and co-star Martin Lawrence,
because it's a great showcase for both actors that never resorts to
slap-sticky drivel. Director Ted Demme is smart enough to realize that
the two comedians can generate enough genuine laughs on their own, and
doesn't insert a distracting plot to back them up. Life is, in a sense,
one great balancing act with Murphy on one end and Lawrence on the
other. Amazingly, the scale never tips in either's favor due to the
marvelous chemistry and wonderful contrast that each actor allows the
other.
As the movie opens, we're introduced to Ray Gibson (Eddie Murphy), a
two-timing pickpocket who schmoozes his way into a club. There he meets
a successful businessman named Claude Banks (Martin Lawrence). Somehow,
after multiple contrivances, the mismatched pair find themselves on
their way to Mississippi on a moonshine run. When all is said and done,
Ray and Claude have been framed for a murder that was actually committed
by the town sheriff.
Hence the setting of Life: Mississippi State Prison, where the main
characters come to realize their unlikely friendship is important, and
become set on finding an fool-proof escape plan. The film takes us from
the 30's all the way to the 90's, presenting a difficult task in showing
how the aging process affects Ray and Claude. Luckily, Rick Baker
handles the makeup effects of the two actors in a fantastic, Academy
Award caliber manner. Not only do we believe the characters look as if
they're 90 years old, but they sound like it, too. Murphy and Lawrence
are completely convincing in the lead roles, even as crotchety old cons
bickering over a game of cards. This is just one of the pleasant
surprises that the film has tucked up it's sleeve.
While the ads are marketing Life as a straight arrow comedy, there is a
hefty amount of dramatic material hidden at it's core. But the comedic
aspects work wonderfully, wisely drawing strength from the talents of
the two stars. The movie is more of a comedy than it is a drama, but in
both senses, it's an overwhelming delight.
I could say a few bad things about the movie, but I don't want to. It's
such a nice surprise, such a great vehicle for Eddie Murphy and Martin
Lawrence, that it warrants a huge smile as the credits begin to roll.
Jamey Hughton was a 1999 Writing Finalist in the YTV Achievement Awards
and writes a Published Column in The StarPhoenix (Saskatoon Sk. Canada).

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: April 16, 1999
Starring: Eddie Murphy, Martin Lawrence, Obba Babatundé, Poppy
Montgomery, Clarence Williams III, Bokeem Woodbine, Nick Cassavetes,
Noah Emmerich
Directed by: Ted Demme
Distributed by: Universal Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (strong language, a shooting) 
As Hollywood has its say, life in prison can be a unique experience.
Humanity is laid bare for the simple civilization it is, and free
individuals from all social classes are equaled as inmates by the
promises of the next meal and free time in the yard. THE SHAWSHANK
REDEMPTION, perhaps one of the best prison movies ever made, gave a
serious outlook (albeit with humorous asides) on a wrongly convicted man
who adapts to the microcosmic society on the inside. In LIFE, however, a
strikingly similar statement is made by director Ted Demme (THE REF)
with almost entirely humorous content. Most exactly, this movie is
SHAWSHANK inverted. 
Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence star as Ray and Claude, our soon-to-be
convicts living life on the edge in 1920's Harlem. They're both hustlers
to a certain degree, making a quick dollar with fast hands and a fast
tongue. Their debts catch up to them, though, an in order to pay it off,
the two are sent with a truck to Mississippi to get a load of moonshine
for a nightclub back in Harlem. All's fine until the two stumble upon a
dead body, and in the segregational South a life sentence for the pair
is inevitable. So they end up at Mississippi State Penitentiary where
director Demme offers us an episodic view of their lives over the span
of nearly seventy years. Throughout that time, the two see a number of
changes -- some good, some bad -- but their humorous outlook and
never-say-die spirit keeps them going. 
As the leads, Murphy and Lawrence are outstanding, and in addition to
complementing each other they make strides individually. As Ray, Murphy
is probably more the audience's favorite than Lawrence as Claude, for
Murphy expands on the mirth and good nature that brought him brief
success in last year's HOLY MAN. 
Martin Lawrence, too, makes a better appearance than his last turn in
1997's NOTHING TO LOSE. Whereas his character there was bland and
somewhat typical, his role here is much more effectual: he plays a
sniveling, weaseling little dime-snatcher who has good intentions and an
annoying way of going about them. Together, with Murphy, he helps
generate the necessary atmosphere for a buddy comedy like this; in fact,
a bond of this type was missing from 1994's SHAWSHANK. Granted, the
Frank Darabont film was more an introspective look at one man's life
told through the eyes of another, but the jokes that fly between Murphy
and Lawrence could not be matched with only a single lead. 
And indeed, the humor comes frequently and to much success. The jokes
are fresh and delivered in good form, in addition to being
well-camouflaged and diverse. There's not a lot of running humor, and so
for the entire 100-minute running length there are hearty new laughs
around the corner. Much of it comes at the other inmates' expense, but
Murphy and Lawrence managed to play up a bit of it between themselves as
well, giving the comedy a dynamic feel. As with everything else, it's
well-done. 
The movie does have its low and slow points, but audiences are sure to
forgive them for the volume of laughs that LIFE offers. This is the
first true comedy since last fall's RUSH HOUR, and it is sure to be one
of the more memorable of 1999. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
     LIFE is funny sometimes...just not as often as you might expect.
Universal is promoting LIFE just the way you'd expect it to promote a film
starring Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence -- as a raucous comedy with
plenty of the insult humor, attitude and gay-baiting their target audience
has come to expect.  The funny thing is -- or isn't, as the case may be --
that LIFE is actually an attempt by the two comedians to grow up a little.
Anyone expecting to see Eddie and Martin doing their version of STIR CRAZY
is bound to be somewhat surprised to find Eddie and Martin doing their
version of THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION.
     It's a commendable effort by two performers best known for more
simple-minded material; it's just not a very successful one.  The
principal action begins in 1932, where two different men find themselves
in similar trouble.  Small-time hustler Ray Gibson (Eddie Murphy) is in
trouble with Harlem crime boss Spanky (Rick James) for running numbers in
his territory; mild-mannered Claude Banks (Martin Lawrence) is in trouble
with Spanky for being short on the bill in Spanky's club.  To save both
their skins, Ray offers to bring Spanky a shipment of bootleg liquor from
Mississippi, with Claude as his partner.  Unfortunately, things go from
bad to worse down South, where Ray and Claude are convicted for a murder
they didn't commit and end up sentenced to life in the Mississippi State
Prison.
     Once the narrative gets to the prison setting (which takes around 30
minutes), the story predictably involves the new city-slicker inmates
learning the hard facts about their new milieu -- when not to back-talk
the bossman (Nick Cassavetes); when to turn over your cornbread to the
largest land mammal on two legs (Michael "Bear" Taliferro); why prison
makes strange bedfellows (literally).  The pacing may be a bit pokey, but
it still looks and smells like a mass-market comedy for a while.  That's
before screenwriters Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone and director Ted
Demme start taking some intriguing detours.  In one scene, Ray begins
describing the nightclub he dreams of starting one day, momentarily taking
his fellow inmates somewhere wonderful; in another, a gay inmate (Miguel
A. Nunez Jr.) about to be released is treated with sympathy and a bit of
dignity.  As LIFE unfolds, it starts to feel surprisingly ambitious, not
at all like a whoop-it-up crowd-pleaser.
     As admirable as LIFE's reach may be, however, it generally exceeds
its grasp.  While it lays out the sub-plots and advancing years like an
epic in the making, the film-makers never appear entirely committed to
making a film that could alienate many of the stars' core fans.  Key
elements of the story -- Claude's fiancee leaving him for another man; a
sympathetic superintendent (Ned Beatty) dying before he can act on
evidence of our protagonists' innocence; even Ray and Claude's fate in the
film's climactic fire -- never actually appear on screen, the information
tagged on by an inmate (Obba Babatunde) narrating the tale in flashback.
LIFE is a frustrating experience, because every time it appears close to
making a connection to its characters it falls back on a lame joke to
reassure the viewers that they're still watching a comedy.
     I may be kinder to LIFE than it really deserves, simply because I was
so surprised by its tone.  Martin Lawrence, whose screen work has
generally bordered on the insufferable, does some fairly nice work as the
straight man in the duo, and Murphy is in fine form as his quintessential
fast talker.  Rick Baker's old-age makeup is also a star of the show,
taking the stars into their 90s (and, in the case of Lawrence, making him
look frighteningly like Whitman Mayo).  LIFE is effective in bits and
pieces, building on the predictable comedy in some unexpected ways.  It
just never builds on them in the necessary ways, never making the
friendship between Ray and Claude its primary dramatic concern.  It's a
film caught between what the film-makers wanted to do and what the studio
must have wanted them to do, just the clashing creation you'd expect from
a story that's part STIR CRAZY and part SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Two of my personal favorite funnymen, Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence, join
together in a prison comedy that starts out in the 1930s and moves its way
into the 1990s, with plenty of foul language and makeup for its stars. The
duo was last teamed up in 1992's BOOMERANG.
PLOT:
Two innocent black men get sentenced to life in the South, after they are
found hovering over a dead man's body. All of their time in jail is spent
trying to get out, and attempting to be funny.
CRITIQUE:
A disappointing film for the two main stars, this movie offers a few
chuckles here and there, no laugh out loud scenes, a lot of retreading
scenarios involving prisoners trying to escape, rape one another, and ending
up in "the hole", alongside an unimaginative plot and a cast of unbelievably
wholesome jailbirds. I kept waiting for this film to "break out" in one
scene or another, but it never really did. In fact, it actually went the
other way, and decided to add a few touching scenes near the end, just to
let us know that "Hey folks, jail isn't all that funny in real life!". Yeah,
well...whatever. Note to Eddie Murphy: Enough of the prosthetics,
dude...stop hiding behind all of that make-up and start choosing some
scripts that truly bring out your innate humor.
Much like the rest of the night's audience, I still could not resist
chuckling along to Murphy and Lawrence's foul mouths (especially when they
were in their old men makeup), but obviously, you do not base a complete
comedy on stars talking about "mutherf**ker this" and "mutherf**ker" that! I
couldn't have cared less about the characters or the story line, and most
certainly would not recommend this film to anyone looking for interesting
characters, an interesting story line or an original idea. Even the final
scene was contrived and unbelievable, just for the sake of the conclusion.
My gut instinct always tells me to stay away from comedies whose trailers do
not even make me crack a smile. This film's trailer had me wondering if it
was even a drama or not, so I guess my sixth sense came through on this one.
Having said that, if you actually do find the film's teaser to be appealing,
and really love Murphy or Lawrence, you may just want to catch this
movie...on video. All in all, this life sucks.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Look closely, because the "bad guy" in this movie, Spanky Johnson, is played
by none other than musician Rick James himself. That's right, the man who
sang "Super Freak"!
Martin Lawrence was born in Frankfurt, Germany and received $8,500,000 for
his role in this film.
The man who plays Sgt. Dillard in this film is Nick Casssavetes. You may
remember him from his role in John Woo's FACE/OFF (8.5/10), in which he
played a drug dealer. He is also a director in his own right, having filmed
UNHOOK THE STARS (7/10) and SHE'S SO LOVELY (5/10).
The two screenwriters' (Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone ) last collaboration
was the ill-fated DESTINY TURNS ON THE RADIO. The idea for this film was
actually Eddie Murphy's.
In case you're wondering where you've seen the actor who plays the character
of "Can't Get Right" in this movie. His name is Bokeem Woodbine, and he
recently starred opposite Mark Wahlberg and Lou Diamond Phillips in THE BIG
HIT (6.5/10).
The hooker with the big breasts in this film is the ever-popular Lisa Nicole
Carson, currently presenting her acting chops on TV's "ER" and "Ally
McBeal".
Actress Poppy Montgomery's middle name is Petal (She played the pretty,
white girl in this film.) In real life, her four sisters are also all named
after flowers: Rosie Thorn, Daisy Yellow, Lily Belle and Marigold Sun.

Author
Mac VerStandig
It has been said more than once that imitation is the highest form of 
flattery. Hollywood works much the same way, as only the truly great 
films seem to find themselves being imitated directly or indirectly in 
future releases. The one question that remains is whether or not an 
imitation can be as good as or better than an original. Sequels 
certainly don't tend to be, and remakes are very mixed. But what about 
in a movie like Life, where deja vu exists with no less than 5 other 
films but some level of originality is still in place? Director Ted 
Demme seems to have proven so.
Ray (Eddie Murphy) is a low life pick-pocket who makes a "living" going 
from petty crime to petty crime. Despite being witty, he seems to hold 
very little close to him emotionally, except for his father's grave, 
and has little sense of the true meaning of life.
Claude (Martin Lawrence) is a far more proper man. He has a job lined up 
for himself at the bank, and is almost over some bad debts. 
Unfortunately, he too has no true ambition in life, and plans on 
spending his money on Yankees tickets, rather than settling down and 
getting married to a woman that clearly loves him.
Through a very odd set of events that seems to wander from crime to 
crime, in a slow and boring fashion, the two men end up being sentenced 
to life in jail together, for a crime they did not commit. It is here 
that the rest of the film is to unfold, and where Claude and Ray are to 
learn exactly what a life sentence really is, and what it can take away 
from you.
A mere five years ago, The Shawshank Redemption was released and it had 
enormous success. Obviously, there are some stark similarities between 
the two films. Both feature an innocent protagonist (In Life's case, 
protagonists) who are in for the ultimate punishment. And both films go 
on to give commentaries on the institutionalization that prison can 
cause, by showing an older inmate dealing with a reality that the place 
he is soon to depart, has become a home to him. But that is where the 
similarities to that production end.
Other films, like Mr. Saturday Night, show two men growing old together 
and dealing with the cards they have been dealt. But none do so as 
spectacularly as this one. There are also scenes lifted from, but not 
limited to, Stir Crazy, Murder in the First, and Spartacus. But none of 
those have any true similarities beyond the obvious settings (prison) 
and situations. So, despite being very similar, Life does manage to take 
it's own direction.
Another potential grim point for this film is the obvious lack of 
reputable actors in the primary casting. To date, Martin Lawrence has 
done nothing that would qualify him to play what ultimately is a serious 
role in a semi-dramatic film. Especially not one that transcends so many 
generations, and requires him to be as young as 20 and as old as 90. The 
same can be said of Eddie Murphy, who, despite some great comedic works 
over time, has done little of a decent dramatic nature. Fortunately, for 
the benefit of this film, they both turn out beautiful performances that 
are certainly their finest so far.
The finest acting out of the two leads comes in the later part of the 
film. As the two progressively age, and the wrinkles on their face 
multiply, you see how well Martin and Murphy have adapted to playing a 
far elder role in a very realistic manner. Not only do they change their 
mannerisms and voices, but you can truly sense a change in overall 
persona within their characters. That is certainly something you can't 
remember seeing before out of these two foul mouthed comedians.
One of the weaker elements of this film is the opening. It takes a while 
to get things into place, and the movie does a relatively poor job of 
entertaining the audience for the first 20 minutes or so, beyond some 
occasional humor. Also, in a classic, yet extremely cheap move, the 
movie skips some much needed details in order to finally get things 
going. Although you are pleased that after those 20 minutes a plot 
emerges that is consistent with the film, you still are left with a 
feeling that something is missing. One scene features the two men in a 
holding cell, optimistic that since they are truly innocent, they will 
be acquitted. The next scene is merely a judge slamming down a gavel, 
pronouncing the word "life." Now, I fully understand that the film has 
neither the time nor ability to explore a trial sequence, but this all 
could have been avoided by merely cutting the prior scene in the holding 
cell.
The ultimate question that can be posed is whether or not a film is 
quality entertainment. The answer in regards to this production is 
"yes." There is an element of fine acting by two actors with potential 
that the world did not previously know of. There is an unfortunate down 
side in the film's opening, but that is forgivable. Ultimately, the 
driving force behind Life is that it finally shows that imitation can be 
quality as well.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
starring Eddie Murphy, Martin Lawrence, Obba Batabunde, Lisa Nicole Carson,
Nick Cassavettes,
Noah Emmerich, Bokeem Woodbine, Clarence Williams III
written by Robert Ramsey & Matthew Stone
directed by Ted Demme
LIFE, Ted Demme's wonderful new film, falls prey to the predator
called marketing. Anyone who has seen the film's trailer and/or poster
will simply dismiss the film as another dumb Eddie Murphy or Martin
Lawrence vehicle, either filled with offensive jokes or strictly for
the kids. Such things happen when an actors become typecast, as Eddie
Murphy and Martin Lawrence have, but their new film, LIFE, is as
expansive as it's title indicates.
Ray and Claude(Murphy and Lawrence, respectively), two practical
strangers living in Harlem, meet when they are forced to retrieve many
cases of beer for the local kingpin, Spanky, because of debts they
each owe. As they travel down to Mississippi, they lose all of their
money gambling to a hotshot whom they later find dead right in front
of their eyes. The man was beaten to death by a cop, but the hicks who
find the two black men suspect him immediately, and before they know
it they are sentenced to prison for life; hence the title.
The Mississippi State Prison of LIFE is a fairly lenient one. The
prison is actually a large farm with no gates, but a boundary called
the "gun line". Ray and Claude form an unlikely partnership, even
though Claude still blames Ray for getting them into the prison. Among
the colleagues they meet, the most memorable ones(I forget his name,
but it's long) is a silent man(Bokeem Woodbine) who, because of his
baseball ablility, is able to escape the prison for the Negro Leagues,
and a homosexual inmate who is granted a pardon but decides to commit
suicide instead of letting his parents see what's happened to him
while in jail.
As Ray and Claude get older, the film begins to grow on the viewer
more and more. After a few failed escape attempts during their
lifetime, the two men are beginning to ponder their own existence and
wonder why they're wasting their time. But they never lose hope.
These qualities of the film, among others, compare favorably with the
Oscar winning Italian film LIFE IS BEAUTIFUL. Like LIFE IS BEAUTIFUL,
LIFE's characters try to provide humor and dreams to get them through
their suffering. Ray sparks the interest of his cellmates when they
all begin to dream about their place in Ray's Boom Boom Room, a
nightclub in which they all play their own little part. Ray and Claude
help prove the universal theory that hope and faith can get anyone
through the worst of times.
Director Ted Demme(BEAUTIFUL GIRLS, MONUMENT AVE.), nephew of director
Jonathan Demme(SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, PHILADELPHIA) lets his actors
shine in roles that flaunt their dramatic and comedic acting
abilities. The film never really addresses subjects like racism
head-on, but the film does, in a much deeper way, help unite a feeling
of peace, instead of violence.  The film then ends on a happy note,
before subjecting the viewer to the unneccesary outtakes. But LIFE is
still one of the year's most unexpected surprises. The film pulls no
punches in getting it's way to your heart, and it proves that life,
though not always beautiful, is always worth living.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST 


Author
David E. Smith
"Life" (1999) - Martin Lawrence, Eddie Murphy...
        Last fall, Eddie Murphy took on a very subdued (at least by his
standards) role in "Holy Man," and turned out a splendid performance that
deserved much better than the mediocre reception it received. In that
movie, he wasn't constantly stealing scenes, and his trademark horse-laugh
was nowhere to be found. Both he and the movie were remarkably funny, and
Murphy's restrained performance was both admirable and successful. I
thought that maybe, after almost twenty years, Murphy had finally learned
that he's not the most important person in the theatre - the viewer is.
Last weekend, "Life" opened around the country, earning over $20
million. It is funny, but intermittently. Certainly not as funny as it
could have been, had Murphy remembered what he learned from G, the
Zen-spouting mystic he played in the previous movie.
"Life" gets off to a slow start, taking over thirty minutes to get
leads Murphy and Martin Lawrence into the central premise - two New
Yorkers given a life sentence to a Mississippi state prison, circa 1932.
Convicted of a murder they didn't commit in the segregationist South, the
story of how they got there is so bizarre and convoluted it could only
happen in the movies.
Once there, the movie really takes off, introducing the viewer to
a whole cast of usual suspects. Miguel A. Nunez Jr. is the probably-gay
character, Bokeem Woodbine is the probably-savant character, and so on.
Rarely are characters drawn out past the point of a stereotype, but in
this case it works. "Life" goes for the quick gag, the cheap chuckle, and
more often than not gets it. Unfortunately, this means that very little in
the way of character development ever happens, and (in classic, old-school
Murphy style) roughly half of the script consists of words that can't be
printed in this paper.
Occasionally, it gets even more ambitious, trying to work in a bit
of a story too. These efforts generally fall flat, a shame because the raw
material available given the premise and setting is so rich. "Life" is
primarily a comedy; those who want a far better version of `the message'
should watch (or read) "The Shawshank Redemption," Stephen King's seminal
prison tale. The broad stereotypes that work so well to build comedy are
exactly why the drama fails to register.
Running just shy of two hours, "Life" isn't exactly a life
sentence, but it is very slow-paced in all the wrong places. Much of the
bathroom humor (and language) wears thin; why some of those slow spots
weren't filled with original jokes, or character development, remains a
mystery. Even the outtakes, shown at the end of the film with the credits,
are funnier than some of what was used in the movie proper.
"Life" has a few bright spots, scattered randomly throughout the
rest of the film. Wait for the home video release, and make a game out of
trying to find them. It'll be at least as entertaining as the rest of the
movie.
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Author
Matt Williams
The pairing seems ideal.  Putting Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence
together sounds like a perfect comedy teaming.  Toss in a high-concept
gimmick and plenty of old age makeup and you get Life, a bland movie
that may not be a prison term, but falls well short of its potential.
When the film opens, in 1930's New York, the pair haven't met and would
seem the unlikeliest of friends.  Ray Gibson (Eddie Murphy) is a thief
and con-artist with dreams of one day owning a nightclub:  Ray's Boom
Boom Room. Claude Banks (Martin Lawrence) is a debt-ridden accountant
who has landed a new job and a beautiful girlfriend.  Things are looking
up, until Claude and Ray both run afoul of local gangster, Spanky (Rick
James).
The pair are given one chance to redeem themselves:  they are to make a
quick trip down to Mississippi to collect some bootleg moonshine. But,
things don't go as planned down South...and Ray and Claude somehow find
themselves sentenced to life imprisonment for murder.
Luckily, the two find themselves assigned to one of the comfiest hard
labor camps in Mississippi (or at least it seems that way onscreen). The
cell-free camp includes the friendliest bunch of murderers you're likely
to see, and plenty of rest and relaxation time (most of which is spent
playing baseball).  Anyone who tries to leave gets shot (except Ray and
Claude on their multiple escape attempts, of course), but the prison is
so cozy, why would anyone dream of leaving? If you get the idea that
Life offers a simplified view of incarceration, you would be correct.
The other inmates at the prison (including Obba Babatunde, Bernie Mac,
Miguel A. Nunez Jr, and Bokeem Woodbine) are meant to be colorful and
interesting, but not enough time is spent with any of them.  We never
learn their stories, and they all end up as mere generic convicts.
The entire film seems to be structured around one idea:  Eddie Murphy
and Martin Lawrence grow old together in prison.  Pile on the latex
aging makeup, and who cares about the lead-up material?  The problem is,
since from the film's opening we know the two spend their entire lives
imprisoned, there's no real point to any of the intervening scenes.
They'll never escape...they'll never die...so why not just skip to the
old age scenes and get on with it?
When Martin and Lawrence are on a roll, they come up with some pretty
funny stuff.  Unfortunately, most of the film is spent rehashing tired
old prison jokes, and the pair are rarely able to cut loose.
There's enough material here for about half a movie, and Life simply
repetitiously stretches it out to the full term.  As a video, this film
may fit the crime, but it isn't worth a sentence at your local theater.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "Life" (Universal Pictures)
       In this comedy/drama, Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence play two men who are wrongly convicted of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment at Mississippi State Prison, known as Parchman Farm. Over the course of 60 years, they endure hardship and appreciate kindness, suffer cruelty and learn forgiveness and, of course, fantasize. One of the best sequences has them in a Harlem nightclub. Throughout their ordeal, they sharpen their sassy, vulgar sense of humor as their friendship deepens, and they never lose hope that one day, somehow, they will walk outside the prison walls as free men.  Apparently, the concept originated with Murphy, who got screenwriters Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone to develop the script. Unfortunately, as often happens with Eddie Murphy movies, the writing never lives up to his abilities as a talented, edgy actor/comedian.  Directed by Ted Demme ("Beautiful Girls"), Murphy and Lawrence do deliver as an "Odd Couple." They worked together once before,!
 back in 1992, in "Boomerang."  The weakness lies in the slick, tolerant, country-club atmosphere of the penitentiary, complete with baseball, booze, and babes - and the constant, complaining banter, which serves to emphasize the episodic nature of the plot and the lack of character development. Co-starring are Obba Babatunde (who serves as the story-teller), Ned Beatty, Clarence Williams III, Miguel A. Nunez, Bokeem Woodbine, and Nick Cassavetes (as the warden). And Rick Baker's "aging" makeup is noteworthy. On the GrangerMovie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Life" is an unfocused, superficial 6 but it does offer two solid, persuasive performances.

Author
Greg King
LIFE (M).  
(Universal/UIP)
Director: Ted Demme
Stars: Eddie Murphy, Martin Lawrence, Obba Babatunde, Nick Cassavetes,
Bokeem Woodbine, Ned Beatty, R Lee Ermey, Ned Vaughn, Clarence
Williams III, Anthony Anderson, Rick James, Barry Shabaka Henley,
Brent Jennings, Bernie Mac, Miguel A Nunez jr, Michael Taliferro, Guy
Torry, Noah Emmerich, Poppy Montgomery
Running time: 108 minutes.
Eddie Murphy teams up with fellow comic Martin Lawrence (Bad
Boys, and the upcoming Blue Streak) for this comedy/drama about two
black men imprisoned for life on a Mississippi prison camp.
The film opens in New York, in 1932, during prohibition.  Ray
(Murphy) is a smooth, fast talking con man with big dreams.  Claude
(Lawrence) is straight laced and honest, and due to start work as a
bank teller.  The two men meet at a night club run by notorious
gangster Spanky (Rick James).  But when both men owe Spanky money,
they are forced to drive to Mississippi and bring back a truckload of
moonshine liquor.  While in Mississippi the pair find themselves
framed for a murder they didn't commit, and are sentenced to life with
hard labour on a prison camp.  The two spend most of their time
bickering, but over the course of their incarceration, a bond of
friendship slowly develops.
For much of its duration, Life falls back upon the tired and
predictable formula of the odd couple-buddy comedy, as the two stars
trade barbs and one-liners.  The comic elements at times recall the
antics of Stir Crazy (1981).  But amongst the generous dollops of
humour there is also a more serious side to Life.  Writers Robert
Ramsey and Matthew Stone (the little seen comedy Destiny Turns On The
Radio) attempt to portray the hardship and brutality of life for
blacks on the chain gangs in America's deep south during the '40's and
'50's.  However, noble ambition is let down by a rather superficial
script that tends to soft pedal for much of the time.
Life spans some five decades, although the most effective
sequence is that in which the film cleverly traces the passage of time
and the changing face of America during this time.  Make up genius
Rick Baker brilliantly ages his two stars.
Director Ted Demme (Beautiful Girls, etc) manages to draw a
more restrained performance out of the usually exuberant Murphy, who
seems perfectly at home with the seemingly tailor-made role of the
charismatic, fast talking Ray.  Lawrence brings a touch of overwrought
energy and compassion to his role as Claude, the truly innocent victim
of blind justice.  The two develop a strong rapport that carries the
movie.  Life also wastes a solid ensemble supporting cast in roles
that amount to little more than familiar cliches of the prison
movie genre.
While Life has some quite funny and touching moments,
ultimately the film proves a little disappointing.

Author
Michael Dequina
"Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence are making the most out of _Life_."
It's a fairly standard tagline, but it speaks more than perhaps its writer
intended.  Indeed, the well-matched pair make the most of what the makers
of _Life_ give them, but what the material they are given isn't nearly as
inspired as they are.
The combination of two comic firecrackers such as Murphy and Lawrence
should add up to something explosively funny, and they do have their choice
moments as New Yorkers Ray Gibson and Claude Banks, respectively, who are
given a lifetime sentence in a Mississippi prison work camp for a murder
they did not commit.  It sounds rife with comic potential, but for some
reason writers Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone, along with director Ted
Demme aren't content with _Life_ being a breezy comic lark.  No, it also
has to hold some dramatic weight as well.
Granted, life imprisonment, let alone _wrongful_ life imprisonment, is no
walk in the park.  But serious touches such as one inmate's self-sacrifice
fail to register because there's no real emotional connection to the
audience--to the story or the characters.  Ray and Claude are likable
enough, but the audience has no emotional investment in them; viewers just
want to see do more of their comic sparring.  The attempts at drama do add
some weight, all right--as in weighing down and slowing the proceedings,
not adding psychological or emotional heft.
That said, when given the chance to strut their comedic stuff, Murphy 
and Lawrence do not disappoint.  Murphy does his tried-and-true smart aleck
routine, but Lawrence goes against type somewhat by playing a complete
square, and he comes off a bit too whiny at times.  Nonetheless, the two
have a natural ease with each other (as shown in their last film together,
1992's _Boomerang_), and a number of scenes strike sparks.
But there aren't enough of these sparks to make the film ignite.  The
preview audience with whom I saw the film seemed rather content with the
film, and their feelings could very well be mirrored in multiplex
auditoriums across the country this weekend.  But for me, _Life_, given the
raw comedic talent and energy at its disposal, simply doesn't have enough
life to it.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com


Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Eddie Murphy, Martin Lawrence. Rated R.
When comics can restrain themselves, heaps of good can come of it. Billy
Crystal gave one of the best performances of his career in the recent Analyze
This all because he acted like a normal person. Adam Sandler's The Wedding
Singer was a gem because Sandler was sweet and gentle instead of maniacal and
repulsive. In the new prison dramedy Life we have two top notch comics, Eddie
Murphy and Martin Lawrence One of them restrains himself and the other goes
all out. Guess which one of tem succeeds.
Life tracks the lives of two people as they enter a Mississippi penetentiary
(sentenced to life in prison) for a crime they didn't commit. Ray (Eddie
Murphy) was a happy-go-lucky bootlegger, smuggling alcohol during the time of
prohibition. The other one, Claude (Martin Lawrence) is a relatively normal
guy, who plans to start a new job and a family. Of course, both of their
plans are shattered when a sheriff frames them for the murder of a poker
hustler.
The film spans their lives from 1932 to 1998, including their repeated
attempts to escape, their bickering and their fighting. By the end of the
movie we almost have an African American Grumpy Old Men. Not that there's
anything wrong with that because much of it is often very funny, in an almost
improvisational style.
Eddie Murphy is ordinarily goofy as Ray, over-the-top and sometimes annoying.
Eddie Murphy is Eddie Murphy. There is nothing outstanding in his
performance, although he is funny as much as he always is. Martin Lawrence,
on the other hand, shines. If you've ever seen his dismal tv show Martin, you
know that he is a talented, but a "Jim Carrey Type" comic. Thus many times he
fails to entertain because he does to his scripts what God never meant for
him to do. In Life, however, he restrains himself enough to be hilarious but
at the same time real. This is essential because Life is not completely a
comedy. It is a drama, too; sentimental and poignant with very subtle but
effective social commentary. Director Ted Demme, working from a script by
Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone is not afraid to stray from the teen movie
that the trailers may lead you to believe Life is. The commentary, mostly on
racism as well as the criminal justice system, here is prevalent enough to be
obvious but subtle enough not to be preachy.
Life bears fleeting similarities to The Shawshank Redemption as well as some
other Eddie Murphy movies such as The Nutty Professor. It's as funny as the
latter (which was overrated anyway), thanks to the chemistry between Lawrence
and Murphy. At the risk of sounding redundant, Life is beautiful.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
James Sanford
"Life" marks yet another unexpected career move by Eddie Murphy, who's
apparently been a bit more willing to take chances in the past few
years after spending most of the late 1980s and early 1990s running
his smoother-than-thou persona into the ground with such shaky
projects as "Harlem Nights" and "Beverly Hills Cop 3."
Last year's "Holy Man" found Murphy trying to play it semi-straight;
had the film been better written, it might have worked. "Life"
continues in the same vein, attempting to find a middle ground between
the sassy Murphy of days gone by and the slightly gentler contemporary
model.  The movie doesn't entirely come off, but it's still a noble
stab at something different.
Though the advertising for "Life" plays up the picture's comic
content, this is by no means a flat-out laugh riot. Perhaps it's
Murphy and co-star Martin Lawrence's roundabout way of testing the
water to see whether audiences are willing to accept them as actors,
rather than simply as funnymen.
Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone's script follows New Yorkers Ray
Gibson (Murphy) and Claude Banks (Lawrence) from 1932 - when they are
reluctantly pressed into service as bootleggers for crooked club owner
Spanky (Rick James) - into their septuagenarian years.
Sentenced to "the long ride" on a trumped-up murder charge during a
run through Mississippi, Claude and Ray find themselves locked up in
the dusty Camp 8, which, though not exactly a resort, does have its
little amenities; certainly this must be the only prison in the
country that allows inmates to drink and carouse openly with women or
men during their time off. When times are tough, Ray enthralls his
fellow convicts with "Kiss of theSpider Woman"-style stories about the
mythical Manhattan hot spot he'll be running when he gets out. But as
years turn into decades, it becomes clear to Ray and Claude the only
other address they're going to have will be in the cemetery.
Although that's a fairly sobering thought for a movie that starts off
on a free-wheeling, fairly lighthearted note, director Ted Demme
capably handles the transition. So does Murphy, who proves he can play
a senior citizen without immediately resorting to tics. Lawrence's
performance is less steady, although he does have a fairly powerful
moment when he catches a reflected glimpse of his withered face in a
car window.
"Life" has about an even number of pros and cons. On the positive
side, Rick Baker's makeup jobs on the stars are terrific, the rhythmic
score by Wyclef Jean is effective, and there are no duds in the
supporting cast.
However, like "Hoodlum," the 1997 Lawrence Fishburne crime drama set
during the Depression, "Life" has no real sense of period style,
throwing in scores of distracting anachronisms in both attitudes and
dialogue. And though this script is considerably less homophobic than
some other Murphy epics, isn't it time to permanently retire the
stereotype of the squealing queen with the flapping wrists?
"Life" is ultimately less satisfying as a comedy than it is as a story
about men trying to deal with a future they can't change. Fans might
be surprised and even a bit disappointed, but it's intriguing to see
Lawrence and Murphy challenging themselves. Hopefully, the next time
out will be even better.

Author
Bob Bloom
 In Life, Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence play two young men wrongfully
convicted of murder and sentenced to life in prison.
 After about an hour of watching this movie, you begin to realize how their
characters feel. Fortunately, for audience members there's a chance to
escape  the nearest exit.
 This, undoubtedly, is Eddie Murphy's worst movie  and that's an
accomplishment.  Remember The Golden Child, Harlem Nights? Compared to
Life, they look like Citizen Kane.
 Life is long, predictable, foul-mouthed and only intermittently funny. Its
100-minute running time feels like 100 years. Robert Ramsey and Matthew
Stone's script basically consist of Murphy and Lawrence referring to
everyone around them as "motherf...s" or "n ..... s."
 You lose count how many times both those obnoxious, offensive words are
used. And if that all it takes to write a script, than any illiterate
jackass can sit at a word processor and compose a movie.
 But, like Life, it will probably stink.
To be honest, the screening audience surrounding me in the theater yucked
it up. But these were the same people who howled at all the flatulence and
fat jokes as well.
 Life is as sophisticated as a belch. It's crude and stereotypical.
Years ago, movies stereotypically portrayed blacks subservient,
second-class people, good for being only maids and servants. For the most
part, the lot of blacks  and other racial groups  have improved.
 But a new, more insidious stereotype is creeping into movies. In many
recent films, through actors such as Murphy and Chris Tuckers, blacks are
presented as fast-talking, conniving, scam artists or hip-hop, gun-crazy,
sex-crazed youths.
 Both sets of caricatures are demeaning. And the fault does not rest with
the actors. They have to eat, too. It is with the people who write the
scripts, the studios who green-light the projects and the audiences who
accept these portrayals without protest.
 Life's only redeeming virtue is the artistry of makeup legend Rick Baker
who flawlessly ages Murphy and Lawrence into 90 year olds.
 Otherwise, Life is an embarrassment, a blot on the resumes of those
associated with it. See it at your own risk.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Walter Frith
In his youth and motion picture debut in 1982 with '48 HRS.', Eddie Murphy
was full of vigour and zest.  He never compromised with his overly brash
style of expressing four letter words.  As part of an adult movie story, it
worked.  His wise cracking and improvisation also helped many movie
screenplays when writers had trouble spicing up a scene.  Many criticized
Murphy for it and many other socially controversial things contained within
his comedy, and a lot of the criticism was justified.  But if you judge him
ONLY on his movie performances, he was great.  If any performer can
contribute between 5 and 10 great pictures to this world, they're lucky.
'48 HRS.', 'Trading Places', 'Beverly Hills Cop', 'Beverly Hills Cop II',
and 'Coming to America' are all great classic films in their own way for
their genre.
All of these things have gone the way of the dinosaur in the 90's.  The only
Murphy film I enjoy watching over and over again in this decade is 1992's
'The Distinguished Gentleman'.  It was a unique and refined comedy that
worked for Murphy that gracefully went with his aging into a new decade,
and his attempt to diversify was a good idea, especially after ending the
80's
with the disastrous 'Harlem Nights' in 1989 and entering the 90's with the
glib
'Another 48 HRS.', which no one asked for.  Since then, films like 'Vampire
in Brooklyn', 'Beverly Hills Cop III', 'The Nutty Professor' and 'Doctor
Dolittle' have all been tiresome, unoriginal, repetitive or shallow.  'Life'
changes none of this.  It's too bad that Murphy hasn't figured out yet that
to be a true and all around legend in the movie business, you have to
embrace film
audiences by appealing to different sides of their taste.  This has worked
for
Whoopi Goldberg, Robin Williams, Jim Carrey, and Dan Aykroyd, who have
all done serious roles and have won the respect of the critics as well as
audiences.  Murphy's career can best be compared to the great Laurel and
Hardy.  Not directly but only in the sense that their peak was in the 1930's
and
they totally crashed and burned in the 40's.  Ditto with Murphy when
comparing his 80's work with the 90's.
In 'Life', set at the beginning in 1932, Murphy, along with Martin Lawrence,
play two New Yorkers involved with a local gang boss in one form or another
who are in debt and must make good for it.  Murphy talks the boss man into
letting him and Lawrence go to Mississippi and bring back some moonshine.
Bootlegging.  Their first mistake.  While in the Magnolia state, Murphy
gambles away their traveling money and Lawrence flirts with a bar tramp
even though he has a steady girlfriend at home.  Their second mistake.  They
accidentally come across a dead body of a man who cheated Murphy at cards
earlier in the evening and they remain at his side for too long.  And that's
the last mistake they ever make in the free world.  Being in the wrong place
at the wrong time gets them life imprisonment, even though they're totally
innocent and the two of them spend the next 65 years together in the big
house.
The film is told in flashback at the beginning and takes us back through the
years leading up to the film's excellent finale.  Unfortunately, the film is
extremely uneven and is another misfire in the typical style of early spring
time releases.  Murphy used to get summer or Christmas time but now, has to
settle for having his film released at one of the worst times of the year
for quality.  The opening half hour is surprisingly too dramatic, the mid
section is loaded with gags that aren't funny, clearly seeing that Murphy's
heart is no longer in comedy.  The scenes strung together in this film look
like they were done in one take and what's most shocking of all is that I
liked
the out takes at the end over the closing credits more than a good portion
of the
film.  That's scary.
Director Ted Demme ('The Ref') stigmatizes his cast, is a slave to the
film's script and has no eye for comedy.  What really sold the film for me
was Martin Lawrence.  He doesn't try to over do it the way Murphy does.
Lawrence is steady, more relaxed and more polished and another good asset
the film has is its make-up.  Seeing the two of them at age 90, combined
with their excellent performances as extremely old men, make Murphy and
Lawrence an asset to the film's last half hour as the film really shines,
finally.  Too bad the mid section is as exciting as reading out dated
magazines in a doctor's office
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Ted Demme.
Cast: Eddie Murphy, Martin Lawrence, Obba Babatunde, Rick James, Brent 
Jennings, Miguel A. Nunez Jr., Bokeem Woodbine, Clarence Williams III, 
Ned Beatty, Lisa Nicole Carson, Nick Cassavetes, Poppy Montgomery.
1999 - 108 minutes
Rated R (for extreme profanity, mild violence, and a brief scene of 
gore).
Reviewed April 17, 1999.
Like several of Eddie Murphy's past films (1998's "Holy Man"), "Life" is 
a perfect example of a film with an identity crisis. Let Murphy loose 
and he can be a dynamite comic (1996's "The Nutty Professor"), but too 
often he is mired in an uncomfortable mixture of comedy and drama. If 
Murphy wants to be treated seriously, why not make a straightforward 
dramatic piece, instead of intermingling it with juvenile comedy, and 
vice versa?
Spanning 60-odd years and beginning in the Prohibition era of 1932, 
Murphy stars as smooth con man Ray Gibson who, along with straight-laced 
banker Claude Banks (Martin Lawrence), finds himself owing a large debt 
to a bootlegger (Rick James). Paired together to travel from their home 
of Manhattan to the deep south of Mississippi on a bootlegging journey, 
they unwittingly witness the death of a black man caused by racism, and 
then are accused of the murder, sentenced to the Mississippi State 
Penitentiary for life. As the decades fly by and they remain locked up, 
Claude and Ray's friendship survives many different hurdles as they 
begin to suspect that they are going to die without ever being free 
again.
Does this sound like a rousing yuk-fest? I think not, and although 
"Life" does boast a few humorous moments (I liked, for example, an early 
scene where they enter into a "No Coloreds" restaurant and the waitress 
tells them that they only have "whites-only pie"), the overall story is 
more depressing than anything else, since we know what we are basically 
watching is two innocent mens' lives being wasted away. In something 
like 1994's "The Shawshank Redemption," this idea worked because the 
subject matter was treated with a realism and intelligence. In "Life," 
it is mostly an excuse to give us one-liners heavily laced with the 
F-word (and worse).
"Life" also has severe pacing problems, as it often has a tendency to be 
marginally entertaining one minute, and then brain-numbingly dull and 
misguided the next. This major problem probably owes itself to the fact 
that there is no story arc to the film, nor is there much of a "story" 
to begin with. Sure, we follow Claude and Ray through an epic 60 years, 
but not much really happens in those years, and, at one point, a whole 
28 years passes by within a two-minute montage! The only good thing 
about that is I knew the sooner Murphy and Lawrence began to get their 
faces more heavily applied with "old man" make up, the sooner it would 
be over.
Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence are strong presences throughout, and 
have at least fairly substantial material to work with. Murphy, 
especially, rolls things off his tongue at such a rapid rate that it is 
usually very humorous, and apparent that fellow comic actor Chris Tucker 
is only imitating him. Lawrence, meanwhile, portrays the more touching 
of the two characters as he is most affected by the prison experience 
and sees many of his future plans ultimately shot down, including his 
love relationship with a fetching young woman (Lisa Nicole Carson). Come 
to think of it, maybe the movie should have simply been retitled "Eddie 
and Martin," as written right above the "Life" title on the poster. The 
movie focuses so much on the two that the rest of the many characters 
are either sorely underused or come off as mere afterthoughts.
Aside from the two central actors, also making an impression is the 
music score by Wyclef Jean, making his film scoring debut. It is clear 
that Jean worked very hard on the music to make it effective and put in 
precisely the right place, and it admittedly does work. 
By the time the ending arrived in "Life," without giving too much away, 
Claude and Ray are ninety-years-old, and although everything concludes 
on an upbeat note, it's a little difficult to pass by the reality that 
these two characters are going to be dead soon. Sure, they've hung on to 
each other's friendship, but that's not enough for me to walk out of the 
theater singing a happy tune. Honestly, not only did the film turn out 
to be a downer for me, but as I write this a mere eighty minutes after 
seeing it, much of the film has already exited my long-term-memory. 
After the disasterous "Dr. Dolittle," the well-meaning misfire, "Holy 
Man," and the mediocre, forgettable "Life," perhaps Murphy should begin 
to choose his feature film projects a little more wisely. After all, as 
this movie can certainly attest to, life is short.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Life (1999)
Eddie Murphy, Martin Lawrence, Obba Babatunde, Ned Beatty, Bernie Mac, 
Miguel A. Nunez Jr., Clarence Williams III, Bokeem Woodbine, Michael 
"Bear" Taliferro, Barry Shabaka Henley, Brent Jennings, Guy Torry, Lisa 
Nicole Carson, O'Neal Compton, Poppy Montgomery, Ned Vaughn, R. Lee Ermey,
 Nick Cassavetes, Anthony Anderson, Noah Emmerich, Rick James. Screenplay 
by Robert Ramsey, Matthew Stone. Directed by Ted Demme. 108 minutes.
Rated R, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com 
WARNING: This review contains obscenities and racist slang.
An early segment in the prison comedy "Life" shows Eddie Murphy's 
character entertaining his fellow inmates by spinning tales about the 
nightclub he dreams of opening. Huddled in their darkened barracks, the 
men sit enraptured as Murphy describes a grand, "Cotton Club" style 
setting and incorporates them into his fantasy. The camera moves from man 
to man, cutting from close-ups of the prisoners' faces to images of them, 
dressed to the nines, strutting their stuff in the neverland nightspot. 
It's a funny, sweet, wistful scene that shows the kind of movie "Life" 
could have been.
Instead, the bulk of the movie consists of scintillating dialogue along 
the lines of "Nigger, what the fuck are you talking about? Shit, 
motherfucker, you don't know a god-damned motherfucking thing, so fuck 
you, motherfucker!" "Oh yeah, well I never liked you either, so fuck you 
too, nigger!" Multiply the "shits," "niggers" and variants of the word 
"fuck" in the preceding sentences by about 200 and you'll have your very 
own copy of the script for this cinematic jewel. If you found this 
paragraph offensive; congratulations, you're a grown-up. If, however, you 
found the dialogue hilarious, then turn off "The Jerry Springer Show," 
find someone with a valid driver's license and haul it down to the 
picture show for some big fun, Cletus.  
Told in flashbacks, "Life" covers 65 years in the lives of two men 
wrongfully convicted of murder, following them from 1932 Harlem to the 
Mississippi prison where they spend the bulk of their lives. Over the 
course of 108 sluggish minutes, we're treated to a few honest laughs, a 
few genuinely heartfelt moments, some terrific make-up, and loads of 
cussing and insult humor. Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence are talented 
enough to make some of this tripe work, but for the most part, "Life" is 
formulaic, obvious and very slow. In fact, the outtakes shown over the 
closing credits are funnier than anything in the movie, particularly the 
final one, which contains a terrific ad-lib from Murphy. 
To be fair, I should note that most of the audience at the sneak preview 
I attended howled through the entire movie and a few people even 
applauded. Perhaps they caught something that I missed. As someone who 
finds insult humor lazy and annoying, I may have simply missed the subtle 
nuances of the script. Or perhaps this same audience would also be 
entertained by staring at shiny rocks. You make the call. 
Had "Life" bothered to flesh out its characters, the shrieking between 
Murphy and Lawrence might have been easier to take, but at the end of the 
film, little has changed. Both men remain rough sketches, older and a bit 
softer, but still terribly underdeveloped. Had the tragedy of lives 
wasted by impulsive behavior and a racist legal system been better 
explored, the humor might have packed some punch. Periodically, the 
filmmakers add segments that truly are touching. The reaction of a 
convict to the death of his lover is presented starkly and with dignity 
(one audience member responded to the scene by loudly saying "Fag"). The 
passage of time is depicted eloquently with images of various inmates 
slowing fading out of the picture. 
Understand, I'm not complaining because the film isn't a drama. But with 
performers as gifted as Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence, and a decades-
spanning tale of the residents of an all-black prison in the deep South, 
"Life" had the potential to be both funny and substantial. As is, only 
one day after seeing the film, all I remember is a few good moments, some 
great outtakes, and a whole lot of obscenity-laced hollering. 

Author
Lars Lindahl
Written by Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone ,
Starring Eddie Murphy, Martin Lawrence, Obba Babatunde, Ned Beatty, Bernie Mac,
Ric James, Bokeem Woodbine, Clarence Williams III, Miguel A. Nunez Jr., R. Lee
Ermey, Noah Emmerich, Ned Vaughan, Brent Jennings, Michael Taliferro, Nick
Cassavetes 
          "Life" is a confused film that could have been more pleasing if it
stuck to an idea. The film presents its audience with a 1930's gambling
adventure (beginning), comic violence  in a prison full of the depressed
(middle), and dramatic issues of racism (end). These plots individually could
be great movie ideas but together in one film it seems as if the writer could
not decide which one to use so he crammed all three into one story. "Life"
follows this doomed formula of mediocre story telling because it does not know
which type of audience it wants to attract. However, once it tries to mix all
different kinds of attractions, it does not please anyone. The film could have
been a lot funnier, especially with the presence of Eddie Murphy and Martin
Lawrence, but instead it attempts to remain serious with a slight comic twist
to it. The problem is every time it tries to be funny it is not and every time
it tries to be serious it is funny. With Murphy and Lawrence in this film, it
is expected that these two characters will cause comedic havoc wherever they go
and brighten up the environment around them. "Life" tries to do this but fails
because not enough scenes are devoted for the two jokers to show their skills.
The film tries too hard to prove that racism is bad, with a number of foolish
stories to show this, that we never learn about any of the characters suffering
from it. Tons of characters are introduced but never developed so that when
they eventually disappear, they are not missed like they are supposed to.
Murphy and Lawrence are supposed to receive sympathy from their viewers for
being put in jail for life but they never do because not enough of their lives
are shown in jail. It takes too much time for director Ted Demme to explain how
and why they were put in jail. Demme uses an unnecessary unpredictable subplot
during this time slot which inevitably comes back at the end to no one's
surprise. If this section was edited down and more information was given about
the prison life and prisoners, then maybe the film would have worked. 
        "Life" follows two black men Claude Banks (Lawrence) and Ray Gibson (Murphy)
as they are framed for murder by racist police officers in 1930's Mississippi.
They must spend the rest of their lives in an all black prison for a crime they
did not commit. In this prison they don't really learn anything but instead the
whole time they try to find a way out. I am not sure if the characters were
supposed to be changed men after this whole experience but it certainly did not
appear this way. When they entered, they were cursing scheming young men, and
towards the end, they were cursing scheming old men. The plot about these two
men does not completely sum up the movie because there are so many unnecessary
subplots with other characters (a mute and the warden's daughter have a child
together, a gay man tries to discover who he really is) that completely ruin
the film. These subplots are repeatedly brought back into the picture and
because they are so forgettable the first time around, they must be explained
the second time around as well. The film gets so confused at times that when it
tries to execute its most dramatic moment, as a prisoner commits suicide by
getting shot while escaping the prison, the viewer is puzzled as to what is
happening.  This puzzlement is, luckily, somewhat cured by the chemistry Murphy
and Lawrence have in the few scenes they are given to shine together. There is
an incredibly inane part in which the two stop talking, for 40 years (!!). This
does not make any sense because the reason why this film is attractive at all
is because of the interesting chemistry these two comedic talents might
develop. In some of the more successful scenes, Lawrence and Murphy just seem
to be having fun together and consequently make the movie more fun. These few
and far apart scenes most likely were improvised on the spot by the actors.
Especially when compared to the many and close together scenes in which cliched
and forced lines are put into their mouths. This movie should have been their
movie, their own play house where anything could happen. This unpredictability
could have created a more interesting result than this sometimes on, mostly off
film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Although Ted Demme's LIFE makes you wait until the ending credits, it
does eventually deliver on its promising casting.  As shown in the
outtakes, Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence can be quite funny together
as they flub their lines and generally ham it up.  They also show
evidence of good chemistry together, something that the body of the
movie has trouble demonstrating.
How's this for a questionable concept for a movie?  A slice of life
story about two prisoners in "for the long ride" -- life in prison.  The
uneventful script by Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone contains little in
the way of comedy or drama.  And rather than pumping up this modest
story, the director restrains his actors.  The result is that the
audience has to wait until the end for Murphy and Lawrence to show off
their talent.  Most of the movie has respectable actors delivering
reverential performances in a film that lacks much-needed oomph.
Thanks to set designer Dan Bishop (LONE STAR), the picture does provide
some impressive atmospherics.  (The story takes place from 1932 until
about 40 years later)  The Southern, "coloreds only" prison is a ragtag
collection of decaying buildings.  Not seeing the need for barbed wire,
the prison has a "gun line" instead.  Step outside of it, and they bury
you that afternoon.
The prison is not quite as bad a place as it sounds.  The men get
conjugal visits, and, for a nominal fee, temporary marriages can be
instantly authorized.  And for all of the white overseer's bluster, he's
frequently more friend than foe.
Still, there's no way out for prisoners #4316 (Murphy) and #4317
(Lawrence), not that they don't try often enough.  Their failed
attempts, which are never with enough humor, are the story's on-going
joke.  About the only prisoner who looks like he might get himself an
exit visa is a speechless guy named Can't Get Right (Bokeem Woodbine).
He may be awarded an athletic scholarship of sorts since the one thing
he can get right is swatting a baseball over the far distant trees.
The movie does contain some nice sections.  Using 4 decades of archival
footage of news events of the era, Demme sets the context of the times.
The story's most poignant scene comes when a convincingly aged Lawrence
looks for the first time in 30 years at a town full of people.  Like Rip
Van Winkle, his body freezes and his eyes glaze over as he looks at the
changes in people's clothing and hairstyles.
Ending first with a nicely ambiguous twist, the movie then feels
compelled to spell everything out for us.  After unleashing our
imaginations, why does the film have to treat us like little kids who
have to know all the answers?  Do they think we would demand our money
back if the film left some doubt as to the story's precise resolution?
LIFE runs too long at 1:48.  It is rated R for some profanity, violence
and mature themes and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
