Title
Review for Bill & Ted's Excellent Adventure (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Greg Goebel
Misadventures in Time & Space: BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE
* BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE is a low-budget, derivative, silly film
that shamelessly panders to its teen-age target audience; it represents nothing
new in film-making; and is blatantly commercial.  
     The plot is simple enough.  Bill and Ted are two California kids who want
to become famous rock stars.  There's only one problem: they can't play their
instruments.  Well, actually, there's two problems: they're both complete
boneheads, and their hardnosed history teacher tells them that if they *don't*
pass their oral history report, they *will* flunk out of school!
     This oral report involves imagining what historical personages would've
thought of the present day and the local environment.  Not too demanding, but
it's still above the ability of these two -- and if they flunk, Ted's sourpuss
dad intends to send him off to a military academy in Alaska -- and the two
friends will be separated, probably forever.
     Fortunately, the society of Earth 700 years from now has a special
interest in them, and an agent (George Carlin) is sent back in a time machine
(shaped like a phone booth -- a normal one, not a British police box) to help
out.  So Bill and Ted have in their hands the best possible tool for conducting
historical research ...
     This sounds silly, and it is; and all the unkind things I said above about
this movie are true -- which leads to the question: What saves it?
     Simple enough: Bill and Ted.  These two guys don't look like they have
the collective mental energy to make a nightlight glow: they don't actually
have to *do* anything to be funny.  You laugh at them even if they're just
*standing* there!  
     Though when push comes to shove, it turns out they're not inherently dumb
by any means -- like a lot of teenagers, they just need to get motivated.  It's
hard not to like them -- they're about as good-natured kids as you're likely to
find.  Bill has the initiative; he takes risks without hesitation (because he
doesn't realize what he's getting into).  Ted is a born romantic, a sweet-faced
kid who all the girls think is really cute; any time he sees a good-looking
girl his heart leaps into his throat and stars flicker in his eyes.
     The story, like I said, is silly -- but silliness is hardly a critical
term when applied to a comedy -- and it does have its moments (Napoleon at the
water slides, Genghis Kahn ...  well, I won't say any more).  It certainly does
pander to teenagers -- nearly all the adults are creeps or morons, and the kids
turn the tables on them in the end -- but it also made me feel wistful.  I
didn't enjoy being a teenager; this film reminds me, in its own bizarre way,
that it could've been more fun than it was.
     The only thing I can seriously say against this film was that by the time
it was over I was glad I didn't have to listen to "PARTY ON, DUDE!" and
"EXCELLENT!" one more time.
     BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE will not win any awards -- in fact,
nobody in their right mind would recommend it for one.  Some movies are like
expensive dinners; others are like Big Macs.  But as Big Macs go, BILL AND TED'S
EXCELLENT ADVENTURE is pretty tasty, and I hope they make a fortune on it.
     Oh, yeah, the usual cautions: No noticeable bad language, overt sexual
activity, or graphic violence (unless you are the sort of person who feels that
the Three Stooges are a bad influence on kids).  Not for people who only go to
serious films [author shakes his head sadly, then shrugs] ... they should go
to something with subtitles.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Well, I have to make it unanimous.  There is something disarmingly
pleasant about BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE, and it is certainly a very
funny film, though it gets by on a premise I usually find tedious to the
extreme in a comedy.  In other words, the Laughing at the Dolts syndrome, where
the main source of humor is a group of individuals so dumb that you laugh at
them.  For instance, I don't like the Three Stooges, Jerry Lewis or any film
with Burt Reynolds and Dom DeLuise together.
     But... but there's something about Bill and Ted, two clueless dudes from
southern California whose rather dense reactions to the most bizarre
circumstances kept me a-grinnin' throughout the majority of the picture.  I do
admit that the premise got things off to a good start -- it turns out that Bill
and Ted's music will someday bring Earth to an age of Utopia (water slides and
everything, dude) -- but without the help of their ancestors, they'll flunk
their history paper and be split up when Ted's dad sends him to the military
academy.  The paper, which is supposed to be an exposition on how various
historical figures were react to being introduced to the California mini-mall
culture, is turned into a research project when Bill and Ted are handed a time
machine and decide to "go bag some historical figures, dude!"  You can take it
from there...
     While much of the humor from comes from watching Bill and Ted's
single-minded quest, there's a pleasant, humorous aura around the rest of the
film.  Little background details, like Billy the Kid and Socrates learning to
play Nerf Football in the background, and Bill's reaction to his step-mother
(nubile and only a few years older than himself) add a gentler strain of humor
than some of the more apparent slapstick.  There are slow spots (the trip to
the future, and some gratuitous water-sliding by Napoleon), but the rest is
constantly entertaining, with even a few time-travel tricks I've never seen
done in a film before (and taken to a fairly hilarious point).
     Sure, I could say that seeing Abraham Lincoln saying "Party on, dudes!"
made it all worth while.  But that would be selling BILL AND TED way short.
Hell, there's 50 zillion summer films heading your way at breakneck speed; get
a little spring humor under your belt before you try swallowing a BATMAN and
STAR TREK combo.
     And remember... be excellent to one another.
