Title
Review for Preston Tylk (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
"You better face it, Mr. Tylk," the seedy detective, aptly named Dick 
(Dennis Farina), warns his new client.  "Your number is up."  The 
sharp-tongued Farina, looking like an unemployed longshoreman, is the 
best part of writer/director Jon Bokenkamp's PRESTON TYLK.
With his usual uneasy edge, Luke Wilson (BLUE STREAK) plays the film's 
lead, Preston Tylk.  When we meet Preston, he is borderline happy for a 
few seconds until his wife, Emily (Mili Avital), announces that she's 
been having an affair, which is now over.  A few seconds after that the 
phone starts ringing, and, you guessed it, it's her ex-lover, Jonathan 
(Norman Reedus), demanding a recount.  As the story's villain, Reedus 
delivers an incredibly bland performance, which effectively cancels out 
the positive effects of Farina's work in the picture.
>From there, Preston's life sinks into the abyss.  After his wife is 
killed, he is chased by the cops and by Jonathan, who has an uncanny and 
unbelievable ability to follow him like a shadow.  He enlists Dick's 
help in obtaining some key evidence.  Most of the movie is a standard 
chase picture with Jonathan and the cops pursuing Preston and Dick all 
over town.  One thing is certain.  Tacoma, Washington, where the story 
is set, has the best police force in the entire nation.  Whenever they 
are needed, a half dozen cop cars show up within seconds.  This all 
makes for a thriller that stretches plausibility a bit too often.
The impressive score by Kurt Kuenne (SCRAPBOOK) does a terrific job of 
setting the mood.  He was at our screening and filled in some details 
about the production.  The score, for example, only accounted for twelve 
thousand of the almost two million dollar budget.  The surprise was that 
their distributor, in a deal that baffles the filmmakers, will be 
retitling the movie to BAD SEED when it is released this summer directly 
to DVD and video.  This is a movie without anyone that could be so 
called.  He asked us to play a game to guess who the bad seed could be.  
We couldn't come up with any plausible candidates.
PRESTON TYLK runs 1:33.  It is rated R for violence and language and 
would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Christopher Null
Despite an atrocious title, I actually held out hope for the
direct-to-video Bad Seed's intriguing premise.
The film opens as man (Luke Wilson) confronts by his wife (Mili Avital),
who screams in admission that she is having an affair.  Enraged, he
storms out of the house.  When he returns, she is dead, and her now
estranged boyfriend (Norman Reedus) is suspect.  So our hero takes
matters into his own hands, finds the boyfriend, and kills him.
That should be the ending of the movie, right?  Wrong.  That's ten
minutes into the film, and Bad Seed quickly plummets off a cliff right
there and lands in direct-to-VHS hell.  The problem?  There's just no
story left after the intro.  What develops is instead a dumbass cat and
mouse game between Reedus and Wilson, with a sentimental P.I. (Dennis
Farina) along for the ride.  Entire plotlines are resolved, and then new
ones arise, having nothing to do with what you've just seen (presumably
to pad the film beyond sitcom length).  Eventually, the whole ordeal
becomes so contrived you don't know who the titular Bad Seed even is. 
After three or so false endings, you cease to care.
Shot in Seattle's melancholy, permanent rain, Bad Seed successfully
evokes feelings of the tragedy it wants to be.  Too bad the rest of the
movie is not so successful.
Director: Jon Bokenkamp
Producer: James Frey, Dan Glasser, Roni Eguia
Writer: Jon Bokenkamp
Starring: Luke Wilson, Norman Reedus, Dennis Farina, Mili Avital
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
