Title
Review for Elles (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
If you're a woman who has been apprehensive lately about what your life
may be like after you reach your 40s and 50s, the motion picture ELLES
may provide just the perfect romantic fantasy for you.  Director Luís
Galvăo Teles has a vision of your middle age that makes it look
downright desirable.  (His vision for the men looks pretty enjoyable
too, but the focus in this movie is on the women's lives.)
In short, here is what lies ahead.  Your looks will be somewhere between
attractive and downright gorgeous.  With more than enough money, you
will be free to pursue your interests, which include having sex with
some incredible guys who look like they just left a fashion shoot.  And
your age will be no problem for the men, even if you are twice their
age.  Being called their mother will be a bit off-putting, but no fairy
tale is perfect.
And if that doesn't stretch credulity enough, how about this one.
You'll become close friends with your ex, and have romantic dinners
outside with him while you discuss your beautiful and accomplished grown
children.
Starring well-known European actresses Miou-Miou (THE EIGHTH DAY),
Carmen Maura (WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN), Marthe Keller
(MARATHON MAN and THE SCHOOL OF FLESH), Marisa Berenson (BARRY LYNDON)
and Guesch Patti, ELLES is a sweet and delicious little confection.
The light, upbeat dialog by the director and Don Bohlinger varies from
the trite to the touching.  The love affair between the professor
(Carmen Maura) and her student is the most passionate and credible.
Their love making, while not that explicit, displays an intensity rarely
seen in American films.
The women briefly suffer some crises toward the end of the story, but
the director wants to make this a feel good film, so he has them
dispatch most of their worries quickly.  Even the guys get to engage in
some fantasies of their own.  Notice that a fair number of the
middle-aged guys hit it off with young, glamorous girlfriends.  Granted
none of this is very credible, but, hey, audiences deserve their dreams.
There are more than enough downer movies to see.
ELLES runs 1:37.  The film is in French with English subtitles.  It is
not rated but would be an R for sex, nudity, profanity and one drug
usage scene and would be fine for older and mature teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 WinStar Cinema/Samsa Film
 Director: Luis Galvao Teles
 Writer: Don Bohlinger, Luis Galvao Teles  
 Cast: Miou-Miou, Carmen Maura, Marthe Keller, Marisa
Berenson, Guesch Patti, Joaquim de Almeida
   One of the most popular shows on American TV is
"Friends," about the loves and lives of a group of 20-
something pals.  If the same performers played the same
roles twenty years from now, how celebrated would "Friends"
continue to be?  Not very.  Why not?  Simply because
Americans are notoriously age-conscious, a youth oriented
society from the get-go.  The idea that older people, or even
those in their forties and fifties have love lives or exist for any
reason other than to nurture their offspring is alien to each
generation of pre- and post-pubescent youngsters.
   Things are different in Europe.  Age seems to matter less
to those who live on the continent.  A relationship between a
45-year-old woman and a 30-year-old man might attract just
a few stares, though gray-haired European men are probably
not unlike Americans in their ardor for rosy-cheeked women
in college. 
   Exploiting the cultural affinities of a few people on the
Eastern side of the Atlantic Ocean, the Portuguese writer-
director Luis Galvao Teles composed a story a decade ago
about a group of women in their 40s and 50s who are friends,
who give emotional support to one another particularly in
matters of amour.  Utilizing a mix of cultures, Galvao
photographed in his home city of Lisbon, but the dialogue is
in French and the principal actors are of French, Spanish,
American and German backgrounds.
   "Women" is an ensemble film that skirts from one individual
to another, generally showing them either with their lovers or
with buddies of their own sex as they express their desires--
or in some forlorn cases a lack of desire--to Linda (Carmen
Maura "Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown"), who
has a successful TV interview program.  Her regular format
consists of asking women on the street for their three wishes. 
She is intent on finding one person who has given up
wishing, apparently reflecting the view of many women in
their middle years who believe that they have already lived
their lives.  Linda would make a good subject for her own
program, as she is conflicted about her lover, Gigi (Joaquim
de Almeida), who also has a young mistress, a situation
which is partially her fault as she has the habit of throwing
him out at 3 a.m. because she cannot sleep with a man in
her bed.  
   Branca (Guesch Patti) is the one obnoxious member of
these friends, a lusty actress and night-club singer who
refuses to acknowledge that she is aging, beds down a
different guy every night, and has a heroin-addicted daughter. 
Chloe (Marisa Berenson), the owner an upscale beauty salon,
is a bisexual who is the least developed of the characters,
and comes to a crisis when she makes an overture to
Branca--thus acknowledging her previously hidden sexual
orientation.  Barbara (Marthe Keller) is a sad case of a
woman who is diagnosed by her ex-husband, an
ophthalmologist, with a fatal disease, while the most adorable
of the group, the slim and youthful college professor Eva
(Miou-Miou), becomes involved with a student who is not only
twenty-five years her junior but is the son of her best friend.
   Galvao succeeds admirably in compressing all five of these
stories into a standard film length.  "Elles," as the movie is
called in French, might recall Pedro Almodovar's "All About
My Mother," except that Galvao's film is more accessible,
dealing with reasonably conventional, professionally
successful people who are walking a thin line between
independence and romance.  The movie has a feel-good
ending without seeming contrived in the slightest, as these
women balance professional identities with sexual
involvements, however neurotic and unstable the latter may
be.  To my eyes, Miou-Miou is the most pleasant on the eyes
and has the most heartening personality, so that her affair
with young Luis (Morgan Perez) is the most absorbing.  The
one scene depicting a fairly overt sexual encounter between
them is the most believable and heartwarming, particularly
when contrasted with the promiscuous Branca's fully clothed,
sordid-looking liaison with a fellow actor (where she is caught
by her flustered, drug-addicted daughter Rita).
   "Women" will benefit the young in the audience by showing
them there really isn't all that much difference between the
loves their experience in their own time and what they might
come to expect two decades later.  For those in their middle
years who may have lost hope for real change, "Women"
offers confidence and conviction.  I wish only that Galvao, a
Portuguese writer-director filming in Lisbon, could have taken
advantage of actors in his own country, using his own
language, rather than fall back on a dependence on the usual
Francophile audiences.
