Title
Review for Paradise Road (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Ben Hoffman
The fact that the film is based on a true story, the hardships visited
on women prisoners by the Japanese in WWII, is about the only good
reason to see the movie.  For one thing, it comes across as a female
version of the magnificent BRIDGE OVER THE RIVER KWAI. . . and suffers
greatly in comparison.
Director Bruce Beresford, director of such outstanding films as BREAKER
MORANT,  DRIVING MISS DAISY, DON'S PARTY, TENDER MERCIES, CRIMES OF THE
HEART, AND MISTER JOHNSON . . . all exceptional films, has faltered
with PARADISE ROAD.  It never really picks up speed being slow-moving
almost from its inception.
Given a great cast with which to work, it is a pity that more could not
have been done with them.  For one thing, I suspect that Beresford
wanted to give equal time to each of his stars and instead ended up
with including each in an episode that did not fully mesh with the
others.
The story, which seems not to be as well known as it should be, is of
the tens of thousands of women (Australian, Europeans and Americans)
who were captured in the Japanese steam-roller push through Asia.  .
When bombs started dropping in Singapore, many women embarked on a ship
that should have brought them safely out of the war zone; instead they
were captured and taken to Sumatra and imprisoned.   How they endured
their incarceration, with music and singing as a catalyst to help them
endure, is the story'S essence.
Glenn Close stars as Adrienne Pargiter, the women's leader in the
prison camp. Pauline Collins is the missionary Margaret Drummond, who
along with Pargiter, stand up to their captors.  Joanna Ter Steege is
a nun, Sister Wilhelmina, Elizabeth Spriggs is Mrs. Roberts.  Julianna
Margulies has the role of Topsy Merrit,  Jennifer Ehle as Rosemary,
Cate Blanchette as Susan, and Fargo's own Frances McDormand is Dr.
Verstak who fronts as the doctor to the sick and injured women.  Sadly,
McDormand's interpretation of her role did not live up to her splendid
marshall's performance in FARGO that won her the Academy Award's Oscar
for Best Actress in 1996.  With a cast like that, we should have
gotten a better film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Sincerity, in and of itself, does not a good film make.  True
stories, no matter how harrowing, will not guarantee that a movie made
about them will become a compelling motion picture.
     So it is with writer and director Bruce Beresford's PARADISE ROAD.
Beresford's directorial record overflows with inconsistencies.  For
every winner such as DRIVING MISS DAISY or TENDER MERCIES, there are
flops like LAST DANCE or A GOOD MAN IN AFRICA.  Bereford's movies click
when they concentrate on a few characters who have a touching story to
tell and a well developed script.  In PARADISE ROAD -- a story of women
held in a Japanese concentration camp during World War II -- the good
and the bad points of the film quickly become apparent.
     Glenn Close, playing a character remarkably like Sarah Wheaton
from SARAH, PLAIN AND TALL, gives an earnest reading of a prisoner of
war who essentially becomes the prisoners' leader and choirmaster.
Although she repeats roles she has done before, her character, Adrienne
Pargiter, must be admired for her tremendous courage.  Pauline Collins
(SHIRLEY VALENTINE), as missionary Margaret Drummond, delivers the best
performance in the show.  Margaret gets most of the memorable, if
sometimes corny, dialog.  ("The will to survive is strong, stronger
than anything."  "I just can't bring myself to hate people.  The worse
they behave, the sorrier I feel for them.")
     Jennifer Ehle, who played Elizabeth Bennett in the PRIDE AND
PREJUDICE mini-series, gives a touching performance as prisoner
Rosemary Leighton-Jones.  Frances McDormand plays a tough German-Jewish
prisoner known as Dr. Verstak.  And so on, which is the problem of the
film in a nutshell.  There are probably two dozen people with
substantial parts.  Only the very best of scripts, which this one is
not, can bring that many characters to life.
     PARADISE ROAD was collected from the reminiscences of female
prisoners of war under the Japanese during WW II.  The screen
adaptation suffers from the lack of any narrative drive.  Although some
of the individual vignettes are deeply moving, others seem no more than
fillers.
     As a tearjerker based on true stories, the film delivers.  Some of
the scenes may have you wrenching in horror.  Still, I found myself
reflecting on my readings about German concentration camps and
wondering about the film's veracity.  I began to believe that the
picture had sugar coated its message a bit to make it more palatable to
the audience.  As horrible as were a few incidents in the picture, I
suspect that the reality was worse.
     Some of the women leave permanently to volunteer to work as
prostitutes at the Japanese officers' club.  The remaining prisoners
derisively refer to the leavers as "The Satin Sheet Brigade."  Like the
rest of the story, this incident happens, but the movie is too busy to
delve into it.  What happened to these women we never find out.
     The glue that ties the stories together uses Adrienne Pargiter's
classical training at the Royal Academy of Music.  She organizes an
"English Ladies Choir" in the camp where the prisoners use their voices
as pseudo-instruments.  Although undoubtedly true, it comes across as a
Hollywood creation to make the camp more fun.  If the writer had
concentrated seriously on a relatively few characters and thrown out
the schmaltzy choir subplot, the movie would have had much more power.
As it is, the film is a heartwarming collage of incidents and
characters that tease your imagination and assault your senses but
leave you more curious than moved.
     PARADISE ROAD runs 1:55 but needs twice that length to flesh out
all the characters.  It is rated R for violence and bathing nudity.
The film would be fine for teenagers if they can handle the torture
scenes.  I give the film a mild recommendation and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     PARADISE ROAD gets my vote for Most Boring Movie of the Year.  A
bunch of stately actresses play a bunch of stately prisoners of war,
interred by the Japanese during World War II, and who form a "vocal
orchestra" as a way to wail in harmony.  The story is true and the
actresses are appealing and neither of these is a reason to recommend
this exceptionally uninteresting movie.  Oh, sure, a *few* things
happen:  one woman is doused with gasoline and set on fire.  A catfight
erupts over soap in the shower.  And Francis McDormand speaks in a campy
German accent.  (Well, at least that's one less role to cast for a big-
screen update of "Hogan's Heroes.")  With the exception of a-cappella
renditions of Dvorak and Ravel, there isn't a thing here that we haven't
seen before.  I kept praying for the film to break.

Author
Adam Joyce
For the women in this film paradise is freedom, and the road to freedom is
a long and arduous one along which many will fall.
As the sun set over Singapore on the 10th February 1942, all women and
children were ordered to evacuate before the fall of Singapore to the
Japanese. They were packed onto undersized marine vessels destined for
Australia and England, many of these were sunk by Japanese bombers as they
headed south. This was the fate of those aboard the Prince Albert in Bruce
Beresfords Paradise Road, and those who managed to swim to the shores of
Sumatra could be considered by some as less fortunate than those who did
not.
Paradise Road is based on the true story of a group of women and children
who were captured and taken to a Japanese POW camp after swimming to the
shores of Sumatra from their sinking ship. It follows the hardships they
face in a squaller of a camp in which the Japanese soldiers seem to have no
compassion, and in which the women are treated worse than animals. As a
means of defiance some of the women form a choir. It is the uniting power
of music that gives many of the women the strength to continue, and is of
such beauty that even the Japanese guards refuse to stop it.
Bruce Beresford, as the writer and director of Paradise Road has managed
to capture the despair and desolation which the women feel, and despite the
death which surrounds them, hope is ever present in those with the will. He
has also provided a contrast to the despair with humour, which is drawn
from the situation in which the women find themselves. This has been done
particularly well, and the audience finds themselves laughing one minute
and crying the next, being carried with the story, and empathising strongly
with the characters.
There are plenty of actors who will be recognised by Australian audiences
in Paradise Road. Glenn Close plays the lead character, Adrienne
Pargiter, a British wife of a tea planter, who with a musical background
becomes the conductor of the womens choir. Her leadership in this position
is representative of her role throughout the film, her courage and
determination inspiring many of the other women not to give up.
Pauline Collins plays a British missionary, Margaret Drummond, who with
Adrienne forms, to use Margarets very apt description, a vocal
orchestra. Frances McDormand, who has a remarkable ability to take on
extraordinarily different characters plays Dr Verstak, a German Jew, who in
McDormands unique style is somewhat odd, but quite charismatic. Australian
Cate Blanchett makes her big screen debut playing Susan Macarthy, an
Australian nursing sister. After this performance there can be little doubt
that we will see her again in feature films. These actors are in addition
to many other faces which will light a spark of recognition in audiences.
The cinematography, especially the shots filmed in Penang, are spectacular.
The mountains which surround the camp provide a stunningly beautiful and
tranquil backdrop, which is a startling contrast to the filthy camp and the
graphic violence of the Japanese guards, which is particularly disturbing.
The vocal orchestra brings the women together, despite their different
backgrounds. Although death surrounds them like a sheaf, this only provides
them with more reason to shine through in the face of adversity. It is
quite difficult to believe that the sound of a group of singing women could
be powerful enough to prevent typically aggressive guards from breaking up
a prohibited gathering. But the singing literally passes right through you,
sending shivers up your spine. It has to be heard to be believed. See, feel
and hear Paradise Road for yourself.
Please Visit Adam's Attic at
http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Glenn Close, Cate Blanchett, Jennifer Ehle, Frances McDormand, 
      Pauline Collins, Elizabeth Spriggs, Julianna Margulies, 
      Johanna ter Steege, Wendy Hughes, Tessa Humphries, Pamela Rabe, 
      Sab Shimono
Director: Bruce Beresford
Producer: Sue Milliken
Screenplay: Bruce Beresford
Cinematography: Peter James
Music: Ross Edwards
U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight
     With a mostly female cast and a poetic title, it might be easy to 
assume that PARADISE ROAD is a 1997 version of Mike Newell's 
effervescent ENCHANTED APRIL.  However, apart from those stated 
similarities, there's little to connect the two films.  ENCHANTED APRIL 
brought the audience on a vacation along with a group of women.  
PARADISE ROAD takes us to a World War II concentration camp for Dutch 
and English-speaking women.  
     Most concentration camp stories are set in World War II's European 
theater, and deal with Hitler's attempted genocide of the Jewish race.  
PARADISE ROAD shifts the focus to the lesser-known, but no less 
inhumane, conditions in the Pacific.  Based on the memoirs of survivors, 
this movie peels away one more layer of the atrocities associated with 
the second World War.  Here, however, it's the Japanese, not the Nazis, 
who are the enemy.  And the means that the prisoners devise to lift 
their spirits are, to say the least, unique.  Yet, even though PARADISE 
ROAD is ultimately about the triumph over adversity, the script never 
forgets that for everyone who overcomes seemingly-impossible obstacles, 
there are many who stumble along the way, never to rise again.  PARADISE 
ROAD offers balance by not forgetting these victims.
     The film opens in February of 1942 on a night of dining and dancing 
at Singapore's Raffles Hotel.  It's a gala ball for soldiers stationed 
in the Pacific and their wives (or girlfriends).  The party breaks up 
when it's announced that the Japanese advance has pushed the Allies back 
and the city is about to fall.  While the men return to their units, the 
women evacuate, cramming aboard the "Prince Albert" for the boat trip 
back to Australia.  They are a mixed bunch of Australians, English, and 
Americans, and petty quarrels break out in the close quarters.  But 
these differences are all forgotten when Japanese planes attack and sink 
the ship.  The waterlogged and weary survivors come ashore on the 
Japanese-occupied island of Sumatra, where they are rounded up and 
thrown into a concentration camp.  There, over the course of the next 
three and one-half years, they fight to survive and not lose hope.  To 
this end, they form a "vocal orchestra" -- a chorus that astounds 
audiences of fellow prisoners by performing hummed renditions of the 
work of Mozart, Dvorak, and Holst.
     The exceptionally strong cast showcases American, British, and 
Australian actresses, all of whom show an astonishing willingness to 
appear in physically unflattering circumstances (no makeup, hair and 
skin caked with drying mud).  The conductor of the orchestra, Adrienne 
Pargiter, is played with grit and zeal by Glenn Close, and represents 
her best screen work in years.  Pauline Collins (SHIRLEY VALENTINE) is 
Margaret Drummond, a missionary who copies the orchestra's sheet music 
from memory.  Australian unknown Cate Blanchett essays Susan Macarthy, a 
timid nurse who finds her voice (in more ways than one) while in the 
camp.  Jennifer Ehle (Elizabeth Bennett in the recent BBC/A&E adaptation 
of PRIDE AND PREJUDICE), with her expressive eyes, is Rosemary Leighton-
Jones, a beautiful young woman who dreams of being reunited with her 
true love.  Frances McDormand, sporting an absurdly distracting accent, 
is the camp doctor.  And Elizabeth Spriggs (SENSE AND SENSIBILITY) 
portrays an old woman who cares more about her dog than herself.
     PARADISE ROAD is less a tearjerker than an honest examination of 
the bonds that are formed during extreme situations.  Although there are 
some heart-wrenching moments, and several scenes of potentially-
disturbing violence, the film never descends to the level of cheap 
melodrama.  Instead, it opts for something deeper and more meaningful by 
allowing us to follow a group of well-rounded characters on a journey 
with a strong spiritual component.  PARADISE ROAD not only pays tribute 
to the human will to live, but it is a testament to music's lasting 
power to heal and uplift. 
     Ultimately, PARADISE ROAD isn't as deeply sad or depressing as a 
Holocaust film, for, although several characters do not survive the 
movie, the goal of the Japanese is punishment and humiliation, not 
genocide.  And, while one of PARADISE ROAD's themes is the barbarity of 
war, it manages to present its case without demonizing the Japanese 
(indeed, it goes to great pains to paint a few of them as sympathetic).  
Instead, the film succeeds by humanizing the kinds of survivors who are 
often pictured as wretched, faceless victims.  
     PARADISE ROAD owes its existence to writer/director Bruce 
Beresford, one of the most inconsistent film makers working today.  
Beresford's resume is all over the place, containing such highly-
acclaimed features as TENDER MERCIES and DRIVING MISS DAISY and such 
ruthlessly-panned entries as HER ALIBI and A GOOD MAN IN AFRICA.  With 
PARADISE ROAD, Beresford is once again at the pinnacle of his ability, 
and, with the help of a courageous and superlative cast, he has 
fashioned a powerful coda to the story of the Belalau concentration 
camp's vocal orchestra.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
