Title
Review for One Tough Cop (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Nick Amado
Starring: Stephen Baldwin, Chris Penn, Gina Gershon, Michael McGlone
Unfortunately it doesn't get much more formulaic than One Tough
Cop. There's the renegade cop with the loser partner who has to many
problems to explain. The renegade has to prove his good name and is
trapped between the good guys, the bad guys and some woman who really
has nothing to do with the story other than being there for the
purpose of providing sex for the hero in the middle of the film.
Bo Dietl (pronounced Deedle, Baldwin) is one tough cop, a guy who is
being investigated by hardass FBI agents due to his association with
the NY Mafia. On top of that problem, he has a drunk, gambling
addicted partner (Penn) who has a penchant for collecting parking
tickets (I guess cops aren't immune?). Then, throw into the mix the
femme fatale (Gershon). Right there you have plenty of ammo for a
decent cop drama. But right in the middle of the film, they throw in a
completely un-related plot point. Dietl and his partner Duke try to
solve a case that they have been warned to stay away from. The film
spends over half an hour tracking the case of a nun who was beaten and
raped to near death. Once the case is solved, the film shifts focus
back to the mafia issue. Whatever neat mesh the screenwriter wanted to
create between the two stories failed miserably.
Aside from being asked to accept Michael McGlone as a Mafioso (an
insult if you ask me) the performances were pretty good. Baldwin,
though he occasionally slips into an impression of his brother Alec,
does a fine job as one tough cop. Penn, who also slips into an
impression of HIS brother Sean, is even better as a loser tough guy
cop.
What One Tough Cop lacks is originality. This film offers nothing
new. Nothing that you can't get from any cop film. It screams Sidney
Lumet all over the place, perhaps because it was produced by Marty and
Michael Bregman, producers of Lumet's Dog Day Afternoon and
Serpico. But even the masterful Sidney would not have been able to
make One Tough Cop into a good film. Too much else is lacking.
I also saw the boom mic pop into the top of the frame twice early on
in the picture, something that I almost never notice. But once I saw
that, I had it in the back of my mind every time I saw a medium or
long shot. At times, I was hoping to see it.
One Tough Cop isn't laughable, nor is it a terrible film, but it just
isn't unique. It is a classic example of a film that didn't need to be
made. But one thing is for sure, it could really use a better title.

Author
Susan Granger
Daniel Baldwin - not to be confused with brothers Alec and
Stephen - plays a not-too-bright Brooklyn cop, Bo Dietl, whose best
friend since childhood is a Mafioso (Michael McGlone). His partner
(Chris Penn) has never seen a doughnut that wasn't delicious, a drink
he wouldn't down, and a sporting event he wouldn't bet on so,
inevitably, you know trouble's ahead, particularly when the beefy,
streetwise duo solve a particularly savage rape/mutilation case for
which they're not given the credit they're due. Then, when Baldwin has
an affair with his Mafioso buddy's mistress, Gina Gershon, and Penn's
gambling debts mount up, you can just see the bullet-ridden
handwriting on the wall. Directed by a Brazilian, Bruno Barreto ("Four
Days in September"), this is second-rate, cliche-ridden melodrama by
Jeremy Iacone - with the only surprise engendered by the dour
appearance of Amy Irving (now Mrs. Barreto) as a tough-talking,
no-nonsense FBI agent. Never has this talented actress delivered a
more robotic performance. And, no, Stephen Baldwin is not the Baldwin
brother who was arrested on drug charges after trashing his suite at
Manhattan's Plaza Hotel - that's the admittedly self-destructive
Daniel - but Stephen looks stoned throughout this film. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "One Tough Cop" is a plodding, predictable,
unimaginative 2. In some cases, a dumb title doesn't necessarily mean
a bad movie. In this case, it does. A better title would have been
"One Dumb Cop."

Author
Matt Williams
If you couldn't tell by the title, One Tough Cop is about, well, one
tough cop.  It's a by-the-numbers cop drama filled to the gills with
generic characters, generic situations and generic dialogue.
Stephen Baldwin stars as NYPD detective Bo Dietl...supposedly a
legendary NY cop, but who apparently did nothing noteworthy enough to
include in a film (everything except Dietl's name has no basis in
fact).  If you've ever seen a cop movie, or watched a police drama on
TV, you know Dietl's type...the gruff but loyal cop who isn't ashamed to
bend the rules as long as justice gets done.
What's a cop without a doomed partner?  In this case, the walking stiff
is "Duke" (portrayed by Chris Penn).  At least, Duke isn't three days
away from retiring and sailing around the world on a yacht named
"Live-4-Ever"...One Tough Cop has standards, you know. Instead, Duke is
saddled with a hefty gambling debt and a pathetic John Wayne
impersonation.  If he didn't already have a huge red bullseye painted on
his chest, you'd probably be eager to paint one there.
Bo and Duke's alleged case is catching a pair of bad guys who raped and
mutilated a nun.  Besides providing a few lurid and distasteful shots,
the actual crime doesn't really matter here. Even Bo and Duke's "unique"
path to solving it is rather straightforward and uninteresting.
What does provide a little spice to the proceedings, however, is the
fact that Bo's best friend, Richie La Cassa (Mike McGlone), just happens
to be a mafia boss.  Bo doesn't see that as a conflict... neither with
his job, nor with sleeping with Richie's girlfriend, Joey (Gina
Gershon).
That love triangle is about as complex as the screenplay here ever gets.
Granted, that might be enough basis for an interesting movie...but not
here, not with this screenplay.  The dialogue seems cut and paste from a
thousand different sources.  You can almost mouth the words along with
the actors, they're so familiar.
Stephen Baldwin takes his stock character and goes nowhere with it.
Perhaps the crackle and pizzazz of a stronger actor might have been able
to get mileage out of this treadless role, but not Baldwin.  True, he
huffs and puffs right on cue, and spouts the necessary dialogue at the
familiar times, but nowhere does he try to take the role anywhere new.
The best praise I can lay on One Tough Cop is that, as far as
cookie-cutter cop dramas go, it doesn't really make any missteps.
However, it doesn't make much of a case for going to the movies, either.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases
