Title
Review for Marvin's Room (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     MARVIN'S ROOM was originally a play produced first in Chicago and
then in New York.  Scott McPherson adapted his own play into a
screenplay before dying of AIDS at thirty-three.  He died five years
ago and now Jerry Zaks has directed a film version of the play.  The
film version is a comedy drama that is getting some positive attention
and an Academy Award nomination for Diane Keaton, though I have to say
it is not my sort of film and so I may not be the best person to judge
it.  Lee and Bessie (played by Meryl Streep and Diane Keaton
respectively) are two sisters who have been separated for two decades.
Lee has gone off to find herself and has since raised two children, the
disturbed Hank (Leonardo DiCaprio) and his studious younger brother
Charlie (Hal Scardino) whose spare time, at least for the course of the
film, seems to be taken up reading 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEA.  Lee
is so self-centered, colorful, and tough it is surprising the role did
not go to Cher.  Bessie is more a warm and loving person who has spent
the year unfulfilled, taking care of her soap-opera-loving Aunt Ruth
(Gwen Verdon) and her senile, long-dying father Marvin (Hume Cronyn).
As Bessie tells her doctor, "My father has been dying for twenty years,
slowly, so I won't miss anything."  Each sister has problems as Hank
burned down Lee's house and has been committed to a mental institution.
Bessie has recently been diagnosed with leukemia.  Bessie needs a bone
marrow transplant from someone with the right kind of marrow so Lee has
arranged a leave for Hank and the two of them and Charlie have driven
down from Ohio to Bessie's home in Florida to test if they have the
right marrow type.  Hank, who never realized that he had an aunt is
first alienated from Bessie, then discovers that in many ways she is a
kindred spirit.
     It is remarkable that Keaton would allow herself to take such an
unglamorous role.  Bessie is starting to show the signs of aging and
her disease.  Her teeth look bad and her hands look like those of an
elderly woman.  Streep is abrasive and usually at odds with her sons,
particularly Hank.  Robert DeNiro, who produced the film along with
Scott Rudin and Jane Rosenthal, plays a role as Bessie's doctor and his
role seems to be one of the most ill-considered touches of the film.
He seems less than totally competent and something of a buffoon.  It is
surprising that Keaton would choose such a misfit to treat her for
something like leukemia, placing her life in his hands,  The
combination of his distressing diagnosis and his comic behavior just
does not seem to work in the film.  The same unevenness comes later in
the film as Bessie is telling a very humorous story to Lee only to have
us realize that the story is one of the great tragedies of her life and
is one she would be unlikely to be laughing about.
     MARVIN'S ROOM is one of a spate of female bonding films we have
seen of late, and not really one of the best.  Like Bessie's life, the
film really goes nowhere in specific, but it picks up texture along the
way.  It is not the kind of film I feel I can judge really well.  The
theme of fulfillment through service to others and forgiveness is one
that could have been taken directly from the Boy Scout Handbook.
Certainly what is deep and meaningful to one person will be trite to
another.  For me this film leaned heavily to the hackneyed, but
admittedly there were those in the audience who were touched by the
film's message.
     For the right audience this was probably a moving film but I was
not that audience and I can give it only a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Miramax)
Starring:  Meryl Streep, Leonardo DiCaprio, Diane Keaton, Robert DeNiro,
Hume Cronyn, Gwen Verdon, Hal Scardino.
Screenplay:  Scott McPherson, based on his play.
Producers:  Scott Rudin, Jane Rosenthal, Robert DeNiro.
Director:  Jerry Zaks.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (some strong profanity, mature themes).
Running Time:  97 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Please ignore the next couple of sentences if you are a stickler
about having no part of a plot spoiled for you:  in MARVIN'S ROOM, nobody
dies.  Illness plays a significant role in the story, and many viewers
have come to resent maudlin disease-of-the-week melodramas in which
everything seems to function as an extended prologue to a tear-jerking
deathbed scene.  There is something terribly dehumanizing about making an
illness the central character in a narrative, so it is a relief to
discover that MARVIN'S ROOM is actually about people.  Though occasionally
stage-bound and over-plotted, MARVIN'S ROOM finds superb actors lending a
surprisingly restrained touch to a genre crying out for a little
restraint.
     Diane Keaton plays Bessie Wakefield, a never-married woman who has
spent most of her adult life caring for her bed-ridden father Marvin (Hume
Cronyn) and somewhat simple-minded Aunt Ruth (Gwen Verdon) in Florida.
After years of helping others, however, Bessie suddenly finds herself in
need of help when she is diagnosed with leukemia.  With a bone marrow
donation her best chance at survival, Bessie calls on the only other
immediate family she has:  Lee (Meryl Streep), the sister she has not seen
in nearly twenty years.  Though miles and profound differences have
separated them, Lee comes to Bessie with her two sons -- emotionally
troubled Hank (Leonardo DiCaprio) and bookish Charlie (Hal Scardino).  The
reunion is strained by a variety of conflicts, but gradually the family
members begin to realize the strength of the bonds that connect them, and
their need for each other.
     Writer Scott McPherson died of AIDS in 1992, and if you look
carefully at MARVIN'S ROOM you can see evidence of that specific disease
in many aspects of the story:  the personal relationships between the ill
and their care-takers; the care-takers themselves becoming ill; the
tension of familial disapproval.  Fortunately, MARVIN'S ROOM isn't _about_
AIDS any more than it is _about_ any disease.  It is about estrangement
and reconciliation and family ties, and it covers this treacherous ground
with as much comedy as sadness.  There are some wonderful black-humored
moments, including Aunt Ruth's pain-blocking device which also acts as a
garage door opener and an absent-minded doctor (Robert DeNiro) who uses
tourniquets as pants clips while riding his bicycle.  Stage veteran Jerry
Zaks does fine work with his rookie screen effort, and the gifted
cinematographer Piotr Sobocinski (Krzysztof Kieslowski's RED) gives
MARVIN'S ROOM a warm, comforting glow.  The overall effect of the film is
an unusual one for films of its kind:  it draws you in without pouncing on
you with over-wrought emotions.
     The superb cast certainly deserves much of the credit for that
success.  Diane Keaton, who has been re-born with two great screen
showcases in 1996 (this one and THE FIRST WIVES CLUB), radiates a basic
decency as Bessie, but she is not painted in saintly tones.  Bessie is not
bitter at the hand life has dealt her; she is simply resentful that Lee
left her to play it alone.  She has a couple of fine moments with Leonardo
DiCaprio, who plays a stock "troubled youth" role skillfully and without
histrionics, as the two lonely souls find sympathy in one another.  And of
course there is Meryl Streep, an actress so talented it has become a sort
of cinematic sport to mock her versatility.  Here she plays Lee with an
anger which drives her every action (though she does indulge in that
well-work actor's crutch of acting with her cigarette on occasion), and
she is convincing both in her early resistance to any overtures of good
will and in her slow realization that she cares more about her sister than
she realized.  There is a particular grace to her honest portrayal of
someone terribly uncomfortable with being around illness.  In one
perfectly pitched scene, she recoils at the sheer number of emergency
numbers needed to care for her father, then slowly steels herself to
helping with his medication because she knows at that moment that she is
needed.  The conflict between Bessie and Lee is presented with an ironic
realization that each sister thinks the other one has gotten the better
life, and both Keaton and Streep make the tearing down of that wall a
moving experience.
     There are certainly times when MARVIN'S ROOM feels hemmed in by its
stage roots, and conversations build to an over-dramatized pitch.
McPherson's script also over plays its comic relief card, particularly in
the person of Dan Hedaya as a lithium-medicated receptionist who seems
more appropriate to an episode of "Murphy Brown."  DiCaprio's character
also feels out of place occasionally, as though every time the story
turned back to him it was in danger of losing its way.  The relationship
between the two sisters is the heart of MARVIN'S ROOM, and the other
conflicts and relationships feel intrusive; the focus on DiCaprio makes
you wonder why the character of the other brother (Hal Scardino, who
spends nearly the entire film reading "20,000 Leagues Under the Sea") was
included at all.  But the important factor in MARVIN'S ROOM is that these
people don't get together for the express purpose of watching one of them
die.  Living is more interesting -- and more complicated -- than dying,
and McPherson created a work which recognizes that fact.  You don't have
to have a funeral to touch real emotions.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Diane Keaton's portrayal of the frustrated Aunt Bessie is probably her best
role since "Annie Hall." Keaton plays a humane, misunderstood woman who is
trying to come to terms with her estranged sister (Meryl Streep) and her
troubled nephew (Leonard DiCaprio) after discovering she has leukemia. It is a
strong, subtle performance and it deserves to be in a much better movie than
the one provided. 
At the start of the film, we see Bessie's estranged sister (Streep) majoring in
cosmetology, and raising two sons on her own. When her older son (DiCaprio)
burns the house down, he is admitted to a mental institution. Then Streep gets
a call from Bessie revealing her condition and her dire need for a bone marrow
transplant. Streep reluctantly agrees, and brings her two sons to Florida since
they qualify as good candidates for a transplant. 
Bessie lives with her bedridden, senile father (Hume Cronyn) and kooky aunt who
cries while watching soap operas. Predictably, Bessie and her sister do not get
along whereas DiCaprio and Bessie do. I don't need to give away much more of
the tedious plot since you may have guessed the rest by now. 
"Marvin's Room" is basically a TV movie with a better cast and stagy production
values (it is based on a play by Scott Macpherson). As aforementioned, Diane
Keaton is forceful and magnetic to watch - her scenes with Streep are powerful.
Ditto the scintillating DiCaprio who steals the scenes he shares with Streep
and Keaton - the scene with DiCaprio trying to eat chips while Streep insists
on asking permission from Bessie is tense and comical. Meryl Streep is
believably trashy and uptight - a performance that recalls her "Silkwood"
portrayal. There's also the ubiquitous Robert De Niro as an affable doctor who
rides in a bicycle and comes to work wearing a helmet (he's also one of the
producers of the film). De Niro delivers a blast of subtle, comedic touches -
too bad, his role is so short (as in "Sleepers") since he brings the film alive
whenever he's on screen. 
'Somehow, "Marvin's Room" follows a very clear, formulaic path from the
beginning and ends just when things start to get really interesting. Every
scene is predictable, and there isn't a sense of spontaneity as you might
expect from such a great cast. Still, what distinguishes it from the norm is
its refreshing lack of overt sentimentality. That and Diane Keaton's bravura
performance warrants a look at this mild, flawed piece. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Michael Redman
Because of the inherent drama, dysfunctional families have always been
better film fodder than "normal" ones and here we have a prize-winner.
Marvin, the father (Hume Cronyn) is a 20-year stroke victim who can't do
much more than lie in bed twitching and watching reflected light bounce
around his room. Aunt Ruth (Gwen Verdon) is semi-invalid, addicted to
soap operas and somewhat demented albeit in a delightful way. Daughter
Bessie (Diane Keaton) has sacrificed her life to care for the two.
To make matters even more complex, Bessie learns that she has leukemia.
She can possibly be saved by a bone marrow transplant from her sister or
nephews. Of course this is complicated too. The two siblings haven't
seen each other since the stroke when Lee (Meryl Streep) abandoned the
family because she couldn't deal with her father's condition.
Realizing that this time she must face up to her responsibility, Lee
packs up and reluctantly heads to the Florida home. First she must
gather up her sons: Charlie (Hal Scardino) who rarely looks out of his
books and Hank (Leonardo DiCaprio) who was placed in a mental
institution after he burned down their house.
Given the commercial approach to marketing films, we shouldn't be too
shocked that the misleading newspaper ads only feature the quote "I
promise Marvin's Room will make you laugh...", but if you're going to
the film expecting a light-hearted laugh-fest, you're in for a surprise.
Writer Scott McPherson (who died of AIDS complications in 1992) succeeds
in pulling off the comedic scenes by making the characters human beings
who have not totally given in to their dire circumstances. Caring for
her father who has been dying for 20 years, Bessie has adapted to the
situation and is able to see the joy in living ("I look back and I've
had such love").
Besides the humor, the thing that saves this from being a melodramatic
"disease d'jour" film is the exceptional acting abilities of the stars.
Even the relatively minor roles are wonderful choices. Bessie's
forgetful Dr. Wally (Robert DeNiro, also one of the producers) and his
half-witted assistant (Dan Hedaya) provide some of the light moments.
"That's what I get for hiring my brother," Wally explains after one of
Hedaya's off the wall comments.
At the core of the film is not the various ailments, but rather the
growing relationship between Hank, his mother and his aunt whom he has
never before met. As he comes out of his anger, there is hope for the
future among the dying.
Keaton appears to be on a come-back roll as she looks and acts much
older than her former screen personas. Streep, who could play almost any
character with skill, abandons herself to the almost-graduated
cosmetologist.
There are no high drama death scenes. Fortunately the story doesn't sink
to the tear-jerking level of who's going to die and how sad it is. It's
more about how to live amongst the sorrows. We are given a glimpse into
the lives of real people: a rare treat.
[This appeared in the 3/6/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
John Schuurman
Directed by Jerry Zaks
Screenplay by Scott Mcpherson, based on his play.
Why is this film called 'MARVIN'S ROOM'? At first glance it doesn't
make much sense. Marvin, (Hume Cronyn) just lies there. He is an
entirely dependent, way old, completely non-verbal, pathetically
incontinent bed-case. He is of no obvious use to himself and is a great
burden to others. In short, conventional wisdom says that the guy is a
perfect candidate for a brief visit with Jack Kervorkian. 
And yet the movie is named after him! Or more specifically his room.
This is -- MARVIN'S ROOM. But if Marvin is a nothing as a person, his
room is really a big zero. There is nothing unique or specific about it
at all. It is just a simple barren room with a hospital bed and the
hapless Marvin lying in it. In the stage play by the same title, you
don't even see inside the room or get to actually have a look at
Marvin. You only hear his moans and see his silhouette through the
glass block wall. 
So why "Marvin's Room"? Instead of Marvin or his room the action seems
to center on his two grown daughters, Bessie (Diane Keaton) and Lee,
(Meryl Streep), and their fractured relationship. The two have had
little to do with each other for the last twenty years. It seems there
was a big disagreement and they went their separate ways. Lee, not
wanting to "waste her life,"  went off to experience various adventures
of romance and self-improvement (all of which fail). And Bessie stayed
at home tending the ailing Marvin whom she says "has been dying for
twenty years -- slowly, so that I won't miss anything."  
It seems that everybody has been wasting their life with depressing
regularity here. 
But now, Lee has come home with her two sons. She has come because
Bessie has been diagnosed with Leukemia and there is a possibility that
either Lee or one of the boys might be a good match for a bone marrow
transplant. So it is understandable if we should conclude  that the
movie's theme concerns Lee and Bessie and their relationship made fresh
through the quest for a donor. But this is MARVIN'S ROOM. 
Another issue that captures a lot of our attention is the situation of
Lee's eldest son Hank (Leonardo DiCaprio). He has "always been a
problem" for Lee and when we first meet him he is in the act of burning
her house down. Throughout the movie we watch this troubled lad come to
a measure of insight about himself and his mother and so here might be
a fruitful center for the movie. But, again,  this is MARVIN'S ROOM
What makes it MARVIN'S ROOM? Let me ask it this way: What makes for a
life of worth? And what makes for a life that is wasted? Those are the
root questions of MARVIN'S ROOM. 
In the room lies the pathetic Marvin in a situation that all people
dread. We pray, "Please God, take me before I get like that." And,
"Lord, I don't think I could cope with someone like that." 
What lies in the room gives us the shudders. And then question comes:
Is it worth anything? Would it be a waste to invest a life in caring
for this? 
I delight to tell you that the movie's answer is clear and unequivocal.
In Marvin's room, lies the person Marvin --  someone who, though
capable of producing only body fluids and guttural noise -- is
eminently capable of BEING loved. The issue is not that he is able to
love in return. That is specifically rejected as any sort of a motive.
No, Bessie says, "I've been so lucky to have been able to love someone
so much." 
What makes for a life of worth? This film says that Bessie has such a
life. She has loved a love that expected nothing and received much. It
is enough. 
For an early hint at the driving theme of the film, check out the
opening credits. While the names role we see medicine bottles, hundreds
of them, along with syringes, thermometers, water bottles, and hand
wipes  all lovingly arranged and bathed in a soft and nostalgic golden
light. It is as if the the camera were panning Christmas tree ornaments
in the most sentimental of possible treatments. But there is no
sentimentalism in this movie, it is rather a combination of brute
realism and some of the great folk that enoble the rest of us. 
Go see this truly wonderful film about the greatness of those who love
sacrificially. It will help you look afresh at who life's real heros
are.
for more reviews by John Schuurman see
http://www.mcs.com/~wcrc/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996 
U.S. Release Date: 12/14/96 (NY, LA); 1/10/97 (limited) 
Running Length: 1:38 
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Mature themes, profanity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
Cast: Meryl Streep, Leonardo DiCaprio, Diane Keaton, Hal Scardino, 
      Gwen Verdon, Hume Cronyn, Robert DeNiro, Dan Hedaya 
Director: Jerry Zaks 
Producers: Scott Rudin, Jane Rosenthal, and Robert DeNiro 
Screenplay: Scott McPherson based on his play 
Cinematography: Piotr Sobocinski 
Music: Rachel Portman 
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films 
     For every happy, "traditional" family, there's one that fits under 
the broad envelope of "dysfunctional."  In general, motion pictures are 
made about those in the latter category rather than the former, because 
the dramatic potential is better.  MARVIN'S ROOM, based on the play of 
the same name, is one of those movies that delves beneath the thinly-
applied varnish covering the gaping holes in a series of sundered family 
relationships.  Like Andre Techine's MA SAISON PREFEREE, what begins as 
an apparently simple tale of sibling interaction reveals a complex web 
of pain, guilt, and uncertainty.   
     Scott McPherson's play, MARVIN'S ROOM, debuted on stage in New York 
six years ago. McPherson went on to write the film's screenplay before 
succumbing to AIDS-related complications.  And, while the narrative is 
not intended to be biographical, McPherson nevertheless drew heavily on 
his own experiences while writing it.  Director Jerry Zaks widens the 
canvas here, expanding the film's locales to a Florida beach and 
Disneyworld while continuing to maintain the level of emotional 
intensity that makes this a memorable story. 
     Bessie (Diane Keaton) and Lee (Meryl Streep) are sisters who have 
gone their separate ways.  Twenty years ago, a bitter quarrel over 
family responsibilities split them, and they haven't spoken since.  
Bessie gave up her life to return to the family home in Florida and play 
the role of caregiver for her father, Marvin (Hume Cronyn), who had a 
stroke, and her bedridden aunt (Gwen Verdon).  Lee, unwilling to accept 
such a personal sacrifice, went her own way.  She had two children, Hank 
(Leonardo DiCaprio) and Charlie (Hal Scardino), that she has struggled 
to raise on her own. 
     Now, Bessie has been diagnosed with leukemia, and her survival may 
depend on a bone marrow transplant from a family member.  This leads to 
an awkward and inevitable reunion between the sisters.  Lee and her two 
sons travel to Florida -- Lee to revisit the past; Charlie and Hank to 
meet the aunt they never knew.  But all is not well between these 
characters.  Hank's rebelliousness, which landed him in a mental 
institution, threatens to explode into the open, and the tension between 
Lee and Bessie is palpable. 
     MARVIN'S ROOM deals with a number of potentially-depressing 
subjects:  mental illness, child abuse, repressed memories, buried 
guilt, and terminal cancer.  In many ways, however, this film is not a 
downer, because it encourages us to look at the good things in a day-to-
day existence.  MARVIN'S ROOM is about three people in damaged 
relationships coming together.  Nothing is really resolved by the time 
we reach the somewhat abrupt ending, but the seeds of hope have been 
planted. 
     The focus of MARVIN'S ROOM is coming to terms with the consequences 
of one's actions and using the healing power of love to cleanse 
festering wounds.  Lee pursued her "dreams" and ended up with a broken 
life.  Selfishness turned her into a bitter, resentful person; guilt has 
gnawed at her soul for twenty years.  Bessie, on the other hand, who has 
sacrificed everything to care for her aunt and father, is fulfilled and 
content.  In her own words, "I've had such love in my life.  I look 
back, and I've had such love."  In a perverse way, Lee holds that 
against her.  However, before Lee can begin to confront her own demons, 
she must resolve her unclear feelings about her sister, her children, 
and her father.  
     Most of MARVIN'S ROOM is dialogue, as one might expect from a play-
to-film script.  There are a few missteps.  For example, Aunt Ruth is 
devised primarily as a source of comic relief, but there are times when 
the humor feels forced and artificial.  There are also a few occasions 
when character interaction falls into over-familiar patterns.  Some of 
the early scenes between Lee and Bessie unfold in a too-predictable 
fashion. 
     Yet, even on those occasions when the screenplay falters, the 
actors are there to take up the slack.  MARVIN'S ROOM's most valuable 
asset is a trio of superlative performances:  Meryl Streep as the 
conflicted Lee, Diane Keaton as the saintly-but-frightened Bessie, and 
Leonardo DiCaprio as the lonely, rebellious Hank.  It's impossible to 
decide who does the best job here.  Each has their own particular series 
of moments, and, by the time the final credits roll, Lee, Bessie, and 
Hank have been developed into fully-rounded characters.  What's more, 
the often-subtle changes to each of their personalities have been 
effectively realized by the actors. 
     Robert DeNiro, cast against type, is seen in a rare supporting 
performance as a well-meaning doctor.  Hume Cronyn spends most of his 
time unconscious or mumbling as the title character, but he does have a 
pair of magical scenes, one of which occurs at the end.  Hal Scardino is 
fine as Charlie, and Gwen Verdon enables us to feel for a character 
whose primary purpose is to make us laugh when there are so many reasons 
to cry. 
     It takes a lot of thought and reflection to untangle all the 
complex relationships revealed throughout MARVIN'S ROOM.  In the end, 
however, the image that lingers is one of promise.  Sure, there's a 
tragedy here, but, ultimately, I think the tone of MARVIN'S ROOM is far 
more positive than the subject matter might lead anyone to believe. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Faust667
Diane Keaton's portrayal of the frustrated Aunt Bessie is probably her best
role since "Annie Hall." Keaton plays a humane, misunderstood woman who is
trying to come to terms with her estranged sister (Meryl Streep) and her
troubled nephew (Leonard DiCaprio) after discovering she has leukemia. It is a
strong, subtle performance and it deserves to be in a much better movie than
the one provided. 
At the start of the film, we see Bessie's estranged sister (Streep) majoring in
cosmetology, and raising two sons on her own. When her older son (DiCaprio)
burns the house down, he is admitted to a mental institution. Then Streep gets
a call from Bessie revealing her condition and her dire need for a bone marrow
transplant. Streep reluctantly agrees, and brings her two sons to Florida since
they qualify as good candidates for a transplant. 
Bessie lives with her bedridden, senile father (Hume Cronyn) and kooky aunt who
cries while watching soap operas. Predictably, Bessie and her sister do not get
along whereas DiCaprio and Bessie do. I don't need to give away much more of
the tedious plot since you may have guessed the rest by now. 
"Marvin's Room" is basically a TV movie with a better cast and stagy production
values (it is based on a play by Scott Macpherson). As aforementioned, Diane
Keaton is forceful and magnetic to watch - her scenes with Streep are powerful.
Ditto the scintillating DiCaprio who steals the scenes he shares with Streep
and Keaton - the scene with DiCaprio trying to eat chips while Streep insists
on asking permission from Bessie is tense and comical. Meryl Streep is
believably trashy and uptight - a performance that recalls her portrayal in
"Silkwood." There's also the ubiquitous Robert De Niro as an affable doctor who
rides in a bicycle and comes to work wearing a helmet (he's also one of the
producers of the film). De Niro delivers a blast of quiet, comedic touches -
too bad, his role is so short (as in "Sleepers") since he brings the film alive
whenever he's on screen. 
Somehow, "Marvin's Room" follows a very clear, formulaic path from the
beginning and ends just when things start to get really interesting. Every
scene is predictable, and there isn't a sense of spontaneity as you might
expect from such a great cast. Still, what distinguishes it from the norm is
its refreshing lack of overt sentimentality. That and Diane Keaton's bravura
performance warrants a look at this mild, flawed piece. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Walter Frith
There are few movies from 1996 with a more realistic look at everyday life
than 'Marvin's Room.'  Meryl Streep and Diane Keaton play sisters who haven't
seen each other for twenty years.  Meryl Streep is a frumpy and belligerent
woman with a large chip on her shoulder whose course personality has had a
devistating effect on her seventeen year old son (Leonardo DiCaprio) who has
burned down their home and is sent to a mental institution.  She has another
young son in tow and her Ohio lifestyle and potential career in cosmetology
is disrupted by a call from her sister (Keaton), a woman of family dedication
and sunshine personality who has just been diagnosed with leukemia and needs
here sister and two nephews to come down to her Florida home and test as
potential bone marrow matches.  All the while Keaton is nursing her weak
minded old aunt (Gwen Verdon) and her bed ridden father (Hume Cronyn).
 Everything goes fine in the process of breaking the ice after a relationship
gap of twenty years between the sisters but hidden feelings begins to surface
and the family is brought to terms of recognizing and confronting each
other's faults and frailties.  This movie is a stimulating and relentlessly
emotional odyssey with touching and heartfelt performances from a
professional cast of actors resembling the visuals of a stage play.  The
movie has no pretentious Hollywood trappings and director Jerry Zaks earns
high marks for his interpretation of presetning a simple fact in life which
is "you can't choose your family."  'Marvin's Room' is headed for that
treasure chest of celluloid to become a burined treasure.  When Robert DeNiro
is asked to do a meaningless bit part as Keaton's doctor and makes it
memorable then you know this has got to be a gem.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As the opening credits roll for MARVIN'S ROOM, the camera takes us
through a long, slowly panning close-up of a forest of medicine
bottles.  Great, I'm thinking to myself.  I'm going to have to sit
through another manipulative, maudlin show about terminal illness.
Usually I find watching this type of film about as enjoyable as peeling
onions.
     Although there have been serious illness movies that I loved,
SHADOWLANDS and TERMS OF ENDEARMENT come immediately to mind, more
often I get offended by their overbearing sentimentality.  MARVIN'S
ROOM was a pleasant surprise because it is about people's
relationships, not their dying, although dying they are.  As an extra
treat, the picture is naturally, but not excessively, funny.  Not the
black comedy of a HAROLD AND MAUDE, but an upbeat one ready to laugh
death in the face.
     Bessie, played with resolve but none of her normal ditziness by
Diane Keaton, is her family's Rock of Gibraltar.  She has given up her
own life to go to Florida to care for her dying father Marvin,
performed only with grunts by Hume Cronyn.  "Dad's dying," explains
Bessie.  "He's been doing it for about twenty years so I don't miss
anything."
     Bessie also cares for her quirky and senile Aunt Ruth (Gwen
Verdon).  Aunt Ruth lives through her television soap operas.  She even
dresses up when the characters on one of her favorite shows get
married.  She is oblivious to real life, but highly attuned to the
imaginary.
     One day, Bessie goes to the doctor, aptly named Dr. Wally and
played with charming forgetfulness by Robert De Niro.  After the
obligatory battery of tests, he decides she has leukemia and not the
vitamin deficiency he first thought.  Bessie has to find a compatible
bone marrow donor if she is to have a reasonable chance of survival,
and the only likely candidates are her relatives.  This means that
Bessie must contact her only sister, but she has not spoken to her in
twenty years.
     Bessie's sister Lee is a low class, chain smoking, new cosmetology
graduate.  Meryl Streep has the part of Lee, whom Streep approaches
much the same as she did her famous Karen Silkwood role.  Lee has a
problem bigger than Bessie's.  Her son Hank (Leonardo DiCaprio), having
recently set fire to Lee's pictures and thereby burning their house
down, is in a prison mental facility.  Lee tells Bessie that, "We call
it the loony bin, or the nut house, to show that we've got a sense of
humor about it."  Lee's other son is a bespectacled nerd named Charlie
(Hal Scardino), and he is everything Hank isn't.  Lee gets Hank a short
leave of absence from the facility so the three of them can leave Ohio
to go to Florida to be tested for donor compatibility.
     The script and the play upon which the film is based is by writer
Scott McPherson, who died of AIDS soon after the play was produced.
The press kit has an insert from the play's original program.  In it,
he says that his grandmother was the first dying person he had ever
known.  Soon he and his friends would begin dying, so the energy and
honesty in the script comes from his experiences.  My main complaint
with the filmed version is that director Jerry Zaks treated McPherson's
staging too reverentially.  Plays are best when opened up for the big
screen.  Too often this movie has the claustrophobic and confined
feeling of a play without the intimacy that a live play provides.
     The heart of the story is the rekindling of the dormant
relationship between the two sisters and the beginning of a
relationship between Hank and the others.  Hank breaks out of his shell
and comes to know his mother and his Aunt Bessie -- both for the first
time.
     The script has a delicacy along with the humor.  This is best
evidenced in Bessie's telling Lee about her adolescent fling with a
"carny worker" who had a voiceless scream.
     The emotive music by Rachel Portman is full of dreamy and sad
little piano tunes.  The cinematography by Piotr Sobocinski, on the
other hand, is too dark.  Although he is clearly trying for intimacy,
it comes off more ugly than effective.
     Without the humor, the film would have been unwatchably morose,
but with it you can concentrate on the blossoming relationships, which
comprise the core of the picture.  Still, the coming of death does seem
to lurk around every corner of the movie.  The saddest scene in the
film ironically happens in "the happiest place on earth" -- Disney
World.  Surprisingly, this is not a movie that builds to the big event.
The most important act turns out to be the middle one.
     MARVIN'S ROOM runs 1:37.  It is rated PG-13 for its realistic
consideration of dying and for a little bad language.  There is no sex,
nudity, or violence.  The movie would be fine for kids interested in
this type of serious material, and I think that probably means kids
nine or ten and up.  I recommend the picture to you and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
