Title
Review for Hsi yen (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Winston Chao, Mitchell Lichtenstein, May Lin, Sihung Lung
           and Ah-Leh Gua.
Screenwriters:  Ang Lee, Neil Peng and James Schamus.
Director:  Ang Lee.
     While watching THE WEDDING BANQUET (currently in limited release),
I found myself thinking that it would have a very good short.  This
Taiwanese-American comedy about generational and cultural conflict has
fifty minutes of genuine energy stretched into an hour and fifty minute
film.  There are moments of real charm and insight, but ultimately the
sluggish pace doesn't hold them together.
     Wei-Tung (Winston Chao) and Simon (Mitchell Lichtenstein) are a
gay couple living together in Manhattan.  Taiwanese immigrant Wei-Tung
is constantly being badgered by his parents, still in Taiwan, to get
married and produce a grandchild.  Wei-Tung responds by listing
"impossibly high specifications" for his ideal woman, but when Ma Gao
finds a woman who fits the bill, Simon proposes a plan.  Wei-Tung will
marry Wei-Wei (May Lin), a tenant in a building owned by Wei-Tung and
an immigrant without a green card.  Ma and Pa Gao get a wedding,
Wei-Wei gets a green card, and Wei-Tung gets a welcome tax write-off.
However, Ma and Pa (Ah-Leh Gua and Sihung Lung) insist on coming to
America for the wedding.  Shamed by the simple civil ceremony preferred
by their son, Wei-Tung's parents accept an offer by a family friend to
throw a lavish wedding banquet for friends and well-wishers.  The
banquet then leads to ... complications.
     There are several thematic threads in THE WEDDING BANQUET, all
with interesting possibilities.  There is the intriguing romantic
triangle of Simon, Wei-Tung and Wei-Wei (who confesses a weakness for
attractive gay men); there is the issue of values conflict between
non-Americans and their Americanized offspring.  Foremost, there is the
issue of living up to parental expectations which have nothing to do
with who you are as a person.  This latter area receives the most
attention, but like the others it is given somewhat short shrift.
Director and co-scripter Ang Lee seems to want his film to be about too
many different things, without giving sufficient attention to any of
them.  Consequently, the pacing is fitful, and THE WEDDING BANQUET
wanders.
     There are, as I've noted, some very clever set pieces.  In one
scene, Simon and Wei-Tung prepare for the parents' arrival by racing
around their apartment removing all evidence of their gay lifestyle.
The civil ceremony, with Wei-Wei malapropping her vows in broken
English, is also a hoot.  The centerpiece, however, is the lavish
banquet.  It's a whimsical sequence, as Wei-Tung tries to carry off his
charade in front of hundreds of friends, including some raucous college
buddies.  These individual moments almost add up, but they don't
quite.
     Much of the responsibility for this lack of engagement falls on
the shoulders of the two male leads.  Chao, a first time actor, never
invests Wei-Tung with any real depth.  He seems capable of only one
expression:  eyes downcast, jaw clenched in dismay.  While his
situation is certainly a difficult one, at times he seems such a drudge
we wonder why Simon loves him, let alone why Wei-Wei might want to
"convert" him.  Lichtenstein too is far too wooden, making Simon's
genuine frustration over having to hide himself come off as simple
petulance.  He also has a scene with Lung as Wei-Tung's father which
could have been truly touching were he capable of showing any emotion
with his face.  Fortunately, there are good performances to somewhat
balance theirs, most notably Lung, who does some wonderful physical
acting, and May Lin, who sparkles as Wei-Wei.  Unfortunately, her
character is sadly underwritten, as are most of the roles.  The lulls
in the pace would have been acceptable had strong characters been
present to pull me along, but I was simply never caught up enough in
their lives.
     It's difficult not to recommend THE WEDDING BANQUET, since it's
heart seems so firmly in the right place.  It has its moments, and the
themes of familial conflict may strike a chord with many viewers.
However, I just never found myself caring quite enough, and I found
myself looking at my watch too frequently.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Marriage-of-convenience comedy of a
     gay, well-to-do, Chinese-American businessman marrying a
     citizenship-seeking artist in order to please his parents.
     The is an enjoyable Taiwanese comedy (filmed and set in
     Manhattan) but what we see of Chinese culture is more of
     interest than the well-trodden material about gays and
     straights.  Rating +1 (-4 to +4)
     Miss Wei-Wei and Mr. Wai-Tung Gao are in love and are getting married.
Wei-Wei (May Chin) is in love with Wai-Tung (Winston Chao) and Wai-Tung is
in love with Simon (Mitchell Lichtenstein), his long-time roommate and
lover.  So why is Wai-Tung marrying Wei-Wei?  His parents do not know that
he is gay and would not be able to handle knowing it.  They have tried for
years to get him paired with a nice Chinese girl, and Wai-Tung has not had
the heart to tell them his sexual orientation.  Wai-Tung is a well-off
landlord and his tenant Wei-Wei, an out-of-work artist and an illegal alien,
has been attracted to him and also would like American citizenship.  So
Simon has suggested this charade of a marriage and the two Chinese have
reluctantly decided it was a good idea.
     The most disappointing aspect of this film, written and directed by Ang
Lee, is that while it is pleasant enough, the basic story is overly
familiar.  It is very much a LA CAGE AUX FOLLES set in the Chinese-American
community.  (And even CAGE itself was derivative of Frank Capra films such
as LADY FOR A DAY.)  So THE WEDDING BANQUET is an engaging view into a
community too rarely depicted in film, but the story itself could occur in
just about any culture and has little in the plot that is not telegraphed.
I think I learned more about Chinese-American marriage customs and life in
general in their community than I learned about gays from THE WEDDING
BANQUET.  Where this film shows us what we have not seen, it is in Gao's
parents' cultural fascination with Chinese calligraphy; it is in some odd
wedding tradition about a piece of what looks like fried chicken on a
string.  Then there is the wild party after the banquet that seems so out of
character with the usually staid outward appearances of the Chinese.  Take
these out of the film and it becomes a television-level situation comedy
with a few very pat lessons.  In fact, it is even a bit uneven as a comedy.
The showpiece scene seems to be the marriage ceremony with the two
principles having almost no command of English.  That seems a bit contrived
since at other times they seem to have considerably more command of English.
     Generally, performances are very good.  Sihung Lung as the father has
little to do but look stiff and dignified in the early parts of film, yet
still finds opportunity to make his the most memorable character of the
movie.  Perhaps because he is enigmatic for so much of the story.
Lichtenstein is winning, if a little overly bright-eyed.  The score, by
Mader, is a bit of a disappointment as it is neither particularly melodic
music, nor does it use Chinese themes.  But it is always interesting to see
foreign films set and filmed in the United States just to get some idea how
other people view the United States.  This Taiwanese film really effectively
uses its Manhattan locations.
     This is an enjoyable film, though perhaps not as good as word-of-mouth
would have it.  I would say it is just average for theatrical films I have
seen this year, giving it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Umar Khan
     I just saw the movie THE WEDDING BANQUET thanks to a local NPR
station which was giving away tickets to a special showing.  This is
advertised as the first Taiwanese film shot in the US (Manhattan to be
precise).  It is about 60% in Chinese (with large subtitles) and 40% in
English (no sub-titles, strangely enough).  It was one of those films
which is done so well that I forgot I was having to read subtitles;
they became almost subliminal.  And the audience, which was about 30%
Chinese, 50% gay (for reasons which will become obvious later in this
article), and the rest everything else, couldn't stop laughing.  There
was barely a five-minute period of time to be found when the audience,
as a whole, didn't break up laughing at least once.
     The story resembles the GREEN CARD film by Gerard Depardieu a bit
and has been compared to LA CAGE AUX FOLLES by some reviewers, though
I don't personally see any resemblance to LA CAGE other than a very
superficial one which comes from both having gay characters and gay
situations in their plots.
     The story is of a young, prosperous Taiwanese gentlemen (Wei Tung,
played by Winston Chao) who lives in New York and is something of a
slum lord (though a personable one).  He is also gay.  The movie opens
with Wei Tung working out with free weights while listening to a tapes
letter from his mother (played by Ah-Lea Gua).  This sets the theme for
the movie.  Wei Tung's mother is pressuring him to get married so she
can be a grandmother.  His parents have been enrolling him in
expensive computer match making services, too.  To get his parents (who
are en route for a visit to America with the single ambition of getting
him married off to anyone) off his back, Wei Tung is convinced by his
lover, Simon (played by Mitchell Lichtenstein) to marry his artist
tenant, Wei Wei (played by May Chin) who needs a green card.  So the
plot thickens.  What ensues is a comedy of errors leading up to a
marriage before a justice of the peace in a municipal wedding factory
and a wedding banquet forced on them by an old family retainer whose
son just happens to own the fanciest restaurant/hotel in Chinatown.
The banquet is a blast.  Everyone, especially the groom, gets zonked.
Then when the bride and groom finally reach their room to collapse
after the festivities, their room is invaded by a throng of returning
wedding guests armed with mah-jong tables, Chinese lanterns, and the
like.  The guests set up shop in the couple's hotel room and refuse to
leave until Wei Wei and Wei Tung get under the covers together and pass
out *all* of their clothes.
     As a result, Wei Wei discovers that Wei Tung can be aroused by a
woman after all.  She gets pregnant and mom and dad (who *still*
haven't left for China) are ecstatic.  But the pressures on the trio
(Wei Wei, Wei Tung, and Simon) have obviously multiplied.  Fights
ensue.  Feelings are hurt.  Lifestyles are cramped.
     I won't tell any more of the plot, because you *must* see this
film.  The "solutions" are not original but they are well done and
always inspire audience laughs.  There are touching "coming out"
scenes, reconciliations, bon voyages, and the like.
     There is enough seriousness (such as when Wei Tung's father, a
retired general who fought with Chiang Kai Chek, played by Shihung
Lung, has a stroke on the day of the big breakfast fight between a
frustrated Simon and father-to-be Wei Tung).  Some seriousness is
necessary because the whole theme of "coming out" to the family and
deciding where one draws the line between duty to parents and honesty
to one's self are all necessarily part of the "gay experience."
     I highly recommend everyone who likes good fun, isn't totally
turned off by gay themes tastefully handled, and who can forget that
s/he is reading subtitles to make immediate reservations when this film
comes to town!

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Winston Chao, May Chin, Mitchell Lichtenstein, 
           Sihung Lung, Ah-Leh Gua
Director:  Ang Lee
Producers:  Ang Lee, Ted Hope, and James Schamus
Screenplay:  Ang Lee, Neil Peng, and James Schamus
Music:  Mader
Released by The Samuel Goldwyn Company
In English and Mandarin Chinese with English subtitles
     Wai-Tung (Winston Chao) has a problem.  Living in New York with a
well-paying job, a nice home, and a stable relationship (with Simon,
played by Mitchell Lichtenstein), everything would appear to be going
his way.  But his parents, unaware of his sexual proclivities, are
expecting a marriage and grandchildren, and Wai hasn't been able to get
up the courage to tell them that he's gay.  But an apparent solution to
the dilemma presents itself when Wei Wei (May Chin), a tenant in a
building owned by Wai, must find a way to get a green card or face
deportation.  As a result, a marriage of convenience is arranged
between the pair, and everything seems to be working out well until
Wai's parents arrive from China to plan the wedding banquet.
     What at first seems like a simple romantic comedy is actually a
deceptively perceptive look at cultural, sexual, and generational
differences.  And, despite THE WEDDING BANQUET's often-light,
occasionally-playful tone, a forceful dramatic structure underlies the
film.  Of course, this is what usually makes for the best kind of
comedy - a movie that cares more about its story and characters than
making people laugh.
     There are a lot of tangled relationships in this film, but all of
them, no matter how complicated or confusing, are handled expertly.
Everyone's motivations are clear, and for once there's no villain,
unless you choose to name circumstances as the antagonist.  It's
refreshing when a movie comes along that allows you to enjoy spending
two hours with the people on screen.
     Writer/director/producer Ang Lee, a Chinese-American film maker,
displays a remarkable ability to present and balance issues without
becoming preachy, and while also avoiding the dangerous trap of cliches
and stereotypes.  All the characters have their own unique identities,
and their emotions come shining through.
     While there isn't anything revolutionary in the story, and some of
the "twists" are easy to predict, it's never clear until the end how
everything is going to be resolved.  Given the nature of the central
triangular relationship (Wai, Wei Wei, and Simon), I had visions of a
horrible, Hollywood-type conclusion that would have destroyed all my
respect for the film.  Thankfully, that did not happen, which shows the
intelligence, good taste, and sensitivity of everyone involved.
     Although it deals with potentially-weighty issues and some very
powerful emotional impulses, THE WEDDING BANQUET never becomes bogged
down by its own seriousness.  Lee manages to keep the production
buoyant by including scenes that are often riotously funny.
     The actors are uniformly good.  May Chin, a huge pop star in
Taiwan, gives a complex rendering of Wei Wei, managing to bring across
the churning emotions of the one person in this film who really has no
one.  Despite this being his screen debut, Winston Chao is as
impressive as any veteran, and there are no readily apparent chinks in
his performance.  Mitchell Lichtenstein's Simon could easily have
slipped into obscurity, but the actor manages a strong enough presence
to avoid such an ignominious fate.  Stately and dignified, Sihung Lung
and Ah-Leh Gua breathe life into Mr. and Mrs. Gao, Wai's parents.
     It's understandable why THE WEDDING BANQUET won the Golden Bear
award at the 1993 Berlin Film Festival, and the Best Film and Best
Director citations at the 1993 Seattle International Film Festival.
There is enough depth in this picture to fill up several movies, yet
THE WEDDING BANQUET shortchanges none of its interwoven storylines.
While I won't go so far as to say that this is a magical motion
picture, it certainly serves as excellent entertainment on more than
one level.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
