Title
Review for Courtyard, The (1995) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Justin Felix
Written by Wendy Biller and Christopher Hawthorne.  
Directed by Fred Walton.  
Starring Andrew McCarthy, Madchen Amick, Cheech Marin.  
Rated R (contains violence, nudity, and profanity)  103 mins.  
Synopsis:  A New York architect moves to L.A., rents an expensive
apartment, meets really weird people, sleeps with a mysterious woman
carrying a parasol, and plays detective rather than work on his project
when his neighbors start dying.  
Comments:  THE COURTYARD is a better-than-average cheap murder mystery.
It's a made-for-cable feature (Showtime produced it) which is enjoying a
second life in video rental outlets.  In fact, a subtle in-joke is played
toward the end of the film: flipping through a stack of bills, the main
character glances at an envelope from Showtime.  
THE COURTYARD plays out as a basic whodunnit, although the plot does become
more involved as the movie progresses than is typical of thrillers of this
kind.  A multitude of suspects are presented, and a number of successful
red herrings throw the audience off as to the killer's identity.  Many
suspense movies make the mistake of not developing their supporting
characters, but not THE COURTYARD.  The Shangri-La apartment complex, as it
has been christened, is populated by interesting, though strange, tenants,
and it's rather fun to slowly learn more about them (they all have secrets
or something to hide).  
Andrew McCarthy and Madchen Amick are adequate as the lead characters.  The
supporting cast, however, are the real stars here.  Cheech Marin (half of
the popular Cheech and Chong comedy duo) humorously plays an L.A. detective
who likes to eat while examining murder crime scenes.  Vincent Schiavelli
and David Proval, both veteran actors, appear as some of the architect's
creepy neighbors and do a good job of it.  
Wendy Biller and Christopher Hawthorne's screenplay, though it is not
perfect, does provide some nice details.  As stated before, the characters
are uniformly well-developed (no cardboard cutouts here).  Some of the
dialogue is memorable; for example, Cheech Marin's detective groans about
his caramel sundae and informs the architect about the caramel / chocolate
chip debate in L.A.  The movie obviously did not have a particularly big
budget, but that doesn't seem to hinder it much.  
THE COURTYARD ends tritely (everything is just a little *too peachy*).  The
architect unveils his design for a new mall modeled directly off of his
apartment complex.  He then claims that it's the most original thing he's
ever done.  One has to wonder about that statement.  Overall, however, THE
COURTYARD is an entertaining little thriller and makes a suitable rental
choice if you've already seen your fair share of blockbuster theatrical
releases.  

Author
Chuck Dowling
The Courtyard (CABLE-1995) *** out of ***** - Cast: Andrew McCarthy,
Madchen Amick, Cheech Marin, Bonnie Bartlett, Vincent Schiavelli.  Directed
By: Fred Walton.  Running Time: 105 minutes.
New York architect Andrew McCarthy is transferred to Los Angeles and finds
a great apartment in a complex called Shangri La.  One night he is awakened
by someone blasting their television and through a pretty clever mix-up
involving the intercom system he is entangled into a complex murder plot.
He meets and falls in love with the victim's sister (Amick, from TVs "Twin
Peaks") and more and more feels like he was the cause of her brother's
death.  So he sets out to try and uncover the killer's identity,
interfering with the investigation of detective Cheech Marin.  The problem
is: just about everyone living in the complex is insane in one way or
another.
"The Courtyard" is pretty good considering the quality of most
made-for-cable films.  It's got a good story, with plenty of possible
murder suspects for the audience to choose from.  I guessed it correctly by
the way, and if you pay close attention to the dialogue you'll be able to
figure it out as well.  If there's nothing else in at the video store, this
one may be worth your time, as long as your video store actually HAS a copy
of it.
--Chuck Dowling  
--Chuck's Movie Reviews -- http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
