Title
Review for Brothers McMullen, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1995, R, 98 minutes [1 hour, 38 minutes]
[comedy/lighthearted drama]
starring: Mike McGlone (Patrick), Jack Mulcahy (Jack), Edward Burns (Barry),
Shari Albert (Susan), Jennifer Jostyn (Leslie), produced by Edward Burns,
Dick Fisher, written and directed by Edward Burns.
The problem with religion and tradition is they can really cramp your love
life. "The Brothers McMullen" is an original film that actually presents
characters with situations all other movies ignore - the problem of trying to
have a meaningful and passionate relationship but also have a set of
[religious] morals. Is there any way to have both?
This is the story of three 20-something Catholic brothers going through some
difficult times with women. Jack (Mulcahy) is the oldest of the GenXers, he
is married but without children. The middle child, Barry (Burns) likes the
single life, he's not a one-woman man and cannot understand the concept of
love and commitment. Patrick (McGlone), the youngest, tries to live by God's
words, but finds it very difficult as he is deeply involved with a Jewish
girl and they may soon get married. 
Burns really does an excellent job in defining the modern male: the man who
is scared to make a commitment, but when he does it somehow turns out worse
for him. Barry is a typical slacker, but he has a talent for writing,. When
he breaks up with his long-time girlfriend he is left without a home and must
crash at Jack's. As he tries to look for an apartment, it is "stolen" by a
young woman about his age. Somehow they manage to hook up with each other,
but Barry becomes scared of a commitment. 
Barry's life is contrasted through Jack, who falls for a single woman and
has an affair with her. Jack has been married for five years, but suddenly he
starts to question the whole idea.
All of the brothers are portrayed as partially devoted Catholics, but they
all have problems with their faith. They sometimes bend and change "the
rules" to suit their own needs.
Even Patrick, the most morally upright brother, often becomes scared by
love. His girlfriend wants him to move in with her, but he just can't do it.
He claims it goes against his religion, but she thinks he's just using it as
an excuse because he's really afraid of commitment.
Patrick and his girlfriend Susan (Albert) eventually split, and he is
attracted to his neighbor, Leslie (Jostyn). Leslie says that she has lost
faith in the church sighting its unrealistic expectations and rules, and that
by following those rules, it has only harmed her life. This is true. Sin is
much more tempting, and sometimes doing the "right" thing can make you
miserable. How can anyone follow God's laws and still live a normal life in
the 1990s? It seems like everyone has ignored moral issues like these a long
time ago.
Burns' excellent screenplay and directing are what really made "The Brothers
McMullen" good. We can really sympathize and relate to these characters. It
asks questions we all have had, but doesn't try to give a answers to them. I
don't know the answers either, but I'm thankful these characters are even
wondering at all.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN is a low budget film by new director Edward
Burns that received the top award, the Grand Jury Prize, at the 1995
Sundance Film Festival.  For a low-budget film, I was surprised to see
that it was released by 20th Century Fox, and other than the grainy
Cinematographic images by Dick Fisher, it was extremely professional
and well done.
     THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN opens in a graveyard as the father of the
three brothers, Barry (Edwards Burns), Jack (Jack Mulcahy), and Patrick
(Mike McGlone) has just been buried.  Their mom leaves immediately
after the funeral for Ireland to be with her long lost boyfriend of 35
years ago.  Her admonition to Barry is "promise me you won't make the
same mistake I did."
     From the very beginning we see a movie with two intertwined
themes.  The main one involves what to do with one's life, especially
regarding love, commitment, marriage, and affairs.  As Patrick says to
Barry, "What am I going to do with my life?  You know I didn't think
college was actually going to end." Jack, on the other hand, naively
believes that his life is in great shape and proudly proclaims to the
entire family at his wife's 30th birthday dinner that "I am a
progressively modern, politically correct housewife."
     The other theme or more correctly the subtext of the movie has to
do with Catholicism in a modern Irish-American family in New York
City.  The Catholicism the show deals with has nothing to with the
belief in or the worship of God.  The brothers are concerned most about
the rules and regulations of the faith.  They violate most of them, but
nevertheless are obsessed with the implications of their "living in
sin." Sometimes they even view this in a positive light as when Patrick
says, "Repression is not such a bad thing." One of his girl friends
keeps wanting him to convert to Judaism and the other describes herself
as a pro-life, vegetarian, ex-Catholic.
     As you can already see from the quotes, the script by the director
Edward Burns is one of the high points of the film.  Another one of my
favorite lines is when Patrick says, "I don't need any new ideas.  I'm
confused enough already".  There is a running series of jokes about Amy
Fisher and Joey Buttafuoco since, like Buttafuoco, the brothers live on
Long Island.  These jokes are all hilarious and are made doubly funny
since Jack Mulcahy is a dead ringer for Joey Buttafuoco.  I wondered if
the writer realized this when he wrote the script?
     The actors and actress appeared to be in their first movies.  They
all showed promise and made the little mistakes of a rookie major
leaguer.  Although the movie was about the brothers, the women, Susan
(Shari Albert), Audry (Maxine Bahns), Molly (Connie Britton), Leslie
(Jennifer Jostyn), and Ann (Elizabeth McKay), were just as good.  The
best of the actress has to be Maxine Bahns who had never acted before
this movie.  I hope she keeps up her acting career.  She brings a
freshness and an unpredictability that makes for a compelling
performance.
     Perhaps it was realistic, but I was bothered by all of the
drinking in the show.  Although the brothers continue to malign their
father as a vicious alcoholic, everyone of them drinks beer continually
in almost every scene.  The beer, however, has no effect on them and
their speech remains clear and their thoughts well composed.  Sure.
     In addition to all of the points mentioned about, there is also
lovely instrumental Irish music by Seamus Egan.  Finally, many movies,
particularly those by new writers, start off well, but run out of ideas
by the last act.  Here the best part of the movie is the way it is all
wrapped up.  Highly satisfying.
     THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN runs a quick and lively 1:37.  It is rated R
for low-key and playful sex as well as some profanity.  There is no
violence or nudity.  It would be fine for any teenager to see.  I
recommend this upbeat and lovely little gem to everyone, and I award it
***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mike McGlone, Edward Burns, Jack Mulcahy, Connie Britton, Shari
      Albert, Maxine Bahns, Jennifer Jostyn, Elizabeth P. McKay
Director: Edward Burns
Producer: Dick Fisher and Edward Burns
Screenplay: Edward Burns
Cinematography: Dick Fisher
Music: Seamus Egan
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox
     Love, passion, and Irish Catholicism collide in THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN,
writer/director Edward Burns' feature debut.  This is one of the better
independent romantic comedies to come along in a while.  Although it
generally stays true to the cliches and plot turns of the genre, THE
BROTHERS MCMULLEN is smart and honest rather than manipulative.  Instead of
resorting to hard-to-swallow story complications, this film stays on-target
from its opening moments.  Along the way, the empty dialogue too often
incipient in this sort of picture is replaced by intelligent, insightful
conversations.
     One of THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN's top assets is the brothers themselves.
Despite their flaws (and each has a reasonably obvious one), Patrick (Mike
McGlone), Jack (Jack Mulcahy), and Barry (Edward Burns) are likeable guys.
They drink beer together, reminisce none-too-fondly about their dead father,
and discuss topics ranging from true love to whether there's a hell.
     Patrick, the youngest, has just graduated from college and is getting
cold feet about the prospect of spending the rest of his life with his
Jewish girlfriend, Susan (Shari Albert).  He thinks he loves her, but he's
not *in love* with her, and he yearns for something more romantic.  On top
of that, Patrick is saddled with the usual Catholic guilt inherent in a
relationship -- especially one that involves pre-marital sex -- with a
non-Catholic.  But is this a genuine concern, or just an excuse to avoid
commitment?
     Jack, the oldest, is happily married to Molly (Connie Britton), the
love of his life.  But, as her maternal instincts assert themselves, Jack's
eye begins to roam.  Waiting to seduce him is Ann (Elizabeth P.  McKay), a
woman who's interested only in sex, not a relationship, and has decided that
the best way to get what she wants is to become involved with a married man.
     Barry, the middle brother, is the most cynical of the three.  ("Being a
pessimist," he says, "makes it easier to deal with my inevitable failure.")
A screenwriter on the verge of a big breakthrough, Barry goes from
relationship to relationship without ever finding love.  For him, marriage
is out of the question, and whenever a woman mentions the possibility of
something long-term, Barry is out the door.  Then he meets Audrey (Maxine
Bahns), and suddenly nothing is quite so clear-cut.
     If this film was only about the three men and their relationships, it
would be enjoyable, but not particularly noteworthy.  However, Burns has
given his characters a slew of interesting things to say, and he hasn't
reduced the women to pawns in male-centered romantic fantasies.  In fact, in
THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN, the female halves of the relationships are often
smarter and hipper than their male counterparts.  When one of the brothers
thinks he's putting something over on his wife/girlfriend/lover, he's more
likely just fooling himself.
     In many closely-knit Irish American communities, as in many Italian
American communities, Catholicism is more of a culture than a religion, and
THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN explores the differences between accepting Catholic
doctrine as a way of life and simply calling oneself "Catholic."  Of the
brothers, only Patrick is especially religious, and he's a perfect example
of the adage "You can't be Catholic and have a healthy sex life."  Barry and
Jack accept their heritage, but, if they even believe in God, they don't
show it.  Yet even Barry is concerned about dating a non-Catholic woman.
     Despite its occasional forays into weighty matters, THE BROTHERS
MCMULLEN largely stays on the light side, where all good romantic comedies
reside.  The tone is upbeat and the script is laced with wit and, upon
occasion, there are moments guaranteed to cause deeper, louder laughter.
Barry's comparison of relationships to peeling and slicing a banana is the
movie's comic highlight.  Above all, THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN is undeniably
charming, and that's the best reason to spend ninety-seven minutes with
these men.  You don't have to be Catholic, or Irish, or even American, to
"get it."  Burns' language, despite originating on Long Island, is universal
in appeal and meaning.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Christopher Null
     THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN are three of the most engaging characters
you're likely to come across in American cinema this year.  A family of
Irish Catholics living in New York, their stories explore living a morally
upright life in the 90's, dealing with failed romances, and the timeless
question of how to commit.
     Jack (Jack Mulcahy), the only married brother, is tempted by another
woman.  Patrick (Mike McGlone) is torn between committing to his long-time
girlfriend and striking out for something new.  Barry (Edward Burns, who
also wrote and directed), is the classic slacker, unable to even conceive
of commitment and an unbeliever in the very notion of true love.
     After the funeral of their abusive father, the trio's mother moves
back to Ireland to be with her lover of 35 years ago.  She leaves Barry
with a singular warning, "Don't make the same mistake I did."  That's all
the encouragement he needs, as Barry becomes the devil on the shoulder of
his brothers, trying with all his might to keep them away from the evils
of commitment.  For Patrick, a devout Catholic and complete neurotic,
marriage is a necessity in living the good life, and Barry is no help at
all.  Jack's infidelity is another problem altogether.  And as the
brothers explore their own problems in the game of love and
self-discovery, each eventually finds the answers.
     This lighthearted romance masks the serious issues it addresses with
heavy doses of nonstop humor in some of the funniest and most genuine
dialogue to ever hit the screen.  The perfect blend of seriousness and
laughter, it's truly that perfect date movie you've been looking for.
     While the film is very skewed toward Irish Catholic culture, we've
all had these feelings, and newcomer Burns establishes himself as a true
creative genius in American film.  There's no slapstick here, just some
excellent conversations about the meaning of life and happiness.  You
*will not* be able to stop laughing.
     It's rare that a film has as profound an emotional impact as THE
BROTHERS MCMULLEN, especially a comedy.  But Burns has crafted such an
incredible picture, that even the most crusty viewer will come out
smiling.  Highly recommended.
-Christopher Null, Mike's FEEDBACK Magazine / null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Film Critic, Screenwriter, Novelist (Mailing list available)

Author
Edwin Jahiel
Photography & editing, Dick Fisher.
Music, Seamus Egan.
Cast: Jack Mulcahy (Jack), Mike McGlone (Patrick), Edward Burns (Barry),
      Connie Britton (Molly), Maxine Bahns (Audry), Elizabeth P.McKay (Ann),
      Shari Albert (Susan), Jennifer Jostyn (Leslie).
A 20th century Fox release.
98 min.
Rated R (language)
     THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN is in some ways both like and unlike Whit
Stillman's METROPOLITAN (1990).  Both are first films, both are
independent productions, both are funny, warm, ironic and high on
conversations.  But while METROPOLITAN dealt with fashionable,
high-class preppies and would-be intellectuals, THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN
is close to the other extreme.  Its main characters, three brothers,
are lower middle-class Irish-American Catholics.
     In a clever opening, after the funeral of Mr. McMullen, Mrs.
McMullen and her middle son Barry (the film's writer-director) stand
alone by the grave.  Sweetly but firmly she announces that she's
returning to Ireland.  She will join the man she has loved for
thirty-five years, during all of which, with Catholic patience and
principles, she had remained ill-married to Mr. McMullen.  Here and
later we learn that the husband was a drunkard, a bully, a
wife-and-children abuser.  "Don't make the same mistake" Mom tells
Barry, that is, don't enter into a bad marriage.
     Five years later we meet all three brothers in the Long Island
house of senior brother Jack.  Jack and Irish-American wife Molly are
the ideal couple, married five years, joking, joshing and loving each
other to perdition.  Barry, a budding script-writer just out of
college, takes his religious faith rather lightly, feels lost outside
the academic cocoon, and is cynically-humorously afraid of
commitments.  The youngest, Patrick, makes his to-the-bone Catholicism
as clear and loud as the call of angels' trumpets.
     As Pat andf Barry live temporarily at Jack's, all three brothers
exchange advice and opinions and try to influence one another.  The
talk is almost exclusively about women.  The funny thing is that Pat,
who is more Catholic than the Pope, has a girlfriend, Susan, who is
Jewish.  Their prudent love-making is not for procreation.  The funny
thing about diffident Barry is that after he meets for a second time
beautiful Audry (Maxine Bahns, Burns' real girl-friend), the "thief"
who "stole" an apartment from right under Barry, a very nice
relationship develops.  The funny thing about wife-adoring Jack is that
Anne, a married woman, comes on to him blatantly, calculatingly (and
ludicrously), until the reluctant fellow yields.
     All this  sends the McMullen men into a series of tizzies.  What
with two out of the three having a well-developed sense of sin, and the
third (Barry) being smart enough to realize what a sophisticated gem
Audry is, moral, guilt and conscience problems swell like hot-air
balloons.
     The most complex quandaries belong to bewildered Pat, in whose
life also enters old school-chum and co-religionist Leslie.  She too
has problems with superego and id.  Or something like that.  Smiling,
without rancor, she declares: "You can't be a Catholic and have a
healthy sex life." "Unless" retorts Pat "you meet your true love."
     The plot's details can be quite charming.  While the unknown
actors lack the glamour, acting savvy and smooth delivery of
professionals, this is, not so paradoxically, what makes the male
performers ring true.  In case your attention wanders a bit, Jack is
the athletic one who looks rather like a younger, trimmer and classier
Joey Buttafuoco; Barry is the one with the not very good skin and not
very good voice; Pat is the shorter one and has the most eloquent
face.
     The female performances are a mixed bag.  The film's construction
has awkward bits, minor holes and gauche moments.  Neveretheless the
whole stands up well.  The characters are not really terribly
interesting, but then I seem to be saying that about the huge majority
of recent pictures.  The story is clear, the three men are not all cut
from the same cloth, and the absence of whiz-bang photography, editing
and blind cinematic ambition is restful.
     The film was made over a long series of weekends, with funds from
relatives and friends, for (depending on what you read) anywhere from
$15,000 to $25,000.  Turned down by several festivals (the usual venues
for independent works) it was accepted by the Sundance Film Festival.
Before (so far as I could find out) it was shown there, it came to the
attention of the president of Fox Searchlight Pictures, who took the
film, put some of his people plus Mr.  Burns to work on revamping,
re-editing and shortening it and improving the sound.  He had THE
BROTHERS MCMULLEN blown up (very sharply) from 16mm to 35mm.  The total
cost climbed to $400,000 or $500,000 (reports differ), which is still a
peanutty sum.  Then, at the Sundance Festival, the movie walked off
with the 1995 top award.
     I suspect that the inner monologues were added too--a clumsy
device.  The music was also "revised," whatever that means, and that's
a blessing: the light, lilting Irish or Irishy music by Seamus Eagan is
a delight, and a relief from the heavy, generic scores that prevail
these days.

Author
Joan Ellis
     Sin hangs inevitably and wonderfully over THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN.
Raised in a Catholic Church that still clings with bloody fingernails
to dictates that contradict human nature, the brothers ponder the
forbidden sins of premarital sex, birth control, abortion, and
masturbation--and then get right on with it.  The funny bone of this
movie is soaked in the guilt each brother carries as he indulges
himself.
     The three brothers McMullen have been raised by Mom and the Church
in the grand tradition of Irish Catholic duality.  In a superb opening
scene at the graveside of her newly dead husband, Mrs.  McMullen
announces to her son Barry (Edward Burns) that now that the rotter is
dead, she is leaving immediately for Ireland to return to a man she has
loved for 35 years.
     Perhaps an overdeveloped sense of duty is the only explanation for
staying for over three decades with an alcoholic tyrant who abused his
family.  But stay she did, and she taught her sons about the
inconvenient values of duty and fidelity.  The opening scene alone is a
real winner for Edward Burns, who wrote, directed, and starred in this
lively story of young people struggling with falling in love.
     The downside to this fine effort includes rough edges and obvious
editing, as well as young actors who lapse often into ordinariness,
exhausted by their grand effort.  If the movie is uneven, it is still a
home run for rookie Edward Burns.  Burns, Mike McGlone, Jack Mulcahy,
and "their women" win credit for a light evening that rivals the rest
of the Multiplex summer menu.
     Patrick, the dedicated idealist, suffers mightily.  "Hey, I don't
need any new ideas, I'm confused enough already."  Jack, after five
years of idyllic marriage to Molly, is still not ready for the children
his lovely wife wants.  Barry, the writer, flees at the first
suggestion of commitment.  "I wasn't ready to move out of my dorm," he
moans.  Lost without a woman, he's angry that they "peel away men's
protective coating and then slice them up."
     "You can't be a Catholic and have a healthy sex life," and
afterward, "I'm going to hell," are pithy comments from young men
tussling with churchly teachings and the demands of their modern
partners.  When Molly says, "We grow accustomed to things and just look
right past them," we know it's a concept covered with dust.  Women
don't look past things so easily anymore.
     "There are certain rules, and you gotta live by them," says a
brother who knows better.  This movie is a playful romp in an Irish
Catholic family whose men have an aversion to permanence, a dread at
the very thought of not experiencing the wonderful world of women
forever.  The brothers McMullen have a bucketful of charm and about
five years of fidelity for the women they love.  All for $20,000.  Take
that, Hollywood.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Filmmaking can be a big international industry and it can be a
small cottage industry.  THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN is one of the films
produced in informal manner.  It was made over eight months of weekends
in Edward Burns's house with Burns's mother cooking for the cast and
crew.  Burns wrote, co-produced, directed, and acted in the film.  The
other producer, incidentally, was Dick Fisher who also filmed the movie
and edited.  The film was shot on 16-millimeter and blown up to 35-
,millimeter giving it a grainy look and making even the bright scenes
seem dim.
     The senior McMullen was an abusive, alcoholic, wife-beater.  He
died five years earlier, totally unlamented.  His wife returned to
Ireland to marry the man she really loved when McMullen made her
pregnant.  That leaves three sons, ages 22 to 33, living in the same
house.  Each is at a different stage of relationships with the opposite
sex.  Youngest son Patrick (Mike McGlone) has a Jewish girlfriend who
is making plans for future with Patrick working for her father. Barry
(Edward Burns) wants to remain a bachelor all his life. and Jack (Jack
Mulcahy) appears happily married but is not sure he wants to take the
next step and have a child.  This is a family that talks and can freely
criticize each other's behavior toward women.  Much of the film is
filled with the brothers asking each other and other people
philosophical questions like "Are you better off alone than with
someone who is not your soulmate?"  Each seems to represent a different
aspect of a group personality.  Patrick, for example, is the conscience
of the family.  He takes his Catholicism very seriously and sees his
brothers' behavior in stern, moralistic terms.  But the most serious
problem with the plot is in the spoiler comment at the end of the
review.
     Considering that this film was made the way it was, it is not
surprising that there are no familiar faces in the cast, nor are any
really needed.  The acting is uniformly very good, indicating that
Burns is already a better director than many with more experience.  The
continuity of the performances is all the more impressive when one
considers that this is a film shot mostly in weekends and in spare
time.  There is not a bad performance and the presence of some actors
who don't look like actors is a definite plus.  There are none of the
bad performances one often finds in informal productions like this one.
Occasionally there is some uneven camerawork including a few
disorienting extreme closeups in the middle of a scene.  There are also
some continuity problems.
     But overall Burns has his story to tell and his characters to
create and he does it in fine form.  My major complaint with his script
takes the form of a spoiler and so follows the review.  I give this
film a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     SPOILER SPOILER SPOILER SPOILER SPOILER
     The real problem with the script of THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN is the
sheer predictability of the subplots.  There are three stories and each
story telegraphed what was going to happen.  In each case it was the
simplest and most obvious conclusion to the story.  Burns has to learn
how to put a little bit of spin on the ball.  Humorous dialogue and
some characterization are nice in telling a story, but there needs to
be a story to tell.
