Title
Review for Reflecting Skin, The (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
In the 1950s, in the Midwest wheat fields, a young boy struggles to
understand the strange world of adults.  One day a black car filled with
strangers arrives in town, and shortly afterward, a series of mysterious
murders begins.  A warped mystery, with some deadpan humor.  Not very
good, though it may appeal to fans of David Lynch.
     Seth Dove is a seven-year-old boy who lives with his parents in the
Midwest (U.S.), in the middle of wheat fields.  The time is the early
1950s, and Seth and his friends amuse themselves by abusing animals,
engaging in vandalism, and various other childish pursuits.  His major
worry is that the woman next door is really a vampire, and will come at
night and suck out all his blood, killing him.
     One day a black car, with four strangers in it, arrives in town.
Seth is the first to encounter them when they stop at his Father's gas
station.  Shortly thereafter one of Seth's friends, another young boy,
vanishes.  Later the boy is found dead in Seth's yard, and the story
continues with the police suspecting Seth's Father of murder...
     This film is full of weird, warped characters and strange events.
The Sheriff is very colorful, with an eyepatch, deformed ear, and
artificial hand.  He's also cranky and not concerned about the rights of
the accused.  The woman next door tells Seth that she is 200 years old
(part of the reason he think's she's a vampire), and gives Seth the tip
of a whale harpoon.  The parents of Seth's friend are religious
fanatics, totally obsessed with the idea of sin and sinful thoughts.
Seth's Father is an alcoholic, and Seth's Mother rants and raves about
the gasoline smell that pervades their home.
     Some of the dialogue is quite warped; some of the dialogue is
funny, although some fails in its attempt to be funny.  The presence of
so much weirdness, with insufficient humor to mitigate it, really
undermines the film.  It makes it seem so self-conscious about its own
weirdness.  You may start to wonder what the next weirdness will be,
rather than what the next major development in the plot will be.
     Many of the events that occur in the film will strain your
credibility, and add to the weirdness.  Some viewers will consider the
weirdness to be stylish, and the film has been compared to David Lynch's
BLUE VELVET and "Twin Peaks."  I frequently like really weird films.
However this film did not hold my attention; it is weird but not funny
enough to make the weirdness rewarding.
     I don't recommend the film to a general audience; it's too strange
and not done very well.  However, some fans of David Lynch might like
it.  If you really want to see a weird film, I would suggest instead (a
radically different film), TALES FROM THE GIMLI HOSPITAL.
Distribution.  The U.S. distributor is Miramax Films; release is
planned for early summer in the U.S.  Note also that BBC Films is listed
in the production credits; this suggests possible television broadcast
in England.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU

Author
Lon Ponschock
     The images that I got from this film were paintings: paintings
I've seen and admired, or images which were familiar:
     The first of these is Edvard Munch's  "The Scream": a shimmering,
distorted figure in the act of a primal angst:  the image occurred to
me in a scene with the character Cameron (Viggo Mortensen).
     Second is a painting called "Christina's World" by Andrew Wyeth: a
scene of the wheatfields of the plains with a single figure looking
towards a barren cabin.
     THE REFLECTING SKIN is one of those pictures whose dramatic
content will be compromised by 'home viewing' with its distractions and
lack of an audience to share the experience.
     It is, however, one of the most affecting films I have ever seen.
A second viewing did not change this opinion one whit.
     As with other fine art films, to attempt to describe it and the
power of the images would simply spoil or fail to do the film justice.
