Title
Review for Fantasia/2000 (1999)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Brian Matherly
Hosted by: Penn Jillette, James Earl Jones, Quincy Jones, Angela
Lansbury, James Levine, Steve Martin, Bette Midler, Itzhak Perlman,
Leopold Stokowski, Deems Taylor, Teller
Written by: Hans Christian Andersen, Don Hahn, Irene Mecchi, David
Reynolds
Directed by: James Algar, Gaetan Brizzi, Paul Brizzi, Hendel Butoy,
Francis Glebas, Eric Goldberg, Don Hahn, Pixote Hunt 
Running Time: 75 minutes 
When I initially set out to review this film, my tag line was going to
be "You too can believe whales can fly".  Then it was going to be "You
too can believe pastel triangles can fly".  THEN, it was going to be
"You too can believe wood sprites can fly".  Finally, I just gave up
trying to come up with a tag line and decided to say... there's a lot of
flying going on in this film! 
As our first host Steve Martin tells us, the original concept behind
Fantasia was to bring it out every year with some old segments retained
and some new segments added in.  Well apparently that plan fell by the
wayside for a while, because approximately sixty years have passed since
the original classic was released.  Part of this might have something to
do with the cold reception the film got when it was first released in
1940 (grossing somewhere close to $110,000 in its original month of
release).  Subsequent re-releases of the film have elevated the
popularity of the film to the classic status it has finally achieved
(and rightfully deserved). 
To celebrate the release of an updated version of Fantasia, Disney and
IMAX teamed up to present the animated film in a fashion no one had seen
before: six stories high.  In an exclusive four month engagement (from
January 1st to April 30th, 2000), Fantasia 2000 can be seen at many IMAX
theaters across the US.  After the engagement is over, the film will be
shown at regular theaters.  Is the format effective for the film?  With
a few exceptions, yes.
The first segment we are presented with is set to Beethoven's Fifth
Symphony.  It's hard to describe exactly what this segment is about, but
it involves a bunch of brightly colored butterfly looking triangles
flitting about happily.  Everything seems to be going great for these
little things until the ground erupts with swarms of evil, black
bat-like triangles that attack and engulf their lighter counterparts. 
Eventually, shafts of light from above help drive away the evil bat-like
things and peace returns to the butterfly things.  Though this segment
isn't very story driven, some of the images are very visually strong,
especially the scene in which the dark cloud of bat things (who are all
outlined in blood red colors) begin to overtake the skies. 
The next segment is set to Ottorino Respighi's "The Pines of Rome".  In
this segment, some humpback whales swim happily through the ocean and
eventually emerge from the water and fly around the massive icebergs
that pepper the oceanscape.  A whale calf gets into a scuffle with some
nearby birds during the flight and ends up getting trapped in a giant
iceberg he smashes into while trying to avoid the birds attack.  He is
finally saved (by another liberating shaft of light) and he and his
brethren take to the skies and fly into the upper atmosphere where they
frolic in the "oceans" of clouds.  Again, visuals are the key with this
segment, especially where the whales are involved.  Reportedly the
whales, as viewed on an Imax screen in certain sequences, are shown as
actual size. The CGI whales look incredibly life-like, except for some
googly cartoon eyes drawn onto the images.  One especially striking
image involves the giant shadow of one of the whales being cast through
the wall of an iceberg as the whale calf tries to find a way out to its
parent.  Absolutely beautiful stuff. 
The third segment (and the least of the eight segments) is set to George
Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue".  This segment is designed as a tribute to
acclaimed caricaturist Al Hirschfeld, and intertwines four different
stories about sad souls living in depression era New York.  There's a
construction worker who dreams of being a jazz drummer, an out-of-work
sad sack that dreams of having a job, a young girl that dreams of
spending time with her parents instead of being hustled off by a
schoolmarm, and a nebbish who dreams of being free from his overbearing
wife.  I won't go into how everything works out, but in fine Disney
tradition there is a happy ending.  Unfortunately, the story drags quite
a bit and the seems out of place within the hyper reality of the rest of
the segments. 
Segment four is set to Dmitri Shostakovich's "Piano Concerto No. 2" and
is an animated version of Hans Christian Andersen's "The Steadfast Tin
Soldier".  A one legged toy tin soldier falls in love with a wind-up
clock ballerina (whom he assumes is also one legged because he can't see
her other leg extended out behind her), much to the dismay of an evil
jack-in-the-box jester.  The jester knocks the soldier out of a window
and continues pursuing the ballerina.  Little does the jester know, the
soldier has been deposited in the sewer and has journeyed through the
pipelines only to be swallowed by a fish that has been captured and sold
to the owner of the set of tin soldiers that the one legged one comes
from.  The soldier eventually saves the day and gets the girl.  Although
the ending has been altered from the Andersen story, "The Steadfast Tin
Soldier" is decently told with in the framework of a seven minute
short.  Some children may find the jester to be a little frightening,
but otherwise the segment is well made. 
Segment five is the funniest of the bunch.  Set to Camille Saint-Saens 
"The Carnival of the Animals", this segment features a flamingo
torturing his fellow flamingos with a yo-yo while they are trying to
perform a choreographed dance number. While it is the shortest clip of
the group and a throwback to the alligators and hippos dancing in the
first Fantasia, it is still well accomplished and a welcome bit of
comedy. 
Segment six is the only segment to be repeated from the original 1940
Fantasia, and it's the one that people remember most, "The Sorcerer's
Apprentice".  The story is the most recognizable, so the draw here is
seeing it on the enormous IMAX screen in remastered stereo. 
Unfortunately, the segment wasn't made to be presented on large format
film (considering it was shot full frame) and exhibits large amounts of
grain.  There were at least two occasions where images were very hard to
make out due to the excessive grain.  Similar problems crop up on modern
day releases when projected on screens too large for the image to be
shown accurately (but no one seems to notice for some strange reason),
an anomaly common to many 18-plus screen theaters. 
Segment seven is set to Sir Edward Elgar's "Pomp and Circumstance March
No. 1" and is the only other Fantasia segment to feature a stock Disney
character.  Donald Duck "stars" as an assistant to Noah, whose task is
loading all of the animals onto the Ark.  During the loading, Donald and
his wife lose sight of each other and both believe that the other one
didn't make it on the boat.  They are constantly missing each other due
to comic misadventures mainly involving Donald being crushed by animals
in various manners.  Despite the slapstick style of comedy in this
piece, it displays more emotion in its final scene than many of the
tear-jerkers foisted on audiences these days.  Powerful stuff. 
Segment eight brings a whole new meaning to the cliché "saving the best
for last".  Set to Igor Stravinsky's "The Firebird", an elk awakens a
forest sprite that proceeds to change the wintery landscape into a
beautiful springtime landscape.  Trees bloom and flowers blossom and
everything seems to be going well until the sprite becomes inquisitive
about a large mountain housing a strange formation.  When the sprite
examines the formation, it awakens and becomes the titular firebird.  In
a stunning spectacle, the firebird rears back and unleashes and fire
storm that destroys everything in its path, including everything that
the sprite has worked to create.  Some amazing animation is present
here, and well worth the ten dollars a ticket alone (although brush
strokes are evident in one scene due to the enlargement of the film). 
The host segments are largely (no pun intended) throwaways, although
Steve Martin's clip is pretty funny.  Be sure to stay through the
credits for a little more humor from Martin.  Penn and Teller are
usually funny, but here their gags seem routine and therefore
uninteresting.  The best segment comes from, of all people, Bette
Midler, who gets to tell us about some of the abandoned segments that
never made it off of the drawing board.  Pieces like Flight of the
Bumblebee, a take on the Four Horsemen set to Wagner's "Ride of the
Valkyries", and a strange segment prepared in the '40s by Salvador Dali
that never was shown are all previewed here and teased that they may
appear in future installments. 
For fans of visual stimulation or classical music, Fantasia 2000 is a
perfect way to spend the afternoon.  The film is also decent family
entertainment and contains little to no objectionable material.  As I
mentioned earlier in the review, if ten dollars seems like too much for
you to spend on this film, fear not because after its run in IMAX
theaters it is going to be brought out in regular theaters.  I must
stress that the best way to see this film is on an IMAX screen though.
Then you too can believe that whales/triangle things/sprites can fly.
[G]
Reviewed by Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com
The Jacksonville Film Journal - www.jaxfilmjournal.com

Author
Ross Anthony
"Tick Tick Tick" the composer taps the podium setting the bird-like theme
into flight.
Similar to its predecessor, "Fantasia" of 1940, this version is more of a
collection of musical shorts than a feature film. So, I'll review each short
on its own.
In the words of Walt Disney (a cartoonist himself), "It is our intention to
make a new version of 'Fantasia' every year. Its pattern is very flexible
and fun to work with -- not really a concert, not a vaudeville or revue, but
a grand mixture of comedy, fantasy, ballet, drama, impressionism, color,
sound and epic fury."
For a variety of reasons, the profit deficiency of the 1940's "Fantasia" not
the least of them, it's taken Disney sixty years to make good on Walt's
hope.
Symphony No. 5
Triangles that flutter and fly becoming butterflies, birds, bats? Swarming
in a cloud of black wings with sharp and ominous flaring red highlights.
Grade ................................. A-
Pines of Rome
Doves tease a couple of humpback whales that take to the air in reply. A
baby whale attempts to ski off of the surface of the water, but ends up
finding himself trapped in an iceberg. The "gaggle" of whales soaring far
above the Earth is absolutely fascinating. If you could paint wonder ---
this is what it would look like. My chin literally trembled with awe.
Capturing the awesome feeling of one's first peer from the window of a plane
into the gloriously clouded sky, this segment lets us relive those precious
few dreams where we actually see ourselves arms out, levitating through thin
air.
Grade ................................. A+++
Rhapsody in blue
Animated in an old cartoon style with European flavor, we follow the
escapades of a host of depression era human characters including: a
construction worker/jazz drummer, down and out bloke, goofy rich guy.
Dominated by a grayish-blue color scheme, this segment stands out as stark
and drab. Perhaps, this is intentional as Gershwin's music relishes the
blues. Still, it feels out of place in a collection called "Fantasia." The
rich man's two second spontaneous dance with a street monkey, is this
segment's shining moment.
Grade ................................. B-
Shostakovich's Piano Concerto No.2
Based on the story "The Steadfast Tin Soldier," a one legged toy soldier
comes to life in order to save a toy ballerina from an evil Jack in the box.
The art incorporates computer animation. Nice story telling, great
expression and fine musical timing. I loved the majestic horns ringing as
the rigid soldier topples into the sewer system only to dodge the green
teeth of red-eyed rats.
Grade ................................. A-
Carnival of Animals
"What would happen if you gave a yo-yo to a flamingo?" Again, great
synthesis with the musical dynamics, but not very full of wonder and magic.
Grade ................................. B+
The Sorcerer's Apprentice
Old, but a classic. Textured with grain, this excerpt from the original
"Fantasia" plays nicely on the Imax screen. You can also see portions of it
at Disneyland projected on a shimmering wall of water during the simply
fantastic "Fantasmic" show. Mickey uses magic to ease himself of daily
chores, but ends up making a huge mess.
Grade ................................. A-
Pomp and Circumstance
Donald is Noah's right-hand duck as the animals march two by two. The
awkward match of this popular graduation classic to biblical cartoonery is
unflatteringly humorous. Fine for Saturday morning, sure ... but in a
feature classic? Nope.
Grade ................................. B-
Firebird Suite-1919 Version
The intangible spring renewal is personified in a beautiful maiden whose
vine entwined hair flows like a blanketing magic carpet, setting the darkest
of winter scenes alive with lush grasses and flowers. A powerful Elk looks
on. Strong climax and fitting end to the entire piece.
Grade ................................. A-
Each "Fantasia/2000" segment gets its own host, from Steve Martin to Quincy
Jones. My question is ... why not Mariah Carrey, Ricky Martin, Jenifer
Lopez, or even Jim Carrey? The closest hosting to any current pop icon is
Pen and Teller -- but even they are on the fringes of "in." My point?
"Fantasia/2000" takes time out of itself to preface each section with what
seems to me would make great introductions for the younger generations into
the classical world. But there are no Will Smiths to help make the
transition. Along the same lines, only "classical" works are included
(albeit some 20th century). Why not include Rock, Rap, or Jazz? Jethro
Tull's Ian Anderson orchestrated an album full of his rock tunes -- a
selection from that CD would have made for a richer mix while at the same
time brought a new audience to symphonic music. Run DMC's Aerosmith cover
"Walk this Way" which fused the rock and rap worlds, played by the Chicago
Symphony Orchestra could fuse yet another musical world. In "Fantasia/20xx"
I challenge Disney to lose the "matured" hosts and go for the icons of the
younger crowd while opening up Walt's wonderful idea of "Fantasia" to a
richer musical fusion. All types of audiences will benefit.
"Fantasia" was the first film ever recorded and released in stereophonic
sound, "Fantasia/2000" is the first (near) feature-length (though not really
a feature) released only at the giant screen Imax theaters.
Fantasia 2000. Copyright Š 1999. Rated G.
Starring Mickey, Donald and a host of others.
Directed by Pixote Hunt, Hendel Butoy, Eric Goldberg, James Algar, Francis
Glebas, Gaetan Brizzi and Paul Brizzi.
Conducted by James Levine. Performed by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.
Produced by Donald W. Ernst at Walt Disney Pictures.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Bob Bloom
 Walt Disney's original intent was to update "Fantasia" every few years,
substituting new musical pieces for old.
 Well, better late than never. Nearly 60 years after the release of this
ground-breaking animated feature, "Fantasia 2000" kicks off the new year at
20 IMAX theaters nationwide, where it will be playing exclusively for the
next four months.
 And I wish I could report that "Fantasia 2000" is as original and as
timeless as its 1940 predecessor. Alas, I'm sad to say that "Fantasia 2000"
is a minor disappointment.
 The reason is not so much with the movie as with the changing times.
 "Fantasia 200" lacks the freshness, the novelty of the original. But even
that is not its main flaw.
 The movie plays it too safe, too conservative in its musical choices. Now,
I am no musicologist, but selecting such works as Beethoven's "Fifth
Symphony", Resphigi's "Pines of Rome," Saint-Saens' "Carnival of the
Animals" and Elgar's "Pomp and Circumstance, Marches 1, 2, 3 and 4" seem
like works to cater to the broadest general audience.
 While for the most part visually exciting and stimulating, "Fantasia 2000"
lacks the daring of the first movie, which featured Stravinsky's "Rites of
Spring" as the backdrop to the story of the rise and fall of the dinosaurs.
 Plus contemporary audiences are a bit more sophisticated and learned. So,
why not choose more modern works by a composer such as Phillip Glass or the
works of an African or Far Eastern composer.
 Because of its white, Western middle-class program, "Fantasia 2000" is
artistically timid.
 Though the musical selections may be pedestrian, overall the movie is
enjoyable and, at a mere 75 minutes,  fast-paced and colorful. And it
contains genuine moments of genius.
 Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue" is set in 1930s New York and is drawn in the
style of famed cartoonist Al Hirschfeld.
 "The Pines of Rome" sequence is breathtaking with its balletic whales and
shimmering waters.
 The animation in "The Steadfast Tin Soldier" sequence, set to the music of
Shostakovich's "Piano Concerto No. 2," is moody, while the "Carnival of the
Animals" sequence, which features a bunch of flamingos dealing with a
yo-yo, is comic and bright.
 The best sequence is a hold over from the original: Dukas' "The Sorcerer's
Apprentice" featuring Mickey Mouse. No matter how many times you've seen
it, you still marvel at its magic and humor.
 "Fantasia 2000" features, for the most part, exceptional animation. What's
missing is boldness and impact. Maybe if the Disney people follow Uncle
Walt's original idea and update it in five or six years, those in charge
will look farther afield when making their selections.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
Christopher Null
     Little known fact: When Walt Disney released FANTASIA in 1940, it
was intended to be a permanent work in progress.  Each time you saw it,
you would see something new combined with something old and familiar.
     It didn't quite happen that way.  The original FANTASIA became a
classic, although a static one.  60 years later, that's about to
change.  With the release of FANTASIA/2000 we get eight animations set
to music: seven new pieces and one classic.  Oh, and this time it's
presented on IMAX -- the first ever animated feature for the large
format.
     Already the chatter of parties, people want to know, "How does it
stack up against the original?"  Comparison is difficult, but on the
whole, I prefer the new version, mainly because the overall animation is
better fit to the music.
     FANTASIA/2000 is good, but it isn't uniformly great.  The segments
range from the abstract (Butterflies dancing to Beethoven's Fifth
Symphony) to the modern (A NYC-themed "Rhapsody in Blue") to the bizarre
("Pines of Rome" can be described in only two words: Flying whales) to
the stupid ("Carnival of the Animals" and its flamingos-with-yo-yos
animation).
     Then there's something old, the classic "Sorcerer's Apprentice"
story with Mickey Mouse and the magic brooms, plus at least two new
classics: Shostakovich's Piano Concerto No. 2 playing for a recreation
of "The Steadfast Tin Soldier" fairy tale, and the grand finale, a
gorgeous Mother Earth vs. volcano story set to "The Firebird Suite."
     FANTASIA/2000 also features interstitial narration from the likes
of James Earl Jones, Steve Martin, and Bette Midler.  This is amusing,
but in decades of moviegoing, I can say I've never seen anything so
frightening as the image of Angela Lansbury projected to a height of 80
feet.
     Like all IMAX films, FANTASIA/2000 is never short of fascinating
while making you mildly nauseous.  Like the original, it's really not a
kid's film, but it is another Disney classic for the vaults.
Director: James Algar, Gaetan Brizzi, Paul Brizzi, Hendel Butoy, Francis
Glebas, Eric Goldberg, Pixote Hunt
Producer: Donald W. Ernst
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Sean Townsend
STARRING:  (animated)
DIRECTOR:  Pixote Hunt, Hendel Butoy, Eric Goldberg, Gaetan & Paul
Brizzi, Francis Glebas, James Algar
WRITTEN BY:  Various (see above)
The original Fantasia, made in 1940, was intended by Walt Disney as the
first of a planned series of 'concert features,' a continually evolving
document which would showcase some of the world's finest animation
married to some of the world's finest music.  It was an overly
ambitious-- and very expensive-- undertaking, and despite a successful
run, the sequels to Fantasia never materialized... until now.  Never a
company to shy away from hype, Disney has decided to kick off the new
millennium with an IMAX-size version of the classic, featuring seven new
animated segments (retaining the original's most famous segment, The
Sorcerer's Apprentice, featuring Mickey Mouse in the title role) and
different pieces of classical music (except, of course, Paul Dukas'
"L'Apprenti sorcier").  Assorted celebrity hosts (from Penn and Teller
to Angela Lansbury) are also recruited to introduce each short.  The
result is quite often visually and aurally breathtaking; nonetheless, I
felt strangely distant from the proceedings.  No matter how hard I
tried, and despite the inescapably immersive IMAX screen and sound
system, I simply could not lose myself in the childlike wonder I was
really hoping to feel.  It was a continual reminder that I, like the
company Walt Disney founded, have grown increasingly cynical over the
years.
The first segment, set to music from Beethoven's instantly recognizable
Fifth Symphony, is also the weakest, if only because the color-splashed,
triangle-based butterfly motif seems so out of tune with the strident
music.  This'll be the one most people forget to tell their friends
about when they describe the movie.  The second piece is far more
effective:  with its gorgeous look and majestic humpback whales, it
would have been moving enough, but when those whales rise slowly into
the air in vast numbers to the accompaniment of Ottorino Respighi's
Pines of Rome, the effect is absolutely spellbinding.
The third segment features the stylized artwork of longtime New York
Times caricaturist Al Hirschfeld and the slinky clarinet of George
Gershwin's Rhapsody in Blue in a funny little fable about a few big-city
dwellers whose lives affect each other in profound ways.  Although the
constant references to Hirschfeld's subliminal name-dropping get
annoying, the piece is probably the best match of musical and visual
styles in the film.
Fourth in line is a condensed version of Hans Christian Andersen's The
Steadfast Tin Soldier, whose very basic plot is hurried along by a rush
of tinkling notes from Dmitri Shostakovich's Piano Concerto No. 2.  It
is followed by the shortest piece, a cute and clever homage to the
original's pink hippos involving flamingos, a yo-yo, and Saint-Saens'
Carnival of the Animals.
A Disney-character double bill comprises the sixth and seventh entries.
First, Mickey Mouse tries on the sorcerer's hat with disastrous results
in The Sorcerer's Apprentice (which, with its resonant themes of the
miscreant Mickey and parental, authority-figure wizard, should win
Disney a few more kiddie converts); afterward, Donald and Daisy Duck
show up in a love story set aboard Noah's Ark to the strains of Edward
Elgar's Pomp and Circumstance.  This is another case, as in the
Beethoven piece, in which the sheer familiarity of the music works
against the animation.
The film ends on a strong note, with a segment that depicts nature's
endless life cycle of life destruction and renewal by pitting a
beautiful dryad against a fire-breathing, volcanic bird of prey.  Igor
Stravinsky's Firebird Suite provides the ideal musical tone for the
segment, making it the best of the bunch.
The first Fantasia was a bold experiment in fusing two very different
forms of art into something which combined their emotional power.  With
Walt gone, however, Disney's idea of bold experimentation has
increasingly been to cannibalize its own successes in a short-sighted
attempt to maintain a bloated corporate empire.  For all its delusions
of grandeur, Fantasia 2000 is no less derivative than any of the
animated fodder the Mouse House has churned out in the last decade, no
matter how big and loud it may be.

Author
Susan Granger
The Sorcerer's Apprentice's spell still works. The Disney
company's crown jewel sparkles again. Shown for four months at 76 IMAX
theaters in the United States, Latin America, Canada, and Asia, it's
now available on 35 mm in local theaters. When Walt Disney released
his bold, animated concert film back in 1940, he envisioned an annual
updating but, for 60 years, that hasn't happened. Now, using
traditional animation and computer-generated effects, there are seven
new segments, along with the original Mickey Mouse Sorcerer's
Apprentice, and the music is by the Chicago Symphony conducted by
James Levine. Each chapter is introduced by celebrities: Bette Midler,
Steve Martin, Itzhak Perlman, Quincy Jones, James Earl Jones, Angela
Lansbury, Penn & Teller. The first features abstract butterflies
dancing to Ludwig Van Beethoven's "Symphony No. 5." Another, set to
Ottorino Respighi's "Pines of Rome," follows a baby whale trapped
inside an iceberg, separated from its mother and the rest of the
pod. There's a 1930s New York City tribute to the caricatures of Al
Hirshfeld, complete with NINA, his daughter's name, hidden in the
drawings, set to George Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue."  Daisy and
Donald Duck march into Noah's Ark to Sir Edward Elgar's "Pomp and
Circumstance."  Hans Christian Andersen's "The Steadfast Tin Soldier"
moves to Dmitri Shostakovich's "Second Piano Concerto," as a
one-legged soldier rescues a ballerina from an evil
Jack-in-the-box. Camille Saint-Saens's "Carnival of the Animals" pairs
a rebellious pink flamingo with a yo-yo.  And the finale is a mythical
ode to the cycle of life moving to Igor Stravinsky's "Firebird Suite."
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Fantasia 2000" is a splashy,
swirling 8. It's a joyous celebration of the art of animation.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
FANTASIA 2000 (non-IMAX) (2000)
Rated G; running time 74 minutes
Genre: Animated
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0120910
Official site: http://disney.go.com/DisneyPictures/fantasia2000/
Written by: Don Hahn, Irene Mecchi, David Reynolds; Hans Christian
Andersen (story: "The Steadfast Tin Soldier" )
Music by: Paul Dukas (from "L'apprenti sorcier"), Edward Elgar (from
"Pomp and Circumstance March No. 1"), George Gershwin (from "Rhapsody
in Blue"), Ottorino Respighi (from "Pines of Rome"), Camille Saint-Saens
(from "The Carnival of the Animals"), Dmitri Shostakovich (from "Piano
Concerto No. 2"), Igor Stravinsky (from "The Firebird"), Ludwig van
Beethoven (from "Symphony No. 5 in C minor, Op. 67")
Directed by: James Algar ("The Sorceror's Apprentice"), Gaetan Brizzi
("Firebird Suite"), Paul Brizzi ("Firebird Suite"), Hendel Butoy ("Pines
of Rome", "The Steadfast Tin Soldier"), Francis Glebas ("Pomp and
Circumstance, Marches #1, 2, 3 and 4"), Eric Goldberg ("Rhapsody in
Blue", "Carnival of the Animals"), Don Hahn ("Host Sequences") Pixote
Hunt ("Beethoven's Symphony No. 5, Allegro con Brio")
Cast: voices of: Walt Disney (Mickey Mouse), Wayne Allwine (Mickey
Mouse), Tony Anselmo (Donald Duck), Russi Taylor (Daisy Duck)
Segment hosts/performers: James Earl Jones, Quincy Jones, Angela
Lansbury, Steve Martin, Bette Midler, Penn Jillette, Teller, James
Levine, Itzhak Perlman, Leopold Stokowski, Deems Taylor
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsfantasia2k.html
   [We interrupt this review for a wee bit of Personal History.
    Readers anxious to skip this somewhat excessive filler and
    Get On With It, are directed to the next section, "The Story".]
I was, in my mother's words, a "peculiar child".  I didn't like pizza
until I was 18 years old.  Unlike the other girls, I thought Barbie
dolls were stupid, and much preferred collecting rocks.  I had to be
forced to wear a dress.  And, oh yeah: I hated Mickey Mouse with a
passion.
To be sure, I loved (and still love) cartoons.  But I was an old-school
TOM & JERRY and WOODY WOODPECKER kinda Chick, and proud of it; who
needed goofy old Donald Duck when you could have the much-cooler Daffy
Duck (and Elmer Fudd, to boot)?  Until Bugs Bunny And Pals were co-opted
by The Man, I was right there with them.  And though I'm definitely
enamored of modern 'toons like A BUG'S LIFE and the TOY STORY series, I
see them more as Pixar creations than true Disney productions.  So it
should come as no surprise that I missed the original FANTASIA the first
time around (which makes sense, since I'm not 60 years old.  But I
digress.)  Okay...to be more precise (and somewhat less flippant), I
never took the opportunity to see the first movie when I had the chance.
After watching the dance of light and sound that played on my senses
while watching FANTASIA 2000, I came to the conclusion that dear ol' ma
was right: I *was* a peculiar child.
   [We now return you to our regularly-scheduled review.  As always,
    we thank you for your patronage.]
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
A blend of traditional animation artistry and modern-day computer
technology, FANTASIA 2000 melds visual delights with grand classical
music scores to create a feeling of sorts more so than to tell a
straightforward, scripted story--advancing the wish of Disney founder
Walt Disney, 60 years after its original release, that Fantasia be a
constant "work in progress".  The modern version updates the classic
segment "The Sorcerer's Apprentice", and adds six new segments, all done
by different directors and creative teams, and introduced by famous (but
in the grand scheme of things here, insignificant) entertainers-as-hosts.
The Upshot:
My description of "the story" is woefully lacking.  It's hard to
describe the beauty of the images and music in words that would make
sense in this forum.  But I reckon it's my job to try.
The narrator introduced the first segment, set to Beethoven's "Symphony
No. 5", by saying that there are three kinds of music: music that tells
a story, music that paints a picture, and music for its own sake--and
further saying that the segment that follows is an example of the
latter.  I would respectfully disagree with that statement; that first
segment, with its beautiful colors which came alive, albeit with no
specific purpose in mind, seemed an example of all three kinds of
"music".  Indeed, most of the segments painted a picture that resonated
in a way that a traditional telling of the intended story, could hardly
approach.  And if the first segment, with its shapes that morphed
smoothly from undefined objects to colorful "butterflies" and beyond,
didn't exactly tell a story, I'd hazard to say the the remainder of the
segments certainly did.
The visual artistry of each segment was well-matched by the beautiful
music chosen for it, though in some very unique ways ("What would happen
if you gave a yo-yo to a flock of flamingos?", indeed!). From the
surreal image of lighter-than-air whales (set to "Pines Of Rome") to the
playfulness of a non-conformist flamingo ("Carnival Of The Animals"),
and especially the wonderous mating of composer George Gershwin's
"Rhapsody In Blue" with artist Al Hirschfeld's unique view of New York
City, FANTASIA 2000 allowed me to re-live fond memories of a time where
cartoons were fun without being overly hip, cynical, and devoid of
inspiration.
The remaining segments were a mixed bag.  The classic "The Sorcerer's
Apprentice" seemed to not have aged as well as I'd hoped (though you
couldn't convince the kids in my audience of that; one squealed "it's
Mickey Mouse!" in unrestrained delight).  Likewise, Donald and Daisy
Duck's turn at being helpers for Noah ("Pomp and Circumstance, Marches
#1, 2, 3 and 4") was less than an unqualified success (but it won me
over by reminding me of my youngest son's recent graduation from high
school).  And I'm of the opinion that "The Steadfast Tin Soldier"
should've remained on that backshelf that host Bette Midler said it
lingered on for so long; it was easily the weakest of all the stories.
But all these sins were forgiven by way of the breathtakingly
bittersweet closing segment, "Firebird Suite".  This normally-jaded
reporter is not ashamed to say that I smiled, I cried, and I cheered, at
the end of this magnificent segment.
That each of the seven segments could get my animation-loving attention,
was not surprising.  That they could grab my interest in their
non-verbal storytelling to the point where I didn't want to leave at the
end, was a delight--one that I am anxious to repeat again (and again).
Next time, sans notebook and pen.
If there was a low point to this film, it came with the Obligatory
Famous Entertainers' "hosting" segments, in which the likes of Steve
Martin, James Earl Jones, Penn and Teller, Bette Midler, and Quincy
Jones, among others, served as a reminder that Hollywood thinks very
little of its audience--and thus, we viewers need to have actors-as-cue
cards read to us "explaining" what we're about to see, since we're
obviously too unintelligent to either figure it out for ourselves, or
individually read introductions that could've easily been splashed
onscreen between segments.  While I have nothing against the performers
(and indeed was relieved that a Robin Williams or a Jim Carrey weren't
invited to overpower what amounted to brief cameos), I do so hate having
my intelligence insulted thusly.  Fortunately, the brevity of each
introductory segment--and the delight in hearing a surround-sound moment
in one of those in-between moments (you'll have to go to see what I
mean)--outweighed my irritation with them.
One unexpected thing, though, was a great surprise for me: there was an
actual Black Factor moment to be had, that had nothing to do with either
of the Joneses, within the triumphant "Rhapsody In Blue" segment (I'd
describe it in detail, but that'd just ruin it for ya, eh?).
All-in-all, FANTASIA 2000 was a brilliant production that will most def
see me in the audience again.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
FANTASIA 2000 is a visual--and aural--masterpiece; true eye candy in
every positive sense of the term, it reminded me of all the reasons I
loved the fully-orchestrated cartoons of the 40s and 50s.  I feel sorry
for today's generations; between all the butchering...er, editing...of
classic cartoons, and the Saturday morning dreck they currently have to
sit through, kids today truly don't know what they're missing.
FANTASIA 2000 (rating: greenlight):
A stunning work of art; but now I have to see it on IMAX--and wait
anxiously for the DVD...

Author
Scott Renshaw
FANTASIA/2000
(Disney)
Featuring:  James Earl Jones, Quincy Jones, Angela Lansbury, James Levine,
Steve Martin, Bette Midler, Penn & Teller.
Screenplay (Host Segments): Don Hahn, Irene Mecchi and David Reynolds.
Producer:  Donald W. Ernst.
Supervising Director:  Hendel Butoy.
Segment Directors:  Don Hahn, Pixote Hunt, Hendel Butoy, Eric Goldberg,
James Algar, Francis Glebas, Gaetan Brizzi and Paul Brizzi.
MPAA Rating:  G
Running Time:  74 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Even today, 20 years after I first saw the original FANTASIA and 60
years after its premiere, I'm still not sure whether the entire concept is
audaciously praiseworthy or pretentiously misguided. Walt Disney's grand
plan to bring classical music to the masses-accompanied by animated visual
interpretation-ranks as one of the strangest cultural literacy experiments
in mass media history. On the one hand, it could be seen as a sincere
effort to bring kids to the castor oil of the classics, with a little eye
candy as sweetener. More cynically, it could be seen as an attempt to
persuade parents to take kids to a cartoon because it's really "good for
them"-sort of like extolling pizza as nutritionally sound because it
includes all four food groups. 
     Yet another possibility is that it's an intriguing case study in
individual interpretation of an artistic work -- with all the peaks and
valleys that concept entails. FANTASIA/2000 introduces seven new visual
renderings of great compositions, wrapped around the return of Mickey
Mouse in Dukas' "The Sorcerer's Apprentice." Beethoven's "Symphony No. 5" 
becomes a tale of good and evil involving abstract shapes. Respighi's
"Pines of Rome" accompanies the adventures of a pod of humpback whales. 
Scenes of Depression-era New York life, sketched in the style of
caricaturist Al Hirschfeld, are set to Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue." 
Hans Christian Andersen's "The Steadfast Tin Soldier" becomes the libretto
for Shostakovich's "Piano Concerto No. 2." Flamingos with yo-yos cavort to
Saint-Saens' "Carnival of the Animals." Donald Duck helps Noah with some
animal roundup to the march of Elgar's "Pomp and Circumstance." And
Stravinsky's "Firebird Suite" turns into a mythological tale of birth,
destruction and rebirth.
     It's quite an eclectic program Roy Disney and supervising animator
Hendel Butoy have put together, and the results are predictably hit and
miss. There's the sense that FANTASIA/2000's creative team felt obliged to
maintain a balance between the experimental and the whimsical, when the
experimental pieces are the ones that leave the strongest impression. Most
dazzling of all is Butoy's computer-animated "Pines of Rome," in which the
image of whales soaring into the sky almost returns the literal meaning to
the word "breathtaking;" that moment alone made me wish I'd had the chance
to experience the film in its IMAX incarnation from earlier this year. 
It's a wondrous piece of work that creates its own world, a feat the
"Firebird Suite" segment comes close to matching (though there's more than
a little PRINCESS MONONOKE to the imagery). There is also an undeniable
energy to the "Rhapsody in Blue" segment, directed by Eric Goldberg
(ALADDIN) with a clockwork story sense and an obvious affection for the
artists who inspired both the look and the sound. When FANTASIA/2000
really lets its creative talent loose to explore the unfamiliar, the
results are impressive.
     Familiarity, however, doesn't help several of the segments. After his
appealing "Rhapsody in Blue," Goldberg gets anthropomorphized-critter
mundane with the cavorting flamingos of "Carnival of the Animals;" the
Noah story of "Pomp and Circumstance" also suffers from a case of the 
cutes. With "Pomp," there's the greater problem of the music's undeniable
connection to a specific context: graduation ceremonies. In fact, there's
something just a bit off about all of the segments connected to instantly
recognizable music-the grandiose abstractions of Beethoven's Fifth, the
Duck Tales-goes-Genesis "Pomp," even the generally satisfying "Rhapsody in
Blue." It may have been part of the FANTASIA plan to say, "Look, here's
another way to look at a piece of music you may have pigeonholed
previously," but it doesn't always work. A magical Mickey defined "The
Sorcerer's Apprentice" in the first FANTASIA; an antediluvian Donald just
makes you wonder why all these animals are graduating from the ark.
     A new twist to FANTASIA/2000 finds actors and musicians in brief
"host segments" introducing each work. Admittedly, a couple of them are
good for laughs (Steve Martin and Penn & Teller, to be specific). The rest
are an overly reverential bore. It's a curious decision, because if
there's one thing the rest of FANTASIA/200 is not, it's reverential. Even
when it flounders, it usually flounders because an experiment fails, not
because someone was unwilling to experiment. And that's the faint
damnation with which I ultimately praise the film: It doesn't always work,
but even when it doesn't work, it's in ways that make it obvious someone
was still trying. This FANTASIA inclines me to the perspective that it
should be seen as a showcase for pure inspiration, a way to see how fine
art can in turn inspire more fine art. This version is an uneven
realization of that vision. I'll still be looking forward to
FANTASIA/2060.

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
DIRECTED BY:      Pixote Hunt, Hendel Butoy, Eric Goldberg, James Algar,
Francis Glebas, Gaetan & Paul Brizzi
CONDUCTED BY:     James Levine
COMPOSED BY:      Ludwig Van Beethoven, Ottorino Respighi, George
Gershwin, Dmitri Shostakovich, Camille Saint-Saens, Paul Dukas, Sir Edward
Elgar, Igor Stravinsky
RATED:            G
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES:       1 Samuel 16:23, Ephesians 5:19, 1 Chronicles 15:15-16
In 1940, Walt Disney released a filmed experiment.  FANTASIA was a blend
of two art forms: classical music and animation.  While it was not
immediately popular with the audiences of its day, it has since become
recognized as something of a classic.
According to the program notes, it was Mr. Disney's intention to have
FANTASIA be a continual work in progress.  Sixty years later, thanks to
the ongoing efforts of Walt's nephew, a new FANTASIA is being released.
It was not only worth the waiting, it is evidence to just how far
animation has come during the past half-decade.
With seven new sequences and one old favorite, FANTASIA 2000 exhibits an
imagination and respect for its art form that is absent from most other
feature films.  Like the original, FANTASIA 2000 will more than likely
bore the very young, although there is more narrative appeal in this newer
version and the segments appear to be substantially shorter, perhaps a nod
to the shorter attention span of the studio's primary audience.
Ranging from the silly to the sublime, each segment is preceded by a
short, humorous introduction or interstitial by a guest celebrity host,
Steve Martin (BOWFINGER) being the first and most effective.  These are
quickly forgotten as conductor James Levine leads the Chicago Symphony
Orchestra through the musical program which, along with the images drawn
by the Disney team of animators, is thoughtfully and beautifully brought
to a stunning synthesis.
FANTASIA 2000 is being released exclusively in the giant-screened IMAX
theaters, making for a unique viewing experience.  There is enough variety
in the program to provide something enjoyable for everyone and surely,
people will exit the theaters with their own personal favorites.
For me, that would have to be the jazz age story of four unconnected and
discontented people living in NYC who, unknowingly, help each other
realize their dreams.  Drawn in the style of caricaturist Al Hirschfeld
and inspired by George Gershwin's RHAPSODY IN BLUE, the music and images
are blended perfectly resulting in a product greater than the sum of its
two parts.
Children will like the short piece set to CARNIVAL OF THE ANIMALS by
Camille Saint-Saens.  Here, a goofy looking flamingo irritates the rest of
the flock with his yo-yo playing antics. They will also giggle as Donald
Duck, playing Noah's assistant, tries to load the animals into the ark to
the familiar strains of POMP AND CIRCUMSTANCE by Sir Edward Elgar. (While
the depiction is not biblically accurate, it is entertaining and might be
excuse enough to familiarize ourselves with the true record by reading
what is written in Genesis 7.)
A positive note is that the studio has avoided any segment which is as
perversely dark as NIHGT ON BALD MOUNTAIN upon which the original film
ended.  There are some images based upon fantasy such as the flying whales
in Respighi's PINES OF ROME or images which have their roots in mythology
such as the ethereal creatures which tell the story of nature's cycle of
life, death, and rebirth in Igor Stravinsky's FIREBIRD SUITE.  But the
stories they tell are uplifting, containing nothing too frightening for
our younger children.
The darkest segment, spiritually speaking, actually belongs to the only
holdover from the original FANTASIA, Mickey Mouse in THE SORCERER'S
APPRENTICE by Paul Dukas.  But overall, the emotions evoked from FANTASIA
2000 are positive ones, being full of hope and promise.
Music has an impact which can be undeniably felt, capable of leading the
listener to emotional peaks and inspirational highs simply not attainable
through other mediums.  It is no wonder that the Levites, as the priestly
tribe of the Old Testament, were also the appointed musicians.  If
Fantasia 2000 is able to introduce a new audience to music which inspires
and exalts, it will have done an incredible service.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
It's been almost sixty years since Walt Disney's Fantasia debuted in
theaters.  Disney had always meant his beloved 1940s classic to be a
perpetual work in progress, replacing one of the original seven segments
with a new animated short each year.  But it never happened that way.
In fact, Fantasia tanked at the box office when it was originally
released, which probably had something to do with Walt's unrealized
dream.  The film did win an honorary Oscar for `unique achievement,' but
it didn't come until two years after its initial theatrical release.
The funny thing about the original Fantasia is that most kids just
didn't dig it.  I couldn't stand it when I was little and, when I grew
older, always assumed that the film was used primarily to enhance the
highs of stoned college students that couldn't find a theater playing
2001: A Space Odyssey.  Fantasia seemed like Walt's attempt to make
`Sgt. Pepper,' even though the Beatles version was still a
quarter-century away from being realized.  Hey, I was just a kid  give
me a break.
What I did take away from Fantasia, be it subliminally or not, was the
music.  If it weren't for this film, and a myriad of Bugs Bunny
cartoons, my knowledge of classical music would be limited to
Schroeder's references in the `Peanuts' cartoons.  The original film,
which ran a full two hours, included seven classical classics that
accompanied each animated segment.  Each piece was performed by the
Chicago Symphony Orchestra, which contributes the music for Fantasia
2000, as well.  So even if you aren't particularly interested in the
visuals, the music is still damn enjoyable (especially coming from the
state-of-the-art IMAX sound system).
Each section of Fantasia 2000 is introduced by a series of special guest
celebrities, ranging from the funny (Steve Martin), to the serious
(Angela Lansbury), to the completely unexpected (Penn & Teller).  The
first is called `Symphony No. 5,' after Ludwig von Beethoven's
masterpiece  and features these flying triangle-shaped bird thingies in
a battle against these other flying triangle-shaped bird thingies.  Good
versus evil?  Who knows?  It was over before I could figure it out.
The second segment was about whales that flew to the tune of Ottorino
Respighi's "Pines of Rome.'  It looked like those Coke commercials with
the polar bears.  George Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue" kicked off the
next portion of the film, which featured very un-Disney like animation
of New York City that began with one simple line.  The fourth (and best)
portion, "The Steadfast Tin Soldier,' was set to Dmitri Shostakovich's
"Piano Concerto No. 2" and was about a one-legged soldier that fell in
love with a ballerina because he believed that she shares the same
disability.  Number five was another short piece, called "Carnival of
the Animals,' after the Camille Saint-Saëns song of the same name.  It
featured a flamingo with a yo-yo.
"The Sorceror's Apprentice" is up next, and it's the same as it was in
the original.  The seventh segment is called "Pomp and Circumstance'
after Sir Edward Elgar's musical contribution.  Probably the most
enjoyable for children, `Pomp' features a duck named Donald that is
placed in charge of rounding up animals to board Noah's Ark.  And the
last portion of the film uses Igor Stravinsky's "The Firebird" to show
the effects of a volcanic bird on a nearby forest.
Each short features a different director and animators, which gives them
all a unique look.  And like any Disney film, there are things that will
rile certain people.  Penn chops off Teller's hand as they introduce
"The Sorceror's Apprentice.'  `Rhapsody in Blue' used some pretty bad
racial stereotypes, including one character that lived in Harlem,
frequented jazz clubs, was bald with a big nose and lips, and couldn't
hail a cab to save his life.  I can already envision Danny Glover
picketing.
Other than that, Fantasia 2000 is perfect family entertainment.  Plus,
it's only seventy-seven minutes long, so your bratty kids won't get
bored, either.
1:17  G for gleeful family entertainment

Author
Jason Wallis
Fantasia 2000
Rating (out of five): ***1/2
Starring Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck, Daisy Duck, James Earl Jones, Quincy
Jones, Angela Lansbury, Steve Martin, Bette Midler and Leopold Stokowski
Directed by Don Hahn, Pixote Hunt, Hendel Butoy, Eric Goldberg, James Algar,
Francis Glebas and Gaetan and
Paul Brizzi
Written by Hahn, Irene Mecchi and David Reynolds
Rated G (suitable for all ages)
Theatrical aspect ratio of 1.33:1
Released in 1999
Running 75 minutes
In 1940, Walt Disney and company released what would come to be known as one
of the definitive movie musicals; a spectacular, awe-inspiring blend of
classical music set in time to striking animated visuals. Their masterwork,
aptly titled Fantasia, was originally slated to be a work in progress,
containing something new each time it was presented to the viewing public.
While this idea didn't exactly pan-out (in fact, Fantasia bombed upon
initial release), Disney has made the wise decision to put together another
assortment of animation to ring in the new millennium, this time taking
advantage of modern technology and presenting Fantasia 2000 on IMAX screens
across the nation.
Now, anyone who has ever seen an IMAX movie before is well aware of what
they are in store for. With the screen over seven stories high, seeing
something like Fantasia 2000 ala IMAX isn't so much a movie-going experience
as it is an event.
And thankfully, Disney has chosen some material worthy of such technology.
While the seven new animated segments vary in quality (ranging from mediocre
to masterpiece status), the overall effect of the film is quite
intoxicating. In fact, Fantasia 2000 features a piece of animation set to
George Girshwin's "Rhapsody in Blue" that is so brilliantly structured and
delightfully magical that all I could do was sit in my seat with a
child-like grin on my face for the duration of its running time.
However, a couple of the sequences are so tired and contrived that it's a
wonder how they made it into the film in the first place (especially the
grueling "Pines of Rome" flying-whale piece).
In addition to the seven new shorts, Disney has also decided to include a
popular piece from the original Fantasia titled "The Sorcerer's Apprentice",
in which Mickey Mouse goes head-to-head with an army of mischievous brooms.
While the notion to include this, one of the finest works of animation the
world has ever seen, was undoubtedly a stroke of genius, it would be an
understatement to say the Mickey suffers in the IMAX format. With grain
spots the size of my fist filling the screen, it's difficult (and sometimes
impossible) to make out the fine details the artists spent so much time
putting into "The Sorcerer's Apprentice".
Thus, Fantasia 2000 doesn't quite live up to the liveliness and
inventiveness of the original. Still, the majority of the segments work very
well, particularly the "Rhapsody in Blue" sequence. It will go down as one
of the finest works the Disney studio has ever developed, and even alone
would warrant an enthusiastic recommendation.
*Find all of Jason's reviews at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by James Algar, Gaetan Brizzi, Paul Brizzi, Hendel Butoy,
Francis Glebas, Eric Goldberg, Don Hahn and Pixote Hunt. Screenplay by
Hahn, Irene Mecchi and David Reynolds, with the segment "The Steadfast Tin
Soldier" inspired by the story by Hans Christian Andersen. Running time:
74 minutes. Rated G by the MFCB. Reviewed on June 23rd, 2000.
The original "Fantasia" was Walt Disney's great experiment. Having 
demonstrated that a feature-length animated film could be a commercial 
(and critical) success with "Snow White And The Seven Dwarfs", Disney's 
next project was a movie introducing children to classical music by 
marrying it to animation in a series of vignettes. Sadly, the idea proved
unpopular in 1940, and so Disney's even grander plans -- creating a new 
version every so often by replacing some of the older segments -- had to 
be shelved.
Until now. At Christmastime, Walt Disney Pictures released 
"Fantasia/2000" to IMAX theatres. Unfortunately, Newfoundland does not 
have an IMAX venue, but now the film has been released in 35mm for a 
four-week engagement. Despite the smaller stature, even this version of 
the movie is so visually splendid, and the music so compelling, that it 
is an experience no one should miss.
"Fantasia/2000" follows essentially the same format as its predecessor. 
The only major change is the use of a different contemporary star to 
introduce each piece. These cameos, directed by Don Hahn, are mostly 
filler, and I fear will date "Fantasia/2000" rather quickly. But some 
sequences -- particularly those featuring Steve Martin and James Earl 
Jones -- are amusing, and they are brief enough that they do not distract 
too much from the proceedings.
The introductory piece is Beethoven's "Symphony No. 5, Allegro con Brio", 
directed by Pixote Hunt, and the animation is an abstract work featuring 
butterfly-like triangles. There are some glorious moments here, 
particularly the sight of thousands of the triangles in flight, and the 
play of color throughout the sequence is dazzling.
Next up is what may be the best part of the movie, set to Respighi's 
"Pines Of Rome" and directed by Hendel Butoy. Butoy has opted to toy with 
our preconceptions and, instead of drawing inspiration from the 
composition's title, presents a visually enthralling depiction of a family 
of whales cavorting in the sea, a series of ice caverns, and finally 
above the clouds themselves. Scenes like one where the whales dive 
through a thundercloud are truly breathtaking, and I felt my heart 
soaring alongside the creatures.
Up third is another superb segment, directed by Eric Goldberg. The music 
is Gershwin's "Rhapsody In Blue", providing a more modern addition to the 
line-up. I'm glad the producers recognised the fact that "Fantasia/2000" 
is meant to be an evolving, experimental format, and did not feel 
confined to using only prototypically classical works. The style of 
animation here also stands out, inspired by the illustrations of Al 
Hirschfeld. Even the color scheme is different from conventional Disney 
fare, keying each character to a specific hue. The stories of four 
Depression-Era New Yorkers -- a budding musician, a young girl, a 
sheepish husband, and a guy looking for a job -- are interlaced, to 
humorous effect. Especially funny is the husband's impromptu jig with an 
organ grinder's monkey.
Butoy returns to helm the next portion of the film, setting Hans 
Christian Andersen's "The Steadfast Tin Soldier" to Shostakovich's "Piano 
Concerto No. 2". It tells the story of a one-legged miniature soldier who 
falls in love with a toy ballerina and defends her from a lecherous 
Jack-in-the-Box. This is a beautiful rendition of the tale, warmly 
animated as though lifted out of an old storybook. Particularly effective 
is the portrayal of the Jack-in-the-Box, brimming with malice.
A short piece follows, accompanying Saint-Saens' "Carnival Of The 
Animals". James Earl Jones deadpans the introduction perfectly, promising 
the segment will answer that eternal question, "What happens you give a 
yo-yo to a flock of flamingos? Who wrote this?" Hilarious hijinks ensue, 
animated in a suitably simple style.
Next is the lone resurrectee from the original "Fantasia", "The 
Sorcerer's Apprentice", directed by James Algar. This was always my 
favourite portion of the 1940 version ("Night On Bald Mountain" running a 
close second), and it was wonderful to see it on the big screen. The 
grainy sixty-year-old animation does suffer somewhat in comparison with
the rest of "Fantasia/2000", and the fact that it is in the original 
(non-widescreen) aspect ratio gives it an archaic look. But the sheer 
jollity and imagination of the story still win me over, and Dukas' 
"L'apprenti sorcier" is a gorgeous composition.
We move from one Disney character to another as Donald and Daisy Duck 
take center stage in a story set aboard Noah's Ark during the Great 
Flood. As with "Pines Of Rome", this is an unusual accompaniment for the 
music, Elgar's "Pomp and Circumstance". But it works, because director 
Francis Glebas concocts a story both amusing and heartfelt. Unfortunately, 
the opportunity for some really fantastic animation inspired by the flood 
and the many animals is passed up, leaving us with a standard Disney short.
The final sequence, directed by Gaetan and Paul Brizzi, similarly 
disappoints by not taking full advantage of the medium. Set to 
Stravinsky's "Firebird Suite", it depicts the story of a nature sprite who 
awakens a fearsome volcano spirit while bringing spring to the land. 
Although a nice fable, it plays out too straightforwardly, and altogether 
fails to convey the natural beauty and primal majesty that the Brizzis 
seem to be aiming for.
Otherwise, my only real complaint about "Fantasia/2000" is that it is 
weighted too heavily toward narrative-style segments, eschewing the more 
conceptual pieces which animation often portrays so well. The commercial 
motivations behind this decision are obvious, but "Fantasia" should be 
all about challenging the viewer -- not just through its presentation of 
classical music and unusual animation styles, but also by introducing new 
ideas. Further, I question the choice to run the two pieces starring 
popular Disney characters back-to-back, as it somewhat unbalances the movie.
These minor gripes aside, though, "Fantasia/2000" is a worthy successor 
to the original, and a fantastic, visually- and aurally-spellbinding movie 
for all ages. Parents who don't take advantage of this all-too-brief 
opportunity and take their kids to see it in the theatre are cheating 
their children. And themselves, too.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/Fantasia2000.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Michael Dequina
_Fantasia/2000_ (G) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
        Stunning.  Breathtaking.  Spectacular.  These are but three
adjectives that will certainly be used to describe _Fantasia/2000_,
Disney's long-in-the-works update of its 1940
classical-music-set-to-animation "work-in-progress," _Fantasia_.
However, one word you won't hear in association with _F/2K_--unlike
the original--is "classic."
        Don't get me wrong--there are a number of stunning bits of new
animation that will stand the test of time, particularly in the film's
first three segments.  Taking a cue from the original, which began
with an abstract rendering of an abstract musical piece, _F/2K_ opens
with an extremely trippy interpretation of Beethoven's "Symphony
No. 5, " directed by Pixote Hunt.  A relentlessly kinetic sequence
with triangles up, down, around, and every which way multiplying with
every "da da da daah," the segment is made even more dizzying by the
IMAX giant screen format (one can only imagine how much more so it
would have been had the film been in IMAX 3D).
        Things are decidedly less hyper in the next segment, but the
product is even more breathtaking.  To accompany Ottorino Respighi's
"Pines of Rome," director Hendel Butoy has come up with a spectacular
vision of whales whose aquatic acrobatics take them to the sky in the
wake of a cosmic explosion.  The concept could not be farther from a
piece of music titled for trees in an Italian city, but this is
_F/2K_'s most seamless and inspired melding of music and imagery.  The
gorgeous, inspiring melodies and the amazing three-dimensional
computer animation make for an experience that can only described as
awesome.
        The in-your-face visuals of the first two segments make way
for the simplistic, two-dimensional Al Hirschfeld-inspired line
drawing style of Eric Goldberg's take on "Rhapsody in Blue," composed
by George Gershwin.  While it features the least flashy art and
animation of the new segments, "Rhapsody"--which follows a
cross-section of sad Manhattanites in the 1930s--is perhaps the most
aesthetically ambitious of them, staying strictly within its very
specific art style and employing a limited palette of primarily
blue-based tones.  The heavily stylized approach makes for the segment
with the most personality, and one of the highlights of the film.
        Unfortunately, that's the last big triumph in _Fantasia/2000_,
for the work is more uneven from there.  The film hits rock bottom
with the next segment, an adaptation of the Hans Christian Andersen
short story "The Steadfast Tin Soldier," set to Dmitri Shostakovich's
"Piano Concerto #2, Allegro, Opus 102."  The segment is about as
exciting as that title.  There's nothing necessarily wrong with this
story of a tin soldier who battles with an evil jack-in-the-box over
the affections of a music box ballerina; the animation is clean,
especially the 3-D CGI used for the main trio of characters.  It's
just that among a group of shorts that bear at least one distinctive
feature, this one comes up emptyhanded.  I guess director Hendel Butoy
exhausted all of his ideas on the whale segment.
        Holding slightly more interest is another segment by Eric
Goldberg, "Carnival of the Animals (Le Carnival des Animaux), Finale,"
which uses Camille Saint-Saëns' familiar tune as a musical backdrop
for a vignette involving a flock of flamingos and a yo-yo.  The only
flat-out comic piece of the _F/2K_ puzzle, it is a vibrantly colored
(the brightest of the whole set) and fast-paced amusement.  The
problem is, it's so short and weightless--in style and subject--that
it evaporates from the memory about as quickly as it zips by on the
screen.
        After a glorious reappearance of the only returning segment
from the 1940 _Fantasia_, the Mickey Mouse-starring favorite "The
Sorcerer's Apprentice," comes a sequence starring another classic
Disney character, Donald Duck.  This segment, set to Sir Edward
Elgar's familiar "Pomp and Circumstance" and casting Donald as an
assistant to Noah before and during the flood, is not without its
cutesy charm.  But it's a mess; the Biblical theme, Donald, and a
romantic subplot where he and Daisy Duck keep on missing each other
are mixed uneasily by director Francis Glebas.
 The disjointed result doesn't quite feel of a piece with the others,
and, unlike "The Sorcerer's Apprentice," it feels less like an expression
of the music than an excuse to shoehorn in a popular character.
        A similar sense of blatant pandering to the masses hovers over
interstitial segments, where celebrities introduce each sequence.
Only lightly amusing at best (Steve Martin and Bette Midler, who have
been funnier) and excruciating (Penn and Teller) at worst, these bits
are the big reason why _F/2K_'s long-term shelf life won't come close
to that of the original film: they date the film as being a project of
the here and now--and not because these are celebrities of
contemporary times, but that it highlights the commercialist mentality
of the era (not to mention that of Disney, perhaps the biggest
perpetrator of all).  The interstitials are obviously a device to make
more mainstream-palatable what is essentially an animated art film for
an especially rarefied crowd.  While a bit on the stuffy side, Deems
Taylor, the host of the 1940 _Fantasia_, was a much more suitable
host.  His earnest demeanor not only lent a certain timeless quality,
he made it that much easier to take the film seriously as a serious
concert film, not a cartoon show for the kiddies.  With all the jokey
celeb cameos, the latter is more the case with _F/2K_.
        Thankfully, _Fantasia/2000_ ends on a note more befitting of
the former, with an ambitious segment set to Igor Stravinsky's
"Firebird Suite - 1919 Version."  It is a beautifully animated tale of
death and rebirth, with a forest's natural splendor ravaged by a
volcano and then replenished by a magical sprite.  Directors Gaëtan
and Paul Brizzi's work is lovely, blending state-of-the-art computer
techniques with the organic hand-drawn style of Japanese animé.
While I do admire this segment, I am far less enthusiastic about it
than the opening three; perhaps I would have enjoyed the segment even
more if it Hayao Miyazaki's _Princess_Mononoke_ weren't so fresh in
the memory, for this segment's storyline bears more than a passing
resemblance to the finale of that film.
        While I did have a few problems with _Fantasia/2000_, overall
it is a worthy extension of the idea conceived by Walt Disney nearly
60 years ago; and, after _Tarzan_, it's another important step forward
into riskier, more ambitious artistic territory for the Mouse's
animation house.  In some points of execution, there is fault; but in
terms of grand spectacle, it's as close to perfect as anything out
there now--which makes it all the more important that it is seen in
its intended IMAX form, not on a regular multiplex screen, where
_F/2K_ will play after a four-month exclusive run on IMAX.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Nick Lyons
  What better way to start off the new year, then with some good old fashioned
Disney. That would have been a nice opening statement, but unfortunately
Fantasia 2000 is a mixed bag, with some great acts (The Steadfast Tin Soldier)
and some that will put you to sleep (Pines Of Rome).
  Unlike the original Fantasia, this one has far less appeal. There are 8
sequences that round out the film, some good some mediocre, but all visually
fascinating none the less. The first shows a pack of triangles dancing to
Beethoven's 5th Symphony, secondly is the whale segment, in which they begin
flying and evntually enter space. "The Pines Of Rome" is played throughout that
one. The third is the illustrious "Rhapsody In Blue" by George Gershwin. This
piece is by far the most poignant, showing us the ups and downs of life. The
fourth and finest sequence (The Steadfast Tin Soldier) is played with
Shostakovich's Piano Concerto No. 2. The Fifth piece is Saint Sean's "Carnival
Of The Animals" in which a Flamingo discovers a yo-yo. It is the most charming
and surely the most enjoyable for the kiddies. The sixth section is the only
returning segment from the original Fantasia, and that of course is "The
Sorcerer's Apprentice", in which Mickey Mouse gets in trouble with the power of
magic. The 7th piece is another likable one for the kid's, and that is Elgar's
"Pomp And Circumstance", in which Donald Duck helps Noah on his ark. The final
segment is almost similar to Princess Mononoke, in which an angel like creature
trys to restore the world, until a demon destroys it. Stavinsky's "Firebird
Suite" is played throught this segment.
  For those who have not been to an IMAX theater before, this will be a
delightful treat, but I can't help but find it lacking in interest. Sure, "The
Steadfast Tin Soldier", "Rhapsody In Blue" are very good, but the rest of the
film lacks pizzaz. The original Fantasia had dazzling segments, and it didn't
need fancy animation to help boost it. They were far more imaginative, and were
constantly surprising the viewer, because it was like a dream. Fantasia 2000's
segments however were formulaic. Nothing ever changed, it simply followed a
story line. I personally like the bits in Fantasia that made no sense, because
they were the most enjoyable. It was like one imaginative collection of
dazzling images that didn't need to be pieced together, because it was so
stunning to watch. Plus they were never boring. In Fantasia 2000 I saw people
sleeping through the "Pines Of Rome" story. It was just a complete bore. I
doubt even the children will fully enjoy this movie, even with the giant screen
awing them. They only seemed to pay attention to cute creatures, or someone
recognizable like Mickey Mouse. That only adds up to 4 that they will really
watch. That's not the bad, considering there's only 5 worth watching. The other
3 could have been cut as far as I'm concerned.
  Speaking of cut, Bette Middler (one of the hosts before each sequence) stated
that there were quite a few optional sections that were cut. Soemthing that
caught my attention was the fact that there was a Salvador Dali based act,
supposively using baseball as a metaphor for life. Now, why didn't they use
this one! If you've seen some of his paintings in a museum before, you know
that they are twisted, obviously a perfect match for an animated feature in
Fantasia. They should have replaced that instead of the grainy "Sorcerer's
Apprentice". It looked absolutely dreadful compared to the rest of the film.
Another disappointing feature.
  While it's often magical, Fantasia 2000 lacks pizzaz, and really isn't worth
the $11 price of admission. Take it from me, it's better to wait until it
reaches regular theaters. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
When Disney released the original FANTASIA in 1940, they envisioned it
to be a "perpetual work in progress," with a new version coming out
regularly, something that has never happened until now.  For the movie's
60th anniversary, Disney has devised an almost all-new film; only
Mickey's famous "Sorcerer's Apprentice" segment remains.
FANTASIA, perhaps cinema's most beloved musical montage, has not merely
been updated.  It has an entirely new medium for its latest incarnation.
Disney decided that they would shoot it in IMAX, a format normally
reserved for films in which the viewers vicariously risk their lives
climbing mountains (EVEREST) or riding roller coasters (THRILL RIDE).
The resulting film, FANTASIA/2000, is a real treat for the ears.  As
classical music from "The Pines of Rome" to "The Pomp and Circumstance
March" booms out of the theater's monster speakers, one has to be in
awe.
It is in the visuals that the movie comes up so short that it has to be
labeled a disappointment.  Given the three-dimensional realism that
we've seen this past year from Disney (TARZAN), Pixar/Disney (TOY STORY
2) and other studios (THE PRINCESS MONONOKE), most of the illustrations
in FANTASIA/2000 look flat and uninviting by comparison.
Then there is the choice of IMAX as the medium, which might seem a cute
idea but turns out to be a fundamental mistake.  Blown up several
stories high, the animation's flaws are magnified.  What should be
compelling instead turns out to be too busy and garish as gigantic
images flash across the screen.
Mickey's segment, especially, suffers by being stretched.  Why they
didn't repaint the colors is a mystery because it leaves this episode
looking needlessly dated due to its grainy texture.  When it ends, they
cut to a properly colored Mickey, which just emphasizes the inadequate
restoration of the original portion.
FANTASIA/2000 isn't a bad movie, just one with so much potential that it
causes you to dwell on its flaws.  Take the whale sequence.  As these
beautiful animals frolic and splash in the ocean, the director decided
not to include any sound effects.  Normally such a scene would have had
some realistic water sounds overlaid with the music.  Without them, the
piece has a strangely remote and detached feeling.
Go in with low expectations, try not to be too demanding when it comes
to the animation and FANTASIA/2000 will prove a pleasant enough
experience.  Just try to forget how good it could and should have been.
FANTASIA/2000 runs 1:15.  It is rated G and would be fine for all ages,
although many kids will be bored as there is little plot to hold their
attention.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, liked the movie enough to give it ** 1/2.  It
was so different for him that he didn't know quite what to make of it or
how to rate it.  He liked most of the segments, except the ending one,
which he found too fast and confusing.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
