Title
Review for Still Crazy (1998)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Greg King

Approved: graham@ee.washington.edu
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Organization: None
X-Questions-to: movie-rev-mod@www.ee.washington.edu
X-Submissions-to: movie-reviews@www.ee.washington.edu
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Summary: r.a.m.r. #17838
Keywords: author=king
Author: Greg King 
Subject: Review: Still Crazy (1998)
STILL CRAZY (M).  
(Columbia Tristar)
Director: Brian Gibson
Stars: Stephen Rea, Jimmy Nail, Billy Connolly, Timothy Spall, Bill
Nighy, Juliet Aubrey, Hans Matheson, Helena Bergstrom, Rachel
Stirling, Bruce Robinson, Zoe Ball
Running time: 96 minutes.
The '90's has seen a resurgence of interest in '70's music,
and bands long considered musical dinosaurs have gained a new lease of
life.  Even many bands that broke up amid acrimony and bitterness,
swearing never to reform until hell freezes over, have buried the
hatchet to cash in on the nostalgia kick.  One such group is (the
entirely fictitious) Strange Fruit, a seminal '70's British band, who
disbanded after a disastrous show at an outdoor concert in 1978.  The
members all went their own way, most of them settling into mundane
nine to five jobs.  Only lead singer Ray (Bill Nighy) has maintained a
largely unsuccessful solo career, under the watchful eye of his
domineering and fiery Scandinavian wife Astrid (Helena Bergstrom).
Tired of refilling condom vending machines on the Spanish
peninsula, former keyboard player Tony Costello (Stephen Rea) has the
idea to reform the band for a twenty year reunion tour.  He tracks
down the other members of the band and brings them together for the
first time in two decades.  Guitarist Les (Jimmy Nail, from tv series
Crocodile Shoes, etc) has established a successful roofing contract
business.  Drummer Beano Baggot (Timothy Spall, from Secrets And Lies,
etc, in a role initially intended for Billy Connolly) runs a nursery
business and tries to evade the Internal revenue service.
Fuelled by nostalgic memories of sex, drugs and rock 'n' roll,
the band heads off on a tour of small European venues.  They
desperately try to refine their old stage act and get it together
before they make a triumphant return to the very same venue at which
they played their last gig.  They learn that the industry has changed
drastically during their absence.  It's also a shock to hear potential
groupies comment on how much their fathers adored the band back in the
'70's.  Eventually, all the old resentments resurface, most of them
directed at the posturing, selfish Ray, and threaten to tear the band
apart all over again.
Initially, Still Crazy seems to suggest another hilarious piss
take on the rock and roll lifestyle a la Spinal Tap, but this funny
movie follows a different tack.  Still Crazy is not exactly exploring
virgin territory here, but it does bring some fresh comic twists,
bittersweet moments and hard truths to the old familiar rock 'n' roll
clichés.  Still Crazy will appeal strongly to the over thirty
crowd, who may well get a kick out of the film, and have fun
identifying some of the thinly veiled pop references along the way.
Still Crazy boasts a solid rock pedigree, with new songs
written by Mick Jones (of Foreigner fame) and Jeff Lynne (from ELO,
etc).  Gary Kemp, the ex-Spandau Ballet member and part time actor,
even taught the actors how to move on stage like the seasoned rockers
they are supposed to be.  Veteran British comedy writing team of Dick
Clement and Ian La Frenais also gave us the marvellous The
Commitments, while director Brian Gibson previously explored the
precarious rock world with the superb Tina Turner biopic What's Love
Got To Do With It?
The ensemble cast bring a potent mixture of weariness,
cynicism and new found enthusiasm to their roles.  Bruce Robinson,
director of the cult classic Withnail And I, contributes a brief
appearance as a former member of the band.  For this band of aged
rockers, preparing to take on the world again and relive their glory
days, the flame does indeed still burn.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
When Still Crazy was nominated for two Golden Globe awards (Best Picture
[Comedy] and Best Original Song [Comedy]) in January, most people had
never heard of it.  At best, they knew that it was about a popular ‘70s
British glam-rock combo named Strange Fruit, and that the film showed
them trying to hit the road after being disbanded for several years in
an attempt to ride the current wave of retro popularity.  Early viewers
described the film as This is Spinal Tap meets The Full Monty.
In its heyday, Strange Fruit had its share of problems.  Original
frontman Keith Lovell died and was replaced by the less charismatic Ray
Simms (Golden Satellite nominee Bill Nighy, FairyTale: A True Story),
who always had trouble living in Keith's shadow.  Keith's brother,
guitarist Brian, was institutionalized years ago and is presumed to be
dead as the film opens.  The remaining band members have been out of the
music game for years, but are itching to regroup once keyboard player
Tony Costello (Stephen Rea, The Butcher Boy) suggests they give it a go.
The hilarious Billy Connolly (Mrs. Brown) is underused as a veteran
roadie (he's also the narrative voice of the film), but of more interest
is the casting of actor-turned-director Bruce Robinson as Brian.
Robinson hasn't acted since the late ‘70s, but did write the recent
debacle In Dreams, as well as the Oscar-winning The Killing Fields, and
directed Jennifer Eight.  Robinson looks eerily like a washed-up rock
star.  Also worth a mention is the performance of Jimmy Nail (Evita) as
the Strange Fruit bassist.  Actually, his performance isn't noteworthy
at all, but he does look like a cross between Anthony LaPaglia in So I
Married an Axe Murderer and MTV's Tom Green.
Directed by Brian Gibson (What's Love Got to do with It), Crazy is
honestly not much like the `mock'-documentary-style Tap.  The only part
that was even remotely like Monty was when the band auditions a young
`hired gun' to play guitar for their tour, in place of Brian.  Actually,
it's probably more akin to The Commitments, which Crazy writers Dick
Clement and Ian La Frenais also penned.  Unfortunately, Crazy isn't
nearly as entertaining.  (1:40 - R for language, sexuality and drug
content)

Author
Steve Rhodes
It was a sign from "the gods of Rock and Roll."  At an ancient Druid
circle where they were lamenting the death of Brian Lovell, their lead
guitarist, the members of the Strange Fruit band heard his music coming
over the hill.  At first they thought it was Brian, risen from the dead.
But then they saw a herd of sheep followed by a young shepherd carrying
a boom box on his shoulder.  Not many people played their music anymore,
so this had to be an omen.
Reunited for a twentieth-anniversary tour after years apart, the Strange
Fruit's last concert had quite a different heavenly encounter.  As they
played outdoors to a jam-packed crowd, their instruments were blown to
bits by "divine intervention" -- a lightning bolt struck nearby causing
a huge electrical surge.
Made by filmmakers with just the right credentials, director Brian
Gibson (WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT) and writers Dick Clement and Ian
La Frenais (THE COMMITMENTS), STILL CRAZY is a small, unpretentious
movie with a big-hearted story.
The Strange Fruit members went their separate ways years ago, but
they've been asked to come back together to play at a big twentieth
reunion concert.  They decide to play seedy clubs and small concert
halls, which they call "down and out venues," in order to prepare for
the big concert, which makes for a energetic ending to a delightful
movie.  Along the way, they have a blast reliving the good old times on
their tour bus.  And in this inviting movie, so will you.  Just kick
back and let the good times roll as the 70's music and the band's good
humor pumps up your day.
Each member of the cast has a sweet little story to tell.  As the
keyboard player, Tony Costello, Stephen Rea wears a tooth of Jimi
Hendrix around his neck.  A contraceptives distributor in Spain, he's
happy to give up his day job for a chance to relive old glory.
Juliet Aubrey plays Karen Knowles, the group's ex-gofer.  When we meet
her, she's wearing a standard issue coat and tie for her corporate
position as a business meeting organizer.  She quits in a flash to
rejoin her old buddies.
Les Wickes (Jimmy Nail) leaves his roof repair job.  David 'Beano'
Baggot (Timothy Spall), who looks like a retired Hells Angel, abandons
his plant nursery position to rebuild the band.  MRS. BROWNS's Billy
Connolly plays Hughie, the tough looking, marshmallow of a guy who is
the band's driver and soundman.
With just this cast, the movie would have been enjoyable, but Bill
Nighy, as the band's troubled singer, Ray Simms, adds extra panache that
gives the movie its special ingredient.  Fond of long fur coats and
living in his mansion, Ray's a superrich guy.  Or is he?  His mansion is
up for sale and his finances are as low as his ego, which needs a lot of
stroking before he's up to singing in front of a crowd again.
Ray can't get used to his loss of fame.  When the pizza delivery guy
asks for his signature on the bill, Ray immediately signs it "Best
wishes to" and asks his name, while the guy looks back at him in
disbelief.  In order to muster the courage to perform, Ray practices in
front of the mirror uttering things like "take no prisoners" and
reciting the number of people in each city who attended their last big
concert tour.
"You know how old I am?" a despondent Ray asks Karen.  "How old?" she
replies.  "Old," he sighs simply.  Ray is an admitted alcoholic who's on
the wagon now.  He is so dedicated that he goes to AA meetings while on
tour.  The one in Holland proves problematic for him since it turns out
to be conducted in Dutch.
"The tragedy is that our lives peak too early," Ray complains.  The
movie argues convincingly that we do not have to accept this
conventional wisdom.  The upbeat film doesn't really care if we ponder
these little messages; it is happy just to entertain us by letting us
hang out with the band and vicariously enjoy their gigs.
STILL CRAZY runs a fast 1:35.  It is rated R for modest amounts of
profanity, sexuality and drug usage and would be fine for most
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Joy Wyse
Over twenty years ago, when a fictional 70's rock band, Strange Fruit,
disbanded, part of their problem had been in determining which one was the
`star'.  A combination of ego, booze, drugs and sex had led to their
downfall, assisted by a lightning bolt from God himself.
Still Crazy is a good example of an ensemble working together.  Top
billing goes to Stephen Rea as Tony Costello, the keyboard player who has
since been reduced to servicing a condom machine route in Spain.  But, he
is not `the star'.  All of the characters are totally believable as
members of the defunct group, but the memorable performance is given by
Bill Nighy as Ray Simms, the lead singer, whose former good looks had
compensated for his limited ability.  He and his Swedish trophy wife,
Astrid Simms (Helena Bergstrom) live in a mansion that is mortgaged to the
hilt, in dire need of repair, and up for sale.  Each member of the group
is stuck in a job that they dislike, so when the suggestion of a comeback
arises, they each agree.  The problem of ego is still there, but the
drinking, drugs and sex have been reduced to almost non-existent.
There is a lot of good adult humor, none of which is offensive.  The
jokes and sight gags are very real, as is the music.  The haunting `The
Flame Still Burns' will linger with you after you leave the theater. 
You'll also remember `Brian's Theme' and `What Might Have Been'.
It is not a great movie, but it is enjoyable.  Even if you're not an
advocate of Rock music, you'll enjoy the story.  I give it a solid B.  

Author
Michael Dequina
Every year, at least one studio stages a one-week Academy qualifying
engagement for a film that clearly has no prayer at snagging any
nominations, let alone any awards.  This year's most blatant example is
this British comedy, which is certainly pleasant enough to watch but
completely forgettable.
After the misfire of _The_Juror_, _The_Josephine_Baker_Story_ and
_What's_Love_Got_to_Do_with_It_ director Brian Gibson returns to his
musical roots--with considerably less success--for this formulaic tale
about the reunion of (fictional) '70s rockers Strange Fruit (played by
Stephen Rea, Jimmy Nail, Bill Nighy, and Timothy Spall).  Naturally, the
personality conflicts that led to the band's first breakup, namely that
between Nail's soulful guitarist/backup singer and Nighy's vain lead
singer, endanger the reunion's success and long-term prospects, but, as is
the case of the recent crop of _Full_Monty_-ish feel-good Brit comedies,
everything gets nicely tied up in the end.  There are a few nice turns,
especially by Nail and Juliet Aubrey (as the band's assistant), but most of
the humor provided by scripters Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais is less
funny than plain silly, such as Nighy's stuck-in-the-glam-era stage antics
and a running gag that has Spall constantly evading debt collectors.  In
short, _Still_Crazy_ is simply an average timekiller.  (opens December 11)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
