Title
Review for Tombeau d'Alexandre, Le (1992) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Max Hoffmann
IN A NUTSHELL: a highly engrossing video about the career and struggles
of a cinematic Russian genius, little-known even to his own people.
Hypnotic archival clips make you yearn to see the original films in
their entirety.  Sheds much needed light on little known aspects of
life in the Soviet Union from Lenin through Stalin.  Transcends the
deadness of many "talking heads" interview.  The memories shared are
immediate and highly personal.
     The film/video is structured in the form of six "letters" to the
deceased Alexander Ivanovitch Medvedkin, which explore and expose his
career as a driving force behind the pioneering "film trains" of the
October Revolution.  Medvedkin is still being rediscovered, even in the
Soviet Union, because he was perennially censored by bureaucrats who
couldn't understand the brilliance of his craft.  Ironically, Medvedkin
was a "pure" communist, who always held to the vision of Lenin.  But as
time went on he found himself surrounded by communists who "faked"
being communists.  His survival into old age (89 years) is a miracle
and an inspiration for "silenced" artisitic visionaries worldwide.  The
survival of nine of his "never shown" films to our present day  is
nothing less than a miracle of Biblical proportions.
     To many Americans, the details of how these Soviet financed
projects were censored or shelved will seem uncomfortably "close to
home" in our era of Jesse Helms, the NEA and the Christian Right's
determination to cut out paper plate sized fig leaves for healthy
depictions of the human form.  Though the Soviets weren't driven by a
frozen religious ideology, their "Stalin knows best" approach to film
cutting is indistinguishable from our own Jesse Helms (currently
trying to protect us from lesbians in high office).  It's easy to see
why some of Medvedkin's films didn't cut committee approval (like one
epic where a group of comrades find themselves in Hell, after death in
battle, and make themselves comfortable because it's so much better
than what they've just been through in Soviet society!).  Some of his
humor was a bit like an early Russian Gary Larson.
     Images from the archival film footage are unforgettable.  Much is
shown from HAPPINESS, the only Medvedkin film well known outside
Russia (though made in 1934, it got its American premier at the 1972
San Francisco International Film Festival).  You will see images of a
peasant's house running away with legs and feet, a large hotel being
removed from a futuristic Moscow on wheels, a tribunal of cows judging
people.  Twilight year interviews with Medvedkin himself are interwoven
with fascinating insights from surviving contemporaries, (as well as
promising young Russian film makers influenced by him).
     Years before CNN's "see it now" coverage of the bombing of
Baghdad, Medvedkin invented the concept of the "film train."  It was a
working film studio with processing facilities transformed from box
cars!  Passenger cars on the train were remodeled into the theatre.
Medvedkin would travel around the country shortly after the revolution,
shoot propaganda oriented films with local residents, develop/edit the
film, and show it to them a few hours later!  (Models of the train are
available for viewing at London's Museum of the Moving Image.)
Wonderful demonstrations of his innovations include the "rifle camera"
he invented in WWII, so ordinary soldiers, trained in the infantry,
could aim through the "cross hairs" and get dramatic front line
coverage of history in the making.
     Medvedkin often had to "recreate" historic battles.  Ironically,
for Westerners, the most universally recognized image of the storming
of the Winter Palace is his highly romanticized recreation.  (One
contemporary relates that more extras were accidentally trampled to
death during the filming than the casualties of the original event,
which took place three years before!)
     Your heart will ache to see some of his films in their entirety,
especially one of his high camp color "musicals" made during WWII, that
features giddy peasant women singing their hearts out while they shovel
wheat!  Images from the Silent films, (which he made into the 30s)
resemble the eeriest of German cinema of the 20s, like THE GOLEM.
Fascinating background detail is also revealed on the actor who
frequently played Stalin's "cameos" in these films (whose image is
more recognizable to the West than the dictator himself).  Thoughts of
Ronald Reagan give some irony to this "actor in the Kremlin."
     Must viewing for any serious student of film, and high on
entertainment value for anyone else.  Probably destined for showing on
PBS.  Request it at your local, esoteric video outlet.
The original French title:
Le Dernier Bolchevik, ou Le Tombeau d'Alexandre
Print from: Les Films de l'Astrophore
(sorry, their address wasn't listed in the festival guide.  Try Paris
directory assistance.)
