Title
Review for Summer School (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
A surprise for anyone expecting just another dumb teen sex comedy, although 
Carl Reiner's involvement as director should indicate something more than 
the usual fluff.  Freddy Shoop (Mark Harmon) is a gym teacher forced into 
teaching remedial English for the summer with a bunch of teenagers who are 
just as unmotivated as he is.  While SUMMER SCHOOL is rooted in familiar 
genre conventions (a beach scene, a party, forgettable pop/rock music on the 
soundtrack) it noticeably steers clear of the expected plot conventions 
(e.g. the revenge-by-humiliation ritual that usually climaxes films of this 
type).  After the first few minutes it looks like the 'dumb teen sex comedy' 
genre is about to give way to the even more repellent high-school cliché of 
'unorthodox teacher inspires misfit kids to succeed'.  Without giving away 
the film's ending, which is more realistic than you'd expect, SUMMER SCHOOL 
heads into that territory but does make a few compromises.
SUMMER SCHOOL's script is full of clever lines and snappy dialogue, 
particularly in the exchanges between Harmon and neighboring teacher Kirstie 
Alley.  The kids are all 'character types' but they aren't the usual jerks 
we see in high school comedies, and even the standard authority-figure 
villain (Robin Thomas) isn't the stock type - for a moment you'll wonder if 
he's secretly amused at the outrageous prank the class pulls on their 
substitute teacher.  Harmon and Alley spar well together - I don't know if 
this role helped her land the part of Rebecca Howe in CHEERS (it was in the 
same year) but there's obvious similarities.  She's immensely likable, as is 
the easy-going Harmon.  The class is also likable, despite their limited 
screen time as individual characters.  Even Harmon's dog is likable!  What's 
odd about this film is that although there's no nudity, sex or drugs, there 
is some coarse language (it's all compressed into one early scene!) and gore 
(we see 'highlights' from a 16mm print of THE TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE) that 
lifts it out of any family viewing category.  There's also a pregnant 
teenager played by Shawnee Smith, a minor role which is treated in an 
unsensational manner and with a surprisingly practical resolution.  Her 
fellow students include Dean Cameron and Courtney Thorne-Smith, who had 
already struggled with high school life in the TV series FAST TIMES.  The 
happy final shot, which has a spontaneous feel to it, sums up the spirit of 
the whole movie.


Author
Dan Frank
     It's gotten to the point now that when I see a Carl Reiner film
advertised, I say, "Aha!  That's like a Rob Reiner film, except that it's not
original!"  Both father and son make technically clean movies with good laughs
and pleasant people.  Apparently, Rob takes a little more time choosing his
scripts, which is probably why we see his work a little less frequently.
     If you've seen the previews (trailers?) for SUMMER SCHOOL, you know the
plot and have seen the best jokes, so you don't have to go.  If you haven't,
here's the basic idea:  Mark Harmon plays the gym teacher, who lives for and on
the beach, on a teacher's salary no less.  He teaches at Ocean Front High,
which in the real world would have been turned into condos years ago.  When the
fellow who was supposed to teach summer school (in a cameo appearance by the
director) backs out,  Harmon is drafted by the evil, politically ambitious
assistant principal to babysit a class of semi-literate misfits through
remedial English.
     Of course, neither Harmon nor the kids wants to be there, so at first he
tries to show them and himself a good time.  But then, threatened by the
assistant principal, and coached by the sultry honors teacher in the next
classroom (played by Kirstie Alley, reprising her Lt. Saavik persona), he does
an about-face, and tries to whip the kids into shape in time for the test.
     The rest of the movie is a disconnected episodic farce, as Harmon gives
the kids an incentive to perform (he bribes them), and helps them become
concerned and decent students.  Sort of.  Reiner can't decide if he's really
serious about this stuff, so the plot veers between melodrama, social
conscience, and utter nonsense.  He even manages to suggest at the end that the
kids would have done better if Harmon had sent them to the bathroom for six
weeks.
     Harmon himself doesn't disappoint us.  If you liked his Coors Beer
commercials, you'll like him in SUMMER SCHOOL.  He roller-skates his way
through the film in a good-natured way, doing his earnest best, and funny
things happen to him.  There is no chemistry between him and Alley, which is no
surprise, either.  You could have replaced either or both with a cardboard
cutout labeled, "Teacher," and had the kids carry it around from scene to
scene, with no difference in effect.
     Still, SUMMER SCHOOL is pleasant enough fare for a summer matinee, when
you'd just be hot outside, and you're not paying full price.  If you want to
kill some time, and they're not asking more than two bucks, go for it.  
