Title
Review for Punchline (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Randy Parker
        With the blockbuster comedy BIG, Tom Hanks firmly established
himself as one of the elite comic actors in Hollywood.  In PUNCHLINE,
Hanks, in an untypically serious and dramatic role, gives unquestionably
his finest performance to date and demonstrates that his acting abilities
extend well beyond comedy.  Hanks plays down and out stand-up comic Steve
Gold.  Flat broke and having dropped out of medical school, Steve is a
fledgling comedian and one of the regulars at "The Gas Station," a New York
comedy club.  Night after night, he and several other comics perform at the
club for dismal pay in the hopes of getting a big break--that is, being
discovered by a casting agent and getting a shot at network television and
stardom.
        Hanks shows incredible dramatic range in a deeply textured
performance.  Evoking everything from pathos to contempt, Steve is complex,
self-destructive, and emotionally disturbed.  In some ways, comedian Steve
Gold is, believe it or not, even more immature than the 12-year-old Hanks
played in BIG.  Steve is usually cold and mean-spirited to others, but
occasionally he can be kind and warm-hearted as well, if it serves his
purposes.  For example, when another comic, played by Sally Fields, asks
him for advice on her jokes, initially he is very friendly and helpful, but
he immediately turns cold and vicious upon learning that she cannot pay him
right away for his services.  Despite these character flaws, or perhaps
because of them, Steve is a great comic; he uses his personal bitterness
and anger to fuel his comedy.  From his displays of rage and anger to his
quiet moments of pain and suffering, Hanks is enthralling throughout
PUNCHLINE.
        Although she must compete with Hanks' impressive performance,
Fields is quite effective and holds her own as Lilah, a housewife who
yearns to make people laugh.  Lilah eventually becomes Steve's protege and
friend.  He gives her pointers and drags her to some of his gigs.  In one
hilarious scene, Lilah observes Steve as he performs in a hospital to an
audience of doctors, nurses, and patients.  As friends, as rivals, and as
almost-lovers, the chemistry between Steve and Lilah is strong.  With
Steve's help, Lilah learns to abandon her generic jokes and to use her
family life as a rich source of humorous material.
        Although PUNCHLINE provides some behind-the-scenes glances at
stand-up comedy, its prime emphasis is on Steve's emotional problems and on
Lilah's conflicts with her family.  Throughout the film, Lilah's
husband--John Goodman in a magnificent supporting role--opposes her comedy
career.  He thinks that she is neglecting her family and abandoning her
responsibilities as mother and wife.  Like all of the major characters in
PUNCHLINE, however, Goodman's is complex and dynamic, and the film avoids
stereotyping him as a callous villain.  He is never motivated by anything
other than his love for Lilah and their two daughters.
        Director David Seltzer brings sensitivity and authenticity to the
scenes involving Lilah's family; these scenes effectively portray the
turmoil that Lilah's comedy career has created at home.  For instance,
after returning home from watching Steve perform at the hospital, Lilah
frantically tries to get dressed and prepare a dinner for company in 5
minutes flat.  Lilah's home life also serves to underscore Steve's
loneliness and solitude; whereas she always can rely on her family's love
and support, he is estranged from his family and has only comedy to sustain
him.
        PUNCHLINE, like TERMS OF ENDEARMENT, is a film that successfully
walks a fine line between comedy and drama.  Seltzer always captures just
the right balance with his delicate and deft manipulation of the movie's
tone.  In addition to delivering big laughs both on and off the comedy
stage, PUNCHLINE provides powerful moments of human drama.  Several scenes
in the film, such as the almost-too-pat ending and the domestic scenes,
easily could have been contrived and superficial.  However, under Seltzer's
steady direction and with the support of the fine acting and screenplay,
these scenes are sincere and heartfelt.
        As a long time stand-up comedy aficionado, I was naturally curious
to see whether Hanks and Fields could perform comedy convincingly on stage.
In the film, the two actors come across not only as genuine stand-up
comedians, but as fairly good ones.  At least part of the credit for this
goes to San Francisco comic Barry Sobel who coached Hanks in his role and
who has a small part in the film.
        I do have a few minor criticisms of the movie.  For instance,
Lilah's one night transformation from nervous and awkward housewife to
polished comedienne is too rapid to be believable.  And a scene in which
Hanks bombs on stage because of an emotional crisis doesn't ring true.
        Even if you don't like the cast or the subject matter, PUNCHLINE is
a must see simply for Tom Hanks' parody of the Gene Kelly "Singing in the
Rain" dance number.

Author
Brian Koller
"Punchline" is a drama about stand-up comics.   They want
to become stars, but their dreams are often reduced to making 
it through the next gig.
Lilah (Sally Fields) is housewife by day, stand-up comic
by night.  The movie opens with her buying jokes, as covertly
as if buying drugs.
She performs at a nightclub as part of a lineup of comics.
(Look for Damon Wayans as one of the troop.)
Fields is not a very good comic.  Her jokes aren't funny,
she's nervous, and can't handle hecklers.  She also faces
problems at the home front.  Her husband (John Goodman)
doesn't support her new career, and her three young daughters
are a handful.
Another comic who performs at the club is Steven (Tom Hanks)
a medical student who flunks college when he can't remember
the word for rectum during an oral exam.  Tom is an
excellent comic and has a bright future, but has yet to
break the news to his father who wants him to be an open-heart
surgeon like himself.
Fields begins to follow Hanks around, pestering him to learn
why he is so much better as a comic than she.  When he learns
she is broke, he at first disdains her, then for some reason
decides to help her.  Under his guidance, she is transformed
into a funny comedian.  This story line is hard to swallow:
Fields is more believable as a flying nun than a hilarious comic.
Goodman wants his wife to entertain business clients,
who are church pastors, to demonstrate his family values.
Pressed for time after hanging with Hanks, Fields must dress up 
and cook a fancy dinner.  The dinner goes well until one
of the bratty daughters tells a dirty joke.
Hanks learns that a network talent scout is considering
putting him on television, a chance at the big time.
He tries to hide this from the other comics to no avail.
One night, he is told that a network bigwig is in the audience,
but the man in the suit turns out to be his father.
Hanks has a nervous breakdown on stage, blabbering about
his relationship with his dad and how fellow med students
taunted him for squeamishness.
Hanks later hits on Fields, another unlikely story line.
She rejects him.  His reaction is to do an imitation of
Gene Kelly in "Singin' In The Rain" while Fields gapes at
him.
The talent scout tells Hanks that there is to be an audition
between the comics with the winner going on Carson.  Fields
has them rolling in the aisles.  Everyone knows that Hanks
is the better comic, but he is self-destructive, mocking the
judges and bigwigs.  He recovers, and by the end of his
routine everyone is laughing.  Fields wins the contest
due to Hanks bad politics.  But she refuses the prize in
order to return to her loving family.  Hanks is then the winner.
The moral is that everyone has a place in life that must be
accepted.  Fields is a housewife not a comic, Hanks a comic not
a doctor.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
