Title
Review for Jungle2Jungle (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: John Pasquin
Writers: Bruce A. Evans and Raymond A. Gideon
Starring: Tim Allen, Sam Huntington, Martin Short, Lolita Davidovitch, 
JoBeth Williams, David         Ogden Stiers, Leelee Sobieski
Okay, I just don't know why, but I seem to be getting this diversion to 
Disney-made real-life actors movies...as well as real-life acting Tim 
Allen movies.  I couldn't even make it through "The Santa Clause," so 
why did I even see this?  (just to make an idle point, I DID like "Toy 
Story," but that was good)  Also, I have this aversion to bad French 
farces, and if they remake them into American films.  Well, this is my 
excuse: it was prom night, I'm not a prom person, my best friend and I 
impulsively went to the Drive-Ins where they were playing "Grosse Pointe 
Blank" - wouldn't mind seeing it again - but I had to suffer through 
this first.  I agreed to go.  Ugh.
In all fairness, I can say that at least this inane plot wasn't dreamed 
by an American.  It was originally a french film released in America 
under the pseudonym of "Little Indian, Big City" (French title - "Un 
Indien dans la ville").  I stayed away from it like it was limburgher, 
and according to Roger Ebert, that was a good idea.  But I can only 
imagine how bad that must be if this is an improvement.
The stupid plot concerns a father who just learns he has a son from his 
current marriage. Let me clarify: his wife (JoBeth Williams) left him 
years ago, and I mean years - around 13 or so - and went to an island in 
the Carribean or something.  He goes to her to FINALLY get the divorce 
papers signed so he can remarry this...thing (played with an emphasis on 
over-done by Lolita Davidovitch, who is usually good).  She tells him he 
has a son as his boatman goes off.  He meets him, he has a weird name 
(Mimi Seku, I think...or as the bad joke goes - "Mitsubishi" - laugh 
track cue), he knows english, they fish, more bad jokes, pirhanna joke, 
the kid has a pet spider, he makes a promise to take him to the statue 
of liberty...you know the drill.
Now this is where the plot complicates (well, complicates for this one, 
at least): the Fish-Out-of-Water joke switches from Tim Allen on an 
island to his island son in New York City.  Tim is a stock broker and 
his coffee profits are plunging because his laptop died and he wasn't 
able to communicate with his assistant or whatever he is - Martin Short. 
 A russian mob is tossed into the plot somewhere (how come in EVERY 
hokey french import, there is a mob?!)  Tim learns a lesson of life from 
his son and we discover that cellular phones can operate on an island 
even though there are no sockets to recharge the batteries.  
The story is crap, the jokes are hokey and not really funny, and the 
actors have to struggle to make it interesting.  But the material is so 
fowl that even a rewrite by Quentin Tarantino couldn't help it.  The 
whole time, I kept thinking that a grown person had to think this up and 
several more grown people had to do this.  At the end of filming, did 
they all scream out, "We've made a great movie, guys!"  I sure hope not. 
Big Question to Get From This Film: why would someone want to remake 
what was billed as one of the worst films of all time if they're just 
going to do it the exact same way?  Huh?  
MY RATING (out of 5): * (for some of the actors' names and a joke or two 
that made me chuckle, I guess...okay, so I really feel bad for it, so I 
only gave it one star)

Author
Ben Hoffman
This live comedy is one the kids will love.  Adults should take a grain
of salt along but, hey, if you are looking for a movie that will make
the young ones stay in their seats because they won't want to miss a
moment of what is happening on the screen, you have come to the right
place.
JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE  has all the elements found in a movie for children.
It has comedy, including of course the slapstick variety.  It also has
the exotic flavor of  a 14-year-old boy who is more at home in an
Amazon jungle than he is in the rat race of the big city where his
father lives. And there is even a touch of puppy love (but no puppies),
with pretty Karen (LeeLee Sobieski.)
Michael (Tim Allen)  is the boy's father.  Allen  is no newcomer to
Disney films as he starred in The Santa Clause and in Toy Story where
he was the voice of Buzz Lightyear.  On TV, Allen has many credits and
is  probably best known for HOME IMPROVEMENT.
Michael would like to marry Charlotte (who wouldn't?) (Lolita
Davidovich) but before he can do that he has to get divorced from his
current wife, Patricia (JoBeth Williams).  So Michael hops a plane to
the Amazon jungle where Patricia, a doctor, is currently working.
Imagine his surprise when he discovers that a 14-year-old boy, with the
adorable name of Mimi-Siku (Sam Huntington)  who wears a headband and a
native "skirt" is his son he never knew he had.  Patricia had neglected
to tell him she was pregnant when they separated.
Michael decides to take Mimi-Siku back to New York City and that is
when things begin to roll as Mimi-Siku does not readily adapt to his
new surroundings.  At this point the comedy shifts into high gear.
Helping to make the film a children's delight are Martin Short, David
Ogden Stiers, Bob Dishy and Valerie Mahaffey as well as others.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Let's play make a movie!  You are a movie mogul.  Your company has
entrusted you with zillions of dollars to spend on films.  Big budget
is your middle name.  You are paid the big bucks because you can make
movies that will sell popcorn like there's no tomorrow.
     All of the producers are pitching their hot projects to you.
Everyone assures you that theirs will be the runaway hit that can make
your career in Hollywood.  Although your life could not look rosier,
you do have this one fear.  Your recurring nightmare involves taking
too much risk and blowing it all with some HEAVEN'S GATE style turkey.
     You need some insurance.  One of the proposals in front of you has
remake stamped right on the cover.  Couldn't go wrong with that choice.
You tell your underlings to get cracking on it.  The movie to be remade
is a 1994 French film called UN INDIEN DANS LA VILLE and released in
the US with a dubbed version called LITTLE INDIAN, BIG CITY.  Your film
will be called JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE.
     After production begins, you finally getting around to asking how
well LITTLE INDIAN, BIG CITY was received.  You find out that it made
the worse 10 of the year list of many of the major critics and one of
the biggest critics called LITTLE INDIAN, BIG CITY one of the worse
films ever made.  You break out the antacid tablets and rediscover
religion.  You worry every minute until the curtains go up.
     Well, you lucked out.  Not a great show but a nice if unremarkable
kids' movie.  You'll probably end up in the black, and your position is
still secure.  Next time, however, you'll do better upfront research.
     Disney's JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE is a live action film featuring popular
actor Tim Allen.  Allen was the comedic foundation of Disney's
successful 1994 film THE SANTA CLAUSE.  Both pictures were directed by
John Pasquin.  Allen's not nearly as funny this time, but it's not his
fault.  Most of his lines are lame, thanks to the script by Bruce A.
Evans, Ray Gideon and Charlie Peters.  His lines are targeted toward
the adults in the audience with mostly ineffective jokes involving such
things as the brand of a shaver.  All of the writer's creative energy
seems to have been focused on developing the part of the boy.
     In the story, Michael Cromwell (Tim Allen) and Richard (Martin
Short) are traders in the commodities pit.  One day, Michael leaves his
jungle to go to the Amazon rain forest.  He goes on a simple mission to
get his wife, Dr. Patricia Cromwell (JoBeth Williams), to sign their
divorce papers.  Simple, but essential, since he is scheduled to be
married in 30 days to a vivacious, but slightly airheaded, fashion
designer named Charlotte (Lolita Davidovich).
     Wearing his suit and expensive shoes, and taking along his laptop,
he looks stranger than the natives in the jungle.  Charlotte introduces
him to his son Mimi Siku (Sam Huntington) whom he never knew he had --
she left Michael 13 years ago.  (The film relishes symmetry.  Later
Michael's costume will look proper, but Mimi Siku's will seem totally
out of place in Michael's jungle.)
     Since the focus of the film is the wild boy, the effectiveness of
the picture hangs on the casting of this role.  Huntington tries hard
and shows promise as an actor, but is miscast in several ways.  For a
boy who has roughed it in the wilderness all of his life, I would not
expect such a delicate looking boy.  He lives in the searing sun of a
river encampment and spends his days hunting in his canoe, but his skin
shows little tan and is smooth as silk.  He looks like a musical
prodigy who has never been outdoors nor ever been bruised from a fall.
The press kit, on CD-ROM no less, says his only movie before this one
was in a small part in BOYS that was left on the cutting room floor.
Even though I think he was all wrong for the part, I ended up liking
him anyway.
     Since the film is called JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE, the action soon switches
back to New York where Michael takes Mimi Siku to get the fire from the
Statue of Liberty for his village chief.  The Amazon part is
cliche-ridden and predictable, but the New York locale, where most of
the action occurs, provides a richer and more interesting terrain for
comedy.  Tony Pierce-Robert's cinematography, however, is shown off
best in the sweeping rain forest vistas.  The music by Michael
Convertino comes alive with the rhythm of jungle drums and flutes
during the Amazon section.
     Once back in The Big Apple subplots appear around every turn: the
Russian Mafia, a losing position in coffee futures, a Fashion Channel
documentary, a teenage love story, a spider with an attitude, and the
list goes on.  Some of the jokes are quite funny with the best
involving a dart from a blowgun that accidentally anesthetizes the cat.
     Lolita Davidovich, much better known for her dramatic roles, gives
the best small performance in the film.  Dressed to kill in one
revealing gown after another, she plays her role with great panache.
Other actresses might have given it the tired old brainless routine,
but Davidovich imbues her character with a subtle but detectable
intelligence.  She also makes her character look alluring rather than
cheap.
     The physical humor dominates as in, for example, the running joke
about Mimi Siku urinating in all the wrong places.  Michael coaches him
too about when to raise and lower the toilet lid.  "Females in the
tribe start war with this," he warns his son.
     Some of the shortest lines have the most punch.  When Mimi Siku
first sees Charlotte's cat, he misinterprets why she has it.  "Cat fat.
We eat?" he asks.
     When the film attempts serious themes, it quickly loses the
audience.  Most effective are the attempts at humor.  Some, like the
coffee futures part, will go over the kids' heads and bore the
grown-ups.  Others such as the Russian Mafia are little more than
tedious plot devices to move the story along.  Still, on balance, a
mildly funny film.  With the dearth of kids' movies, it's good to see
one even if it's only mildly funny.
     JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE runs 1:51.  It is rated PG for a couple of scenes of
threatened violence.  (The film at the press screening had a G rating
so perhaps it was re-rated.  The press kit says PG as does the
advertising.)  The film would be fine for kids of all ages.  Most
Saturday morning cartoons are scarier than this film.  My son Jeffrey,
almost 8, found the film "very hilarious."  He liked the character of
the boy, especially when he was climbing big places.  I thought it was
an imminently forgettable film, but one funny enough for me to give it
a thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tim Allen, Sam Huntington, JoBeth Williams, Lolita Davidovich, 
      Martin Short, David Ogden Stiers, Bob Dishy
Director: John Pasquin
Producer: Brian Reilly
Screenplay: Bruce Evans and Raynold Gideon
Cinematography: Tony Pierce-Roberts
Music: Michael Convertino
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     Before I start lambasting this motion picture, let me recap my 
feelings about the French film upon which JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE is based.  
LITTLE INDIAN, BIG CITY (a.k.a., UN INDIEN DANS LA VILLE) was easily one 
of 1996's worst films -- a dull, lifeless attempt to cull laughs from 
dumb characters doing stupid things in contrived situations.  Not for 
one moment was it cute, funny, or likable.  So Disney, in their infinite 
wisdom, gobbled up the rights and decided to remake this loser by re-
teaming Tool Man Tim Allen with THE SANTA CLAUSE's director, John 
Pasquin.  The predictable result is a bad movie -- the kind of pointless 
tripe that the Mouse Company continues to foist upon us in the name of 
"family entertainment."  
     When I first heard that Allen was going to star in the LITTLE 
INDIAN reworking, my reaction was that it couldn't possibly be worse 
than the original.  Ultimately, I was right, although just barely.  
JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE (what a stupid title -- why use "2" instead of "to"??) 
is pretty close to unwatchable, and it's certainly neither entertaining 
nor enjoyable.  It is slightly more energetic than LITTLE INDIAN, and 
that's the only reason why I have given it a marginally better rating.  
     Allen plays Michael, a top-of-the-line Wall Street trader.  He's 
engaged to an airheaded bimbo named Charlotte (Lolita Davidovich), but 
before they can tie the knot, he has to fly to Venezuela, find his 
current wife, Patricia (JoBeth Williams), and get a divorce (they've 
been separated for more than a dozen years).  When he arrives in 
Patricia's little village, he learns that the thirteen year old white 
kid (Sam Huntington) in a loin cloth is actually his son.  Furthermore, 
for reasons that are never made clear, Michael is obligated to bring the 
boy, Mimi, back to New York to experience life in the big city.  
CROCODILE DUNDEE this ain't.  
     Everything in JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE is hackneyed.  There's never a whiff 
of innovation or a hint that the film makers might be interested in 
trying something different.  And, like all "good" family films these 
days, there are several obligatory flatulence jokes.  I think we're 
supposed to be touched by the growing bond between Michael and Mimi, and 
tickled by the slapstick-y antics of Allen and Martin Short (who plays 
one of Michael's cohorts).  Neither of these aspects work.  There's 
nothing emotionally solid or satisfying about the father/son 
relationship, and the duo's attempts at comedy seem more desperate than 
funny.  The most amusing moment in JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE is entirely 
unintentional.  During a scene when an incredibly fake spider is 
scurrying around the floor of Michael's boss' office, you can see the 
strings being used to manipulate it.
     I for one am sick and tired of the unappealingly unoriginal fare 
that Disney releases on a constant basis.  It's getting to the point 
where a visit to the dentist sounds like a reasonable alternative to 
sitting through another plot-by-numbers family film from the studio of 
plastic characters and happy endings.  At least this time they've 
managed to do something of dubious note:  turn one of 1996's worst 
motion pictures into one of 1997's.  Congratulations, Disney.  I hope 
Walt is turning in his grave.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Tim Allen, Sam Huntington, JoBeth Williams, Lolita Davidovich,
Martin Short, David Ogden Stiers, Bob Dishy Director: John Screenplay:
Bruce Evans and Raynold Gideon
How deep can the relationship between a father and son truly be? When
one is repeatedly called 'Baboon' and the other is named 'Mimu-Siku',
which literally means cat piss!
The level of this new Tim Allen comedy is as superficial as its idiotic
name calling. The humour is based on jokes involving blow guns used to
kill flies, moronic Russian Mafia, anaesthetised cats, and the dietary
habits of 'Mimu-Siku'; who shoots pigeons, eats tropical fish, and cat
food when denied the cat.
By far the most interesting character is the hairy, pet tarantula who
uses its radio sonic abilities to hunt its prey. What Tim Allen, and
every other character needs is a good bite from this spider, both to
wake them up and prevent  the audience from lapsing into a undeserved
coma.

Author
Michael Dequina
Jungle 2 Jungle (PG) no stars (out of ****)
I was sitting here for about fifteen minutes trying to figure out a
snappy lead for my review of the new Tim Allen "comedy" Jungle 2 Jungle
until I realized it wasn't worth the trouble.  This remake of the French
blockbuster Little Indian, Big City (which was massacred by critics during
its brief stateside run last year) is pure crap, plain and simple.
Uptight New York commodities trader Michael Cromwell (Allen), during
a trip to visit his estranged-for-13-years doctor wife Patricia (JoBeth
Williams) in the Amazon village of Lipo Lipo), discovers he has a
13-year-old son named Mimi Siku (unpromising newcomer Sam Huntington) whom
Patricia raised in the wild with her.  Michael takes Mimi back to New York
with him per a promise he made to the boy, and hilarity supposedly ensues.
Right now, three days after I've seen the film, I'm still waiting for the
hilarity to ensue.
Just about everything about this film is sloppy, awful, and
creatively bankrupt.  In the Lipo Lipo-based first act, all director John
Pasquin and writers Bruce A. Evans and Raynold Gideon do is sic exotic
animal after exotic animal on Michael.  First piranhas.  Then a spider.
Then alligators.  Then piranhas again.  How funny.  Things don't get any
better once the action shifts to New York, with Mimi Siku running around in
a loincloth, brandishing a bow and arrow, urinating in potted plants,
killing birds with his bow and arrow, and cooking up Michael's co-worker
Richard's (Martin Short) expensive tropical fish.  What fun.  Mimi Siku even
climbs to the top of the Statue of Liberty in a moment a press mailing from
Disney (complete with a working flashlight fashioned after the Statue's
torch) says, "reaches new heights of hilarity."  Whatever.  Mimi Siku's
ignorance of the ways of the "civilized" world is supposed to be charming,
but it's just insulting.  The character is an assemblage of every native
cliche and stereotype you can think of wrapped up in a young Anglo package,
which I guess is supposed to make it OK.  I don't think so.
By the time Mimi Siku makes his climb up Lady Liberty, I thought the
(bad) idea had been mined for whatever it was worth (nothing) and that the
film was almost over.  Not so.  The film creaks along for about another
forty minutes, introducing a couple of new plot threads fashioned just to
prolong the agony.  One thread involving a shady deal Richard makes with a
Russian mobster (David Ogden Stiers) is a complete waste of time, a
storyline whose only apparent purpose is to set up a truly painful Home
Alone-style slapstick climax.  Just when you think it couldn't get any
worse, there's the second thread, the sappy, cloying, gag-inducing romance
between Mimi Siku and Richard's clean-cut daughter Karen (LeeLee Sobiesky).
To call this development cornball is an understatement.
In fact, to call Jungle 2 Jungle bad is an understatement.  It's
awful.  Horrible.  Garbage.  A waste of time, money, and film stock.  I'm
sorry to say that most of the children in the audience ate this crap up,
which is just another disturbing sign that America's youth is in trouble.  
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Disney)
Starring:  Tim Allen, Martin Short, Sam Huntington, Lolita Davidovich,
David Ogden Stiers, JoBeth Williams.
Screenplay:  Bruce A. Evans and Raynold Gideon.
Producer:  Brian Reilly.
Director:  John Pasquin.
MPAA Rating:  PG (mild profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  110 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Whenever film fans learn of plans by an American studio to re-make a
foreign language film, the common reaction is a collective cringe.
Wonderful foreign films like THE VANISHING and DIABOLIQUE have been turned
into big-budget garbage, as Hollywood tends to grab on to a plot without
grasping the point.  The prospect of a remake of UN INDIEN DANS LA VILLE
(LITTLE INDIAN, BIG CITY), however, inspired cringes of a different kind.
The 1996 American theatrical release of LITTLE INDIAN inspired some of the
most savage reviews of the year, making the prospect of the Disney-fied
version JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE almost too much to bear.  Hollywood could only
improve on the original this time around, but it hasn't improved enough.
JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE is a dopey and predictable family comedy which could be
thought of as disappointing, if not for the wretchedness of the source
material.
     Tim Allen stars as Michael Cromwell, a Wall Street commodities broker
with a non-stop lifestyle.  He barely has time in his schedule to finalize
his divorce from his first wife Patricia (JoBeth Williams) -- who left him
for medical work in the Amazon -- so that he can marry his current
girlfriend Charlotte (Lolita Davidovich).  When Michael reaches Venezuela,
he finds quite a surprise waiting for him:  a 13-year-old son named Mimi
Siku (Sam Huntington) who has spent his entire life in the jungle.  A
hastily made promise lands Michael the task of taking Mimi Siku back to
New York with him for a visit, but Michael still has little time to teach
his newfound son about life in the concrete jungle, especially when
Michael and his partner Richard (Martin Short) get in hot water trying to
dump a load of coffee futures on the Russian mafia.
     Yes, you read correctly, the Russian mafia.  JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE
certainly doesn't take any chances on having too few plot threads,
offering up David Ogden Stiers as the menacing mafioso, an entourage of
film-makers following Michael's fashion designer fiancee Charlotte, a
romantic interest for Mimi Siku in Richard's daughter Karen (LeeLee
Sobieski, who _will_ be cast some day as a young Helen Hunt) and a pet
tarantula who makes trouble any time things get slow.  There is a lot of
going on to keep everyone busy, but even at its busiest JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE
simply isn't funny very often.  The gags in the script by Bruce A. Evans
and Raynold Gideon (previously responsible for masterworks like KUFFS and
CUTTHROAT ISLAND) include tired pokes at postal employees, foreign cab
drivers and the battle of the sexes over leaving the toilet seat up.  It
sometimes seems as though most of the film was transcribed from
10-year-old Jerry Seinfeld routines.
     It's hard to believe that after waiting over two years to follow up
his $144 million film debut in THE SANTA CLAUSE, Tim Allen decided this
was the script he couldn't pass up.  JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE (directed by THE
SANTA CLAUSE's John Pasquin) once again finds Allen playing a workaholic
who requires extraordinary circumstances to teach him lessons in
fatherhood, but THE SANTA CLAUSE gave Allen a unique set-up and clever
situations to work with.  JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE doesn't give him nearly as much
good material, relying on standard fish-out-of-water scenarios -- Mimi
Siku dines on cat food and tropical fish, hunts pigeons and climbs on the
outside of skyscrapers -- and a healthy serving of pratfalls.  Allen has
many comic talents, including fine timing with an exasperated one-liner,
but he is not particularly deft at physical comedy.  When co-star Martin
Short throws his tiny body at a locked door in a futile attempt to break
it down, you see what a real physical comedian looks like; Allen just
looks like he realizes he is much smarter than this material.
     Everyone in JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE does thoroughly likeable work in their
one-dimensional roles, which is probably as much as you should expect from
the performances in a film of this kind.  JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE is intended
primarily for kids, of course, and it does offer some appealing bits.
Most of the best ones involve Michael's ineptitude with Mimi Siku's
sleep-inducing blow darts, including a very funny struggle to revive
Charlotte's anesthetized cat.  The same kids who find that sequence
hilarious probably won't be able to make heads or tails out of the big
deal over some coffee, however, nor are they really a proper audience for
swishy gay stereotypes or jokes about flatulence and penis size.  There
just didn't seem to be much thought put into JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE except to
give it just enough tailoring to make it a Tim Allen vehicle.  Considering
that the original outfit they were working with was a cinematic polyester
suit like LITTLE INDIAN, BIG CITY, it might have been a better idea to
throw it all away and start from whole cloth.
