Title
Review for Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss (1998)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Sometimes large ambitions can be realized with
inconsequential admonitions.  In the case of "Billy's Hollywood
Screen Kiss," the writer-director ends the movie with the
caption, "A Tommy O'Haver trifle," yet he opens the scenario
with his lead character's pronouncement that he intends to
bring straights and gays closer together.  I think that the title
person, Billy (Sean P. Hayes), understands the straight world
well enough; he wants to get heterosexuals to fathom where
homosexuals are coming from a little more.  And the principal
stereotype held by heteros that he aspires to explode is that
gays are largely promiscuous: that their pairings-off have
nothing to do with discrimination but are designed simply to
afford them sexual release.  To O'Haver's credit, that very
large pigeonholing is discredited without the slightest pinch of
pretentiousness or weighty plotting.  "Billy's Hollywood Screen
Kiss" features likable characters whose flaws may include
opportunism and confusion but who are otherwise delightful
beings with whom to spend an hour and a half.
   O'Haver uses a cute distancing device throughout the film,
a series of Polaroid snapshots which Billy has allegedly taken
behind the viewfinder of the camera he carries around at all
times.  He is unemployed but hopes that his photography will
get him noticed, preferably via a gallery exhibition set up by
an established lenser.  He is not confused by his sexual
identity but he is baffled by his inability to find someone to
commit himself to, another soul who could likewise find him
attractive.  In this longing he precisely mirrors the folks in
straight society, thereby showing the audience that gays and
straights are really the same.  
   In a series of episodes divided by a display of Polaroids,
Billy first presents exhibit A, that of himself in bed with
Fernando (Armando Valdes-Kennedy), who likes him but is
committed to someone else.  When he runs into a
staggeringly handsome coffee-shop waiter, Gabriel (Brad
Rowe), he's in love.  Though Gabriel repeatedly speaks of a
girl friend he left behind in San Francisco when he went to
L.A. for fame and fortune, he sends out mixed signals.  Billy is
hopeful that the girl friend is a fabrication and, against the
advice of his roommate Georgiana (Meredith Scott Lynn) and
his well-to-do friend Perry (Richard Ganoung), he pursues the
26-year-old man.  
   The movie gets its title from the way that our current
romantic imagination is fueled by the old Hollywood pictures
like "From Here to Eternity."  In fact, Billy gets Gabriel a job
modeling for master photographer Rex Webster (Paul Bartel)
simulating a scene at Catalina Island from that famous Burt
Lancaster-Deborah Kerr sizzler.  In the film's most tender
scene, painstakingly milked for poignancy by director
O'Haven, Billy gets Gabriel to share his bed and slowly, like
any straight man seeking to get somewhere with the object of
his devotion, cautiously and "accidentally" touches him on his
bare torso to observe a reaction. What results fashions the
movie's climax--so to speak--and leads Billy to go ahead with
a Polaroid show in which Hollywood romantic scenes are re-
created.
   In a clever subplot, Billy's roommate Georgiana becomes
involved in a one-night stand with a drugged hippie (Carmine
Giovinazzo) who sings a ridiculous love song to her which he
composed on his guitar.  The movie has a bittersweet ending,
but most of all this light and airy fiction conjures up dream
worlds with which Shakespeare himself was not unfamiliar.

Author
Heather Picker
Written and Directed by Tommy O'Haver. Starring Sean P. Hayes, with Brad Rowe,
Richard Ganoung, Paul Bartel, and Meredith Scott Lynn. 1998, 92 min., Rated R.
     Billy Collier (Sean P. Hayes, now stealing scenes as Jack on NBC's "Will &
Grace") is a struggling photographer and hopeless romantic. As if that wasn't
bad enough for a young person in the 90s, Billy has fallen for coffeehouse
waiter Gabriel (Brad Rowe), and he doesn't know whether or not Gabriel is gay.
Apparently, Gabriel doesn't know either. The two become friends, and Gabriel
works as a model for the new series Billy is shooting (re-creating famous
Hollywood screen kisses-such as that famous roll on the beach in "From Here to
Eternity"-using Gabriel and a drag queen). As the friendship progresses and
Billy becomes more intent on finding out where he stands with Gabriel, a
somewhat needless journey provides an opportunity for Billy and his close
friend, Georgiana (Meredith Scott Lynn) to escape to an exotic location where
they both do some soul searching.
     "Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss" is a predictable movie, but it is well
acted. Hayes, Rowe, and Lynn are all appealing in the three largest roles, and
this is a promising effort from writer and director Tommy O'Haver (this marks
his feature film debut). Billy's black and white fantasies (about his Hollywood
screen kiss) and the clever Polaroid flashbacks are nice touches that
distinguish the movie from other romantic comedies. The DVD is presented in
widescreen format, and the picture is crisp and clear. The 2.0 Dolby Surround
Sound works well for this film, which is mostly dialogue. There aren't many
supplementary features, just the theatrical trailer and commentary from O'Haver
(I would have liked to have heard commentary from the actors, as well) in
addition to the standard interactive menus, scene access, and subtitles. Fans
of the film will definitely want the DVD, as the video is still priced for the
rental market.
     Notes: Rated R for language, and brief scenes involving sexuality and drug
use.
     DVD Details: Keep case (disc holder on left side), widescreen, 2.0 Dolby
Surround Sound, Digitally mastered, Interactive menus, Scene access, Theatrical
Trailer, French and Spanish subtitles, Director commentary.
     The Verdict: "Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss" is a breezy comedy with an
intelligent, mostly light-hearted script and good performances that will please
open-minded audiences that don't mind a predictable story.
    Review Courtesy of http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss (1998)
Sean P. Hayes, Brad Rowe, Richard Ganoung, Meredith Scott Lynn, Matthew 
Ashford, Armando Valdes-Kennedy, Paul Bartel, Carmine Giovinazzo, Holly 
Woodlawn, Mark Allen Anderson, Christopher Bradley. Written and directed 
by Tommy O'Haver. 89 minutes.
Rated R, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
Light as cotton candy, breezy and utterly charming, "Billy's Hollywood 
Screen Kiss" is reminiscent of one of those fluffy, exuberant Rock 
Hudson/Doris Day romantic comedies from the 60's, except in this case 
Rock is out of the closet and Doris is a guy.
Despite working on a shoestring budget, Indianapolis filmmaker and I.U. 
grad Tommy O'Haver had the audacity to film "Billy" in a cinemascope 
screen ratio, and his ballsy move works. Beautifully framed and drenched 
in vivid colors, the wide screen production is truly handsome, enhancing 
the film's innocent, good-old-days feel.
O'Haver has created an unusually beguiling hybrid of 90's sensibilities 
and 60's panache, as he examines the intricacies, absurdities and 
heartbreaks of the dating ritual. Although gays will especially 
appreciate his romantic observations, heterosexual audiences should also 
be receptive to the gentle truths about the human condition presented 
here.
Billy Collier is an up and coming photographer in the ultra-trendy L.A. 
art world. While working on a new photo project, recreating great screen 
kisses from Hollywood's Golden Age with an all-male/drag cast, and 
stumbling through the dating scene, he meets Gabriel, a great-looking 
coffee house waiter. Billy recruits him as a model, and the two build a 
friendship complicated by Billy's growing infatuation for Gabriel and 
Gabriel's confusion over his sexual orientation. Is Gabriel straight, gay 
or bi? More importantly, does he care as much for Billy as Billy cares 
for him, or is our young hero doomed to suffer the indignities of 
unrequited love?
Regardless of orientation, we've all been down that road. We've all tried 
to take things slow, because it's the sensible thing to do, while our 
hearts demand that we dive in the deep end of the romantic pool. We've 
all spent hours waiting for a phone call from that special someone, even 
while knowing the foolishness of such behavior. We've all tried valiantly 
to let things flow naturally, fighting that insidious impulse to 
manipulate situations to meet our romantic agenda.
And what gay man hasn't spent a sleepless night laying by a "platonic" 
buddy, hoping he'll roll over and plant a big Hollywood screen kiss on 
his lips? "Billy" captures all of that romantic torture, without ever 
falling into pathos or losing its sprightly spirit.
Thank O'Haver's ingenious script for that. Crisp and clever, his dialogue 
has the easy wit and insight of early Woody Allen relationship comedies, 
without any of the creepy undertones.
The actors do justice to O'Haver's words, with Sean P. Hayes a delight as 
Billy, the all-American kid just looking for love. Hayes hits all the 
right notes, balancing puppy-dog innocence with brains and style. Billy 
knows that he probably will get hurt, but he just can't resist Gabriel's 
beauty and charm. 
Brad Rowe, a Brad Pitt look-a-like who joined the cast of "NewsRadio" 
late last season, is very effective as Gabriel, deftly creating a 
character who is a bit dim and shallow, but utterly genuine. In lesser 
hands, Gabriel could easily have been just a himbo, but Rowe invests the 
character with enough substance that we understand why Billy is drawn to 
his spirit as well as his body.
The supporting cast is strong as well, with Meredith Scott Lynn a stand-
out as George, Billy's confidant and ersatz big sister. Armando Valdes-
Kennedy also scores as a Latin lover who just can't stop telling Billy 
how "special" he is.
With a drag trio popping up from time to time as the film's Greek chorus 
and several inventive dream sequences, "Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss" 
maintains a cheery, unpretentious tone, playing like a gay "Gidget" while 
gently dealing with the temptations and trauma of romance. The film was a 
big hit at last years Sundance Festival with good reason. O'Haver has 
spun a rich, entertaining confection, a gay film that manages to be 
mainstream without compromising itself. Now that's something to be out 
and proud about.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Much of what I liked about "Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss,"
the new gay romantic comedy from Tommy O'Haver, stems from what the
film DOESN'T do: it doesn't degenerate into trite melodrama, it
doesn't revel in its gayness, and it doesn't adhere to stereotypes.
With the exception of a drag queen or three, the gay characters
aren't flamboyantly over-the-top, the straight characters aren't
homophobic bastards, and everyone basically gets along.  Wishful
thinking on the director's behalf?  Perhaps... but O'Haver knows
that a romantic comedy isn't typically the right place for a Great
Statement, and he doesn't attempt to make one.  I applaud him for
it.
        What he gives us instead is a charming story about a gay
photographer named Billy (the extremely pleasant Sean P. Hayes), who
has a dream project: he wants to reshoot some of Hollywood's classic
movie kisses... but using only men, rather than heterosexual couples.
While looking for models to use in this project, Billy spies an
attractive waiter named Gabriel (Brad Rowe) at a local coffee shop,
and decides that he'd be perfect for the shoot.  The only problem
is, Gabriel's straight.
        This doesn't stop the two of them from becoming friends,
however... and soon Gabriel is giving Billy indications that maybe,
just maybe, his sexual preference is not as concrete as Billy had
originally thought.  That could be very good news for the lovestruck
photographer, who's having a hard time keeping his feelings in check
with his new friend.  Thus do we have "Chasing Amy," but from the
gay point of view.
        "Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss" tells its story with
sweetness, intelligence, and an almost childlike glee; although it's
hardly the first gay-themed romantic comedy, it skips along at a
happy, lighthearted pace, unencumbered by the Serious Messages
which all too often weigh down films of this kind.  Creative
directorial touches, such as Billy's wistful dreams about Gabriel,
or the narrated Polaroid montages used to depict off-screen events,
keep things interesting even when the narrative becomes unfocused,
which does happen in a few scenes.
        The performances are overall quite strong, with Sean P.
Hayes' depiction of Billy being particularly praiseworthy.  Director
O'Haver couldn't have picked a better actor for the role: Hayes has
that intangible charismatic quality that can make or break a
character, and the utter sweetness he brings to Billy makes the film
an utter joy.  Brad Rowe is also fun as the sexually-confused
Gabriel, although Gabriel's final scene is a bit of a disappointment;
it's one of the few moments which seemed totally unbelievable to me.
Meredith Scott Lynn brings a touch of sass to her role as Billy's
(hetero) female roommate Georgeanna, which helps spice up the
slightly downbeat second half of the film.
        Wisely, "Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss" does not attempt to
either apologize for or justify the fact that most of its characters
are gay, which is one of the few nitpicks I had with "Chasing Amy."
The protagonists feel like real people, who basically like themselves
and are happy with who they are.  It's a nice touch; like "Smoke
Signals," this film gave me a better understanding of a culture I
had very little knowledge of.  I enjoyed the time I spent with both
movies, and their respective inhabitants.
        One of the nicest discoveries for me was the simple fact that
the story didn't really revolve around the issue of sexual
preference.  There's no reason the film couldn't have worked just as
well if Billy had been a straight guy, trying to charm a female
waitress who was reluctant to model for him; as such, we can all
relate to Billy's plight.  Surely everyone has, at one time or
another, been infatuated with a person and been unsure if their
response indicated a mutual attraction or merely polite indulgence.
That's undoubtedly an issue that spans both genders, and all forms
of sexuality.
        The script is extremely funny; one of my favorite gags
involves a recurring character named Lance who keeps popping up at
odd moments, forcing Billy to wonder if he (Lance) is stalking him.
The dialogue sparkles; I laughed out loud several times, as did the
predominately gay audience with whom I viewed the film.  Although
the screening I attended consisted almost entirely of male couples,
everyone, regardless of sexual preference, came out of the theater
smiling and laughing together.  That may be the greatest praise I can
give this, or any, movie.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Sometimes a film with such a tantalizing title comes along that
you're compelled to slap down your seven bucks without first seeing the
trailer, reading a synopsis, or even consulting the cast list.  "Billy's
Hollywood Screen Kiss"--say that again?--is one of those films and by the
time you've wrapped your tongue around the nomenclature, you'll realize the
title is one of the better things about the movie.
        "Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss" starts out with a sequence
comprised entirely of Polaroid photographs and narration that includes a
bold statement: this film will help you understand some of the differences
between gays and straights.  The film doesn't come close to delivering on
that promise.  In fact, the main problem with the film is that it all too
often sets up an expectation and then fails to provide the goods.
        Billy is a gay, L.A.-based photographer, currently "unemployed and
loveless."  According to many of his friends, this puts him at his creative
peak.
        Encouraged to shoot a series of photographs featuring great
Hollywood screen kisses, like the one exchanged by Deborah Kerr and Burt
Lancaster amidst the pounding surf in "From Here to Eternity," Billy casts
a handful of drag-queen acquaintances in the women's roles.  But he needs a
fresh face, a good-looking male model to substitute for the Clark Gables
and the Jimmy Deans.
        While hanging out in a coffee shop with his girl friend George
(played with Barbra Streisand panache by co-producer Meredith Scott Lynn),
Billy suddenly finds himself gazing into the eyes of an angel, a
blond-haired, blue-eyed Brad Pitt lookalike appropriately named Gabriel.
It's love at first sight, professional ethics be damned!
        Figuring out if Gabriel is gay and, if so, whether he's interested
in Billy, forms the core of "Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss."
        For a picture like this to succeed you have to feel some kind of
empathy for the main character.  Empathy, interest, understanding--all of
these help.  I couldn't muster up much.  Not only is Billy unappealing as a
character--perhaps the goatee reminds me of comedic everyman Eric
Schaeffer, who ruins every project he's associated with--but Sean P. Hayes
who plays Billy is a fledgling actor, which causes a further distancing.
        Fortunately the film is peppered with a large collection of minor
characters who *are* appealing, which makes up for a lot.
        The film would have been more interesting, though perhaps not
necessarily as amusing, if it spent as much time focusing on Billy's photo
essay as it does his awkward mumblings and fumblings in the presence of
Gabriel.  Although Billy's daydreams are presented as black-and-white
teasers complete with celluloid leaders, the only Hollywood screen kiss
actually realized is the afore-mentioned "From Here to Eternity" embrace.
I was hoping for more.
        On the other hand, three very enthusiastic drag queens provide an
amusing opening credits sequence plus various "intermissions."  And cult
filmmaker Paul Bartel ("Eating Raoul") appears as a fashion photographer
who offers Gabriel an underwear gig on Catalina.
        Overall "Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss" is a mixed bag--likable,
yet not without its frustrations--and a reminder that one should never
judge a book by its cover.
