Title
Review for All Quiet on the Western Front (1930)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"All Quiet on the Western Front" was the first great film
of the sound era.  It remains the greatest anti-war film
ever made, and it is one of best war films ever, much better
than more acclaimed films such as "Apocalypse Now" or
"Bridge on the River Kwai".
Lew Ayres stars as a common German soldier during World War I.
(This viewpoint is unusual since nearly all English-language
world war films are from the allied perspective.)  Politics such as
what nation started the war are ignored, and the story is
life on the front lines.  Trenches, shelling, machine guns,
hand-to-hand combat, hunger and death are all the soldier knows,
and his only question is, when will it be my turn to die?
One soldier is shown reading a math book, and is told by
another, "What are you reading that for?  Someday you'll stop
a bullet and it will all be for nothing."
"All Quiet on the Western Front" rejects the patriotism
behind war.  Ayres' character even delivers the line "It is
better not to die at all than to die for one's country."
The film was banned in Germany until after World War II.
Hospitals near the battlefield fill with the wounded.
Their limbs are amputated and they cry for doctors, who
are too busy with other patients to tend to them.
Most of wounded soldiers die, and their possessions such
as watches and boots are taken from them while still
living.
The best scenes are the front line battles.  In an incredible
sequence, French soldiers are shown rushing to German trenches,
mowed down by the hundreds by German machine guns.  The French
soldiers reach the trenches, and engage in hand-to-hand combat
with the Germans.  Wrestling and spearing with bayonets follows.
It is as if the viewer is in the German trenches as well.
The horror and waste of trench warfare could not be better
demonstrated.
"All Quiet on the Western Front" was initially filmed as silent.
Influences of the silent era can be seen in some scenes,
such as soldiers eating with exaggerated hand motions and
facial expressions.
The film won Academy Awards for Best Picture and Best Director
(Lewis Milestone), and was nominated for Best Cinematography
and Best Writing.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
