Title
Review for Crow, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
SESSMAN@ibm.mtsac.edu
NO PLOT SYNOPSIS OR CAST/CREW LISTING, BUT INSTEAD A CRITICAL ESSAY:
     Having been fairly well scorched by other reviews on this post,
I'd like to say a few words on behalf of THE CROW, recently released
amid due controversy.  While it is true that the film is limited and
justly scrutinized as a result of the death of BRANDON LEE, the final
film which appears on the screen is tight, suspenseful, craftily
composed and thoroughly realized by director Alex Proyas.  It's lack of
story element is fluidly complemented by it's wealth of interesting
visuals, performances and conceptualization.
     First off, yes, the story leaves one less than fully intrigued,
given its fairly simple execution of a revenge story, most reminiscent
of ROBOCOP, more so than BATMAN.  Once the origins sequences have
passed and the Ernie Hudson character is firmly established (the
renegade cop), THE CROW falls into its familiar plot of seeking and
destroying those which are responsible for the Lee character's death.
At this point, the film comes down from its early energetic cycle, and
we are left with lowered expectations.
     However, what accompanies the remainder of the film is as boldly
compiled and sequenced a comic-book rendering as has come onto into
movies.  Lee is physically an impeccable image every moment he is on
the screen, and Proyas has shot him in such a way as to captivate and
stimulate you as the film flows.  Lee's emergence from the grave,
followed into his old apartment and his inter-cut discovery of his own
murder is shot with grace, style and unique motion.  I don't recall
such an undeniable entrance into a film for a main character, in terms
of both presence and dynamic framing.  Other examples, such as Bruce
Willis' tracking entrance in THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, or Harrison
Ford's trek through the jungle in RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK pale in
comparison.  I found myself glued to every nuance and length of his
amazing figure each time he carried himself within that character.  He
successive elimination of his murderers each were visually stunning and
most economically effective; I hardly found an excessive, uninteresting
or superfluous shot in Lee's sequences.
     Proyas has outdone both Ridley Scott and Tim Burton at their own
games.  It is certainly true that he is borrowing heavily from the
precedents that they set for dystopian urban underworlds, but in both
BLADE RUNNER, and BATMAN, the visuals overwhelm, if not supersede
the story.  In THE CROW, Proyas is seamlessly letting his visuals *fit*
the story that he is telling.  The notion of finding your own killers
and exacting the grim treatment upon them that was done to you and your
beloved fiance is a dark and ringing one, and Proyas has dictated that
mood without letting his ambience crowd his theme.
     With his editing, Proyas could have handled the confrontation
between the evil urban overlord/sidemen thugs and Lee's Crow with the
same sharpness, verve, and quick poignancy as his other scenes.  But
the point during that pre-climactic shoot-out was mayhem, and the
editing reflected that, though it was a difficult scene to follow
closely.  It is a tribute to the stimulating pace of the first 2/3 of
the film that one *expected* and *wished* to see more during the
massive shoot-out, and I found myself *wanting to see more* during that
scene.
     A last gracious touch in the film, one so lacking in other studio
pictures, was the color, ethnic and gender-blind casting, on both the
"good" and "evil" sides.  While Lee and the femme fatale character were
Asian-based, there were African-Americans, Anglos and Latinos all cast
in key roles throughout the film.  This equivocal approach was
refreshing and added a significantly unique perspective to the picture,
which has been missing in so many major films.
     Thus, I would recommend the film to those who wish to see a very
intelligent fantasy, shot with passion and energy, and featuring a
truly *star* performance by Lee, an individual who would have certainly
been destined for great things.  My immediate reaction as the end
credits rolled was a sadness that we will see no further work from
Mr. Lee; it puts an eerie pall over the film that could not have been
foreseen, even by fans of the late actor's father.
--- Please forward comments/reactions to:
--- SESSMAN@ibm.mtsac.edu

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Brandon Lee, Ernie Hudson, Michael Wincott, 
           David Patrick Kelly, Angel David, Rochelle Davis 
Director:  Alex Proyas 
Producers:  Edward R. Pressman and Jeff Most 
Screenplay:  David J. Schow and John Shirley based on the comic 
             series by James O'Barr 
Music:  Graeme Revell 
Released by Miramax Films 
     THE CROW is a gothic nightmare.  With a view of Detroit that is 
every bit as bleak and dazzling as the urban panoramas presented in 
BATMAN and BLADE RUNNER, this film makes it clear from the outset that 
wherever its flaws may lie, they will not be in the realm of visual 
presentation.  Indeed, not only is THE CROW a feast for the eyes, but 
it collides violently with another sense, utilizing a high decibel 
soundtrack to keep the energy level up. 
     There can be few in the audience upon whom the tragic irony of this 
picture will be lost.  Lead actor Brandon Lee met his death in the 
final days of filming, killed as the result of a gun accident while 
acting the part of a man who returns from the dead to avenge his 
murder and that of his girlfriend (the film is dedicated to Lee and 
his fiancee, Eliza Hutton).  It is a case of "art imitating death", 
and that specter will always hang over THE CROW.  Fortunately, 
however, the vision of director Alex Proyas lifts this film above its 
sad history. 
      Lee plays murdered rock star Eric Draven, who returns from the grave 
one year following his Devil's Night slaughter.  His task is simple 
and bloody - avenge his death and that of his beloved Shelly by taking 
out each of the four killers.  This he proceeds to do in some of the 
most grizzly manners possible.  Along the way, he teams up with a 
friendly cop (Ernie Hudson) who sympathizes with his goals. 
     THE CROW allows no room for the viewer to take a breath, as it 
blazes with breakneck speed from scene to scene.  Proyas displays talent 
similar to that of a John McTiernan or James Cameron in the way he 
packages the action scenes.  This motion picture moves, and that makes 
up for a number of character and plot deficiencies.   
     Admittedly, the appeal of THE CROW is entirely visceral.  There's 
nothing intellectual about frying eyeballs and impaled bodies.  No 
matter how stylish the direction and how captivating the action 
scenes, it's hard to see this film as much more than a highly-
accomplished entry into the "revenge picture" genre.   
     The decision to tell the story - at least in part - from the 
perspective of young Sarah (Rochelle ) is an effective choice.  By 
utilizing her point-of-view, THE CROW attains an emotional level that 
it would not otherwise have reached.  This is one of the few occasions 
when a voiceover works to advance, rather than hinder, the story.  
     Most of the comic relief is provided by Angel David's Shank, but 
this character grows wearisome quickly, and lingers for a few too many 
scenes.  Conversely, we probably don't see enough flashbacks of Eric 
and Shelly together before the violence, although admittedly the 
inclusion of such scenes might have damaged the film's pacing. 
     Over the past few years, the flow of action movies has slowed, but 
that hasn't meant an overall increase in quality.  THE CROW is rare 
exception - something that stands out because it's different and 
exciting.  As something that the director and producer finished in 
memory of their young star, this film is a fitting epitaph. 
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
The Phantom
     All the ingredients were there--that's for sure.  Friday night
in Times Square, sitting in a just-this-side-of-sleazy movie theater
among the kind of audience that can really make a picture like this.
We had KFC on the right, and--not to put too blunt a point on it--a
certain controlled substance on the left.  And the movie itself?  Well,
what more could one ask for than Brandon Lee coming back from the dead
to settle and old score in the most violent way possible?
     And yet it didn't take too long for the Phantom to realize that
things were not going as planned.  He should have been having a great
time watching THE CROW--reveling in the soundtrack, the slick
cinematography, the timeless theme of revenge, revenge, and more
revenge.  But instead he (and the rest of the audience) was growing
increasingly restless; it seemed for a while that the entire auditorium
was in perfect psychic sync: all of a sudden, 400 perfect strangers
found that their expectations were not being met.
     It took a while for the Phantom to figure out why he wasn't
enjoying THE CROW as much as he expected to, but somewhere between the
opening narration (always a worrisome sign in a genre picture; after
all, what could possibly be unclear about someone returning from the
grave to seek vengeance on those who put him there?); the fourth camera
swoop through the miniature Gotham that is its setting; and the tenth
bucketful of rain that comes close on the heels of at least a thousand
more, it became clear.  Too much style, and not nearly enough attention
to what makes a good genre picture good.
     People are often fooled into believing that action, horror, or
exploitation films are easy to make, but they're not.  Though they may
not require inspired writing, acting, or plotting, genre pictures do
require solid direction, if only to make up for the lack of nearly
everything but a straight-ahead story and good special effects.  Steven
Spielberg--who is responsible for four of the best genre pictures of
our time (DUEL, JAWS, POLTERGEIST, and most recently JURASSIC PARK) --
knows this, which is why his latest blockbuster opens not with
ponderous narration by a precocious, death-culture waif, but with
someone being eaten by a dinosaur run amok.  Consider what happens
during the first 10 minutes of DIE HARD or LETHAL WEAPON, and you'll
understand why John McTiernan and Richard Donner are among the best at
what they do.
     Straight-ahead action, horror, or revenge is best accomplished
without a lot of window dressing, but although THE CROW is a genre
picture to the core, so much time and energy are spent making it look
alternately like BATMAN, BLADE RUNNER and any of a number of "stylish"
videos on MTV that it's sometimes hard to tell. Although Miramax and
Dimension would very much like you to believe that THE CROW is a
mainstream film, it's not.  Not even close.  For underneath the by now
familiar urban dystopia setting; the death culture gloss; the trendy
soundtrack filled with retailer-friendly cuts by industrial/alternative
bands; Brandon Lee himself, who until his untimely death as a result of
a stunt mishap always seemed to be on the brink of major mainstream
success--underneath all of this lies the cold-blooded heart of a
sleazy revenge flick.  Take all the window dressing away (and there may
perhaps be more window dressing than window in THE CROW) and you're
left with THE EXTERMINATOR.  And much as the Phantom enjoys a good
revenge flick, he knows full well that very few other people do --
crows or no crows.
     Too, revenge flicks need to be carefully crafted.  THE
EXTERMINATOR, like DEATH WISH before it, succeeds where many pretenders
fail, by placing the audience in the position of an average man who
suffers a terrible wrong and does what he must to put things right
(which always means taking revenge; after all, no one in his right mind
is going to pony up $7.50 to see 90 minutes of personal injury
litigation).  James Glickenhaus has some feeling for this particular
cinematic niche, and his exceedingly seedy film works precisely because
it is so completely straightforward.  The "everyman" in his film could
be any man in the audience; when he goes about methodically taking his
revenge (and employing some particularly inventive ways of dispatching
the bad guys), we're with him precisely because he is so completely
two-dimensional.  To put it another way, THE EXTERMINATOR succeeds as a
revenge flick in large part because it is *not* stylishly filmed;
because it *isn't* raining all the time; and because no one crawls out
of a grave and dresses himself up as a mime with a very bad attitude.
     Well, maybe not a mime, but Lee does go to some lengths to look
like the lead singer of The Cure (or, come to think of it, of The Black
Crowes, which seems appropriate).  It's not every corpse that enjoys
access to water-proof theatrical makeup, but hey, that's this film's
schtick.  That and the crow who serves as Robin (so to speak) to Lee's
Batman--it is the source of his superhuman powers as well as an
early-warning system that lets Lee see things from a bird's eye view.
All of this is fine and well; perhaps a little much for a movie about a
guy who finds and kills the bad guys who seriously aggrieved him, but
it's workable.  What is less workable is all the window dressing that
the filmmakers obviously felt compelled to pile on top of such a slight
plot.  Had THE CROW stuck to basics, it might have worked better than
it does.  But then it wouldn't be THE CROW; nor would it any longer be
based on the successful comic book character of the same name.
     But style (and exposition) in a comic book don't obscure action,
whereas on the screen that's all they can do.  The Phantom presumes
that a lengthy preparation for The Crow's return from the grave works
reasonably well in a comic book; on the screen, however, it seems like
nothing more than the worst kind of wheel-spinning.  The idea that a
crow guides souls from the land of the living to the land of the dead
(and sometimes back again when they have some unfinished business to
take care of) is not one that requires a lot of explanation, and yet
explanation is all we get for the first 10 minutes of the film.  Even
after Lee crawls out of the grave, it seems like we endure another 10
minutes of pointless flashbacks before the film finally gets into
gear.  Perhaps only the Phantom believes that THE CROW might be a lot
more enjoyable had Lee simply climbed out of the grave and killed
someone in the first 10 minutes; instead we get an overwhelming amount
of exposition, narration, and ultimately frustration as the filmmakers
succumb to the worst case of Enterprise-itis since STAR TREK: THE
MOTION PICTURE.  Do the obvious miniatures that comprise THE CROW's
obvious tribute to BLADE RUNNER and BATMAN's Gotham look good?  Yes, at
first.  The very first time the camera swoops through the city streets,
over rooftops and down alleyways, it looks pretty good.  The second
time it looks a little less good.  The third time the Phantom started
worrying that the filmmakers might have even more miniatures in store
for him--perhaps the camera would swoop through miniature cow
pastures and past miniature 7-11's, around miniature farm animals and
miniature Big Gulps.  After the third time, the Phantom lost count, but
suffice it to say that the budget did not permit any more interesting
swoops--THE CROW sticks loyally to the three-square-block radius of
miniatures it can afford.  By the last swoop, it seemed to the Phantom
that the filmmakers needed only a jolly king, a trolley, and Mr. Rogers
dressed in black to complete the transformation from urban dystopia to
Evil Land of Make Believe.
     Putting aside a setting which even the characters themselves feel
compelled to comment on (says the annoying little girl who --
incredibly--serves as the only character with which we can identify:
"It can't rain all the time, can it?"  "Not all the time," answers
Lee.  "I'm sure it will," replied a waterlogged Phantom who at that
point in the film had thoughts of a warm and dry bed dancing in his
head), there's the cinematography, which is--without trying very
hard--the absolute worst of every music video cliche of the past few
years.  This is not entirely unexpected--after all, the director Alex
Proyas does quite well for himself directing commercials and music
videos in Australia--and yet it still took the Phantom aback.  What on
earth was all this fancy camera work doing in an action film?  Didn't
anyone associated with the production realize that action sequences
cannot be shot as if they were music videos or Diet Pepsi commercials?
Or that music videos can support the kind of jumpy, hyper-stylish
camera work that so plagues THE CROW precisely because they are not
required to maintain any sort of coherent narrative flow?  Strobe
lights, incessant rain, a camera that can't stop jumping around--this
is not the formula for a successful film of any kind, let alone an
action film.  After all, what good is a fight sequence if you can't
tell where anyone is, what they're doing, or who they're shooting at?
As coldly stylish as BLADE RUNNER was, at least Ridley Scott knew
enough to leave the camera in one place long enough for his audience to
get a feeling for where they were and what was going on.  Proyas lets
his cinematographer Dariusz Wolski (who is actually quite talented when
someone keeps him from going over the music video edge) run hog wild,
and the film suffers for it.
     The real problem with THE CROW, however, would exist even had the
entire picture been shot sans MTV fireworks.  The real problem is with
Lee's character, a small-time rock star who finds himself crawling out
of his own grave one evening because his great love for his fiancee has
prevented his soul from resting.  Assuming that the filmmakers wanted
to play this for straight horror, it would have worked almost as is.
But they don't--they want us to identify with Lee and so pile on
flashback after flashback showing Lee and his fiancee acting as if they
were in a extra-long Levis commercial: smiling, hugging each other,
having goofy stove-related accidents while making dinner ("We'll eat
out" declares Lee as his fiancee sets fire to a pot), lighting candles,
making love. This goes on and on, all throughout the film, and to what
purpose the Phantom cannot imagine. Because all the flashbacks do
nothing more than expose the paradox at the heart of THE CROW: if Lee
is such a wonderful, sweet-hearted guy, what on earth is he doing
dispatching the four people who killed him and raped and killed his
fiancee a year before?  And in ways gruesome enough to give even James
Glickenhaus pause?  If he's so nice, what is he doing stabbing a pawn
shop dealer in the hand and blowing up his store?  Is this guy THE CROW
or THE PUNISHER?
     Since a movie about an enraged mime with a bird on his shoulder
killing four neighborhood thugs wouldn't be long enough for theatrical
release, the plot is padded with a number of scenes involving Sarah,
the death-culture waif who hung around with Lee and his fiancee before
their untimely deaths.  Sarah exists as another mainstream sop--it
seems that in addition to making him a supernatural, revenge-crazed
killer, the screenplay has also tossed in a caring, tender side for Lee
to juggle.  One moment he's brutally killing a thug; the next he's
helping to reform Sarah's mother by leading her away from a life of
drug addiction and prostitution.  (By the way, the Phantom is fairly
sure that he was not alone in feeling puzzled by the earnest anti-drug
and anti-smoking messages in THE CROW.  Brutal vigilante revenge?
That's fine!  But just say no to anything you might want to inhale.)
     But although the scenes showing Lee's sensitive side do help pad
things out a bit (while making far worse the central paradox of the
film), the screenplay can't stop there.  Instead, in a futile attempt
at BATMAN-ization, the filmmakers throw in scene after scene of Top
Dollar (that's his name, believe it or not), who plays the Mr. Big of
THE CROW's Gotham, acting malevolently.  It seems that Top Dollar and
his henchmen are responsible for all the crime in the city, including
the "Devil's Night" fires that the camera swoops past once or twice
near the beginning of the film.  How is he tied to Lee?  Well, it seems
that he ordered some of his henchmen to clear out an apartment
building, and things got out of hand.  This (very) loose tie enables
the filmmakers to steer the CROW in a more BATMAN-like direction, but
it happens far too late in the proceedings to make much difference.
There's a lot of mumbo-jumbo by Top Dollar's Asian half-sister/lover;
people's eyeballs are bandied about; and meanwhile the audience is left
to wonder why, if Top Dollar is the King of all Bad Guys, he can't get
a decent hair cut.
     As Lee moves toward the final, inevitable confrontation with Top
Dollar, the last of THE CROW's major flaws is revealed to us.  Because
he's back from the dead and out for justice, it seems that Lee cannot
be permanently injured or killed.  If he's shot or stabbed, his wounds
disappear (courtesy of the hard-working folks at Dream Quest) T2-like,
which must have seemed very cool to the filmmakers.  But as it happens,
Lee's superhuman abilities do more to throw THE CROW off track than all
the rain and fancy camera work combined.  After all, if Lee is never in
any danger, what's the fun?  Do people really want to see a film in
which an invincible "good guy" finds and brutally kills four bad guys?
Even as one who loves the genre, the Phantom quickly realized that he,
for one, did not.
     It remains to be seen how well THE CROW will do.  Certainly the
film will benefit from Lee's untimely death and from the publicity
surrounding it and the digital tricks the filmmakers played to continue
shooting without him.  There was something undeniably spooky about
seeing Brandon Lee claw his way out of a grave; but one spooky scene
doesn't pay the rent.  As for the rest of the film, THE CROW is as good
an example as any of how good ideas can go wrong as they're
transplanted from one medium to another, and how--once
again--filmmakers can underestimate the effort and talent needed to
produce a quality genre picture.  THE CROW has all the right elements,
but the mix is all wrong.  And it is truly a shame that in real life
Lee won't be able to come back and do it again--but this time do it
right.

Author
Tak
Miramax/Dimension Films /rated R
Starring: Brandon Lee Ernie Hudson Michael Wincott 
Classification: Dark Tragedy
Tak Rating: see once as a matinee
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Eric (Brandon Lee) and his fiance, Shelly, are brutally killed
the night before their wedding.  A year later, Eric rises from the 
grave as an invincible avenger who sets out to kill all those involved 
in shattering his life and happiness.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     "One day you are going to lose everything you have.  
Nothing will prepare you for that day. Not faith... Not religion... 
Nothing.  When someone you love dies, you will know emptiness... you 
will know what it is to be completely and utterly alone.  You will 
never forget and never ever forgive.  For some things there is no
forgiveness... absolutely none."
     - John Bergan
       Introduction to THE CROW trade paperback
     If you want an unbiased review of THE CROW (movie), you'll
have to go elsewhere.  I'm afraid I can't help but compare the movie 
to the original comic series by James O'Barr from which it was 
adapted.  Yep, you guessed it.  The original was better.
     THE CROW (comic series) is an incredible work.  Not your
typical comic book.  It contains beautiful illustrations and poignant 
poem and song excerpts.  Not your typical story, either.  It's a 
heartbreaking story of lost love and a shattered life.  I've read it 
dozens of times and it never fails to move me.  The chapter titles 
give a feeling for the tone: PAIN, FEAR, IRONY, DESPAIR, DEATH.
     THE CROW (movie) failed me here.  It was certainly dark and
gloomy.  Detroit looked like Gotham city, the soundtrack was great (go 
buy it) and there were hardly any bright colors.  But I didn't feel 
it.  Nor did I feel like any great atrocity was committed.
     Brandon Lee, however, was great. He's believable as a good
person involved in an atrocity.  He tries to pull off the pain and 
agony felt in the story, literally writhing with pain at times. 
Although right from the story, this agonizing didn't play well on the 
screen, actually provoking giggles from younger audience members.
     I read that James O'Barr became good friends with Brandon Lee
during the filming.  So it's hard to imagine him being angry, outraged 
or unaware of the changes.  I hope the decisions were out of O'Barr's 
hands.  You'd think a comic book would be perfect for movie 
adaptations -- they've got the story, and even a storyboard.  But they 
still changed, added, and cut things.  Substantial things.
     o Originally, the atrocity was random and senseless. Now it's
       because Shelly took a stand against an eviction.
     o Originally, Erik had no powers other than being already dead.
       Now he's gets "Crow-Vision", vulcan mind-meld powers, and a 
       talisman (the crow) that powers his prolonged mobility.
     o Originally, Eric tracked his murderers, and interrogated street
       scum for clues, with the crow as an invisible cameo. Now he 
       receives supernatural guidance from the ever-present crow.
     o Originally, police involvement is almost background. Now two 
       minor police characters are combined into a sidekick/co-star.
     o And we get lots of Hollywood-isms.  Car chases, wry police 
       humor, rooftop sword fights, and a politically correct and 
       sanitized story. "These things [cigarettes] will kill you."  
       The dialog with the druggie FunBoy is missing, and the "crown 
       of thorns" morphine scene is reversed and sanitized.  Dammit. 
     But just so I don't end on a bad note, the shoot-out (combined
from two scenes in the original) where Eric confronts and takes out a 
whole room full of "foot soldiers" was awesome.  It's extremely well 
choreographed and exciting to watch.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     As a translation of O'Barr's THE CROW, the movie has some serious
failings.  THE CROW (movie) introduces Hollywood-isms, new plot 
elements, and can't portray the sheer tragedy, atrocity and pain. 
I won't tell you to not go see it, I couldn't bear to do that, 
especially if you haven't read it.  Just be aware that THE CROW story 
is orders of magnitude better than THE CROW (movie).
-----
Mark Takacs  "Fear is for the enemy.
mtakacs@netcom.com  Fear and bullets."      THE CROW, James O'Barr    
(Watch for my CROW shrine, appearing on WWW soon, bug me about it...)
-----

Author
Clarence Worley
     I've been reading many reviews recently on THE CROW and I have to
say I'm a little disappointed.  I think everyone is being a little too
hard on this movie.  The fact is that this movie was put out by Miramax
Pictures.  A not so upper class company.  It is a fact that THE CROW
had the most profitable opening weekend of any Miramax film ever.  So
the budget of THE CROW is not that high.  I think it was like $23
million, which was reportedly $8 million over because of Brandon's
death.  The point I am trying to make is that this movie should not and
cannot be compared to BATMAN or BLADE RUNNER.  And also is too good to
be compared to CAPTAIN AMERICA or THE PUNISHER.
     I think that the action scenes were filmed very well.  I found the
rooftop scenes to be very entertaining.  Brandon Lee definitely had a
future in action movies.  For those who don't agree with me I have two
words, LASER MISSION.  If you have not yet seen this movie, see it.  It
stars Brandon Lee as a government agent trying to regain a stolen
diamond that is going to be used by some bad guys to make a laser.  It
is one of the worst movies I have ever seen.  When I look at THE CROW
it amazes me that Brandon Lee was ever in a movie like LASER MISSION.
What I am trying to say is that Brandon Lee has come along a great deal
from movie to movie.  LASER MISSION came out in 1990.  Within only four
years Brandon Lee made a major motion picture.  I think that Brandon
Lee could easily take an action movie with a $50 million budget and
turn it into a huge success.
     Back to THE CROW: I do admit Brandon did have a few corny lines.
But beyond that I thought the screenplay was well written.  Michael
Wincott's character had a witty remark to everything as did everyone
else.
     I also loved the music.  I think that it added a dimension to the
film that most action films do not have.  Most action movies have third
rate bands stealing third rate songs from shitty top forty groups like
Def Leppard.  The soundtrack to THE CROW contained songs by such acts
as: The Cure, Stone Temple Pilots, Nine Inch Nails, Helmet, Jesus and
Mary Chain, Violent Femmes, and Pantera to name a few.
     I feel I must make a comment on a review I read on the net.
Someone said that Eric Draven looked stupid as a wise cracking
vigilante.  Well what did you expect.  Remember that this is the same
guy who was in a rock band, he's young and full of life.  Just because
he was dead for a year doesn't mean that he has lost his sense of
humor.
     All in all I think that THE CROW was a very good movie.  I was
kept entertained throughout.  There was good action, snappy dialogue,
and who can deny the eerie irony that surrounds the picture.  The tragic
death of Brandon Lee may have altered my mind a little but that's ok.
I loved Bruce Lee and Brandon Lee and I feel that the world, especially
the movie industry, will not be the same without their martial arts and
charisma.  Remember when you watch THE CROW that you get out of
something what you put into it.  In the case of THE CROW you get more
than a $24 million picture.

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are some movies that present a rather difficult
dilemma towards the reviewers. Those dilemmas are often
associated with circumstances not directly related to the
film itself. One of the examples is THE CROW, 1994 dark
fantasy film directed by Alex Proyas. Instead of being
remembered by its own merit, this is film that will always
be associated with the tragedy that happened during its
shooting - the accident that claimed the life of its lead
actor, 28-year old Brandon Lee. As it usually happens with
stars who perish in their youths, they become immortal and
legend of THE CROW also grew from many rather sinister
coincidences. Brandon Lee was the only son of Bruce Lee,
legendary star of 1970s kung fu movies, whose death was also
premature. And the story of THE CROW is also macabre one,
based on dark underground comic book. All that ensured that
THE CROW would almost immediately get cult status, many
critics raved about it, and such status was kept for the
next five years. But now, we are faced with the question -
is it really worth it? Or is it cruel to trash movie for
whom some people literally gave their lives?
The plot of the film is rather simple one, and it shouldn't
surprise anyone, since it is based on a comic book by James
O'Barr. In Detroit, city that resembles dark, gothic visions
of Burton's BATMAN, night before Halloween is called
"Devil's Night" because local hoodlums, led by evil Top
Dollar (Michael Wincott), organise mass arsons in
residential areas. During one of such instances, rock
musician Eric Draven (Brandon Lee) is killed together with
his fiance in the eve of their wedding. But one year later,
the crow, which, according to legend, leads the souls of the
dead to another world, brings Eric back from the grave. Now
he is back on earth in order to make things right and avenge
his own death and the death of the loved ones. His revenge
would be witnessed through the eyes of Sarah (Rochelle
Davis), little girl who used to be Eric's friend.
Brandon Lee was killed before the movie had been finished,
and it shows in the final product. Filmmakers used variety
of techniques - stunt doubles, special shots and new,
computer-generated graphics - in order to hide that fact,
but those efforts, although very effective and commendable,
still failed. And, as a result, the main character - The
Crow - simply isn't as charismatic and effective as it
should have been. The screenplay by David J. Schow and John
Shirley did another disservice to his character, because it
provided him with corny, forgettable lines and made other,
minor characters, more memorable. Brandon Lee as an actor is
capable in his last role, although his action routines are
more effective than his acting. Still, this film showed that
he had a lot of potential, and the his death, in the light
of this fact, becomes even more tragic. The acting belongs
to minor actors, and this film features plenty of them -
Ernie Hudson as sympathetic detective, Michael Wincott,
Michael Massee, David Patrick Kelly and Jon Polito as
villains, Rochelle Davis as Sarah.
However, the acting can't hide the fact that this film is
less about story and characters and more about visuals and
atmosphere. Proyas, who had begun his career directing
videoclips (which became rather disdainful background these
days) employed a lot of talent in order to make this film
heavy with the dark atmosphere of gritty, rainy megalopolis
without hope for its inhabitans. This atmosphere is helped
with the very effective cinematography by Dariusz Wolski and
impressive musical score by Graeme Revell. On the other
hand, like many directors who came to Hollywood from
videoclip industry, Proyas has some problems in direction of
action scenes, especially when they engage more than few
characters. On the other hand, scenes of Crow's revenge on
individual villains are quite effective, although heavy
metal tunes often seem annoying.
So, finally, I can finish this review by stating that THE
CROW doesn't deserve its cult status. But, in the same time,
it must be praised as very good film, better than most of
the Hollywood products in comic book adaptation category.
And, last, but not least, THE CROW is more than sufficient
cinematic epitaph for Brandon Lee.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Brandon Lee, Ernie Hudson, Michael Wincott, Rochelle Davis.
Screenplay:  David Schow and John Shirley. 
Director:  Alex Proyas.
     I have seen a number of reviewers falling over themselves to
praise THE CROW, and I'm not convinced that many of them haven't been 
unduly influenced by the film's morbid history.  As it is now well-
known, star Brandon Lee was killed during the filming of THE CROW, and 
consequently its storyline of a man returning from the dead to bring 
closure to his life hits close enough to home to create a natural 
fascination.  I, like many, hoped that THE CROW would serve as a 
fitting epitaph to a budding star, and show that he hadn't died simply 
to make another schlocky action-fantasy.  But sadly, that's basically 
what THE CROW is--a paper thin story supporting a lot of rain and 
moody lighting.
     Lee stars as Eric Draven, a rock guitarist killed when he
enters his fiancee's apartment as she is being raped, and eventually 
killed herself.  One year later, a supernatural crow causes Eric to 
burst forth from his grave, endowed with superhuman abilities 
including the ability to take a truckload of bullets and keep on 
ticking.  One by one he hunts down the gang responsible for his death 
and that of his fiancee, assisted along the way by the cop (Ernie 
Hudson) who worked the original case.  At the top of Eric's list is 
Top Dollar (Michael Wincott), the city crimelord who ordered the 
killing, and who proves to be Eric's most dangerous challenge.
     All right, let's dispense with the formalities right off the
top:  THE CROW *looks* great.  Director Alex Proyas (an Australian 
previously best known for music videos) and his production team have 
captured the grim feel of James O'Barr's graphic novel; the cross- 
cutting to flashbacks, freeze frames and evocative lighting all have a 
distinct comic book feel.  But there is very little THE CROW does 
visually that BLADE RUNNER or BATMAN didn't already do, and for the 
most part do better.  Proyas wheels out cliches like the cityscape on 
fire opening shot, the close-up of the hero's face dripping with rain, 
and lightning revealing something previously hidden in shadow. While 
the art direction and cinematography are striking, there is nothing 
original enough to obscure the glaring weaknesses in the rest of the 
film.
     The trouble begins with the script by David Schow and John
Shirley, but the fact is that there's no way of knowing what changes 
were made as a result of Lee's death.  Perhaps the original script 
didn't begin with Eric and Shelly already dead, giving more poignance 
to the story and a chance to understand what Eric has lost beyond the 
snippets shown in flashback.  Perhaps it included a scene between Eric 
and Sarah (Rochelle Davis), the young street kid who is his friend in 
life, where Eric confronts the fact that he can't have friends in 
death.  As it stands, there is not enough pain in Eric's 
characterization, not enough opportunity for us to see him responding 
to the circumstance in which he finds himself.  Eric should go about 
his business full of rage, not like the wise-cracking vigilante he 
becomes.
     What is true of Eric's characterization is true of the
characterizations right down the line:  they're either lazy, or they 
just don't make sense.  Rochelle Davis is the tough-but-victimized 
urchin with a skateboard; Ernie Hudson plays a gruff-but- 
compassionate cop.  Michael Wincott does fine work as the villain, but 
the attempt to explain his motivation is one of the lamest in recent 
memory.  And the rest of the villains appear to have been Xeroxed from 
ROBOCOP.
     However, I'm willing to admit that there may be only two
relevant questions for most potential viewers of THE CROW: 1) Is it a 
good action film?  2) Was Brandon Lee headed towards stardom?  The 
answer to #1 is, better than most; THE CROW is well paced, well 
choreographed and is at least somewhat creative.  As for #2, it's hard 
to say.  Unlike most action stars, Lee at least had English as his 
native language, and given time he might have become a good actor.  
But in THE CROW, he wasn't yet.  And I can't help but think that if he 
were alive today, most critics wouldn't have bee so forgiving.

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1994, R, 102 minutes [1 hour, 42 minutes]
starring: Brandon Lee (Eric Draven - The Crow), Ernie Hudson (Officer
Albrecht), Michael Wincott (Top Dollar), Rochelle Davis (Sarah), produced by
Edward R. Pressman, Jeff Most, written by David J. Schow, John Shirley,
directed by Alex Proyas, based on the comic book and characters created by
James O'Barr.
"The Crow" is an unusual, but excellent film unlike anything I've ever seen
before. It's a modern mythology story that takes elements from almost every
genre. What we get is a fantastic thrill ride of adventure, suspense, and an
overall sense of Gothic supernaturalism. 
A narrator tells us when someone dies a crow takes their soul to the realm
of the dead, but if something went wrong, if something is unresolved,
sometimes that person is able to come back and set the wrong things right.
This is all told over an establishing shot of a dark and dirty city that
seems to be lit by the fires of Hell. The intense mood is immediately
established through the hardcore industrial soundtrack, a deathly black
night, with an overall design that is the epitome of Gothic.
Brandon Lee stars as Eric Draven, a man who was murdered after he and his
fiancee Shelly tried to protest the mob's decision to evict everyone in their
neighborhood. Throughout the film we are shown flashes of their murder, which
is quite disturbing. The killers were essentially common thugs but with a
vicious, sadistic attitude. Eric's "ghost" returns to the scene of the crime
and relives it, but now he is ready to make those who did wrong to him pay
for their sins. 
We also meet Sarah (Davis), a 12-year-old who was friends with Eric and
Shelly and misses them terribly. She is a curious, outspoken kid who takes
care of herself because her mother loves heroin instead. There is also police
officer Albrecht (Hudson), a cop who becomes personally involved with Eric's
case. He actually seems to care about people's welfare in a place where right
and wrong are reversed. 
Eric hunts down his killers, and one-by-one, exacts vengeance, always
leaving behind his symbol which Officer Albrecht uses to put together the
pieces. Lee is so intense as his character he is sometimes more frightening
than the villains.
The source of the city's crime and evil seems to be coming from the nearly
demonic mob boss "Top Dollar" (Wincott). We see him perform cannibalistic
rituals, and when he speaks, his rhetoric is almost hypnotizing, and all of
this adds to the supernatural mood. He vileness makes him easy to hate, and
the film plays to our hopes that Eric will eventually confront him and
justice will be served.
The storytelling style here is not exactly straightforward. It allows for
scenes of interaction between Eric, Sarah, Officer Albrecht, and the
criminals he is after. Many of scenes do not build up the story, but serve
only to enhance mood, which is the film's primary existence anyway. We never
know what's going to happen next, but everything that does happen makes
sense. 
Of course, Top Dollar figures out a way to "kill" Eric, which leads to an
exciting ending that is sad but poetic.
"The Crow" is a fascinating film. Never before has a film been able to
create such a powerful theme through mood and character alone. 


Author
Michael J. Legeros
Written by David J. Schow and John Shirley, based on the comic book
     series and comic book strip by James O'Barr.
Cast Brandon Lee, Ernie Hudson, Michael Wincott, David Patrick Kelly, 
Rochelle Davis, and Jon Polito.
MPAA Rating "R" (presumably for rape, language, and violence)
"Looks like he zigged when he should've zagged."
     - Ernie Hudson, as a police officer commenting on a suspicious 
       death.
     Comic book translations are notorious tricky-- anyone up for a 
double-bill of THE PUNISHER and CAPTAIN AMERICA?-- and THE CROW proves 
no exception. Despite a gross of good intentions, Brandon Lee's final 
film doesn't fly very high.
     The story opens on Halloween Eve, better known as Devil's Night. 
Wilmington-as-Detroit is in flames and the police are tending to at 
least *one* murder:  young rock-musician-turned-pavement-artist Eric 
Draven (Lee), found on a sidewalk six-stories below the apartment he 
was thrown from. The cops are also upstairs, administering aid to his 
fiance who was assaulted and raped and not necessarily in that order.  
She dies, the perps. escape, and, exactly one year later, Draven rises 
from the grave to wreak revenge.
     Unlike Charles Bronson, whose only known superpower involves an 
inability to refrain from filming DEATH WISH sequels, Lee's character 
has supernatural strength and amazing agility and can even reheal from 
gunshot wounds faster than Robert Patrick in TERMINATOR 2. By his side 
is his crow, the presumable source of his powers as related in the 
narration.
     Wearing what appears to be Alice Cooper's leftover make-up, Lee 
is plopped into an underlit urban landscape that was obviously modeled 
after BATMAN and BLADE RUNNER. But no number of red-lit, rain-soaked 
streets can compensate for cheap FX that make THE CROW seem closer to 
DARKMAN than BATMAN.
     (The glaring miniatures should show better on video, though. :)
     A nod to DARKMAN is an insult to Sam Raimi, though, because Alex 
Proyas can't film a decent action scene to save his life.  His two 
"best" set-pieces-- some banzai board-room butchery and a cool church-
roof sword fight-- are also undercut by the awful editing of Dov 
Hoenig and Scott Smith.  Blame said editors for the film's frightful 
flashbacks, as well.  But the pace is quick, thank God, and every 
good-idea-turned-bad is over before it begins.
     The cast is better than it should be. Ernie Hudson is a good 
choice as a friendly policeman and he gets off most of the film's 
funnier lines. Newcomer Rochelle Davis does well as both the narrator 
and Draven's scrappy ward.  Jon Polito has a small, succulent role as 
pungent pawnbroker. And Michael Wincott makes a distinct impression as 
a long-haired Mr.  Big whose collection of ancient-swords makes him 
seem like he walked into the film from the trailer to HIGHLANDER III.
Finally, there's Brandon Lee, son of Bruce Lee, and a 28-year-old 
rising-star who was fatally shot during shooting. Lee had four films 
to his name-- KUNG FU:  THE MOVIE, LASER MISSION, SHOWDOWN IN LITTLE 
TOYKO, and RAPID FIRE-- and THE CROW would've been a nice feather in 
his belt and that's about it.  There's nothing great from him here-- 
just a good performance that owes as much to presence as ability.
     When the echo of that gunshot finally fades, watching THE CROW 
should prove an even *less* remarkable experience. Despite a healthy 
dose of humor and some surprising sincerity, THE CROW is still just a 
couple notches above its straight-to-video brethren. For now, maybe 
it's an appropriate eulogy to an actor who could only get better.

Author
Jamey Hughton
The Crow has a basic revenge-style premise that is enlivened by great
production designs and cinematography. Director Alex Proyas plunges us
into an ugly, grim society where criminals do as they please and the
police are all but helpless to put an end to the massacre. The Crow
paints a dark and moody picture, but it is also one of the more
effective examples of it's kind in recent years.
As the movie opens, the police are investigating a double-homicide of a
nice young couple who were about to get married. Eric Draven (Brandon
Lee) was pushed out the window, while his fiancee was brutally raped by
a band of thugs who had broken into their apartment. He died instantly,
while she passed away after a long struggle at the hospital.
Flash forward a year to the startling awakening of Eric from his muddy
grave. Led by a crow who will serve as his guide through the land of the
living, he goes on a vengeful spree of wiping out those who were
responsible for his untimely death. He wears makeup that would put the
members of Kiss to shame, and leaves the outline of a crow at every
crime scene, whether it be in blood or a carefully laid ring of gasoline
to set fire to. I can't really elaborate on the film's plot, because
there's really no more to tell - this is your basic revenge flick with a
handful of unique qualities, just a new spin put on a familiar tale.
Just the same, the film's basic premise proves to be oddly moving.
Proyas knows how to set up a scene so that it will be easily absorbed by
the audience, and he's a master craftsman when it comes to the
choreography of action sequences. There's one monster shoot-out in The
Crow that will knock your socks off, as martial artist Lee proves to be
more than sufficient in a demanding physical scene.
Draven's trail of bad guys leads him to an underworld gang led by a
vicious crackhead (Michael Wincott), and his bizarre mistress (Bai
Ling). With the help of a sympathetic cop (Ernie Hudson), who finds his
motive to be more important than withholding the law, Draven finishes
off the last of the punks who crossed him and his wife. There are
flashbacks involving the couple's close relationship and home life, but
in most cases they are too brief or miss the point entirely. The biggest
thing The Crow has to brag about is it's spectacular set and production
designs, which bring to life this perpetually bleak city and practically
give it a life of it's own. Like in Proyas sophomore outing, the equally
impressive but intellectually superior Dark City, the surroundings play
just as big a part as many of the characters do. Another similarity of
the two films is the use of lighting. In both, any bright light
whatsoever is almost non-existent, and that only aides in the
effectiveness of the overall tone.
It's no question that The Crow will be remembered for the sudden death
of star Brandon Lee, who was killed during a freak accident near the end
of filming. This casts somewhat of a dark shadow over the proceedings,
but considering this film is already so dark there's little notice of
it.
The Crow is an impressive piece of gothic art, with a highly stylized
visual appearance that adds to the enjoyment. But it's little more than
that. The main character has but one goal, and after all the trouble is
over with, the audience will have indulged in the ride he provided but
never quite got entirely involved.
 Contact Jamey at:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Sean Eric Fagan
     This is the third time I've tried to write a review of THE CROW,
which I saw early this afternoon.  My first review consisted, solely,
of "Wow."  The second one I gave up on because it was too chaotic.
     So let's get down to the nitty-gritty:  THE CROW is a fine film.
I think it's going to make Tim Burton *really* jealous.  It has a
darkness and realism that BATMAN should have had, but didn't.
     I won't talk too much about the story, because I don't want to
give it away.  It is, however, fairly typical (and the fact that I can
say that places me in a minority of strange people, but readers of
these groups do fit into the same minority) of its genre.
     Some of the advertisements say, "Believe in Angels."  That is a
good summation of part of the movie.  It could also be said to deal
with magic, and has some strong, classical symbols (All Hallow's Eve,
crows [who'd've guessed? 8-)], a specific time span, etc.).
     Our hero is superhuman.  Or maybe transhuman.  Played by Brandon
Lee (who, in case there is somebody who doesn't know, died just before
filming finished for the movie), he manages to portray, at the
beginning of the movie, a surprising amount of pain, confusion, and
rage.  All without saying a word, and mostly through *motion*, not
facial expressions.  Shortly thereafter, he puts on makeup, which
reminded me of Johnny Depp in EDWARD SCISSORHANDS.  (But this is not
*bad*.  As I said earlier, there is a starkness that is reminiscent of
some Tim Burton movies, but which seems *real*, not contrived.  And one
of my first thoughts after Lee put on his makeup was that Depp could
*never* have done this part.  And Depp impressed me greatly in EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS!)
     Our hero is ... a captivating part of the movie.  The character
itself, and Lee's portrayal, were, to me, transfixing.  And oh so
intense!  For the first fifteen or twenty minutes of the movie, all I
could think was "Wow!"
     It did not, however, continue that level of intensity.  Which is,
in some ways, a pity, but probably necessary.  I can't really picture
myself watching 100 or more minutes like that.
     That first part of the movie is the cause for all the praise I
reap on it.  The rest of the movie is, unfortunately, more traditional,
probably meeting some formula somewhere in Hollywood.  But that doesn't
mean it is *bad*.  Or even not good.  As a whole, it is an excellent
fantasy story (I probably wouldn't classify it as horror, myself, but
the distributors have).
     I highly recommend this movie.  I'd give it a +4.5 on a -5 to +5
scale.  I also highly recommend seeing it at a *GOOD* theatre, with
large screen, excellent sound, etc.  I can't imagine enjoying it the
same way on a small screen (such as video).
