Title
Review for Lost in America (1985)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dustin Putman
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews ">Http://members.aol.com/filmfan16/index.html>
"Lost in America" is a very funny comedy from Albert Brooks (who also 
made 1996's "Mother"), about an unhappy married couple (Brooks and Julie 
Hagerty) in their 30's who are stuck in high-paying jobs that are going 
nowhere, and feel like their lives are just passing them by. When Brooks 
finds out that the execute vice manager position has been passed over 
him to another worker, they decide to quit their jobs, sell everything 
they own, purchase a motor home, and set out on the open road together. 
It's what they've always wanted to do, and besides, they are hoping it 
will save their marriage. Predictably, things immediately don't go as 
planned when they stop in Las Vegas to renew their wedding vows and 
Hagerty loses all of their money gambling.
"Lost in America" isn't necessarily an original film, and it knows it 
isn't (there are various references to it being exactly like "Easy 
Rider", and it is very similar to the delightful 1950's comedy, "The 
Long Long Trailer," starring Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz), but what 
saves it from being completely cliched is the highly enjoyable and witty 
screenplay by Albert Brooks and Monica Johnson. The dialogue, as in all 
of Brooks' films, is sharp and funny, and he and Hagerty make a great 
team. In fact, they are so charismatic together, I'm surprised they've 
never reteamed for a film. Now, that's an idea!
"Lost in America" was so good throughout that the film easily had the 
potential to be a great comedy, like the similar "National Lampoon's 
Vacation," but it feels much too short, and just when you think it 
should be hitting the 3/4 mark, it ends, as if they forget to film a 
conclusion. When the end credits started to roll, I was disappointed 
because I felt like there was so much more that could have been done, 
but wasn't.
Nonetheless, Albert Brooks' "Lost in America" is so entertaining the 
whole way through that it certainly should not be missed. It's a 
perfectly good way to spend an hour-and-a-half.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        LOST IN AMERICA is commonly considered to be Albert 
Brooks' crowning triumph, but I place it third, behind DEFENDING 
YOUR LIFE and MOTHER. I've seen it twice and still don't consider 
it the four-star masterpiece Roger Ebert made it out to be. What it 
does have is the trademark Brooks meld of intellectual humor, 
cultural satire and mid-life angst. I have a feeling that, if this guy 
ever does figure out how to be happy in life, we'll be out some good 
movies.
        Brooks plays a lower-upper class yuppie who seems to have 
it all. He's got a successful job in advertising and is in line for a 
promotion, he's about to move into a million-dollar house, has put a 
down payment on a Mercedes and he's married to Julie Hagerty, the 
AIRPLANE! chick, and she's successful in her career. So, of course, 
neither of them are happy. Their lives are boring, predictable, 
mundane. They never found themselves as young adults.
        These doubts about their role in corporate America come to 
the surface when Brooks is passed over for the promotion he was 
counting on. The company is transferring Brooks instead, and he 
blows up at the boss in one of the movie's best scenes. He gets fired 
and finally adopts a screw-it attitude toward responsibility. His line 
of thought is forget the new house, forget the new car and forget 
work. He and Hagerty have a nest egg of a couple hundred thousand 
saved up, and decide to invest in a Winnebago.
        It's time to throw away convention and live from day to 
day, meandering across the country going wherever their hearts take 
them, "like in EASY RIDER." In a comedy, of course, things never 
turn out like they're supposed to, so the journey soon becomes a 
disaster when they stay at a Las Vegas hotel to renew their vows and 
Hagerty gambles away the nest egg while Brooks sleeps.
        LOST IN AMERICA, with its EASY RIDER Winnebago 
premise, would appear to be a wacky travelogue movie. But no, it's 
not ALBERT BROOKS' VACATION. After the loss of the nest egg, 
things get sidetracked pretty quick. It's refreshing to see a movie 
where the protagonists don't get their money back at the end and 
don't get what they want. If there's any complaint about LOST IN AMERICA, it's that Brooks allows us too little satisfaction. In 
MOTHER and DEFENDING YOUR LIFE, Brooks compromises his 
acid wit to please the audience, but not here. The happy ending just 
kind of got lost... yes, in America.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving The World For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!
