Title
Review for Sixth Man, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Even pure formula films can have their charms.  THE 6TH MAN
recycles ideas and dialog from a host of other movies.  Not being a
sports fan, I tire easily of films whose narrative consists of little
more than a fast drive to the big game, which will inevitably end in
the big shot that will catapult the underdogs to victory.  THE 6TH MAN
takes this sports film formula and crosses it with a remake of GHOST,
thus increasing the potential for disastrous results.  Generally
loathing slapstick comedies and being far from the audience's intended
demographical age of twelve plus or minus four, I, nevertheless,
enjoyed this sweet little film.
     Director Randall Miller, whose last picture was the poorly
received HOUSEGUEST, paints his film using broad humor mixed with a
tinge of pathos.  Kenny Tyler (Marlon Wayans) and his brother Antoine
(Kadeem Hardison) are basketball stars and buddies.  Their dad, whose
was their original coach, dies of a heart attack.  The boys grow up and
play college basketball for the University of Washington Huskies.
     The genuine chemistry between Kenny and Antoine puts extra punch
in their gentle jabs at each other.  "You should forget females,"
Antoine chides Kenny.  "Stick to Nintendo."
     Antoine dies of a heart attack just like his dad did.  Without his
brother, Kenny's play deteriorates and the team's hope for a
championship begins to fade rapidly.  Stepping into the void caused by
Antoine's lost, is Antoine, or rather Antoine's ghost.  He becomes the
invisible 6th man on the team, and he will propel the Huskies on to
victory.  He does this by such antics as picking up the Huskie players
and flying them up to the basketball hoop and by sitting on the
opposing team's hoop and keeping their balls from going in.
     Wayans and Hardison are instantly likable stars.  Their
cliche-ridden characters still manage to be engaging.  On the other
hand, David Paymer (from QUIZ SHOW and CITY HALL) gives an unbelievable
performance as the Huskies' Coach Peterson.  Exhibiting all of the
charisma and drive of a fishmonger, he urges his team to do their best.
     Although there are a couple of funny lines, the film derives most
of its laughs from the physical comedy surrounding the long running
joke that only Kenny can see his brother.  As the two brothers wrestle
with each other, as brothers do, it appears to others as if Kenny's
body is exploding in spasms.  Typical of the unoriginal dialog is the
scene in which Kenny is putting the moves on his would-be girlfriend,
R.C. St. John (Michael Michele).  After his ghostly brother does
something, he yells "Stop that."  To which, R.C. inquires, "Stop what?"
This scene and those words appear verbatim in almost every ghost movie.
     My favorite comedy routine in the show involves the team's mascot.
In the pre-game warm-up, the mascot tries out various gadgets to fling
himself into the air in a vain attempt to dunk the ball.  Always ending
in humorous pain to the mascot, the sequences are reminiscent of the
coyote in the Road Runner cartoon and his quest to find a gimmick that
will enable him to catch that pesky Road Runner.
     The show has some nice special effects where Antoine's body is
distorted in various ways.  One time, for example, he blows up his
thumb like a balloon which then disengages from his hand and whooshes
away.
     Other than the two stars, the other actors add little to advance
the story.  Michael Michele, as the girlfriend and snoopy reporter,
gives an uninspired performance in an underwritten role.  The
basketball team is a careful mix of characters of every type, but none
with any depth.  The threadbare and risk-adverse script by Christopher
Reed and Cynthia Carle needs more substance and originality.  They feed
a lot of one-liners to the on-court announcers, but most fall flat.
("Call 911 - that ball needs a doctor")
     No matter how minimal the supporting cast and the writing, the two
leads carry the show.  Their brotherly love radiates readily into the
audience.  I've seen their vaudevillian style of humor many times
before, but they are so good spirited that I still found myself
laughing with the rest of the crowd.
     THE 6TH MAN runs too long at 1:44.  It is rated PG-13 for some
profanity and innuendoes.  The film would be fine for kids 7 and up.
My son Jeffrey, almost 8, said, "I love it.  It is so good."  Since he
knew from the trailers that the lead character would die, he did not
become scared.  This upbeat show's comedic energy won me over enough to
be able to recommend it and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
     For about five minutes (and I'm being generous with this figure), 
THE 6TH MAN is marginally funny.  For the other one-hundred plus 
minutes, it's an unimaginative waste of time.  This film, directed by 
Randall Miller (HOUSEGUEST) and written on a kindergarten level by 
Christopher Reed and Cynthia Carle, develops a dubious premise in the 
most pedestrian manner possible.  Even fans of formula-driven sports 
movies will be bored by this entry -- not only is the outcome never in 
doubt (which is usually a given in this genre), but the road to the big 
victory isn't especially fun.
     THE 6TH MAN has obviously been released at this time of the year to 
capitalize on "March Madness" -- those few weeks during late 
winter/early spring when the NCAA basketball championship is decided.  
However, while audiences may be in the mood for a movie about the sport, 
they're likely searching for something more creative or energetic.  THE 
6TH MAN pales in comparison to the least competitive NCAA game.
     Antoine (Kadeem Hardison) and Kenny Tyler (Marlon Wayans) are star 
basketball players for the Washington Huskies.  Their inspired play has 
led the team to its best record in years.  However, all of the playoff-
bound optimism evaporates in a flash of tragedy when Antoine collapses 
during a game then dies on the way to the hospital.  The Huskies' 
fortunes tumble and Kenny, unable to take over his brother's role as 
leader, cries out that he can't do it alone.  Unexpectedly, his plea 
invokes supernatural help, as Antoine's spirit returns from beyond the 
grave to ensure that his former teammates make it all the way to the 
NCAA Final Four.  Suddenly, the Huskies are the beneficiaries of ghostly 
tip-ins, mid-air ball deflections, and other amazing examples of "good 
luck."
     Most of THE 6TH MAN's comedy is the result of Marlon Wayans' madcap 
physical antics.  Although Kenny can see Antoine, he's invisible to 
everyone else, so, on those occasions when the two brothers interact 
(such as when Antoine has Kenny in a headlock), all anyone else sees is 
Kenny in a position that would make a contortionist envious.  Some of 
these sequences are worth a hearty laugh or two, but there aren't nearly 
enough of them to justify the bloated one-hundred eight minute running 
length.  A script this thin would have difficulty holding an audience's 
attention for half that time.
     All attempts at drama end in failure.  This includes Kenny's feeble 
and unconvincing struggle to cope with his brother's loss, his romance 
with a female reporter (Michael Michele) who is experiencing a crisis of 
conscience, and the team's sudden desire at the end to win without 
Antoine's help.  THE 6TH MAN is by-the-book screenwriting at its most 
uninspired.  And Randall Miller's direction doesn't do anything to liven 
things up.  In fact, despite the presence of a number of real college 
coaches, he manages to make the staged basketball games look just that -
- staged.
     Marlon Wayans is the only one involved in this project who exhibits 
any talent whatsoever, and his effectiveness is destroyed by bad 
writing.  The rest of the cast -- Kadeem Hardison, Michael Michele, 
David Paymer (as the Huskies' coach), and Kevin Dunn (as a sports 
reporter) -- vary from mediocre to listless.  The most painful aspect of 
all, however, is being forced to watch the always-hyper Dick Vitale 
attempt to turn in an acting performance.  Vitale's endeavors to act 
spontaneous are laughably absurd -- a term that could describe this film 
as a whole.  THE 6TH MAN should be called for a very apparent foul.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Marlon Wayans, Kadeem Hardison, David Paymer, Michael Michele.
Screenplay:  Christopher Reed and Cynthia Carle.
Producer:  David Hoberman.
Director:  Randall Miller.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, mild sexual content)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I wasn't sure I would be able to enjoy THE 6TH MAN as a wacky comedy,
given the uncomfortable familiarity of the plot.  In 1990, All-American
forward Hank Gathers of Loyola Marymount University died of a congenital
heart ailment in the middle of one of his team's final regular season
games, a tragedy which took on even more mythic proportions when his
under-manned team went on an improbable run through the NCAA championship
tournament before losing to eventual champion Nevada-Las Vegas.  Gathers'
death affected me as profoundly as any celebrity tragedy ever has, and I
cringed at the idea of that event being turned into a source of
supernatural hijinks.  Perhaps that's why I was so pleasantly surprised to
discover how much heart THE 6TH MAN turned out to have.  Though slapstick
is definitely part of the mix, there is a genuinely affecting human story
at the core of this film which outweighs its occasional clumsiness.
     THE 6TH MAN is the story of two brothers playing for the University
of Washington Huskies basketball team:  Antoine Tyler (Kadeem Hardison),
the team's senior leader and superstar, and Kenny Tyler (Marlon Wayans), a
junior who has lived his life in Antoine's shadow.  The Huskies are having
one of their best seasons in years, contending for the Pac-10
championship, when tragedy strikes.  In the middle of a key game, Antoine
suffers a heart attack and dies, leaving the team heart-broken and
disoriented.  No one is more heart-broken than Kenny, who asks his departed
brother for help when he struggles with the new leadership role asked of
him.  Much to his astonishment, he gets that help:  Antoine appears as a
ghost visible only to Kenny, offering to help the Kenny and the rest of
the team.  Thus begins a surge for the NCAA tournament when strange breaks
seem to be going the Huskies' way, drawing the attention of sports writer
R. C. St. John (Michael Michele).
     THE 6TH MAN is a fantasy of course, but close followers of Pac-10
basketball will appreciate that it's not just the presence of ghostly
activity which makes the film fantastic.  Not only are Washington and
Stanford in this film's Final Four, but dismissed head coaches Todd
Bozeman of California and Jim Harrick of UCLA are still sitting on their
respective teams' benches in game footage; if that doesn't qualify as
fantasy, I'm not sure what does.  THE 6TH MAN is certainly targeted at
college basketball fans given its release during Final Four weekend, but
the on-court action is often awkwardly photographed with too many
close-ups and choppy editing.  For a film about college basketball, THE
6TH MAN generally doesn't try very hard to re-create the fan excitement or
game situations of the sport.
     Of course, THE 6TH MAN isn't a documentary.  It's a comedy, and
occasionally it's a very funny one.  Marlon Wayans turns in an extremely
entertaining and energetic physical performance as Kenny, who has to do a
lot of solo acting as though he is being hassled by his invisible older
brother -- hugs, head-locks, wrestling matches and other practical jokes.
It's fun, if somewhat predictable stuff, mostly because Wayans is able to
sell it with enthusiasm.  He gets a bit of supporting help from Hardison
and from David Paymer (as the Huskies' coach), but with a cast composed
largely of former college basketball players (including Lorenzo Orr and
Travis Ford), Wayans has to carry the most of the humorous moments on his
shoulders.
     Fortunately, THE 6TH MAN is actually more enjoyable when it's not a
comedy.  Some of the character material is unnecessary -- notably the
attempt at a romantic relationship between Kenny and R. C. (yes, Michael
Michele is a woman) -- but the sibling story-line is extremely effective.
A short flashback opening shows Antoine and Kenny as kids on their
father's youth league team, setting up a relationship where Kenny always
depends on the more talented Antoine to hit the winning shot or make the
spectacular play.  When Kenny calls on Antoine for help, he believes he
doesn't have it in him to be a star, and having his ghostly brother around
gives him an excuse not to try.  It is only when Antoine begins to go a
bit too far on the court that Kenny decides to make an identity for
himself apart from being Antoine's brother.  One of the nicer touches in
THE 6TH MAN is that Antoine isn't made into an angel on the hardwood; he's
the same mildly obnoxious ball-hog in death that he was in life, a big
brother who thinks he always knows best.  The interaction between the two
brothers, squabbles and all, is what makes THE 6TH MAN more than the
formulaic Disney silliness you might expect.  In spite of some erratic
pacing and uneven comedy, THE 6TH MAN has the emotional content to give a
tragedy the weight it deserves, as well as the entertainment it needs.
