Title
Review for Ours, L' (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Randy Parker
        Director Jean-Jacques Annaud must not think very highly of
dialogue.  His third film, QUEST FOR FIRE, chronicled the adventures of
some primitive cavemen who never said anything because they hadn't yet
developed a language.  His fourth film, NAME OF THE ROSE, was set in a
Monastery.  And now his fifth effort, THE BEAR, continues this tradition of
minimal dialogue; its two main characters are a 2,000 pound Kodiak bear and
his adopted cub.  And guess what?  They don't speak English, or Japanese,
or Swahili.  They speak in Bear talk, which consists of roars, growls, and
yelps.
        The film is based on the 1916 novel "The Grizzly King," about a
couple of bear hunters in British Columbia circa 1885.  Unlike the book,
which adopts the hunters' point of view, the movie assumes the bears'
perspective.  The film milks this gimmick for all it's worth.  Not only do
the two bear actors get top billing in the credits, they also get more
screen time and give better performances than do their human counterparts.
The plot is pure and simple: hunters shoot adult bear.  Bear gets away.
Orphaned cub licks the wound.  Adult adopts cub.  Hunters track them with
dogs.  It's your basic man versus beast scenario, except in this case we're
rooting for the beasts.
        THE BEAR has already grossed over $100 million in Europe so any
business it generates in America is merely icing on the cake.  The movie
arrives on our shores with a ton of advance hype.  It's being hailed as the
E.T. of the '90s and as one of the greatest adventure films of all time.
But let me tell you, unless you're an animal lover or a nature-freak, the
movie is nothing to phone home about.  Don't get me wrong: THE BEAR is
exhilarating and heartwarming, but it's just not the ground breaking wonder
it's hyped to be.
        The gimmick of using the bears as protagonists is the film's main
strength and also its main weakness.  The animals certainly make loveable
heroes.  The young cub is so cuddly and playful you want to lift him right
off the screen and take him home.  The little orphan is played with great
aplomb by Douce, who may give Beasley (Hooch in TURNER & HOOCH) some Oscar
competition.  The adult male, played by Bart, is so majestic you're
overwhelmed by feelings of respect and awe.  The two bears should be a
dream-team for movie tie-in merchandise; don't be surprised if they show up
on theme cups at Mcdonald's.
        Unfortunately, the movie gets carried away with showing us the
cub's psychological point of view.  In one scene he's chasing a frog and in
the next he's dreaming about frogs!  The movie includes two surrealistic
dream sequences, and that's two too many.  In the middle of the film, the
cub receives a lesson in sex education, but he gets bored so he wanders off
and eats some wild mushrooms.  Then, believe it or not, you get to see the
psychedelic images that float through his head as he trips out.  Now, the
last time I checked there was no way of knowing what goes on inside a
bear's head when he's dreaming or doing 'shrooms.  Maybe there is something
about the director I don't know.  Annaud goes to great lengths to create a
sense of authenticity; he tries to fool you into thinking you're watching
the real thing.  But whenever he tries to take us into the cub's head, THE
BEAR just seems like science fiction.
        Annaud also sometimes shows poor judgment in making the bears seem
too much like humans.  It's hard to stay absorbed into the film when you're
constantly asking yourself whether the bears' behavior is realistic and
natural.
        Still, for all its flaws, THE BEAR wows you with its breathtaking
wilderness setting and its powerful condemnation of hunting.  Maybe we can
learn something from these two magnificent bears who display more nobility
and honor than do many humans.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Some films are just simple enough and pure enough that they look
effortless.  They seem as if they put themselves together with nearly
everything clicking.  One such film is THE BEAR--even the title is simple
and pure.  The film covers about a month or so in the life of a young bear.
The film's greatest fault is that it is too short--about 90 minutes--and
covering so short a span in the bear's life is simply not satisfying enough.
The filmmakers could easily make this the beginning of a series about the
same bear and not have it wear thin after ten chapters.  The bear--or more
accurately the two bears--in this film are characters that audiences will
really want to know more about.
     THE BEAR has a minimum of dialogue and no narration.  This helps avoid
having the film be as cutesy or sugary as some Disney wildlife
documentaries, but it means the story is told more slowly than if a narrator
were telling you plot.  When the bear is sad, you pick it up from body
language and inference rather than being told, and the emotion is felt by
the viewer far deeper this way.  At the same time, much of the emotion gets
understated.  When the bear loses her mother it is probably more traumatic
than the film can convey.
     The story, set in the Canadian wilderness, is of a young bear whose
mother is accidentally killed.  After staying with the body hoping it will
move again, the bear finds that she--I think it was a she--must find food
for herself.  She finds and seeks the protection of a large bear who, as it
happens, is being hunted by a group of men.  The film could easily have made
the men soulless beasts, particularly since the film is both implicitly and
explicitly an argument against hunting.  To the film's credit, both man and
animal are to some degree sympathetic.
     The photography of the Canadian wilderness and of the bears in it is
constantly enthralling.  Faults of the film?  A couple of the animals look
more like props on fishing lines, specifically a butterfly and a frog.  The
film tries to put you inside the mind of the bear, seeing dreams and at one
point a hallucination.  Just what a bear would see in these different states
of consciousness we will probably never know and the film's interpretation
is speculative at best.  The bear's voice was dubbed after shooting and
seems often to be unrealistically expressive, though I do not have
sufficient knowledge of bears to decide if that is really true.
     Jean-Jacques Annaud, who previously did QUEST FOR FIRE, is to be
commended for making one of the most original as well as one of the five
best films of the year.  My rating is a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.  If
Annaud promises to make a sequel a year to THE BEAR, just telling us as well
what the bear is up to that year, I promise to buy a film ticket to each
one.  If he spends the rest of his life telling the story of this one bear,
it will be well-spent.
