Title
Review for Cyrano de Bergerac (1990)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Pedro Sena
Cyranno is a good film.  In fact, it is much better than the first film
version of this story which brought Jose Ferrer an Oscar.
I am not a Gerard Depardieu fan.  To me, he is to the French, what Arnold
and Bruce are to the American fans.  Heart throbs.  Sometimes I am glad I am
not a woman, to have those tastes.   But Gerard, does stand out in this
film, in a role that can fit his size and lack of ability.  He has been
taught how to  read poetry, or at least, how to say it.  And at the same
time, the film is so well directed, that it probably hides Depardieu's
inability's, while allowing  for his strengths.  As in his past characters,
in many small time films ( Jean de Florette is the exception ) he usually
played the part of bad boy, or lover  who took advantage of his many
girlfriends, and a good for nothing character, his brooding tendencies seem
to fit this character.  While Cyranno is quick to his feet with his epee, he
is slow to his feet with his honesty, and love.  And the procrastination
lasts a lifetime, which the poor girl Roxanne never has  realized, or
figured out.  Either Cyranno is too shy, or this girl just is too
naive, and not a good companion for him, who is so intellectually
stimulated. After 30 years, their love is still not discussed.  Only on his
last words is he capable of telling his beloved about all his letters, and
his tries to reach her attention.
It is a statement on the ideological ways of youth, who would rather get
involved with an idea they like, rather than a person who might be good for
them, and then wonder why things didn't work out, when they could try the
ones who really care first.  Roxanne is infatuated by the young fighter and
soldier whom she thinks is trying to reach her.  The young soldier dies and
Roxanne is grief stricken, but never notices that the beautiful letters
still come to her.
The best thing in this movie are the costumes and the moody settings.  The
weakest is the whole ending, when it gets a bit soggy.
The script is written by today's best known film writer, JEAN CLAUDE
CARRIERE, whose material has now graced the stages and film screens for over
four  decades, always with satisfying results.  The talent is the mix of
well  known poetry, and lines, with a setting that is excellent, and an
atmosphere
that is really  beautiful and well lit.  With such nice costumes, if you
don't do a good job acting it all through, you just don't have it.
Anna Brochet plays the role of Roxanne, and is a bit on the flaky
( youthful ) side and loses the innocence as she gets older, but never
figures out who  her pursuer is although it is obvious to us.  Depardieu
starts strongly and  ends weakly.  It may have merited his Oscar nomination.
He is good.  But the  movie is much better.
The Steve Martin film was taken from this story, and while it is funny, it
does not have the 'tragic lovers' feel that this film and original story
does.  The Martin film is a good natured love story, based loosely on a good
story, with a much better result.  If you are, or were, a French student,
you have read  this play, with its old French style.  The poetry is good.
See it, when you feel like seeing something different.
This film won a bunch of awards in many of Europe's film festivals.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Not surprisingly, there have been several films made of Edmond
Rostand's poignant story of unrequited love. More astonishing is that
each has been just about excellent.   In 1950, Jose Ferrer was CYRANO
DE BERGERAC and in 1987, Steve Martin acted in his own version, the
film being called ROXANNE.  The current version stars the ubiquitous
hot French actor, Gerard Depardieu.
The swashbuckling hero, Cyrano,  wants to be remembered, as he says,
for his "panache."  He is amazingly wonderful as he battles
single-handedly against 100 men.  He is even more astonishing as the
man with the soul of a poet but with a nose too large to be taken
seriously as a lover.
Just quickly, the story is that a young soldier  in love with the
beautiful Roxanne but he lacks the words to convey his love.  He asks
Cyrano to hide in the bushes below Roxanne's window and to speak for
him to his beloved. . . who happens to be a distant cousin of Cyrano
who too is in love with Roxanne and is able to "pour it on" while all
the time aware that he, with his very large schnozz has but a minuscule
chance to win the beauty for himself.
Rostand gave Cyrano such lines of beauty as would break your heart:
"And what is a kiss, when all is done?  A promise given under seal.
. . a vow taken before the shrine of memory. . . a signature
acknowledged. . . a rosy dot over the i of loving."
This version will rank high among the best Cyranos ever made.  With
Depardieu at his very finest, you will not want to miss it.
In addition to Depardieu, there is Anne Brochet as Roxanne, Vincent
Perez and Jacques Weber.

Author
Frank Maloney
     The French-language film CYRANO DE BERGERAC stars France's most
popular actor, Gerard Depardieu.  It is a handsome, affecting version of
this nineteenth century warhorse, a verse play by Edmund Rostand.
     Americans mostly, I assume, know Cyrano through the interpretations
of Jose Ferrer (also called CYRANO DE BERGERAC) and Steve Martin
(ROXANNE).  Martin's pastiche of the source material is a pretty good
vehicle for him, but not necessarily for the story or for his
Cyrano-esque character, but especially not for his Roxanne played most
ineptly by Daryl Hannah.  Jose Ferrer's 1950s film, on the other
extreme, is extremely stagy in its concept and execution, which is to
say it looks and sounds like a filmed stage play, and Ferrer's delivery
is smooth, polished, Shakespearean, and fluid--a gentleman's Cyrano.
     The best quality that Depardieu brings to Cyrano is his roughness,
his lack of smoothness, polish, and Shakespearean (or Comedie Francaise)
delivery.  Depardieu reminds us that Cyrano, despite his aristocratic
lineage is a Gascon, practically a foreigner in Seventeenth-Century
Paris, impecunious, a poet, and a soldier.  His Cyrano has more in
common with the pit than with the precieux in the boxes or sitting on
the stage itself.  This Cyrano is a populist rogue, a thief and a
roughneck, a very angry man who makes us understand why he is so ready
to fight.  In fact, Depardieu's impassioned, angry, noble, and
principled Cyrano reminded me most of that wonderful poet and scalawag
Francois Villon (whose best-known poem is probably the ballade in "Le
Testament" with the refrain "Mais ou son les neiges d'antan" or "Where
are the snows of yesterday").
     CYRANO is filled with wonderful scenes of great detail, texture,
and brilliance.  The opening sequence takes us into a primitive theater
and down into the pit, a place so abandoned to its own chaos that bears
would blush to be seen there.  It is there we first meet Cyrano, who
causes a glorious uproar that results in a duel with a precieu, a kind
of literary dandy of the day.  During the duel, Cyrano promises to
extemporize a ballade and to finish his opponent with the last couplet.
     I have not seen a costume flick that so evoked the nitty-gritty of
early modern life since THE THREE/FOUR MUSKETEERS movies of Richard
Lester.  This Paris not only glitters, it stinks.  War is not only
brave charges, it's slowly starving to death in siege, it's dying in a
suicide charge ordered by a supercilious and vengeful officer.  The
production values and the research behind them alone recommend the
movie.
     I regret I am not sufficiently familiar with the French cinema to
know any of the actors in CYRANO except for Depardieu.  I can tell you
Depardieu has not been better since LA RETOUR DE MARTIN GUERRE and that
his performance totally redeems his reputation from an extremely
objectionable and hateful movie he appeared in four or so years ago,
which I think was released in this country as MENAGE A TROIS.  I can
praise the actor who played Roxanne, but I cannot tell you her name,
alas.  As is the often the case in the best French movies, this one is
densely populated with wonderful character actors, all of whom are
worthy of praise, but who will remain anonymous masters of their craft
for this poster.
     And now a word about the subtitles.  They are a verse translation
by the English writer Anthony Burgess (A CLOCKWORK ORANGE, ENDERBY,
etc.).  At first, when a rhymed couplet appeared on the bottom of the
screen I was a little distracted.  But I quickly acclimated and forgot
about them.  CYRANO is a wordy play and movie, scenes consist of
wonderful speeches more than action.  The subtitles are, in fact,
admirably succinct and easily encompassed without losing sight of the
screen area above them.
     This CYRANO works hard at not being a filmed play.  The result is
sumptuous, detailed, and lively camera work.

Author
Malcolm Austin
     I saw CYRANO DE BERGERAC yesterday.  It is by Jean-Paul Rappeneau,
and stars Gerard Depardieu in the title role.  It is, of course, based
on the play by Edmund Rostand.
     I am a long-time Cyrano fan.  I have seen the Jose Ferrer version
several times, and seen it performed as a play twice.  I have also read
two translations.  And I'm not even counting Steve Martin's ROXANNE!
     I went to this film expecting it to be great, and I have to admit I
was disappointed.  I think this was partially my own nearly jaded
familiarity with the story, and partially a result of the film.  In
particular, the sub-titles are the bane of this movie.
     The film tries much harder than the Ferrer version to avoid seeming
like a play.  The locations are detailed and look authentic.  In many
ways the translation reminds me of Zefferelli's ROMEO AND JULIET.  It is
beautifully shot, and the camera-work is top-notch.  Depardieu gives
another wonderful performance, and the rest of the cast is up to his
level.
     Despite being filmed as a movie, no liberties were taken with the
dialogue from the play, as far as I could tell, although at least a few
scenes were trimmed.
     The film is in French, and, frankly, I think that this is why the
film kind of fell flat for me.  The subtitles were excellent (written by
Anthony Burgess), but they were very distruptive, particularly when they
became idiomatic.  Burgess went to great trouble, I think, to construct
rhyming subtitles when appropriate, but at times this causes a gap
between the sub-titles and the actual dialogue.  There is also a lot of
dialogue, spoken very rapidly, and I found myself often straining to
keep up with the lines, and still look at the film itself.
     Subtitles are a blunt instrument designed to allow a foreigner to
enjoy a film, and follow the plot.  This film foils them.  I am not
suggesting that the film such have been dubbed.  That would have been
far worse.  But this film depends heavily on language, and subtitling
is just not adequate.
     There were several French speakers in the audience, and they were
rapt.  During the final scene, many (all men!) were crying.  This is how
I recall reacting when I saw the play, and read the book.  This time,
though, I felt more emotion seeing the reactions of those around me,
than in seeing the film.
     To sum up, this film is breath-taking and wonderful--if you speak
French.  If not, you might actually prefer the English (Ferrer) version,
even though it is really a far inferior film.  Better yet, see it as a
play.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Over the past twelve months or so we have seen releases of film
versions of three classic stage plays: Brannagh's HENRY V, Zeffirilli's
HAMLET, and Jean-Paul Rappeneau's CYRANO DE BERGERAC.  For production
quality and for entertainment value I find it very easy to pick HAMLET for
third place.  Choosing between first and second place is somewhat harder,
but for both production quality and pure entertainment value I give the edge
to CYRANO.  This is likely to remain the best adaptation of the story to
film we will see in our lifetimes and very likely the most entertaining,
even if we include Steve Martin's popular modern reframing ROXANNE.
     CYRANO DE BERGERAC is, of course, an adaptation of Edmond Rostand's
popular play, first presented in 1897.  (Rostand took some poetic liberty,
incidentally, but Cyrano was a genuine historic figure who was soldier,
expert swordsman, poet, playwright, philosopher, and even a science fiction
writer.  His best-known literary work today is A VOYAGE TO THE MOON, which
is why Rostand put so many references to moon travel in the play.  Cyrano
suggested several means of extra-terrestrial propulsion, mostly absurd, but
on one he got lucky.  Cyrano de Bergerac was the man who first suggested
that space travel might be possible using rocket propulsion.)  The story is
of the noble swordsman who would like to woo his beautiful cousin but is
stigmatized by his own prodigious nose.  When it turns out that an
inarticulate but handsome soldier under Cyrano's command also loves her,
Cyrano agrees to help the soldier.  The soldier will provide the good looks
and Cyrano will provide the words.  The story packs into a surprisingly
small space comedy, tragedy, drama, action, and adventure.
     This production cost seventeen million dollars and, taking into account
modern production costs, that was something of a bargain, considering the
number of detailed sets, costumes, and even battle scenes.  Presumably
shooting in Hungary kept prices down.  Director Jean-Paul Rappeneau co-
authored the script with Jean-Claude Carriere, editing down the Rostand and
occasionally adding some of their own lines.  The film is in French with
English subtitles by novelist Anthony Burgess, who had previously translated
the play.  The producers decided that for each foreign language in which the
film would be subtitled, they would get where possible the best-known
translator of the play into that language to do the subtitles for the film.
Gerard Depardieu has a very natural style as Cyrano that Jose Ferrer lacked
in the previously best-known film version.  His nose also looks surprisingly
real, thanks to the contributions of Michele Burke, who receives on-screen
credit for creating the nose.  Special notice should be given to a fine
score by Jean-Claude Petit, who produced many very good themes.  For action
scenes his score sounds not unlike Danny Elfman's score for BATMAN, but
Petit also has some very melodic themes for other emotions.  CYRANO DE
BERGERAC is a top-flight production.  I give it a +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.
