Title
Review for Double Indemnity (1944)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian Koller
For those who think that all old Hollywood movies have happy
endings and sugary values, "Double Indemnity" will change your
opinion.  It is a dark crime drama that ruthlessly explores
how people will not stop at murder in the search for love and
money.
Fred MacMurray is cast against type as insurance peddler
Walter Neff.  Neff is a little too sure of himself, and
thinks he knows all the angles.  He visits a client at his
home, but instead meets his wife Phyllis Dietrichson
(Barbara Stanwyck).  Stanwyck soon realizes that MacMurray
is stuck on her, and that this is a golden opportunity for
her to rid of her hated husband, who shows no interest in her.
Stanwyck presses MacMurray for accident insurance on her
husband, and drops hints of murder as she bats her eyes at
him.
Throughout the movie, Stanwyck's character is evil incarnate.
She has murdered before, and plans to again.  She has no
feelings, but can act any emotion required to get what she
wants.  Soon MacMurray has been reeled in completely, and
schemes to kill the unlucky husband to collect a $50,000
insurance policy.
To collect double the policy amount, Stanwyck's husband must
be killed in a train accident.  Stanwyck and MacMurray kill
him, MacMurray impersonates the husband on the train, and
once alone, jumps off the train.  The body is then placed on 
the tracks by the murderous couple.
MacMurray's boss Norton is suspicious of the "accident",
suspecting suicide.  Claims adjuster Barton Keyes (Edward
G. Robinson) suspects murder.  Fortunately for MacMurray,
Robinson is a long time co-worker and confidant, and he
does not suspect him.
Edward G. Robinson was one of the all-time great character
actors.  He did not have the looks or voice of a leading
man, but he had sufficient charisma to get leading roles
anyway, usually as a crime boss.  On an occasion when he
had a leading man role, he played the love-blinded sap
as in "Scarlet Street".
Robinson does a great job as Barton Keyes, scowling, growling,
and suspicious of everything.  He suspects that MacMurray's
imaginary girlfriend Marjorie drinks from the bottle.
Keyes was once engaged, but then suspected his girlfriend.
He had her investigated, then broke the engagement!
He always has a two-for-a-quarter cigar in his hand,
but can never find a match.  Perhaps that is why he enjoys
MacMurray's company, as he constantly lights his cigars for him.
The script, co-written by director Billy Wilder and crime
novelist Raymond Chandler, is terrific.  The direction is
excellent as well and milks the inherent suspense from every 
scene.  Many times, MacMurray or Stanwyck are on the verge
of having their evil plan collapse, but survive after much
dramatic tension.
Oh, and there's also a needless romance between MacMurray and
Stanwyck's doe-eyed daughter-in-law Lola (Jean Heather).
And MacMurray's character has an unlikely change of heart at 
the end.  But few movies are perfect!
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
James Sanford
         In the dazzling "Double Indemnity," Fred MacMurray's Walter
Neff is the kind of velvet-tongued cynic who used to be described as
"hard-boiled": He's a top-flight insurance salesman who makes the
mistake of calling on Phyllis Dietrichson (Barbara Stanwyck), whose
ice-colored hair hints at the cold blood in her veins. Pretending to be
concerned about her oilman husband (Tom Powers), Phyllis enlists
Walter's help in getting an accidental death policy on him, and a few
meetings later, Walter is eagerly helping Phyllis come up with an
air-tight plan to kill off her spouse and collect on the policy's double
indemnity clause, the extra money to be paid if he dies under
extraordinary circumstances, such as falling from a moving train.
 What Walter doesn't count on is the brilliant mind of boss
Barton Keyes (Edward G. Robinson), a claims manager who also happens to
have world-class deductive powers. By the time Phyllis confesses to
Walter she's "rotten to the heart," he's already in far over his head,
both with her and with Phyllis' lovesick stepdaughter Lola (Jean
Heather).
 For the generation that grew up thinking of MacMurray as the
kindly father-figure on "My Three Sons" and Stanwyck as the regal
matriarch of "The Big Valley," it's a jolt to see them playing such
devious, money-hungry types. But though Stanwyck and MacMurray (try
counting how many times he calls Phyllis "babe") both shine under Billy
Wilder's crackling direction, "Indemnity" is stolen by the fast-talking
Robinson, who turns what could have been a colorless supporting role
into a showcase. Though largely dark and foreboding in the classic
film-noir style, "Indemnity" does provide a few giggles when seen today
-- imagine a time when drive-ins served beer, secretaries didn't mind
being called "sweetheart" by their bosses and people were free to smoke
while perusing the aisles of the local Piggly Wiggly. James Sanford

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DOUBLE INDEMNITY (director/writer: Billy Wilder; screenwriter: from
James M. Cain novella "Three of a Kind"/Raymond Chandler;
cinematographer: John Seitz; cast: Fred MacMurray (Walter Neff), Barbara
Stanwyck (Phyllis Dietrichson), Edward G. Robinson (Barton Keyes),
Porter Hall (Mr. Jackson), Jean Heather (Lola Dietrichson), Tom Powers
(Mr. Dietrichson), Byron Barr (Nino Zachetti), Richard Gaines (Edward S.
Norton), Fortunio Bonanova (Sam Garlopis), 1944)
A splendidly chilling noir tale about murder, immorality, lust, and
greed. The three stars are all magnificent. The director, Billy Wilder,
an Austrian émigré, is in top form, as this film was made before he
became too leery of Hollywood and became more cynical than hard-boiled.
The James M. Cain story is crisp, darkly-spun, hard-edged, and
pessimistically brooding. It was Wilder himself who made the script so
taut, relying on the drunken Chandler for limited support, as he was too
inebriated to work on the script but very skilled in making the dialogue
sparkle. The result of Wilder's efforts to streamline the story and keep
it obsessive, is a film that can make you sweat. Its dark and moody
cinematography is brilliantly shot by John Seitz, setting up the
hypnotic rhythmical flow of the story, as narrated by MacMurray's
noir-like voiceover. If all that wasn't enough to make this one of the
best noir films ever, add on the odd attraction the two killers have for
each other and the genuine relationship between the MacMurray and
Robinson characters, which is almost father and son like, plus you got a
film that perfectly captures the dark atmosphere of the prewar Los
Angeles scene.
Walter Neff (MacMurray) is a successful and ambitious 35-year-old
bachelor insurance salesman. Barton Keyes (Robinson) is the cunning
claims manager of that insurance company, who has been there for 26
years and doesn't miss a trick of his trade. Phyllis Dietrichson
(Stanwyck) is a good looker, who married the oilman (Powers) of the
woman she was a nurse to, and according to her stepdaughter Lola
(Heather), purposefully let her die so that she could marry her rich
father. The marriage turned out to be a sour one, where she doesn't love
him and he doesn't love her. Her reason, is because he doesn't provide
her with the kind of income and attention she wants. He has lost a lot
of money in oil investments and has since become a sullen man. His
probable reason for not loving her, is because she has ice water in her
veins.
By chance, after meeting Neff, who came over to the house to see her
husband but he wasn't in, she decides to take out an accident policy on
her husband, without his knowledge, using her sexual allure to get Neff
to fall for her and cook up the scheme that will make them both rich.
He, thereby, falls for her hook, line, and sinker, and devises a
brilliant scheme to collect double on the $50,000 policy by killing her
husband and making it look like an accident, where he fell off a moving
train. They fulfill their bargain by becoming secret lovers, patiently
waiting for a time when they could declare their love openly. At least,
that is their temporary plan of things, a sort of half-hearted
explanation for this imponderable relationship they got themselves into.
The film opens in the dark of late night, with the badly bleeding Neff
just entering his workplace building and going up to his 12th floor
office to dictate an office memorandum on a Dictaphone to Barton Keyes:
July 16, 1938. It is for a confession, stating that he committed a
murder, gently chiding Keyes for being right about the case being a
fraudulent claim, but wrong on who the male party was who did the
killing. Telling him, you picked the wrong killer. "I killed him for
money-and for a woman. I didn't get the money. And I didn't get the
woman.''
The film then goes into a flashback mode, with Neff saying, it all began
a few months earlier in May, when I went to get the renewal on Mr.
Dietrichson's auto insurance but he wasn't in, but I caught a look at
Mrs. Dietrichson wrapped in a towel and then looked at her ankles as she
went down the stairs and knew only that I wanted to be with her. At that
time, he says, I didn't know that murder can smell like the honeysuckles
I smelled on her street.
Watching the characters interact, belies the beauty of the film and
provides intense interest in the relationships observed, particularly
the one between the bored Phyllis and the restless Walter, who are both
after something exciting but are not clear exactly where their
relationship is going until their third meeting together, after they
slept together in his apartment and the inner workings of their devious
plan is fully concocted, with no retreating from the plan now being
possible. He's a cocky, womanizer, someone who thinks he knows
everything, all the angles, who can't stop lusting for her, even
becoming blind to what their relationship is and what they are actually
doing. While she seems to be without a heart, a cold and bitter femme
fatale, who, at first look, seems to be at blame for what transpired.
But, on another look, it seems as if chance played a great part in the
tragedy that was to happen, as the two combustible personalities were
alike more than what they at first realized, and their chance encounter
set everything in motion. They will carry off a murder that they
probably wouldn't have done if they just thought about what they were
doing and what they really wanted.
Walter Neff blames his problems on fate.There was a factual case this
film was based on: the murder in 1927, of Albert Snyder of Queens, New
York, who was murdered by his wife and an insurance agent who were
trying to collect his insurance benefits.
The relationship between he and the older Keyes is almost like a
father-son relationship, with the younger man having a deep respect for
the older man's abilities and powers of deduction, somehow wanting to
show him up, to let him know that he could outfox him. While the older
man wants him to inherit his post when he retires, he sees similarities
in their life; he is like the son he never had. There is a genuine love
between them, but they are both too caught up in portraying the hardened
men they want to appear as, than to recognize their very tender needs.
Once the couple decided to do the crime, they must have realized they
had no plans of what to do after it was committed, as all their energy
was spent on making it a perfect crime, and now they couldn't spend time
together having sex, which is what they both probably wanted even more
than the money.
It would have been a perfect crime, but then too many questions kept
popping up. The clever plan called for Neff to establish an alibi that
he was home at the time, for him to wear the same suit as her husband
does when he boards the train, for Neff to hide in back of the car and
strangle him before they reach the train, and for Neff to board the
train with his crutches and pretend to be him on the train. The first
thing that goes wrong, is that there is a Mr. Jackson (Porter) in the
last train car and to get rid of him, Neff has to get him to run an
errand to get cigars. Jackson will become a witness for Keyes. Neff then
jumps off the observation platform of the slow moving train and places
the body of Mr. D. near the tracks. The police believe this is an
accidental death, thinking that probably his crutches got tangled up and
he fell over. But Keyes has studied how people die for a long time in
his career and can't believe that this death was an accident. He also
becomes suspicious, when he thinks, if he had an accident policy, how
come he didn't try to collect when he broke his leg.
The other complication is, that Lola was going out with a boy her father
doesn't approve of, Nino Zachetti (Barr), and they break up. After the
murder, Phyllis befriends him and he seemingly becomes her lover, at
least Neff thinks so, as does Keyes, who has her house watched and
observes him spending many nights there.
Keyes is real smart and soon figures out exactly how the murder took
place, shaking off his boss's (Gaines) opinion that it was suicide.
According to Keyes, the train was moving too slow for a person intent on
suicide using that place for his demise. Since it is in Keyes' nature to
be suspicious of everyone, he might have also been suspicious of Neff
without realizing it, as his stomach always acts as if a "man" were in
it and he becomes all tied up in knots when he suspects something is
wrong. This "man" keeps turning up where Neff was. It takes him to where
Neff doesn't want him to be: in his apartment, just when Phyllis is
coming over; and, again, when he brings Neff into his office with the
eyewitness Mr. Jackson, who can't identify Neff, but mentions the person
he saw on the train wasn't in his fifties like Mr. D. was, but was much
younger, someone probably in his thirties.
By now, it has dawned on Neff what he has done and that he won't get
away with it. His romantic interest in Phyllis has also soured, he just
wants to break it off and forget about the money. But she seems to now
be interested only in the money and won't listen to Neff's advise. He
tells her, once Keyes is onto to something fishy, he never lets go. Neff
tells her that Keyes will turn down her claim and that if she sues, he
will uncover the truth in court and she'll go to the gas chamber.
Also, at this time, Neff is innocently seeing Lola and learns how she
saw Phyllis practically murder her mother, but was not believed by her
father because she was a child at the time. This interest in Lola is
refreshing for him, he finds that he would rather be with her than with
Phyllis. He realizes that all he can do is straighten things out with
Phyllis. He must stop her from suing, as he is smart enough to know that
once she gets on the witness stand, it's all over for the both of them.
The climactic scene takes place in the dark of her house, where Neff
goes to kill her, knowing that Nino will get blamed for the murder. What
he doesn't count on, is that she is also planning to murder him, as she
shoots him when he goes to close the blinds on the window. He then walks
toward her, taunting her to fire again and she responds, "No, I never
loved you Walter--not you or anybody else. I'm rotten to the heart. I
used you, just as you said. That's all you ever meant to me. Until a
minute ago, when I couldn't fire that
second shot."Neff has heard enough from her and fires his gun, killing
her instantly, after the first and only time she probably told the truth
in her life.
A running gag throughout the film, is that Neff continually lights the
cigars of the "matchless" Keyes. Now the favor is returned, as Keyes
lights the cigarette of the fallen Neff, unable to escape to Mexico, who
will either die from his gun wound or get the gas chamber. This comes
after they both profess their love for each other, men who have
difficulty knowing what love is because they haven't looked at their
heart the way they look at their mind for strength. As Wilder's perverse
sense of humor, supports the film's grim conclusion, that both Phyllis
and Neff were not criminals in the real sense of being criminals, but
were weak-minded individuals, unhappy with their lives, who succumbed to
their human failings.
Wilder's original ending of having Neff die in the gas chamber was
scrubbed by him as being unnecessary, so we'll never know if that ending
was more powerful than the present one. Wilder told an interviewer that
Neff's death was among"two of the best scenes I've ever shot in my whole
life"(the other being the Sunset Boulevard opening). What this ending
left was a question mark, as I wondered why Neff returns to the office
to confess to Keyes, if what he really wanted to do was to escape. It
suggests, that Keyes was his alter-ego, the only one that he didn't feel
right about lying to, and that he didn't want to escape, but instead, he
wanted to die letting Keyes know that he cared about him. Take note of
their last comments: "You know why you couldn't figure this one, Keyes?
I'll tell you. Because the guy you were looking for was too close--right
across the desk from you.'' Keyes says, "Closer than that, Walter,'' and
then Neff says, ``I love you, too.''
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
