Title
Review for Bűche, La (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Empire Pictures
 Director: Daniele Thompson
 Writers:  Christopher Thompson, Daniele Thompson
 Cast: Sabine Azema, Emmanuelle Beart, Charlotte
Gainsbourgh, Claude Rich, Francoise Fabian, Christopher
Thompson, Jean-Pierre Darroussin
   Daniele Thompson is a clever writer.  His script for
"Cousin, Cousine" a quarter century ago--about two people
married to others who become cousins by marriage and go
beyond the kissing stage--was a piercing comedy of the sort
with which the French excel.  Then his longer "Queen
Margot," a huge production based on the Dumas novel of
events surrounding the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in
16th Century Frnace, boasted strong performances by
Isabelle Adjani and Daniel Auteuil together with striking
decor.  His first feature film as a director, though, is a
disappointment.  "La Buche," which means "yule log" in
English, focusses on a family's rituals on the days
immediately preceding Christmas--the holiday which is
supposed to be the happiest of the year but which most of
know often serves as a display of celebrants' bitter
disappointments, frustrations, and depression.
   Billed as a comedy--though more like what we'd call a
family drama--La Buche is in the director's words a
summoning of "the influences of those who make me laugh
and cry: Oury, Sautet, Allen Capra."  While he declares that
he also "wanted to make a movie unlike any other, even
unlike the ones I love," he overstates his ambition because
while "La Buche" is well above the level of a TV tale, the
mingling of the characters' loves and losses are neither 
compelling nor unique.  The screenplay by the director and
Christopher Thompson does not give major French
performers like the lovely Emmanuell Beart and the energetic
Sabine Azema much for us to care about.  These are for the
most part bourgeois people who appear so insular that events
outside their immediate circle appear to have no impact on
them.  They are wrapped up in their petty memories, and
those recollections may not prove especially inviting to their
movie audience.
   Not that these personalities are poorly developed.  Through
the usual fixation of French film makers on talk talk talk, we
learn plenty about them.  Louba (Sabine Azema) is the most
vigorous, a singer of those Russian songs that are performed
over and over to tourists, the types of folks who might go to
Ireland hoping to hear "Danny Boy" yet another time as
though the Emerald Isle produced nothing else of import. 
When she is not singing and dancing or chasing the franc by
giving Russian lessons during the day, she is enjoying an
affair with the married Gilbert (Jean-Pierre Darroussin) who
(guess what) is not about to leave his wife and kids.  Sonia
(Emmanuelle Beart) is not the sort of person we can
sympathize with, though she is on the verge of a breakdown
as she undergoes a painful divorce.  She's rich, beautiful,
and spoiled, even smashing a bottle of champagne on the
floor while conducting a tantrum.  Charlotte Gainsbourgh
plays the standard-issue gamin, the young sister who simply
cannot come to terms with Christmas as the holiday makes
her face the loneliness she covers up during the rest of the
year.
   All of the situations and memories of this family are fairly
typical of quite a few of the world's middle-class people,
though the Parisians like to think that their affairs are
uniquely French.  If the people in the tale do not inspire, at
least Robert Fraisse's camera spotlights a colorful City of
Lights at holiday time, its stores crammed with an
abbondanza of gifts.
Not Rated.  Running time: 106 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
