Title
Review for Glass Shield, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 6/2/95 
Running Length: 2:15 
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Profanity, mature themes) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
Cast: Michael Boatman, Lori Petty, Ice Cube, Michael Ironside, 
      Don Harvey, Richard Anderson, Bernie Casey, Elliot Gould, 
      M. Emmett Walsh, Victoria Dillard 
Director: Charles Burnett 
Producers: Carolyn Schroeder and Thomas Byrnes 
Screenplay: Charles Burnett 
Cinematography: Elliot Davis 
Music: Stephen James Taylor 
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films 
     Charles Burnett's THE GLASS SHIELD opens with a clever conceit:  
comic book panels displaying the bravery and heroism of cops.  That's a 
mindset which J.J. Johnson (Michael Boatman) buys into with all his 
heart and mind.  Since childhood, he's wanted to be a policeman and, 
following his recent graduation from the academy and subsequent 
assignment to the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, he sees 
himself on the streets, righting wrongs and bringing evil-doers to 
justice. 
     J.J.'s first encounter with reality occurs when it becomes clear 
that his new place of employment is less concerned about meting out 
justice than maintaining an "old boys' network".  Headed by the 
seemingly-affable Clarence Massey (played by grandfatherly Richard 
Anderson, best known as Oscar Goldman from the 70s hit THE SIX MILLION 
DOLLAR MAN), the department bubbles with intolerance from the likes of 
detectives Baker (Michael Ironside) and Hall (M. Emmett Walsh).  The 
hatred isn't exclusively directed at J.J., however.  Also in the line of 
fire is Deborah Fields (Lori Petty), who happens not only to be a woman, 
but a Jew as well. 
     Nevertheless, despite all the cold shoulders and deliberate snubs, 
J.J. is determined to stick it out, unwilling to let go of his glorious 
image of what it means to be a cop.  So, when an apparent murderer 
(played by Ice Cube) is captured, J.J. is all-too-willing to lie on the 
witness stand to help put the man away.  Then he discovers that he's not 
the only one guilty of perjury -- in fact, truth is a rare commodity in 
this trial. 
     Burnett, the director of TO SLEEP WITH ANGER and KILLER OF SHEEP, 
paints a bleak and disturbing picture of corruption and prejudice, 
basing his script on several real cases.  The storyline is a bit 
convoluted, but it never gets so confused that the primary themes become 
obscured.  This is a cop movie that concentrates on drama instead of 
action -- there's not a car chase to be seen.  Burnett has chosen to 
focus on racism, shattered naivete, and the tough decisions that come 
with being caught in the middle.  J.J.'s fight against the system 
becomes a struggle for his own identity and humanity. 
     One of the problems with THE GLASS SHIELD is that it settles for 
stock villains.  Despite a series of competent performances by the likes 
of Richard Anderson, Michael Ironside, and M. Emmett Walsh, the bad guys 
here are pretty much one-dimensional from start to finish.  This lack of 
character depth blunts the film's impact.  With the exception of the two 
protagonists and one token veteran officer, every cop is like the next:  
nasty, crude, and bigoted.  Positive characteristics are definitely at a 
premium in the L.A. County Sheriff's Department.   
     Burnett's screenplay has a tendency to be a little too preachy, 
especially during the unsatisfying final scene.  There's a fine line 
between getting the message across through subtlety and becoming 
didactic, and THE GLASS SHIELD occasionally strays across it.  Despite 
this, however, the film clearly has something worthwhile to say, and 
does so in a manner that, while not ground-breaking, is at least 
engaging.  There just should have been a little more gray amidst the 
black-and-white. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Christopher Null
     At least it *sounded* like a good idea.  Unfortunately, the
execution of the new Miramax film, THE GLASS SHIELD, a drama set in an
L.A. sheriff's station, leaves the viewer with little more than the
perception that he's just seen a movie that could have been something,
but didn't quite make it.
     THE GLASS SHIELD is the tragic tale of J. J. Johnson (Michael
Boatman), a bright-eyed and idealistic black deputy-in-training who is
"chosen" to join an all-white Los Angeles station for his first
assignment.  There, he encounters not-so-subtle racism and persecution
which begins to crack his romanticism of the cop's life.
     Soon after his arrival, J. J. is drawn into a plot to falsify
evidence against a supposed murderer.  Then, a much deeper conspiracy
is uncovered, and J. J. and his sole ally, Deborah (Lori Petty, as the
only female and only Jew in the department), become trapped between the
wheels of the conspirators and the legal system, both of which they are
sworn to serve.
     The trouble with THE GLASS SHIELD is that the storytelling is so
heavy-handed and convoluted that it never becomes the gripping thriller
that it wanted to be.  In fact, television shows like Law and Order and
NYPD Blue tell more enthralling stories in half the time.  Director and
screenwriter Charles Burnett introduces far too many pointless
characters and takes the movie down so many subplot paths that the
moviegoer has no choice but to give up trying to pin names to faces.
And although the lengthy narrative scenes are cut with some nice bits,
like renegade cop Baker (Michael Ironside) jamming a gun into J. J.'s
mouth and threatening to blow his head off in the station building
itself, they don't even look like they belong in a movie that feels
dedicated to droning on and on without really moving the story
forward.
     There are some parts to the film that shine:  Boatman is
absolutely riveting as J. J., and the bad guys couldn't be any badder.
The clever use of sedated color and lighting and some nice camerawork
help the film immensely, also.  But on the other hand, the casting of
Petty is a complete mystery--she's completely lifeless and out of place
here.  After all, I'm not the only one who hasn't forgotten TANK GIRL
(though I'd desperately like to).
     Burnett is a lucky alumnus of the MacArthur "genius" Grant clique
and obviously feels like he can't be second-guessed.  Hopefully his ego
won't be too bruised by the lukewarm reception his film is getting, but
he does need a wake-up call.  THE GLASS SHIELD may have a few bright
spots, but overall, it is definitely not the work of a genius.
