Title
Review for Sweethearts (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Darrell Rudmann
** SWEETHEARTS (1996)
** Starring Janeane Garofalo, Mitch Rouse
** IMDB: http://us.imdb.com/Title?0120256
SWEETHEARTS is a direct-to-video film that aspires to be a tragic romantic
comedy that comes across like a film student's first year project.  Garofalo
gets to reprise her role as the date from hell (see BYE BYE LOVE, 1995) as
Jasmine, who has dealt with a lifetime of having bipolar depression.  Arliss
(Rouse) gets sucked into Jasmine's crazy world for one brief, dark evening.
And I do mean dark.  First, the comedy is quickly lost as the story gets
more involved with Jasmine's mental disorder and Arliss' desire to rescue
her.  Jasmine has decided to go on one last date before attempting suicide
to end her misery, and Arliss is the lucky date.  Arliss' character is never
completely realized; Arliss spends nearly the entire movie trying to rescue
Jasmine.  While understandable, it's not very captivating.  Perhaps the
story would have been stronger if, over the course of the evening, Arliss
comes to understand the extent of her disorder better (which was continually
referred to throughout the movie as 'bipolar manic depression,' which
incorrectly mixes two terms for the same disorder) and decides to go along
with her decision, supporting her despite his inner pain from liking her.
Instead, the film leaves the viewer with no real insight into the human
experience.
Second, the VHS format of the movie looks like it was shot in
candlelight-the film is literally dark.  Many of the scenes were pools of
red and black colors that spoke.  Finally, several scenes featuring the use
of guns are--probably unintentionally--heavier than they were meant to be,
given the recent spree of murder-suicides in the U.S.
However, the film represents an interesting departure from the usual
romantic comedy.  For Garofalo fans, or fans of Margaret Cho or Bobcat
Goldthwait, it's a must-see chance to see these comedians in an unusual
project.  Cho steals many of her scenes, but Goldthwait isn't given many
opportunities to use his comedic talent.
/* Spam-blocking in effect.  To send an e-mail reply
   to this address, put the word "review" anywhere
   in the subject line. */
