Title
Review for Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Raymond Johnston
Directed by Alan Rudolph
Starring- Jennifer Jason Leigh, Campbell Scott, Matthew Broderick,
          Jennifer Beals, Andrew McCarthy, Wallace Shawn, Peter Gallagher,
          Martha Plimptom, Stephen Baldwin, Keith Carradine
Screenplay by Rudolph & Randy Sue Coburn
Produced by Robert Altman
     It would seem that the makers of ED WOOD and the makers of MRS.
PARKER got their scripts mixed up.  ED WOOD was about a fun film about
an interesting group of celebrities.  MRS. PARKER is a downbeat film
about somebody declining into alcoholism and failure.
     MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE can be seen as a companion
piece to Rudolph's 1988 film THE MODERNS.  The jazz age cultural elite
of New York, instead of Paris, is prominently featured.  Instead of the
Paris cafe scene, the main setting is the dining room of the Algonquin
Hotel.  Anybody who was anybody seemed to sit at one table there.
Dorothy Parker, Robert Benchley, George S.  Kaufman, and Edna Ferber
were among the most notable.  The 'good natured' sarcasm of the critics
and playwrights assembled still turns up to fill the small stray spaces
of magazines.
     From this group, Rudolph focuses on verse poet Dorothy Parker and
erudite humorist Robert Benchley.  Jennifer Jason Leigh and Campbell
Scott respectively turn in fine subdued performances in the lead
roles.  Leigh gets a lot out of her emotionally distant Dorothy Parker
character that always has to be ready with a verbal barb.  Scott
manages to find a level of insecurity in Robert Benchley, the face
behind the mask.  Most of the other roles in the film are just cameos,
people that Parker and Benchley encounter along the way and fail to
connect with.  Wallace Shawn has an amusing turn as the Algonquin
waiter.  Keith Carradine, star of THE MODERNS, turns up very briefly as
Will Rogers.
     The plot of the film is very loosely structured, so much so that
it can hardly be called a plot at all.  Days at the Algonquin when
famous people turned up to say famous lines are punctuated by Dorothy
Parker's increasing dependence on liquor and empty sexual encounters.
Her later years, in black and white, are intercut with her pastel
colored memories of her time in the national eye.  It is more a series
of events than a story.  And while we often see the characters drink,
we seldom see them write.
     Both as a double character study and a recreation of bygone era
MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE is quite successful.  It avoids the
common tendency to automatically deify the subject of the film.  Quite
to the contrary, depicting the human failings of the famous people of
the jazz age seems to be the project of the film.  The famous witty
jabs somehow don't seem quite as funny when the nature of the "vicious
circle" is revealed.  Mostly they become forced vain attempts at
comraderie.
     As with all of Rudolph's work, the film is visually stunning if
perhaps a little slowly paced.  The audience for the film is also
perhaps a small one.  Watching the film evokes the same feeling as
reading New Yorker magazine, which published work from Dorothy Parker
and others depicted.  If you don't enjoy one, you probably won't enjoy
the other.

Author
Bryant Frazer
     Somebody write a masterpiece for Jennifer Jason Leigh--please.
     The withering wit of the legendary American writer Dorothy Parker
is the best source material any American actress has had since THELMA &
LOUISE drove into the Grand Canyon, and Leigh does wonderful things
with it in the new literary biopic, MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE.
The throaty drawl she delivers her lines with may not be entirely
accurate (Leigh studied tapes of Parker's voice, though some scholars
have suggested that Parker probably spoke differently in her youth),
but it certainly lends an appropriate, insistent rasp to Parker's
trenchant poetry and one-liners.  Her sympathy is apparent and complete
for the Dorothy Parker that she creates--a tragic figure whose fall
from literary grace and relentlessly bad luck with men fueled her
propensity for morbidity and cynicism.
     Dorothy Parker was the most famous member of the Algonquin Round
Table, a cadre of New York writers who met for lunch daily at the
Algonquin hotel on Manhattan's West 44th Street beginning in the 1920s
(for a New York movie, this one has surprisingly little New York in it,
relying overwhelmingly on pretty interiors).  The movie draws a
broad-brush outline of her life, beginning around the time of her
firing from VANITY FAIR.  That incident cements the friendship of
drama critic Robert Benchley (Campbell Scott), who quits his job at the
magazine in a protest against the "stupid" decision to fire
Mrs. Parker.  Benchley is indeed Parker's greatest friend, and could
perhaps be the great love of her life, if the two of them weren't
already married.  The moments when the movie absolutely hits its mark
are the ones illustrating the unconsummated love between Mrs.  Parker
and Mr. Benchley.  That relationship rings so true (and is so well-
performed) that it manages to anchor the whole film--which needs it.
We see characters talk about forming a magazine devoted to
sophisticated discussion of New York ("Why not call it the NEW
YORKER?" someone asks), we watch Mrs. Parker struggle ever-so-briefly
to come to terms with Hollywood, and we get to eavesdrop on the titular
"vicious circle"  of authors (all of whom besides Parker are virtually
unknown today), but none of this is compelling and most of it is
unconvincing.
     Alan Rudolph, the quintessential L.A. director and Robert Altman
crony, obviously cares about this woman's story, but he honestly has
little to add to it.  Some viewers may be encouraged to do a little
reading and research of their own (which they will find more rewarding
in a historical sense), and God bless them for it, but few will find
this to be a satisfactory exploration of the woman and the environment
she worked in.  As long as it's enough to let Leigh show her stuff and
toss around a few choice passages from THE PORTABLE DOROTHY PARKER,
the whole thing glides along nicely.  But other scenes, which rely on
fresh dialogue (by Rudolph and co-writer Randy Sue Coburn) to give the
impression that the writers are having a smashing time with themselves,
are pretty but dull.  The low point comes when Rudolph trots out a
psychotherapist to explain the problems of Parker's dysfunctional
literary family--presumably for the benefit of the audience, since
Mrs. Parker doesn't seem to learn much from his observations that she
didn't already know.  If Rudolph was doing his job, the audience would
know it, too.
     But it's worth the outlay of eight bucks just to see Leigh bring
Dorothy Parker back to life in her own image.  In the film's closing
scenes, when Leigh plays Mrs. Parker as an old woman, her
transformation is nearly complete.  Whether or not Leigh's character is
a faithful recreation of the Algonquin Round Table's most famous
member, it's a luminous creation of its own, and one that lives on in
the memory after the film itself has faded.  One of these days, Leigh
is going to get a great part in a great movie (SHORT CUTS, though
ambitious and admirable, was not that movie).  Until then, we can hope
that this performance will open up new doors for her and get a part in
a film that succeeds as film, not just as an interesting character
study that offers Cliffs Notes to history.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE is the true story of Dorothy
Parker (usually called Mrs. Parker) and her literary friends that met
every day for conversation at the Algonquin Hotel in New York.  They
always ate at a round table which was saved every day for the dozen or
so of New York's literary elite.  There were writers, painters, actors,
comedians, and most of all, literary critics.  They wrote for many
different magazines from Vanity Fair to the one they started, The New
Yorker.
     The movie happens mainly in the 20s with the focal point being the
daily gathering at the Algonquin for lunch.  Dorothy had a room there
where she was usually delinquent with the bill but where she was not
kicked out for obvious reasons.  She made her money writing what she
referred to as little "do-das" for various magazines.  She was a
critic, an author and a poet, but most of all she was famous for her
round table conversations.
     The glue that keeps the film together is black and white footage
of Dorothy in the 1940s and 1950s.  She talks briefly about her life or
she recites a short poem of hers and then we are back in color in the
1920s.
     The artists at the round table were sort of the second string of
that era.  You will recognize the names, but they were not the best.
Although the image one has of them is discussing Kant and Nietzsche and
of the meaning of life, in fact, the conversations were only of the
shallow variety.  The banter around the table was nothing more than
sarcastic one liners.  They had an obsession with being with each other
and yet all they could do was issue trite put downs of one another.
     Dorothy and all of the artist were heavy and constant drinkers
from sun up to sun down.  They agreed that as one of the writers put
it, "the only way to cure a hangover is never stop drinking." Dorothy's
first husband was also a morphine drug addict.  She lived her life
extremely depressed and tried suicide on many occasions.  One doctor
asked them why the artist group felt the need to be with each other all
of the time and why were they afraid of enjoying life and being happy.
     What makes this show worth seeing is the performance by Jennifer
Jason Leigh (remember her as the bad girl in SINGLE WHITE FEMALE?).
Her performance deserves an academy award nomination.  You can feel
Mrs.  Parker's depression and the utter emptiness of her life.  She
jumps from one man's bed to another without managing to really ever
enjoy herself.  Finally, I especially liked the accent, low and raspy,
that Leigh used.
     Most of the show gets a little tedious and long after a while.  Do
you like hanging around with a bunch of drunks, albeit some brilliant
ones?  Do you like sharing your evenings with people who are scared of
being anything other than shallow?  Want to fall for a beautiful lover
who is so depressed she wants to slash her wrists frequently?  Accurate
this all may be, but it was a bit much for me after a while.
     MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE runs too long at 2:05.  It is
correctly rated R for some low key, natural nudity, massive
drunkenness, and one drug usage scene.  Older and mature teenagers
could probably see it if they like.  Solely on the basis of Jennifer
Jason Leigh's performance, I do recommend this movie to you, and I give
it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jennifer Jason Leigh, Campbell Scott, Matthew Broderick.
Screenplay:  Alan Rudolph and Randy Sue Coburn.
Director:  Alan Rudolph.
     The collection of authors, journalists and performers who gathered
for lunches at New York's Hotel Algonquin in the 1920s are among those
peculiarly American individuals who are perhaps more famous for being
famous than for anything they actually said or did.  There is a great
historical disagreement as to who was there at any given time, to whom
certain famous quotes should be attributed, and even whether those
quotes were actually spoken.  More than anything, they became symbolic
of the kind of dissolute Jazz Age bon vivants immortalized by
Fitzgerald and Hemingway.  But who were they, really?  At least part of
that question is answered by MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE, an
uneven but still quite intriguing examination of the Algonquin Round
Table's most famous member.
     That individual was Dorothy Parker (Jennifer Jason Leigh), an
author and freelance critic who was renowned for her often caustic
theatrical reviews.  The film opens with Dorothy as a screenwriter in
1930s Hollywood, then flashes back to 1920s New York.  There Dorothy is
working for Vanity Fair with Robert Benchley (Campbell Scott), her
editor and close friend.  Her husband Edward (Andrew McCarthy) has a
war wound and a serious morphine addiction, and the marriage is far
from a happy one.  After Dorothy is fired from Vanity Fair and Benchley
quits in sympathy, they begin meeting with other journalists and
writers at the Algonquin.  Among those who join their company is
reporter Charles MacArthur (Matthew Broderick), with whom Dorothy has
an ill-fated affair which comes to define the tragedies of her life.
     Director and co-scripter Alan Rudolph is a disciple of Robert
Altman, and the mentor's style is as evident in MRS. PARKER as it has
ever been in Rudolph's work.  Altman's trademark overlapping dialogue
is particularly noteworthy, and it is one of Rudolph's most
questionable decisions.  The Round Table was defined by the volleys of
bon mots exchanged by its members, and while many clever lines come
through, nearly as many are drowned out by other conversation.  I often
caught uproarious laughter in response to a joke I hadn't heard.
     Now with the same breath that I knock Rudolph on practical
grounds, I must acknowledge that as an artistic choice, it is largely
successful.  Rudolph uses the interactions of these individuals to
demonstrate a superficiality which defined Dorothy Parker's world:
everyone at the table was too busy trying to be clever to pay much
attention to anything anyone else had to say.  "I write doo-dads,"
Parker comments in one scene, "because it's a doo-dad kind of town,"
and that remark speaks volumes about the Round Table regulars, and
perhaps even the Jazz Age as a whole.  As we watch Parker slip deeper
and deeper into depression, it becomes astonishing that none of her
so-called friends, with the exception of Benchley, ever seem to notice
or care.
     That relationship between Dorothy Parker and Robert Benchley is
the backbone of MRS. PARKER, and it is captured in dead-on performances
by Jennifer Jason Leigh and Campbell Scott.  Scott has played mostly
pretty-boy roles to date, but his Benchley is a complicated character,
a teetotaling homebody who is pulled to his eventual destruction by the
people around him.  Leigh's performance is stunning, though she does
affect a speech pattern that sounds like a gin-soaked variation on her
Stanwyck/Hepburn bit from THE HUDSUCKER PROXY, and she seemed to
swallow many of her lines.  It's a piece of work made all the more
challenging by the odd structure of the script, which has Leigh playing
Parker at several different phases of her life, as well as reading
selections from Parker's poetry directly to the camera.  She manages to
capture the soul of an extremely troubled survivor whose final line in
the film ("I can't believe I made it") is both comic and touching.  Her
performance *is* MRS. PARKER, and through all of Rudolph's fits and
starts I found that I actually felt I had met Dorothy Parker.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Jennifer Jason Leigh, Campbell Scott, Matthew Broderick, 
          Andrew McCarthy, Jennifer Beals, Sam Robards 
Director: Alan Rudolph 
Producer: Robert Altman 
Screenplay: Alan Rudolph and Randy Sue Coburn 
Cinematography: Jan Kiesser 
Music: Mark Isham 
Distributed by Fine Line Features in association with Miramax Films 
     "[Dorothy Parker] was a groundbreaker in a lot of ways.  In her
day, to write captions and fashion stories was about all that a woman
writer could aspire to.  Dorothy had the respect of her peers.  But she
was also a critic, and I think she worked against herself as an artist
in that capacity.  We show her once with a note in her typewriter--'Oh God, please let me write like a man.'  And what we really remember
her for is how much like a woman she wrote."
     - Randy Sue Coburn, co-writer, MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE
     MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE is set primarily against the
backdrop of the roaring '20s, with critic/poet/writer Dorothy Parker
(Jennifer Jason Leigh) as the centerpiece.  Parker was by far the best
known female member of the famed Algonquin Round Table--a collection of
journalists, actors, writers, and other artists who gathered daily for
lunch at a 44th Street Manhattan hotel.  Also included in the
membership of this exclusive circle were Robert Benchley (Campbell
Scott), Harold Ross (Sam Robards), and Charles MacArthur (Matthew
Broderick).  Among their successes, the Algonquin clique could claim
Pulitzer Prizes, Oscars, successful stage shows, and bestselling
books.  To the outside world, they were celebrities; to some on the
inside, they were "just a bunch of loudmouths showing off."
     Dorothy Parker is perhaps best remembered for her tart sayings and
pithy turns of phrase, and that's the tone that this movie initially
adopts--playful and clipped.  However, as the screenplay delves beneath
the surface of its lead character's personality, a grim, more serious
mood becomes pervasive, turning Dorothy's witticisms into self-
contemptuous jabs or cries for help.
     MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE is uncomfortable, as we in the
audience are forced to watch someone emotionally drowning without being
allowed to throw a life preserver.  If, as is asserted, the source of
all great literature is "an upheaved soul", then Parker had an endless
supply of inspiration, especially as her life became progressively more
dissolute (sex and alcohol have always been supposed antidotes to empty
existences).  Jennifer Jason Leigh, giving the best performance (to
date) of a varied career, is tremendous, drawling her lines in a
Katherine Hepburn-like voice and expressing pain as much through her
eyes as through words and body language.  Oscars have been awarded for
less.
     One of the most difficult tasks for a film maker is to blend
comedy seamlessly into a drama.  I'm not talking about inserting a few
pointed jokes here and there, but incorporating the humor as an
integral part of the story--one that makes the serious elements all the
more poignant.  Director Alan Rudolph (THE MODERNS, EQUINOX) succeeds,
creating in MRS. PARKER a picture to both laugh and cry through.
     Visually, this is the most interesting and ambitious of Rudolph's
projects.  The film opens in 1937, with Parker reminiscing about the
previous decade.  The bulk of the movie is shot in color, but various
flash-forwards--to '37, '45, and '58--are photographed in black-and-
white.  It's a memorable way to structure a motion picture.
     Arguments can be made about the historical accuracy of the film.
Many of the events related herein are based on Parker's own statements,
and she was notorious for exaggerating--if not outright lying--about
her past.  Regardless of how faithfully it records its title
character's life, however, MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE is a
top-notch movie.  Everything is in place--a striking lead performance,
solid supporting players, a well-written script, and, above all, expert
direction to merge the ingredients.  In a case like this, "truth" may
not be the most important factor to consider in the overall
evaluation.
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily those of
Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It was with great anticipation that I looked forward to the
screening of this film about the Algonquin Round Table of the 1920s
with its extraordinary group of wit and talent.   Who could forget
Robert Benchley, Harold Ross, Alexander Woollcott, Edna Ferber, Deems
Taylor, Will Rogers, Robert Sherwood, Heywood Broun, Neysa McMein,
George S. Kaufman, Marc Connelly, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Harpo Marx, FPA,
Donald Ogden Stewart ... and the many more who made that period a
memorable one?   Among the leaders of that superb pack was Dorothy
Parker herself who was (and is) probably quoted more often than anyone
but Shakespeare.
     Many of the actors looked like those they were portraying which
was fun to spot.  But even those, like Benchley (Campbell Scott) who,
tall and slender, did not resemble the more rotund Benchley, gave some
of the finest performances.
     Where the film loses out is that Jennifer Jason Leigh, playing
Dorothy, chose to use some weird accent so that aside from sounding
like the proverbial marbles in the mouth, the witty words she spoke
were often lost.   Having read Dorothy Parker's verse, stories and
one-liners for lo these many years, I was able to recall the punch
lines but I fear that most in the audience missed many of the gems.
     Mrs. Parker's life should have been the most glorious because she
was a unique and talented personality.  Instead, her private life was a
mess and this the film does explore to the end.  How sad that a woman
who wrote better than most of the men of that period (all famous), as
well as drink them under the table, should have been such an unhappy,
lonely soul.
     Whatever makes the film worth seeing is due to the many witticisms
that flew across the table, and the rest of the cast which includes
(among many, many others), Matthew Broderick, Sam Robards, Martha
Plimpton, Stephen Baldwin, Wallace Shawn, Keith Carradine, Nick
Cassavetes and Peter Benchley.

Author
Alex Fung
Fineline
Starring Jennifer Jason Leigh, Matthew Broderick, Campbell Scott,
         Jennifer Beals, Peter Gallagher, Andrew McCarthy,
         Wallace Shawn, Martha Plimpton, Sam Robards, Lili Taylor,
         James LeGros, Gwyneth Paltrow, Heather Graham, Stephen Baldwin
Written by Alan Rudolph and Randy Sue Coburn
Produced by Robert Altman
Directed by Alan Rudolph
Rated AA [Adult Accompaniment] in Canada for brief nudity and 
   coarse language
     After opening exclusively in New York in late November 1994, the
new Alan Rudolph film, MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE is
beginning to get a wider, if somewhat restricted, distribution, and has
opened here in Toronto during the Xmas weekend.
     Filmed in Montreal, MRS. PARKER is a loosely biographical film
dealing with the writer Dorothy Parker, who entertained America in the
1920s  with her sharp tongue and witticisms, and her follies with what
became known as the Algonquin Round Table, a group of friends and
colleagues who would dine daily at the Algonquin in New York and trade
verbal barbs and amused chatterings.  This group would encompass some
of the most influential figures on American culture of their time.
     If you're looking for an upbeat feel-good comedy, this is likely a
film you would want to stay away from.  As Dorothy Parker's life is
revealed through a series of flashbacks, swapping between her youth and
her old age, it is revealed that behind her banter and sly wit lay
sorrow, despair, self-consciousness and perpetual depression.  We
cringe in the audience as we watch Parker desperately enter futile
relationship after relationship, thus perpetuating the cycle of her
misery, and we morosely watch the elderly Parker, a shadow of her
former self, react with regret and grief on actions unfulfilled and
love unconsummated.
     The young ensemble cast is very solid in MRS. PARKER in their
limited roles, but the three major characters featured in the film are
Dorothy Parker (Leigh), Robert Benchley (Scott), and Charles MacArthur
(Broderick).  Broderick is fine as one of Parker's loves, and Campbell
Scott is outstanding in a potential break-out performance as Parker's
confidant and soulmate--physically, in this film he mildly resembles a
dapper Patrick Bergen--but by and large, this film is a vehicle for
Jennifer Jason Leigh, who is in virtually every scene.
     Much has been said in the press and the newsgroups about how
Leigh's rendition of Parker's slurred, grating voice has rendered much
of her dialogue incomprehensible, but honestly, I did not encounter
this problem at all.  It may be a function of the theatre speakers and
background noise (i.e., viewers talking) that may compound the difficulty
for some, but in general her words are understandable, if mildly
challenging.  In any case, her version sounds so true to the original
that one must give her points for trying.
     Dorothy Parker, as depicted in this film, is a well-suited entry
in Leigh's catalog of downbeat, dark, and quirky characters, and while
she is capable in the role, it is a mild disappointment that, save for
the inflection, she did not stretch much further for it.  Many of
Leigh's own characteristic performance ticks can be seen in the film,
but it may due to the character's lack of range in the screenplay that
this becomes obvious.  Nonetheless, Leigh will probably get serious
Oscar consideration, since this is one of very few high-profile
dominant female roles of the year, and her other work has been
critically accepted.
     MRS. PARKER suffers from some significant pacing problems and at
times seems too choppy and uneven.  The film lurches between the two
timelines, and while what's depicted on-screen is done well, it only
gives the audience a voyeuristic glance into scenes from Parker's life,
and doesn't flesh out the characters sufficiently.  The conclusion of
the film seems to come rather abruptly, and some scenes in the movie
tend to be a bit overlong in bringing their significance to point.  The
humour is a hit-and-miss affair; some points are roaringly funny, while
other jabs provide nary a chuckle.  The costumes (by John Hay) and
production design (by Francois Seguin) are first rate, and the period
score, though appropriate, is slightly overprominent and becomes
grating at times.
     Though the screenplay could have probably undergone a bit more
revision, it is nonetheless very effective in its ultimate portrayal of
Parker as a tragic figure.  While those with no familiarity or interest
in Dorothy Parker may be disenchanted, the combination of this
unfortunate soul in American history with an excellent ensemble cast
makes MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE a haunting little film.  On
my four-star scale, I give this a two-and-a-half.
Note:  There is one scene that is shown after the credits have begun to
       roll, so one may want to remain for that scene to complete before
       leaving.  Incidentally, Leigh's half-sister, Mina Badie, has a
       minor speaking part in this film.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The Algonquin Round Table was a unique literary circle.  Through
the 1920s a group of the brightest, wittiest, and elitist of the
Manhattan's artistic types met every day in the Rose Room of the
Algonquin Hotel on 44th Street.  There they ate lunch, traded barbs,
and gossiped.  Woe betide the unprepared newcomer who tried to join the
prestigious group.  He became an immediate target for the rapier-
sarcasm of some of the cleverest literary minds this country ever
produced.  The Round Table circled around its two brightest stars,
Alexander Woollcott and Dorothy Parker.  Both were merciless critics as
well as authors.  Other notable members were Robert Benchley, Marc
Connelly, Edna Ferber, George S. Kaufman, Robert Sherwood, and many
others.  MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE is the story of Parker's
life, particularly during the years of the Round Table.
     Our story begins in Hollywood of 1945 with Parker (played by
Jennifer Jason Leigh) married to Alan Campbell (Peter Gallagher) and
writing films for which she has no respect.  She begins thinking about
the old days and the film flashes from monochrome to color.  As her
rumination opens Parker is not yet the angry literary critic she was to
become.  She was just the very cross theater critic for Vanity Fair,
though she already displayed a cynical and biting wit.  She is fired
for writing reviews that were too negative.  Her husband (Andrew
McCarthy) has returned from the war.  In his weakened state as a drunk
and a morphine addict he is no match to trade insults with his
distinguished.  Dorothy has lost her taste for him as she would lose it
for just about everything else in life, everything but her close circle
of friends.
     These friends meet for lunch daily in the Algonquin and soon form
the tight literary clique that would become the Round Table.  The put-
downs would come fast and furious.  One might pat another's bald head
and say something like "It feels just like my wife's behind."  The bald
man would feel his own head and say "Why, so it does."  We follow
Parker through a torrid love affair--as passionate as Parker would ever
feel about anything--with newspaperman Charles MacArthur (Matthew
Broderick).  But the great love of Parker's life is critic and comedian
Robert Benchley (Campbell Scott), who carefully remains only a platonic
friend.  In fact, he probably deserves awards for remaining that close
to a woman who seems to have a double entendre for a personality.
Parker seems to have a real affection for dogs and none whatsoever for
people.  Even so, she always seemed to have a current man and a current
dog.  Eventually there would be just the dog.
     Leigh studied what few recordings there are of Parker's voice to
imitate exactly the irritating, affected elocution that Parker herself
used--a near relative of the speaking style Leigh used in THE HUDSUCKER
PROXY.  The acting is quite good, but it is less then pleasant to share
a room with this person for over two hours.  Campbell Scott is a little
more pleasant to watch as Robert Benchley though he is a too thin to
look like Benchley in the old comedy shorts.
     The script by director Alan Rudolph and Randy Sue Coburn jumps
around in time with a latterday Parker offering bleak little humorous
poems as commentary on the action--or lack thereof--of the film.  The
film works as a detailed portrait of someone whom you would not want to
meet in real life.  This is sort of a literary SID AND NANCY which
tells you more than you want to know about a person about whom there is
less than meets the eye.  The other members of the Round Table are of
more interest, of course.  I would rate it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
