Title
Review for Weekend at Bernie's (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chad Polenz
Weekend At Bernie's
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1989, PG, 101 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Jonathan Silverman (Richard), Andrew McCarthy (Larry), Catherine
Mary Stewart (Gwen), Terry Kiser (Bernie), written by Robert Klame, produced
by Victor Drai, directed by Ted Kotcheff.
Ninety-nine times out of a hundred the "live action cartoon" comedy doesn't
work. Now, "Weekend At Bernie's" is not that one hundredth film, it's more
like 99 1/2. The film's premise is jokes about a dead body, which makes for a
few good gags, but not that many.
Jonathan Silverman and Andrew McCarthy star as Richard and Larry, a pair of
20-something buds working as data processors at the generic huge insurance
corporation in New York City. Right from the get-go the paldom is interesting
with Richard as the uptight workaholic while Larry is the obnoxious slacker.
The chemistry between the two is the standard "odd couple" formula, and even
though this is obvious it didn't bother me.
Somehow the two stumble upon a scam to defraud the company. When they
approach their boss, Bernie Lomax (Kiser), he is so appreciative and happy he
invites them to stay at his vacation house in the Hamptons for the upcoming
Labor Day weekend. However, it turns out Bernie was defrauding his own
company and there is a cartoony mob involvement, and you can pretty much take
it from there.
And so the two head out to Bernie's vacation mansion only to find their host
dead of what they believe to be a suicide via drug overdose. Bernie was
killed because he was cheating with his fellow mobster's girlfriend. The
problem is the film is a too slowly paced and this subplot starts to detract
from the comedy. From here on we get a comedy about trying to make people
believe Bernie's alive. It's the hyperactivity between Silverman and McCarthy
that keeps the film from becoming a disaster of dumb sight gags.
The film does come back to the mob subplot as the two find themselves
running all over the place because they think the killer is after them. Even
though this is stupidity, McCarthy and Silverman are quite funny because of
their constant bickering and zany antics. The funniest scene occurs when they
try to get off the island via speedboat and Bernie's body ends up being
dragged and hits a dozen bouies. I was laughing hard at the time, but
thinking about it now, I don't understand what was so funny about it. The
ending is a cliche but it doesn't become overly annoying, which is how the
film acts as a whole. 
I'm glad "Weekend At Bernie's" didn't ask us to take it seriously, but it
didn't exploit that notion enough. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
