Title
Review for Ŕ ma soeur! (2001)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Cowboy Bookings International
 Director:  Catherine Breillat
 Writer:  Catherine Breillat
 Cast: Anais Reboux, Roxane Mesquida, Libero De Rienzo,
Arsinee Khanjian, Romain Goupil, Laura Betti, Albert Goldberg,
Claude Sese, Marc Samuel
 Screened at: Loews Screening Rm., NYC 10/2/01
   Being an only child has its advantages, I suppose.  Horseback
riding lessons, dance lessons, and the like, but oh, what a
sibling-less person misses!  If a guy has a sister or a girl has a
brother or even if you have a sib of the same gender, you get to
be a mentor or a mentee, usually the older counseling the
younger about the ways of dating, mating and the like. 
Sometimes the younger person gets to instruct the older, more
experienced one, at least according to Catherine Breillat in her striking
film "Fat Girl," which is seen from the point of view of a 12-year-
old, the title figure, who is clearly less experienced than her 15-
year-old sister but who somehow, simply by observing quietly gets
to know the ropes vicariously and to use her knowledge to counsel
the more attractive companion and family member.
   "Fat Girl," selected for viewing at this year's New York Film
Festival, is by the writer-director whose "Romance" two years ago
stirred up as much discussion as "Mulholland Drive" has been
doing nowadays, though for different reasons.  "Romance," about
a woman who is rejected by her lover and goes on a sexual odyssey is
sexually explicit, but because writer-director Catherine Breillat
went over the line with pornographic techniques into the field of
gynecology rather than eroticism, the film was not really titillating.
With  "Fat Girl," on the other hand, Breillet wisely steers clears of
the Debbie-Does-Dallas school of filmmaking--though full frontal
nudity is no problem for her or her performers--but she uses the
sexual scenes to show us their effect on the 12-year-old Anais
(Anais Reboux).  Anais is a cute enough pre-adolescent who has
a weight problem, who overstuffs on French cuisine for the usual
psychological reason of building up a layer of armor between her
and the world.  Anais has a love-hate relationship with her
attractive sister, Elena (Roxane Mesquida), hugging and giggling
with her one moment, then switching as would an infant into a
dissing contest usually initiated by Elena, who is fond of calling
Anais a bitch.  The two girls share a love-hate relationship with
their parents, played by Arsinee Khanjian and Romain Goupil,
whose link with their daughters varies from detached to
harshly critical.
   The story takes place during a summer vacation in modern
times, though the clothing is as retro as the mood.  Anais watches
every move of her sister Elena like a Greek chorus, detached, yet
critical, now advising, now consoling, sometimes hostile.  When
she is off by herself swimming in the pool, she sings to herself and
in one arresting scene photographer Yorgos Arvanitis captures
her caressing the diving board, then fondling the ladder, while
challenging the ladder to show envy toward her previous
inanimate object of affection.  When Elena meets Fernando
(Libero De Rienzo), a third-year Italian law student on holiday, she
takes no more than three minutes to begin cuddling with him in
an outdoor cafe after which they proceed at night to her room
where she engages in more intimacies, albeit greatly conflicted
about losing her virginity.  What gives the nocturnal scene its heft,
so to speak, is that we witness it through the eyes of poor Anais,
who is brimming with envy and who sees through Fernando's
typically male "line" about how much he loves Elena and how he
wants to see her "in the city."  Elena and Anais have divergent
views about what sort of relationship one should have before
going all the way, a difference of philosophy that becomes a key
point in the film, given the sudden turn of events that not only jolts
the audience almost to its feet but encompasses the best payoff
scene of any movie this year.
   With an exceptional performance by Anais Reboux in the title
role and a moving supporting part by Roxane Mesquida as the
conflicted sister, "Fat Girl" becomes a heartfelt work about the
altogether mixed joys of adolescence, giving us insight into sibling
rivalry and what looks like an authentic look at what goes on in a
young woman's mind when she resolves to give herself to a man
for the first time.
Not Rated.  Running time: 83 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Fit for a ghoul's night out, Fat Girl stands cast iron firm with the
simplistic, fatuous, built-in excuse that its woman director is baring
the harsh sexual realities of adolescent girls.  Being a boy, I might
not understand female behavior and am unequipped to analyze this
particular pseudo-feminist coming-of-age story.  Fair enough.  I'll
pretend to ignore the mannered posturing and Health Class 101 "this is a
no-no" dialogue when Older Teenage Boy coaxes Younger Teenage Girl to
let him fuck her up the ass, speaking variations on "It won't hurt!" for
a scene that seems to last at least ten minutes.  This is done almost
entirely in an unbroken master shot that suggests unimaginative
camerawork more than unblinking voyeurism.  They dare you to look away,
without possessing the courage of allowing the children to actually
sound like children (they're mouthpieces for writer-director Catherine
Breillat's one-note clinical politics).
Rather than show an even-handed evaluation of the rigors of hormonal
change, Breillat (previously responsible for the unwatchable Romance)
wants to indulge in her hour of hate.  Life is pain, highness.  Get used
to it.  She'd find keen bedfellows in Neil LaBute and Todd Solondz,
other sultans of misanthropy who lack the balls to be earnest or
honest.  For children, dealing with trauma and pain is complicated.  To
bury that in sarcasm and academic theory feels cheap.  These would-be
auteurs (more like hauteurs) haven't earned the right to display
suffering because they don't layer it in emotional truth (as Mike Leigh
does throughout Naked and David Lynch in several key scenes of Blue
Velvet).  Of course, there I go again comparing her to all these
(better) male directors.  I don't care.  Gender be damned, she's
borderline inept.
Braced for a knee-jerk reaction from the art house crowd (mortified
shock or compulsory applause will suffice), writer-director Catherine
Breillat may well accomplish her mission to get a rise out of people. 
Don't be fooled.  This grotesque oversimplification of awkward forays
into passion may be quickly forgotten, remembered only as cold, boring,
philosophically arid, and incompetently photographed.  The hyperviolent
climactic sequence proves so extraordinarily misguided that I honestly
wondered whether Breillat had thrown in an impromptu dream sequence.
Twelve years old, a bundle of dough with a sour pout, the superb Anaďs
Reboux plays the titular fat girl with a thousand yard stare and a
frumpy insouciance.  (Her character is also named Anaďs.)  Sitting at
the table morosely slurping down a banana split, her presence is
grounded and heartbreaking.  It's a pity Breillat never finds anything
for her to do other than get defensive against her evil storybook
sister, 15-year old Elena (Roxane Mesquida), for bringing a transitory
boyfriend home to their shared room.  In this summer cottage, Anaďs has
no escape from her position as stoic bedside observer to Elena's
depressing confusion of cheap sex with romance.  The boy in question, a
smug Italian college kid named Fernando (Libero De Rienzo) is a real
piece of work, claiming that the experience is a declaration of love
while begging for a blowjob.
Anaďs doesn't receive any warmth from her largely absent parents, who
join Elena in making fun of her hefty girth.  She finds pleasure in
wandering the beach alone, singing songs to herself, and swimming in the
pool kissing the metal railing and pretending that it's her paramour. 
Reboux commands the screen, but there's only so much a child actress can
do recounting pretentious monologues to herself.  If one is inspired to
rescue this young performer and place her in a better movie, at least
she fares better than the other young talent asked to perform in intense
love scenes that might feel justified if they weren't so dramatically
misguided.
This 83-minute vignette is something of a horror show, but Breillat
saves her nastiest poison for the very end.  On the long ride home
punctuated by an uncomfortable silence between family members, gigantic
trucks swerve by as the hour grows late.  Will mommy fall asleep at the
wheel?  Perhaps.  Or maybe there's something deadlier around the corner,
lying in wait to pounce upon the unsuspecting Fat Girl.  What's more,
she might even like it.  With the intent of being unfair and
unpredictable, placing her heroine in the most diabolical of corners in
order to face up to impending adulthood, Breillat's extreme flourish of
sadistic tawdriness reveals her as a master purveyor of contempt.  Fat
Girl is a bitter pill indeed.
Aka Ŕ ma soeur!  Screened at the 2001 New York Film Festival (feature
coming soon).
Director: Catherine Breillat
Producer: Jean-François Lepetit
Writer: Catherine Breillat
Starring: Anaďs Reboux, Roxane Mesquida, Libero De Rienzo, Arsinée
Khanjian, Romain Goupil
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
