Title
Review for Earth Girls Are Easy (1989)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Randy Parker
        EARTH GIRLS ARE EASY gives new meaning to the phrase, "leave your
brain at the door."  Although it's silly and fun, EARTH GIRLS ARE EASY is
also mindless, unoriginal, and altogether forgettable.
        The movie arose from the twisted mind of July Brown, the singer and
video star who's responsible for such classic tunes as "The Homecoming
Queen Has a Gun" and "I Like My Men Big and Stupid."  Brown co-wrote EARTH
GIRLS ARE EASY, which takes its name from one of her songs.
        Geena Davis stars as a manicurist from the Valley who catches her
fiance in bed with another woman.  The next day as she's sulking and
sunbathing, a space ship inhabited by three furry and sex-starved aliens
crash lands in her swimming pool.  The aliens, who look kind of like teddy
bears, quickly learn English by watching television--isn't that original?
Davis initially panics in reaction to her unusual house-guests, but then
she comes to her senses and takes them to the "Curl Up & Dye" beauty salon
for electrolysis.  With their fur removed, we can finally recognize the
three aliens as Jeff Goldblum and comedians Jim Carrey and Damon Wayans.
The movie depicts their fish-out-of-water misadventures, which include an
interplanetary love story between Goldblum and Davis.
        EARTH GIRLS ARE EASY is consistently entertaining and engaging.
Director Julian Temple, who's best known for rock videos and the film
ABSOLUTE BEGINNERS, has created a colorful and fast-moving film.  Geena
Davis' talents are well suited to her weird and eccentric, yet sympathetic,
character.  July Brown is extremely appealing in her supporting role as
Davis' air-headed, fun-loving, and boy-crazy boss; she's especially
hilarious in a musical scene at the beach in which she extolls the virtues
of being a dizzy blonde.  And Carrey, Wayans, and Goldblum make the most of
their one-dimensional roles.
        Unfortunately, EARTH GIRLS ARE EASY is too much like a TV sitcom.
The movie's slapstick comedy is reminiscent of shows like "Laverne &
Shirley."  Like most TV sitcoms, EARTH GIRLS ARE EASY is formulaic and
doesn't contain an ounce of originality.  But even so, the movie does
provide a few moments of inspired comedy, such as its satirical barbs at
valley girls.  Most of the time, however, EARTH GIRLS ARE EASY seems like
nothing more than one long July Brown video.  The movie is full of musical
dance numbers which don't advance the story.
        So while EARTH GIRLS ARE EASY is perfect if you're looking for some
harmless and disposable entertainment, it won't give you much food for
thought.  By the end of the closing credits, EARTH GIRLS ARE EASY will have
already slipped from memory.

Author
Jeff Meyer
[Seen at the Seattle International Film Festival]
EARTH GIRLS ARE EASY (USA, 1988)
Director: Julian Temple
Screenwriters: Julie Brown, Charlie Coffey, Terrance E. McNally
Cast: Gena Davis, Jeff Goldblum, Julie Brown, Jim Carrey, Damon Waylans,
      Michael McKean, Charles Rocket
     As Dennis Miller might say, "Hey, what can I tell ya?"  You got your horny
aliens from outer space, who (once they've had the Nair treatment) look just
like humans.  You got your attractive, pleasant, somewhat naive hairdresser
who's looking for Mr.  Right.  You've got that mythical plastic Southern
California Suburban World of beaches, bimbos and blondes to let the cast play
around with.  And you've got 45 minutes of the old "gotta keep the nice aliens
from being discovered" theme, which was getting stale back when Bill Bixby
hadn't even thought about having a weekly green steroid treatment.  What do YOU
think is going to happen?
     Well, you're right.  Outside of some of Julie Brown's bouncy pop tunes,
there isn't much here to entertain.  There's certainly no surprises; I found
about two jokes funny (and a nice shot which is FLY-inspired), and the scenes
with Goldblum (head alien and romantic love interest of Davis' character (and,
I guess, Davis)) and company learning Earth customs is a pale retread of other
pale retreads.  (I can remember the one part I enjoyed -- the prosthetic tongue
scene -- simply because it stood out among such a completely familiar
background.)  Goldblum looks a little uncomfortable, even for a space alien in
California.  Davis holds up well, and you end up hoping that she and Goldblum
had a good time working together again.  Charles Rocket plays his usual role as
the yuppie rotter; he must be sorry that MOONLIGHTING is gone, as it appears to
be the only place he ever got to stretch his talents some.  The only thing I
really enjoyed about the film were the opening credits (you'd think they were
done by Pee-wee Herman), the art direction, and the old SF props/masks/suits
that they got out for Davis' dream sequence.  Other than that, *yawn*.
     I have the feeling that the director and screenwriters saw HAIRSPRAY and
thought they were working at something similar here.  They aren't; HAIRSPRAY is
an immensely well-crafted film that balances its elements with exceptional
precision, and comes out with a film that is parody, satire AND an actual
"teen" film at the same time.  This film just reminds you of how many comic
alien films you've seen before, and that while you might like Julie Brown's
songs, at least they're over in five minutes.

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Screened at its U.S. premiere, March 10, 1989, at the San Francisco
International Film Festival (Kabuki Theatre, San Francisco).
     Synopsis: Space aliens visit earth, and while they're here, decide to have
a good time with ... human girlfriends!  An outrageously funny and delightful
comedy/satire.
Director: Julien Temple
Producer: Tony Garnet
Screenplay: Julie Brown, Charlie Coffey, Terrence E. McNally
Principal cast: Geena Davis, Jeff Goldblum, Julie Brown, Charles Rocket,
                Jim Carrey, Damon Wayans
Released by: Vestron Pictures
     Director Julien Temple scores a bullseye with this light & warm hearted
film that manages to satirize just about everything, including consumerism, Los
Angeles-style pop culture, modern romance, and science fiction films.  The
satire is very well done, without the hard edges or cynicism that is so common
nowadays.
     The film begins by showing us the inside of an alien space ship, which is
piloted by three furry humanoid creatures.  They are frustrated and lonely, as
they are on a long journey without female companions.  The only female
companionship available to them is to play holographic projections of (alien)
females.  The film then shifts to earth, where we meet Valerie (Geena Davis),
an air-headed manicurist who works at the Curl Up & Dye hair salon.  It seems
that Valerie is engaged to a young Doctor, who is chasing every skirt in town
but hers, and she is disturbed by this.  Anyway, the alien space ship is
passing earth, and they decide to do a little girl-watching.  They happen to
zoom in on Valerie's home, and they see her sunbathing by the pool.  When
Valerie removes her "breast protective device" (the top of her bikini), one of
the aliens gets so excited that it leads to the alien ship crash-landing in her
pool!
     This sets in motion a sequence of truly unique and hilarious events, as
the aliens suffer real "culture shock" in LA.  Valerie takes the aliens to the
beauty salon for a make-over, so that they are presentable in society.  They
then go out for a night on the town.  There is a truly hilarious scene in a bar
where one of the aliens is drinking out of a tall glass.  He sticks his long
(several inches) tongue into the glass, whereupon the four beautiful girls he
is with start openly fighting among themselves to see which girl gets to go
home with him that night!  I won't give away any more of the film to avoid
spoiling anything.  Rest assured that there is a *lot* more humor in the film!
     This film is a real delight.  It is outrageously funny, but also
warm-hearted.  It is very fast-paced, and includes send-ups of, among other
things, science fiction films, beach blanket films, television, and Jerry Lewis.
Audience reaction at the premiere was enthusiastic, to say the least.  Oh yes,
it is also a romance film, and those aspects of the film also receive the comic
touch.
     There are a few other points that should be mentioned.  Director Julien
Temple is best known for music videos (although he has directed other films:
ABSOLUTE BEGINNERS, THE GREAT ROCK AND ROLL SWINDLE), and this film does
include a few sequences that are essentially music videos.  Although the music
is nothing special, these "videos" are funny and fit well into the movie.
Also, the special effects of the alien spaceship (except for the holographic
alien females) are really cheesy.  The alien costumes are also rather obvious.
However, this does *not* detract from the film; the appeal of this film is its
satire and comedy, not special effects.  [Note: the holographic alien females
effect is nicely done.]
     I really enjoyed this film, and I think most people will too.  The only
danger in viewing it is that you will be overwhelmed by the humor, which comes
at a frantic pace.  I am also quite certain that this film will be a very *big*
hit when it is released this summer!  In summary, I would describe this film as
the funniest full-length film I have seen in a very long time.  [Remark: it is
funnier than THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN, though the films are not
directly comparable.  MUNCHAUSEN is primarily an adventure film, which
coincidentally has plenty of humor in it.  EARTH GIRLS is pure comedy.]
     Overall evaluation: highest rating possible; a must-see.
Reviewer: Thomas E. Billings; Department of Statistics
          University of California, Berkeley
Reviewer contact: teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Helium-weight comedy has a typical
     Valley Girl (played by Geena Davis) meeting a bright blue
     furry alien (played by Jeff Goldblum looking like a flea-
     market bathmat).  EARTH GIRLS is based on the Julie Brown
     song of the same title.  Director Julien Temple also directed
     ABSOLUTE BEGINNERS and it was much better.  Rating: high 0.
     It all started when witty and moderately attractive Julie Brown nearly
made it to being chosen homecoming queen.  As she tells it, rather than just
being disappointed she struck back by writing songs making fun of all the
institutions her friends enjoyed.  Her songs--now a popular staple of the
Dr. Demento show--include "Everybody Run, the Homecoming Queen's Got a Gun,"
"'Cause I'm a Blond," and "Earth Girls Are Easy."  The last was done in a
Valley Girl accent as an air-head describes a close encounter of a fourth
kind with non-humanoid aliens.  When the song was sold to be made as a film,
Brown rephrased it to delete the non-humanoid references.  She also co-wrote
the script and plays a prominent role in the film.
     EARTH GIRLS ARE EASY hides the fact that it is really a British
production, directed by Julian Temple.  Temple directed the kinetically
stunning ABSOLUTE BEGINNERS, which unfortunately never found its market and
which died at the boxoffice.  EARTH GIRLS is a much less ambitious film, but
it probably is light and mindless enough to make the profit the other film
missed.
     EARTH GIRLS ARE EASY opens with a sort of pop-art spaceship in a pop-
art space scene.  Inside are three shaggy aliens, each one of the primary
colors (red, yellow, and blue), and each looking for female companionship.
Loneliest of all is Mac (played by Jeff Goldblum), who is not just merely
blue, he's really most sincerely blue.  But our three aliens strike it
lucky: they pick up a television broadcast from Earth and discover that this
planet has girls!
     Meanwhile, one such girl is Valerie (played by Geena Davis--a mere
decade too old for the role).  Valerie, the Valley Girl air-head of the
song, is engaged to Ted (played by--can you believe it?--Charles Rocket!), a
doctor who cannot resist *playing* doctor whenever he is given the
opportunity.  Julie catches Ted about to play "Dr. Love" with a nurse and
she throws him out of his own house.
     [Sorry--this next part has to be done in Valley Girl accent.]  Well,
like she's feeling all bummed out the next day, ya know, and like sitting
next to Ted's pool soaking up sun when--like wow!--this totally tubular
spaceship falls out of the sky and like, ya know, splashes down right there
in the pool.  Awesome!  She should know she can't make it with Mac because
he's like blue, ya know, and all covered with hair.  And, like they're from
two different worlds.  But then, hey, this is science fiction.  [Okay,
that's enough of that.]
     Temple's view of Americans is not very perceptive.  His production
numbers look like they are borrowed from GREASE and from 1960s beach blanket
movies.  He does have one very nice dream sequence, an homage to the props
of better-known science fiction films, but that is as close as EARTH GIRLS
ARE EASY ever gets to art.  If there is an idea to this sci-fi (in the worst
sense) film Temple has made clear that it is an unwelcome guest and has
sentenced it to solitary confinement.  I rate this cotton candy film a 0 on
the -4 to +4 scale.  Like wow.
