Title
Review for Kafka (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     KAFKA is a film by Steven Soderburgh with a screenplay written by
Lem Dobbs.  The film stars Jeremy Irons, Theresa Russell, Joel Gray, Ian
Holm, Alec Guinness, Jeroen Krabbe, Armin Mueller-Stahl.  Rated PG-13
for brief violence, mature themes.
     KAFKA is the brilliant follow-up to Steven Soderburgh's debut film
SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE.  It is like its predecessor only insofar as it
too is a chance-taker, a long-shot project, this time based on a
ten-year-old script by Lem Dobbs (THE HARD WAY).  It is also a film that
is inevitably going to be compared both to Terry Gilliam's BRAZIL and
David Cronenberg's NAKED LUNCH; however, the other film that I was
reminded of, and which almost certainly influenced Soderburgh, was THE
WIZARD OF OZ.  More about this later, however.
     First, you should clearly understand that the conceit of KAFKA is
like that of the film HAMMETT, namely that a famous author in the days
before his fame becomes involved in a situation that is a pastiche of
his most famous, or most typical, works.  In the course of the story,
the necessarily literate viewer is invited to pick out references to the
author's stories.  In HAMMETT, for example, the title character has
table lamp the base of which looks just like the black Maltese falcon in
the Bogey movie.  In KAFKA, there are references to "Metamorphosis,"
"The Trial," "The Castle," at a minimum.  However, this is a fantasy on
the theme of Kafka, not a biopic, not film version of a Kafka story, and
it is most certainly not that tired old cliche Kafkaesque, and it sure
as heck ain't Merchant and Ivory quaint.
     Instead, what we have is Jeremy Irons is a wonderful performance.
Of course, Irons is one of our very best film actors, but it is always
surprising to be once again reminded of his range and versatility.  Some
critics think the Irons is merely walking through the role, but I think
they are underestimating how much skill is involved in the kind of
nervous, intense, withdrawn-from-life characterization with which Irons
delineates his Kafka.
     Irons is supported by an amazing cast: Theresa Russell as Gabriela,
the seductive revolutionary; Joel Gray as the office-messenger Burgel,
who seems to have a lot more power than your average messenger ("Aha!
Away from your section, without cause!"); Alec Guinness as the Chief
Clerk, who advises Kafka "You should find a more athletic hobby -- put
some color in your cheeks"; Armin Stahl-Mueller (lately in Barry
Levinson's AVALON) as Inspector Grubach; the slapstick team of Ludwig
and Oscar (Keith Allen and Simon McBurney) who are assigned to be
Kafka's assistants at the soul-killing Accident and Insurance
Compensation Association where he's been clerking for nearly nine years.
About his job, he asks a co-worker: "You've never felt it was a horrible
double life from which there was no escape but insanity?"  And then
there's Ian Holm as Dr. Murnau, the name being a sly reference to the
legendary German director F. W. Murnau.  Not to forget, Jeroen Krabbe as
the stonecutter who admires Kafka's writing and who supplies clues to
the Castle that dominates the storyline as it does the skyline of
Prague.
     Dobbs has complained that Soderburgh mangled his script, but
whatever the truth the fact that remains that filmed script does an
elegant and intelligent job of drawing on Kafka's life and works to make
its absurdist points, at least until it detours into horror-movie mode.
It is in this part of the movie that Soderburgh invites comparison, and
a pale one, with BRAZIL.  However, a more favorable comparison of the
two movies would mention the sly and sometimes hilarious humor of much
of the absurdism, especially Kafka's lines.
     Just as witty at times are the photography and sets.  Soderburgh
and his cinematographer Walt Lloyd make superb use of the Prague
locations.  Most of the film is shot in black and white.  Some of this
actually started my heart racing with its beauty.  The section of the
story transpiring inside the Castle is shot in color, and Kafka's entry
into this world of color, horror, and surreality has got to be modeled
on the moment Dorothy opens the door of the house and reveals
Munchkinland.  The color is what I (in my lamentable ignorance of film
technology) think of as supersaturated like what I believe is called the
three-strip color of old Technicolor, that unnaturally rich, jewel-like,
painterly color of Errol Flynn's ROBIN HOOD, especially.
     The fantasy reaches its climax in this color sequence, but when
Kafka returns to the black and white world of Prague outside the Castle
there is a new look of unreality to this "real" world.  I don't know if
it was just me, or if the cinematography was different in the last
b-and-w segment than in the first, maybe focused slightly differently.
But I had the same reaction when Dorothy wakes up back in Kansas: those
people are quite as real; Kansas isn't quite as real as Oz.  Once you've
been vouchsafed a vision, the quotidian world is changed forever.
Certainly Kafka's character is different in the last morgue scene than
in the comparable scene earlier in the movie.
     Have I told you I loved Steven Soderburgh's KAFKA?  See this film,
do yourself a real treat.  It may not, as some critics say, have the
"lyrical perfection of SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE" (Michael Upchurch,
Seattle Times), but it is a stunning performance both by this still new
director and his wonderful cast.  KAFKA will certainly achieve some kind
of cult status, for good or ill, and it will certainly be paired in
revival houses with NAKED LUNCH, with which KAFKA shares some creative
sensibilities and motives.  But see it now while it's still a fresh,
invigorating, stand-alone experience.  And the cost be hanged.

Author
Pedro Sena
This film is only as good as your reading was in your school's English
classes.
If you read a few of Kafka's short stories, you will like the blend in this
film.  If you didn't, chances are that this film will go over your head and
you will not appreciate the famous literary tradition which the writer
developed, because this film is Extremelly faithful to the way he wrote.
Frans Kafka, is not easy reading, and neither is it a Sunday pleasure and
cup of tea, terrace reading.  It is all too often, much more serious, with
implications which lean towards the existentialist movement in literature in
the late 40's, 50's and
early 60's.  By the time the sixties arrive, the shadows of the war were
diminishing, and the arts, in general, took an up swing in feeling and
attitudes.  The existentialists, having made their point through Albert
Camus and Jean Paul Sartre, all of a sudden were alive with a group of
weird, unusual, and clever writers.  And what was originally
known as 'new wave' cinema, may have been the ( Godard and Truffaut ) reason
why it started in the first place.  The negative and often helpless
attitudes with overtones of the decline of the civilization of the
industrial age, all of a sudden was alive.  The social rules and ways has
dehumanized people....and Kafka's contempt is for the fact that people can't
do much to change it any more....and often have to die knowing the truth,
but having to admit the falsities, just in order to survive.  The sixties
were the first rebirth of 'life' since the war that destroyed so much in
Europe.....and Franz Kafka, could very well have predicted it and hoped for
in his writing, were it not for a friend who did not do what he was told.
This highly autobiographical film, starts with the young Kafka doing his job
as an insurance clerk, where as time goes by his fear of impropriety and
dishonesty is discovered to be true by his mind ( his perception  already
had it figured out ), but the whole thing is undermined by his inability to
clarify his relationship with his father and eventually himself, and those
he cared for, or cared for him.  There were fears which suggested he was
unable to cope with the fact he knew what some of the outcomes were, not
realizing that he could have a say in how to change that outcome.
As he gets older, and notices his 'friends' happen to be the unusual sort of
people, gathered for political activities against the society they despise,
with whom he really does not wish to be involved, but with whom he happens
to share some points of view.  Eventually it makes  him a hero of sorts,
because he has the ability to succeed in destroying  a part of the system
where all the other revolutionaries have failed. However to himself, he
still is a personal failure, and with this he fails himself.  His weak
health eventual fells him.
The best part of this film is actually the acting showcase put on by the
likes of Joel Grey, Alec Guiness, Ian Holm, and Theresa Russell, who
probably couldn't resist a chance to work out a literary event. And although
Theresa comes off a bit overly emotional at times, and for good reason, she
is not as strong as the others, but manages to hold her own, as the ill
fated Gabriella.  And the film suggests that it is
her fall that weakens his own quest for self discovery.  The girl who loves
him is a nice girl, but he does not show any inclination to doing anything
about it, and she is too shy to do anything about it. Gabriella has a
stronger appeal, if not domineering, which may appeal to the younger Kafka.
And she is not immature, and young by any means,
where the other girl appears really naive, and incapable of understanding or
being a satisfactory partner on an intellectual level, which might be a
requirement for Kafka.
Joel Grey as the co worker is very good, and funny, if not obnoxious. Alec
Guiness as his boss is really smooth, as usual, in anything he does. And Ian
Holm stands out as the intellectual evil man, who is still exercising the
atrocities of the past war, obviously something which in Kafka's mind, must
be done away with, and buried away.
