Title
Review for Spy Who Loved Me, The (1977)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Bill Hatfield
Starring Roger Moore, Barbara Bach, Curt Jurgens, Richard Kiel, 
Caroline Munro.
Featuring Bernard Lee, Desmond Llewelyn, Lois Maxwell, and Geoffrey 
Keen.
Directed by Lewis Gilbert
Written by Richard Maibaum and Christopher Wood
EON Productions/United Artists, 1977
        Released in 1977, at a time when the once-prolfic James Bond series 
was sinking deeper and deeper into oblivion, THE SPY WHO LOVED ME 
turned out to be the turning point in the series. Agent 007 was 
rescued from a cinematic grave with this tenth installment in the 
continuing Bond saga. (I won't even mention THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN 
GUN.)
        On my list of Bond films, this has got to be one of the best ever 
made. Why? Simply, it takes all the fantastic elements from previous 
Bond films that we know and enjoy and turns it into something 
completely different and even more enjoyable. Recycled might be an 
acceptable word, but I disagree- the right word is *adapted*.
        The plot isn't as complex as some of the later Bonds, thankfully. It 
involves a madman shipping magnate by the name of Karl Stromberg, 
who's portrayed by German actor Curt Jurgens; and Stromberg is 
secretly snatching U.S. and Soviet nuclear submarines right out of the 
water with his gigantic tanker, the "Liparus". 
        When British Intelligence investigates, they send James Bond, who's 
played by Roger Moore (in his best performance as the suave spy). Bond 
gets to do some kick-ass stunts, like seducing a Austrian babe who's 
actually a KGB agent. Then he skis off a gigantic cliff. How awesome 
can you get? And that's just the opening. We're treated to the 
seductive Barbara Bach as Major Anya Amasova of the Russian Army and 
the KGB. We see Richard Kiel in his first and best appearance as the 
seven-foot-one killer with the steel teeth, Jaws. We also get sexy 
Caroline Munro as Naomi, a dastardly villainess. Bond puts an end to 
her with a sub-surface to air missile from his well-equipped Lotus 
Esprit.
        Any low points? Not many, actually. Jaws' invincibility gets a little 
tiresome, but it's better than seeing him fall in love with that 
blonde bimbo in MOONRAKER, a far inferior sequel. Barbara Bach doesn't 
seem like an established actress (read: line delivery), she still is 
great to see on screen and handles the role better than most Bond 
girls.
        All in all, this movie is certainly one of the best of the series. 
While many diehard Bond fans from the Connery school will disagree 
with me, it's really true. While it's a fact that GOLDFINGER is 
probably tops, THE SPY WHO LOVED ME has been the best film ever since 
to emulate the standard Bond formula. The more serious ones like FROM 
RUSSIA WITH LOVE, DR. NO, and FOR YOUR EYES ONLY are in a Bondian 
league of their own (read: serious spying), but no Bond film since THE 
SPY WHO LOVED ME has really been able to emulate the glitzy, lavish 
atmosphere of this movie. Sure, it's nineteen years later, but it's 
true. As Carly Simon's title tune goes, "Nobody Does It Better!"
Bill's Rating, on a scale of 000 (poor) to 007 (excellent): 006
Coming Soon: A Retrospective of ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE

Author
Dragan Antulov
Some films are good illustration how people's tastes and
movie preferences change through the years. Once upon a
time, the author of this review used to live in a blissful
world of childish ignorance. During that time, he honestly
believed that STAR WARS is the best motion picture ever
made, and that nothing on this world could match its quality
and impact. However, even in those times, there was a movie
that threatened the top spot of STAR WARS in this reviewer's
heart. It wasn't as spectacular or influential as STAR WARS,
but it managed to entertain me as no other film before. Its
name was THE SPY WHO LOVED ME, tenth film in the James Bond
series. For many years, I considered this film not only
among the best films ever made, but, naturally, the best
Bond film ever made. I had to wait for years before I had an
opportunity to change my mind after my movie-going
preferences matured and had an opportunity to watch classic
Bond films with Sean Connery. When I changed my mind, I
changed it by 180 degrees - THE SPY WHO LOVED ME was a
silly, unimaginative attempt by Bond franchise to cash in on
the contemporary trend of the 1970s. Then, years have passed
and things changed again. After a while, I began
appreciating this film again, and now, although I can't say
that it represents one of the best films ever made, it still
remains very good piece of entertainment.
Story begins with the mysterious disappearance of the
British nuclear submarine. In response to the crisis,
British government sends their best secret agent, James Bond
(Roger Moore), to investigate. His quest leads him to the
new, revolutionary submarine tracking system, that is put on
sale by few shady characters in Cairo. Bond comes there,
only to realize that his KGB counterpart, Major Ania Amasova
(Barbara Bach), wants the same thing, for the same reason -
somebody snatched a Soviet nuclear submarine too. While two
of them try to steal the precious data from each other and
in the same time evade professional killer nicknamed Jaws
(Richard Kiel), their respective government forge temporary
alliance. Bond and Amasova are now working together, faced
not only with their own unresolved sexual tension, but also
with some past issues - Bond had killed Amasova's colleague
and lover. Their investigation leads him to Stromberg (Curd
Juergens), oil tycoon who is obsessed with the underwater
life and who might be the link to the mystery of
disappearing submarines.
Like all of the first four Bond films with Moore as
Connery's replacement, THE SPY WHO LOVED ME finds its
inspiration in the popular cinematic trends of the 1970s.
While the previous two unsuccessfully tried to exploit
popularity of blaxploitation and kung fu films (and
MOONRAKER would two years later be more successful with
science- -fiction), this one pays homage to Steven
Spielberg's JAWS and the short- lived sub-genre of
underwater adventure. This might indicate the lack of
originality among the film-makers, but THE SPY WHO LOVED ME
was something quite opposite. Script by Christopher Wood and
Richard Maibaum was the first with plot that didn't have
even nominal resemblance to Ian Fleming's novel with the
same name. That gave film-makers enough freedom to make the
film as contemporary as possible. Unlike Fleming's Cold War
days, Soviets and West actually co-operate in the spirit of
detante; in the aftermath of oil crisis shipping tycoons are
the real nemesis of the free world; Bond's girl is his equal
in the era of feminism; finally, even immortal Bond musical
theme received disco treatment.
THE SPY WHO LOVED ME, because it was made in synchrony with
the moods, fashions and worldviews of the contemporary
audience, actually managed to fulfill almost impossible task
for a post-Connery Bond film - its reputation became almost
equal to the reputation of the classics. That shouldn't
surprise anyone, because this Bond has all the ingredients
of the classic formula - beautiful women, exotic locations,
daredevil stunts, spectacular scenes, impressive villain,
high-tech gadgetry and plot that deals with saving the world
from evil megalomaniacs. The concept is spiced with large
quantities of humor, and also by a lot of movie reference
jokes (one scene is direct allusion to LAWRENCE OF ARABIA,
while the other segment references BATTLESHIP POTEMKIN).
This Bond was good and entertaining, but it doesn't mean
that it was perfect. The special effects, while impressive
at some points (especially those dealing with Stromberg's
supertanker), are unscuccessful at others (blue screen ski
chase, that was saved by real-life stunt in the last shot).
The chief villain, played by not too enthusiastic Curd
Juergens, had undeveloped character and was definitely
bellow Bond standards. In that regard, it was from the
scriptwriters to spare his main sidekick Jaws for another
film. However, the biggest mistake was casting of Barbara
Bach as Anya Amasova; her lack of acting abilities was
almost painful at times, and her stunning look barely
manages to hide it. But, despite those flaws, THE SPY WHO
LOVED ME still remains a very good film, one of the best
Bonds ever made.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     1977's THE SPY WHO LOVED ME, the tenth episode in the Bond saga,
teaches us the universality of secret agent habits.  As the show opens,
a Russian and a British nuclear submarine disappear.  On two sides of
the globe the countries's best spies are interrupted from their trysts.
Britain's 007 is in bed with his usual blonde bombshell and Russia's
top agent, Triple X, is in bed with a good looking brunette.  Just when
some will assume that Triple X is the handsome guy in the bed, it turns
out instead to be the gorgeous female beside him.  More formally known
as Major Anya Amasova, XXX is played with a fetching beauty by Barbara
Bach.
     In his third outing as Bond, Roger Moore becomes totally
comfortable with his role and puts his own relaxed style into the part.
His awkwardness from his first two episodes is now completely gone.
His dark blue double breasted tuxedo fits so perfectly that he seems to
have worn it and the Bond role since birth. (No one, of course, will
ever equal Connery in the part.)
     Is there no end to Bond's skills? In this movie he even shows off
his dexterity in racing a camel through the desert.  Q, too, comes
through as always, this time with an unlikely gadget of a killer tea
tray.
     Always happy to do whatever is expedient, Bond kills villains with
abandon.  When a bullet is coming his way, he feels no remorse if he
has to use his female companion as a human shield to take the bullet
intended for him.  Nothing PC about James, he does whatever he deems
necessary to accomplish his mission.
     Carl Stromberg (Curt Jurgens), the story's megalomaniac, lives in
a placid, but deadly, aquarium-style home.  Decorated with large
tapestries and looking inside like a palace, the home has piped-in
classical music.  What is his diabolical plan?  Nothing less than
Armageddon -- not to be confused with this coming summer's blockbuster
movie, ARMAGEDDON, in which Bruce Willis will save planet.  Bond films
tend to be at their best when some nefarious eccentric has some
cataclysmic plans for total annihilation.
     Stromberg's henchman, a man appropriately named Jaws (Richard
Kiel), has a strapping big mouthful of shiny, steel incisors, which
come in handy when he has to bite through chains or the more mundane
flesh of human necks.  When Jaws isn't gnawing on his victims, he likes
to crush their bodies against the ceiling, proving again that size does
matter.
     Continuing in the grand Bond tradition, much of the movie is
filmed in exotic locals, this time amid the alabaster-colored stone of
the Sphinx and other massive Egyptian monuments, as well as in the
surrounding deserts.
     The movie's theme song as well as Bond's famous theme add up to a
musically pleasurable experience.  And to remind us of another great
film set in the desert, as 007 and XXX head off walking in the
wilderness, the theme from LAWRENCE OF ARABIA comes up loudly.
     Although Barbara Bach's acting as XXX may make you yearn for the
tougher female leads like Honor Blackman as GOLDFINGER's Pussy Galore,
you have to appreciate Bach's grace and beauty, especially in her
seductive and low-cut, tight-fitting gowns.
     When Triple X and 007 get stuck out in the cold, she assures him
that "You don't have to worry.  I went on a survival course in
Siberia."  It seems they taught her many techniques including, "share
bodily warmth."  To which she quickly adds, "when necessary."  And be
reassured that Barbara Bach is certainly someone whose body looks like
it may generate some considerable heat.
     The show's best chase scene has a helicopter, driven by a
beautiful foe, chasing 007 and XXX in James's sleek, white sports car.
How do they escape?  Bond drives the car off a pier and pushes the
button that neatly retracts the wheels and turns it into a sub, one
which looks like it might be featured in the Neiman Marcus Christmas
catalog for the superrich.
     Ingenuity is one of the hallmarks of the Bond films.  In this one,
the way James figures a way into an impregnable control room is quite
imaginative.  Even better is his resolution of the international crisis
through a secret retargeting of weapons.
     In another variation on the traditional Bond ending, our hero and
heroine end up conveniently in a floating circular bed with white
cushions and a properly chilled bottle of 1952 Dom Perignon.  Being
international spies does have its rewards -- for men and women alike.
     THE SPY WHO LOVED ME runs 2:05.  It is rated PG for sexual
innuendo and comic violence and would be fine for kids around nine and
up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, liked it although he preferred Moore's
previous Bond film, THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN GUN.  His favorite of the
first ten Bond movies remains Thunderball.  He didn't like the
character Jaws in this one because he was too "undefeatable."  His
favorite part of the movie was the way 007 blasted open the control
room and the car that morphed into a boat.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Roger Moore, Barbara Bach, Curt Jurgens, Richard Kiel, 
      Caroline Munro
Director: Lewis Gilbert
Producers: Albert Broccoli
Screenplay: Richard Maibaum and Christopher Wood based on characters 
created by Ian Flemin
Cinematography: Claude Renoir
Music: Marvin Hamlisch
U.S. Distributor: United Artists Pictures
     Of Roger Moore's seven James Bond pictures, THE SPY WHO LOVED ME 
stands out as the best.  Stripped of the extreme silliness of THE MAN 
WITH THE GOLDEN GUN and packed with style, action, and wit, THE SPY WHO 
LOVED ME ranks alongside the Connery Bonds as a memorable cinematic 
representation of Ian Fleming's superspy (although the screenplay is 
*not* based on Fleming's novel of the same title).  
     For the first time in three films, Roger Moore starts to unearth a 
personality for Bond, and the fatuousness which was to mar his later 
outings rarely asserts itself.  This version of 007 is suave, 
sophisticated, and only a little flat.  He's good with wry humor and 
one-liners, and seems reasonably capable as a "man of action."  In a 
nutshell, Moore isn't Connery, but he recognizes this, and doesn't try 
to be what he can't. 
     As usual, Bond's chief nemesis is a megalomaniac.  This time, his 
name is Stromberg (Curt Jurgens), and he's out to destroy the world to 
fulfill his dream of creating and populating an underwater city.  The 
first part of his plan involves destroying the over-water civilization 
by a nuclear holocaust.  To that end, he steals British and Soviet 
submarines with the intention of using their nuclear capacity against 
the superpowers.  007, along with his Russian counterpart, Major Anya 
Amasova, aka agent Triple-X (Barbara Bach), is dispatched to stop this.  
There are complications, however, because, although the USSR and England 
are cooperating on the mission, Anya has a personal grudge against Bond, 
and she makes it perfectly clear that she intends to kill him at the 
first favorable opportunity.  
     THE SPY WHO LOVED ME marks the first appearance of Jaws (Richard 
Kiel), who would prove to be 007's most dangerous and persistent 
adversary (he returns in MOONRAKER).  So massive and powerful is Jaws 
that there's little Bond can do against him physically.  He's the 
perfect supervillain, and it's great fun to see how 007 survives 
confrontations with the steel-toothed giant.  
     Barbara Bach proves to be a pleasant addition to the cast as the 
latest "Bond girl."  Major Amasova is attractive, smart, sexy, and (of 
course) dangerous.  Her repartee with Bond is scripted with the usual 
attention to double entendres and witty retorts (note especially the van 
exchange in the desert when Triple-X and 007 are trying to escape Jaws).  
There also seems to be slightly more tenderness in this relationship 
than is typical for Her Majesty's most promiscuous agent... but only a 
little.  After his wife's death at the end of ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET 
SERVICE, it's clear that Bond has no intention of ever again becoming 
involved in a serious romantic entanglement.  
     The second "Bond girl" of the film is Naomi, played by Caroline 
Munro.  Her part is actually rather small--she shows up, looks good, 
utters a few lines of dialogue, then tries to kill 007.  Jurgens is 
adequate as the villain.  There's nothing remarkable about his 
performance except that he remains more restrained than the average Bond 
madman.  Old friends like Lois Maxwell (Moneypenny), Bernard Lee (M), 
and Desmond Llewlyn (Q) are back.
     The single most impressive moment in THE SPY WHO LOVED ME comes in 
the pre-credits sequence.  Following a harrowing ski chase, Bond zips 
right off the edge of a cliff.  Rick Sylvester was paid $30,000 to do 
this stunt, and it's worth the money, giving the film the kind of kick-
start that no other opening has matched (before or after).  It's the 
perfect lead-in to Carly Simon's rendition of "Nobody Does It Better", 
possibly the best-known of all the Bond themes.  The rest of the film's 
action, directed by Lewis Gilbert (YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE), is as 
impressively staged.
     THE SPY WHO LOVED ME has no shortage of gadgets.  These include 
noxious cigarettes, ski pole projectiles, and, most impressive of all, a 
Lotus Esprit that swims rather than sinks.  But such toys are only part 
of 007's appeal.  Bond films attract audiences because they're solid
fun--light, uncomplicated entertainment that requires no more from a 
viewer than that he or she sits back and enjoys.  Despite the recycled 
plot, THE SPY WHO LOVED ME deserves its popularity as one of Bond's most 
engaging outings.  Even those who swore off the films with Sean 
Connery's departure might consider checking this one out.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Andrew Hicks
        One of the most entertaining James Bond films from the 
Roger Moore era, THE SPY WHO LOVED ME is probably the biggest 
budget Bond movie, with huge sets and props as well as some 
blockbuster action scenes. And how can you not like a movie that co-
stars Ringo's wife, Barbara Bach, and features a non-stop disco version 
of the traditional series score?
        It's a globe-trotting action movie that has Bond and Mrs. 
Starr, a beautiful Russian spy, teaming up to end SPECTRE's latest 
threat. This time, it's a madman who kidnaps two nuclear submarines, 
one Russian and one American. His plan is to destroy the civilized 
world as we know it and begin an underwater society. This is 
somebody who went a little too far after seeing THE LITTLE 
MERMAID. I know the shell bra is a real turn-on, but give me a 
break.
        The Bond formula works especially well here. Even though 
the omnipresent disco score becomes annoying and the ski slope chase 
scene at the beginning is blue screen technology at its worst, there are 
still more than enough gadgets, explosions, chases, etc. to make up. 
And as usual, Bond's three-woman quota is reached with a little help 
from Mrs. Starr, who also makes the movie a standout in the series. 
Most of the beautiful women from the 70's were hidden behind the 
ugly bell-bottoms and poofy hair, which makes Bach's straight-haired, 
smartly-dressed Agent XXX a welcome exception.
        I'd have to say Ringo Starr is the luckiest bastard on earth. 
First his talentless self got to be in the greatest rock and roll band ever, 
then he married one of the hottest ladies of the 70's, now he gets to eat 
his pizza _crust first_! We should all be so fortunate.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
