Title
Review for Can't Hardly Wait (1998)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Set at one long party featuring underage alcohol abuse and the
trashing of a house, CAN'T HARDLY WAIT is FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH
without the laughs.
     Written and directed jointly by Harry Elfont and Deborah Kaplan, a
team whose only credited role is as the screenwriters of A VERY BRADY
SEQUEL, CAN'T HARDLY WAIT brings together all of the high school
stereotypes into a single movie.  The picture features horny but
brainless jocks, tacky bimbos, clueless nerds and would-be gangsta
white kids.  The only missing ingredient for a proper parody is a
humorous script.
     As Mike Dexter, the most popular boy in school, Peter Facinelli,
from his broad toothy grin to the way he holds his body, is the
spitting image of the young Tom Cruise.  He tells his buddies to
jettison their current girlfriends to get ready for all of those hot
babes they will meet when they get to college in the fall.  ("The
future, broh, is women."  As in college women.)
     Mike's girlfriend is, of course, the most sought-after girl in
school, Amanda Beckett.  Like Godzilla, the movie teases us for the
first twenty minutes without revealing what she looks like.  Eventually
she turns to the camera, and we learn that Amanda is played by teenage
heartthrob Jennifer Love Hewitt from I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER.
     Sandwiched in-between the bad jokes is a would-be tender romance.
The homely Preston Meyers, played by Ethan Embry from VEGAS VACATION,
has loved Amanda since she ate the exact same type of pop-tart as he
did when they were freshmen.  She doesn't know he exists, but by the
end of the movie - surprise - she will go from the hollow hunk Mike to
the sincerely serious Preston.
     The movie passes the time by recycling humor you've heard before.
("Isn't this the weekend you date your girlfriend from the Internet?"
one of the geeks asks the other, while reenacting scenes from STAR WARS
and searching the skies for UFOs.)
     There are a few nice scenes including one in which two kids get
locked in a bathroom and decide to drop their masks and become real
people again.  Without their facades, they decide they like each other
enough to have sex together.  Once the door is opened, they quickly
revert to their previous false and shallow behavior.
     CAN'T HARDLY WAIT runs 1:39.  It is rated PG-13 for underage
drinking, profanity and sexual situations and would be acceptable for
older teenagers.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
This film is basically a 90's retread of all the dopey 80's teenage
high school movies from the ultimate of all teenage films, BREAKFAST
CLUB (8/10), to the ultimate in all house-party-fantasy movies, WEIRD
SCIENCE (8/10), to all the geeks and geekettes in the all-American
black comedy classic, HEATHERS (8/10). Slap some Jennifer Love Hewitt
in a tight top into the mix, and you've got yourself a
testosterone-fest of beer, teenage heartaches, devirginizations and
love matches to which you could crack an egg. 
PLOT:
The high school's most popular girl gets dumped by her boyfriend, who
happens to be the most popular guy, on the last day of school right
before the last big party before College. Everyone who's anyone goes to
the party that night, from nerds to jocks, hipsters to poseurs, all
looking for that last real high before their life of actual
responsibilities takes off. Love is in the air, but so is a lot of
alcohol and music. Pour over ice, mix well, and drink up!
CRITIQUE:
Completely unoriginal idea for a film scores points for a great
soundtrack, a solid cast, a decent characterization of most every
stereotype, and a mostly funny, sometimes sentimentally nostalgic look
at the last days of the greatest days of most of our lives. Call me a
sucker for high school comedies that feature house parties, but this
film never bored me through its entire quick runtime, despite its
derivative nature, and generally kept me smirking and interested in the
lives of the characters presented therein. 
For this accomplishment, I must give the props up to two of the actors
that portrayed their characters with the most believability and
sincerity, that being Ethan Embry and Lauren Ambrose. But don't get me
wrong, the rest of the cast was also quite adequate in their roles,
with Seth Green acting out a great fly white-young black-wannabee (a la
Gary Oldman in TRUE ROMANCE (9/10), I might add) but these two stood
out amongst the plethora of cardboard cutouts plastered through most of
this film. Having said that, I think the marketers of the film did a
piss-poor job of marketing this film as a Jennifer Love Hewitt vehicle,
since first of all, she is barely in it, second of all, is not all that
good in it, and third of all, is one of the least interesting
characters in the entire picture. I think they might've gained a wider
diversity of audience, if they were to have introduced more of the
characters in the previews, but then again, who am I to argue against a
set of gazongas?
All in all, this picture is interesting enough to watch, funny enough
to laugh at from time to time, and nostalgic enough to drift your mind
off to the days of old for a second or two. Also, the soundtrack of
this film really blew me away with its eclectic mix of heavy rock, rap
and punk, and any film that has the balls to feature Guns 'n Roses
"Paradise City" as one of its flagship tunes (During one of the best
scenes in the film) is allright in my book! Cameos by Jenna Elfman and
a dead-ringing jock Jerry O'Connell top this tasty tart of emptiness,
and the epilogues of all the featured characters stamp this film as the
ultimate impersonation of all films teenage. 
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This film was originally titled THE PARTY.
Macho-man Peter Facinelli had a baby-girl with 90210-famed actress
Jennie Garth in 1997. They named her Luca Bella.
Jennifer Love Hewitt was born in Waco, Texas. She has a cat named Don
Juan (She loves Johnny Depp), and also had a role in SISTER ACT 2: BACK
IN THE HABIT.
Some of you may remember fly-boy Seth Green from his part of Scott
Evil, son of Dr. Evil, in the shaggoliciously funny Michael Myers film
AUSTIN POWERS (7/10).
You might also remember Charlie Korsmo, who plays the nerd character
effectively in this film, from his earlier kid roles in HOOK, WHAT
ABOUT BOB? (7.5/10) and DICK TRACY, alongside Hollywood legend Warren
Beatty. He took a seven-year hiatus from acting to have a "normal"
teenage life and finish junior high and high school.
Actress Lauren Ambrose is also a classically trained opera singer.
Ethan Embry is one of the many actors to have portrayed Chevy Chase's
goofy son in the VACATION movies, as he was the one to portray Rusty
Griswold in 1997's VEGAS VACATION. His real last name is  Randall, but
he changed it to Embry because it was his grandfather's.
This is the directorial debut for both Harry Elfont and Deborah Kaplan.
Summer Phoenix, from the famed Phoenix clan (River and Joaquin) has an
unnamed part in this film.
The girl running around with the yearbook throughout this entire
picture is Melissa Joan Hart, better known for her TV role as "Sabrina,
the Teenage Witch".
Producer Betty Thomas also directed the Howard Stern vehicle PRIVATE
PARTS (7/10).

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Either all the critics are wrong or I'm wrong, but I liked CAN'T 
HARDLY WAIT. They say it rips off other teen party movies like SAY 
ANYTHING, SIXTEEN CANDLES, DAZED AND CONFUSED and FAST TIMES AT 
RIDGEMONT HIGH, all of which I liked. I say that's because all these 
movies are based in part on the screenwriters' high school experiences, 
and let's face it, every high school is pretty much the same. They say 
the characters are all one-note stereotypes. I say so are at least two-
thirds of teenagers, or at least they behave in stereotypes because they 
think that's how they're supposed to act.
        I will admit, there's not a lot of intelligence or originality in 
CAN'T HARDLY WAIT, but it's the kind of movie that gets into your psyche 
and makes you laugh all over again at the same old stuff, root for the 
same good characters and hate the same bad characters. And it may 
even make you wish you could go back to that big graduation party all 
over again. Hell, I turned down the invitation to my big graduation 
party, so movies like this and college parties are all I've got.
        The main character is Preston (Ethan Embry, formerly of 
EMPIRE RECORDS), the soft-spoken writer type who's carried through 
high school an obsession with Amanda (Jennifer Love Hewitt, the 
victim of a lot of obsessions right about now), the prom queen who's 
just been dumped by boyfriend Mike (Peter Facinelli, a dumbed-down 
Tom Cruise), the football quarterback who's now trying to convince all 
his jock friends to dump their girlfriends and join him for a summer of 
commitment-free sex with a string of babes.
        Rounding out the ensemble are Denise (Lauren Ambrose), the 
independent thinker no one remembers; Kenny (Seth Green), the 
white kid who talks ghetto and wears goggles as a fashion statement; 
and William (Charlie Korsmo), the nerd who's been picked on all 
through high school and now wants revenge on Mike. He enters the 
all-night keg party while his geek friends wait on the roof, debating 
"Star Wars" and "The X-Files," and showing each other their 
retainers.
        CAN'T HARDLY WAIT is filled with cheap, predictable humor like 
that, but somehow I liked it, and I liked the characters, especially 
Denise and Kenny, who end up locked in a bathroom for most of the 
movie. There are some real groaner moments, most of them coming 
when the movie tries to be serious (and having a stripper Jenna 
Elfman as the instrument of redemption just plain doesn't work), but 
for what it is, it's a good movie.
        You can listen to all the grownup critics if you want, but I've 
got a level head on my shoulders (thumbs-up to THE TRUMAN SHOW, 
thumbs-down to GODZILLA) and I personally think CAN'T HARDLY WAIT 
is worth ticket price just to see a drunken Korsmo, the Kid from DICK 
TRACY, singing "Paradise City" and ripping his shirt off while all the 
popular girls drool over him. It just proves that the best moments in 
teen movies aren't about the stuff we know will happen but the stuff we 
wish would happen.
Visit the Movie Critic at Large homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Close to 1,000 reviews with a comedic flair...

Author
Frankie Paiva
Can't Hardly Wait is supposed to bring back the teen comedy, the days where
virginity was discussed in detention, where Sean Penn was a skateboard dude,
where angry vice-principals tracked you down on your sick days. While the film
does some of this, it's really putting a modern twist on what we have seen over
and over again.
The setting is perfect, the Girl Who's Party It Is (an aptly named character
along with creative ones such as Boy Who Steals Everything and Ready To Have
Sex Girl) holds a bash on Graduation night with her parents away from home,
it's a must-come event and every member of the student body will be there.
Enter our hero, Preston (Embry) he's been lovestruck by Prom Queen Amanda 
(Jennifer Love Hewitt, who seems to be content not running from Ben Willis) and
decides to finally tell her how he feels. Love adopts her quiet, popular girl
role of the recently dumped (by a full-of-himself jock named Mike played by
Peter Facinelli) well, but she adds tones of drama that aren't needed.
Accompanying him is Denise (Ambrose, who's great, what else has she been in?)
she's goth outcast without the makeup who gets stuck in a bathroom with Kenny
(Seth Green) a white homeboy, obsessed with being black. Also in for the ride
is William (Charlie Korsmo) school nerd who attempts to gain revenge against
Mike by taking Polaroids of him with one of his friends in a naked embrace.
Great cameos are also present, with Jerry O'Connell, Selma Blair, Melissa Joan
Hart (who could have been more in the movie to give it more of a satire feel)
and Jenna Elfman as a stripper. Yes, you heard me correctly, Jenna Elfman is a
stripper. I have awarded this film the Consistency (please tell me I spelled
that right) award of 1998. It's a film that you'll discover something new about
after every repeated viewing. However it is a tad contrived, and just a bit
predictable. But the film embraces it's spirit making this light-hearted
romantic comedy a sure one to go see.  

Author
A. Estey
        Movies about teenagers and teenage culture rarely prove to be
either interesting, entertaining or convincing, because of one
fundamental reason: movies are made by adults and not teenagers.
        Occasionally, however, films like Say Anything, Dazed And
Confused and The Breakfast Club will break the mold and offer genuine
insight into the lives of those bizarre creatures which surround us
called "teenagers." Can't Hardly Wait, however, does not. Instead, the
writing/directing team of Harry Elfont and Deborah Kaplan manages to
take every cliché found in the teenage genre, strip it completely of
perception, intelligence and wit - and turn it into one of the most
nauseating cinematic experiences I have ever been subjected to.
        Can't Hardly Wait follows a group of characters as they attend
a house party on the night of their high school graduation. The main
characters are such perfected stereotypes that no analysis needs to be
provided to perfectly understand them: there's the average male
protagonist Preston (Ethan Embry), prom queen and cheerleader Amanda
(Jennifer Love-Hewitt), football star Mike (Peter Facinelli), white
rapper wannabe Kenny (Seth Green), computer geek William (Charlie
Korsmo), and brainy outsider Denise (Lauren Ambrose).
        I couldn't stand any of those characters. Whether it was
William getting drunk and signing along to heavy metal songs or Kenny
proclaiming "Yo, I gotta have sex tonight!", all I could think of was
how Elfont and Kaplan possibly managed to con Columbia Pictures out of
ten million dollars to fund their film.
        Apparently, Can't Hardly Wait is supposed to be a comedy, but
it tends to fail in this respect because of the fact that it's not
funny. In all honesty, Elfont and Kaplan should be forced by their
employers to attend remedial classes in humour. And when I say
"forced", I mean it. They should be strapped down to a chair and have
their eyes wedged open in a similar fashion to Alex in A Clockwork
Orange. This is how desperately they need to be educated about the
concept of humour. For instance, Can't Hardly Wait features a foreign
exchange student who is instructed to repeat absurd statements such as
"I am a sex machine." For some reason, Elfont and Kaplan believe that
if this character repeats it enough, eventually it will be funny. If
only Elfont and Kaplan could recognise the irony that they actually
got paid for making this junk - now that's funny.
Reviewed by: A. Estey
Copyright 1999, by A. Estey (gbv_adam@hotmail.com)

Author
DeWyNGaLe
CAN'T HARDLY WAIT by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: A-
Can't Hardly Wait should have been the Scream of comedies.  It stars the
upcoming Ethan Embry (That Thing You Do!) as Preston Myers and superstar
Jennifer Love Hewitt (I Know What You Did Last Summer) as Amanda Beckett.  It
takes place at a graduation party the last night of school.  The big gossip
around the kids is that Amanda Beckett has been dumped by the most popular kid
in school, Mike Dexter. (Peter Fancinelli) Mike Dexter is just like a lot of
characters in comedies who thinks about college girls and how they are going to
be.  Their four year relationship is over, and now Preston sees an opportunity
to finally be with the one he has loved for so long.
We also meet Kenny Fischer played by Seth Green. (Enemy Of The State)  He is a
kid who thinks he is very cool and hip and he also thinks that everyone loves
him.  No one really likes him and he is extremely annoying.  Preston is also
great friends with Denise Fleming played by Lauren Ambrose.  She has a bad
attitude and not many people know her.  Awhile back, she was best friends with
Kenny.  There is also William Lichter, played by Charlie Korsmo.  After we meet
everyone, the party begins.  The music is playing, people are dancing, and
everyone is getting drunk.
Amanda's friends try to help her with what she is going through, although she
isn't really saddened by Mike's actions.  Preston continues to see Amanda
throughout the night, and tries very hard to talk with her, but just can't do
it.  He has a long letter that he has written, but when he sees her with
another guy, he throws it away.  The letter still gets to Amanda though, in
many weird ways.  She reads the letter and is touched and immediately wants to
find this Preston Myers kid.  When he finds her and finally has the guts to
tell her he loves her, she tells him off, not knowing who it is.
Throughout the night, many other events also take place.  William and company
want to get revenge on the jocks for all they have done to them, Kenny wants to
hook up with someone and the party, and a band named "Loveburger" fights a lot
whether what to wear during their performance.  All of the sub-plots together,
including Mike and Amanda's sun-plot all made the film a better one.
The plot of Can't Hardly wait is extremely simple, but it works very well. 
Most of the characters in the movie are much like kids today, having problems
with the world around them.  Many people will be able to relate to this movie. 
I do not see why this film is not more popular.  Everything is there for it to
be a hit movie, including Seth Green and Jennifer Love Hewitt, a great
soundtrack, a lot of funny moments, and a PG-13 rating.
The performances in the film are very realistic.  They played the characters so
it was very easy to understand that character's personality, and the way they
felt about other people.  Seth Green and Lauren Ambrose perhaps gave the best
performances as their funny, original characters.  Jennifer Love Hewitt was
good as always, but didn't get the screen time she deserved.  For Ethan Embry,
I think Can't Hardly Wait will be a break through movie.  He did a really
surprising job, and his character was certainly a step up from That Thing You
Do!'s bass player.  The supporting performances from Peter Facinelli, Charlie
Korsmo, and even Jenna Elfman added to the feel of the movie.
The Bottom Line- I can't hardly wait to see this one again and again.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Who would make a movie like this?  I guess the first place to look would
be the producer credit.  Go ahead, take a peek at it.  Jenno Topping?
Does that sound the slightest bit strange to you?  Maybe Jenno is a new
brand of ice cream and if you put some chocolate sprinkles on it, they
would be a Jenno Topping.  Perhaps it's a pseudonym to hide his real
identity.  And speaking of pseudonyms, the editor is named Michael
Jablow.  Nuff said.
Next check the director credit.  Yup, that's two names.  Can anyone name
a good movie that had two directors?  OK, two non-sibling directors -
the brothers Farrelly (Kingpin) and Hughes (Menace II Society) don't
count.  These two are making their directorial debut and have only A
Very Brady Sequel under their screenplay belt.  Why not let them run
loose on a soundstage with a bunch of money?
Can't Hardly Wait is one of those annoying coming-of-age pictures where
every character learns something important about themselves and,
occasionally, about those around them as well.  Set on the eve of the
affluent Huntington High graduation, Can't Hardly Wait offers nothing
that its predecessors hasn't, but has possibly broken new ground in
terms of underage drinking and teen sex.  And I'm not saying that's a
bad thing, either.
Of course, there is the obligatory graduation party thrown by the
obligatory girl who is afraid that her parent's house will be trashed.
There is also the obligatory nice guy (Embry, Vegas Vacation) who for
years has hidden his love of the obligatory prom queen (Love Hewitt,
Party of Five), who has been dating the obligatory jock (Facinelli)
throughout their four year high school interment.
You've also got your obligatory geek who becomes popular (William
Lichter), your obligatory `wigger' (Seth Green, Buffy the Vampire
Slayer) and your obligatory ugly duckling who ends up finding true love
(Ambrose, In & Out).  Strangely missing are the obligatory man-hating
lesbian and the obligatory boy-from-the-wrong-side-of-the-tracks.  This
is OK with me because it kept the running time down to a stomachable
length.
What would make somebody decide to see a movie like this?  Take a look
at Love-Hewitt's rack and ask the question again.

Author
Josh Schirmer
Maybe my review is unfair, me being a teenager and this being a teen
movie. It's a well known fact that every teen movie that comes down the
pike is hailed by our generation as, "Like, the most kick-a** movie
ever!" (For those of you unfamiliar with the way teenagers talk, that's
like giving it 'a very enthusiastic thumbs up' -- eat your out, Gene and
Roger.) And that review holds it's ground until the next one comes
along. We started with Empire Records, then Scream, I Know What You Did
Last Summer, Scream 2, Titanic and so on. And now that summer is in full
swing and reruns have set it, we need something new to keep us
entertained. How about another "most kick-a**" teen movie?
Now, I'll be honest. Out of the movies listed above, the only one I
REALLY enjoyed was Titanic. Parents and teachers always tell me I'm
mature for my age, and that makes me proud. They have their reasons, too
-- I'm the kind of kid that actually focuses during class, keeps myself
busy with sports and other extra-curricular activities, and lists my
favorite movie as "As Good As It Gets". And teen movies rarely excite
me. Nevertheless, I joined a group of my friends and headed off to see
"Can't Hardly Wait".
And to tell the truth, I actually had fun.
At first glance, Can't Hardly Wait is a simple pageant of "boy is in
love with girl that doesn't know he exists". But a viewing proves that
the movie is more than that -- rather, it's a simple pageant of growing
up and reaching your peak. And it approaches it humorously, barraged
with heaping honesty.
Many critics have pointed out that the characters have no depth -- if
you ask me, this was the story's intention. I think to truly enjoy the
movie, you have to look at the characters for who they most resemble in
your own little group of high-school friends. From there, you yourself
can determine their back stories and what they're feeling.
And (coming as a REAL shocker in a teen movie), there is a lesson in
diguise. The movie simply states live for the moment, because the moment
is all that should matter. That, and (to borrow a line from the film),
"Fate works in some f---ed up ways."
There have been better movies this summer (Truman Show comes to mind),
but there have been worse -- like Godzilla. Give this one a shot. Your
kids are guarateed to think that it's the "most kick-a**" film ever (or
until the next one), but you might actually find something in it you
enjoy.

Author
Scott Renshaw
CAN'T HARDLY WAIT
(Columbia)
Starring:  Ethan Embry, Jennifer Love Hewitt, Seth Green, Lauren Ambrose,
Charlie Korsmo, Peter Facinelli, Jenna Elfman.
Screenplay:  Deborah Kaplan and Harry Elfont.
Producers:  Jenno Topping and Betty Thomas.
Directors:  Deborah Kaplan and Harry Elfont.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, sexual situations)
Running Time:  96 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Deborah Kaplan and Harry Elfont have commented that one of the
reasons they made CAN'T HARDLY WAIT was that "nobody was making those good
John Hughes teen comedies any more."  That's probably why CAN'T HARDLY
WAIT feels so much like a Greatest Hits compilation, peppered with
recognizable elements from the entire Hughes oeuvre of the mid-80s and a
dozen other teen comedies of the last 25 years for good measure.  The
events center around a huge party on the last day of high school, where
characters of every social stratum congregate [DAZED AND CONFUSED].
Nondescript nice guy Preston (Ethan Embry) hopes to make a connection at
the party with popular, seemingly unattainable Amanda (Jennifer Love
Hewitt), whom he has long adored from afar [SAY ANYTHING], before he
leaves for college the next day [AMERICAN GRAFFITI].  Preston has a girl
as a best pal, tomboyish and anti-social Denise (Lauren Ambrose) [SOME
KIND OF WONDERFUL].  Meanwhile, geeky William (Charlie Korsmo) and his two
even geekier cohorts [SIXTEEN CANDLES] hope to use their superior minds to
get back at Amanda's jock ex-boyfriend Mike (Peter Facinelli) and his
buddies [REVENGE OF THE NERDS], until geek and jock find a chance to bond
over their shared insecurities [THE BREAKFAST CLUB].
     That's one hefty dose of deja-vu, enough to overwhelm most films this
slight.  Fortunately, Kaplan and Elfont prove as adept at entertaining as
they are at reminiscing.  CAN'T HARDLY WAIT may be familiar and
predictable, but it's never out-and-out dumb, and at times it's
surprisingly funny.  The appealing cast features solid work from Lauren
Ambrose as vulnerable wiseacre Denise and Seth Green as a tries-too-hard
homeboy with whom she ends up locked in a bathroom.  Consistently goofy
scenes spring up out of nowhere, from the karaoke performance of "Paradise
City" which turns a drunken William into a sex symbol, to the arc of a
high school band's career from inception to breakup to reunion without
ever actually playing a song.  Some of the forced whimsy does fall flat
(notably Jenna Elfman's cameo as an "angel" offering advice to the
lovelorn Preston), and Kaplan and Elfont probably toss a few too many pop
culture references on the fire.  For once, however, the problems in a teen
comedy spring from over-writing rather than under-writing.
     If there's one noteworthy hole in CAN'T HARDLY WAIT, it's the central
plot of Preston's pursuit of Amanda.  Ethan Embry is pleasant enough in an
unrequited puppy-dog way, but this is the kind of role John Cusack defined
a decade ago; you root for Preston not because his entire demeanor sells
his longing, but because the machinations of the plot point you in that
direction.  Similarly, Jennifer Love Hewitt provides a merely-adequate
object of desire, her performance doing little to emphasize that Preston
could be more interested in what she has inside than what she has outside.
Of all the plot threads running through CAN'T HARDLY WAIT, theirs is by
far the least interesting, though it's the one inevitably destined to
provide the happy ending.
     Still, it's hard not to find charms in a teen comedy that's lively,
moderately intelligent and effective in its portrayal of high school
social dynamics.  It also features a wonderfully eclectic soundtrack which
runs the gamut from Guns 'N' Roses to Smashmouth, from Third Eye Blind to
Run-DMC, from Parliament to the title tune by the Replacements.  CAN'T
HARDLY WAIT even manages to include a bit of social commentary in its
adolescent craziness, promoting environmental awareness, safe sex and
responsible drinking and driving behavior.  Sure, the latter is emphasized
when party attendees drop their car keys into a bowl, which is yet another
detail swiped from SAY ANYTHING.  CAN'T HARDLY WAIT shows off its
antecedents unabashedly, and still comes up with something satisfying on
its own level.  Looks like John Hughes didn't have to worry about telling
a generation of movie-goers "Don't You Forget About Me."

Author
Jamie Peck

CAN'T HARDLY WAIT
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Most of the action takes place at a big bash to celebrate Huntington High
School's graduation day. Attending the beer- and sex-soaked festivities
are our six main teenagers -- requisite nice guy Preston (Ethan Embry),
prom queen Amanda (Jennifer Love Hewitt), star jock Mike (Peter
Facinelli), acerbic wit Denise (Lauren Ambrose), white "homeboy" Kenny
(Seth Green) and unpopular brainiac William (Charlie Korsmo). Kenny,
hoping to hook up with a girl and lose his virginity, ends up bonding with
Denise, who's present out of emotional support for Preston, who wants tell
Amanda of his longtime crush on her. Amanda has just broken up with Mike,
who's been tormenting William, who will seek revenge against Mike before
the night is over. Did you get all that? 
Actually, the gossipy character interaction that composes "Can't Hardly
Wait"'s various story threads ring true for the most part. (Gosh, I was
there only two years ago!) It's within the characters themselves where the
movie begins to falter. That they're walking, talking stereotypes really
doesn't matter; this seems like a deliberate effort on the part of
co-directors and -writers Harry Elfont and Deborah Kaplan to emanate such
"classics" as "The Breakfast Club." But they fail to make their entire
contemporary cross-section of young people completely interesting. Both
Michael and William are crudely rendered, and their conflict, particularly
how it ends, is pretty revolting. The Preston-Amanda romance (or lack
thereof) is supposed to be Wait's main event, but it's hard to care much
about either person. 
Preston is solely defined by his affection for Amanda, while, in turn, all
she does throughout the film is mope and pout. The would-be relationship
somehow manages to click despite the strange, hindering oversight that
we're never allowed to see why she's so special to him. This is not
because we root for Preston, but because we root for Ethan Embry, whose
endearing, natural and occasionally goofy charm makes up for his
alter-ego's lack of distinction. Embry ("That Thing You Do!") does a fine
job of getting the audience to identify with the anxiety, longing,
hesitancy and heartbreak of first love; if only his Preston were fully
fleshed-out, he'd be worth following into a "Can't Hardly Wait" spin-off
feature. 
On the other hand, Denise and Kenny already are; when the film eventually
breaks up into several superimposing stories, it is only theirs that
crackles with the completely realized good-time vibe that Elfont and
Kaplan were probably going for -- and that's very likely because Lauren
Ambrose and Seth Green have a great deal of fun bringing to life the most
comedically vibrant party patrons here. So, while the material is
distinctly uneven, these winning performers, their occasionally winning
characters and smattering of winning moments make the whole package not
much of a chore to endure. "Can't Hardly Wait" is a decent attempt to make
a film that definitively encapsulates a decade's worth of teen fads and
attitudes. It's just too bad the far more successful "Clueless" beat it to
the punch three summers ago.

Author
Michael Dequina
Can't Hardly Wait (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
Trust me, you _can_ wait for this messy throwback to '80s teen comedies.
A big, post-graduation blowout bash is the setting at which a number of new
high school graduates set out to resolve some long-simmering issues, most
prominently the shy Preston's (Ethan Embry) unspoken love for the popular
Amanda (Jennifer Love Hewitt), who was just dumped by her jock boyfriend
Mike (Peter Facinelli).  This thread is supposed to be the emotional hook
of the piece, but it is done in by the underwritten character of Amanda;
Preston claims to see the "person inside" her glammed-up exterior, but the
audience is never treated to a glimpse of this purported interior soul.
All that shows up on screen is an above-it-all, constantly bitching snob,
and as such writer-directors Deborah Kaplan and Harry Elfont do a
disservice to the engaging performance of Embry.
Far more involving--and upstaging the central action--is a subplot
following the unlikely but inevitable romance between Preston's acerbic
best friend Denise (the delightful Lauren Ambrose) and Ebonics-spouting
white boy Kenny (a hilarious Seth Green), who find themselves locked in a
bathroom together.  This thread is sweet yet raucous, and often very funny,
which is the mix Kaplan and Elfont obviously strived for in their other
storylines.  But all else, including a predictable arc about the geeky
valedictorian's (Charlie Korsmo) beef with Mike, quickly grows tiresome, as
does the movie as a whole.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Ted Prigge
Writers/Directors: Harry Elfont and Deborah Kaplan
Starring: Ethan Embry, Jennifer Love Hewitt, Peter Facinelli, Lauren
Ambrose, Charlie Korsmo, Seth Green, Michelle Brookhurst, Erik Palladino,
Melissa Joan Hart, Breckin Meyer, Donald Adeosun Faison, Jerry O'Connell,
Jenna Elfman
The most interesting part of "Can't Hardly Wait" just happens to be not
only the most human, but for many of us, the one part that many of us can
easily relate to.  That is the character of Denise (Lauren Ambrose), the
film's sole sarcastic member who mocks everything that goes on in the film,
and at one point sits down on a couch and looks totally bored.  The film
wisely holds over this moment, nicely showing her alienation in the midst
of a large high school party...almost too nicely.  For some members of the
audience (read: me), this is basically a mirror of what's going on with
them watching this film.  We sit there wondering why we've even bothered to
see a film about a long high school party we probably never felt the desire
to go to in the first place.
I would actually highly recommend this film if it satirized all of this. 
After all, this film is filled with a bunch of pathetic stereotypes much of
which I went to high school with.  Everyone's here: the Jock, the
Homecoming Queen, the Nerd (and his dominions of Trekkies and X-Philes),
the Alienated Wannabe Writer, the School Spirit Girl, the Pothead(s), the
Wigger, etc, etc, etc, and weirdly enough this film shows them as
superficial, lame, and basically as a bunch of losers.  Except for Denise,
who rolls her eyes at everything, and easily becomes the most likable
character even before she speaks (her yearbook entry, something which is
done for each main character, quotes Oscar Wilde - definite pointers
there).
Unfortunately, the writers and directors take several major misteps on the
way to making this into an admirable and even likable film.  The film, as I
said, portrays most of its characters as superficial and just totally
ignorant to everything.  However, instead of sticking with this, perhaps
even going a bit further with it, they let this lie, and actually make
these characters into our heroes.  We follow several of them, all a bunch
of moronic stereotypes with only a shread of humanity and realism, and
tries to tell boring and overly melodramatic tales about them as if we
actually cared and/or identified with them.  And if we did, we certainly
don't want to revisit that state of being.
Here's a quick low-down: it's graduation, and we follow a bunch of seniors
on the last night, otherwise known as the "American Grafitti" or, to a
lesser extent, the "Dazed and Confused" cliche.  The formal just followed
them as they drove aimlessly; the latter did a little bit of that and
featured a big outdoor keg party.  "Can't Hardly Wait" just opts for a big
indoor keg party, and a little bit of aimless driving, albeit of the
I'm-whining-because-I-can't-get-a-girl-I-want brand.  We follow many people
around, but mostly we trail Preston (Ethan Embry, of "That Thing You Do!"),
the Alienated Writer, who's been pining over the Homcoming Queen, Amanda
(the totally overrated Jennifer Love Hewitt), for the entirety of High
School because he thinks they shared a moment their freshman year over a
freaking Pop Tart.  Now that she's broken up with her football player
boyfriend, Mike (Peter Facinelli), he decides to go to the party with a
note he's written declaring his "love" for her in the hopes he'll build up
the guts to give it to her...even though he's leaving for a multi-week
intensive writing program hosted by none other than Kurt Vonnegut (okay:
the ingenius Vonnegut or some icky Noxema spokesperson?).
Since that plot is incredibly lame and a track record of what goes on with
it wouldn't be able to carry a commercial let alone a feature film, and
because it's a party, there are some more main characters, such as: William
(Charlie Korsmo, finally surfacing after "Dick Tracy"), the Nerd (and his
dominions) who has come up with a ridiculous plan to publically sabotage
Mike, who's humiliated him for years, but gets too caught up in drinking to
do it; Kenny (Seth Green), the Wigger, who has decided that this party will
be where he will finally get laid (uh huh); and Denise, the only
exceptional character, who unfortunately gets stuck in a bathroom (don't
ask) with Kenny where the two characters let down their characters and are
allowed to follow the laws of plot cliches from point A to point B with
nary a bit of characterization involved after awhile.  Ugh.
The main comparison this film is getting to another film is actually not
"American Grafitti" or "Dazed and Confused," two films that embraced and
ultimately made humans out of many of its high schoolers (not to mention
were extremely entertaining), but to John Hughes films of the 80s, most
notably "Sixteen Candles."  The big difference in the two is that that film
managed to not only embrace but even satirize its main characters, and did
so equally and in an entertaining fashion.  This film forgets to satirize
its characters, and ultimately tells a story about a bunch of uninteresting
stereotypes...and then says that it's all okay.  We can't take this film
seriously, nor can we take this as fun, so really what good is it?
But I will tell you some things I did like: I liked the direction, except
for a couple too-over-the-top features, like way-too-glossy jump cuts (it's
like an oxymoron) and other obscurities.  Generally, though, Elfont and
Kaplan do have graceful camera movement, and even manage to capture an
Altman-esque feel to their film from time to time (a thing with a note,
though, is too hokey to really be admirable).  I actually did like Seth
Green, for once in about a decade (when he played a very young Woody Allen
in "Radio Days") - his desintegration of his Wigger character was almost
believable...almost.  And, of course, Lauren Ambrose is wonderful as
Denise, the one character we could have used some more of, even though it
would have changed the entirety of the film.
However, the character of Denise really doesn't work with the film, when
really thought about.  She's far too witty and realized (at least for the
first half) to belong in this film, and whenever she appears, she
automatically gives everything a delightfully satirical tone.  She's not
just The Cynic or The Intellectual; she's just a very interesting character
who provides entertainment even if it further damages other already damaged
characters.  She may ruin the film more, but at least when she's on screen
we can sit up and think to ourselves "Well, at least we'll be entertained."
A couple other things that just don't work: Mike's character, who suffers
an epiphany throughout the film but in the end acts as though he has
forgotten everything: too much the sacrificial lamb for the film in
general; the aimless, bitchy driving by Preston to try and get over his
inability to shack up with Amanda - give me a break; and perhaps the one
thing that just doesn't work at all: Jenna Eflman's uncredited cameo as an
angel - just didn't work, but nice try.
Basically the worst thing about this film, the real reason I'm giving this
such a low rating, is because it refuses to give us any fully realized
characters and then insists we follow around complete stereotypes from
other movies doing things that are inane and unlike anything we'd do.  We
don't feel for these characters because for most of us, we aren't
stereotypes going through the motions to worn subplots.  The acid test for
high school movies is: does it at all capture the feel of what it's
portraying?  The answer for this film is no.  Nice try, though.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW: Can't Hardly Wait
By Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au)
Cast: Ethan Embry, Jennifer Love Hewitt, Peter Facinelli, Charlie
Korsmo, Seth Green, Lauren Ambrose, Jerry O'Connell, Melissa Joan Hart,
Jenna Elfman
Directors: Deborah Kaplan & Harry Elfont
Screenplay: Deborah Kaplan & Harry Elfont
Australian theatrical release date: September 17
Films like Can't Hardly Wait are initially interesting to look at; not
because there is necessarily anything remarkable about them, but rather
because they position their main characters in or around the same
setting for almost all of their duration.  We've seen this style of film
work really well in, say, The Breakfast Club, and pretty awfully in
something like Kevin Spacey's Albino Alligator.  When a screenplay is
based on the actions of characters in secluded environments, one of two
things usually happen.  We are either given a dynamic understanding into
the thoughts and actions of the protagonists, or we are sadly exposed to
butt numbing scenarios of the same boringly conceived characters.  Can't
Hardly Wait finds itself with more of the latter than former, probably
thanks to the debut efforts of directors/writers Harry Elfont and
Deborah Kaplan.
Elfont and Kaplan's primary setting is a teenage post-graduation party
of booze and sex.  After all, drunks trying to get laid are, um, always
entertaining to watch.  Taking place at the party are plenty of well
known screen-party activities, which are given a new shining thanks to
some snappy camera shots, including an interesting way to introduce
important characters.  It all may look pretty and glossy, but under the
skin the screenplay falls flat on its face in terms of expressing itself
adequately.
By adequately, I mean actually doing something.  Most of Can't Hardly
Wait is spent pondering what could have been, and whilst I was watching
the characters party on, I couldn't help but feel that I was missing out
on something.  Looking back, I've figured out what it was: Can't Hardly
Wait never manages to find stable cinematic ground to stand on.  Elfont
and Kaplan probably had the best intentions at heart when putting pen to
paper, and I guess there first and foremost aim was to create a fun teen
comedy, perhaps in the style of a John Hughes film. Alicia Silverstone's
Clueless was intelligent enough to keep its material trashy but sly, and
Dazed and Confused skillfully introduced characters and setting, then
developed from there.  But Can't Hardly Wait is just trash and fun, and
neither is satirical or smart enough to make it worthwhile.  You could
say this film is a good example of a reasonable concept that is
developed without the skill or know-how that it desperately needs.
Jennifer Love Hewitt and Ethan Embry look charming together when they
are, actually, together - if only for a few minutes.  The rest of the
film, however, is pretty sober and dull, with many scenarios drawn out
way too long.  Can't Hardly Wait does succeed reasonably well with
audience entertainment, and although laughs are infrequent and the gags
are not particularly memorable, it's a little piece of shot-sized fun.
But all in all, if this is an example of what a new wave of teen's films
might look like, I can definitely wait.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Harry Elfont, Deborah Kaplan
Cast:  Ethan Embry, Jennifer Love Hewitt, Peter Facinelli, Charlie
Korsmo Seth Green, Jerry O'Connell, Melissa Joan Hart
Screenplay:  Deborah Kaplan, Harry Elfont
Producers:  Jenno Topping
Runtime:  100 min.
US Distribution:  Columbia/Sony Pictures Entertainment
Rated PG-13:  teen drinking, sex, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
I think I'm just barely too young to have been part of that 80s series
of Movies for Rebellious Teenagers.  I've seen The Breakfast Club, and I
think it's a pretty good film.  I've seen only parts of some of the
other noteable ones (like Say Anything and Fast Times at Ridgemont
High), so whatever cliches exist in this genre are likely to have passed
me up if they were present in Can't Hardly Wait.  I thoroughly enjoyed
myself through this film, for not only is it a smart and funny movie,
but it captures the essence of high school perfectly.
I've read a lot of reviews for Can't Hardly Wait before writing my own
(typically I don't like to do this, but, because I've procrastinated so
much, it was unavoidable).  Most of the critics are saying the same
things, complaining about stereotype characters and standard situations,
et cetera.  It seems pretty clear to me that Deborah Kaplan and Harry
Elfont, who co-wrote and co-directed, were very conscious of the angle
they took.  High school was little more than stereotype characters and
standard situations, and Can't Hardly Wait does a great job of making
fun of every degree of the caste.
It's the night of graduation, and there's a big party.  The film
doesn't follow a strict narrative or plotting, but does a good job of
introducing some fun characters and giving them high-school-ish things
to do.  The most central character is Preston (Ethan Embry), the typical
nice guy (and smart guy -- we immediately learn that he's off to
Dartmouth in the fall).  His subplot revolves around his love for Amanda
(Jennifer Love Hewitt), who has just been dumped by her four-year jock
boyfriend, Mike (Peter Facinelli).  
Preston is friends with Denise (Lauren Ambrose), a cynical misanthrope
(are all misanthropes cynical?), who gets trapped in the bathroom with
Kenny (Seth Green).  Kenny is a white guy who pretends that a) he's
black, and b) he's a slick ladies man.  Denise shows him that he's
neither one.  Then there's William (Charlie Korsmo), the genius nerd who
finally gets drunk and finds that the ladies are more attracted to
intelligence than he had initially thought.  
Can't Hardly Wait flows nicely through the twenty-four hours in which
it takes place (beginning with graduation and ending with a nice scene
in a train station).  Kaplan and Elfont have constructed the film
intelligently, and put some familiar tricks to good use (I liked the way
Preston's letter gets into Amanda's hands).  They also keep the popular
music raging throughout the picture; even though this dates the film
severely, it certainly will bring back not-so-distant memories for
anyone in my generation.  
I also liked the actors and their characters.  Are they really
stereotypes?  Well, I suppose.  A few critics agree that the only
interesting character is Denise, but since I know so many people like
her, I found her no more interesting than anyone else.  I could enjoy
myself watching Jennifer Love Hewitt scrape paint off a wall, so her
acting ability is negligible for me (although I do think she's a
talented actress).  Embry is endearing with his puppy dog eyes (and he
could win a Matthew McConaughey look-alike contest).  I also enjoyed
Facinelli's over-the-top imitation of the Head Jock.  I hate jocks, and
he does a great job making fun of them (and he could win a Tom Cruise
look-alike contest).
If I have any complaints, it's that the movie kind of lags through the
middle.  The pace is swift, but it gets a bit repetitive at times.  But
on the whole, Can't Hardly Wait is a funny and intelligent film about
the late teenage years.  High school, which, for this reviewer, ended
just two short years ago, was nothing more than a bunch of stereotypical
people searching for themselves.  There's no doubt in my mind that
Kaplan and Elfont had this fact in mind as they made their film -- Can't
Hardly Wait is a movie that any kid who grew up in the 90s will
appreciate.  

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1998
U.S. Release Date: 6/12/98 (wide)
Running Length: 1:40
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Profanity, sexual situations, teen angst)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Ethan Embry, Jennifer Love Hewitt, Peter Facinelli, 
      Charlie Korsmo, Seth Green, Lauren Ambrose, Jerry O'Connell, 
      Melissa Joan Hart, Jenna Elfman
Directors: Deborah Kaplan & Harry Elfont
Producers: Jenno Topping, Betty Thomas
Screenplay: Deborah Kaplan & Harry Elfont
Cinematography: Lloyd Ahern II
Music: David Kitay and Matthew Sweet
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     With CAN'T HARDLY WAIT, I suppose first time directors Deborah 
Kaplan and Harry Elfont (whose previous credits include writing the 
script for A VERY BRADY SEQUEL) were trying to recapture the mood of a 
John Hughes '80s teen comedy.  Unfortunately, while perhaps aiming for 
the level of THE BREAKFAST CLUB and FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH, they 
have come a lot closer to the likes of REVENGE OF THE NERDS.  CAN'T 
HARDLY WAIT is a painfully predictable account of that ultimate teenage 
bacchanalia -- the post-graduation party.  Yet, instead of bringing 
intriguing characters with real problems and interesting dialogue to the 
bash, Kaplan and Elfont take the lazy approach of pulling generic 
stereotypes off the shelf and throwing them into a formulaic plot that 
doesn't offer one genuine surprise or meaningful moment.
     CAN'T HARDLY WAIT is awash in pointless subplots.  Depending on how 
one counts them, there are at least six or seven.  Some are given more 
screen time than others, but none has enough to flesh out the characters 
beyond two-dimensionality or to get us interested in their lives.  The 
difference between a good movie with an ensemble cast and a bad one is 
how easily the protagonists and their individual pieces of the overall 
plot engage the viewer.  Instead of taking a few risks to win us over, 
CAN'T HARDLY WAIT traverses the tediously safe route by stringing 
together a series of would-be "cute" scenes, slapstick humor (drunks are 
always supposed to be funny, right?), and trite "bonding" moments.
     Everything in CAN'T HARDLY WAIT transpires during the course of one 
all-night party.  School's out, the summer is just beginning, and the 
graduating seniors of Huntington Hills High School are ready to do the 
two things that rootless teens do best:  get drunk and get laid.  The 
main story, inasmuch as there can be considered a main story in a film 
this overcrowded, focuses on Preston Meyers (Ethan Embry), an 
articulate, lovestruck young man who has spent the past four years 
pining for the unattainable Amanda Beckett (Jennifer Love Hewitt).  Now, 
in a shocking development, Amanda has been dumped by long-time boyfriend 
Mike Dexter (Peter Facinelli), leaving the door wide open for Preston, 
if he can get up the courage to speak to her.  Meanwhile, the class 
valedictorian, William Lichter (Charlie Korsmo), is hatching a plot to 
avenge himself upon Mike for years of cruel practical jokes.  Preston's 
friend, Denise (Lauren Ambrose), is trying to find some way to fit into 
a party that is obviously not her scene.  An off-the wall weirdo named 
Kenny (Seth Green), who uses ebonics despite being white, is trying to 
lose his virginity.  And a former graduate (Jerry O'Connell) has 
returned to bemoan his lack of success with college women.
     What CAN'T HARDLY WAIT offers are flat characters stuck in 
underdeveloped situations.  The only semi-interesting individual, 
Denise, is trapped in a bathroom with Kenny for most of the night.  Of 
the film's dozen-or-so primary players, she's the only one who seems 
more like a real person than a caricature.  As ably portrayed by Lauren 
Ambrose (who previously appeared as one of Kevin Kline's students in IN 
& OUT), Denise is capable of engaging our sympathies.  Everyone else 
seems to exist for only one purpose -- to be at this party.  It's 
virtually impossible to imagine anyone having any kind of life outside 
of these circumstances -- such shallow characters are obviously tailored 
to the needs of the script.  
     For those who enjoy saccharine romances, the interaction between 
Preston and Amanda offers some limited possibilities.  You'd have to be 
hopelessly naďve not to realize how it's all going to turn out, but the 
two actors, Ethan Embry (THAT THING YOU DO!) and Jennifer Love Hewitt (I 
KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER), are so likable that it's hard not to 
have at least a minor rooting interest in their pairing.  Seeing the 
inevitable resolution is one of the few reasons to stay for the duration 
of CAN'T HARDLY WAIT's one-hundred minute running length.
     Just like the teen movies of the '80s, CAN'T HARDLY WAIT is 
targeting the 13-to-18 year-old group by offering popular actors like 
Embry and Love Hewitt, wall-to-wall pop music (often, the film seems 
like nothing more than an excuse to sell a soundtrack), and ample 
portions of booze and sex (although the PG-13 rating limits the latter).  
It's all marketing -- collect enough appealing snippets for a 30-second 
TV commercial, and maybe the kids will come.  With effectively-developed 
characters, decent dialogue, and something resembling a compelling plot, 
this approach can lead to a satisfying movie-going experience.  Sadly, 
those characteristics are taking a vacation in CAN'T HARDLY WAIT.  
Whatever shallow charm the film offers wears off fast as we realize that 
it's not funny, endearing, dramatically sound, or going anywhere that we 
haven't been before.  As a result, the title seems unexpectedly 
appropriate, as it accurately summed up my feelings about sitting in the 
theater and anticipating the arrival of the end credits -- I couldn't 
hardly wait.  
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Jamie Peck
CAN'T HARDLY WAIT
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Most of the action takes place at a big bash to celebrate Huntington 
High School's graduation day. Attending the beer- and sex-soaked 
festivities are our six main teenagers -- requisite nice guy Preston 
(Ethan Embry), prom queen Amanda (Jennifer Love Hewitt), star jock Mike 
(Peter Facinelli), acerbic wit Denise (Lauren Ambrose), white "homeboy" 
Kenny (Seth Green) and unpopular brainiac William (Charlie Korsmo). 
Kenny, hoping to hook up with a girl and lose his virginity, ends up 
bonding with Denise, who's present out of emotional support for Preston, 
who wants tell Amanda of his longtime crush on her. Amanda has just 
broken up with Mike, who's been tormenting William, who will seek 
revenge against Mike before the night is over. Did you get all that? 
Actually, the gossipy character interaction that composes "Can't Hardly 
Wait"'s various story threads ring true for the most part. (Gosh, I was 
there only two years ago!) It's within the characters themselves where 
the movie begins to falter. That they're walking, talking stereotypes 
really doesn't matter; this seems like a deliberate effort on the part 
of co-directors and -writers Harry Elfont and Deborah Kaplan to emanate 
such "classics" as "The Breakfast Club." But they fail to make their 
entire contemporary cross-section of young people completely 
interesting. Both Michael and William are crudely rendered, and their 
conflict, particularly how it ends, is pretty revolting. The 
Preston-Amanda romance (or lack thereof) is supposed to be Wait's main 
event, but it's hard to care much about either person. 
Preston is solely defined by his affection for Amanda, while, in turn, 
all she does throughout the film is mope and pout. The would-be 
relationship somehow manages to click despite the strange, hindering 
oversight that we're never allowed to see why she's so special to him. 
This is not because we root for Preston, but because we root for Ethan 
Embry, whose endearing, natural and occasionally goofy charm makes up 
for his alter-ego's lack of distinction. Embry ("That Thing You Do!") 
does a fine job of getting the audience to identify with the anxiety, 
longing, hesitancy and heartbreak of first love; if only his Preston 
were fully fleshed-out, he'd be worth following into a "Can't Hardly 
Wait" spin-off feature. 
On the other hand, Denise and Kenny already are; when the film 
eventually breaks up into several superimposing stories, it is only 
theirs that crackles with the completely realized good-time vibe that 
Elfont and Kaplan were probably going for -- and that's very likely 
because Lauren Ambrose and Seth Green have a great deal of fun bringing 
to life the most comedically vibrant party patrons here. So, while the 
material is distinctly uneven, these winning performers, their 
occasionally winning characters and smattering of winning moments make 
the whole package not much of a chore to endure. "Can't Hardly Wait" is 
a decent attempt to make a film that definitively encapsulates a 
decade's worth of teen fads and attitudes. It's just too bad the far 
more successful "Clueless" beat it to the punch three summers ago.

Author
Matt Williams
Remember the glut of mid-80s teen angst films?  Well, apparently every
generation needs its own, and Can't Hardly Wait has picked up the
gauntlet. Unfortunately, beyond broad stereotypes and patently obvious
social observations, Can't Hardly Wait has very little to offer.
It's the night after graduation, and the entire senior class of
Huntington High has gathered together for one final party.  Although all
the usual archetypes are present, the film focuses primarily on six
teens: the most popular guy and girl in school, Mike Dexter (Peter
Facinelli) and Amanda Beckett (Jennifer Love Hewitt), who have recently
broken up.  Ordinary Preston Meyers (Ethan Embry), who spends his time
pining for the beautiful Amanda.  Uber-nerd William Lichter (Charlie
Korsmo), who spends his time pining for revenge against bully Mike.
Antisocial Denise Fleming (Lauren Ambrose), dragged to the party by her
friend Preston.  And then there's Kenny Fisher (Seth Green), a white kid
who wants to be black, and who's come to the party to score.
The film's setup is tedious at best, and much too lengthy.  I mean, the
characters are all merely caricatures, and the prolonged introduction
only serves to point out their shallowness.
The closest the film comes to an interesting character is Preston
Meyers, whose appeal is due more to the talents of Ethan Embry than
strong writing.  As a character, he is completely defined by his
attraction to Amanda. But Embry's engaging mannerisms make the character
more endearing than he was written.
As the object of his affection, Jennifer Love Hewitt takes a flat role
and leaves it lifeless.  Korsmo and Facinelli play their stereotypes to
the hilt, but without any interesting touches.  Lauren Ambrose wanders
through the film looking for a personality, and Seth Green, looking like
Bulworth Jr., is never quite as funny as he tries to be.  He's actually
better in his quieter moments.  The few sparks from the supporting cast
are actually delivered in cameos (by Jenna Elfman and Jerry O'Connell).
The humor in the film is scarce, though it does get slightly better as
the film rolls along.  The script (by directors Deborah Kaplan and Harry
Elfont) offers few surprises (beyond the fact that they can still build
an entire film out of these hoary old clichés).
Teens might get a kick out of the film's obvious humor, but this entry
is far from being a credit to the genre.  Recently, Clueless and even
the Scream series have had more insight into teen culture.  Don't
believe the title...you can wait for this one...a long, long time.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Edwin Jahiel
CAN'T HARDLY WAIT  * 1/2   Written and directed by Harry Elfont and Deborah
Kaplan.Photography,Lloyd Ahern. Editing, Michael Jablow. Production design,
Marcia Hinds-Johnson. Music, David Kitay & Matthew Sweet. Produced by Jenno
Topping and Betty Thomas. Cast: Jennifer Love Hewitt (Amanda), Ethan Embry
(Preston), Charlie Korsmo (William), Lauren Ambrose (Denise), Peter
Facinelli (Mike), Seth Green (Kenny), Jerry O'Connell, (Trip McNeely),
Jenna Elfman (Angel).  A Columbia Pictures release. 95 min. PG-13
High-school kids are human, but you'd hardly think so from a large number
of movies about them, including Can't Hardly Wait. It's the first
directorial effort by Kaplan and Elfont whose main claim to fame was being
among the five writers of A Very Brady Sequel.
A few teen films have been on the thoughtful side: the classic
post-graduation American Graffiti, the excellent end-of-school-year Dazed
and Confused (by Richard Linklater),  some works by John Hughes  (The
Breakfast Club, Sixteen Candles), the funny-to-hilarious Fast Times at
Ridgemont High (by Amy Heckerling), Ferris Bueller's Day Off, Weird Science
(both by Hughes).
Note that the Hughes titles above were set in Illinois, while Dazed and
Confused  is in Texas. The school of the CHW kids is in California, the
center of the universe as per Hollywood. The sad denial of another America
beyond the southern Pacific coast continues, obviously for practical
filmmaking reasons.
The opening credits are a quick, cutesy way to introduce the main
characters, their accomplishments, aims, favorite quotes, etc.  As a rule
this gimmick makes one suspect the worst. One quote is "A true friend stabs
you in the front," attributed to Oscar Wilde. I cannot guarantee its
authenticity, but a search for it turned up a Wildeism more germane to the
film: "There is no sin, except stupidity."
The film's title must refer to the impatience of the kids to leave
adolescence for maturity, as well as to the state of English in schools.
Following the seniors' graduation ceremony, their class has the usual
ritualistic bash--in the home of a girl who ought to have known better
than volunteer the place. The party is a rite of passage --not the Rites of
Spring but the Trites of Spring. The motto, as in other such events, must
be Brew and Screw.
For its characters, the filmmakers round up the usual suspects, all of them
types found in the teen genre. If there is some originality here, it is
well-hidden by cliches gathered from earlier flicks. CHW's  deja vu types
and actions make up a pot-pourri, an expression where "pourri" means
"putrid." But this epithet would be too strong a condemnation of a movie
whose main guilt is total  superficiality.
The action almost entirely takes place at the shindig. Celebrants range
from geeks to nerds to jocks to cuties.  Without a central plot or guiding
thread, the whole thing is just a collection of skin-deep subplots. The
main one is this: athletic Mike, the BMOC, has just dumped Amanda, his girl
since freshman class, as part of "game plan" with his pals. The idea is
that those among them who are going on to college will have women by the
regiment falling into their arms and beds, so why not break with the boys'
current liaisons? It's not only a dumb idea but a revoltingly cynical one.
Learning this, college-bound would-be writer Preston  wants to declare his
love to now-uncommitted Amanda. He is a likable, shy fellow who has been
adoring her silently ever since they both were freshmen. In a flashback to
four years ago, the movie goofs by showing Amanda, Preston and others
looking exactly as they do now. Add to this the sin that Hollywood has been
committing since silent  movie days and in many contemporary films as well:
too many screen students --high-schoolers or undergraduates--are
perceptibly older than they would be in real life.
Preston comes to the party with his confidante and best pal Denise. She is
brainy a la Janeane Garofalo, even  looks like a mix of Garofalo and a
young Kathy Bates. She lacks confidence in her own appearance, is outside
the girlish loop,  critical of others, has a mordant tongue. Another
subplot will involve her being accidentally locked inside a bathroom with
Seth, with predictable consequences. He is  a white boy whose solution to
having an identity has been to adopt a black personality in dress, speech,
manners, music, and the like. (There are, by the way, some merely token
minority students at the party)
As for Amanda, she's been a kind of First Lady all along, Queen of this and
of that. She is nice but, like almost everyone else, not a thinking person.
(You wonder how the vague Preston will perform  as a writer)  Amanda does
get the film' s main profundity when she realizes (and confesses a bit
pathetically) that all her glory came from being Mike's satellite. With
some people, it takes time to see the obvious.
I will not mention other characters, events or gratuitous developments of
CHW. The partygoers, are without exception not just undeveloped but
undersketched. There are  few small saving graces. One is the movie's
relative briefness. Even though the title calls for the joke I Could Hardly
Wait For It To Finish, I did not find it unbearable -- just blah. Another
is that Preston is neither depicted as pathologically shy nor as a
caricature intellectual. There are no drop-dead gorgeous women. And, in a
near-surreal sight, as Preston tries to use a public phone, a woman, a
tired stripper with fake angel wings,  hassles him for the use of the
cabin. She is played by the uncredited Jenna Elfman, who recently had a
major part in Krippendorf's Tribe and is married to the nephew of composer
Danny Elfman.
Obviously made for high-schoolers who may or may not get some mini-shocks
of recognition, and full of references to current pop culture, CHW will
survive only if its target audience shows up.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Alex Fung
CAN'T HARDLY WAIT (Columbia - 1998)
Starring Jennifer Love Hewitt, Ethan Embry, Charlie Korsmo,
  Lauren Ambrose, Peter Facinelli, Seth Green
Screenplay by Deborah Kaplan & Harry Elfont
Produced by Jenno Topping, Betty Thomas
Directed by Deborah Kaplan & Harry Elfont
Running time: 98 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   The two niche film genres which roared to success in the 1980s only
   to be arguably overmined were the slasher flick and the teen comedy.
   As the genres reached the end of their respective heydays, it became
   clear that audiences grew tired of watching maniacs in ski masks
   hacking up young virgins, while the typical formula adhered to by
   teen comedies eventually devolved to a group of guys in
   alcohol-induced romps spying on nubile young women in showers.  The
   best films of the teen comedy genre, which CAN'T HARDLY WAIT clearly
   aspires to emulate, the SAY ANYTHINGs and the FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT
   HIGHs, exceeded this stupefying formula by being more observant and
   giving us more -- relevant characters we could care about, and
   indelible, resonant moments: can anyone soon forget the wonderfully
   poignant and emotionally powerful scene in SAY ANYTHING with John
   Cusack standing defiantly with his boombox hoisted overhead?
   There aren't any moments like this in CAN'T HARDLY WAIT, and in truth
   the film doesn't remotely approach the zenith of the genre, but it's
   a harmless, watchable piece with a few somewhat touching moments and
   sporadic funny bits amidst the all of the adolescent hijinx which
   comprise its bulk.  Originally titled THE PARTY (and renamed when MGM
   indicated plans to remake the 1968 Peter Sellers film of the same
   name), CAN'T HARDLY WAIT appropriately spends almost all of its
   ninety-eight minute running time at a raucous house party being held
   to celebrate the senior class graduation of Huntington Hills High
   School.  Here we meet the usual suspects -- the stunning prom queen
   Amanda Beckett (Jennifer Love Hewitt), the self-absorbed class jock
   Mike Dexter (Peter Facinelli), the socially-inept class braniac
   William Lichter (Charlie Korsmo), the self-styled hipster Kenny
   Fisher (Seth Green), and, in a nod to SAY ANYTHING's John Cusack and
   Lili Taylor, our lovelorn chief protagonist Preston Meyers (Ethan
   Embry) and his faithful sardonic friend Denise Fleming (Lauren
   Ambrose); give her a guitar and him some kickboxing moves, and the
   homage would be complete.  Preston has been mooning over Amanda since
   he first saw her four years ago, and with she being unceremoniously
   dropped by her longtime boyfriend Mike and this being his last night
   in town before heading off to a Boston college, he's convinced that
   the fates are aligned in his favour (the incongruous broadcast of
   Barry Manilow's "Mandy" on the radio is a cincher) and heads to the
   party, Denise in tow, in order to win Amanda's heart.
   The motives of the other major characters are decidedly less
   poignant.  Mike, dumping Amanda in his plan to upgrade to college
   women, is out to convince members of his clique to do likewise to
   their high school girlfriends.  William seeks vengeance on Mike for
   years of torment and ridicule in school, and, in the film's most
   misconceived subplot, devises an ridiculous revenge fantasy involving
   chloroform and Polaroids.  And Kenny, who winds up revealing his true
   colours as a poseur, is simply looking -- desperately so -- for some
   action.  The many other characters which populate the party are
   cardboard-thin in depth and accordingly sport names such as Girl
   Whose Party It Is and Exchange Student.  (Melissa Joan Hart of
   SABRINA, THE TEENAGE WITCH makes an impression as the overly zestful
   Yearbook Girl.)
   The cut-loose antics at the crowded, energetic party, in all its
   picture-defacing, furniture-destroying, beer-swilling glory, is at
   times amusing to watch and is supported by an entertaining
   soundtrack, but the film improves when it shifts its focus away from
   the teeming masses of revellers and towards its detached primary
   characters.  Denise and Kenny are the furthest removed from the
   festivities, literally isolated in a locked bathroom by an accidental
   mishap which eventually leads to a extended session of THE BREAKFAST
   CLUB-styled soul-searching and meditation, but almost all of the
   other characters are in some form similarly set apart from the party:
   Amanda mopes through the celebration in the haze of an identity
   crisis, while Mike stumbles about in confusion as he learns that his
   influence over his friends isn't strong enough to overcome their
   hormones.  Meanwhile, Preston wanders around on the brink of the
   ongoing chaos, trying to summon up the courage to present Amanda with
   his heartfelt love letter.
   The screenplay by Harry Elfont and Deborah Kaplan, who also shared
   direction duties, is at times unforgivably lazy -- there are two
   separate occasions where, having presumably written themselves into a
   wall, summon up an incidental character (cameoed by recognizable
   faces such as Jerry O'Connell as a one-time highschool bigshot and
   Jenna Elfman as an ersatz roadside angel) to essentially tell their
   characters what to do next -- but there are moments of cleverness in
   the film, and CAN'T HARDLY WAIT captures the sheer purity of
   Preston's adolescent longing, when the love for a girl is so
   overwhelming that it's the only thing that matters in the world.
   The film's young cast fares well in the film.  Mr. Embry conveys his
   character's dreamy-eyed nature well, while Ms. Hewitt is attractive
   and convincing as his dreamgirl.  Ms. Ambrose is given the most
   complex character and the sharpest dialogue, and acquits herself
   nicely.  Mr. Green's character undergoes the biggest character arc
   in the film, and surprises in his ability to draw audience empathy.
   CAN'T HARDLY WAIT concludes in the way that many films of the genre
   do, with freeze-frame shots of its central characters as superimposed
   text appears at the bottom of the screen spelling out their
   respective eventual fates.  As the final shots of the film unrolled,
   I sunk in my seat -- this device usually leads to a series of glib
   one-liners that typically aren't either clever nor funny.  While this
   rule-of-thumb holds mostly true here, the final three lines, perfect
   in their simplicity, conclude the film on just the right note.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Unlike you, I'm tolerant of weirdness."
     - Jennifer Jason Leigh, CROOKED HEARTS
