Title
Review for Mask, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Ben Hoffman
     The biggest thing in movie making these last few years has been
the advent of fantastic special effects.  Leading the pack is ILM,
Industrial Light & Magic, which has given us JURASSIC PARK, DEATH
BECOMES HER, WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT, ET: THE EXTRATERRESTRIAL, the
"Indiana Jones" series, the "Star Wars" trilogy, and on to FORREST
GUMP.  In THE MASK they live up to their reputation as the best.
     Here the wearer of the mask has all the outlandish movements we
are accustomed to seeing in cartoons.  The character spins like a top,
whirls into the air and away, has eyes that pop way out, a tongue about
a yard long, a heart that jumps out several yards and pumps away.
     But while special effects are great the movie also needs a story
and THE MASK provides that along with some great comedy by Jim Carrey.
Stanley Ipkiss (Carrey) is a timid bank clerk.  Into the bank (with
thunder and music turned way up) enters Tina (Cameron Diaz in her
first film): tall, blonde and with a body made in heaven.  While making
advances on the stunned Ipkiss, the camera in her purse is taking
pictures of the vault.
     When, through a series of circumstances, Ipkiss finds a mask that
has been in a treasure chest under sea for many years, he puts it on
his face as a gag and instantly changes into a man of action, a super
hero.  Bullets cannot stop him.  He whirls, he dodges, he is invincible
but always in a highly original and humorous way.
     Very funny dialogue aids the film so that Carrey's broad comedic
style here and the odd story of the magical mask all result in a
hilarious and different kind of movie.  While the film could use about
15 minutes of editing, it is one of the funniest to come along in a
great while.

Author
Jeff Pidgeon
        If you want to see ILM's latest resume entry in terms of effects, "The
Mask" is a nice addition to their already impressive body of work.  On just
about any other level, though, it's pretty disappointing.  It's an improvement
over the comic book that inspired it, but the comic was barely a premise, much
less a story.  I was hoping the screenwriters could expand the basic idea --
geek finds mask, becomes "cool", wreaks havok -- into something that could en-
gage and entertain for a couple of hours.  Nope.
        Jim Carrey plays Stanley Ipkiss, a nebbish-y bank teller who is 
jerked around by everyone in sight -- until he finds the mask, a sort of magni-
fying glass for the wearer's personality.  Since Stan is a big-time animation
fan (like most other film protagonists these days), after donning the mask, he
becomes a Tex-Avery-style force of nature, zipping about, generally doing
whatever he damn well pleases.
        If this sounds like fun, it could be -- but Carrey doesn't know what to
do with the nebbish side of the equation to make it empathetic or funny.  We 
should be on Stanley's side as much as the Mask, but I found
myself waiting for more effects because he was so uninteresting.  The acting
and writing are strictly from dishwater -- only the manic Carrey, shored up by
ILM's rubbery visuals, gives the film spark.  The script sets up most the rules
the plot needs to work, but how the mask comes on or off -- either in terms of
a parasite-mask that "wants" a host, or an increasingly addictive temptation to
the wearer -- is poorly dealt with.  "Beetlejuice" is a similar concept (with
similar problems) that managed to be quirky and lively enough to leap the plot
gaps.  There's a fair amount of slack here, and the direction, while not with-
out verve, isn't up to the task.
        It's interesting to see cartoon physics applied to real actors this way,
but it's mostly an excuse to trot out the same gags that were old in "Roger 
Rabbit".  The great thing about the Tex Avery cartoons was the feeling that you
never knew what you were going to get -- they were so chaotic that you went
away feeling that if you saw them more that once, they might be different the
next time.  Here, you pretty much know what's on your plate, and (aside 
from the live-action application) oftimes they're even in the same context.
As for the supporting players, Peter Riegert has a couple of moments as the po-
lice detective, and the fellow playing his simple sidekick manages to eke a few
laughs. Cameron Diaz has presence, but is required to do little but stand 
around in tight dresses while the camera leers up and down her frame.  The vil-
lains are forgettable, and this really hurts the picture.  Randy Edel-
man's score neither hurts nor helps much.  Someone looked at "Ace Ventura" and
decided that there had to be another cute little dog -- although he is quite
important at several points in the plot (almost as much as the Mask himself).
Generally, Carrey was a funnier cartoon character in "Ace Ventura", and we got
to see him be funny all the way through, instead of having to wait for laughs.

Author
Craig Good
     THE MASK just burst onto summer screens.  It will be interesting
to watch and see how it does at the box office.  From me it gets a
mixed, if mostly positive, review.  The film has many assets, and not a
few liabilities.
     The production had the guts to go with the grotesque design of the
character itself, and I can't help but wonder how many people will want
to see a whole movie with *that* face in it.  On the other hand, the
movie is clearly at its best when the mask is on.  When it comes off,
the energy drops and the audience has time to fidget and notice the
frayed curtains around the stage.  When it goes back on, hot dang.
Nobody notices anything except the great gags on the screen.  Some of
them are so well timed as to pull most of their humor from the basic
element of comedy, and others are simply audaciously funny.
     Star Jim Carrey is himself a mixed blessing.  His gift for broad
physical comedy serves him well when he is The Mask, but in his Dr.
Jekyll state it's obvious that, as nice a guy as he is, he just can't
act his way out of a wet paper bag.  I mean, watch him try to be
sincere and *then* come tell me how bad Keanu Reeves is.  A pleasant
surprise is the actress who plays the bombshell (I'm sorry I didn't
catch her name in the credits, but I expect we'll all know it after
this movie).  She acts rings around Carrey (no big deal) and manages to
project some charm through her ho-hum role.  And that's the trouble
with all of the other characters--they're just not interesting.  The
simpleton sidekick to the detective is a bright spot, but for the most
part we just want Jim to put the mask back on so we don't have to spend
more time with these people.
     The film's greatest assets are the art direction and the stunning
effects.  THE MASK paints the frame in solid, comic book colors and
strong graphic shapes.  It almost looks as though someone dipped DICK
TRACY in a little of THE CROW.  Both the design and, more importantly,
the animation of the cartoony transformations are top notch.  On the
downside, the film wants to pay homage to Tex Avery, but doesn't quite
understand how.  When The Mask becomes the Tex Avery wolf who used to
pop his cork at the Preston Blair girl, he's not staged in profile.
Instead, he's seen three-quarter view and in a darkly-lit setting.
This robs an otherwise flawless 3D adaptation of the graphic impact
Avery had in his films.  (My animation bias isn't showing, is it?)
     The story is also a mixed bag.  Many aspects of how the mask works
and how it changes the life of a spineless bank clerk are addressed in
a solid and entertaining manner.  Other basic questions are just
ignored.  The spine of the story contains no real surprises, although I
have to admit that a lot of things happen which I just did not see
coming.  Any sort of a surprise in a fluffy summer film is a pleasant
one as far as I'm concerned.
     So, if you've already seen TRUE LIES, wander on down to the
theatre.  Try to see THE MASK in a good one: the sound effects editor
had the best sense of timing and one of the best senses of humor of
anybody involved in the project.

Author
James Berardinelli
     I never thought it could happen.  Jim Carrey (star of ACE
VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE) upstaged--and not once, but twice!  While it's
true that THE MASK is another vehicle for the rubber-featured
modern-day amalgamation of Jerry Lewis and the Three Stooges, this time
around Carrey has some competition, and there are a number of scenes
where he ends up playing second fiddle.
     The special effects are, for the most part, rather impressive, but
they're as frequently guilty of overwhelming the star's performance as
complimenting it.  Nevertheless, if you think Carrey has an expressive
face, wait 'til you see him with the mask on.  Eyes pop out and jaws
drop--literally.  ILM goes to work with their own version of
live-action animation whenever anyone dons the mask.  Good costumes and
make-up serve only to enhance the computer-generated visuals.
     And, even as the audience's attention is arrested by the work of
the effects wizards, there's still room for a canine scene-stealer.
Milo (whose real name is Max) is the perfect foil for Carrey's
goofiness and--yes--there are occasions where his animal antics divert
the spotlight away from his two-legged co-star.
     Carrey, meanwhile, is playing a split role: mild-mannered Stanley
Ipkiss and his superhuman alter-ego, the Mask.  Stanley is a shy,
unassuming man who works in a bank and lives with Milo in a small
apartment.  One day, following a terrible bout with Murphy's Law,
Stanley finds a curious-looking mask floating amidst some debris in a
river.  Later, at home, when he finally gets around to trying the mask
on, Stanley learns that this isn't some archeological curiosity.  It
has power--the power to transform.  From the moment the mask clings to
his skin and his face turns green, Stanley's personality undergoes a
radical shift.  Insecurity is replaced by flamboyance.  Physically,
there seems to be little that he can't do, from twisting his body into
a pretzel to taking a bullet in the chest or forming a tommy gun out of
a balloon.
     While wearing the mask, Stanley makes a comment about becoming a
superhero, but he's really interested in one thing:  Tina Carlyle
(Cameron Diaz), a voluptuous nightclub singer who works for a local
gangster (Peter Greene).  Following a bank robbery (to finance his
wooing), the Mask discovers that a cop, Lt. Mitch Kellaway (Peter
Riegert), is hot on his trail.  And it's not that difficult a trail to
follow.  After all, how many lime-faced bandits are there who move like
the Warner Brothers cartoon Tasmanian Devil?
     Carrey plays Stanley with surprising restraint, giving his
zaniness free reign only when the mask is on.  In some ways, it's a
Clark Kent/Superman thing.  Stanley and the Mask might share the same
body, but they're very different.  One is a typical nice guy who
finishes last.  The other is Robin Williams' genie from ALADDIN come to
life (Carrey provides dozens of whirlwind impersonations).
     As a comedy, THE MASK is genial, but its recycled plot is far too
thin for the film to succeed as either an adventure or a spoof.  "Comic
book" and "cartoon" are two terms that come to mind for describing this
movie.  Neither is intended to be pejorative, but each conjures certain
apt images.
     For me, ACE VENTURA was too much concentrated Jim Carrey.  In THE
MASK, the forceful personality is diluted.  The star is mostly-subdued
except during those off-the-wall bursts of energy that accompany the
appearance of the Mask.  The film is entertaining enough--in a light,
undemanding sort of way--but more than the combined efforts of Carrey,
ILM, and Max are demanded to camouflage the seams and holes still
apparent in this production.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
Comic book industry has suffered a sharp commercial decline
in the last decade. One of the reasons for that can be found
in the rapid development of computer graphic technologies
that brought whole new dimension to interactive video games
and Hollywood films. Two-dimensional paper world of comic
books simply can't compete with them and the adolescents,
who used to keep the industry alive, are turning away
towards alternative forms of entertainment in which their
favourite characters, even the most outrageous ones, look
more alive and more attractive. One of such examples is THE
MASK, movie adaptation of Dark Horse comic book, directed in
1994 by Charles Russell.
Protagonist of this film is Stanley Ipkiss (played by Jim
Carrey), mild-mannered bank clerk who is not particularly
happy with many aspects of his life, especially those
related to opposite sex. One day a beautiful night club
singer Tina Carlyle (played by Cameron Diaz) comes to his
bank and Stanley hopelessly falls in love with. But the
visit to the night club ends with Stanley being bounced and
spending the rest of night walking by the sea. There he sees
a strange ancient mask that features face of Loki, Norse god
of mischief. When Stanley puts the mask on his face, he gets
transformed into Mask - a new character with a green face, a
person who does almost any thing Stanley would never do.
While doing that he brings attention of both police led by
Lt. Mitch Kellaway (played by Peter Riegert) and crime
syndicate led by Dorian Tyrell (played by Peter Greene).
There are few comic actors like Jim Carrey whose comedic
talent is such that he can carry movies that would otherwise
be unwatchable. THE MASK is one of those rare instances
where Jim Carrey's overwhelming talent actually had to
compete with something else. The outrageous and cartoonish
character of Mask was simply impossible to put on the screen
without massive display of latest CGI technologies. In the
end the special effects became the most important element of
the film and everything else - plot, characters, settings
etc. - was just an excuse for their display. Unfortunately,
those scenes tend to be too short and between them viewers
have to deal with the weak script by Mike Werb and
anachronistic characters and situation that might look like
they were time-warped from 1940s. Although Carrey really
tried his best (and usually succeeds) in bringing life to
the comic book characters, his efforts weren't enough to
rescue this film from sinking into oblivion. Those who
remember THE MASK these days usually don't think of Carrey
or ground-breaking CGI effects; the main reason why this
film gets mentioned is Cameron Diaz in her first major movie
appearance, in which she displays somewhat rounder shape
than we are accustomed to see from Hollywood actresses. In
the end, those viewers who aren't big fans of Carrey, Diaz
or comic books probably won't miss much if they don't watch
this film.
Review written on September 29th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Lara Shaffer
     Hi.  I am not a movie reviewer.  I'm not even a grown-up.  I'm 13,
and I'd just like to post my opinion of this movie.  I know Jim Carrey is
in it, but I'm not really sure who else is.  I think it's rated PG-13.
Here's the review:
     I think the lesson in this movie that they were trying to teach
you was that you don't need a mask, you can just be yourself.  I think
that they did a lousy job of getting this message across.  It seemed to
me that Jim Carrey, who had found a mask in the river and when he put
it on transformed into an action-packed cartoon character who seemed
to be killing someone or doing something against the law almost every
second... anyway, like I was saying it seemed to me that Jim Carrey
could not get along without the mask.
     There were two main female characters in the movie, one liked Jim
Carrey for the mask, the other liked him just for himself.  If they
were trying to say you don't need a mask they would have had the
sensible girl who liked him without the mask fall in love with him.
But no, she betrayed him and he ended up with the gangster's girlfriend
who liked the guy with the mask better.
     Also they made it look like robbing a bank, shooting people,
tricking the police, getting in jail, and escaping from jail was cool.
It also made smoking look cool.  And people wonder why teenagers start
smoking so early!
     In my opinon the only good part of the movie was when they were
dancing to that Mexican song.  It looked like a fun movie to make, but
it wasn't that great watching it.

Author
Craig P Steffen
     When going to see this movie, I was honestly expecting some bad
brain candy at the very best, judging by ACE VENTURA.  The feeling I
had after leaving the theater was "Wow, that was really good!"
     Jim Carrey stars in this quasi-thirties-super-hero story where the
jokes are almost all actually funny, rather that so disgusting as to
make the audience titter a bit.  Stanley Lipkiss, Carrey's character, is
very much the mild-mannered, Clark-Kent image as a bank clerk.  After
donning the Mask one night, however, it's powers allow him to become
what he sees himself as in his fantasies.  Snappy cinematography and
superbly blended computer animation make his alter ego someone with the
powers of Beetlejuice and the wardrobe sense of BATMAN's Joker.
Between Carrey and his two love interests, there is enough real acting
(surprisingly enough) to add a bit of human touch so we don't feel like
we're watching a cartoon.  Lastly, in his forays as the pastel
crusader, Carrey will keep all movie buffs in the audience hopping with
his rapid-fire quotes from all over the spectrum, both old and new.
There is just a dash of the classical cheesy musical, which the loudly
costumed mask is able to play to a tea.
     Carrey delivers a performance that will surprise those who have
seem him on TV or in other movies.  Lipkiss appeals to everyone in the
audience who has ever not quite fit in with their peers.  The two
leading ladies' [don't know actor's names] performances add some
humanity to the story, but otherwise aren't that impressive.  The
villains are just that, the scum of the earth, very one-dimensional,
and good a being so.  The only other performance worth expounding on is
Lipkiss's dog; he gives a performance that would leave Lassie in the
dust, and furthermore, takes you completely by surprise several times.
     A good movie to see once for fun in the theaters, it's selling
power will be for video.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Stanley Ipkiss, whose letter to the local paper signed "nice guys
finish last" had generated a torrent of replies the year before, has
been undergoing a change lately.
     Bank clerk Ipkiss, played with sweet sincerity by Jim Carrey,
discovers a mask that, like Dr. Jekyll's potion, temporarily creates an
all new person.  To understand how the mask works, he turns to a
masks-that-people-wear expert named Dr. Neuman, played with dripping
sincerity and dead pan humor by Ben Stein.  Although the doctor proves
useless, Stanley finally discovers for himself what the mask does.  It
magnifies your inner desires.  Since Ipkiss is an incurable romantic,
who spends his free time watching cartoons, it is inevitable that the
mask turns him into the world's greatest lover and song-and-dance man.
     After avoiding Carrey for years, I was blown away by his
performance in LIAR, LIAR -- one of this year's funniest films.  Since
THE MASK in 1994 was the movie that really launched his film career, I
suggested we check it out one evening on vacation.
     With the help of realistic and colorful special effects, Carrey,
as The Mask, struts his stuff non-stop.  When he meets his heart-throb,
Cameron Diaz in her film debut as blond bombshell Tina Carlyle, at a
nightclub, his heart jumps out of his body and his jaw drops open far
enough for a yard long tongue to drool out .
     Carrey shows off his ability to impersonate countless other actors
and reenact their most famous scenes.  When trapped by bad guys with
machine guns, he pulls out two cartoonish, cannon-like guns with a
dozen barrels each.  "You have to ask yourself a question," he warns
with a soft Clint Eastwood voice.  "Do I feel lucky?"
     Ha Nguyen's stream of elaborate costumes for The Mask sets the
tone for all of The Mask's emotions.  When The Mask is trapped by an
army of police, he switches to a Latin costume and soon has everyone
formed into a singing and dancing conga line.
     In a highly imaginative film, the only surprise is how slowly
director Chuck Russell paces the non-mask scenes.  Although it never
got the belly laughs out of me that LIAR, LIAR did, THE MASK delivers
some well choreographed numbers and displays Carrey's talents well.
Still, I must confess that my favorite character in the film was not
Stanley, but Milo, his little pooch.  Why cute animals like Max, who
plays Milo, do not get more acting roles in the movies remains a
mystery.
     THE MASK runs 1:41.  It is rated PG-13 for some cartoonish
violence and some profanity.  Most of it is so mild that the film
should be fine for kids around 7 and up.  My son Jeffrey, age 8,
thought the show was "really good and funny."  I recommend the picture
to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jim Carrey, Cameron Diaz, Peter Riegert, Peter Greene,
Richard Jeni, Amy Yasbeck.
Screenplay:  Mike Werb.
Director:  Charles Russell.
     Either you "get" Jim Carrey, or you don't.  All right, maybe
there's a little middle ground, but not much.  Carrey is turning into
one of those performers who inspires as much head-shaking among his
detractors as laughter among his fans.  Apparently my Carrey Threshhold
is higher than that of most critics; I enjoyed his ACE VENTURA shtick
while all about me were hurling brickbats.  Now he gets to carry a big
budget summer fx comedy, THE MASK.  And once again, his manic gifts
turn a wafer-thin story into a real guilty pleasure.  As lively as the
special effects are, THE MASK would be a loud dud without Jim Carrey's
unique talents.
     Carrey stars as Stanley Ipkiss, a milquetoast bank clerk who
frequently finds himself on the receiving end of life's splashed
puddles.  One evening after his car breaks down, Stanley finds a
strange mask floating in the ocean.  When he puts the mask on, he
becomes a superhuman whirling dervish, seemingly able to make his every
whim a reality, including winning the attentions of beautiful night
club singer Tina Carlyle (Cameron Diaz).  However, The Mask also draws
the attention of Tina's shady boyfriend Dorian (Peter Greene) when he
interferes in a bank heist Dorian is orchestrating, and of a stoic
police detective (Peter Riegert) for the same reason.  Much to his own
amazement, Stanley becomes a real superhero, fighting crime to save the
day.
     If the underlying premise of THE MASK seems familiar--mild-
mannered guy is affected by supernatural forces and finds his innermost
desires released--it's because it was already done this summer in
WOLF, right down to the detail of how the same phenomenon has a
different effect on people with different "true natures." WOLF handled
the theme much better, but it was a more stylish film in many ways.
THE MASK is full of cookie-cutter small-time hoods better suited for
comic relief than for any real villainy, which makes Stanley's
predicament much less interesting.  In fact, it's probably safe to say
that nothing in THE MASK would be at all interesting without its
inventive visuals and Jim Carrey's rubbery mug.
     Fortunately, THE MASK does have those elements, and they make for
a dizzying ride.  The computer graphics which turn Carrey into a
walking Tex Avery cartoon are delightful, granting him a lunatic
arsenal of tricks.  The most whimsical use of ILM magic might be the
Mask's effect on another cast member, Stanley's scene-stealing dog
Milo, in a hilarious bit from the final showdown.  Special kudos also
should go to the makeup team headed by Greg Cannom, which has managed
the challenging task of making Carrey's Mask distinctly otherworldly
without obscuring his malleable features.  With so much technical
wizardry flying around, it might be easy to overlook the art direction
and set decoration, from Stanley's apartment to the Coco Bongo Club,
all of which are perfectly in tune with the comic book atmosphere of
THE MASK.  All these elements are skillfully combined by director
Charles Russell (who was "Chuck" Russell when directing low-budget pics
like A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET 3).
     Then there is 1994's boy wonder, Jim Carrey, who turns in a
performance so energetic it should probably be regulated.  He goes
Robin Williams' ALADDIN Genie one better, using his own face and body
as often as any cinematic chicanery to become a gallery of characters.
He is the single best reason to see THE MASK, and he truly must be seen
to be believed.  Surprisingly, he actually gets supporting help,
particularly from Peter Riegert, effectively deadpan as the no-nonsense
cop.  There are flat spots, like the sluggish performance of Richard
Jeni as Stanley's friend and co-worker, and the aforementioned
yawn-inducing villains.  The bottom line is this:  if you can
appreciate the idea of a group of police officers involuntarily joining
The Mask in a performance of "Cuban Pete, and if Carrey doesn't make
you cringe, THE MASK will fit you perfectly.

Author
David Wilcock
Jim Carrey stars in this violent, cartoonish comedy. He plays timid bank
clerk Stanley Ipkiss, who, after finding a mask in a river and placing it
on his face (ugh! Who knows where that mask has been?) he turns into a
wild, cartoon like person with a green face. Cameron Diaz falls in love
with him, and The Mask also gets into trouble with a gang of gangsters,
after accidentally killing one of their men. 
What follows is a fast paced, sometimes violent, and usually funny, comedy.
The special effects are fantastic, with the mask testing computer graphics
to the limit with eyes popping out, getting flattened, and turning into
different characters in the blink of an eye. Also, Ipkiss dog puts the mask
on as well, and a whole load of new special effects kick in. Jim Carrey
plays a cartoon very well, with silly voices, and some great catchphrases.
There's also some very moments, such as when The Mask does a production
number with the police force, and his death sequence in the Coca Bongo is
great as well. 
The film has some flaws though. Firstly, the bad guys are far too intense
in a family comedy like this, and are too violent. The violence should be
expected though, as the director usually directs film like Eraser. 
Also, if you hate Carrey (and some people do) you're going to really,
really hate this movie. But I guess you already knew that. Also, Diaz is
wasted, and the ending is pretty weak.
But despite its flaws, there enough in here to make it watchable, and it's
actually quite enjoyable. Overall then, this is a good Carrey vehicle, but
it's a little too violent for younger kids.

Author
Jon A. Webb
     THE MASK is a remarkably enjoyable film, for a movie without much
of a plot or characters.  What it does have is Jim Carrey, who is very
fresh and exciting (though he seems to be using up his talent in the
fastest possible way), Cameron Diaz as this year's full-lipped object
of desire, and a remarkable blend of morphing and cartoon-like special
effects.  Also a cute dog.  What more could you ask for?
     Carrey plays a nebbish accounts exec at a bank who finds a mask
which has a mysterious power to transform him into a cross between a
superhero and, well, Jim Carrey.  The gag works pretty well, because it
fits Carreys style so well and allows him to make a film out of
outrageous impersonations.
     I thought the musical numbers were great, especially "Cuban
Pete."  I still find myself recalling the wonderful transition when
"Pete"'s mysterious power takes hold of the female cop and she joins
in.  It's a thrilling sequence.  These bits are somehow exactly how
those dance sequences should have been done all along--with the
appropriate super-real enhancements.  At these moments, and in the
final confrontation, the movie becomes a work of real, hilarious,
vision.
     But most of the time, while we're waiting for Carrey to get hold
of the mask (which transforms him into a kind of super-hero) we're just
waiting, and even Jim Carrey can't think of much to do with this very
weak script and shallow direction.  The Carrey-Diaz romance is no
diversion; when Diaz is around him she seems to undergo a reverse
transformation and change into a nice but conventional neighborhood
girl.
     As they say, let's see how Carrey does in a good film.  The
problem is that many comics never get that good film (or only get one
or two out of a career of far too many movies)--they end up being
exploited in one bad movie after another until their audience shrinks
to nothing and they disappear.  Think of Bill Cosby, Richard Pryor,
Gene Wilder.  What works is to transition into another genre of film
(like Eddie Murphy action films); Carrey better get moving soon if he
wants to still be making films in 1996.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This thin-but-amusing adaptation of the Dark Horse comic book is
closer in spirit to BEETLEJUICE than BATMAN, though it *really*
resembles the third segment of TWILIGHT ZONE: THE MOVIE.  By Joe
Dante.  Pet Detective Jim Carrey stars as a mild-mannered bank clerk
who dons a mystic mask to transform into something wilder and hipper
than Jerry Lewis *ever* imagined.
     The concept is canny enough: a green-faced, yellow zoot-suited
superhero be-bopping around and just generally causing mischief in the
dark, edgy city of Edge City.  Complete with nifty matte painting ala
BATMAN.  Said mask is discovered by a diver, floats to the surface, and
is finally found by repressed-but-still-a-nice-guy bank clerk Stanley
Ipkiss (Carrey).
     (Though, frankly, Jim Carrey is pretty soggy as a milquetoast.
But *we* know he's the hero-to-be and that's all that counts, anyway.)
     The fun comes when Stanley tries on the mask and is transformed
into a living cartoon character, just like the ones he like to watch
after work.  Stanley spins like the Tazmanian Devil and bounces like
Woody Woodpecker, to name a few.  The twist is that Stanley Ipkiss, aka
The Mask, is not a goody two-shoes and he ends up doing some of his
*own* dirty deeds that set both the cops *and* the crooks on his yellow
tail.
     Viewers still recovering from ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE can
relax; THE MASK is not a Jim Carrey vehicle, per se.  The rubber-faced
actor actually exerts *some* self-control over the course of the film
and that's good news because Carrey can be a bit much to take.  (Even
Robin Williams and Jonathan Winters work within boundaries.  For
Carrey, there *are* no rules.)
     Though the comic is clearly captivating, the real star is/are the
(literally) eye-popping special effects that allows Carrey to stretch
and contort into shapes previously only permitted for cartoon
characters.  Too bad that too many of the gags-- such as Carrey turning
into a whistling wolf-- go on too long.  THE MASK needs twice as many
gags in half the time.
     There are two dance routines, though, that are pretty fun,
including Carrey as "Cuban Pete" in a sequence that recalls the "Banana
Boat Song" from BEETLEJUICE.  And don't miss a dog who's a better
scene-stealer than Eddie from TV's "Fraiser."
     Production values are all surprising strong-- notably in the sound
department-- but the story doesn't have either an edge or an
interesting subplot to speak of.  There's noir to run from a bad
"B"-movie menu of supporting characters including a siren (Cameron
Diaz), a gangster, a rasping Mr. Big, and a smart-mouthed cynic cop
(Peter Reigert).
     Most disappointing are too many obvious references to animator
extraordinaire Tex Avery.  Subtly, where is thy sting?
