Title
Review for Hanging Garden, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In a flashback, the teenage girl in the eccentric family in the
Canadian film, THE HANGING GARDEN, tells her senile grandmother that
she is going to a school dance.  Horrified, the grandmother wants to
know if her granddaughter knows "the rule of 6."  If you don't break
off a kiss by the count of 6, then you committed a sin with the boy.
And most of all, the grandmother wants to know if she has "protection?"
She must carry a rosary in her pocket at all times.
     The richly acted film is written and directed by Thom Fitzgerald
in a quirky but loving style.  Although some may refer to the film as
yet another dysfunctional family picture, that moniker misses the mark.
Yes, every member of the household has their own special problems, but
the writer didn't choose to name so many characters for various flowers
by accident.  This delightful little picture mixes love, tragedy and
pathos, resulting in a hopeful and almost magical concoction.
     During the opening credits we observe the boy, Sweet William, at
the center of the story.  First, he's an average sized young lad who is
slapped off-screen by his father.  Next, he's 300 pound teenager,
played with hopelessness and depression by Troy Veinotte.  When the
opening credits end, we cut to 10 years later.  William is now an
average-sized, reasonably happy adult, played with love and compassion
by Chris Leavins.
     William has returned after 10 years absence to attend the marriage
of his free-spirited and foul-mouthed sister Rosemary to his first
childhood lover, Fletcher (Joe S. Keller).  Kerry Fox from AN ANGEL AT
MY TABLE and SHALLOW GRAVE plays Rosemary with a compelling joy.
Nicole Burnell, who gave such a devastating performance in THE SWEET
HEREAFTER, plays the teenage Rosemary.
     The father of the family, Whiskey Mac (Peter MacNeill), is an
alcoholic autocrat who is more obnoxious than harmful.  His wife, Iris
(Seana McKenna), says that she would have left him years ago to at
least go to some place warm were it not for her lack of money and her
obligations to the kids.  Rounding out the family is Christine
Dunsworth as nine-year-old Violet, the sister whom William meets for
the first time.
     As the exuberant Irish music fills the air at the wedding in the
family home, William wanders off to try on one of his old coats, which
causes him to laugh at the size of his former self.  The director
manages to stage simple scenes in wonderfully imaginative ways.  He
takes a common wedding dress train and uses it to set up scenes in
fresh and fascinating ways.  Rosmary's trip to the bathroom after
drinking too much beer is beautifully orchestrated, and Kerry Fox is at
her hilarious best trying to cope with the long train in a small bath,
all while talking to her brother.
     As much as anything, the film is a series of character sketches.
In one of the strongest we watch William in a flashback as he has his
first sexual encounter, a homosexual one.  Although he is perfectly
happy liking the same sex, his mother is aghast.  A woman friend of
hers suggests she take William to a local housewife, Dusty Miller
(Martha Irving), who, for a fee, will have heterosexual sex with
William.  With absolute finesse the director crafts a subtle scene that
manages to yield significant emotional punch without being sensational.
Dusty, after asking Iris to watch her daughter, takes William and
gently introduces him to the joys of sex with the opposite sex.  All of
this notwithstanding, he still prefers males.
     The film is at its most poignant in several sequences in which the
grown William comes face-to-face with himself when younger.  This
causes his ugly old memories to be reignited.  In the most devastating,
he has to come to grips with his former self who was so overwhelmed
with the stress that he tried to hang himself.  Even here, the director
touches your heart without ever letting the story dissolve into
anything approaching a tearjerker. The ultimate result is an uplifting
story that has more hope that one would ever expect from the outline of
its plot.
     THE HANGING GARDEN runs 1:31.  It is rated R for strong sexuality,
language, violence and some teen drug use and would be acceptable for
teenagers only if they are quite old and mature.

Author
Justin Siegel
Starring: Chris Leavins, Kerry Fox, Peter McNeill, Sarah Polley
Written and Directed by: Thom Fitzgerald
Release Date: 11/14/97 (Saskatoon, Sask.) / Early 1998 (U.S.)
Saskatchewan Classification: 14A (Language, domestic violence, sexuality)
Running Length: 1:34
        I don't think I have ever seen a movie with more flaws that I enjoyed more 
thouroughly than THE HANGING GARDEN. For all its sloppy direction, lapses in smart 
dialogue, amateurish acting and glaring missteps, I must say I was truly taken with this 
powerful and moving film. Canadian director Thom Fitzgerald has crafted a debut film so 
eloquently, that I'm sure his is a name Americans will know as well as Atom Egoyan's by 
the next millenium.
        The hanging garden of the film's title, is a small flower-garden in the backyard 
of a middle-class Nova Scotia family's acreage, where the abusive, alcoholic father 
Whiskey Mac (Peter McNeill) teaches his children the names and blooming seasons of his 
favorite flowers. Mac, it is obvious, cares more for his garden than for his children. It 
is refered to as the "hanging" garden because Mac's overweight, homosexual teenage son 
Sweet William hanged himself there after losing his virginity to a prostitute.
        The film opens, of course, ten years after this fact, when Sweet William (Chris 
Leavins of Saskatoon - it's nice to see a local boy do good for himself) returns to the 
family house for his sister Rosemary's (Kerry Fox) wedding. And right now you're 
thinking, But isn't Sweet William dead? Well, yes, as a matter of fact... or is he? His 
bloated teenage body still swings from a tree in the backyard, and his five-year-old self 
dances through quite a few of the film's scenes, as well. THE HANGING GARDEN is not about 
making sense or answering questions, but about coming to terms with, and (literally) 
burying the past.
        Rosemary (played as a teenager by the Martha Plimpton-ish Sarah Polley, also 
wowing 'em in yet another Canadian masterpiece, THE SWEET HEREAFTER, opening Stateside in 
four days) is a foul-mouthed, chainsmoking, yet loving sister to Sweet William, always 
the most supportive of the family. The fact that she's marrying the very man that William 
shared his first homosexual experience with only complicates matters, and the flirtatious 
bridegroom's passes at Sweet William are making him rather uncomfortable. The way the 
film weaves through flashbacks and present-day is reminiscant of THE SWEET HEREAFTER, yet 
neither the film, nor the direction, is up to par with Egoyan's film.
        The film, however brilliant, has tonnes of obvious flaws. The fact that the 
film's first and second acts have titles, yet the third does not, is one that Fitzgerald 
should've picked up on, as well as the unresolved disapperance of Sweet William's mother. 
The character of Violet (notice the flower-related names here?) is poorly realized as 
well as poorly defined, and Whiskey Mac's mother and sister are never given a chance to 
make any impressions on the viewer.
        I hgighly recommend you see THE HANGING GARDEN as soon as it inches its way to 
American art-houses, which should be sometime in early 1998. It and THE SWEET HEREAFTER 
would make an excellent double-bill, and it proves that, yes, you _can_ go home again - 
even ten years after your death.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Chris Leavins Troy Veinotte, Kerry Fox, Peter MacNeill, 
      Sarah Polley, Seana  McKenna, Joel S. Keller, Joan Orenstein, 
      Christine Dunsworth
Director: Thom Fitzgerald
Producers: Thom Fitzgerald, Louise Garfield, Arnie Gelbart
Screenplay: Thom Fitzgerald
Cinematography: Daniel Jobin
Music: Ashley MacIsaac, Heather Rankin
U.S. Distributor: Goldwyn Films
     THE HANGING GARDEN was one of the hottest films to be shown at the 
1997 Toronto International Film Festival.  Not only was it the 
centerpiece of the "Perspective Canada" series, but it packed its first 
critics' screening and took home two prestigious prizes:  the Toronto 
City Award for the Best Canadian First Feature and the Air Canada 
People's Choice Award for the Most Popular Film.  While I'm not sure 
that the picture deserves the full share of praise heaped upon it at the 
festival, there's no denying that it's a fine, fascinating debut effort 
from director Thom Fitzgerald.
     THE HANGING GARDEN dissects one of the most dysfunctional families 
ever to appear on the silver screen.  It is by turns engrossing, 
horrifying, shocking, eccentric, and pretentious. In order to tell the 
entire story, the film moves back and forth through three different time 
frames.  There are overlaps in the periods, with characters from the 
past slipping into their future.  It's up to the viewer to determine 
whether they're real or imaginary – ghosts or physical embodiments of 
guilt and responsibility.  THE HANGING GARDEN opens in the present, with 
the wedding of Rosemary (Kerry Fox, last seen in WELCOME TO SARAJEVO) 
and Fletcher (Joel S. Keller).  It also marks the return home of Sweet 
William (Chris Leavens), Rosemary's brother, after a lengthy absence.  
William's appearance – he's thin and handsome – surprises everyone, 
since, when he left home as a teenager, he was grossly overweight.  Now, 
having started a new life away from his abusive father, he has learned 
to embrace his homosexuality and to like himself.  Also on hand for the 
wedding are the abusive father, Mac (Peter MacNeill); Rosemary and 
William's mother, Iris (Seana McKenna); their dotty old grandmother, 
Grace (Joan Orenstein); and their little sister, tomboy Violet 
(Christine Dunsworth).
     Before long, images from the past rise up to haunt William.  As an 
obese teenager (Troy Veinotte), he began to discover his gay urges one 
night while engaging in some innocent sex play with Fletcher.  Fearing 
that he might not be "normal," Iris arranged for him to have intercourse 
with a local woman who was willing, for a little money, to act as an 
instructor.  Meanwhile, Mac's attitude toward his son was shaped by the 
typical unpredictability of an alcoholic father – loving one moment, 
violent the next.  Only William's closeness with Rosemary (Sarah Polley, 
of THE SWEET HEREAFTER) kept him sane.
     THE HANGING GARDEN is brimming with symbolism.  Most of the 
characters – Sweet William, Rosemary, Violet, Iris – are named after the 
plants that grow in the family's extensive, well-groomed garden.  Each 
of the names says something significant about the person who bears it.  
Sweet William is vulnerable, Rosemary is biting, Violet is resilient, 
and Iris is proud and regal.  There's also a great deal of religious 
imagery, most of which is used to emphasize guilt (especially William's 
concerning his sexual urges).  On a number of occasions, the eyes of a 
Virgin Mary statue are seen to move.
     THE HANGING GARDEN  is not plot intensive, although the story 
offers at least one unexpected revelation (we anticipate a "surprise" 
concerning this plot element, but not the one that comes to light).  
Rather, it's about the characters -- how they interact and how the 
consequences of long-age actions have irrevocably altered their 
personalities.  From her teen years into her twenties, Rosemary has 
remained the same person (the performances of Fox and Polley, who work 
to match their presentations of Rosemary's mannerisms and personality, 
allow us to always see the character, not the actresses).  Sweet 
William, on the other hand, is vastly different in appearance, 
confidence level, and his ability to cope with the misery of his 
adolescent existence.  The watershed moment in William's life is THE 
HANGING GARDEN's central mystery.  Fitzgerald handles all of this 
difficult material like a pro (only occasionally going overboard with 
flashes of pretentiousness), displaying a distinctive visual style, and 
injecting a fair amount of humor into what is, in essence, a tragic tale 
about abuse, misunderstanding, and love gone awry.  THE HANGING GARDEN 
is a memorable debut.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."
