Title
Review for Tromeo and Juliet (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Holiday Bob
I was lucky enough to be able to go to the premiere of "Tromeo and Juliet"
last night at the UCLA Film Archives.  They had a junk-food reception
beforehand, and a lot of the people involved with the film were there.
The movie is amazing!  It is definitely the best "extreme" film I ve ever
seen, and I think it will be an all-time cult classic.  The weird thing
for me is how much better this is than other Troma movies, twice as good
as anything coming out of that company, including "The Toxic Avenger,"
which is the only one of their films I sort of like as an actual film.  I
met three or four people from the movie, including one of the leads, and
was telling them this.  They said the reason it s so good is because the
credited director, Lloyd Kaufman, isn t the actual director.  The actual
director is James Gunn, who only gets co-screenwriting credit, and
whatever an "associate director" is supposed to be.  If you ve ever been
to Troma s web site, you know this guy because his name s plastered all
over it. 
Whatever the case, "Tromeo and Juliet" really shows that it was directed
by someone besides the person who directed "Sgt. Kabukiman."  And Gunn
obviously has a thousand times more talent than Kaufman.   The movie s
coming out Thanksgiving into theaters here in L.A., and I guess I think it
would be sort of a sin for anyone who says that they re into extreme
movies not to check it out.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Tromeo and Juliet (1995) *1/2 out of ***** - Written by: James Gunn and
Lloyd Kaufman. Directed by: Lloyd Kaufman. Running Time: 102 minutes
How can I review a film which is supposed to be bad? Troma Films' "Tromeo
and Juliet" is a twisted spin (and twisted really isn't a strong enough
word) on the classic Shakespeare story (guess which one). One thing I
usually grade a film on is: Does the film succeed in doing what it is trying
to do? Technically yes, it tries to be bad and succeeds. By that, "Tromeo
and Juliet" should get a perfect rating. But I just can't do that. So I use
another of my grading criteria: Does the film entertain? No, for the most
part it does not.
I assume fans of Troma films will delight in the film's use of nudity,
cartoonish gore, lesbianism, bondage, incest, toe-sucking, nipple-piercing
(on camera no less), animal mutilation, profanity, drug use, and vomiting.
Call me crazy, but most of those things just don't appeal to me.
I will give the film credit in a couple areas. There are three characters in
the film who have such a high level of energy that they are fairly
entertaining, and the actor's portraying them are decent. They provide a few
laughs. Also, I must admit that I've never seen anything like someone's
stomach swelling up, and then bursting open to reveal fresh yummy popcorn to
the delight of others who are in the scene at the time. Bizarre? Of course,
but that's Troma.
On the down side, there's constant Troma product placements which
immediately get irritating. Also, the actor playing the lead role of Tromeo
is borderline repulsive to watch. And mainly, I'm all for campy fun, but
countless scenes involve incestuous relations between Juliet and her father,
not exactly what I'd consider fun to watch. The scenes aren't even played
campy. But again, I guess that's Troma. The best part of the film is the
closing credits, and no, not just because the film is over. They're done in
the "Airplane" style, and a couple of them are worth a chuckle or two. [R]
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related links, and reader's reviews.
