Title
Review for Love & Sex (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
"Love is a minefield," Kate (Famke Janssen, Dr. Jean Gray in X-MEN) 
tells us in the introduction to LOVE & SEX.  "You take a step and are 
blown to pieces."  
This philosophical film by writer/director Valerie Breiman would have 
been more aptly titled REFLECTIONS ON RELATIONSHIPS, but, of course, the 
current title is a more marketable one.  Love and sex there is, but the 
characters spend more time discussing the twin subjects than engaging in 
them.  And when it comes to sex, Janssen would appear to have a 
no-nudity clause in her contract, since she stays partially clothed in 
situations which would much more naturally be engaged in without 
underwear.
Although most of the staging never quite rings true, the movie does 
commendably place both of the leads in real jobs that they actually go 
to.  Most cinematic characters appear to live off of some off-screen 
sugar daddy, permitting them to live without the toils of work.
Kate is a cubicle dweller at the headquarters of a women's magazine 
named "Monique."  Kate's only honest piece of writing -- about oral sex 
as a cure for depression -- is rejected by the magazine's eponymous 
owner, played without emotion by Ann Magnuson.  
"They say 'you have to kiss a lot of frogs to get a prince,'" Kate tells 
us before finding hers, an avant-garde painter named Adam (Jon Favreau, 
the crazy cop in THE REPLACEMENTS) who likes to paint things like a 
woman with a severed head coming out of her rear.  As her fourteenth man 
and his fourth woman -- these numbers are featured prominently in the 
storyline -- Adam and Kate form an instant relationship based on caustic 
wit.  He, for example, likes to call her by her school nickname of 
"horse face" and takes great delight in ridiculing her big feet.
"Hey, I believe in relationships.  Mine are just short ones," Kate 
explains to Adam after he finds out that he's number 14 on her 
relationship dance card.  "You're like a whore!" he tells her.  They 
have the sort of strange chemistry whereby they both think that it's 
funny that he calls her a whore.  They also enjoy sharing bedtime 
flatulence.
As they compete in the insults derby, in which he always wins, Adam and 
Kate become best friends.  They love arguing.  He tries to prove that 
men age better than women by asking, "Who's better looking: Sean Connery 
or Shelley Winters?" 
The supporting cast of Kate's various other boyfriends includes Josh 
Hopkins as a Robert De Niro-obsessed porn star and Noah Emmerich as 
Eric, her number two.  Like the rest of the reflective characters, Eric 
is full of dating suggestions.  "Scheduled spontaneity is the key to 
long-term love," he says.
As witty as the script is, the direction is way off the mark.  The cast 
almost uniformly suffers from a bad of case of low energy.  Scenes seem 
designed more for cuteness than believability.  And never is the 
chemistry between Adam and Kate genuine, which is the kiss of death for 
a romantic comedy.
Although the movie has some wonderfully acerbic moments and some 
insightful parts, it is basically forgettable fluff.  You'll kind of 
enjoy it while you're there, but after you leave you'll wonder why you 
ever bothered.  
LOVE & SEX runs just 1:22.  It is rated R for language and sexual 
situations and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
        Speaking from the story perspective, _Love_&_Sex_ doesn't cover
much of anything that hadn't already been addressed in other romantic
comedies.  But at the center of writer-director Valerie Breiman's
Sundance crowdpleaser are the special qualities that would make the most
familiar scenario completely fresh: a breakthrough performance by star
Famke Janssen; and sparkling chemistry with her leading man, Jon Favreau.
        Janssen, most widely known for the empowered female types she's
played in films such as _X-Men_ and especially _GoldenEye_, is a
revelation as Kate Wells, magazine writer and perpetual screw-up in the
ways of romance.  In a role that for once neither relies on her imposing
physicality nor stunning beauty, Janssen reveals a beguiling
vulnerability and wonderful comic flair as Kate revisits her romantic and
sexual misadventures while attempting to write an article about finding
the perfect man--a subject that could not be more foreign to her.  Nearly
every one of Kate's stabs at romance has ended in disaster, from her
first crush in elementary school to a fling with a married man, with an
ill-advised dalliance with her high school French teacher taking place
somewhere in between.
        But there was one man who could have very well been "it"--Adam
Levy (Favreau), an artist with whom Kate has had her most rewarding and
least dysfunctional relationship.  Favreau, who was most recently
stripped of his innate likability as a one-dimensional tough guy in
_The_Replacements_, reminds why his big splash, _Swingers_, remains an
indie fave nearly four years after its initial release.  Sporting an
unruly haircut with scruffy sideburns and often wearing paint-stained
casual wear, his Adam certainly doesn't look like a typical movie leading
man--but Favreau's portrayal nails down harder-to-achieve allure: low-key
confidence and a down-to-earth, playful sense of humor.
        That latter area is where Kate and Adam, Janssen and Favreau, and
Breiman and the audience really connect.  There is a sense of fun when
these two are together, and not the artificially sunny type of movie
happiness; just as doing a typically awkward striptease in front of a
camcorder is good for a laugh, so are more grounded moments like pointing
out each other's physical flaws; nonchalantly doing what would normally
be embarrassing in the comfort of bed; and coming up with knowingly dumb
yet intimately special terms like "I cheese sandwich you."
        But as the film reveals from the beginning, this relationship
turns sour as well, and here Breiman also runs into some trouble. 
Numerous situations come out of the school of sitcom contrivance, such as
Kate and Adam trying to make each other jealous by fawning over others;
and an all-too-coincidental bump-in between Kate, Adam, and his new
girlfriend at a movie theatre.
        Those are just the most familiar moments in _Love_&_Sex_, which
indeed takes a few more steps on a well-worn cinematic path.  However,
the success of films like these is largely dependent on the stars, and
with Favreau and especially Janssen--who should find a host of even more
varied acting opportunities open to her after this--striking real sparks,
_Love_&_Sex_ is an engaging and satisfying love story that deserves to
break out of the arthouse pack.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Christopher Null
     But fear not the women's romantic comedy, gentle readers.  While
Love & Sex won't win any Oscars or many hearts, it's a capable movie
worth a chuckle or two.
     Famke Janssen (recently seen in X-Men) stars as Kate, a somewhat
hapless fashion-rag journalist looking for love in the big city of Los
Angeles.  Only she's "complicated," - and not to mention, like, eight
feet tall - so no guy "understands" her.  That is, except for artist
Adam (Swingers' Jon Favreau), a sort of L.A. version of a Woody Allen
neurotic, the kind of guy who obsesses over a woman, jumps out of the
relationship when it slows down, and of course immediately regrets his
decision.  Adam's stalker-like behavior with Kate becomes a focus for
the film, with the pair meeting periodically to tear out their
respective hair.
     First-time writer/director Valerie Breiman has made an often funny
but always scattered picture in Love & Sex.  Kate's endless
quest-for-love saga is pretty obviously drawn from Breiman's own life,
which probably explains why the movie is all over the map:  She's just
giving us the high points, the ones that might make for good jokes.
     To bad for Janssen that Favreau gets all the good lines. 
Singlehandedly he makes Love & Sex watchable, carrying it through the
rocky comic moments (first date, strip tease, etc.) and past the few
dramatic cliches these movies always seem to have (hint: she's
pregnant).  For her part, Janssen looks so much like Sandra Bullock in
this movie that it's disturbing.
     Fortunately, Janssen and Favreau have enough chemistry to mostly
carry Love & Sex through its rocky moments... of which, there are quite
a few.
Director: Valerie Breiman
Producer: Timothy Scott Bogart, Martin J. Barab, Brad Wyman, Mark Damon
Writer: Valerie Breiman
Starring: Famke Janssen, Jon Favreau, Noah Emmerich, Cheri Oteri, Ann
Magnuson
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review can be found at
http://www.moviereviews.org/love_and_sex.htm ---
---Mac VerStandig's coverage of the 2000 Florida Film Festival can be found
at http://www.moviereviews.org/florida_film_festival_2000.htm ---
`I know ten times more about blowjobs than I do about relationships' insists
Kate Welles (Famke Janssen) in the opening moments of `Love and Sex.' Over
the course of the next 75 minutes, Kate will experience one gigantic
epiphany consisting of numerous smaller realizations and will emerge, hardly
to the viewer's surprise, with a full grasp on the nature of relationships.
Yet, dull and predictable as such an inherently mawkish premise might sound,
the film is actually an oftentimes cute and humorous piece that should be
much easier for couples to cuddle up to than the recently similar `High
Fidelity.'
In Kate's life can be found shades of `American Beauty's' Lester Burnham
(Kevin Spacey). She works at a popular woman's magazine, is decidedly fed up
with her job and pens article after article that she recognizes to be phony.
Her boss is referred to as `the antichrist' and is preparing to fire Kate
over her current piece. The article in question, originally supposed to be a
commentary on the pleasures of oral sex, turned into a how-to on performing
effective fellatio; Kate refers to it as `a blow by blow' description.
However, unlike Lester's approach of trying to solve his problems at home
with each day being a new beginning, Kate decides to do like `High Fidelity'
s' protagonist, Rob (John Cusack), and first reconcile her romantic past.
The movie comes fully equipped with bite-size romantic philosophies like
`scheduled spontaneity is the key to long term love' and `we [fall in love]
for one reason: nothing in the world makes us feel better.' Such one-liners
do help the movie work on multiple levels and progress forward although you
can oftentimes tell that such hokey comments are the product of a
screenwriter who probably worked late nights.
The film seems to have no qualms allowing its characters to engage in some
very public displays of affection. Yet, the filmmakers seem inexplicably
scared to go `all the way' and instead opt for a very unsettling lack of
nudity. Films like this and `An Affair of Love' simply aggravate audiences
with continuous sexual lingo yet no genuine sexual content. If a movie's
purpose is to show the true nature of intimate relationships, which `Love
and Sex's' apparently is, then the reality of nudity should be welcomed, not
dismissed with such awkward tactics as the infamous `L' shaped covers which
reach just over a man's groin area yet extend over a woman's breasts.
Fortunately, the film's lead actress, Famke Jannsen, does have sex appeal.
She comes across as a blend of Julia Roberts and Sandra Bullock with her
only noticeable physical flaw being a slightly too-long forehead. However,
most importantly, the young actress seems human and doesn't yet have the
jaded movie-star look that separates sex appeal from sex symbolism among
Hollywood's leading ladies.
At one point in the film, Kate and her primary boyfriend, Adam (Jon Favreau
who is a dead ringer for Jeremy Piven) argue over what to rent at a video
store. Kate favors a tear jerking foreign film while Adam endorses a movie
about topless ninjas. `Love and Sex' would be the perfect compromise.
