Title
Review for Hook (1991)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Brian L. Johnson
140 min., PG, Fantasy, 1991
Director: Steven Spielburg
Cast: Robin Williams, Dustin Hoffman, Julia Roberts, Bob Hoskins,
      Maggie Smith, Charlie Korsmo, Phil Collins, David Crosby, Glenn Close
     A retelling of the widely known fantasy Peter Pan.  This one,
though, has a big twist to it, Peter Pan (going by the name Peter
Banning) is now grown up and is a very successful business man.  So
successful, in fact, that he has no time for his family and has
forgotten about his childhood.  For Christmas, Peter, his wife, and two
children, go to London to visit Wendy.  Wendy has to go and give a
speech and Peter and his wife go with her.  They leave their children
alone in Wendy's house.  When they get back they find the house in
shambles and the children missing.  Attached to the bedroom door, with a
knife, is a note saying that if Peter ever wants to see his children
again he must come to get them, and it is signed Hook.  Peter must
journey to Never Never Land to try to remember his childhood and save
his children.
     HOOK is one of the best films I have seen in a long time!  The
special effects are well done and the story, except in a couple of
places, is very well done.  Those few spots when the script was lacking
didn't hinder my enjoyment of the film though.  The soundtrack, done by
John Williams, fits the film perfectly.  I definitely recommend that you
venture out to your local movie theater and see this film, even at full
price.  On a zero to five scale I give the film a five.  HOOK is rated
PG for explicit language and violence, but is perfectly acceptable to
bring the whole family to.
     Robin Williams plays Peter Pan and does a relatively good job.  As
Peter Banning, Robin Williams did a perfect job.  It was like the role
was written for him, a serious businessman who takes phone calls during
his daughter's play (of "Peter Pan," of course) but yet still finds time
to have fun, like dueling with cellular phones.  As Peter Pan, though,
something was missing.  He didn't quite fit the role.  Over all he did a
very good job, to the best of his abilities, which is the most you can
ask of someone.  And Robin Williams in green tights is a sight to see.
     Dustin Hoffman portrays the ultimate evil, Captain Hook.  He makes
Hook into an evil person but with some compassion.  For instance,
instead of just killing Peter Pan in the beginning when Peter can't
fight, Hook waits to give Peter a chance to make himself a better fighter
so Peter can have a chance.  Part of the reason for this, I am sure, was
to make Captain Hook seem not so scary to little children (I don't know
how well that worked because I went to the 9:30 PM showing and there were
no little children in the audience).  At times Hook will seem a to do
things a little odd, but if you just accept it, it will make the movie
run smoothly and thus makes the movie more enjoyable for you.  At some
spots in the film the script, the lines for Captain Hook could have been
written a little better, but Dustin Hoffman covers quite well in the
slow spots.  Overall Dustin Hoffman puts in a memorable performance.
     Julia Roberts plays TinkerBell, Peter Pan's friend fairy.
Although Julia Roberts would not have been my first choice for the role,
she, like everybody else in the movie, put in a very good performance.
In most of her scenes she was edited in, so she was seen with Peter Pan
or some of the Lost Boys, very effectively.  With the props used I found
myself believing that Julia Roberts was really that small in real life
which means that the special effects in the film are very good.  In my
opinion, TinkerBell is one of the most important roles in HOOK (second
to Peter Pan and Captain Hook) which means that the performance put out
by the actress is very important, and Julia lived up to my expectations.
     Maggie Smith plays Wendy, now grown to the age of eighty-something.
She remembers the days before Peter Pan grew up and when he decided to
grow up she helped him find a home, along with many of the Lost Boys.
In fact the speech she is giving is because she is being honored for her
work with children, which included finding homes for some of the Lost
Boys.  I don't have much to say for Maggie Smith's performance for she
is not on the screen very much but when she is she does a very good job.
Her character provides the sensitivity and compassion that Peter's kids
need and she is also the person who tries to explain to Peter who he
really is, but to no avail.
     Bob Hoskins portrays Smee, Captain Hook's right hand man.  He is
the brains behind most of Captain Hook's devious schemes to capture the
Lost Boys and to kill Peter Pan.  He is not given a chance though to
really express how he feels because Captain Hook steps in when ever he
tries.  Bob Hoskins role was not written so the character would be
really remembered after the film.  He was there mostly, I feel, because
he was in the original Peter Pan story, and for occasional comic relief.
     Charlie Korsmo (of DICK TRACY fame) plays Peter Pan's male child
and I missed who plays Peter's female child.  The two combined put in
good a performance, always fighting and playing, especially when Daddy
is on the phone trying to speak about some important business
information.  But apart the two don't do nearly as well, as proven
towards the end of the film.  Korsmo is a child that has a hard time
forgiving his dad after he has been let down, and this anger towards his
dad becomes very important towards the end of the film.  Peter's
daughter, on the other hand, is quick to forgive her dad, partially, I
feel, because she realizes even though he messes up he still loves her
very much.
     Pop singer Phil Collins shows up for a brief cameo as a police
detective that arrives at Wendy's house to investigate the missing
children.  David Crosby (of Crosby, Stills, and Nash) is one of Captain
Hook's fun loving pirates and, like Phil Collins, doesn't show up very
often in the film.  Glenn Close also shows up for a brief cameo in the
film.
     The biggest mistake in the writing of the film, I feel, is how the
Lost Boys were handled.  Most of Never Never Land has remained the same
way it was from when Peter Pan was there, but for some reason some of
the Lost Boys have been changed to the current times.  The new leader of
the Lost Boys has a punk hairdo and rides around on sort of a skate
board that runs on tracks.  The Lost Boys hide out has been equipped
with a basketball court, and a skate board rink even!  I feel that the
Lost Boys should have been left alone.  Some of the Lost Boys, on the
other hand, were unchanged in the ways that they act and are dressed.
     The sets were really well made, especially the ones for
TinkerBell.  They also really portrayed the fact that Peter Pan was no
longer in the regular world, but in a world that for the most part is
behind the "civilized" world.  The major set mistake was the Lost Boys
hide out.  The Lost Boys hideout is a giant tree on a raised island.
From the far shots the island looks really small, but when the people
are in the hideout, the hideout seems to stretch out for miles.  Also,
how do the Lost Boys make it onto the island.  Never in the film do the
Lost Boys fly and I am sure that they don't always go up the way Peter
did, by a giant sea shell that was raised from the ocean.
     The way the end of the film was handled was predictable and a
little disappointing.  I think that the most effort in a script should
go towards the ending, because for me the ending of a film makes it, or
breaks it.  Almost at the very end the script picks back up again and
just when you think that it has recovered it totally loses it with a
scene with.
     Other than these few mistakes, which you barely even notice when
watching the film, the film is very, very good.  Steven Spielberg's
directing was also very well done.  So run out to the movie theater to
see the film, but allow yourself plenty of time for the movie might sell
out early, and this is one not to miss.

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     A few weeks ago, Robin Williams joked, "Hey, HOOK stars the stars
of ISHTAR and POPEYE and was directed by the man who brought you 1941,
so it has a history of people familiar with bombs."
     HOOK isn't a complete dud, but it's disappointing given the amount
of hype its gotten.
     HOOK has a great premise: What if Peter Pan grew up?  According to
an article in PREMIERE magazine, the premise popped out of the mouth of
the six-year-old son of the scriptwriter one day.  IMHO, most of the
problems in the film relate to the script and the direction.  Most of
the magic in the film is the credit of the art direction team, who
created a phenomenal Never-Never Land, and the special effects team, who
orchestrated some terrific flying.
     There's a long opening sequence in California showing what a
work-obsessed Yuppie Peter Banning (Robin Williams) is.  There's a lot
of unneeded setup between the time the movie opens, and the time a very
elderly Wendy (a winning performance by Maggie Smith) tells Peter that
"you are Peter Pan."  This sequence could have been minimized because
Peter's troubled relationship with his kids is done-to-death once
Captain Hook spirits the kids to Never-Never Land.
     Once TinkerBell drags Peter off to Never-Never Land to rescue his
kids, the action picks up, but only slightly.  There's some lovely
business around Hook realizing what a mundane dud Peter is now, and how
TinkerBell promises Hook to get Peter in to shape for a proper war.
     I've already mentioned that the movie has a lot of extraneous stuff
in it, but there are also a few inexplicable edits in it (okay, you can
attribute these inexplicable things to "magic," but still...).  One
weird quick cut shows Peter being hoisted into the Lost Boys treehouse,
but you never know *who* does it.  There are also some "magical" costume
changes.
     The biggest misstep of the movie was its handling of the Lost Boys.
Spielberg often does a great job directing one or two children at a
time, but the writing and direction of the Lost Boys stunk.  Most of the
boys were updated into punky or overly cute American kids.  It just felt
wrong.  There were too many "cute shots" of the kids, and a lot of
incredibly crude language at times.  Peter's acceptance by the boys was
tentative at first, but once Peter started believing in himself, they
started believing in him.
     One writing/directing problem in this movie is the same problem
that plagued 1941: You can see *everything* coming miles away.  There
are few surprises.  Also, there are two sequence that scream "THEME PARK
RIDE!"  I had this same feeling from THE ADDAMS FAMILY, where some stuff
felt like it was added to the movie for the sole purpose of being
developed into a theme park ride.
     I haven't talked about the acting of the main characters, and I
guess its because I have such mixed feelings about it.  IMHO, Peter Pan
is a role Robin Williams was born to play, but he almost does a better
job as Peter Banning, mundane, than Peter Pan, the eternal child.  While
Dustin Hoffman doesn't chew the scenery as Hook, he wavers wildly
between being a buffoon and being quite terrifying.  Charlie Korsimo is
alternately affecting and obnoxious as Peter's son Jack.  The girl who
plays the daughter, Maggie, is cute and spirited.  Julia Roberts is fine
as TinkerBell, but her performance seemed strange, and it just might
have been because she rarely acted *with* anyone.  They aren't terrible,
but they appeared to wear their characters like clothing.  On the other
hand, Bob Hoskins is wonderful as Smee, as is the actor who plays
Toodles, another aged Lost Boy.  Look for Phil Collins, David Crosby,
and Glenn Close in cameos.
     The essential problem with the script is it can't decide if its an
overblown fairy tale, or if it's a serious movie about parents and
children.  There are some genuinely affecting moments in the movie, but
there are other times when I felt blatantly manipulated.  So I think
that is where HOOK fails the most----if you can really get in to a
movie, you don't feel manipulated.
     In short, HOOK isn't a bomb, but it just doesn't deliver very much.
If you like the trappings of a film you might like it because there's a
lot to admire about the production.  Unfortunate, it doesn't include the
script.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
"Magical" may be a good word to describe quite a few of Steven Spielberg's
films. He's notorious for elaborately done flicks, which are often fresh and
visually superior to the run-of-the-mill movies coming out all the time.
"Magical" can also be used to describe the world of fairy tales and legends
we've all come to know and love as children. So what happens when the two
meet? HOOK - and it's a delightful result.
HOOK asks the question, "what if Peter Pan grew up?" Simple, to the point,
and very intriguing. HOOK begins in modern-day America as Peter Blanning
(Robin Williams, excellently cast), a workaholic father of two, is taking his
family back to London where he grew up. No, it's not a vacation, and we soon
learn that it probably never would be since Peter can't get away from the
demands of his office. The real reason they are heading across seas is to
attend a special dinner in honor of Wendy Darling (Maggie Smith), the
"mother" of orphaned Peter and several others. We also quickly learn that
Peter's family relationship has suffered considerably due to his 25 hour
business days. He misses his son's soccer games, he pays more attention to
his cellular phone than his daughter's performance in a play, and although
it's never addressed, he probably hasn't made love to his wife in months.
While in London, the temperatures continue to rise (metaphorically speaking).
Even on the other side of the Atlantic, Peter can't get away from pressing
business matters and non-stop phone calls. Nonetheless, Peter, his wife Moira
(Caroline Goodall), and Granny Wendy head off to the award banquet, leaving
the two children in care of some no name maid (or something - Hell, I don't
know). While they're gone, tragedy strikes. Jack and Maggie (Charlie Korsmo
and Amber Scott respectively), the two kids, get kidnapped by none other than
Captain James Hook (Dustin Hoffman).
Naturally everybody freaks out and Phil Collins shows up playing a police
officer. Sorry folks, no rock video forms here. The only evidence left behind
is a note nailed, well actually "sworded" to the bedroom door from Captain
Hook. It seems ole' Hook wants a rematch with his "only worthy opponent", and
he's going to use the kids to make sure he gets it! 
This is where things get interesting: Granny Wendy *is* the Wendy from the
beloved fairytales! And, as she explains to Peter, he *is* actually thee
Peter Pan. One day, long ago, Peter Pan never returned to Never-Never Land
(tongue twister, ain't it?) and finally grew up. But because Peter became
Peter Blanning and blacked out that part of his memory, it's as much as shock
to him as it is to us (in theory). And so, with nothing more to really be
done, Peter ends up flying the friendly skies back to Never-Never Land to
reclaim his children.
HOOK is actually quite an admirable film and, with a couple of exceptions,
couldn't have been cast better. Williams plays both Blanning and Pan to a T.
They could *not* have found a better man (or woman for that matter - think
Mary Martin). Hoffman *is* Captain Hook, mixing the perfect amount of evil
and cowardice to the role while Smith, Korsmo, Scott, and Bob Hoskins as Smee
are all wonderful and damn-near flawless. It's Julia Roberts as Tinkerbell
that really sinks and stinks. She's annoying and although she's probably
supposed to maintain a sense of youth and playfulness being a pixie and all,
she comes off more like some kid overly eager to charm us. Then again, when
most of your lines are spoken to yourself, it could be mighty hard to play
off of.
The sets and effects here are another delight. Seemingly simplistic at first,
the Never-Never Land sets add quite a bit of depth and realism to the film,
making it fun to watch as Peter re-discovers his true homeland. And while the
special effects are not those of flashy sci-fi movies, they are quite well
done and a pleasure to watch.
HOOK doesn't quite hold enough to be deemed a classic, but it does rise high
above mediocrity with it's dynamic acting, captivating cinematography, and an
enchanting musical score by John Williams. All of that tops off a richly
intriguing plot with a definitive hook (pun heavily intended). If you're
looking for some good family fare, this might just do you in!

Author
John Wagner
     (Two Hollywood scriptwriters meet in a restaurant.  Number One
works for Steven Spielberg's organization; Number Two for another major
studio.  Number One sits down at Number Two's table, brandishing a
heavily-pencilled typewritten manuscript of a film script.)
ONE: Hey there, dude!  Que pasa?  Listen, is the Spielberg
     organization hot, or is it hot?
ONE: Yeah, we just had a major script conference, with the Marketing
     and Customer Profile people there and *everything*.
     Mr. Spielberg even showed up.
TWO: Wow, it *must* have been important.  What's the project?  Can
     you talk about it?
ONE: Talk about it?  Hell, man, we want this leaked to every major
     paper in the country.  This is *the* number-one idea of the
     Nineties!  It's a heartwarming film that'll make the whole
     family laugh, cry, and feel good about themselves!
ONE: Even better, man!  Here, have a look at the script yourself;
     I'll give you a rundown.  (Hands the thick manuscript across
     the table).
ONE: No, Pan, Peter Pan.  P-A-N.  Anyway, get this:  He leaves
     Neverneverland, grows up, and becomes an American corporation
     lawyer!
TWO: (Aghast)  What?  You're shitting me!  This is some kind of
     parody, right?  Like AIRPLANE?
ONE: Get with the program, man!  This is a major creative
     breakthrough!  See, he's married now -- to Wendy's granddaughter
     -- and he's got a couple of adorable, precocious kids just like
     the ones in E. T., and he's a borderline alcoholic...
ONE: ...yeah, and so totally dedicated to his job that he's, like,
     losing touch with his family.
TWO: (Leafing through the manuscript) From the way these kids are
     written, I don't blame him.  'Precocious' is hardly the word
     for it.  Don't you guys over there at Amblin ever get to meet
     any *real* children?  Kids don't act or talk like this.  Not
     without a team of writers handy, anyway.
ONE: Aw, don't be so literal-minded, man!  We're just bringing out
     the true heart and soul of the child in all of us.
TWO: (Suspiciously) Where did you get *that* line?
ONE: It's on the sign over Mr. Spielberg's office.  Anyway,
     Peter's wife goes with him on a business trip to London...
TWO: Yeah, and what >about

ONE: Look, they're *married*, for Christ's sake!  What do you think
     this is, a *romance* or something?
TWO: Well, you might at least have made her a more interesting
     person.  She doesn't seem to be much more than someone for
     the kids to call "mommy."  From what I see here, you've made
     her a cross between Betty Crocker and a botched Anne Murray
     clone.
ONE: Motherhood is what brings a tear to the eye of every right-
     thinking American family, you goddam coldhearted cynic.  Our
     Market Research group says statistical surveys bear it out.
     Anyway, there'll be a big John Williams crescendo behind it
     every time the little tykes coo "mommy," and that's all the
     characterization she needs.
TWO: Okay, okay.  Hmmm... I see that Peter has somehow managed to
     forget who he is, and that he used to live in Neverland.  But
     nobody else from Neverland seems to have that problem when
     they visit our world.  How come?
ONE: Just because, that's all.  Look, it's a fantasy; you've got to
     have suspension of disbelief.  Don't you have *any* imagination?
TWO: Let it pass.  Let's see...  Tinkerbell takes Peter back to
     Neverland, and the Lost Boys...  Hey!  The way you describe
     the Lost Boys in here, they sound like a bunch of American
     kids from some urban street gang.  Even spiky haircuts and
     skateboards! What the hell?
ONE: (Disdainful) Well, *sure*.  I mean, this is the nineties,
     man!  You don't expect audiences to identify with a bunch of
     turn-of-the-century Limey urchins, do you?  We've got to have
     broad-based audience appeal.  You'll notice that the Boys are
     an ethnically-diverse group, too: A prominent percentage of
     blacks, Asians, and Hispanics.  Their leader is even a street-
     smart ethnic kid called Rubio.
TWO: But the Lost Boys, in the original story, were from *England*,
     not Los Angeles!  You're trying to Americanize -- hell,
     *Californianize* -- the whole setting.  Jesus, here you've got
     Captain Hook's pirates playing *Baseball*!  (With sudden
     suspicion)  Hey, do the Lost Boys at least have British accents?
ONE: Don't be such a stickler for petty details; American audiences
     don't care about this stuff.  Now, look here, how the Lost Boys
     get Peter back into shape after Hook kidnaps Peter's kids...
TWO: Why did Hook kidnap them?  How did he know Peter would be in
     London, especially seeing how Peter doesn't even know his own
     identity?  And how did he get to our world and back?
ONE: Aw, man, there you go again!  No imagination!  I'm telling you,
     *suspension of disbelief*!  Get in touch with your inner child,
     and stop whining about every little unimportant thing.  Just
     let the wonder and magic of the story carry you along.  The
     important thing is that Pete saves his little ones, brings
     them back home to Mommy, and never returns to Neverland again.
TWO: (Amazed) He comes *back* to this world?  What for?  Neverland
     is a magic world full of delight and wonder and adventure,
     where no one ever gets old and dies.  Why would he come *back*
     once he knew the way?  If he's so crazy about Mom and the kids,
     why not bring *them* over?
ONE: Oh, nonononono!  Movie characters *never* choose immortality and
     magic over their everyday lives.  They've always got to decide
     that the life they've got right here at home is the best of all
     possible worlds.  If we were to imply otherwise, audiences might
     be dissatisfied with their own lives, and a dissatisfied audience
     is an unhappy audience that doesn't go out and tell their friends
     to see the film.  Immortality is a taboo subject anyway.  You
     can't have it in real life, so you've got to make it look
     undesirable on film.
TWO: Well, okay, but it still sounds to me as if you're just trying
     to glorify the American upper-middle-class yuppie lifestyle.
ONE: *Now* you're seeing the light, dude!  All those aging Baby
     Boomers with adorable little kiddies of their own are just
     going to *flock* to this one!  Market Research says it'll even
     out-pull E.T.!
TWO: (Flipping through more pages, skimming the dialogue) Now
     *here's* something intriguing, that really rings true:  This
     part where Tinkerbell reveals that she's in love with Peter.
     And she's a good, strong character, with depth and a certain
     complexity.  (Proceeds a few pages more)  Oh, hell -- you have
     Peter refuse her love because he wants to remain true to Mommy;
     I mean, his wife.  That might be believable if you'd made the
     wife a real person, with some sort of dimension, but as she's
     written, she's about as interesting as a slice of white bread.
     You're trying to say that Peter would find this insipid wimp
     so fascinating that he doesn't even *consider* an intelligent,
     unique woman like Tinkerbell?  Come on!
ONE: Listen, you degenerate, you're talking about *adultery*, maybe
     even *bigamy*!  This is a *family* film, and the sanctity of
     the American Family Unit is the product -- I mean *premise* --
     of this picture.  Peter's wife is a Devoted Mother, and he
     wouldn't even *think* of betraying her!  The juvenile lures of
     Neverland have no attraction for Peter.  He only wants to get
     back to the rewarding warmth of his family.  His sense of
     *responsibility* carries him away from such childish temptations.
TWO: Oh, really?  But it looks to me like an overdeveloped sense of
     responsibility is what turned him into such a boozy, burned-out
     workaholic to begin with.  It doesn't make sense to try and
     claim that his experiences in Neverland teach him something
     about the value of responsible behavior.
ONE: (Loftily) The Work Ethic; Willing shouldering of one's obligations;
     the sacrifice of one's personal needs for the greater good of the
     moral community.  These are the foundations of our Kinder, Gentler,
     private-sector, Family-Channel America.  What are you, some kind of
     *hippie* or something?  Amblin Entertainment does not endorse
     self-centered hedonism.  We have a responsibility to reinforce the
     moral outlook of all those ticket-buying, upscale, socially-
     conservative, middle-American baby boomers out there.
TWO: (Sighs wearily) It's only a film; stop trying to make it sound
     like the Sermon on the Mount.
ONE: Don't be irreverent.  Mr. Spielberg has enormous respect for
     mainstream American middle-class values and their preju... er,
     ethical structures.
TWO: Look, I don't care what a picture's moral outlook is; all that
     matters is that it have a coherent, convincing, logical story,
     and that it be internally consistent enough to make me accept it
     on its own terms.  This script doesn't do the job on *any* of
     those requirements.
ONE: Ah, that's because you're just looking at *words*, dude!  We
     are no longer living in your archaic, word-oriented society --
     today's world is *visually* oriented.  Rock videos; visceral
     commercials.  The image is the message.  The *story* isn't
     what's important, it's the totality of the *product*, er, that
     is, the film itself.  First of all (ticks items off on his
     fingers), we've got Industrial Light & Magic doing the megabuck
     special effects.  Old Walt Disney must be spinning in his
     cryogenic vault wishing *he'd* had computer graphics like ours!
     Then there's the John Williams score, which captures all the
     rich magic of his music for STAR WARS and E.T....
ONE: ...right.  But I've saved the best for last:  Get this, dude,
     we have signed *Robin Williams* and *Dustin Hoffman* to play
     Peter and Captain Hook!
TWO: (Thoughtful) Mmmm.  Good choices, no doubt about that.
ONE: 'Good?'  Hell, it's *great*!  We were ready to fall back on
     Michael Keaton if Williams wouldn't make a deal, but everything
     worked out just fine, contract-wise.  I've seen some of the
     early rushes of Hoffman playing Hook, and it's *incredible*!
     I mean, we are looking at possible Oscar material here, baby!
TWO: Well, I can easily believe that; he's quite an amazingly
     versatile guy.  But the presence of one, even two, great
     actors isn't enough to make a film good by itself.  Nor can
     it cover up a ridiculous premise or a silly, illogical, treacly
     script full of saccharine, empty sentimentality in place of
     genuine feeling.  And pyrotechnic technical effects won't cover
     up lack of a story either, even with a John Williams score to
     dramatize them.
ONE: Story, hell!  This film is an *experience*!  Audiences will
     laugh, they'll cry, they'll leave the theater hugging each
     other with ecstatic warmth; it's a heartwarming experience
     that the whole family will love and cherish throughout their
     lives; it's an affirmation of goodness and a triumph of the
     human spirit.
TWO: It's a dumb, shallow story.  And a very expensive dumb, shallow
     movie.
ONE: (Furious) Oh yeah?  Well listen, mister literature-professor-
     type, you think maybe you could do better?
TWO: (Stares vacantly into the salad bar, thinking quickly)  Well,
     there must be a hundred ways that the basic premise could be
     handled in a more believable, adult way.  How about...  Let's
     say, just for the sake of argument, that we keep your idea about
     Peter somehow leaving Neverland and forgetting who he is.  Now
     he's grown up, unhappy in his corporate existence, but divorced,
     alienated from his own children.  His wife has remarried, and
     the kids seem perfectly happy with their stepfather, much to
     his bleak dismay.
     Now Tinkerbell comes along, looking for Peter.  There's some
     kind of crisis in Neverneverland; Captain Hook looks to be
     setting up a pirate dictatorship or something.  She drags him
     back against his will, just like in your version, and gets the
     Lost Boys to bring him up to speed and restore his lost memory.
     (Glares at ONE) And the Lost Boys will be British orphans, just
     like they're supposed to be!
     There are all kinds of wild adventures, with as many neat
     special effects as you can afford, an eventual confrontation
     with Hook, in which he is defeated but not killed, in case you
     want to do a sequel.  In the course of all this, Peter has gone
     from a confused, despised tackling dummy of the Lost Boys to a
     caring father-figure to whom they all look for guidance and
     support -- things that the old, less-experienced Peter couldn't
     give them: also not too far from your version.  But then
     -- how's this? -- he realizes how his obsessions with material
     success were poisoning his relationship with his own children,
     and, in fact, that it was his buried memories of Neverland that
     were making him so unhappy in our everyday world, and leading
     him to the bottle.  Now that he's back where he belongs, so to
     speak, he decides to become a real father to the Lost Boys,
     having learned his lessons.  The love interest with Tinkerbell
     can be allowed to develop, instead of just being raised and
     then clumsily dropped.  There:  The End.  Peter Pan remains a
     legendary, otherworldly figure; everybody lives happily ever
     after, and not a dry eye in the house.  But we've done it with
     real, three-dimensional adult characters, believable, realistic
     child characters, and a coherent, logically-unfolding storyline
     with some depth and character development.
     Of course, that's just one possible alternative approach.  If
     you want to insist on keeping Peter's wife and kids in the
     picture, we could try it this way...
TWO: No, listen, when you start thinking about it, there are a lot of
     interesting possible ways of handling this set of characters and
     situations.  We could maybe go at it from this angle...
ONE: (Frantic) No! Enough!  You call that a *script*?  Where's the
     reaffirmation of Traditional American Family Values?  Where's
     the comforting reassurance that There's No Place Like Home?
     Where's the goddam *moral*?
TWO: What makes you think a story has to have a moral?  Or if it does,
     that the moral has to be trite and simplistic?  I was describing
     a story with *Human* values, not slanted from any special set of
     presuppositions.  Sometimes, you know, 'home' can be a pretty
     unhappy place, one from which it's best to move on, if you've
     got the courage.  It would take skill, talent, and a real feeling
     for genuine emotions to write a script like *that*.  You couldn't
     gloss over the hard parts with a lot of slick, pseudo-sentimental
     cellophane, or swelling violin choruses.
ONE: (Disgusted) You see?  You see?  It's just your kind of cynical,
     jaded negativism that our organization is battling so hard to
     root out of America.  You don't know anything about *real*
     emotion, the kind the Real People out there in the Heartland
     feel!  Well, let me tell you, Mr. Scrooge, our Marketing
     Research department says that *your* kind only amount to 2.31
     percent of the American movie audience!  You can just go right
     back to your books and your creative writing classes while the
     rest of us Real People continue to tug at the bittersweet
     heartstrings of the American Dream!  (Grabs script back, shoves
     it into attache case, and stands angrily)  And furthermore, you
     *pseudo*-intellectual snob, *my* studio's five-year profit curve
     is *twice* the five-year profit curve of *your* studio!
     Good-*bye*! (Storms out of the restaurant)
(TWO sits at the table alone, munching on his sandwich and brushing
spots of ONE's Cream Of Lobster soup off of his shirt sleeves.  A
waiter ambles along and begins clearing away ONE's dishes.)
TWO: Oh, I guess he really wanted me to sort of personally review
     a new movie he's working on.
WAITER: Oh, yeah?  And what's your review?
TWO: (Thinking for a moment)  P-A-N, buddy.  Pan.
