Title
Review for Performance (1970)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
If you like films that challenge every inch of your imagination, body,
spirit and soul, this is the film to see! it is one of the best written,
filmed and spectacular films ever done and one of a kind. Few have really
come close to the complexity of this film, that just about dares you to see
it again, just so you can go look for yet another thread and meaning.
However, this film is not for every one, though it features some of the best
known talent in the world of arts, specially music, which is another
astounding element used so powerfully through out the visual madness of this
film.  This style of musical filming, was adopted by Nicholas Roeg, who is a
master of music timing and spacing, in all of his films.  The passages with
music tend to enhance the film twice fold, rather than just show off a
pasture, or  grandiose sight.  In PERFORMANCE, the music is the enzyme which
carries the  film, while also, being the drug, that confuses you to no end.
This film put Randy Newman ( Long Dead Train ), Merry Clayton ( Gimme
Shelter ) Ry Cooder ( Bootleneck guitar ), Buffy Saint Marie ( Dyed, Dead,
Red ) and Jack Nietzche ( original music, and all musical arrangements ) on
the map as people whose talent and ability would go beyond the mere fancy of
a hit song.
And of course, it had MICK JAGGER in his first film.
This film was first made in late 1966, and early 1967, and was on the shelf
for almost two full years, because Warner Brothers was afraid of how they
could present something so weird, and unusual.  Eventually, the fame of Mick
Jagger, and the success of both Don Cammell and Nicholas Roeg, forced the
studio to release the film, in a version which was at least thirty minutes
shorter for American audiences ( damn it !!! ), because of its sexual
content, in the form of total disregard for nudity, manners, and poor taste
in several scenes.
And one must remember that this film has at least two or three levels
running at all times.  We may be seeing what one person is saying, and
immediately,  a visionary scene happens, which depicts what it is the person
is really  saying, or thinking.  In this sense, the film is extremelly
difficult to  explain, because there are two stories.  One which we may
think is the real  one, and the one which we think is the invisible one, or
the one which is  felt, and not generally worked with.  However, the actions
of both  extremists, the performer ( James Fox ) and the retired rock star
 Mick  Jagger ) are so extreme and off the wall, that it becomes almost
impossible  to define where one level ends, and the next starts.   In
between, it has  amazingly prophetic lines of dialogue, specially to Mick
Jagger ( James  Fox remarks about Mick's make up and effeminate clothing "
.... you'll look  funny when you are forty ... ") which I am sure was not too
pleasing to  Mick, and might still not be.  But his presence, does make the
film really  something else.  And he is in peak form as a performer in this
film ( Memo  From Turner ) and in a scene with some fluorescent lamps on his
hands.
A performer ( hired killer ) is trying to quit his group, after one final
job, who happened to have been an old friend of his, and the wrong one to
mess with. The performer ( James Fox ) tries to change his appearance, and
decides to take up in the Soho flats, where sex, drugs and rock'n'roll are
the mode of living.  While he is on the run, trying to figure out where he
is going to go, he meets a stoned musician ( looks like Hendrix, but isn't )
who is talking  to some one else about the good hits, and stuff one could
find there, and that he had just left the place, because it was too heavy.
The performer, jumps at the chance to hide in a hitherto unknown and
unexpected part of town, where he may succeed at evading his pursuers.
Arriving at the flat where the retired
rock star lives with two women ( Anita Pallenberg - Keith Richards' wife,
and Michelle Bretton - French actress who lived with Mick for a while, who
looked like a twin of Marianne Faithfull ), he requests to rent the room.
He is turned down, but insists.  He finally gets the room.  And the fun
really gets started here.  Amidst much literature, mushrooms, loud music,
and much sexual activity, the story goes every which way, with the performer
trying to get a passport in the mean time.  He goes out in wigs and clothes
provided by the girls.  By the end of the film, he has been found and his
boss is coming to get him, and take him home ( to kill him ).  They show up
on a given day, and come to pick up the performer.  The performer, goes up
to the rock star's
room and plants a bullet on his head ( the camera follows it ) and then
leaves. We only see the wig and body move.  When the car moves off, a face
turns, and ........ we can't give it away.
AND WE ARE STUCK. WHAT.? How the heck...?
There are several hints through the film.  The most obvious one, and
probably the most difficult to explain, is when Anita Pallenberg, amidst one
of the  scenes where they gave the performer several mushrooms ( they are
trying to  find out who he is, and it is this invasion which leads the
performer to kill  the rock star in the end ) and when he inquires about the
rock star, and  why he isn't on the stage, Anita says " ... he's stuck, he's
stuck ... " and  she tells a story about him playing around with mirror
magic ( staring  into a mirror ) and what happened.  She says that " ... he
lost his demon ...  it's out there, somewhere ... " which is harmless enough
for now.  I find  this one of the best clues to this movie.  If one accepts
the premise that  one being has two sides, one evening in a fit of drugs and
bad  meditational experience, the person split in the two obvious parts.
And
one could say that the 'demon' has become the performer ( who has no
history at all, and his boss comments on that ) and the 'real' person is
the rock star.  However, one side without the balancing agent produces
disturbing effects.  For the rock star, it is the inability to find his
spark.  And for the performer, it is his inability to find a relative  piece
of mind, in a world where only violence and hatred persists.  And my
estimation,is that since they are one and the same person, they are doomed
to meet at some point in time.  Since we met them when they were separated,
we do not know, or have a hint as to who is the real person.  When they
meet,
eventually a choice has to be made ( cross roads ) and one will be gone.
In the film, the rock star is the body to go.  However, being that we see
him alive in the end, the one who really went was the performer.  And the
rock star is now reborn, I presume.  End of film.
And you will sit for an hour or two wondering what hit you in the head.
The use of the visual elements, the sensory part of the film, are disturbing
at times, and loving at others.  For example.  The performer is doing one of
his jobs, on a beautiful Bentley ( or Rolls ) and destroys it first with
some acid solution, and then begins shaving the man's head, and torturing
him.  He doesn't kill the guy, but tells him this is a lesson.  The sensory
part of the film shows the performer making love to a woman, the performer
being  birched severely, a woman having an orgasm, and the whipped person
screaming, and a court of law discussing a case ( we hear the judge, and
see his face close up ) and when the deed is done, he leaves.
The sensory parts of the film centered around the rock star, are all geared
towards sex with the two women and the rock star ( a scene mixes everyone in
such a fast paced cut, that it confuses the viewer ), and a preponderance of
drugs.  The dialogue is strong, and unusual important, offering what may be
the hints to the real story.  The only unexplainable parts, to me, regards
the performer's boss, who in the song Memo From Turner, is played by Mick
Jagger,  another suggestion that the rock star may be the real person.
Along with THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW, this film is the most famous of
all midnight show'ers.  And a great one, it is ,too.  You'll end up seeing
this film more than once, to try and answer your own questions.  That tells
you how good of a film it really is.
MUST SEE. PERIOD. GREAT FILM. SUPER MUSIC. WRITTEN LIKE NO OTHER BEFORE, OR
SINCE.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

PERFORMANCE (director: Donald Cammell/Nicolas Roeg; screenwriter: Donald
Cammell; cinematographer: Nicolas Roeg; editor: Frank Mazzola; cast:
James Fox (Chas Devlin), Mick Jagger (Turner), Anita Pallenberg
(Pherber), Michele Breton (Lucy), Johnny Shannon (Harry Flowers), Stan
Meadows (Rosebloom), John Bindon (Moody ), Anthony Morton  (Dennis),
Anthony Valentine (Joey Maddocks), Kenneth Colley (Tony Farrell), Allan
Cuthbertson (The lawyer), John Sterland (The Chauffeur), Laraine Wickens
(Lorraine), 1970-U.K.)
Strange, bizarre, confusing, and psychedelic, all are apt descriptions
for this easy to follow story but most difficult film to keep track of.
That is mainly due to the elliptical editing, fast cuts, forward and
backward flashbacks, and a montage of images with all kinds of
implications behind them. It is a film, that of all studios, for Warner
Bros. to come out with it, just doesn't make sense. This is not the type
of independent artistic film they make over there. Their reaction to
seeing the finished product was predictably one of disbelief and
disgust. They felt they had been dirtied by having their name associated
with this film; and with Donald Cammell, the former artist now film
director, refusing the studio's demands to cut huge portions of the
film, therefore the film was put on hold for a few years until Cammell
was called back to finish the film his way. Nicolas Roeg, at that point,
disassociated himself from the film, but since his name was left on it,
and Cammell was an inexperienced 26-year-old director, Roeg unfairly
received the lion's share of the critical credit that was to come from
some of the established critics who, true to form, didn't recognize what
an innovative and masterful film it was until much later. An underground
audience, well-aware of the peyote mushrooms and psychedelic flashes
throughout the film, rushed to see it in a partylike 'hippie' atmosphere
during the midnight hours it was shown, to packed audiences. Warner
Bros. was clueless how to market the film, whether to make it a Mick
Jagger 'rock' experience or as a gangster film. Therefore the film
floundered in the box offices across straight America, and was quickly
pulled out of the theaters by the unhappy studio executives.
Chas (James Fox) is the muscle man for a London protection racket, run
by a puff, the egotistical and perverted Harry Flowers (Johnny Shannon).
That Chas is an anal compulsive, an artist in his field of enforcement
(a takeoff on the British gangster Jimmy Evans), thoroughly enjoying his
work of putting the fright into those who cross the organization, is
shown, as he leaves the woman (Wickens) he just slept with and goes to
work smartly dressed in a suit and tie, warning the accused on trial for
an unethical merger that he'll be in a wheel chair if he implicates
Harry Flowers in any way. When his lawyer butts in, saying he is not
intimidated, Chas returns with the boys, Rosy (Meadows) and Dennis
(Morton), and they gag the lawyer's Chauffeur and razor cut his hair,
and take a bucket of acid to the lawyer's Rolls Royce, ruining the paint
job. The next one they go after is one of the East Enders Chas grew up
with and whom he now hates for various personal reasons, Joey Maddocks
(Valentine), who is being forced into joining the organization and
giving up control of his horse betting parlor. Harry warns Chas to stay
out of this, keep your personal things out of the business. When the
boys decorate Joey's place, Chas walks in when its over and rubs it into
Joey, taking him to see Harry. Joey joins the organization, gleeful at
seeing Harry admonish Chas for not listening to him and calling him
mockingly the Lone Ranger.
Joey will jump Chas in his flat after they leave Harry's, wrecking the
place and pouring red paint all over it, and with the help of two of his
boys pin down Chas and whip the daylights out of him. Somehow Chas gets
free and shoots Joey, which turns out to be his downfall, as he now has
to go on the run from the gang and from the police.
One of the highlights of the first half of the film, was the nude dance
number performed by the Harry Flowers gang. They danced, sang an ode to
Harry, and we saw that they can be just as notorious as America's
gangsters. Their overt homosexuality indicated that  homosexuals wield
tremendous power within his crime organization and probably have some
impact in Britain's gangster world.
The next half of the film is about Chas finding shelter in the Notting
Hill home of a once famous pop singer, Turner (Mick Jagger), who is now
reclusive, living with two foreign women in an exotic sexual
relationship, with the well-built Pherber (Anita) and the skinny
masculine looking Lucy (Breton). What abounds in Jagger's bohemian
place, are head trips, mind-screwings, merging of personalities and
sexual characteristics. Each artist is currently stuck and in a dilemma
on how to resolve their problem: Fox enjoyed his work too much and
didn't know when to stop, and is now doomed. Jagger has lost his demon
for madness, which gives him his creativity to perform. It seems as if,
in a strange way, these two opposites, have similar impulses that give
them their power to succeeed. This is Jagger's thought, as he attempts
the merging of their personalities alchemically by feeding Fox those
potent mushrooms and getting him confused about his masculinity and who
he really is, until Jagger can digest his trip fully and trade places
with him, even though he knows Fox is in extreme danger of losing his
life.
Fox needs to get a passport from Tony (Colley), someone he can rely on,
as he phones him for help to escape to America (a very good place for
gangsters and performers to go to). Unfortunately for Fox, he is
double-crossed by Tony, who tips Harry off to where he is.
As a reward for getting into Fox's head, Jagger is shot by him when
Harry's boys come to take Chas away on a ride he will never return from.
I guess it is one head trip exchanged for another, each doing it the way
they know best.
The violent trip that Fox is on, has been around forever, as under the
hallucinogenic drug, time becomes irrelevant and we are treated to all
sorts of images from his past and present life, plus a glaring look at
Francis Bacon's homo-erotic art work, which makes reality and fantasy
become hard to distinguish. Chas is very uncomfortable with losing
complete control of the situation; yet he sticks to who he thinks he is,
pretending to be normal, even though he has been sexually
crossed-dressed by Pherber, losing his sense of complete manliness and
is scrutinized by Jagger as he tries to reclaim the image he has of
himself. Chas looks and acts as anything but what society would take for
normal. The last image we have of him, is as Pherber dressed him, as he
enters Harry's white Cadillac and his face looks just like Jagger's; but
Harry happily greets him as Chas, as if he was becoming reaquainted with
an old friend.
Performance is also noted for its memorable music, as arranged by the
rock genius, Jack Nietzche. Some of the music played was by the Last
Poets, a bitter rap song about the 'The Big Apple,' Randy Newman ( Long
Dead Train ), Buffy Saint Marie ( Dyed, Dead, Red ), and Ry Cooder (
Bootleneck guitar).
Warner Bros. tried suing the director Cammell after seeing how he
completed the film, hoping not to release it, that's how bad the
feelings were, for a film that lived on to become a cult favorite even
though it never got its proper due with the straight critics and public.
Cammell committed suicide in 1996, copying the style used by Fox when he
executed Jagger, and supposedly remaining conscious for 45 minutes after
the shooting, but was in no pain, as reported by friends. For him,
murder turned out to be truly a work of art.
It was a film whose psychedelic flashes might seem a bit dated now, but
all the best directors from Kubrick to Scorsese borrowed freely from it,
as it changed the way many mainstream films were to be made after 1970.
The freshness and energy and montages of the film are unique, as it was
able to mix the world of art with violence, something that seems to be a
natural fit, as shown in these kaleidoscope images. What results is the
merging from the opposite worlds of the underworld and underground, as
influenced by the business of making money, the Holy Grail at the end of
the journey. It is a film that both gangsters and artists can sink their
teeth into, even if the gangster might fail to recognize how he looks to
others or to himself.
A one of a kind film, deserving of much critical praise, as it is a most
efficacious look at the subculture of the gangster and artist worlds
and, simultaneously, a most enigmatic film to try and take in all its
fanciful images and perversions and drug induced fantasies, though time
has taken away some of its freshness, it still is a work of considerable
power.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
