Title
Review for Thomas and the Magic Railroad (2000)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Manchester City Centre)
Released in the UK by Alliance Atlantis on July 14, 2000; certificate U; 85 
minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Britt Allcroft; produced by Britt Allcroft, Phil Fehrle.
Written by Britt Allcroft.
Photographed by Paul Ryan; edited by Ron Wisman.
To begin, some background information: "Thomas the Tank Engine" was a strange 
and wonderful British TV show for children, first broadcast when I was 
growing up in the 1980s, and still popular today. It took place at a railway 
station, where every day virtuous steam engines and malevolent diesel trains 
would pull in to tell the one human character, Fat Controller, what scrapes 
they'd been getting into. It was innocent fantasy, complete with a great 
theme tune, and narration by Ringo Starr.
Now it has been adapted to the big screen in a movie that shows why 
'Americanisation' is a pejorative term. "Thomas and the Magic Railroad" is 
nonsensical, cheesy, saccharine drivel, with all the charm of its source 
material removed, and the low-tech special effects kept in. The original 
television programme was on a limited budget, and so the trains were plastic 
models with stationary painted-on expressions that talked without moving 
their mouths. This is a big Hollywood movie, but uses the same technique, 
despite having computer graphics for its other sections.
The movie's shabby, mismatched visual style prevents its multiple story 
threads from coming together, and creates a schizophrenic tone, especially as 
characters zoom across different worlds "Alice in Wonderland"-style without 
ever looking shocked. There are scenes in 'reality' -- where a reclusive 
railway tycoon, Burnett Stone (Peter Fonda), is being visited by his 
granddaughter Lily (Mara Wilson). Their time together is interrupted by a 
distress call from the film's main character, Mr. Conductor (Alec Baldwin), a 
midget pixie who uses a magic whistle to transport himself across the 
multiple universes he inhabits.
These include Shining Time -- a whitewashed theme park of a town, whose 
residents wear zombie-like smiles and uniform clothing -- and the Island of 
Sodor, which resembles episodes of "Thomas the Tank Engine" but has nothing 
to do with anything else in the movie. The plot follows Mr. Conductor's 
search for gold dust, which he needs to power his whistle. Efforts to 
resupply keep getting thwarted by naughty trains like Diesel, Splatter and 
Dodge, and he must speak to flowers, send supernatural spells to dogs and do 
a lot of other incomprehensible stuff to succeed.
I found this hard to follow. Kids will be so confused you might as well hand 
them the work of Plato in the original Ancient Greek tablets. The actors 
deserve sympathy, too, because they had to pretend that it all made sense. 
Baldwin is the most embarrassing -- wandering around on his own, attempting 
to breathe excitement into nothing in particular, talking as if to an 
imaginary friend. Fonda delivers a ridiculous series of sentimental, deadly 
serious speeches; he looks like he's trying to win an Oscar, even though his 
lines are all similar to the following: "Lady was the best steam engine in 
the world... ah, how I loved her... and my wife loved her, too... but Diesel 
chased her... and her coal all ran out! O God!"
"Thomas and the Magic Railroad" was written, produced and directed by a 
first-time helmsman named Britt Allcroft. He should be ashamed of himself. 
Projects like this -- incompetent and tortuous, but advertised as 'family 
entertainment' -- not only insult children's intelligence, but eat away at 
them, causing devastation. Kids will approach it with high expectations, 
because of love for the TV show; then refuse to believe it's bad, convince 
themselves that it must be good, and that they just weren't paying attention. 
Then they will slowly realise that, no, it WAS bad, and that they have been 
cheated and fooled.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Norm Schrager
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/332cc53728903c488825691e006d6bc1?OpenDocument
Bullies suck.  "Being useful" is good.  Magic is cool.  You just can't
argue with these irrefutable facts in the world of Thomas and the Magic
Railroad, a preschool adventure based on the successful television
series about the little tank engine that could.  The lessons may be
admirable, but creator/director/writer Britt Allcroft has created a
scattered children's tale that looks good, but feels messy.
She has done some things right: she's cast big stars, like Alec Baldwin
as the Lilliputian Mr. Conductor, and Peter Fonda as the sad grandpa,
Burnett Stone; her production designers have continued the show's happy
train colors, with bright blues and reds, and have added bonus design
touches to the live sets and wardrobe; her script applauds positive
thinking, creativity, and foiling the bad guy.  It's just that all of
this is mired in a clunky set of hole-filled plots, confusing enough to
make me want to interrogate the little guy sitting in front of me.
The story doesn't really revolve around one particular character or
plotline, but the simple gist is that young Thomas and the other shiny
steam engines are being pushed around by a mean, yucky diesel with a
scary set of pinchers.  At the same time, Mr. Conductor, played with a
childlike earnestness by Baldwin, has run out of magic gold dust, and
thus may be stuck on the wonderful island of Sodor, never to return to
the train station at Shining Time.  Meanwhile, Burnett lives in a kind
of tunnel/cave, lamenting his inability to revive the beautiful steam
engine Lady, with Fonda playing Burnett like a mopey actor waiting for
the next Ulee's Gold.  
Anyway, he's visited by his granddaughter from the big city, who gets
her own dose of gold dust, allowing her to shrink and ride the "magic
railroad" (Hello Alice!), joining the effort with Mr. Conductor and the
cute talking trains.   How do these kids follow all this?!
After a while, the film, with its awkward order of scenes, doesn't live
up to the promise of the sweet idyllic feel of the introduction, and is
a bit boring.  It's dragged down further by generally flat acting.  Mara
Wilson, the cute kid from Mrs. Doubtfire, is now a cute adolescent as
the granddaughter, but can't act a lick.  Her young friend, played by
Cody McMains, is worse, and the stiff dialogue doesn't help matters. 
And Fonda's sleepwalking sealed it for me that I wasn't the only
unexcited one. 
I picture this film existing years from now on cable, where college kids
will turn the stilted lines and occasional psychedelic trips and colors
into some kind of drinking or smoking game.  When one particular train
rides triumphantly through a magic palette of wispy, primary colors,
look out!  It'll be like the original Fantasia's 1963 re-release, but
for a new generation of stoners.  For now, though, I think the little
kids dig it for what it is.  
After the movie, I spoke with a 5-year old, a 3-year old, and their
moms.  I learned that the 3-year old was the one leading the cheering
section in the theater, and the 5-year old said the movie was
"awesome".  What the hell do I know?
Director: Britt Allcroft
Producer: Britt Allcroft
Writer: Britt Allcroft
Starring: Peter Fonda, Mara Wilson, Alec Baldwin, Didi Conn, Russell
Means, Michael Rodgers, Cody McMains, John Bellis 
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger: "THOMAS AND THE MAGIC RAILROAD"  (Destination Films)
 For almost two decades, Britt Allcroft's imaginative Thomas
the Tank Engine has intrigued youngsters on television and video - and
now Thomas chugs off on a feature-film adventure. The plot is
ridiculously complicated but, basically, Thomas and his friends on the
magic railroad live on the Island of Sodor while humans live in a
happy village called Shining Time. Using sparkling gold-dust that he
sprinkles with his whistle, a miniature man known Mr. Conductor (Alex
Baldwin) travels between the two worlds but he's losing his gold-dust
supply. "My universe is in danger!" he wails, adding: "I think you're
going to help me and Thomas sometime in the story." This sets up an
inter-active premise with the audience that is never fulfilled as the
live-action characters function in an animated world. Instead, we meet
a somber, resourceful 12 year-old (Mara Wilson) who is going to visit
her grumpy grandpa (Peter Fonda), who spends his days tinkering with
Lady, an enchanted steam engine he's hidden in Muffle
Mountain. Mr. Conductor needs to find the long-lost Lady in order to
get more gold-dust. Meanwhile, there's a subplot involving the efforts
of nasty Diesel to relegate Thomas and his shiny cohorts to the
roundhouse, and Mara befriends a local lad (Cody McMains). Curiously,
the trains speak with British accents while the Conductor's slacker
cousin (Michael E. Rodgers) has a Scottish brogue and the other humans
are distinctly American. Alec Baldwin smiles relentlessly, looking
silly, while Peter Fonda seems befuddled. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Thomas and the Magic Railroad" is a stiffly tedious,
awkwardly fragmented 4.  Pre-schoolers - two, three, four year-olds -
may enjoy this fantasy about being "useful," but I suspect anyone
older will be squirming. Wait for the video.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"The magic is gone," the 6-inch tall Mr. Conductor (Alec Baldwin) says
about his supply of gold dust, which has run out.  And if the magic from
the enchanting television series isn't totally absent in Britt
Allcroft's movie version, THOMAS AND THE MAGIC RAILROAD, it is too
frequently AWOL.
When my son was little, his absolute favorite series was "Thomas the
Tank Engine."  He only tolerated "Shining Time Station," on which the
Thomas episodes appeared, preferring instead to rent the videos, which
eliminated the superfluous humans.  He liked the series so much that at
age 3, he started telling us to call him Thomas and even renamed us and
our automobiles after other engines on the show.
In this movie version, the well-known actors in it try hard but just
muck up the story.  Baldwin is way too silly, Peter Fonda, as the
widower grandpa, is too morose and the ever sweet Mara Wilson, as his
granddaughter Lily, is underutilized.
Besides the missing gold dust, the plot also involves a lost engine
named Lady.
If you're not familiar with the series, the model trains have faces on
them and speak.  In addition to Thomas ("the really useful engine"),
each of the others (Gordon, Percy, Henry, etc) has a unique personality,
and although they may bicker a lot, they are all good engines at heart,
except for a mean one called Diesel.  The series has simple 5-minute
Thomas episodes, accompanied by the series' energetic little theme
music.
The problem with the movie version, besides those pesky humans in it, is
that the story doesn't go anywhere for quite a while, much like a short
story that is stretched beyond its limits.
"What have you brought me here for?" Lily asks at one point.  The
audience may be asking the same question.  Although it is a treat to see
little Thomas on the big screen, the studio should have waited until
they had a script with over an hour's worth of material in it.
THOMAS AND THE MAGIC RAILROAD runs too long at 1:25.  It is rated G and
would be fine for all ages.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, gave his old friend's first movie a full ****.
He liked the story, especially the part with the new engine named Lady.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Sometimes I wonder about writing movie reviews. There are movies that
really want me to ram-ble on and on, pontificating,
pseudo-intellectualising, and overanalysing it (which is when I really
want to do it). Then there are movies that are so bereft of any solid
content that I have nothing to say except empty words. /Loser/ happens
to fall among the latter category.
The film is a typical "underdog boy meets girl / boy loses girl / boy
gets girl" film. In this case, Paul (Jason Biggs) is the boy (a
"loser" from a small-town who isn't hip to the New York scene) and
Dora (Mena Suvari) is the (goth) girl in love with her Literature
professor.
Paul is the first in his family to go to college. He correctly worries
about fitting in. We watch him deal with the culture shock, his
use-and-abuse roommates, and his heartbreak.  The thing is, anyone who
acts like Paul in an academic institution today is far from being a
loser and is probably the kind of a person who is likely to go off and
form a startup and become wildly successful (at least by certain
measures of success, but ones I'm sure Paul's nasty roommates would
agree to).
Biggs and Suvari are decent actors, but this material doesn't
challenge them in any way. The chemistry between them is minimal. The
issues are unambiguously black and white (Paul is the perfect boy and
his roommates and the professor are perfect assholes), which is highly
unlikely in any real relationship scenario. The sound track is decent.
There's some commentary to be made about the use of the "date-rape"
drug Rohypnol, but director Amy Heckerling (of /Clueless/ fame)
doesn't make it. In the end, it becomes only a means by which Paul
gets revenge on his roommates.  The nature of the abusive relationship
between Dora and her professor is thought-provoking, especially from a
Freudian (lack of father figure) perspective, but the movie doesn't
explore that either.  /Loser/ is a rental for a romantic evening, but
only if the video store clerk can't "aide" you in finding something
better.


Author
Laura Clifford
Thomas the Tank Engine is facing a crisis on the Island of Sodor even the 
magical Mr. Conductor, (Alec Baldwin) who's losing his sparkle, can't help 
him with - the evil Diesel 10 has returned to threaten the magic.  Help
arrives in the form of twelve-year old Lily (Mara Wilson, "Miracle on 34th 
Street"), a passenger travelling to visit her lonely grandfather (Peter 
Fonda, "Ulee's Gold") in "Thomas & the Magic Railroad."
Writer/director Britt Allcroft brings to the big screen the character
she brought to the British small screen in "Thomas the Tank Engine and
Friends," which was narrated by Ringo Starr (who also later starred as
the conductor in "Shining Time Station").  The character of Thomas was
created in a series of 1940s childrens' books by the Reverend Wilber
Awbry.  I am completely clueless as to why this story has any appeal.
It's a jumble of moral lessons ('I must be responsible, reliable and
really useful') and magic that has no logical story structure.
There are happy, shiny people in Shining Time Station such as Stacy the
Station Master (Didi Conn) and Billy Twofeathers (Russell Means, "Natural
Born Killers").  This is the 'real' world, where Mr. Conductor (Alec Baldwin) 
appears only about one foot high.  He shuttles between Shining Time and
the magical Island of Sodor (where he's the right size) with its talking 
trains and mysterious magical railroad that may disappear, along with Mr. C's 
supply of gold dust, because its engine is missing.  Gold dust is the 
'sparkle' that allows Mr. C. to transport himself and is the stuff of magic.
Meanwhile the dour Burnett Stone is hiding Lady, that selfsame missing
engine, within Muffle Mountain, near Shining Time.  He's bereft, having 
recently lost his wife, but also because he let Lady down when the evil 
diesel chased her until she ran out of coal and crashed.  He's not been 
able to find any coal to make her steam again.  When his granddaughter
Lily arrives for a visit, she's soon transported off to the Island of
Sodor with Junior, Mr. C's irresponsible cousin.  Mr. C's lost all his
his sparkle trying to find its source and Thomas has been trying to help,
even discovering the buffers (a device to stop a train) that mark the
entrance to the Magic Railroad, but Diesel 10 has discovered them as well.
If all that sounds pretty incoherent, well, that's how it plays.
The purpose of the Magic Railroad is never explained.  For that matter,
there appears to be no reason for the Island of Sodor and its talking
trains, either.  The trains are bright and sport round faces which
change occasionally to project different emotions, however their lips
don't move when they 'talk,' making the whole film seem like child's
play.
The children at the screening I attended all seemed pretty wrapped up
in this, however, so it apparently has appeal for the six and under crowd.
Adults will find little to entertain, although there always is
the sight of Alec Baldwin in a sleep cap that says 'Thinking' on one
side and 'Sleeping' on the other.  While the wee ones may enjoy "Thomas
and the Magic Railroad," I just can't recommend it.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
