Title
Review for Go Now (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1996
U.S. Release Date: Summer 1997
Running Length: 1:26
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, profanity, sex)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/8/97 & 5/10/97
Cast: Robert Carlyle, Juliet Aubrey, James Nesbitt, Sophie Okonedo,=20
      Darren Tighe, Berwick Kaler, Sean McKenzie, John Brobbey,=20
      Sara Stockbridge
Director: Michael Winterbottom
Producer: Andrew Eaton
Screenplay: Paul Powell and Jimmy McGovern
Cinematography: Dafydd Hobson
Music: Alistair Gavin
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     Few screen romances are as touching, as tragic, and as life=20
affirming as the one shared by Nick (Robert Carlyle) and Karen (Juliet=20
Aubrey) in director Michael Winterbottom's GO NOW.  While the film is=20
ultimately about the effects of multiple sclerosis upon both a body and=20
a relationship, GO NOW is not the exercise in depression the material=20
might make it seem to be.  Winterbottom, who took an equally=20
unsentimental approach to his adaptation of Thomas Hardy's JUDE THE
OBSCURE, avoids numerous melodramatic pitfalls on the way to making Nick=20
and Karen's experiences with the disease real, believable, and=20
manipulation-free.  By including a copious amount of lowbrow humor and=20
occasionally using black-and-white freeze-frames with amusing captions,=20
Winterbottom never allows GO NOW to become too much of a downer.
     The film starts at the beginning -- the beginning of Nick and=20
Karen's relationship, that is.  They meet one night at a pub while Nick,=20
a construction worker with a passion for soccer, is out having drinks=20
with his best friend, Tony (James Nesbitt), and Karen is in the company=20
of her roommate, Paula (Sophie Okonedo).  While Tony aggressively=20
pursues sex with Paula, Nick and Karen connect in a quieter, more=20
meaningful way.  After a few chance meetings on the street following=20
their initial encounter, they start dating.  The relationship quickly=20
becomes serious, and the two move in together.  Only then does Nick's=20
disease begin to assert itself.  In this way, Winterbottom allows us to=20
get to know the characters before introducing complications.
     It starts slowly, with minor symptoms:  double vision, numbness of=20
the hands, and a lack of bladder control.  Nick goes for tests and is=20
diagnosed to have MS.  GO NOW doesn't use a didactic, "movie of the=20
week" approach to the subject.  It doesn't explain what MS is, why=20
people get it, or how they can live with it.  Instead, the film=20
concentrates on showing the condition's debilitating effects on Nick,=20
and, equally important, on his perfectly-healthy partner.  It's rare for=20
any motion picture about a disease to take such a blunt, uncompromising=20
look at how it can erode the foundation of even the most loving=20
relationship.  Sunk in frustration and self-pity, Nick frequently lashes=20
out at Karen, torn between wanting her to leave him alone in his misery=20
and needing her to help him.  For her part, Karen loves Nick dearly, but=20
his moodiness threatens to drive her into the arms of another man, if=20
only for a brief respite from Nick's rancor.
     Another interesting aspect of GO NOW is how it addresses the=20
quandary that Nick's friends find themselves in after he has been=20
stricken.  They're caught between walking on eggshells and trying too=20
hard to make it seem like he's still just "one of the guys."  None of=20
them walks the line adeptly, and one of Tony's jests cuts Nick deeply. =20
Still, the difficulties Nick's friends have adjusting to his condition=20
are minor compared with the conflicted emotions that Karen experiences.
     The acting in GO NOW is superlative.  Robert Carlyle, who was good=20
in RIFF-RAFF and TRAINSPOTTING, is amazing here, using body language,=20
facial expressions, and vocal intonations to convey his character's=20
experience to the audience.  Juliet Aubrey (Dorothea Brooke in the 1994=20
BBC version of MIDDLEMARCH), whose portrayal of Karen is just as=20
forceful and multi-faceted, never allows herself to be eclipsed by=20
Carlyle.  Even in the most dramatically powerful scenes, she stands toe-
to-toe with him.  Members of the supporting cast, especially James=20
Nesbitt (JUDE, HEAR MY SONG), are no less solid.
     With its rich and varied emotional texture, GO NOW is a movie that=20
you feel deep in the heart, with a pair of characters, Nick and Karen,=20
who are so vivid that they stay with you long after the theater lights=20
have gone on.  Coupled with JUDE (which was made after this film), Go=20
Now illuminates the director's keen, unerring insight into the=20
complexity of emotions and situations that movies too often reduce to=20
familiar clich=E9s. Wrenching, passionate, and unforgettable, GO NOW=20
hardly makes a misstep from beginning to end.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 5/15/98 (limited)
Running Length: 1:26
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, profanity, sex)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/8/97 & 5/10/97
Cast: Robert Carlyle, Juliet Aubrey, James Nesbitt, Sophie Okonedo, 
      Darren Tighe, Berwick Kaler, Sean McKenzie, John Brobbey, 
      Sara Stockbridge
Director: Michael Winterbottom
Producer: Andrew Eaton
Screenplay: Paul Powell and Jimmy McGovern
Cinematography: Dafydd Hobson
Music: Alistair Gavin
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     Few screen romances are as touching, as tragic, and as life 
affirming as the one shared by Nick (Robert Carlyle) and Karen (Juliet 
Aubrey) in director Michael Winterbottom's GO NOW.  While the film is 
ultimately about the effects of multiple sclerosis upon both a body and 
a relationship, GO NOW is not the exercise in depression the material 
might make it seem to be.  Winterbottom, who took an equally 
unsentimental approach to his adaptation of Thomas Hardy's JUDE THE
OBSCURE, avoids numerous melodramatic pitfalls on the way to making Nick 
and Karen's experiences with the disease real, believable, and 
manipulation-free.  By including a copious amount of lowbrow humor and 
occasionally using black-and-white freeze-frames with amusing captions, 
Winterbottom never allows GO NOW to become too much of a downer.
     The film starts at the beginning -- the beginning of Nick and 
Karen's relationship, that is.  They meet one night at a pub while Nick, 
a construction worker with a passion for soccer, is out having drinks 
with his best friend, Tony (James Nesbitt), and Karen is in the company 
of her roommate, Paula (Sophie Okonedo).  While Tony aggressively 
pursues sex with Paula, Nick and Karen connect in a quieter, more 
meaningful way.  After a few chance meetings on the street following 
their initial encounter, they start dating.  The relationship quickly 
becomes serious, and the two move in together.  Only then does Nick's 
disease begin to assert itself.  In this way, Winterbottom allows us to 
get to know the characters before introducing complications.
     It starts slowly, with minor symptoms:  double vision, numbness of 
the hands, and a lack of bladder control.  Nick goes for tests and is 
diagnosed to have MS.  GO NOW doesn't use a didactic, "movie of the 
week" approach to the subject.  It doesn't explain what MS is, why 
people get it, or how they can live with it.  Instead, the film 
concentrates on showing the condition's debilitating effects on Nick, 
and, equally important, on his perfectly-healthy partner.  It's rare for 
any motion picture about a disease to take such a blunt, uncompromising 
look at how it can erode the foundation of even the most loving 
relationship.  Sunk in frustration and self-pity, Nick frequently lashes 
out at Karen, torn between wanting her to leave him alone in his misery 
and needing her to help him.  For her part, Karen loves Nick dearly, but 
his moodiness threatens to drive her into the arms of another man, if 
only for a brief respite from Nick's rancor.
     Another interesting aspect of GO NOW is how it addresses the 
quandary that Nick's friends find themselves in after he has been 
stricken.  They're caught between walking on eggshells and trying too 
hard to make it seem like he's still just "one of the guys."  None of 
them walks the line adeptly, and one of Tony's jests cuts Nick deeply.  
Still, the difficulties Nick's friends have adjusting to his condition 
are minor compared with the conflicted emotions that Karen experiences.
     The acting in GO NOW is superlative.  Robert Carlyle, who was good 
in THE FULL MONTY and TRAINSPOTTING, is amazing here, using body language, 
facial expressions, and vocal intonations to convey his character's 
experience to the audience.  Juliet Aubrey (Dorothea Brooke in the 1994 
BBC version of MIDDLEMARCH, with a small role in Winterbottom's WELCOME TO 
SARAJEVO), whose portrayal of Karen is just as forceful and multi-faceted, 
never allows herself to be eclipsed by Carlyle.  Even in the most 
dramatically powerful scenes, she stands toe-to-toe with him.  
Members of the supporting cast, especially James Nesbitt (JUDE, 
HEAR MY SONG), are no less solid.
     With its rich and varied emotional texture, GO NOW is a movie that 
you feel deep in the heart, with a pair of characters, Nick and Karen, 
who are so vivid that they stay with you long after the theater lights 
have gone on.  Coupled with JUDE (which was made after this film), Go 
Now illuminates the director's keen, unerring insight into the 
complexity of emotions and situations that movies too often reduce to 
familiar clichés. Wrenching, passionate, and unforgettable, GO NOW 
hardly makes a misstep from beginning to end.
Copyright 1997, 1998 James Berardinelli 
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Gramercy Pictures/PolyGram 
 Director:  Michael Winterbottom
 Writer:  Paul Henry Powell, Jimmy McGovern
 Cast: Robert Carlyle, Juliet Aubrey
   The British have a way with working class comedies, with
Pater Cattaneo's "The Full Monty" getting the big Oscar
nomination along with movies far more titanic.  With "Go
Now," Michael Winterbottom--whose "Welcome to Sarajevo"
was one of last year's trenchant dramas of the tragedies of
war--displays his skill at evoking humor out of the most
wrenching circumstances.  "Go Now," named for one of the
songs on its notable soundtrack, deals with the dread disease
of multiple sclerosis but does not succumb to the banal
disease-of-the-week format.  Nor does it separate its
humorous sections from its tragic aspects.  Based on scripter
Paul Henry Powell's actual experience with the malady, "Go
Now" certainly has its somber moments, but humor informs
even the most melancholy viewpoints so effectively and in
such good taste that the movie does not dampen audience
mood nor does it mock the obviously serious implications of
the condition.  Anyone in the audience who has ever had his
or her happy life muffled by the sudden onslaught of
debilitating illness will relate strongly to this slice of an
athlete's vicissitudes.
   This is not to say that Mr. Winterbottom's vision is fully
realized.  The film's repetitiveness is distracting, particularly in
exhibiting a soccer coach's diatribes to a frequently inept
team and one character's insistence on feeding the same,
self-defeating line to women he is trying to bed.  For those in
the audience not born into the working classes of Britain's
hinterlands, subtitles would have been welcome.
   "Go Now" spends considerable time developing the milieu
of working-class society in Bristol, England, focusing on the
Scottish-born Nick Cameron (Robert Carlyle) and his
relationship with his peers on the soccer field and with a
woman, Karen Walker (Juliet Aubrey) whom he has begun
dating and who has moved in with him.  He has a satisfying
life as a plasterer during the week, kicking a football in
weekend competitions and taking the jibes of his teammates,
particularly those of his best pal Tony (James Nesbitt).  When
he begins seeing double and has trouble holding on to the
tools of his trade because of increasing numbness, he visits a
doctor and is given glasses.  Behind the scenes, however, the
physician tells his girl friend that Nick may have MS which, we
learn, sometimes spreads almost imperceptibly, sometimes
with paralyzing rapidity.  Unfortunately for Nick, his case
progresses rapidly so that toward the movie's conclusion, he
is using two canes to walk and can no longer work with his
hands.
   Though Karen is supportive, Nick predictably is irritated
from his infirmity and takes his problems out on her, insisting
that she leave him and find a better life elsewhere.  Though
Karen is pushed temporarily into the arms of her boss, she is
too much in love with Nick ultimately to betray him.
   As with his "Welcome to Sarajevo," Winterbottom does best
when he satirizes institutions of society.  Here, the director
takes pot shots at Britain's socialized medicine to great effect. 
The first doctor Nick sees refuses to tell him the dread
diagnosis, and as a result Nick gets into a minor accident with
his car and delays further treatment unnecessarily.  Worse,
one of the doctors eats a sandwich while speaking with him of
the illness, tells him his records got lost, and orders him not to
report back for further testing for four weeks.
   The sexual activity between Nick and Karen is as graphic
as it is great to see, giving new resonance to the term
"working stiff."  The director also includes several panoramas
of the winter bottoms of the men taking their hot showers.
   The chemistry between Carlyle and Aubrey is palpable,
Juliet Aubrey demonstrating the necessary working-class
roughness while Carlyle persuasively defines Nick's increasing
vulnerability.  The bonhomie of Nick's circle is also portrayed
well, his teammates shifting between continuing to treat Nick
as one of the guys and showing pity for the young man. 
Neither as wrenching as Winterbottom's "Jude the Obscure"
nor as realistic as his more recent "Welcome to Sarajevo,"
"Go Now" makes for involving theater with its dramatic
portrayal of some of Britain's little people,  Not Rated. 
Running Time: 88 minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey
Karten
