Title
Review for Shadow of a Doubt (1991) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When I was growing up, I was aware that there were a series of dramas
brought to television by the Hallmark Hall of Fame.  It seemed that near
card-sending holidays Hallmark would do a television play, and some were
decent, but I would have preferred to go out to a movie any day.  I think as
I got older Hallmark really did get better.  I know my perspective changed,
but I genuinely feel that objectively they improved also.  I first noticed
how good they had gotten in 1979 with the remake of ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN
FRONT.  I liked the film a lot and really wanted to see the original classic
film.  Actually I was a bit disappointed by the original, which did not seem
to be so detailed a story or have so well-developed characters.  But I told
myself it was not a fair comparison.  The original was an early sound film
before a lot of techniques were developed.  Besides, I'd seen the remake
first and it had formed my opinions on the story.  I also preferred their
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST to Cocteau's, but then I am not a big fan of Cocteau's
style.
     I ran out of excuses with Michael Tuchner's HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME.  I
had seen the three major film productions with Lon Chaney, Charles Laughton,
and Anthony Quinn in the title role.  Anthony Hopkins was the best Quasimodo
and this production was the most detailed.  I have also liked some of their
original productions, but have only recently started paying closer attention
to them.  DECORATION DAY was among the best five films I saw last year.  If
I was going to put made-for-television movies on my "Top Ten of the Year"
list, this would have made the list.  Now Hallmark is back, remaking the
classic film.  This may be their first real suspense film, but they are
starting with grand style.
     Overall, the production values of SHADOW OF A DOUBT were very good.
They used the original script, which was co-authored by Thorton Wilder.  The
murderous gigolo "Uncle Charley" was played by Mark Harmon, in the role that
Joseph Cotten originally filled.  Now, Harmon is a lot better looking than
Cotten--almost pretty.  Had someone with Harmon's looks played the role in
the Hitchcock, you have never have been able to put someone with Cotten's
looks in the remake.  But putting someone better-looking in the role of the
charming and villainous lady-killer works just fine.  Harmon is not a very
good actor and he does not project much emotion.  In this role his synthetic
charm and the veiled emotion work in his favor.  The remake on its own is a
pretty good suspense film.
     The Hitchcock film was made in 1943 and, being made during the war, it
was intended to show the soldiers what they were fighting for.  It was a
portrait of somebody's idea of an ideal American town: pearly-white, Anglo-
Saxon, Protestant.  It was a town where just about everyone sees each other
in church.  It was set in its present of 1943.  The remake is a slight
update, being set in 1953, the year Fidel Castro was captured and
imprisoned--we hear about the event on the console radio.  That really is
the film's one questionable note.  In a town like Petaluma, California, I
doubt there were still many wind-up Victrolas in 1953.  With that one minor
objection, this remake is done in fine style.  I would give it a +2 on the
-4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "It's not good to know too much about someone, Charlie," Charles
warns his niece, Charlie (Margaret Welsh), with a devilish grin.
Charlie is infatuated with her namesake uncle, her "soul mate" as she
calls him since her mother gave her his name.
     There's a lot to know about Charles, not the least of which is
that he strangled 3 widows back East.
     Mark Harmon, who looks like anything but a killer but specializes
in playing them, plays Charles, the Merry Widow Murderer in the 1991
Hallmark Hall of Fame remake of the 1943 Hitchcock film, SHADOW OF A
DOUBT.  And to avoid any questions about his guilt, we see Charles in
action in the opening scene with his last victim.
     The story takes place in the early 1950s in the small town of
Petaluma, California, where Charles heads to avoid the police.  John
Gay's script uses most of the original screenplay by Sally Benson, Alma
Reville, and Thornton Wilder.  Karen Arthur's direction is certainly no
match for the great master, but on an absolute scale, the movie
maintains a high level of suspense.
     When supercilious and deceitful Charles comes to pay a visit of
indeterminate length with his sister and her family in Petaluma, they
don't know about his nefarious activities.  He showers them with
elaborate gifts to buy the love they had already given him anyway.
     Two mysterious and exceedingly clean-cut writers for a magazine
show up to take pictures of the family for a spread on the "average
American family," but their interest is focused on Uncle Charles,
especially on taking his picture and learning about his background.
Charlie, who first welcomed her uncle's visit, begins to feel more and
more uncomfortable with him and suspicious of the disingenuous magazine
reporters.
     The picture advances with a delicate power using small details
such as the newspaper article that the uncle tries secretly to remove
and that Charlie discovers.
     The beauty of the story is the pas de deux between uncle and niece
as they try to out psych each other.  She wants him to leave, and he
doesn't want to go, what with a local, rich widow as a prospective
victim.  Will Charles kill Charlie first, or will she get him out of
town.  Harmon is wonderfully creepy and smug, and Welsh is tough but
trapped.
     With a deft touch the director sets up each scene, several with
thunderstorms, and Tom Neuwirth's sepia-toned cinematography makes the
movie feel as if it were filmed in the 50s.  My only quibble is the
director's awkward staging of the final scene on the train.
     Is Hitchcock's version better?  Of course.  Is this one worth
watching as well?  Actually, yes.
     SHADOW OF A DOUBT runs 1:40.  It is not rated but would be PG for
adult themes and would be fine for kids around nine and up.
