Title
Review for Nobody's Fool (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Paul Newman, Dylan Walsh, Jessica Tandy, Melanie Griffith, 
          Bruce Willis, Gene Saks, Pruitt Taylor Vince
Director: Robert Benton
Producers: Scott Rudin and Arlene Donovan
Screenplay: Robert Benton based on the novel by Richard Russo
Cinematography: John Bailey
Music: Howard Shore
Released by Paramount Pictures
     NOBODY'S FOOL is about as sublime a motion picture as is likely to 
come out of Hollywood.  With a structure that contravenes the norm, this 
film concentrates on character first, letting the plot fall naturally 
into place.  Situations are forced on neither the film's inhabitants nor 
on those in the audience.  It's rare to sit through a drama and not feel 
manipulated, but the feelings generated by Robert Benton's movie are 
entirely natural, and likely to bring a smile to the heart.
     In another Academy Award-worthy performance, Paul Newman gives an 
unforgettable portrayal of Donald Sullivan (or Sully, as most people know 
him), a cantankerous aging man living in the small, snowbound town of 
North Bath, New York.  With the spirit of a mischievous teenager but the 
body of a sixty year old, Sully has the kind of infectious presence that, 
in his own words, "grows on you."  He delights in flirting with women 
half his age, and engages in a game of theft where he and his sometimes-
boss Carl Roebuck (Bruce Willis) take turns devising creative means by 
which to steal a snow blower from one another.
     NOBODY'S FOOL is as much about regrets as about choices made; as 
much about the road not taken as the one traveled.  It's about families 
broken apart, and parent/child relationships mended.  Sully's father was 
a ruthless, violent drunk whom he never forgave, and that is perhaps why 
he was such a poor father to his own son Peter (Dylan Walsh).  When the 
boy was just one year old, Sully walked out on him and his mother.  Now, 
decades later, the abandoning father is trying to make amends--not only 
to his son, but to his grandchildren as well.
     For those seeking a film with an unforgettable central character, 
NOBODYS FOOL is not to be missed.  Not only does it offer the best in 
easygoing, unconfrontational drama, but the story is told with a sense of 
wry, intelligent humor.  In fact, the movie is so perfectly attuned to 
its audience that it can display Melanie Griffith's breasts without the 
moment's self-consciousness that so often accompanies nudity in American 
motion pictures.
     Speaking of Griffith, this is the best acting she has done in a long 
time.  After a string of lackluster comedies (the last one of which was 
MILK MONEY) and ineffective thrillers (SHINING THROUGH, A STRANGER AMONG 
US), NOBODY'S FOOL offers a role for which she is  suited.  Playing the 
dowdy wife of a perpetual womanizer, she finds the right mixture of 
strength and pathos.  
     Also holding his own is Bruce Willis, here in his second consecutive 
solid performance (on the heels of PULP FICTION). Jessica Tandy, to whom 
the film is dedicated, is as effective as ever.  Of course, no one can 
quite match Newman, who shows a chameleon-like ability to shed his star 
image and don a most atypical personality.  This is the sort of part 
normally  associated with a character actor of Albert Finney's status.  
     Quiet and enchanting in its simplicity, NOBODY'S FOOL is a joy.  
Admittedly, it meanders a bit, but that's part of its charm. The 
intelligent sensitivity of the script, coupled with Newman's powerfully 
understated performance, make this motion picture special.  There aren't 
many of them like this out there.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Edwin Jahiel
NOBODY'S FOOL (1994) *** 1/2 Written & directed by Robert 
Benton from the novel by Richard Russo. Photography, John 
Bailey. Editing, John Bloom. Production design, David Gropman. 
Music, Howard Shore. Produced by Scott Rudin and Arlene 
Donovan. Cast: Paul Newman, Jessica Tandy, Bruce Willis, 
Melanie Griffith, Dylan Walsh, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Josef 
Sommer, Gene Saks, Philip Bosco. A Paramount release. 110 
minutes. Rated R (severely so, for language and flash of 
nudity). 
"Nobody's Fool" deals with a group of people in a small, 
upstate New York town called North Bath. The movie is in some 
ways the many-times-removed cousin of "Our Town." Unlike that 
film however, it does not give equal stress to everyone, but 
keeps an emphatic focus on  Donald  ("Sully") Sullivan, who is 
60 but whom 70-year old Paul Newman plays without the least 
stretch.
Ages ago, Sully divorced his wife who still resides in North 
Bath with her second husband. Sully rents a room in the house 
of his grade-school teacher (the late Jessica Tandy in her 
last role) whom everyone calls Miss Beryl although she has a 
middle-aged son, a pinched banker.
Sully is a prole who has never lived a regular working stiff's 
life and probably has bummed around a little in North Bath, 
living from day to day. Now a bum leg keeps him unemployed 
after a fall from a scaffolding of the modest Tip Top 
Construction Company, whose boss Carl Roebuck (Bruce Willis) 
Sully keeps suing in vain.  
"Nobody's Fool" is a rare movie for these days, as it delves 
on characters and relationships rather than action or major 
plot turns. Sully, happy-go-lucky, occasionally hard-drinking, 
always ready with a wisecrack or repartee, is liked by all who 
know him: by the judge (Philip Bosco) who rules against his 
lawsuits and later sends him to jail for assailing a vexatious 
cop; by his ineffectual lawyer (stage director Gene Saks) who 
has an artificial leg; by Miss Beryl; by his friend, handyman 
Rub (Pruitt Taylor Vince) who is his partner-employee in odd 
construction jobs;  by the bar-lady of his regular haunt; by 
the police-chief...
Sully may be perpetually broke, but he is, as the old yet 
valid cliche goes, rich in friends, and quietly willing to 
help others and treat them decently. Behind Sully's surface 
simplicity lies a complex man. 
Cleverly, this two-way liking is not goofy, smarmy or 
sentimental, but natural,  subtle and taken for granted within 
an overall warm framework.
Better yet, in one of the script's many originalities, Carl 
and Sully, have been friends forever, and still are, in spite 
of trading disparaging remarks. They even belong to a regular 
group of poker playing that includes the chief of police. All 
the while Sully keeps stealing Carl's snow-blower which Carl 
keeps stealing back--all in good humor.
Carl is a Lothario who openly has affairs with his successive 
blonde secretaries. His wife Toby (Melanie Griffith) faces 
this with tolerant spunk and humor. To top it all, Toby and 
Sully have, quite openly too, a whimsical May-November mutual 
attraction that Carl jokes about.
Events take a new direction when Sully's son Peter (Dylan 
Walsh) appears with wife and boys for a reluctant Thanksgiving 
dinner at his mother's. Peter, an English  professor at the 
University of West Virginia, has professional troubles, 
marital woes, and a major grudge against his father whom he 
practically never saw. 
Much of the film from now on will be about the rapprochement 
between Sully and Peter, a connection catalyzed by a wildly 
funny re-theft of the snow-blower by those two (families that 
steal together stay together?) and by Sully's interest in one 
of the boys. This and other small events make Sully finally 
grow  up and discover that he is a father and a grandfather.
The movie's dialogue is splendid, witty and sharp. It fleshes 
out the characters beautifully. These are real people with 
real talk -- not necessarily real-life talk, since, if the 
dialogue were of the authentic, tape-recorded type, its wasted 
words and hesitations would bring yawns to the listeners. But 
it is first-rate movie-real dialogue, a convincing simulacrum 
that walks the wire between the spontaneous and the 
convicingly concocted.  
The acting is impeccable --and colorful -- throughout. 
Watching, in relatively small parts, Melanie Griffith ( not 
everyone's cup of tea) and Bruce Willis (unarmed for a 
change), is a joy, now touching, now amusing, now both. 
Watching Paul Newman (which means the entire movie) is vastly 
entertaining. Without copying himself, and in a 
semi-minimalist way, Newman is still the fellow who, though a 
loser in some respects, is sure of himself, brings to his 
roles a paradoxical touch of class and of purity, and can also 
do crazy things  -- as in "The Hustler," " Cool Hand Luke," 
"Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid," "The Sting" and 
elsewhere.  
All this is in a perfectly realistic setting of a depressed 
town that had known much better times, as witnessed by some 
nice old buildings. Now both interiors and exteriors look 
run-down and grungy. Nothing is prettified, and winter (the 
time is between Thanksgiving and Christmas) makes things even 
worse with dirty snow and lack of cheerful greenery that would 
hide ugliness.
The many qualities of the film range from its basic premises 
to a host of well observed details, from hilarious to moving. 
Like  a child afraid to approach the kindly lawyer who has an 
artificial leg. Like that leg being removed in a session of 
strip-poker. Like the near-total absence of touchy-feely 
scenes. Like the subtle correspondence of making Bruce Willis'  
secretaries akin to the dizzy dames portrayed by Melanie 
Griffith in several movies.
"Nobody's Fool" may fool some people into thinking of it as 
mainly a Paul Newman vehicle. That it is, but it is also a 
movie by Robert Benton, the writer of "Bonnie and Clyde," the 
writer-director of "Bad Company," "Kramer vs. Kramer," "Places 
in the Heart," and others--a man who has a wonderful eye and 
ear for ordinary people. And it is a film that also belongs to 
its technicians and to the great ensemble playing of its cast.  

Author
Mark O'Hara
It's been five years since Robert Benton adapted Richard Russo's long novel 
Nobody's Fool and directed Paul Newman as its title character Donald 
Sullivan, the irascible Sully.  It's June of 1999 now and I just finished my 
yearly viewing of it, and the film plays just as good each time.  It's 
almost therapeutic for me to view it, to watch Russo's true American 
character, as much hero as sad sack, a man who's made scads of mistakes but 
has hit a streak of luck that makes us love him.
It's pure pleasure to watch Newman as Sully.  Throughout the performance he 
inhabits the role with a mix of weariness and comfort.  With his long 
experience, Newman has mastered what might be called under-acting, his 
manner natural, his voice gruff, his blue eyes gleaming with assurance.  A 
70 year-old playing a man 10 years younger, Newman gets Sully's limp 
perfect, and creates a very believable crust on the outside of a man who has 
begun to discover he can do this living the right way after all.
Upstate New York is the setting - the decaying town of Bath, closed 
factories overlooking the once prosperous streets.  Benton's camera touches 
upon the locales and characters that make up Sully's world.  There's the 
huge two-story house owned by Miss Beryl (Jessica Tandy in her last role, 
the film dedicated to her);  Sully rents the top floor from the old woman, 
who decades before taught him in the eighth grade.  There's Carl Roebuck 
(Bruce Willis), owner of the Tiptop Construction Company.  Sully's in the 
midst of a lawsuit against Roebuck after a fall from a scaffold wrecked 
Sully's knee.  (Yet the two still interact, Sully throwing caustic humor 
Carl's way, Carl throwing piecemeal work Sully's.)  Carl's wife Toby 
(Melanie Griffith) is another of Sully's pals, the victim of her husband's 
countless affairs, a beautiful woman with a crush on Sully, who is old 
enough at least to be her dad.  As Sully's sidekick, Rub Squeers (Pruitt 
Taylor Vince) is a poor man suffering from ingrown dreams ("You know what I 
wisht, Sully?" is Rub's slogan;  Russo has Rub saying it hundreds of times 
in the book).  Sully's ineffectual lawyer is Wirf (Gene Saks), a one-legged 
crony who can be counted on to play cards and drink in the chair to Sully's 
right.
Even though the action doesn't leave Bath, the plot is picaresque, following 
Sully's adventures as he lives a few weeks in a snowy winter.  It's worth 
mentioning that Sully's son Peter (Dylan Walsh) calls Rub "Sancho," 
reminiscent of Sancho Panza, the chum of the aging but noble Don Quixote!  
Accordingly, Sully rescues Miss Beryl after she has a mini-stroke; Hatty - 
the senile mother of the woman who runs the diner Sully frequents, after she 
wanders out in the snowy streets, intending to walk to Albany; grandson Will 
(Alexander Goodwin) after he gets in a painful fight with little brother 
Whacker (Carl J. Matusovich).  Sully also offers comforting words to Toby, 
boosts Rub's confidence, and even counsels his son after Peter and his wife 
separate.  Time after time Sully plays the under-rated hero.
A hilarious subplot involves Sully's determination to get what's coming to 
him, compensation for his knee injury.  Hence Sully steals Carl Roebuck's 
new snowblower, uses it on Miss Beryl's sidewalk, and loses it when Carl 
takes it back.  In a humorously tense scene, Sully enlists Peter's help to 
pinch the machine again, this time from the fenced, Doberman-guarded yard of 
Tiptop.  Another story has Sully dealing with an overzealous police officer. 
  This subplot is set up when Sully is stopped for a broken tail-light, 
Officer Raymer (Philip Seymour Hoffman) cutting off Sully's truck with his 
cruiser.  It is brought to a climax typical of dark humor, when Sully drives 
his pick-up along the sidewalk in an attempt to win the attention and 
forgiveness of Rub.  Raymer once again cuts off the F-150, and when Sully 
keeps coming, the inept cop fires a warning shot, inviting Sully's knockout 
punch to the nose.  The climax of the film actually unwinds around Sully's 
short jail term for this assault, as Sully and the town discover just how 
much the old ne'er-do-well is worth to their lives.
So Sully's personality has many sides, most of them contradictory.  "If you 
can be a grandfather to him (Will), why can't you be a father to me?" is 
what Peter intones resentfully, supplying one of the few predictable parts 
of the plot, weak because of its repetition.  A touching part of the story 
comes when we learn that Sully's father was a hopeless alcoholic, a man who 
knocked his wife across the room and pounded his son Donald when he stood up 
once for his mother.  The empty Sullivan house stands as a bleak reminder of 
Sully's grudge against his long-dead father;  all these years Sully has 
refused to refurbish or even to pay taxes on the property, haunted as it is 
with memories of dysfunction.
Robert Benton picks and chooses parts of Benton's novel carefully.  He has 
included the elements needed, of course, to ensure a rather smooth and 
comprehensible plot.  A film is no novel, though, and Benton knows better 
than to include too much detail from Russo's Dickensian storyline.  Hence we 
never meet Rub's wife, who in the book steals daily from her job at the 
five-and-dime; we never see the darker, adulterous side of Peter, in his 
affair with a girl from West Virginia (where he has been laid off from a 
teaching job at the university), and later with a revenge-seeking Toby.  But 
the story flows well - certainly more character- than plot-driven.  In all 
the film has an admirable lack of sentimentality, even though it uses 
moments both bitter and sweet to evoke responses in the viewer.
The casting is masterful.  I've written enough about Newman already.  The 
rest of the cast is also flawless.  The way in which Rub acts the born 
loser, his eyes darting around as Peter takes the jelly donut off his plate 
and gives it to the boy Will;  the way Wirf and the police chief sit 
nonchalantly around the table as the group plays strip poker, Carl and his 
latest bimbo buck naked - these veteran actors all seem to portray character 
parts with expertise and relish.
Though at times the pace of the film is slow, the story builds a momentum as 
its threads are brought together.  The character of Donald Sullivan is not 
new to American literature.  In recent years John Updike mined the same 
material in four books, his man Harry "Rabbit" Angstrom, an adolescent 
sports hero, irresponsibly deserting his young family and seeing the 
consequences years later.  In Nobody's Fool, there is something about the 
way Russo and Benton have drawn Sully that makes the viewer feel sympathy.  
We want the guy to succeed, and I would submit that we enjoy watching the 
gritty and frustrating and absolutely charming rogue over and over for years 
to come.


Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1994, R, 110 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Paul Newman (Donald "Sully" Sullivan), Dylan Walsh (Peter
Sullivan), Bruce Willis (Carl Roebuck), Jessica Tandy (Miss Beryl), Melanie
Griffith (Toby Roebuck), produced by Scott Rudin, Arlene Donovan, written and
directed by Robert Benton, based on the novel by Richard Russo.
The problem with making films based on novels is that the films tend to have
a "novel" mood to them. They often seem more like actors reading straight
from the book and not feature films. "Nobody's Hero" does an excellent job in
capturing the essence of a "Great American Novel," but does this necessarily
make for a great film?
The story opens just before Thanksgiving in North Bath, N.Y., a small town
in the mountains covered in snow. We meet Donald "Sully" Sullivan (Newman),
and old-timer who is the town wiseass and the local mooch. He lives with Miss
Beryl (Tandy), an elderly woman, and is trying to sue his (former) employer,
Carl Roebuck (Willis) and his Tip Top Construction company, for injuries he
sustained from "work-related duties."
Sully seems to be desperate for cash in any way he can get it. He vows he
will never work  again, yet he can't help but go back and ask for something
to do.  Roebuck is a no-nonsense guy and knows  Sully is a good worker, but
also a slacker. Roebuck cheats on his wife but doesn't try too hard to keep
it a secret. Whenever Sully and Toby Roebuck (Griffith) see each other they
talk about how they should get back at Carl by having an affair of their own.
Right away the film has that "novel" atmosphere to it, where all the
characters are representations of classic personalities and themes. The
problem is they are portrayed in such a way the film almost assumes we can
understand and relate to the characters and the events, especially when it
comes to the relationship between Sully and Toby.
Sully meets his adult son Peter (Walsh), whom he hasn't seen since he left
his family when Peter was a child. Sully can't explain why he did it, and he
doesn't expect Peter to forgive him either. A pretty interesting relationship
begins to unfold between the two as they start to get to know each other.
They actually become close friends, which is quite interesting to watch. 
Peter and his wife have a fight which causes her to leave and take one of
the kids with her. So Peter and Sully start to work together, scavenging
pieces of an old house in which Sully grew up in. The chemistry between Walsh
and Newman is great, they really do seem like father and son even though they
are just getting to know each other. We also see Sully taking care of his
grandchild, and Peter asks why he cares, to which Sully replies, "Well, I
gotta start somewhere."
Not much else happens in terms of plot. There is a subplot about a
prospective amusement park to be built near the town, but it has little to do
with the relationships between the characters. In the end Sully has grown and
matured, but he is still basically the same (the more things change the more
they stay the same).
So a typical novel has been made into a rather typical movie, but a pretty
good movie nevertheless. It certainly is interesting to see how these small
towns operate and to watch these characters interact with each other.
"Nobody's Fool" is a good movie about American life in a manner we don't see
that much. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Vince Deehan
Directed by Robert Renton. 
Written by Robert Renton. Based on the novel by Richard Russo.
Cast : Paul Newman, Jessica Tandy, Bruce Willis, Melanie Griffith, 
Dylan Walsh, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Gene Saks. 
NOBODY'S FOOL is set in the small town of North Bath, in upstate New York, 
and tells the story of Sully (Paul Newman) a man who has been living life 
by his own rules and has long since abandoned his wife and son.  Sully is in 
his sixties and does odd-jobs around town with his slow-minded friend 
Rub (Pruitt Taylor Vince) and is trying in vain to get some financial 
compensation from the Tip Top Construction company boss Carl (Bruce Willis), 
for whom he did a job during which he suffered an accident, damaging his knee. 
Sully hasn't got alot of money so he hires the services of a local one-legged 
lawyer (Gene Saks) who tells Sully that although they haven't won compensation 
yet, his constant attempts will eventually lead to success. 
Sully shares a house in town with his elderly landlady, Miss Beryl (Jessica 
Tandy), who clearly values Sully more than he does himself.  When Miss Beryl 
suffers a mild stroke and is released from hospital she hopes that Sully will 
look after her, a suggestion that he doesn't take too enthusiastically, 
although she is sure he is up to the job.  
Sully's ex-wife still lives in the same town, though she is now remarried, and 
she is visited for Thanksgiving by her and Sully's son and grandchildren.  
Sully meets up with his son and becomes quite close to his newly met 
grandchildren and gradually starts to bond with his son Peter (Dylan Walsh) 
who he abandoned as a child.  Sully is a very unconventional guy and sees no
wrong in the petty theft of his old boss Carl's snowblower. When Carl finds 
out who took it from him he steals it back from Sully and then Sully gets 
Peter to help him steal it again. From this point on Sully and his son begin 
to get closer and Peter comes to know his father for the first time. 
Paul Newman gives a fantastic performance as Sully, but is never flashy and 
showy.  It is a subtle performance that slowly builds up to give the picture 
of man who has a good heart but has made some mistakes in his life that he is 
now trying to amend for. There is no clear reason given for Sully's 
abandonment of his wife and son (other than admitting that he didn't get 
along with his wife), and somehow this doesn't really matter. We don't need
to know exactly what went wrong, we can see clearly enough that Sully was 
probably unable to cope with the responsibility and simply fled.  In the 
scenes with his son Peter, there are no exaggerated scenes where Sully begs 
forgiveness from his son. Sully knows he has done wrong and simply lets Peter 
into his life and lets him decide for himself if he can learn to respect
his father.  
The supporting performances are also very strong, with Jessica Tandy and Pruitt 
Taylor Vince deserving the most praise.  NOBODY'S FOOL is dedicated to Jessica 
Tandy, who died before the film was released.  She gives a fine performance 
as an old lady who knows that she has found a soulmate in Sully, although she 
knows better than to expect him to acknowledge it.  Every scene she is in 
radiates with the warmth of her character.  It's a joy to watch her scenes 
with Paul Newman, particularly the scene at the hospital where she breezily 
mentions that she had suffered a small stroke.
As Sully's friend Rub Squeers, Pruitt Taylor Vince delivers a finely judged 
performance as an innocent, childlike man who is very close to Sully, and 
feels very upset and left out when Sully's son Peter comes along and seemingly 
takes Sully away from him.  The scene where Sully reassures Rub that they are
still best friends leaves Rub close to tears . This is a scene where the 
sheer skill of Newman and Vince veers the scene away from mawkish 
sentimentality and makes it feel natural and real.
NOBODY'S FOOL is a wonderfully engrossing study of small town life where 
excellent writing and acting combine to show characters you slowly come 
to know and care about.
Review written on Sat 2nd March 1996 by Vince Deehan
(vince@deehan.demon.co.uk)

Author
Mike Harris
     This is a slice of life in small-town New York state where
everybody knows everybody so well that it pushes the boundaries of
normal social convention.  Paul Newman and Jessica Tandy give excellent
performances but there is a very strong supporting cast with very good
ensemble.  The plot is really secondary to the exposition of the
intricate and sometimes bizarre relationships between the characters
that stay just inside of being believable.  The plot, since I know you
want to know anyway, is focussed on Paul Newman's character, a man in
his sixties, who is just an ordinary guy in a sense.  He comes from a
family where his father regularly beat his wife and he learned to hate
him, he walked out on his wife when his son was a year old and his son
subsequently learned to hate him for abandoning them.  But things come
full circle as the son returns to town, his marriage in trouble and
learns the seeds of love for his father as he helps him through
troubled times.
     That sounds pretty heavy but it is not, quite the reverse, the
drama is never "laid on" but always light with a touch of humour.  The
humour in some instances erupted and made be laugh out loud and long,
one of the funniest being the court scene where the town is prosecuting
guess who for striking a police officer after the said police officer
had fired his pistol.  And if that doesn't pique your curiosity ...  how
can that be funny?

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Paul Newman, Jessica Tandy, Bruce Willis, Dylan Walsh,
           Melanie Griffith, Pruitt Taylor Vince.
Screenplay/Director:  Robert Benton.
     Maybe it's envy, maybe it's years of Hollywood trying to sell
every pretty boy or gorgeous girl as the Next Big Thing, and maybe
it's some combination of the two.  For whatever reason, both
moviegoers and critics alike seem to have incredible difficulty
acknowledging that attractiveness and talent could go hand in hand.
Paul Newman was nearly sixt before it became widely acknowledged
that there was more to this guy than his famous blue eyes; he could
actually act.  When he won as Best Actor in 1987 for THE COLOR OF
MONEY, it was widely considered a lifetime achievement award, but
apparently Newman had at least one more trick up his sleeve:
NOBODY'S FOOL, a small, quiet drama driven by Newman's delightfully
weathered lead performance.
     Newman plays Donald "Sully" Sullivan, an often-unemployed
construction worker living in the sleepy upstate New York town of
North Bath.  After suffering an on-the-job knee injury, Sully's days
are largely spent playing poker, bantering with his landlady
(Jessica Tandy) and trying to squeeze some compensation out of the
construcion company's owner Carl Roebuck (Bruce Willis).  But during
this holiday season, there are other opportunities.  In town for
Thanksgiving is Sully's son Peter (Dylan Walsh), a son he's had an
uneasy relationship with since Sully left the family when Peter was
a baby.  Peter is having marital troubles of his own, and when Peter
stays in town with his own son, Sully has the chance to look back on
his life and begin to take on some degree of responsibility for it.
     Writer/director Robert Benton has a gift for making low-key,
relationship-based films (KRAMER VS. KRAMER, PLACES IN THE HEART),
and NOBODY'S FOOL is a worthy heir to that tradition.  Benton uses
his snow-covered locations beautifully, practically turning North
Bath into one of the characters in the story.  In many ways,
NOBODY'S FOOL is as much about North Bath as it is about Sully.
This is a town where everyone really does know everyone else, where
local disputes are settled by a judge (Philip Bosco) who addresses
people by their first names, and where a guy like Sully, to all
outward appearances a loser in life, is still treated with a basic
respect for his independent mind.  When a local banker attempts to
bring a theme park to North Bath, it is a demonstration of a
fundamental misunderstanding of what the town is about:  a sense of
family.
     That connectedness makes the relationships between characters
in NOBODY'S FOOL a rare joy.  There is not a mean-spirited moment to
be found, because even the characters who don't get along treat each
other as fellow humans.  Sully's feud with Carl is one of the few
external conflicts in the film, manifested primarily in a game of
stealing a snow-blower back and forth, but even that exchange is
essentially good-humored.  It's one of the things that makes Sully
so appealing as a character:  as ornery as he can be, he always
treats people decently.  His paternal relationship with sadsack
co-worker Rub (Pruitt Taylor Vince) is a pleasure to watch unfold,
and a simple moment when Sully helps a senile older woman back to
her home is handled without an ounce of condescension.  It's
ironic--and perhaps part of the point of NOBODY'S FOOL--that the one
relationship which seems forced is that between Sully and Peter.
Still, there's something strangely satisfying about a meeting
between an estranged father and son which doesn't include a shouting
match or tears.
     However, the main reason Sully is so appealing is Paul Newman.
He has reached a point in his career where he doesn't really play
characters any more; instead, he slips into them like the flannel
shirts Sully favors.  That is in no way meant to belittle what
Newman does as an actor.  The fact is that he makes it all look
effortless, as though he's really been Sully all his life, and
someone just happened to turn the camera on at this moment.  The
background for the character (an abusive father, his own abandonment
of his family) seems almost tacked on so the movie seems to be about
something more, but Newman doesn't really need it.  What we are
watching is the story of a man who is somehow coming to terms with
all the choices he has made in his life, and choosing to move
forward rather than stand in place.  It's Newman's gift that he can
do all that with a well-placed sigh and a twinkle in those eyes.

Author
Jason Overbeck
Nobody's Fool is an excellent character piece that starts great and just
keeps getting better.  It also contains a great Academy Award nominated
performance by Paul Newman, as a aged constuction worker witha bum knee
and very limited prospects.  He lives with his eighth grade teacher
(Tandy is her final role) and has been ducked away from responsibility.
I use the word "ducked" because he is finaly trying to make amends for
his past failing as a parent.  For a man who ducked responsibility he
seems to have all the weight on his shoulders, and that is killing his
knee.  With all his responsibility he finds time to feud with Bruce
Willis (over a snowblower and money that Willis might owe him) and flirt
with Willis' wife Melanie Griffith, whom flirts right back.
Most of the best scenes are very quiet, carefull wording of sentences or
responses to actions.  I meantione Newman, because he is grand for this
role, but every other actor seems to do a wonderful job, including some
I haven't seen for a while.  There are wonderful moments between Newman
and his grandson and Newman and Walsh (his son).  Walsh resents Newman
for leaving him when he was young, and Newman (too proud to flat out
apologize) tries to start fresh being a grandfather, that does
grandfatherly things.
I also liked Pruitt Taylor Vince as Newman's slow constuction partner,
and best friend.  It is nice to see them onscreen, the way they
compliment each other.  The understanding that Vince looks at Newman as
something of a father figure and Newman humor him as he talks, yet
beneath the surface there is an understanding that we gain about the
nature of their friendship.
I realize I am talking about Newman and the subtle relationships with
him.  That is this film, I don'tknow where else I could point without it
leading back to Newman.  So why let old habits die hard.
Of all the relationships, Newman with Melanie Griffith is the best. 
They flirt with innuendo after innuendo and talk about where they would
go if they were free.  There is a great scene where Newman and Griffith
talk about Willis' former sercretary.  He issues a subtle dare, "When
Ruby was here she used to wear a see through top, so you might want to
keep up with her."  She responds by lifting up her sweater and flashing
him.  Game, set and match.  By the way, Newman's reaction to this is
ALONE worth the price of a rental.
