Title
Review for Cérémonie, La (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Seth Bookey
France, 1995; in French with English subtitles
"Well, you will certain reconsider hiring help after this movie!" And with
that, Linda and I plunged ahead to see La Ceremonie, director Claude
Chabrol's 55th movie. The opening couldn't be more ordinary--Catherine
Lelievre (Jacqueline Bisset) interviews Sophie (Sandrine Bonaire) at a
cafe.  She needs a domestic worker at her remote home in Bretagne for her
blended family--her rich husband and their children from previous
marriages.
Fate pairs Sophie with Jeanne (Isabelle Huppert), a wacked-out postal
clerk (this stereotype extends beyond America), who has it in for the
bourgeois family. They routinely receive their mail opened, mutilated, or
not at all. The stage for unsettling us is set early, when Catherine picks
up Sophie at the train and Jeanne asks for a ride. She shows an intense
interest in Sophie, and the feeling that *something* is going to happen is
palpable. 
Without giving too much away, the secret Sophie hides is certainly part of
her problem, and it is rather unnerving when it is revealed to us. That
she has not remedied the problem is what seems truly disturbing.  But she
has bigger problems. Both she and Jeanne have had close relatives perish
in suspicious circumstances, and this only bonds them further.
The family goes about its business, with worries about what to have for
dinner, and other petit bourgeois concerns; the university
student/daughter, Melinda, feels free to treat Sophie like a person; but
Sophie grows to dislike this family, with Jeanne fanning the flames for a
personal Marxist revolt. The family is used to having domestic help
around, regardless of how the domestics feel about them. In a capitalist
western nation like France, it is understood that when you are hired as a
maid, democracy disappears, but you are free to leave employment. 
However, this freedom can disappear when you need housing and food. Is
Catherine truly guilty of class insensitivity? The two are clearly
unbalanced, but is there an underlying truth to their outrage? La
Ceremonie is a nice comparison to *Breakdown*; the former pits intimate
strangers against each other and grudges are overblown; the latter shows
strangers deliberately victimizing people at random, and the grudge is
just a rouse. 
Sandrine Bonnaire has never looked more drab, but it suits the tabula
rassa she becomes for Jeanne's vengefulness. Isabelle Huppert, often
likened to an "ice princess"; because of her portrayals throughout her
career (Madame Bovary, Sincerely Charlotte), really opens up as the
unhinged, postal clerk. A very nice surprise is Jacqueline Bisset, who is
elevated to a whole new level when she speaks French throughout a movie. 
Most people remember her for such unilluminating performances as Rob
Lowe's mother and his classmates lover in Class.
Based on Ruth Rendell's novel *A Judgement in Stone*. 
Copyright 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021

Author
Froilan Vispo
The Lelievre family watches a television broadcast of  Mozart's opera
DON GIOVANNI where Leporello serenades a servant-girl, imploring her to
come to the window.  Those watching the opera feel safe in the knowledge
that although the scene is a deception (not wanting to be recognized,
Don Giovanni has hidden himself in some bushes and has ordered his
servant  Leporello to lip-synch to his song), it is a comic one and the
intentions of Don Giovanni are amorous in nature.  Unknown to the
Lelievres, their new housekeeper had received a beckoning from a
stranger and even allowed her inside their home.  
There is no deception to LA CEREMONIE.  In fact, its
narrative - that of a stranger introduced into the home - rings familiar
but its unfolding unnerves nevertheless.  
Much of the success of LA CEREMONIE can be attributed to the faultless
acting of all involved, especially Sandrine Bonnaire who plays Sophie,
the new housekeeper hired by the wealthy Lelievres to tend their grand
country home.  Bonnaire's performance lulls like anaesthesia, assuring
us that the foibles are trivial and that the disquiet in our minds is
undeserved.
Initially, Sophie proves quite capable although strangely quiet and
complacent.  Some household duties exhibit that this exterior calm is a
shaky one, however, but Sophie is boundlessly resourceful in her
determination to keep her shortcoming a secret from the Lelievres.  As
we learn more about what lies underneath Sophie's calm facade - her easy
frustration, her steel resolve and its resulting resourcefulness - the
overall impression becomes less reassuring indeed.  
After Sophie allows Jeanne (Isabelle Huppert), the village postal clerk,
into the Lelievre home, through the window even, the two quickly
establish a friendship.  Their initial antics seem harmless enough,
bordering on childish play and slumber party mischief.  Like Sophie,
Jeanne also has her own secrets judging by the rumours swirling about
her.  As Sophie's relationship with the Lelievres deteriorates, both
women find themselves isolated from everyone else in the village except
each other.  It is a perfect and disturbing fit: Jeanne rambles on
contemptuously against everyone else, complete with gossip involving
each of the Lelievres, while Sophie plays the blank but impressionable
slate who willingly assists Jeanne's minor conspiracies against her
employers.  Or is Sophie the willing co-conspirator with devices of her
own? 
What does the title refer to, "the ceremony?"  The word, with all its
nuances, is an apt one, but the most disturbing dictionary definition is
this: an action performed only formally with no deep significance.  I
will take refuge in the faint hope that the nonchalant senselessness of
it all was supposed to mean something, to be symbolic.  What is certain
is that LA CEREMONIE allows few refuges.
Address e-mail for Froilan Vispo to vispo@bigfoot.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Director Claude Chabrol's work has in fact been compared
frequently to that of Alfred Hitchcock, but he lacks the British
director's efficiency and compactness of story-telling.  Take away a
few subtle implications of quiet class warfare and this is a story that
could have been done every bit as effectively as a half-hour episode on
ALFRED HITCHCOCK PRESENTS in the late 1950s.  Given the screentime of
LA CEREMONIE, Hitchcock could have told a story by wide margins both
more thoughtful and more entertaining.
     The setting is a small but modern village on the northwest coast
of France.  Sophie (Sandrine Bonnaire) is a mysterious woman who hires
herself out as a maid to an upper-middle-class family.  Her employers
are the bland Catherine and Georges Lelievre (Jacqueline Bisset and
Jean Pierre Cassel).  Given their personalities, Sophie is
understandably very standoffish with her new employers.  She seems to
prefer retreating to the solitude of her room to having any beyond the
required contact with the Lelievres.  Instead she watches the
television. What nobody realizes is that Sophie has a rather surprising
secret, one that she protects with surprising dexterity.  The little
human contact she does make is instead with Jeanne (Isabelle Huppert)
the clerk at the village post office whose mild if slightly surly
demeanor hides a lot of rage for the more wealthy around her.  This is
a French film, but it fits well with the new American stereotype that
post office workers have an insidious side.  Sophie and Jeanne share a
common distaste for life in the village in general and of the Lelievres
in specific.  Chabrol hints at more than friendship and the beginnings
of a physical relationship between the two. Each finds the other a
sounding board for her rage and together they just might do the
unthinkable things that they never would do without each other.
     Basing the film on the novel A JUDGMENT IN STONE by Ruth Rendall,
Chabrol very slowly and deliberately paces the film though not really
adding a lot to the depth of his characters.  We see a good deal of
Georges and Catherine, but we never get to know very much about them
except that they are most comfortable with each other and with their
two children.  They have a hard time being very warm toward an intruder
in their house, even if the intruder has been hired by them.  While
they seem to be favored with wealth, their attitudes toward others
outside the family is stand-offish and self-absorbed at best.  Chabrol
takes a few cheap shots at the family and their class.  At one point
Jeanne is faced with having Sophie as a house guest for an extended
period of time.  She has lived comfortably on her post office salary
but with a second mouth to feed she comments that it will be hard for
them to eat.  Chabrol immediately cuts to the Lelievres eating a
somewhat fancy meal.
     In the final analysis, this is really not a lot deeper or more
impressive a film than various American films in which the hired hand
turns out to be more than a handful.  While the conflict is not as
one-sided as that in films like THE TEMP and THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE
CRADLE, LA CEREMONIE is really not far from that genre.  The
denouement, when it comes, has a few logic problems.  This film has
done well by the critics, but it is seems to have its problems.  I rate
it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     SPOILER... SPOILER... SPOILER... SPOILER... SPOILER... SPOILER...
SPOILER... SPOILER...
     If the recorder was running all evening, recording the opera,
would the family have been talking over the opera, essentially ruining
the recording?  At what point did the recorder come off record mode
with the people present not realizing it?

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sandrine Bonnaire, Isabelle Huppert, Jacqueline Bisset, 
      Jean-Pierre Cassel, Virginie Ledoyen, Valentin Merlet
Director: Claude Chabrol
Producer: Marin Karmitz
Screenplay: Claude Chabrol and Caroline Eliacheff based on the novel 
      A JUDGMENT IN STONE by Ruth Rendell
Cinematography: Bernard Zitermann
Music: Mathieu Chabrol
U.S. Distributor: New Yorker Films
In French with subtitles
     At the beginning, Claude Chabrol's creepy, atmospheric thriller, LA 
CEREMONIE, looks like it's going to be another entry into the popular 
"stranger among us" genre.  And, while the film never completely frees 
itself from this label, it's everything that THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE 
CRADLE wasn't:  dire, tense, unpredictable, and, ultimately, satisfying.  
LA CEREMONIE isn't movie-making by numbers; it's the work of an adept 
director intent on using dialogue and tone to drive his story.
     LA CEREMONIE, based on the novel A JUDGMENT IN STONE by mystery 
writer Ruth Rendell, introduces us to Sophie (Sandrine Bonnaire), a 
humorless, efficient woman who has applied for the position of live-in 
maid for the rich Lelievres.  After a brief interview with Catherine 
Lelievre (Jacqueline Bisset), she's hired.  Several days later, she 
reports to work -- a large, isolated house in the French countryside -- 
and meets the rest of the family.  There's Georges (Jean-Pierre Cassel), 
the stern, erudite patriarch; Gilles (Valentin Merlet), the couple's 
son; and Melinda (Virginie Ledoyen), Georges' pretty daughter from a 
previous marriage, who stops by every once in a while when she has a 
break at college.  
     It's a lonely life for Sophie, who, lacking friends, throws herself 
wholeheartedly into her work.  At nights, she holes up in her room 
gazing glassy-eyed at TV game shows while the family chats away 
downstairs or watches DON GIOVANNI on their big-screen TV (with the 
audio hooked up to an expensive stereo system).  Eventually, Sophie 
makes a friend, but, as far as the Lelievres are concerned, it's the 
wrong friend.  Jeanne (Isabelle Huppert) is a gossipy postal clerk with 
a disturbed history who manipulates her way into Sophie's confidence.  
It's clear that she has a grudge against the Lelievres, but uncertain 
how far she's willing to go to settle the score.
     LA CEREMONIE succeeds on many levels, not the least of which is the 
expert way in which Chabrol develops the tension.  Scene after scene, he 
raises it almost imperceptibly, drawing us in through the slow-moving 
plot that gains momentum as it charges towards a devastating finale.  
There's also a sardonic, ironic quality to the film that is never more 
apparent than at the end, as the closing credits crawl over LA 
CEREMONIE's concluding images.
     One area where Chabrol meets with only limited success is in his 
approach to Sophie.  The problem is that, despite attempts to flesh her 
out, she never attains the multi-dimensionality necessary to make her 
real to the audience.  Even Sophie's struggles with her dark secret 
(she's illiterate and ashamed of it) don't do more than fill in a few 
blanks.  And it can be argued that Sandrine Bonnaire's icy performance 
is a little too distant, which only adds to the gulf between character 
and audience.  The rest of the cast is quite good, especially Virginie 
Ledoyen as the sympathetic Melinda and Isabelle Huppert as the scheming 
Jeanne.
     Chabrol takes a number of calculated shots at France's pampered 
upper class, showing rather graphically how offensive their attempts at 
sympathy can be.  What seems to Catherine and Georges like a genuine 
attempt to take an interest in bettering Sophie's life comes across to 
the object of their "kindness" as unwanted and condescending.  Of 
course, it doesn't help that Jeanne is always on hand, ready to apply 
the most unflattering interpretation to anything the family does.
     Those who have seen films like HEAVENLY CREATURES, FUN, and SISTER 
MY SISTER will recognize similar themes running through those films and 
this one:  two people influencing each other in such a manner that, 
together, they act in a way that neither would act alone.  Chabrol does 
not develop this scenario quite as well as the above mentioned films do, 
but LA CEREMONIE is invested with enough creepiness and skill that the 
payoff is worth enduring any rough spots along the way.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
vergerus@interlog.com
Claude Chabrol's "La Ceremonie" is a return to the bourgeois 
thriller and to the heights scaled by the director almost thirty 
years ago, in such films as "Une Femme Infidele" and "Le Boucher." 
 However, "La Ceremonie," which is an adaptation of Ruth Rendell's 
"A Judgment in Stone," finally transcends its generic trappings to 
take its place among the most frightening and disturbing of all 
films.
The narrative concerns a strange, remote young woman named Sophie 
(Sandrine Bonnaire), who is hired as a maid by an "haut bourgeois" 
family, the Lelievres, to care for their provincial mansion.  
Sophie performs her chores with an admirable efficiency, but she is 
sullen and withdrawn, and she spends her free time alone, riveted 
to the television set in her room.  We soon learn that she is 
illiterate and is paranoid about concealing this fact from the 
Lelievres.  In time, Sophie strikes up a friendship with Jeanne 
(Isabelle Huppert), the uninhibited village postmistress, who bears 
a grudge against the Lelievres and their wealth....
That's basically the story, but in the end it seems far less 
important than the film's rich accumulation of characterizations 
and details, which remains vivid in the memory long after the film 
is over: Sophie and Jeanne's "bonding," in a paroxysm of giggles; 
the Lelievres garbed in evening dress to watch an opera telecast; 
the manner in which Melinda, the Lelievres' daughter, returns a 
borrowed handkerchief to Jeanne; the stricken expression on 
Sophie's face when her illiteracy may be discovered.
"La Ceremonie" has been presented as a "thriller," and while the 
film fulfills certain generic expectations, some viewers have 
expressed dissatisfaction at the film's detached tone, the lack of 
sympathetic characters, and the alleged "pointlessness" of it all. 
 But, finally, the film is not strictly a genre work, and therefore 
it's senseless to attempt to impose generic (Hollywood) conventions 
on it.
Chabrol's cold, even clinical, manner is off-putting to some, but 
it has always been the essence of his style.  In "La Ceremonie," it 
is precisely his refusal to moralize, and thereby to provide easy 
answers, which makes the film so resonant as well as ironic.  It's 
not difficult to surmise on which "side" the director stands, in 
terms of the class opposition presented in the film, but his 
approach remains remarkably balanced.  Chabrol's art is one of 
observation, and it ensures that we are free to interpret for 
ourselves.
Our need for a protagonist is not only a Hollywood convention, of 
course, but one of classical and modern narrative forms.  Chabrol 
scorns this need, and in the two "unsympathetic" lead roles, 
Sandrine Bonnaire and Isabelle Huppert are superb.  Huppert 
exhibits a much greater vitality than American audiences have come 
to expect of her, and her Jeanne is a mischievous meddler laced 
with a truly malevolent edge.  Even more impressive is Bonnaire's 
brave, uncompromising performance as Sophie: both she and Chabrol 
have the audacity to present a central character who is cold and 
withdrawn and enigmatic.  We are provided several clues as to the 
possible sources of Sophie's sullen, aloof demeanor, such as her 
illiteracy and the strong intimation that she has perpetrated a 
crime.  (And if she did indeed commit it, why?  Was she abused or 
oppressed?  Is her illiteracy something that was forced upon her?) 
 It is quite deliberate that we never really understand her, 
because for Chabrol there can be no simple cause-and-effect.  The 
incomprehension and emotional distance that we, as an audience, 
feel towards Sophie are not only essential to producing the film's 
underlying sense of tension and discomfort; our alienation from her 
puts us precisely in the shoes of the Lelievre family, and also 
makes Sophie's final actions simultaneously more unexpected and 
more plausible.
What does the film finally mean?  Don't expect the Hollywood 
"we're-going-to-spell-this-out-for-you" approach.  Certainly, 
Chabrol intended "La Ceremonie" as a critique of the French class 
struggle, but it's also about the breakdown of human relationships 
and the substitution of mass communications (television); about how 
one personality emotionally and morally overwhelms another; about 
the commonplace nature of evil.  And in his rather weighty review 
in "New York," David Denby has said that the film is about "the end 
of civilization."  Given that "la ceremonie" refers to the 
colloquial French term for "dead man walking," he may just be 
right.
