Title
Review for Enemy Below, The (1957)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE ENEMY BELOW (1957) *** Produced & directed by Dick Powell. Written
by Wendell Mayes, from the novel by D.A. Rayner. Photgtaphy, Harold
Rosson. Editing,Stuart Gilmore. Art design, Lyle Wheeler, Albert
Hogsett. Music,Leigh Harline. Music director, Lionel Newman. Special
Effects, L.B.Abbott.  Special Soundd Effects, Walter Rossi. Cast: Robert
Mitchum (Capt. Murrell),Curt Jurgens(Von Stolberg),David Hedison(Lt.
Ware),Theodore Bikel(Schwaffer),Russell Collins(Doctor),Kurt Kreuger(Von
Holem), Frank Albertson,Biff Elliot, Alan Dexter,Doug McClure, and many
others. 98 min.Not rated. Color,  
Director Dick Powell was the juvenile or young tenor in many musicals,
who made a strange about-face and turned to often convincing tough guy
roles. His most memorable one was in the film noir "Murder, My Sweet." 
Later he produced an directed five features, of which Number Four, "The
Enemy Below" is by far the best, and good by any standards.  
It is a World War II submarine yarn about an American destroyer
captained by Robert Mitchum who is hunting down a German sub 
in a cat-and-mouse game. The U-Boat is commanded by Curt Jurgens. His
able second and good friend  is played by Theodore Bikel.  
A sure-handledly directed film, it may be formulaic, but with a
difference, mostly because of the interesting resemblances and
differences between Mitchum and Jurgens, and some solid
characterizations in other roles. Naturally, it has the expected quota
of stiff upper lip and "Up periscope!", some bits about humanity, and
last minute sentimental touches thrown in. 
Within the war film genre there is a sub-genre about undersea warfare.
Within the latter, there is a  sub-sub-genre--as here-- which celebrates
the respect that brave, professional commanders feel for their
opponents' skill and courage. There's a job to be done, and it must get
done without hate, without showing the enemies as cruel men, if not
monsters. In fact the main German opponents are humanized and rather
"sympatisch." The opposing commanders are not rah-rah or gung-ho, but
tired of war and disillusioned.
There are several good moments that work well without pummeling you with
bathos or with funny stuff. Two examples at random: 1)  the Germans
defiantly singing the stirring "Ich hat' ein' kamerade"; 2)  the
American crew in a lifeboat, returning to the  sinking vessel to get
their Captain and one man saying: "Come on, Sir, I'm double-parked
downstairs."
This said, the movie is still  a far cry from the pronounced realism and
the de-glorification of war that is  found much later in the German 
"Das Boot" (1981), the best of submarine movies.
The action scenes are good but will not fool experienced eyes. Many
shots betray the use of miniatures in a tank, with the additional dead
giveaway of flames and waves that are too big. (They may make you wonder
who are the lucky people who may have inherited some of those finely
crafted toys.) 
This 20th Century Fox film was done in CinemaScope. When shown on
television not letterboxed but via the infamous pan and scan system that
cuts off both sides, the loss of widescreen, so useful for giving one a
good view of submarine interiors, hurts the story and the esthetics.
"The Enemy..." was the first film ever made with a script by Wendell
Mayes, whose writing credit appears in 15 films from 1957 to 1982,
including "The Spirit Of St. Louis," three Otto Preminger films 
("Anatomy Of A Murder," "Advise and Consent," "In Harm's Way,")  
"Von Ryan's Express," and the excellent Vietnam War movie  
"Go Tell The Spartans." 
Walter Rossi won an Academy Award for his special sound effects. (Edwin
Jahiel)
