Title
Review for Pyromaniac's Love Story, A (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     Ever had this experience?  You're at a party and someone tells a 
joke.  It's not all that funny, but it's worth a laugh.  Later, they 
tell it again.  This time, it's not even a little amusing.  And they 
keep at it, all through the night, to the point where this repetition 
becomes irritating.  That's sort of what A PYROMANIAC'S LOVE STORY is 
like:  it's pleasant in the beginning, gradually becomes boring, then 
eventually degenerates into the kind of excruciating experience that 
will have you squirming in your theater seat.
     The movie starts out as another tale of unrequited love.  Sergio 
(John Leguizamo) is head-over-heels for Hattie (Sadie Frost), but she 
thinks of him as just a friend.  While Sergio is content to stay in the 
city and work for his pastry chef boss, Mr. Linzer (Armin Mueller-Stahl),
Hattie wants to travel and see the world, so naturally Sergio is anxious
to save as much money as possible so he can afford to accompany her.  But
it's not easy to get rich on his salary.
     Then one day, the pastry shop burns down, and a man comes to Sergio 
with an offer--take the blame for the real arsonist, his son Garet 
(William Baldwin), and make a quick $25,000.  Sergio is uncertain until 
Linzer is arrested for torching the business, then he goes to the cops 
with his made-up version of events.  From there, things go downhill.  
Hattie expresses nothing but anger and disappointment, and Garet turns 
out to be anything but grateful.
     At the heart of A PYROMANIAC'S LOVE STORY is a series of mix-ups, 
chief of which is the identity of the actual arsonist.  We, the 
audience, know who it is, but at least four people confess to the crime, 
which keeps a steady stream of the guilty and innocent flowing in and 
out of jail.  However, buried under all this convoluted dross is a 
reasonable love story.  In fact, the film is supposed to be about the 
necessity of passion in everyone's life (with fire as an all-too-obvious 
metaphor).  Unfortunately, there's not nearly enough interaction between 
Sergio and Hattie to allow A PYROMANIAC'S LOVE STORY to succeed.  It's 
too bad, because there is some chemistry here.  Leguizamo is a likable 
actor, and Frost has an element of the same star quality apparent in 
such box-office draws as Marisa Tomei and Sandra Bullock.
     A PYROMANIAC'S LOVE STORY is one of those motion pictures that 
tries too hard to be offbeat.  The result isn't as tedious as DESTINY 
TURNS ON THE RADIO, but that's not saying much.  William Baldwin's
over-the-top performance is jarring, especially considering how
understated everything else is.  But the failure of this movie isn't one
man's fault--it's a combination of things, too few of which work.  The
lesson here is that if you're going to make a comic fable/love story,
make sure it's funny, magical, and/or romantic.  If it's none of the
above, the stillborn result will be something like A PYROMANIAC'S LOVE
STORY.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It is usually a dead give away that a film with a cutsey name is
going to be a dud.  Then I looked at the cast and was pleasantly
surprised to see it contained, not only William Baldwin, but several
great actors: Michael Lerner, Joan Plowright and Armin Mueller-Stahl.
It did not help.  The movie, despite being a kind of fairy tale, was a
bore and for the following reasons:
     1) It had one theme: when people are in love they will do
anything for their lover.  But you do not make every scene in the film
based on that one idea.  This film did just that over and over again.
     2)  It was silly, unexciting and predictable.  When Linzer's
(Armin Mueller-Stahl) Bakery burns, his pastry boy Sergio (John
Leguizamo) thinks his boss did it for the insurance. John loves Hattie
(Sadie Frost) and when the father of the arsonist offers John $25,000
to take the rap, he accepts because after a probable probation, he will
have enough money to marry and travel with Hattie.  Pretty dumb.
     3)  Every few minutes, someone else says "He (she) did not start
the fire; I did it."  Why are they saying it?  Because they love the
person who last confessed and is now in jail and they are willing to
sacrifice themselves.
     4)  Most of the famous actors mentioned above have smallish roles
in the film.
     The only good thing that can be said about the film is that nobody
is harmed ... except, of course, the audience who were enticed into
seeing the film by the "big names" in the cast.  In a word, "borrring."
