Title
Review for Nice Girls Don't Explode (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Other film-makers could take a lesson from this comedy, which gets the right 
mileage out of its simple premise: April Flowers (Michelle Meyrink, a 
regular player in teen comedies) is kept away from boys by her 
overprotective mother (Barbara Harris) because fires have a tendency to 
spontaneously ignite whenever her hormones are aroused.  When it looks as 
though she's about to rekindle a friendship with an old flame (William 
O'Leary), Mom goes into overdrive. 
The film's title is suggestive of those disposable quickies from the Troma 
studio, but it's really nothing of the kind.  I don't know whether NICE 
GIRLS DON'T EXPLODE is underrated, overlooked, or just unknown, but it's an 
appealing comedy.  True, there are no great moments or humorous highlights, 
but the film's buoyant tone remains faithful from start to finish.  This is 
aided by the script's trimming of subplots and padding, so that the story is 
almost solely constructed of ongoing oneupmanship between Harris and 
O'Leary, with Meyrink caught in the middle.  Wallace Shawn plays a fourth 
character (a pyromaniac that has trouble making friends!) just to give the 
other three something to bounce off.  What I like about the film is that all 
four of the film's central players not only give totally different 
performances, as if they had been placed together from four separate 
comedies, but also relate to each other in very different ways - e.g. Shawn 
meets Meyrink in a psychiatrist's waiting room, sells incendiary supplies to 
her mother, and makes friends with her boyfriend in jail, yet is completely 
unaware that the three of them have any outside connection.  It's this state 
of inhabiting their own private universes that prevents everyone in the film 
from noticing anyone else's eccentricities - the spillover effect is that we 
don't think they come across as that unusual either. 
The whole idea of teenage hormones literally catching alight in the heat of 
passion makes NICE GIRLS DON'T EXPLODE a humorous reminder of those old 
public information films that American youth was shown in the 50s.  If it 
weren't for the clothes and cars, you'd swear that this film was supposed to 
take place in that era.  In fact, it is so wholesome in its execution that 
it almost could have been made back then - but it's plain that the film's 
appearance is meant to perpetuate the tongue-in-cheek 50s morality of the 
whole enterprise. 
