Title
Review for East of Eden (1955)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
In 20th Century one of the easiest ways for people to become
immortal came in the form of early, premature death. At
least, that was the case with celebrities, which became
legends sometimes simply by dying before showing all their
potentials. One of the best known examples is, of course,
James Dean. He died at the age of 24 and had only three
major roles, but those three roles were enough for him to
become one of the most recognisable Hollywood icons. Perhaps
his cult status came from the simple fact that his image of
rebel youth remained untarnished by all age, and universally
appealing for all future generations. That may be true, but
also few people should forget that Dean was one of the
greatest actors of its time, if not one of the greatest
actors who ever worked in Hollywood. His talent is displayed
in his first major film, EAST OF EDEN, 1954 drama directed
by Elia Kazan.
Plot of this film, based on the novel by John Steinbeck, is
set in California during World War One. Adam Trask (played
by Raymond Massey) is a ranch owner in Salinas Valley,
righteous and noble man whose respect in the community is
undiminished even after disastrous business venture.
Everyone around Adam seems to be happy except his son Cal
(played by James Dean), troubled young man who was always
jealous of the love and attention his brother Aron (played
by Richard Davalos) receives from his father. His jealousy
was recently inflamed with his feelings towards Aron's
girlfriend Abra (played by Julie Harris), as well as with
frustrating discovery of estranged mother Kathie (played by
Jo Van Fleet), owner of the brothel in nearby town. In Cal's
mind, the only way to earn love and respect of his father
lies in a business venture that would compensate father's
recent losses. His scheme, that includes borrowing money
from mother and investing in beans, business made lucrative
by war, is successful but it actually causes a chain of
events with tragic consequences.
I never read Steinbeck's novel, but long time ago I've been
watching 1981 four-hour mini-series based on it. That
series, naturally, covered much larger territory than
Kazan's cinema version, and, consequently, all who watch the
latter one can't help noticing lack of many interesting
subplots, situations and characters. Compared with
television version, 1954 script by Paul Osborn looks barren
and simplistic, and the story sometimes have biblical
elements that are too obvious. On the other hand, despite
that, EAST OF EDEN still has strong dramatic potentials, and
director Kazan uses that by assembling terrific cast which
gave memorable performances.
The only one awarded by "Oscar" for this film was Raymond
Massey as virtuous Adam, and his role is really engaging,
since it requires whole set of different emotional states -
from patriarchal stoicism, across despair towards final and
inner serenity. But, the real star of this film is,
naturally, James Dean. He was simply perfect to play this
part, because troubled, neurotic Cal in many ways resembles
misfit, rebellious 1950s youth in America - generation whose
icon Dean later became. Dean used method acting to the full
extent (with Kazan making deliberately him drunk during the
shooting of one scene), and although, especially in the
beginning, his mannerism could slide into overacting, in the
end it rewards our patience with strong emotional impact. Jo
Van Fleet, who played his mother, received a "Oscar"
nomination, but her performance, although good, didn't
deserve it, at least not compared with underrated role by
Julie Harris. Harris, who would later be remembered most by
her role in 1963 version of HAUNTING, was perfect for the
role of Abra; she portrays her as plain looking yet
attractive all-American girl, the only person that can find
understanding for troubled Cal, since deep under her
righteous surface she shares his frustrations.
Since he had such a good cast, Kazan probably thought that
he shouldn't much bother with the visual details. EAST OF
EDEN looks plain in all scenes that don't feature actors,
and even some that do aren't best directed. Idea to
symbolise conflict and the twisted states of mind through
unusual camera angles was already used by other directors
and here it gives impression of artificiality that was quite
unnecessary for this film. On the other hand, Kazan in this
film used opportunity to comment on some darker sides of
American society. EAST OF EDEN is one of the rare films that
deal with anti-German chauvinist hysteria that erupted in
USA immediately after American entry into WW1. Although
apocryphal in the context of this film, this subplot would
be quite interesting for some who are still troubled with
the way USA treated its Japanese citizens in the next world
war, as well for those who are still undecided about Kazan's
own role during McCarthy hearings.
But, I doubt that many would watch EAST OF EDEN with such
heavy thoughts on their mind. James Dean is still the main
reason why should we enjoy this very good example of 1950s
cinema.
