Title
Review for Nosferatu: Phantom der Nacht (1979)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mike Watson
NOSFERATU THE VAMPYRE (Germany 1979)
This extraordinary re-telling of Bram Stoker's "Dracula" by German
filmmaker Werner Herzog deserves the most prominent of places in
cinematic vampire lore.  Inspired by F.W. Murnau's 1922 silent film of
the same name, Herzog's film is a work of exquisite bleakness, an
oddly touching tragedy with a beautiful and uniquely haunting quality
that lingers long afterwards.
The original full-length English and German language versions of
NOSFERATU have at last received a video release by U.S. distributor
Anchor Bay Entertainment, and in gorgeous widescreen prints.  Until
now only a shortened English language version of the film was
available on video, and only in Europe.  Both of these re-releases
restore the film to its full length, but viewers should still be wary
of the English version due to its often stilted dialogue.  Apparently
the English dialogue coach Herzog had on the set during filming was
incompetent, and some of the voices also seem to be dubbed.  The
German version with English subtitles remains the definitive one.
Everyone knows the story of Dracula.  Or do they?  His story has been
so bastardised on film over the years that a brief reminder of the
basic plot certainly won't hurt.  
Jonathan Harker is a young lawyer sent to the gloomy castle Dracula in
Transylvania to do business with a creepy count (played by Klaus
Kinski) who wants to buy a house in Harker's hometown.  Upon seeing a
photo of Harker's wife (the radiant Isabelle Adjani) he instantly
falls in love with her.  Locking Harker up in his castle, he sets off
on a long journey to meet this woman whose beauty so bewitches him.
Upon divining his identity as a vampire, Adjani seduces the count and
lures him to his death one morning as the sun rises.
That is a story familiar to millions, but Herzog has elevated Stoker's
tale into the realm of - and I use this term a tad reluctantly -
cinematic art.  NOSFERATU is as much a meditation as it is a film,
shot through blue-ish and white filters and peopled with characters
who perform as if they were half hypnotised.  The film's surreal,
dream-like quality is utterly mesmerising.  There is much to enjoy,
but I'll limit my praise to a few key points.
Holding the film together is Kinski's remarkable performance as Count
Dracula.  Past screen portrayals, including Bela Lugosi's famous turn,
have largely been one dimensional and tended towards camp.  But
Kinski...oh boy, this is something far more compelling.  Aided by a
startling make-up job, he portrays Dracula's vampirism not simply as
pure evil but as some sort of loathsome disease.  This man is
dreadfully lonely.  He lives in utter solitude, shunned by the locals
for his hideous appearance and reputation for bloodlust.  Kinski's
portrayal of the Count is both creepy and deeply affecting.  When he
dies, you almost feel as if this man's tortured soul has been freed at
last.
Then there's the unforgettable soundtrack, largely composed by German
group Popul Vuh.  It is so eerily beautiful and evocative that it's
quite impossible to imagine the film without it.  Popul Vuh are
longtime Herzog collaborators and play an ancient-sounding kind of
spacemusic using piano, chants, and exotic instruments.  When I first
saw this film some years ago I was so impressed I tracked down and
bought a number of their albums.  The one I still listen to the most
is "Tantric Songs", from which most of the music in NOSFERATU is
taken.  It's a testament to the music's depth that it is as powerful
without the pictures as it is with them.  The album is still available
on the highly respected ambient and world music label Celestial
Harmonies.
This is a timely re-release by Anchor Bay.  After Francis Ford
Coppola's unscary and woefully overblown version of Bram Stoker's tale
in 1992, it is a joy to go back to Herzog's film and see the amazing
things he has done with what is now a century-old story.  To some
aficionados, NOSFERATU is quite simply the greatest vampire film ever
made.  Without a doubt, it is an unmistakable classic of the genre.
Don't miss it.

Author
Thomas E. Billings
* Sometimes listed as NOSFERATU THE VAMPIRE
Synopsis:
     Very classy and stylish version of the Dracula story. A remake of the
classic 1927 film by F.W. Murnau, NOSFERATU. Of interest to fans of vampire
movies.
Germany (German with English subtitles), color, 1979.
Director: Werner Herzog
Principal cast: Klaus Kinski, Isabelle Adjani, Bruno Ganz
     There is no need to detail the plot of this film, other than to say that
it is a very well made version of the classic novel, DRACULA, by Bram Stoker.
Klaus Kinski stars as the evil ghoul, Count Dracula.  Kinski's Dracula has a
shaved head, and he wears white make-up for a distinct "ghoulish" appearance.
     According to the information available to me, the film follows the
original novel storyline very closely.  As such, it may interest individuals
who liked the book, but not the numerous film versions that modify the story
("rewrite" might be a more accurate description for many of the Dracula films).
The film has a "gothic feel," and is very well done.  There is very careful
attention to detail, and the film was shot on location in Eastern Europe.
     One attraction of the film is its music, done by the German group Popol
Vuh (Florian Fricke, Daniel Fichelser).  Their music falls into the category
that is now called "new age," although Popol Vuh began in 1971 as part of the
early German electronic music scene.
     The acting is excellent, although it may be a bit understated.  Kinski's
Dracula comes across as a very strange recluse, rather than the flamboyant,
arrogant persona evident in other Dracula films.  This makes the story more
"believable."
     This film is a staple at many repertory theatres.  Some theaters screen it
several times a year, usually pairing it with more recent vampire films.  When
I last checked (Fall 1988), it was not available on video, although the 1927
silent version is available on video.
     Overall evaluation: very good.  Recommended if you want to see a "quality"
Dracula film.
Reviewer:  Thomas E. Billings, Department of Statistics
           University of California, Berkeley
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU

Author
Mark R. Leeper
[This review originally appeared in 1979.  It is included here as counterpoint
to Thomas Billings's review. -Moderator]
     To paraphrase JACOBOVSKY AND THE COLONEL, Werner Herzog's new film,
NOSFERATU, is one of the truly great films of the silent era.  While the
film is a color film--just barely--and a sound film--just barely--it comes
off as if Herzog had contritely decided to subject himself to the
limitations and constraints of the pre-sound classics.  The entire film is
shot through a heavy blue filter, leaving the photography with a bloodless,
lifeless feel.  It also makes minimal use of dialogue, seemingly so as not
to take unfair advantage over the original silent NOSFERATU.  It does,
however, repeat many of the same scenes with camera angle and acting style
intact.
     The dialogue--and there is not much more of it than one would find in a
silent film--is mostly delivered in a monotone and often seems
inappropriately pseudo-metaphysical.  A prematurely bloodless Lucy is prone
to spontaneously give forth lines like, "Dr. Van Helsing, is it possible we
are all insane and one day we will awake in strait-jackets?" or, "I fear an
inner, nameless, deadly dear."  Dracula, too, has his share of quotable bon
mots such as, "Time is an abyss, profound as a thousand nights."  The
photography is much in the style of the silent film, with fifteen-second
shots of characters devoid of motion or emotion.  These shots do provide
considerable time to contemplate Klaus Kinski's vampire make-up, which looks
like something between the original Schreck vampire and Milton Berle.  The
only acting that involves the audience in any way but cerebrally is that of
the constantly chuckling Renfield and that of a reluctant city official
official who has a curious scene toward the end of the film reminiscent of
MONTY PYTHON AND THE HOLY GRAIL.
     Even though this film is indirectly based on DRACULA and has some
excellent photography, combining some of the style of German Expressionism
and some of THE SEVENTH SEAL, I cannot see the film having a wide general
appeal in the United States.  It will go down well with the art film crowd
and the rest of the viewing public will probably avoid it.
