Title
Review for Incident at Oglala (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In April of 1992 I reviewed THUNDERHEART, one of a pair of films made
by British filmmaker Michael Apted about the Lakota Indians of the Pine
Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota.  I was and remain fairly negative
on THUNDERHEART because, as I said in my review, the story-telling was not
very good.  I see the story as being extremely cliche-ridden and weak.  I
did--and still do--think Apted's implication that Indian magic really works
weakened rather than strengthened the film.  (This was not intended as and
anti-Indian sentiment, as I feel the same way about any magic in a non-
fantasy film.  As a strict empiricist, I just do not believe in the
supernatural, religious or otherwise.)  At the time I expressed my belief
that THUNDERHEART was the wrong film for the right movement and I expressed
my hopes that INCIDENT AT OGLALA would be better.  It is.
     In spite of Apted having more experience with fiction films, his
fiction films are often melodramatic.  His more political films seem to give
loaded arguments, making the villains dehumanized nasties.  His INCIDENT AT
OGLALA is a solid piece of political argument that cuts right to the bone.
It has its "good guys" and "bad guys" also, but they are condemned by their
own words and by the testimony of people actually involved in the incidents.
It is the authenticity of the documentary style rather than the whim of a
fiction scriptwriter in complete control that makes INCIDENT AT OGLALA so
much better than THUNDERHEART.
     The fundamental conflict documented in INCIDENT AT OGLALA is the
conflict between the traditionalist Indians and those more for assimilation
into the dominant society.  In 1975 the two groups were so much in conflict
that the Pine Ridge Reservation became a literal battlefield with both sides
killing each other in a reign of terror that claimed over sixty victims,
mostly traditionalists.  The FBI aligned itself with the assimilationist
Indians.  On June 26, 1975, two FBI agents were killed in the violence.
INCIDENT AT OGLALA is the story of that shoot-out, what led up to it, and
the aftermath.  One man, Leonard Peltier, went to prison and is serving two
consecutive life sentences.  The film gives apparently strong evidence that
Peltier was railroaded.  Major witnesses are discredited.  Evidence used in
the trial is apparently shown to have been falsified.  In general, the
argument is very forceful.
     INCIDENT AT OGLALA is a powerful piece of documentary filmmaking, far
better than Apted's companion film.  The evidence shown here seems more than
ample to justify a re-trial, so much so that it undermines somewhat Apted's
argument.  It is hard to believe the entire judicial system up to the
Supreme Court is so corrupt that this weight of evidence would be
insufficient to justify a re-trial.  Like JFK, while it is not totally
convincing, it certainly raises questions that should be answered.  I give
it a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
