Title
Review for Yume (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
Akira Kurosawa, has been accused of being a rat, because he will not do a
film for the greedy Japanese studios who want him to make them millions of
yen.  Instead, Akira goes around the world to find funding for whatever work
he has finished writing, and gets it done with very little fuss, and with a
lot of international good will, for his trully
beautiful and colorful work.
And while this type of work may not be indicative of the trend of  Japanese
money making films, it is a love offering for the world of film enthusiasts
which Akira Kurosawa has gained over fifty years of film making.  His work
is staunchly personal, and totally against the 'public' faire, which
Hollywood prefers, as does Tokyo.  In the  process, he makes use of his best
friends around the world, who always produce his work, and make sure it gets
released, despite the man being blacklisted in his own country as a renegade
director.  At least he knows he will be remenbered and revered as an artist,
something that the money makers never will get.  What they get in money,
Akira will
get in years of being remenbered as a stupendous film maker, who deserves
it.
DREAMS is a personal set of short stories on film.  And while they are
unusual, they still stand out.  The three best stories ( gosh I don't even
remenber if there were more in the film ) were the first one which dealt
with a child who sees the spirit of the peach trees ( the deva is the
accurate description ) tell him  that he should keep these trees alive
forever, instead of cutting them down for a development, which seems to be
the obvious outcome as Japan grows and prospers into the industrial world.
The hint is
that all the beauty of these visions will disappear.  An odd piece, in that
things tend to appear and disappear in a dance ritual that is dazzling, and
hipnotic at the same time.
The second one has to do with another young man, who is ready for war, in
his military outfit.  They all march into a tunnel, and on the other end of
the tunnel, only the young man shows up, the rest presumably all dead.  It
is a beautiful metaphor about how
war treats people.  The young man is scared, and immediatelly  lonesome, and
having to deal with his own perceptions and emotions.
Another story is about Van Gogh, and how he worked, played by the director
Martin Scorcese ( a special friend to Akira ), a tribute not so much to the
artist, but to Akira himself, who must consider himself a Van Gogh, in an
age where they do not appreciate the real art of the spirit, much less the
country.
As usual, the film is beautifully filmed, with startling color, and so alive
as to make us quite a part of it.  In the field of flowers, where the
painter works, the camera rarely lifts itself above the level of the flowers
who touch the camera lovingly.  A startling commentary about what art is,
rather than what a movie is.  While the actual 'copy' is not what Van Gogh
does, the camera does the same, by providing us with the real inspiration,
rather than money.
A MUST SEE FILM FOR AKIRA KUROSAWA FANS.
BEAUTIFUL CINEMATOGRAPHY.
PERSONAL FILM, IN THAT IT HAS ELEMENTS WHICH COULD BE THOUGHT OF AS
FANCIFUL FLIGHTS OF THE IMAGINATION.

Author
Malcolm Austin
     DREAMS is the first film by Akira Kurosawa since RAN was released
(in 1986?).  It is composed of eight pieces, each individually titled,
and each describing an incident seemingly taken from a larger story.
All of them of are beautifully filmed, with striking, occasionally
surreal imagery, and a minimum of conversation.  Don't wait for this
film to hit videotape; cropping the pictures will ruin many carefully
composed scenes.
     There is no plot to this film.  The individual scenes do suggest
stories, although they come sometimes from the beginning, middle, or
end of the stories which contain them.  The cinematography is
consistently astonishing.  I saw a PBS special on Kurosawa recently
which showed him painting watercolor visions for what would become the
film KAGEMUSHA.  In DREAMS, he also seems to have carefully constructed
his images.  I can think of a half-dozen individual stills which I would
like posters of.
     The film is relentlessly visual, with long stretches containing no
dialogue.  Like most Kurosawa movies, the pacing is somewhat slow by
American standards.  Scenes are built very carefully.  In "Blizzard,"
for instance, he waits until we experience the same exhaustion that the
characters on screen are going through before advancing the story
along.  The short length of each segment, however, prevents the film
from lagging, at least until the final three scenes.
     The final scenes do take the film down some, as they contain long
speeches about the evils of radiation and industrial civilisation.  I
may be reacting in part to my own negative opinion of the "Split wood,
not atoms" message imposed on these scenes, but I feel that the long
speeches, absent from any of the other scenes, disrupt the visual
storytelling process.  During the afore-mentioned PBS special, Kurosawa
says that he distrusts films that carry meanings.  As he put it,
"Meaning is easy, but style--that is very difficult."  He seems to have
forgotten this sentiment midway through this picture, and employs a
troubling narrative style to present his views.  This is a jarring
contrast to the other pieces.  "The Tunnel," for example, delivers a
very strong and complex "message" without any exposition at all.
     Even these scenes are beautifully made, however.  In particular,
the last scene, which contains no surreal photography (although the
setting is, sadly, all too unreal), is a wonderful celebration of nature
and life.  This film left me deeply moved and in awe at Kurosawa's
ability to compose images.
     The movie may be difficult to find.  In NYC, it is playing at only
one theatre (the 57th St. Playhouse), and I don't think it has been
released very widely.  It is worth the effort, however, so don't pass up
a (probably brief) chance to see this film in a theatre.
