Title
Review for Shikoku (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Dalgleish
"Do a person's feelings have to die with them?"
Starring Yui Natsukawa, Michitaka Tsutsui, Chiaki Kuriyama, Kie Negishi;
Directed by Shunichi Nagasaki;
Written by Kunimi Manda and Takenori Sento, from a novel by Masako Bando;
Cinematography by Noboru Shinoda
        SHIKOKU is named after its setting, and with good reason, for the
setting is vital to its success.  Shikoku is an island in Japan, removed
from the familiar urban environments of Tokyo, Osaka, and the other great
Japanese cities.  It is a remote place where the primal forces of the earth
have not been paved over.  The sky is wide and blue, the mountains are
steep and verdant.  Temples with priapic pillars and womb-like openings
lurk in the depths of the forest.  SHIKOKU tells the story of a woman who
seeks to bring back her daughter from the underworld of the dead, and, in
this setting, it resonates with ancient myths, taking on an elemental power
which is hard to resist.
        Eighty-eight temples circle Shikoku.  They act as a seal,
buttressing the island against the influence of the dead.  Buddhist priests
circle the island, travelling from temple to temple, chanting, invoking,
maintaining the seals.  But the seals can be undone: by traversing the
temples in the reverse order, and performing the appropriate rituals, the
boundary between the living and the dead can be weakened.  Complete the
circuit once for each year of the deceased's life, and she will be brought
back.  The name of the island itself reflects its dual nature: it can mean
both "The Island of the Four Lands" and "The Island of the Dead."
        Sayori was sixteen when she died.  Her mother is a priestess who
can summon spirits, and she decides to resurrect her daughter, so that her
bloodline may continue.  As this is happening, Sayori's childhood friend
Hinako returns to her home village for the first time as an adult.  There
she meets another old friend, Sayori's high school sweetheart Fumiya, and
learns of Sayori's death.  In the days that follow, Fumiya and Hinako are
both haunted by sightings of Sayori's restless spirit.  They become further
perturbed when they learn that Sayori's father has been in a coma for eight
years after a mysterious accident.  They seek advice from a folklore
expert, who tells them about the 88 seals and how they may be broken.  They
learn that Sayori's mother is on her sixteenth pilgrimage around the
island.  They begin to piece it all together, with a growing sense of
dread--which the audience shares.
        The sense of dread, unfortunately, is often undermined by a kind of
niceness or prettiness which underlies the film.  It is beautiful to
behold: the lead actress is beautiful, the village is beautiful, the
surrounding countryside is beautiful.  The cinematography is especially
beautiful, awash in hazy evening sunshine and moon-lit forest mists and
rippling blue light reflected off the surface of still waters.  All well
and good, but it's difficult to feel scared by a movie that at times
resembles an unusually elegant travel brochure.
        The nicety extends to the characters as well.  The ghost is
motivated by that most acceptable of undead sentiments: a love which defies
the boundaries of life and death.  She does bad things, but she is
sympathetic.  Hinako and Fumiya are attracted to each other, and though the
power of ghost stories is amplified by repressed emotions, they are allowed
a tender, perfunctory romantic interlude which effectively unleashes all
their repressions.  In the closing sequence, when drama is called for, we
are instead given an overlong scene in which the characters work out their
differences by having what is almost a therapeutic chat.  Then a dramatic
resolution does come, but Hinako--our focal point--is more observer than
participant.  The brunt of the disaster is not borne by her, and what
should be tragedy seems like mere misfortune.
        Director Shunichi Nagasaki otherwise handles the material expertly.
SHIKOKU does the things horror movies are supposed to do, and does them
well.  A pale hand, slimed with algae, emerging from a black pool.  A bare
room wallpapered with sheets of paper bearing the 88 seals, fluttering in
the wind.  A marvellous scene in which Fumiya sits at a desk reading, and
another character places her hand on his shoulder, and he talks to her
without looking back--but the woman he thinks he's talking to is not the
one who has her hand on his shoulder.  The dramatic irony is played for all
its worth.  None of this is revolutionary, but there is still a deep
pleasure to be gained from a movie which takes timeworn elements and uses
them so well that it almost makes them seem new.  Almost.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com)
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)
