Title
Review for FernGully: The Last Rainforest (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian L. Johnson
75 min., G, Animated/Fantasy, 1992
Director: Bill Kroyer
Voices of: Tim Curry, Robin Williams, Christian Slater,
           Samantha Mathis, Richard "Cheech" Marin, Tommy Chong,
           Tone-Loc
     In Fern Gully fairies fly around helping the plants grow.  One
fairy (voice of Samantha Mathis) gets curious about humans.  She learns
from Batty, a bat, (voice of Robin Williams) that there are humans
nearby.  She goes to see what they are like and, by mistake, ends up
shrinking one.  She brings him back to Fern Gully so his size can be
fixed.  Another fairy (voice of Christian Slater) gets jealous of the
human getting all of Mathis's affections.  The fairies find out from the
human that other humans are going to be cutting down Fern Gully.  They
find out that evil Hexxus (voice of Tim Curry) is behind the cutting
down of Fern Gully and try to stop Curry.
     FERN GULLY...THE LAST RAINFOREST is a very good film with
*important* messages behind it.  One message is that our forests are
important and should be protected.  The other message is that testings
on animals in labs is bad for the animals and shouldn't be done.  I
highly suggest that you go see this film, and if you have children you
can bring them along too.  They may miss the messages, but will enjoy
the animation and the story.  I give FERN GULLY...THE LAST RAINFOREST a
five on a scale of zero to five.  FERN GULLY is rated G which means it
contains nothing objectionable.
     The animation is well done.  It is not nearly as good as what the
Disney studios do, but I liked it better than what the Don Bluth studios
do.  Fern Gully is really colorful and looks like a very nice place.
The land of the humans and the forest that has been leveled looked very
dreary and sad.  The tree-cutting machines, although they look quite
comical, are drawn looking sinister with dark tinted colors.
     The voice talent is from a good set of known actors/actresses.  Tim
Curry (THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW) plays the evil monster of smog,
smoke, etc., that is out to level Fern Gully.  Tim Curry seems to be on
a roll with voices recently.  He was a voice on the premiere of the
television show "Capitol Critters", which I think is now extinct, the
premiere of the television show "Fish Police", which I also think is
extinct now, and an episode of "Dinosaurs".  Robin Williams (HOOK) does
the comical bat who has been used for too many human lab experiments.
Christian Slater (PUMP UP THE VOLUME) is a macho, but jealous, fairy.
Samantha Mathis (PUMP UP THE VOLUME) is the fairy of Slater's interests.
Tone-Loc (THE ADVENTURES OF FORD FAIRLANE and a rapper) does the lizard
that shows up early in the film.  Richard "Cheech" Marin and Tommy Chong
(a.k.a. the drug comedy team Cheech & Chong) do a drugless routine as
Stump and Roots.
     The music is okay, but not as good as the recent BEAUTY AND THE
BEAST and THE LITTLE MERMAID.  It does have a rock beat to it.  At least
the people who do the singing can sing (don't laugh, I have seen some
musicals in which no one in the cast can sing).  The movie is rather
short (only an hour and a quarter in length), which is too bad because I
really enjoyed the movie and wish that it had lasted longer.

Author
Victor-charles Scafati
     What an animation renaissance we are experiencing!  With *multiple*
prime-time animated series on the networks, the revival of after-school
animated programming, Ted Turner and his announced 24-hour cartoon
cable channel,  Bluth's ROCKET-DOODLE around the corner, and Disney's
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, arguably the all-around finest animated motion
picture of all time, animation buffs are having the times of their
lives.  Now they can throw the soon-to-be-released FERN GULLY onto the
pile of quality entertainment.
     I've just returned from a pre-screening of FERN GULLY, and was
astonished at the quality of this film.  It is a superb blend of a good
plot (which doesn't "drown" in its attempt to deliver a message),
quality character animation, lovely backgrounds, and solid voice talent.
     The character animation seems to draw on a variety of influences.
The fairy characters are reminiscent of Ralph Bakshi's work, while the
other animals are far closer to Don Bluth's style.  At times the
characters take on a bit of the "jobbed out overseas" look, but not to
the point of fault.
     The stunning backgrounds never become tiring to the eye, largely do
to the magnificent job the color stylist did in choosing his hues.
There is an apparent color *progression* throughout the film the leaves
the viewer always aware of where the action is taking place, be it in
the canopy of the rain forest, or in Fern Gully, or elsewhere.  Seldom
is this much care taken in the color *style* of a movie.
     The voice talent cast does a perfect job.  Tim Curry plays the evil
antagonist, Robin Williams practically steals the show with his comic
bat character, and Cheech Marin and Tommy Chong turn in predictably
amusing performances.  The other lesser-known performers rise to the
occasion and round out the fine cast.
     Sadly, the music leaves *much* to be desired, but I almost always
say that (unless it's an Ashman-Menken score).  The music is weak, and
the songs are teeny-bopperish.  I don't know *why* animated music
generally has such a poor history (with exceptions, I know), but in my
opinion FERN GULLY will be added to the list of entirely forgettable
animated movie scores.
     I should add that FERN GULLY is a "Politically Correct" theme
movie, but the message is delivered with a degree of subtlety.  Rather
than being obnoxious, it's the sort of movie that parents will be glad
to have their children watch and be influenced by.  By all means, go
see it!
