Title
Review for Diggstown (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     DIGGSTOWN is a film directed by Michael Ritchie, from a script by
Steven McKay.  It stars James Woods, Lou Gossett, Jr., Bruce Dern,
Heather Graham.  Rated R for language.
     DIGGSTOWN is based on Leonard Wise's novel THE DIGGSTOWN RINGERS.
Presumably the novel is better than the script.  Steven McKay, whose
previous claim to fame is the script for Steven Segal's HARD TO KILL,
has no interest in his characters, sets up situations and drops them
without a word, fails to clarify motivations and relationships, and
generally does his best to undermine the fine acting turns by James
Woods, Lou Gossett, Jr., and Bruce Dern, as well as some successful
boxing sequences, and a nicely corrupt small town.
     Of course, it would be a mistake to lay all the blame at the feet
of the writer.  One must also remember the failures of the director,
Michael Ritchie.  Ritchie directed one of the great and timeless
political movie, THE CANDIDATE.  Since then he has been settling for the
small and short-lived: Chevy Chase's Fletch flicks, THE COUCH TRIP, THE
SURVIVORS.  Ritchie has all the earmarks of the classic Hollywood
sellout, as DIGGSTOWN amply demonstrates.
     If you must see this film, go for the performances.  The three
principals are all fine.  Woods is the ex-con con man out to take a big
killing in Diggstown, some sort of small-town boxing capital (named for
its favorite-son boxer, now its favorite vegetable).  Gossett, whom we
are asked to accept as a 48-year-old retired knock-out artist, is
clearly trying to redeem himself for his lowbrow series of IRON EAGLE
movies, sweats, bleeds, and wise-cracks; it's never quite believable, of
course, Gossett is too old and too thick in the waist, despite his
excellent condition, for the part, but still it's a game effort.  Dern
is a cold-hearted, power-hunger s.o.b.  who can betray anyone, even his
own son.  He is reptilian and unctuous, vicious and driven, and one has
to admire his black, black heart.
     The supporting cast is also good, especially Oliver Platt as
Woods's front man, Orestes Matacena as the heavy money from Miami (there
something so sinister about his bald pate and huge ponytail), Thomas
Wilson Brown as Dern's fawning son.  Dern's other hangers-on are also
suitably corrupt and venal.  There are two actors who play a pair of
brothers, whose names I didn't catch, and who did fine in their parts as
two of the fighters who sign on to challenge Gossett to ten fights in 24
hours.
     You might want to catch this one on video, but I cannot recommend
it to anyone but a special-interest viewer, even at matinee prices.  The
script and direction problems simply swamp the acting and the result is
to leave one with a feeling of being cheated by a couple of con men,
which is a little too recursive for real life.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  DIGGSTOWN is a fast, smart film about a
     con job worthy of the "Mission Impossible" team.
     Unfortunately, it leaves holes and unanswered questions and
     has an ending that is just not completely satisfying.  It is,
     however, a good film to get the juices flowing.  Rating: +1
     (-4 to +4).  (Following the review will be a spoiler section
     presenting script problems.)
     Gabriel Caine (played by James Woods) is a con man about to be paroled
and he is not waiting to be released to get into mischief.  He has a scam in
mind that could leave him owning a sizable piece of a redneck town.
Diggstown is a town that lives and dies for boxing.  It is named for a local
boxing legend who once took on five men in one day.  Now the town is
covertly owned by John Gillon (played by Bruce Dern) who runs the town like
a king.  Caine, with a little help from some friends like card sharp and
hustler Fitz (played by Oliver Platt) and a boxer, "Honey" Roy Palmer
(played by Louis Gossett, Jr.) is going to put the squeeze on John Gillon
in an absurd bet that Palmer can take on any ten locals.  Once these two men
set up an honorable bet, each is going to cheat in any way possible to win.
     Steven McKay's screenplay based on Leonard Wise's novel THE DIGGSTOWN
RANGERS races and forces the viewer to work hard to keep up with everything
that is happening in DIGGSTOWN's 97 minutes.  This dialogue is fast and
funny, though the film's best line (starting "Just remember") is reportedly
an ad lib by Woods clever enough that the trailer is built around it.
DIGGSTOWN is directed by Michael Ritchie, who at some time decided to
concentrate on sports films like SEMI-TOUGH, DOWNHILL RACER, THE BAD NEWS
BEARS, and WILDCATS.  That may be a pity, since his one really superb film,
SMILE is about a beauty pageant rather than sports.  Ritchie's DIGGSTOWN is
not as good as SMILE, but it is diverting.  I give it a +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.
     There are problems with the screenplay.  One is that Caine is entirely
too brilliant at knowing what his opponent will do.  He is prepared for
eventualities that he would have no reason to suspect would happen.  Also,
for him to choose the right set of the ten boxers to involve in his plan
requires knowledge that he is unlikely to have had.  Finally, the punishment
at the end seems surprisingly mild when one considers what has happened
before.
