Title
Review for Noz w wodzie (1962)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Knife in the Water" was the first feature
film that Roman Polanski directed, having
earlier made a series of shorts.  It was
also the last film that he would make in
Poland, as critical success and government
interference led to greener pastures in
France and America.
Supposedly the script was written in only
three days, by Polanski, Jerzy Skolimowski
and Jakub Goldberg.  It was a low budget
film with only three actors, two of them
amateurs whose voices were later dubbed
(Polanski himself did the voice of the
drifter).  With most of the story taking
place on a sailboat, only a few sets were
used.  But Jerzy Lipman's cinematography
was very good, as was the script.
The plot has proud, successful sportswriter
Andrzej (Leon Niemczyk) spending a weekend
sailing with his younger, attractive wife
Christine (Jolanta Umecka).  Their marriage
seems loveless, and Andrzej in need of
distraction, so it is little surprise when
Andrzej picks up a nameless teenage hitchiker
(Zygmunt Malanowicz) and invites him to go
sailing with them.
>From the start, Andrzej and the drifter
try to impress each other, with the tensions
rising and falling through a series of
oneupsmanships.  Andrzej has the advantages
of greater life experience, greater physical
size, and the possession of Christine, but
he seems to need the respect of the drifter,
who isn't disposed to give it readily.
Christine tries to be a peacemaker, but
the tension between the men eventually turns
to violence.
"Knife in the Water" is a moody, interesting
character study.  However, it is often slow,
and the ending is a bit contrived to give
Christine and the young man a romantic scene
together.
"Knife in the Water" received an Academy
Award nomination for Best Foreign Language
Film.  The British Academy Awards gave it
Best Film (of any source).  Polanski later
achieved great success in America with
"Rosemary's Baby" and "Chinatown", before
an encounter with a teenage girl forced
him to leave the country.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
