Title
Review for Hav Plenty (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Harvey S. Karten
    When the political correctness movement began it was
fashionable for men to express their feminine side, to show
their emotions freely, to cry when they felt sad.  Then a
backlash developed: women decided they weren't so sure that
men should show their weaknesses and needs so
flamboyantly.  The principal character in the delightful comedy
of manners "Hav Plenty," Lee Plenty (Christopher Scott),
experiments with the fouding ideas of PC, outdoing Woody
Allen in putting himself down.  He's temporarily homeless, but
instead of hiding that actuality to the attractive women he
meets one day, he revels in revealing this information as
though eager to study their reactions.  To his surprise, they
are perversely captivated by his honesty and aggressively hit
on him to such a degree that he actually must struggle to fend
them off.
   "Hav Plenty" may be a screwball, lighter-than-air burlesque,
but it's filled with so much rapid-fire snappy dialogue and
edited so swiftly that it demands your close attention to the
words.  Narrated by Christopher Scott Cherot (who also
wrote, directed, edited and stars in this little gem), "Hav
Plenty" is a movie within a movie, a Pirandellian report of a
series of events that occurred in the life of its director during
the course of a year.  Stretching the theme a bit we could
almost say that it's an African-American "The Last Days of
Disco," focusing on a group of buppies (black, upwardly-
mobile professionals) who are self-absorbed and thoroughly
into themselves, but who underneath their unbending exteriors
display signs of emotional need.
   The story opens on Lee Plenty, a New York writer suffering
from block, whose lucrative book deal has fallen through just
as he had given up his New York apartment.  Left without a
place to stay, he is invited by a buddy he knew from college,
Havilland Savage (Chenoa Maxwell) to her mother's lavish
home in Washington D.C. where he is introduced to Hav's
unhappily married, beautiful sister and to her brazen friend
Caroline.  The more Lee puts himself down, the more the
women are taken by him.  But the materialist Hav, who who
has the deepest affection for him, cannot consider him for
marriage because he is not financially successful.  Hav had
just broken up with a flourishing soul singer, Michael
Simmons (Hill Harper), who had been caught cheating and
who keeps his eye out for admiring women, greeting everyone
with the same expression, "Hey! Love 40, baby!"
   While exposing the audience to the haughtiness of this
upscale group of young black professionals (Hav works in
publishing while her dad owns a lucrative software company),
Christopher Scott Cherot keeps the best lines for himself.  In
the tradition of Restoration Comedy, Cherot spoofs the vanity
of the class, allowing Caroline to sprinkle French into her
conversation and to arrogantly flush a broken toilet despite
warning signs that such an action could cause a rank flood.
    Woody Allen, then, meets Spike Lee in a congenial
comedy that has the excellent Mr. Cherot stopping the action
from time to time to address the audience directly, even
counseling us that he is about to make a fool of himself.  He's
an absolute charmer who unfortunately is to lose his delightful
innocence once he becomes a success in the professional
world.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Chris Cherot, Chenoa Maxwell, Tammi Jones, Robinne Lee, 
      Reginald James, Hill Harper
Director: Chris Cherot
Producers: Chris Cherot and Robyn M. Greene
Screenplay: Chris Cherot
Cinematography: Kerwin DeVonish
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     Despite a host of faults, Chris Cherot's HAV PLENTY is still a 
likable endeavor.  It isn't the most adept feature I've seen recently, 
but it is energetic, earnest, and (at least at times) endearing.  In 
essence, this is fairly commonplace romantic comedy material punctuated 
by a few unusual, albeit not terribly unique, stylistic twists.  As 
Cherot reveals in one of the film's late scenes, his goal with HAV 
PLENTY is not to break new cinematic ground, but to tell a story that is 
likely to find favor in multiplexes as well as in the art houses that 
typically show Miramax fare.
     The movie's title is a play on the names of the two main characters 
– Havilland Savage (Chenoa Maxwell) and Lee Plenty (director Cherot).  
These two are typical mismatched lovers who are destined not to 
acknowledge their true feelings for each other until the final reel 
(that's the way it is with 90% of romantic comedies – if you're not 
comfortable with this, avoid the genre).  She's rich, haughty, and 
cursed with a mercurial temperament.  He's broke, humble to the point of 
self-deprecation, and affable.  The "action" starts on December 31 when 
Havilland, who is dateless after breaking up with an unfaithful fiancé 
(Hill Harper), invites Lee to make the drive from New York to Washington 
D.C. to act as her companion for the evening.  Also at Haviland's New 
Year's Eve gathering are her friend, Caroline (Tammi Jones); her sister, 
Leigh (Robinne Lee); and her brother-in-law, Felix (Reginald James).  
     Lee's one-night stay in D.C. lengthens into a several-days 
vacation, and, during the course of his time there, he is hit on by both 
the unattached Caroline and the newly-married Leigh.  Regardless of how 
attracted he is to the women, Lee rebuffs their advances, arguing that 
it's not the right occasion.  We realize (based on time-honored romantic 
comedy equations, not to mention the none-too-subtle foreshadowing of 
the title) that this is all a prelude to some kind of sexual dance 
between Lee and Havilland.
     This is probably the most color-blind of all the black romantic 
comedies currently available in theaters or on video.  Race is almost 
entirely irrelevant.  It would be possible to use white actors in all of 
the parts with only minimal changes to the script.  The result is that, 
while HAV PLENTY is pleasant enough, it's also generic.  Cherot's 
flourishes (which include Lee speaking directly to the camera and a 
self-referential version of the movie-within-the-movie, a la SCREAM 2's 
adaptation of SCREAM) aren't sufficiently daring to give HAV PLENTY an 
edge.
     Obviously put together with more enthusiasm than technique, HAV 
PLENTY is not a polished production.  Many scenes, especially early in 
the film, are characterized by stilted, unnatural dialogue and strained 
performances.  Lee and Havilland's on-screen meeting, when he arrives in 
D.C., is especially painful to observe due to bad timing from both 
actors.  Moments like this are sprinkled throughout the movie, 
interspersed with material on a somewhat higher level.  The acting is 
mostly solid; although there are no standouts, everyone exhibits a grasp 
of the individual they're playing.  Tammi Jones' Caroline occasionally 
got on my nerves, but that was more the character than the actress.
     HAV PLENTY opens with a caption assuring us that this is a true 
story.  I don't know whether that's a sincere statement or not, and it 
shouldn't affect anyone's enjoyment of the film, but this seems more 
like a fantasy than real life.  There are some nice touches that keep 
the movie from becoming stale (such as a scene where Havilland playfully 
rummages through Lee's traveling bag while trying on his boots), but, 
ultimately, this is pretty familiar stuff – diverting, but not 
exceptional.  However, for those who aren't too demanding about what 
they see, the slim plenty offered by this picture is probably enough.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Joy Wyse
This movie begins  like an amateurish 8mm home movie , but soon at least
the quality of the film  stock  improves.    The characters have surnames
such as Darling, Savage and PLENTY.  It doesn't take a sleuth to realize
that the lead female is HAViland Savage, the and lead male is PLENTY, Lee
Plenty.
The plot basically concerns the lives of a nouveau-riche black family. 
Their money comes from computers, music, etc.   Although they're rich,
Haviland still has the mouth of a longshoreman, letting loose with f...
this and f... , more than polite society would ever accept.  
Plenty  is a homeless guy who is house-sitting for Haviland  and caring
for her cat.  She invites him to her parents' house for the weekend, and
strangely, we never hear another word about that cat.
Haviland has just broken up with her boyfriend, a big time recording
artist.   We are meant to wonder whether she is still in love with him, or
really desires Plenty.  The other females seem to find Plenty
irresistible, which is a bit hard to believe.  
This was a very uneven film.  I have to admit that there are some very
funny moments, yet there was some very wooden acting.  It is a sad state
when you  find  yourself looking at  the pimple on his forehead, or the
beauty mark on the end of her nose.  And, you keep wondering about her
hair.  It doesn't match from scene to scene, and you can't help noticing
it.  
I  never knew where the plot was going, and I don't think that they did
either.  Surprisingly, it was a bit hit at the 1998 Sundance Film
Festival.   

Author
James Sanford
        There are some smart ideas and pleasant performances in ``Hav
Plenty,'' an attempt at a modern screwball comedy involving several
affluent African-Americans, and it's easy to admire writer Christopher
Scott Cherot's ambitions - especially after such recent low-brow
turkeys as ``Ride'' and ``I Got The Hook-Up.''
  But though its heart is in the right place, ``Plenty''
doesn't quite click. Perhaps in the end Cherot spread himself a bit
too thin: In addition to authoring the screenplay, he also produced,
directed, edited and starred in his movie.
  It's his performance as homeless young writer Lee Plenty
that handicaps the picture most severely, since, in order for the
story to work, we must believe Lee is a charmer who proves to be prime
date-bait for the women he meets. Though Cherot dons a threadbare
sweater and tattered jeans to look suitably down-at-the-heels, the
charisma the part requires eludes him.  He tries to make up for this
lack of sparkle by playing cute - blowing bubbles in his juice with a
straw, affecting a hangdog look, making little asides to the audience
- and few things are less attractive than adults trying to be
adorable.
  In form, ``Plenty'' is vaguely similar to director Paul
Mazursky's fondly remembered ``Down and Out In Beverly Hills.'' Lee,
living in his car since he lost his lease on a New York apartment,
accepts a last-minute invitation from sophisticated friend Havilland
Savage (Chenoa Maxwell) to spend New Year's Eve at her family's home
in Washington. Once in the house, Lee is practically attacked by
Havilland's lusty pal Caroline (Tammi Katherine Jones), Havilland's
unhappily married sister Leigh (Robbine Lee) and, finally, by
Havilland herself.
  The ladies just can't resist ... the discreet charm of the
destitute?  Whatever allure Lee possesses, it's not on-screen. Sex and
nudity are also conspicuous in their absence, sort of a surprise in a
movie of this type.
  Cherot's direction is more assured than his acting, and he
gets generally strong performances from his cast. Lee and Maxwell make
strong impressions, generating a sisterly friction that feels
true-to-life, and Hill Harper appears to be having some serious fun as
a Puff Daddy-ish musical impressario.
  If the cinematography by Kerwin De Vonish is sometimes a bit
on the fuzzy side, it's worth noting that ``Hav Plenty'' was made for
only $65,000, a pittance by Hollywood standards. Even so, Cherot
managed to attract Kenneth ``Babyface'' Edwards to supply a seductive
soundtrack, including a Babyface/Des'ree cover of Bruce Springsteen's
``Fire'' that undoubtedly will burn up the charts this summer.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     HAV PLENTY, as we are told in the beginning and reminded during
the film, is a true story.  Life itself is a series of true stories,
but most are not movie material.
     As scripted, directed, and acted by cinematic newcomer Christopher
Scott Cherot, HAV PLENTY limps along at best.  Its dialog is so stilted
- "You know what they say, 'No women; no cry.'" - that the actors are
content to read the screenplay rather than invest much energy in trying
to act it.
     In the story, Lee Plenty (Cherot) is a 28-year-old author and
teaching assistant.  The movie, which happens mainly over the New
Year's holiday, consists of a series of incidents in which various
single and married women try to kiss Lee or take him to bed.  Since he
consistently refuses, Caroline Gooden (Tammi Katherine Jones) figures
that he must be gay.
     Eventually he and Havilland "Hav" Savage (Chenoa Maxwell) get
together, proving that he wasn't gay after all, just picky.  Sexy women
can sit on his lap and ask him to go to bed with them, but he will not
even kiss them.  He's a man who knows his mind, which he frequently
shares directly with the audience in a series of trite and overly cute
monologues.
     Filled with wealthy African-Americans, the story is closest in
tone to LOVE JONES, which was better.  HAV PLENTY's story doesn't go
anywhere.  At the end it subjects us to Lee Plenty's new film, which is
a movie of the movie we've just seen, but with even worse acting.
     "Remember folks that, as outrageous as this all seems, this is a
true story."  Hav tells the camera, but the problem is that it's not
outrageous at all or even the least bit interesting.  HAV PLENTY isn't
so much a bad film as it is a total waste of the audience's time.
     HAV PLENTY runs 1:32.  It is rated R for profanity and would be
fine for most teenagers.

Author
Scott Renshaw
HAV PLENTY
(Miramax)
Starring:  Christopher Scott Cherot, Chenoa Maxwell, Tammi Katherine
Jones, Robinne Lee, Reginald James, Hill Harper.
Screenplay:  Christopher Scott Cherot.
Producers:  Christopher Scott Cherot and Robyn M. Greene.
Director:  Christopher Scott Cherot.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  92 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     HAV PLENTY comes from that school of independent film-making that
enchants some and aggravates others.  Like other recent indy success
stories including THE BROTHERS McMULLEN and CLERKS, HAV PLENTY will win
admirers for its comic charms and low-budget, can-do enthusiasm, even as
detractors line up to fire pot-shots at its gross amateurishness and
complete lack of visual style.  Think of it as Puppy Cinema:  it's so easy
to be won over by their cute, slobbery energy that you may overlook how
much they need discipline to avoid making a mess time and time again.
     Christopher Scott Cherot, the multi-hyphenate creator of HAV PLENTY,
definitely has the puppy thing down cold.  Cherot stars as Lee Plenty, a
struggling would-be screenwriter living out of his car while he waits for
his Big Break.  The maybe-girl-of-his-unrequited-dreams is Havilland "Hav"
Savage (Chenoa Maxwell), a well-to-do New Yorker with whom Lee shares a
love/hate friendship.  During one New Year's weekend at Hav's mother's
home in Washington D.C., with Hav taking time out from her philandering
fiance (Hill Harper), Lee becomes an object of interest for Hav's
high-maintenance friend Caroline (Tammi Katherine Jones), Hav's sister
Leigh (Robinne Lee) and Hav's old prep school chum Bobby (Kim Simmons) --
everyone, it seems, except the one person whose interest he most wants.
     Not everyone could get away with a premise that sounds like a
film-maker's ego-stroking fantasy.  Cherot, however, is so unassuming and
self-effacing -- and so doncha-just-love-him puppy-cute -- that all the
unsolicited romantic advances actually seem like they make him
uncomfortable.  Though far from a polished performer, Cherot has a natural
screen presence, an eye for wry commentary and the rare ability in the 90s
to sell a pratfall.  Simply put, it's easy to like him, even when the
film's narrative gets a little rough around the edges.
     Make that a _lot_ rough around the edges.  Cherot has a solid enough
sense for how to put together a comic scene, but he hasn't got a clue yet
how to unite them.  HAV PLENTY amounts to little more than a series of
vignettes, ideas for character encounters lined up in a row until they add
up to 90 minutes.  The characters are little more than one-dimensional,
occasionally even grotesque caricatures for the deadpan Cherot to react
to.  There are even takes included where the actors clearly fumble their
lines.  In such a makeshift effort, the sly, slick performance of Hill
Harper stands out as a hilarious delight.  Playing Hav's fiance Michael, a
criminally insincere R&B star whose song titles involve such romantic
analogies as comparing a woman to malt liquor in "Love Forty," Harper
creates one genuinely brilliant scene and one great comic character.
     That scene and Cherot's low-key appeal are enough to push HAV PLENTY
over the edge as an entertaining diversion.  Mostly, however, Cherot will
earn plaudits for his good intentions -- for making the film nearly as a
one-man show, for creating a romantic comedy with smart, upscale
African-American characters, etc.  HAV PLENTY ends with Lee finding
success as the "true story" of his relationship with Havilland becomes his
first film.  If Cherot wants to find success beyond HAV PLENTY, he'll need
to mature as an effective story-teller rather than just an effective
joke-teller.  A messy puppy may be cute, but all grown up he's just a
mess.
