Title
Review for American Movie (1999)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Who hasn't dreamed of becoming a filmmaker?  Of receiving a standing
ovation after screening your film for the first time?  Of accepting your
first Oscar while Jack Nicholson flashes you a smile and a thumbs-up?
If you have, then American Movie will bring those dreams crashing down
to reality.  It's a hilarious documentary that follows a struggling
young filmmaker's attempt to complete a black-and-white horror short
about zombies.
The aspiring Spielberg is Mark Borchardt, a high-school dropout from the
blue-collar Wisconsin suburb Menominee Falls.  He has a paper route and
three kids.  He's a greasy metal-head with long hair, thick glasses and
bad facial hair.  His brother fears that Mark is more suited to becoming
a stalker or serial killer than a filmmaker, perhaps fearing that he
could be a victim.  Mark even pronounces the name of the film he's
making incorrectly.  It's Cöven, but Mark says `COH-vin.'  He explains
that the correct pronunciation of the word `coven' sounds just like the
word `oven,' and that can't be right.  Mark sees Cöven as a cash-cow
project that will allow him to fund his dream project – a feature film
about his hometown called Northwestern.  He plans to sell 3,000 Cöven
videos at $15 each.  Despite these quirks, Mark is actually an
intelligent man with an obvious eye for cinema.  An eye like Ed Wood,
but an eye nonetheless.
Movie opens with Mark telling the audience the importance of not blowing
important opportunities because second chances are hard to come by.  He
learned this lesson the hard way, as we soon see footage of Mark on a
local radio show, where he was supposed to be talking up a short film
that he made called Creeps.  Instead, Mark showed up at the radio
station under a beer/marijuana spell that left him babbling incoherently
on the air.
We see Mark open his mail, which includes letters from creditors that
threaten legal action.  We also see an offer of a new credit card,
followed by a gleam in Mark's eye as he realizes he can stay financially
afloat a bit longer thanks to this pre-approved offer.  We also see
clips of other Super 8 horror shorts that Mark has made, including, at
age 14, The More the Scarier.  If the title cracks you up, just think
about the two sequels (and the unfinished third).  There is also a
special-effects extravaganza from Mark's past called I Blow Up, which
features him, umm, blowing up in front of a bathroom mirror.
Realizing he doesn't have the financing to continue Northwestern, Mark
decided to complete Cöven, a film he has abandoned on and off over a
seven-year period.  His Uncle Bill reluctantly provides start-up money
for Mark after his nephew flashes headshots of a beautiful model that he
hopes to land for Cöven.  Mark's best friend Mike, a burnt-out slacker,
often accompanies him, playing a portly Abbott to Mark's stringy
Costello.  Jay and Inarticulate Bob, perhaps.  In fact, because of the
cavalcade of bizarre characters, you might think this is a mockumentary
(a la This is Spinal Tap!).  But it's real.
Movie's director Chris Smith follows Cöven from Uncle Bill's financing
through the local premiere, set against the backdrop of Mark's thirtieth
birthday and the Green Bay Packers 1998 Super Bowl victory.  Smith's
project, which was originally supposed to take six months, stretched to
over two years as Mark continually ran into filming and financial
obstacles.  The two met while editing separate projects and Smith was
taken by Mark's enthusiasm toward filmmaking.  You too will be drawn
into Mark's world, which, although sometimes frightening and often
unintentionally hysterical, is really a very poignant portrayal of the
American Dream.
1:47 – R for adult language and drug content

Author
Aileo Weinmann
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Aileo Weinmann.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/1327fde39a3e33218825682e0025cae9?OpenDocument
Got a serious appetite for life?  Prepare to gorge yourself on AMERICAN
MOVIE's all-u-can-eat buffet of reality.  This documentary's menu:
Destiny, Failure, Family, Friendship, and enough Humor to warrant
bringing a pack of Rolaids for that warm feeling that will invariably
creep up from your gut straight into your heart.
Menomonee Falls, Wisconsin – Mark Borchardt (himself) is a man possessed
by a desire to make movies, budget black & white horror flicks, to be
precise.  After facing the reality that his current project won't get
done before he gets funding, Mark shifts his focus to making money by
finishing his previous film.  Titled Coven, it's about a
substance-abusing writer whose spiral leads him to a self-help group
that is less than supportive.  As Borchardt struggles through continuous
and severe setbacks, the audience comes to understand and care deeply
about his passion.  He is so charismatic that there may be a temptation
to attribute the power of this story to his charm.  Greater than this,
however, is his tenacious determination at what he says is the critical
juncture in his voyage.  With the financial backing of his 82 year-old
Uncle, seemingly inexhaustible loyalty of his friends and mother, and
(quite) a few beers, Mark's core of pure energy just might be enough to
fuel a victorious journey – it's certainly sufficient to infuse the
audience with inspiration.
Then there's Mike Schank (himself) – musician, (very) recently reformed
drug user, and source of some of the best laughs of the year.  Friends
with Mark since childhood, Mike is as true as they come.  He's the kind
of person who has somehow managed to hold on to that simple but profound
wisdom often attributed to children, that usually leaves us as soon as
we stop telling the truth all of the time.
In an odd sort of way, AMERICAN MOVIE gave me the same kind of
satisfaction that comes from really good down home cooking; neither
needs false pretense to make you happy.  In fact, it was so good, I'm
thinking about going back for seconds.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Check out the G-Rex Personal Shopper at http://www.g-rex.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
"We're in America today, and we're ready to roll," says the
indefatigable filmmaker, Mark Borchardt.  Chris Smith's hilarious
documentary, AMERICAN MOVIE, chronicles the innumerable trials and
tribulations of Mark as he sets off to make his magnum opus,
NORTHWESTERN.  (Most of the film, however, has Mark sidetracked as he
attempts to finish COVEN, one of his many cheap horror flicks, so that
he can raise enough cash to complete NORTHWESTERN.)
After winning the Grand Jury Prize at Sundance, AMERICAN MOVIE was
picked up by Sony Pictures Classics for a nationwide theatrical release.
The only recent movie quite like AMERICAN MOVIE was the much better
HANDS ON A HARDBODY, which should be required viewing for anyone who
likes either documentaries or comedies.  What the two films share is a
respectful but honest view of the poor part of America either ignored by
Hollywood or excessively romanticized.  Both take place in the
cinematically unpopular middle of the country.
Actually, AMERICAN MOVIE isn't about making a movie, that's just the
context within which to tell the story of someone in search of the
American dream.  "The American dream starts with me each and everyday,"
Mark proudly tells us.  And for the 30ish Mark, the day starts off with
his paper route so that he can earn some of the money he needs to stoke
the fires of his ambitions.
In the Silicon Valley, young adults dream of striking gold with the next
Internet IPO.  In Milwaukee, in the bleak, cold heartland of the
country, Mark sees film as his ticket to success.  Driving out of his
poor neighborhood of tiny houses and mobile homes, he goes to an upscale
community to show us where he wants to live.  Were it not for the
fabulous success of THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT, we might write-off Mark's
cheesy, slasher flicks as being forever destined to be financial
disasters.  But if another indie filmmaker can ride to fame and fortune
on something that looks like a bad home video, why not Mark, who even
shoots with real film rather than videotape?
Mark, a likable guy with a scraggy beard and long unkempt hair, talks a
mile a minute about his aspirations.  He figures that when NORTHWESTERN
is in production, he'll need a bunch of assistant directors just to hold
the crowds back.  Still, Mark, who comes from the Ed Wood school of
filmmaking, readily admits his deficiencies.  "There's such corny
dialog," he says of his third draft of NORTHWESTERN's script, "that it'd
make the Pope weep."
Although you'll find Mark charming and funny, not everyone has a
charitable view of Mark's potential.  "His main asset is his mouth," his
own brother tells us in candor.  "He's best suited for just working in a
factory."
His buddy and fellow filmmaker, Mike Schank, who looks straight out of
Central casting, acts like his brain was fried years ago.  The rotund
Mike, with his tie-dyed shirt and his wild hair and beard, relates
stories of his abuse of drugs and alcohol, which he has finally given
up.  He steals every scene in which he appears with his sweet, out-of-it
demeanor.  Sent with careful instructions on how to put up flyers for
the world premier of COVEN, Mike walks off without taking the flyers.
When reminded by Mark, Mike just gives him a puppy-dog grin as if to say
that if you didn't place the flyers directly into my hands, it can't be
my fault.
As delightfully inviting as the documentary is, it makes you yearn for a
fast-forward button.  After a fast-paced, promising beginning, Chris
allows his film to lose focus in the middle.  Including too much footage
of Mark's semi-senile, elderly grandfather, Smith lets the picture get
sidetracked.  Footage of Mark bathing his grandfather might work in some
other film, but here it just bogs down the narrative.  His grandfather,
as one of his financial backers, deserves a place in the documentary,
but perhaps not so prominent a one.
Although the documentary is about Mark's films and whether they would
ever get distributed, Chris Smith and Sarah Price, the two filmmakers on
AMERICAN MOVIE, maxed out their nine credit cards buying film stock for
two years, as they followed Mark around.  They eventually did attract
some investors and, after their success at Sundance, a distributor.  The
American dream appears to have come to them quicker than it did to Mark
and Mike, but in America there is plenty of dream to go around.  And
Mark, certainly, isn't one who is likely to ever quit.
AMERICAN MOVIE runs too long at 1:49.  It is rated R for fake-looking
gore and frequent profanity and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Murali Krishnan
The phenomenon of ultra-low budget independent filmmaking has achieved
some measure of commercial success in recent years, with the best
example being 1999's ubiquitous Blair Witch Project. However, for
every film that manages to reach audiences, there are countless many
that go unnoticed. Simply being an independent production does not
mean that a film is being developed from quality source material. Even
when the fundamentals are sound and the filmmaker has a clear vision
for the project, restricted resources can present crippling obstacles
that keep the film from developing into a coherent product.
This film is a documentary that chronicles the struggles of Mark
Borchardt, an aspiring filmmaker, and his attempt to fulfill his
dreams. He is a young man who is unable to keep his personal life
completely stable, but who has a strong vision and an indomitable
determination to succeed in film. Fittingly, Mark does not toil in the
shadows of the studios of Hollywood, but instead pursues his craft in
a working class suburb of Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Mark is a rather odd
person, and thus he is a compelling character to anchor a documentary.
Mark does not have the luxury of being a fulltime filmmaker. He works
menial odd jobs to scrape up enough money to keep his project going,
and to occasionally have a beer with his friends. Mark's background is
fleshed out through interviews with his family members and his
friends. Hardly any character occupying significant screen time comes
across as a "normal" person, and this gives the film a surreal tone.
Particularly Mark's close friend, Mike Schank (whose original music
appears in this film), seems like an exaggerated caricature. The
surrealness gives the impression that this not an actual documentary,
but a fictional mockumentary, where all the humor was actually
scripted.
At the beginning of the story, Mark is working on a feature film,
Northwestern, his master work. However, production must be halted due
to a serious lack of funding. Mark's plan becomes to finish a short
film, Coven, (which is also a work in progress) and use the proceeds
from its sale to underwrite Northwestern. The problem of funding still
remains for his work at hand, but Coven is fully written, and requires
less money since it is only a short.
Since his minimum wage job(s) barely contribute anything, and since
his parents are unwilling to give him more money than they already
have, Mark turns to a miserly uncle, Bill, for funding. Although a
cynic might assume that Mark treats his uncle well because of his
money, it is clear from the footage of Mark's interaction with Bill
that he truly cares for him. These are the most moving parts of the
film. It is not often that one sees a deep intergenerational
relationship in modern cinema (except perhaps for the relationship
between a young child and an elder).
As the story progresses, Mark is able to shoot parts of his film
whenever he has the resources. The story culminates in Mark's final
composition of Coven and its first showing. Small parts of the film
are shown, and it is striking to see how parts that were haphazardly
filmed ended up being so vividly striking.
Ironically, the making of this film was an effort not unlike Mark's
struggles. The budget was always an impediment, equipment broke,
footage was lost, and many other obstacles were faced that were
typical to an independent feature. The result here, unlike many
projects that become overwhelmed by obstacles, is a coherent and
successful film.
Recommended. Fans of independent film will enjoy this portrait of a
quirky filmmaker. Non-fans of the genre will be entertained by this
look at an odd individual. Although the narrative of the documentary
lacks some smoothness, it is still a compelling story with highly
interesting characters, and even some suspense in seeing whether the
filmmaker achieves his goals.
