Title
Review for First of May, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mac VerStandig
***Note: Given the excellence of this film, I have added it to the 
Moviereviews.org top 100 list at the #82 position.***
***Note: As of June 20, 1999 no studio had purchased the film for 
distribution and therefor no release date has been set.***
Paul Sirmons' directorial debut is entitled "The First of May", a term 
that the film explains is given to youngsters in circus life who have 
unlimited potential before them. With beautiful sentiment, all the 
traits of a great family film, loveable acting, and a story able to 
bring nearly anyone to tears, The First of May is a film as rich and 
capable as the youngster its name describes, as well as being one of the 
most heartwarming movies in recent memory.
Cory (Dan Byrd) is an 11 year old foster child who has been in numerous 
homes and shelters. Cory's latest set of parents are Dan (Tom Nowicki) 
and Michelle (Robin O'Dell), a happily married young couple with a 
bright future in front of them.
Early in the film Cory becomes friends with Carlotta (Julie Harris), an 
elderly lady who constantly complains about the prison like atmosphere 
that her nursing home provides. A former world traveler, she is both 
knowledgeable and sweet to the young child.
When Cory learns of plans that will place him in yet another home, he 
and Carlotta choose to runaway from the lives that constantly distress 
them. During this nearly magical journey that they take, Corey matures. 
He not only masters the ordinary grade school material that kids his age 
are mandated to learn, but he encounters lessons in business, love, and 
survival as well.
Most important during Cory and Carlotta's journey is the young boy's 
discovery of various forms of affection and love. Not only does Carlotta 
become the stable caretaker that he has dreamed of, but he becomes the 
grandchild that she has always wanted. Additionally, he forms bonds with 
a turtle named Mr. T, a beautiful and talented young girl, and the 
numerous people that he encounters, who soon become the family he has 
always desired. But by far, the most touching and heartwarming moment of 
Cory's journey is when he receives batting advice from a certain 
baseball legend named DiMaggio. This spectacular scene is most memorable 
because unlike typical cameo appearances by stars playing themselves, 
Cory's lack of knowledge regarding DiMaggio's identity transforms 
the greatest baseball player ever into an ordinary guy.
Furthering its heartwarming quality is The First of May's ability to 
call itself a family film. This production is absolute proof that any 
and all ages can be entertained without violence, sex, or even naughty 
language. Older generations will be grinning at the numerous references 
to the great New York Yankees dynasty, and the aforementioned scene with 
DiMaggio. Younger crowds should be well amused by some circus atmosphere 
stunts that can only be described as "neat." And just about everyone 
should enjoy the film's ability to move swiftly through the nearly two 
hours, and always have an interesting focus on screen.
If the plot, themes, and entertaining qualities of The First of May make 
it a tasty film, then the acting is a cherry on top. Newcomer Dan Byrd 
is presented with one of the toughest roles that an actor could be 
given. Not only is he the protagonist of a film, but he must play 
opposite Hollywood great Julie Harris in nearly every scene. Byrd and 
Harris both turn in performances that make their characters so sweet 
that audiences will lovingly "awe" and cry at times. The pinnacle of 
this occurs early in the film when the two are sitting in a tree 
together, and form a bond literally as strong as that of a loving 
family.
Holden Caulfield had what he considered to be a "lousy childhood." 
Oliver was an orphan. Over time writing and filmmaking have introduced 
the world to some of the most intriguing, entertaining, and occasionally 
adorable children with blemished histories. Cory is certainly one of 
these great characters. Through a loveable script, memorable moments, 
and touching acting, The First of May is a heartwarming family film.
