Title
Review for Say Anything... (1989)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There must be at least a hundred high school dating movies made each
year by Hollywood since there are about two new ones on cable each week.  It
would be very easy to assume that this type of film had been all mined out
and that there was not much more that could be done with it.  But in fact
there is always room in any genre for a film of fresh and well-observed
characters.  Humans like looking at humans and seeing how humans behave.
James Bonds are fun to watch too, or sexy mannequins doing unrealistic
things under some circumstances, but a film that shows fresh and real people
will always be a joy to watch.  SAY ANYTHING is unique and a very human
comedy/drama.
     Diane Court (played by Ione Skye) has it all.  She is class
valedictorian, she has won a prestigious fellowship to study in England, she
is beautiful, and in all probability she has butterscotch in her veins.
Lloyd Dobler (played by John Cusack) is not good-looking and is below
average in his class.  He has no goals except to be a better kick-boxer and
to date Diane.  Sound familiar?  Except for the valedictorian part it has
been done hundreds of times.  Give the film half an hour and you will start
to like this film a lot better, particularly James Court, played superbly by
John Mahoney, who goes from bemused at Lloyd, to protective of his daughter
through a lot more changes until he becomes the focal point of the film.
SAY ANYTHING goes from a teen comedy to a very solid drama of human
interaction.
     The writer/director of SAY ANYTHING is Cameron Crowe, who is best known
for screenwriting FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH based on his novel of the
same name.  That film was about 90% teen comedy but had a surprisingly solid
piece of human drama at its core.  This time the comedy is more even
balanced with the drama.  SAY ANYTHING joins TERMS OF ENDEARMENT and
BROADCAST NEWS as a James L. Brooks produced film. of a woman choosing
between love and loyalty.  That may, of course, be coincidental, but because
each triangle is resolved in a different and believable way, the films make
an excellent trilogy.  Through unlike Debra Winger and Holly Hunter, Ione
Skye cannot quite hold her own for audience interest against the other two
vertices.  While it is not quite the strength of a BROADCAST NEWS (nor
probably TERMS OF ENDEARMENT, though I am not as fond of that film), SAY
ANYTHING does the nearly impossible of making a satisfying film from a high
school dating comedy.  I rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SAY ANYTHING... (director/writer: Cameron Crowe; cinematographer: Laszlo
Kovacs; editor: Richard Marks; cast: John Cusack ( Lloyd Dobler), Ione
Skye (Diane Court), John Mahoney (James Court), Lili Taylor (Corey
Flood), Amy Brooks (D.C.), Pamela Segall (Rebecca), Eric Stoltz
(Vahlere), Joan Cusack (Lloyd's Sister), Lois Chiles (Diane's Mother),
Loren Dean (Joe); Runtime: 100; 20th Century-Fox; 1989)
First-time director Cameron Crowe who was to go on and make many
successful films (Singles/Jerry Maguire), including his latest "Almost
Famous," gives his due respect to these teenage characters, whose
character are rarely treated in such films in such a plausible human
way. That alone is enough to make this a superior film, but besides
that, the film was superbly scripted and acted, with tremendous use of
the characters interacting in a real way. John Mahoney as James Court,
plays a role that is usually one-dimensional but here it has surprising
depth- as the protective and caring single-parent for his daughter Diane
(Skye), the high school valedictorian, who has received a scholarship to
study in England. John Cusack plays Lloyd Dobler, the graduating high
school student who has a crush on the brainy Diane, whose interest is
not in scholarship but kickboxing. He lives with his older sister (Joan
Cusack, his real sister) and her little boy, while their father is
stationed in the Army, serving in West Germany.
Lloyd calls Diane for a date, even though he doesn't travel in the same
circles as she does, though they are both children of the same
middle-class upbringing. He is attracted to her because of her eyes and
does not give up when she says no. In the habit of 'saying anything'
when nervous, fast-talking his way through situations, he gets the date,
as Diane is impressed that he made her laugh. Most boys are scared to
even ask her out, even though they find her attractive, as they are
intimidated by her brains. But Lloyd shows that he is a very confident
young man.
Diane worships her father, believing he is the best man in the world, as
she chooses to live with him rather than with her mother. For a
graduation present, he gives her an expensive new car, something no one
else graduating received.  He dedicates his life to giving the patients
in the nursing home he runs the best care that they can receive, which
really impresses Diane. She has a special relationship with him, where
he is not only her father but her best friend, as they have a deal where
they do not lie to each other, and she tells him everything about
herself and what she does. On her date with Lloyd, she tells him that
he's a little nutty but that she enjoyed going out to a party with him
and meeting his zany friends. She finds that she trusts him, that he is
gallant, and that he impressed her deeply when he swept aside some
broken glass on the sidewalk with his sneakers so that she could safely
walk by. She feels that he will always be there for her.
But the father becomes wary of Lloyd at a dinner conversation, when his
future plans seem so vague, saying he wants to become a professional
kickboxer. The father finds this career move unacceptable for someone
serious about his daughter, as he sees her as someone moving in more
elite academic company. And when she tells him that they slept together,
the father is glad that she is honest with him, but wants her to break
the summer relationship off, telling her that she will soon be in
England and it is better to have no ties  with a boy who has no solid
future. She tearfully obeys her father and resists Lloyd's attempts to
win her back, as he parks his car in front of her house and serenades
her by playing on his boom box the Peter Gabriel CD recording of "In
Your Eyes."
Since honesty is the key to their relationship, a surprising development
occurs when he lies to her about what he did, even though he did it
solely for her benefit. The IRS investigates her father for making huge
profits due to phony billing procedures at the nursing home and he is
charged with tax evasion, charges that will result in prison time.
The film resolves the relationship she has with the two men in her life,
both of whom she dearly loves, in a very satisfactory and intelligent
way. Finally, we have a teen film that doesn't dumb down its story line
and play it as a goofy teen film. The important thing here is that
everyone was presented in a real way, even the IRS agents were given
more than one dimension, and therefore it meant something to see how the
relationship between the teenage couple developed.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Randy Parker
        In many ways, the romantic comedy SAY ANYTHING is a generic teenage
love story--one we've seen countless times before.  It tells the
all-too-familiar story of young love between two recent high school
graduates.  Ione Skye plays Diane Court, the intellectual and socially
reserved valedictorian of her high school class.  She has just been awarded
an extremely prestigious scholarship to attend college in England.  John
Cusack plays Diane's suitor, Lloyd Dobler, an amateur kick-boxer who's
unsure of his future.  He does know one thing, however: he'd like to spend
his summer with Diane.
        Lloyd and Diane are the classic mismatch or odd couple.  He is your
average Joe, unexceptional but for his sensitivity, chivalry, and boyish
charm.  And she, on the other hand, is one of a kind--someone definitely
destined for success.  However, despite their differences, Diane and Lloyd
click as a couple.  He can make her laugh, and she gives him
self-confidence.  They start dating, and the movie follows their tumultuous
on-again-off-again relationship.
        If SAY ANYTHING's premise sounds formulaic and unoriginal, that's
because it is.  The movie doesn't break any new ground, but it's
surprisingly effective nevertheless.  After so many brain-dead treatments
of this material, SAY ANYTHING stands out for its intelligence,
sophistication, and sharp wit.  The movie also adds a unique twist to its
story: namely, one of the most sensitively and touchingly portrayed
father-daughter relationships in recent memory.  Diane is unusually close
to her father; he's her very best friend and confidante.  John Mahoney is
outstanding as Diane's loving and understanding father, a man who
desperately wants only the best for his daughter.  In fact, he's even
willing to cheat the Internal Revenue Service in order to better support
Diane.
        In SAY ANYTHING, Cusack demonstrates once again that he makes an
extraordinarily appealing romantic lead.  His sense of vulnerability,
insecurity, and humility make him seem far more authentic than his brat
pack colleagues, such as Rob Lowe and Tom Cruise.  Cusack is always at his
best when he plays the underdog, as he does in SAY ANYTHING and as he did
in such films as BETTER OFF DEAD and EIGHT MEN OUT.
        Skye, who received considerable attention three years ago for her
role in RIVER'S EDGE, gives a compelling performance as Diane, the troubled
young woman torn between her love for Lloyd and her loyalty to her father
who is under criminal investigation by the IRS.  Skye poignantly conveys
the painful confusion and emotional anguish Diane feels as she falls in
love and asserts her independence from her father.
        SAY ANYTHING pushes the limits of its tired and worn-out
boy-meets-girl, boy-loses-girl, boy-gets-girl-back story.  But
unfortunately, SAY ANYTHING fails to say anything terribly new or profound
about young love.  Most of us already know all too well from our own
experience just how exhilarating, terrifying, and painful first love can
be.  However, as I mentioned before, SAY ANYTHING is special not so much
for WHAT it says, but for HOW it says it.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Speaking for myself, I really enjoy a good romantic comedy, heavy on the
romantic side.  Unfortunately, there aren't too many good examples of that
genre leaning towards the romantic.  It is a credit to John Cusack that he
stars in the only two that really come to mind over the last five years:  THE
SURE THING, and now SAY ANYTHING.  Of the two, I enjoyed SAY ANYTHING the most;
while THE SURE THING takes place in a reality I know exists, SAY ANYTHING
unfolds in a reality I know.  What is amazing -- what is truly amazing -- about
this film is that it is able to nurture the spirit of romance in a setting that
never forsakes its hold The Way Things Work to keep the romantic plot going.
Nothing less than hope for frustrated romantics everywhere....
     The film opens with Cusack's character graduating from high school.  He's
living with his sister (played by Cusack's real-life sister Joan in an
uncredited role) with only two things certain in his mind: that he enjoys
kick-boxing, and that he has fallen in love, from afar, with the the most
brilliant graduate in his graduate class, played by Ione Skye, who hardly knows
him from Adam.  Skye has just found out that she's won a prestigious fellowship
to study in England starting in the next fall; she is delighted -- almost as
delighted as her doting, affectionate father, played by John Mahoney.
     Cusack's character is hardly a scholar (though his honesty and good nature
alone make him exceptional), but he manages to generate enough uneasy courage
to ask Skye's character to go out with him to a graduation party.  She, in
turn, gets the chance to encounter a (wonderfully accurate) group of people she
has gone to school with for three years, separated from by her exceptional
scholarship.  And she finds herself liking Cusack's character very much....
     This is one of those rare films where the plot could have fallen into the
ruts of cliche at almost any point, but through superior direction, writing and
acting, scrapes off the layers of cinematic reworkings and literally shines.
John Mahoney's character could so easily have degenerated into the
parent-who-thinks-boyfriend-no-good role, but he's witty and imaginative; he
affection and friendship with his daughter are immediately endearing, and if he
dislikes Cusack's character because of the threat he sees to his daughter's
future, you can also see his occasional delight with the special character
Cusack plays.  Cusack, Skye and Mahoney's characters are all wonderfully
written and acted, but the other exceptional point of this film is how well the
smaller roles are created and performed.  The three girls who are Cusack's
closest friends are a delight, like ducats found on the side of the road during
a pleasant journey.  They are funny without being absurd, and telling without
being preachy or sounding artificial.  Indeed, it is amazing how much character
the creative team is able to develop in so small a time.  Joan Cusack can't
have more than a minute and a half in this film, but she manages to create a
harried, worried, loving sister during that time.
     Get the message?  One of the two or three best films I've seen this year
(and that includes the entire SIFF).  Don't take the chance that you'll miss
it: see it now.
