Title
Review for Cité des enfants perdus, La (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The plot is almost as bizarre and complex as the characters.  Evil
Krank (played by Daniel Emilfork) has lost the ability to dream and as
a result is aging before his time.  He can preserve his life by
kidnapping children and stealing their dreams.  To do this kidnapping
he has a band of video-enhanced henchmen called Cyclopes.  They steal
children and bring them to his fortress in an off-shore oil derrick.
There he keeps a philosophical brain alive in a tank and is tended by
six identical clones (all played by Dominique Pinon seamlessly rematted
into the same frame as many as seven times since he also plays a diver)
and their dwarf mother (Mireille Mosse).  Pitted against Krank is One
(Ron Perlman), an inarticulate carnival strongman looking for his
adopted little brother who has been kidnapped.  He is joined by a young
thief Miette (Judith Vittet) from the local band of child criminals
ruled over by the villainous Octopus, a pair of Siamese twins played by
Genevieve Brunet and Odile Mallet.  Now have I left any of the weird
character out?  Yes, lots of them.  But I do not have the space to list
them all.
     The film is the brainchild--or is it the enfant terrible--of
Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Marc Caro, who in 1991 gave us DELICATESSEN, a
popular but not fully realized post-holocaust comedy.  This time they
have created a film that will be hard for them ever to match.  This is
a creation that is so full of visual wonders that it really needs to be
well-dubbed since the eye is much too busy to read subtitles
translating the French.  The visual style is very much like that of
Terry Gilliam in BRAZIL with if anything a darker sense of humor.  But
the density of images is somewhere between that of BRAZIL and THE
NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS.  (I saw the trailer for the film perhaps
eight times before I noticed the screaming faces in the green nightmare
smoke!  That is just the kind of film it is.  By comparison 12
MONKEYS's imagery i simplistic.)
     The film has a nifty set of sequences that work like something out
of either Rube Goldberg or "Mission Impossible."   One sequence asks
the question if you want to get into a locked room, why would you start
by grating cheese onto the floor?  Another follows a miraculous set of
events that shut down a city because one tear flew through the air.
This is a film of often jaw-dropping imagination.  Few faces will be
familiar to American audiences, though it does star Ron Perlman of TV's
"Beauty and the Beast" and CRONOS.  Daniel Emilfork will be a pleasant
surprise for audiences who have not seen him before, though he did make
an excellent devil in the surprising horror film, THE DEVIL'S
NIGHTMARE.
     For those with a taste for the unique or who just want to be
weirded out by the creatively bizarre, this is an amazing film.  Mostly
for its originality I give it a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Eric Brochu
Starring:  Ron Perlman, Judith Vittet, Daniel Emilfork,
     Dominique Pinon
Directed by:  Marc Caro (artistic director) and Jean-  
     Pierre Jeunet
A circus strong-man named One breaks chains with the 
power of his lungs.  A street preacher proclaims the 
wonders of entering a cult whose members ritually blind 
themselves.  A greasy, opium-smoking assassin with a soft 
heart turns people into murderous zombies with flea-
delivered drug injections.  A group of clones sing a 
birthday song to a disembodied brain in a glass tank.  
Welcome to the bizarre world of _The City of Lost 
Children_, a stunning fantasy film from Jean-Pierre 
Jeunet and Marc Caro, the makers of the widely-acclaimed 
darkest-of-dark comedy _Delicatessen_.  If you've seen 
_Delicatessen_, you probably have some idea of what to 
expect from these brilliantly imaginative French 
filmmakers, and while I'm not sure it ultimately holds 
together as well as _Delicatessen_ does, _The City of 
Lost Children_ more than makes up for it in terms of 
sheer imaginative power.
The setting of the film is a port city somewhere in a 
never-never land equal parts Dickensian London, prewar 
Paris, and drug-induced hallucination.  The carnival 
barker announcing the strongman's show is stabbed, and 
when the strongman and his three-year-old brother return 
home that night, they are attacked by members of a child-
stealing cult known as the Cyclopes, who blind themselves 
and wear brass eyepieces to see electronically.  The 
strongman, One (Ron Perlman) gives chase but loses the 
gang.  The Cyclopes, it turns out, are stealing the 
children for the twisted Krank (Daniel Emilfork), who 
cannot have dreams of his own, and is forced to subsist 
on the stolen dreams of children.  
Krank is the creation of a scientist who has now 
disappeared, and he lives on a strange offshore 
laboratory with the scientist's other creations: a 
ruthless midget "princess" (Mireille Mosse); Uncle Ervin 
(voiced by Jean-Louis Trintignant), a disembodied, 
migraine-ridden brain, kept in a glass tank from which he 
speaks through a pair of Victrola-style speakers; and six 
dim-witted, narcoleptic clones (all played by Dominique 
Pinon), one of whom is convinced he is the original from 
which the others were made.  
The Cyclopes trade One's little brother to the clones for 
some of the electronic eyewear and ultra-sensitive 
hearing aids.  Meanwhile, One, searching for his brother, 
runs into Miette (Judith Vittet), a member of a band of 
child-thieves working for a pair of villainous Siamese 
twin sisters (Genevieve Brunet and Odile Mallet).  Miette 
gets One to help in a safe-cracking operation (he 
staggers out of the building with the massive safe in a 
wonderfully choreographed escape sequence), but then 
leaves her fellow criminals behind to join One in his 
search for his brother.  
I won't spoil the movie for you by detailing the twists 
and turns the plot takes and the other delightfully 
strange characters Miette and One run into, but rest 
assured they do meet up with Krank and his fellow 
experiments in a climax that is alternately hair-
raisingly creepy and gut-bustingly funny.  
_The City of Lost Children_ opens with a dream sequence.  
It's Christmas, from a small child's point of view.  
Santa Claus comes down the chimney, smiling and cherubic, 
and bearing delightful toys.  Then another comes down the 
chimney.  Then another, and another, and pretty soon the 
room is filled with Santas, some engaging in most un-
Santa-like behavior.  A reindeer relieves itself on the 
floor.  The child starts to bawl its head off, and the 
dream sequence ends.  This scene sets the feel of the 
film that follows.  _The City of Lost Children_ is 
littered with dark humour and oddball sight gags.  It is 
often hilarious, but there is a menacing atmosphere to 
many of the jokes.  Many of the sight gags involve the 
deformities of the characters; when one of the Siamese 
twins takes a puff on her cigarette, for example, the 
other coolly exhales.  Others involve oddly mechanical 
situations: one memorable scene involves a flying tear 
which sets of a chain of events that leads to the 
collision of a spectacularly massive ship.  The humour is 
imaginative and unapologetically idiosyncratic, and not 
for those who don't like their laughs mixed with a touch 
of dementia lurking somewhere nearby.
Caro and Jeunet have made the film a phenomenal visual 
experience, full of striking imagery.  It is beautifully 
shot by Darius Khondji (_Seven_), who uses unconventional 
camera angles and wide-angle lenses to bring Marc Caro's 
artistic vision to life.  Caro's wonderfully 
claustrophobic sets create a permeating sense of 
impending menace throughout the film: brick walls and 
fire-escapes have never looked so eerie.  Even the actors 
look perfect for the film.  Perlman's misshapen, but 
warm, features and impressive physique suit his kindly 
muscleman perfectly; as Krank, Emilfork is impeccably 
haggard and twisted; and Vittet, a strikingly pretty 
child with long black hair and unflinching countenance, 
looks simultaneously innocent and world-weary.  
While many Hollywood fantasies look either unimpressively 
pedestrian or get caught up in a series of over-designed, 
under-imagined spectacles that beg for the chance to awe 
you with their budgets, _The City of Lost Children_ 
manages to strike a perfect balance between dreamlike 
surrealism and real-world reference points.  There are 
very few films that can match _The City of Lost Children_ 
in the sheer power of its imagery, which I'm sure will 
stay with me for weeks.  Whether it's the sight of Uncle 
Evrin, the disembodied brain, wheeling towards an 
elevator at breakneck speed or Miette and One in a 
rowboat drifting through a fog-shrouded field of giant, 
floating mines, the images are consistently beautiful, 
strange and compelling.  It is easily one of the finest 
examples of Expressionist filmmaking on this side of the 
silent era.  In short, the film looks fantastic, in both 
senses of the word.
_The City of Lost Children_ also features first-class 
acting.  Ron Perlman, Dominique Pinon, and Daniel 
Emilfork are all real pleasures to watch, and they all 
look like they're having a great time.  The real find, 
though is Judith Vittet.  I don't know how old she was 
when she made this film (she looks about ten), but she 
does a great job in a difficult, if somewhat cliched, 
role as a streetwise child who has built up a tired, 
cynical facade to mask her loneliness.  It is to her 
credit, and those of the other child actors, that they 
are never typical Hollywood kids; they are not 
wisecracking miniature adults or panderingly cute 
annoyances: they are people, and Miette and her fellow 
thieves are the most human characters of the film.  The 
filmmakers have obvious sympathies towards the children 
without making them into a transparently nostalgic vision 
of what an adult filmmaker _thinks_ kids in a film should 
be.
Alas, _The City of Lost Children_ isn't perfect, though 
its weaknesses are far from fatal.  Most notably, the 
film sometimes gets bogged down in its imagination and 
uses gorgeous imagery where plot might have been more 
satisfying in the long run.  The Cyclops cult, for 
example, is marvelously costumed and suitably oddball in 
behavior and belief, but while they are central early in 
the film, they disappear completely in the second half, 
without any kind of resolution.  They're never even 
mentioned: you're just left to wonder about them.  
Similarly, the explanation of what, exactly, Krank is 
doing when he steals childrens' dreams is so vague it 
simply left me scratching my head, which is quite 
unfortunate, as Krank's dreams are pivotal in the film's 
climax.
These criticisms, however, are tiny compared to the 
unique experience of seeing this exciting, funny, stylish 
film.  I rarely watch a movie a second time without a 
long period in-between, but I went to _The City of Lost 
Children_ two nights in a row.  The second time, I knew 
what was going to happen, so I just sat back and let the 
images wash over me, and I enjoyed it even more.  
Unfortunately, I'm not sure the dark splendor of _The 
City of Lost Children_ will survive being shrunk to fit 
on a TV screen; this is the kind of film that must be 
seen in the theater to really be appreciated on the level 
its creators intend.  Fortunately, I suspect it will 
become a staple of repertoire and "art house" theaters.  
If you have an opportunity to see this film in a theater, 
don't hesitate to do so.  Magic like this doesn't come by 
every day.

Author
Christopher Null
     The long-awaited follow-up to DELICATESSEN is another surrealist
adventure into the questionably sane minds of French creators
Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Marc Caro.  It's been four years since that
film, and their new picture, THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN, is twice as
strange and almost as good.
     A twist on the typical fairy tale, THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN is
the story of an evil genius named Krank (Daniel Emilfork) and his
henchmen of mechanically-enhanced Cyclops, six identical Clones (all
played by Dominique Pinon), the tiny and bossy Miss Bismuth (Mireille
Mosse), and a disembodied brain (voiced by Jean-Louis Trintignant)
which provides the philosophical foundation for the group.  The band of
genetically-engineered characters live on a man-made island off shores
of a coastal city, and it is from this city that Krank's thugs kidnap
children.  Why?  Because Krank is unable to dream, he attempts to steal
them from the children's minds.
     When the adopted brother (Joseph Lucien) of a circus strongman
named One (Ron Perlman) is stolen, One goes on a crusade to save him.
On his way, he hooks up with a nine-year-old ingenue/street punk named
Miette (Judith Vittet), and they develop a symbiotic bond in their
quest to destroy Krank's plot.
     If you saw DELICATESSEN (and I highly recommend you do), you'll
know what I mean when I say it gets *much* stranger than this.  Full of
vibrant imagery and elaborate sets that seem half from the 1700's and
half from the 2100's, THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN pushes style to the
limit, while occasionally causing substance to lag behind.  While the
movie sometimes gets so convoluted it's impossible to tell exactly
what's going on, it's always fun to watch.
     Be sure you know what's on the menu if you decide to see this
film.  Expect some incredible effects, especially Pinon's unprecedented
six-fold presence, plus one of the best serendipitous-chain-of-events
sequences ever filmed.  Angelo Badalamenti (who scored "Twin Peaks")
provides appropriately haunting music as well.  You might not "get"
this film when you leave the theater, but you'll be sure to have had a
terrific time.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Daniel Emilfork, Ron Perlman, Judith Vittet, Dominique Pinon, 
      Jean-Claude Dreyfus, Mireille Mousse, Jean-Louis Trintignant 
Directors: Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Marc Caro
Producer: Claudie Ossard
Screenplay: Jean-Pierre Jeunet, Marc Caro, Gilles Adrien
Cinematography: Darius Khondji
Music: Angelo Badalamenti
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
In French with Subtitles
     In 1991, the creative team of Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Marc Caro 
introduced movie-goers to their nightmarish view of a post-apocalyptic 
world where troglodytes inhabited the underground and a butcher relied 
on apartment tenants to keep his meat cabinet full.  DELICATESSEN, a 
bizarre black comedy, became something of a cult hit -- certainly not 
everyone's fare, but those who got it, loved it.  Now, four years later, 
Jeunet and Caro are back, and, with their latest film, THE CITY OF LOST 
CHILDREN, it's apparent that they have neither moderated their approach 
nor mainstreamed their vision.  THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN is as visually 
striking and daringly offbeat as its predecessor.
     In THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN, Jeunet and Caro have presented 
another gloomy world where "normal" life is no more.  The film is 
saturated with atmosphere and features some of the most imaginative set 
construction of the year.  The picture works in part because the film 
makers have taken the time and effort to frame a strange land where all 
their quirky characters can live and operate.  Jeunet and Caro's movie 
is thematically and stylistically inspired by such diverse sources as 
FRANKENSTEIN, DRACULA, BRAZIL, TIME BANDITS, and THE WIZARD OF OZ.  Like 
DELICATESSEN, THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN is characterized by dark, 
twisted humor, yet this movie is more of a fantasy than a macabre 
comedy.  
     THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN relates dreams to creativity, youth, and 
wonder.  The capacity to escape the rational world through imagination 
fuels not only the desire to continue living, but the need to make 
something out of one's life.  In this film, we are introduced the 
brilliant-yet-warped mad scientist Krank (Daniel Emilfork), who is aging 
prematurely because he cannot dream.  In an effort to stay alive, he has 
begun capturing children to steal their dreams.  One of the toddlers 
abducted by Krank is little Denree (Joseph Lucien), the brother of a 
simpleminded circus strongman named One (Ron Perlman).  One is joined in 
his search for his brother by Miette (Judith Vittet), the nine-year old, 
wise-beyond-her-years leader of an orphan gang.  Together, One and 
Miette seek to penetrate Krank's fortress; elude his six cloned henchmen 
(all played by Dominque Pinon), the deadly Miss Bismuth (Mireille 
Mosse), Irvin the talking brain (voice of Jean-Louis Trintignant), and 
the scientist himself; and rescue Denree.  It proves to be a difficult 
task.
     While much of THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN is surreal and strange, the 
film's emotional center -- the relationship between One and Miette -- is 
nurtured with care and genuine feeling.  Miette sees in One and Denree 
the chance for the family she has never known, although there are times 
when her intentions towards the older, child-like man seem more romantic 
than sisterly.  It's to Jeunet and Caro's credit that they are able to 
present the ambiguities of this relationship tenderly, without ever 
injecting a hint of the sordid or perverse.
     Daniel Emilfork is wonderfully frightening as Krank.  Bald-headed 
and evil-looking, he evokes memories of Max Schreck's vampire in the 
classic silent film NOSFERATU.  Dominique Pinon, who had the lead in 
DELICATESSEN, uses his unusual face and goofy mannerisms to good comic 
effect in turning the clones into the Six Stooges.  Judith Vittet shows 
great promise from one so young in her appealing portrayal of Miette, 
and Ron Perlman is effective as the strong, silent One.
     Like DELICATESSEN, THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN won't be to everyone's 
taste.  In fact, even though I thoroughly enjoyed Jeunet and Caro's 
previous film, it took a while for me to warm up to this effort.  The 
first forty-five minutes are poorly-paced and it's easy to get lost down 
one of the script's many dark, maze-like alleyways.  The film tends to 
lurch along in fits and starts until Miette becomes established as a 
central character.  From that point on, improvement is immediate and 
consistent.  For those who enjoy the offbeat, THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN 
is worth taking the time and effort to find. 

Author
Frankie Paiva
I am constantly intrigued by how different films are in all of the countries
around the world. The entire universe is bursting with talent and the most
gifted filmmakers may not live on this continent. Several recent imports have
supported this theory, but the statement also holds true for a handful of video
releases. This is the case with The City of Lost Children. The City of Lost
Children is one of those movies that is so incredibly strange, so extremely
bizarre, that it takes two or three viewings to fully grasp the plot and the
ending. Some of the most amazing art and set direction as well as
cinematography is present here from the directors of the cannibal film
Delicatessen. From the beginning of the film to the very last frame we are
assaulted with astoundingly beautiful images that make up for the lack of a
comprehensible storyline. If you don't get what the film is about, don't worry,
just read my summary carefully again.
Krank (Daniel Emilfork) is a professor who is tormented because he cannot
dream. He has assembled a laboratory in the middle of the ocean to test
children and sees if he can figure out what makes them dream. He has many blind
henchmen who steal children for him so that they can be tested. He is assisted
by a group of wacky brothers (who are all clones of each other) and by his wife
who he accidentally shrunk into a midget. 
One day Denree (Joseph Lucien), a little boy, is stolen by Krank and sent to
his laboratory. Denree's huge big brother (Perlman), who is a circus strongman,
tries to go after him and get him back. On his journey, he makes friends with
Miette. She is a girl who is the head of a group of children who steals jewels
and other valuables for a pair of conjoined twins who run a city orphanage. The
two begin to form an unlikely bond (as it's what always happens in films) and
the two are faced with several life or death situations. There's a subplot
involving which one of Krank's clones is the original copy, and that leads to
an interesting set of events near the ending. This turn of events will take
more than a couple of viewings to get. Sound complicated? It is. But aren't all
films from foreign countries?
The visual world that envelops you in The City of Lost Children is amazing.
This is helped by an extremely original (if hard to get) script that was
written by Gilles Adrien and Jean-Pierre Jeunet. It's at quite a different pace
then most French films, and definitely at a different tone than anything from
Delicatessen. However, despite some creepy performances (Genevieve Brunet and
Odile Mallet are perfection in their affecting Siamese twin role) and a
wonderful sense of atmosphere, there isn't much left in the film. Ron Perlman
plays the lead character without any showing acting ability whatsoever. From
the beginning of the film we instantly do not like him and thus make it hard
for us to care about anything that happens to him throughout the rest of the
movie. Miette is also a weak link. Young Vittet is good in the role, but she's
so tough and self dependent that it's hard to find what she sees in him. A nice
movie to look and marvel at, but lacking in story and likable characters, The
City of Lost Children gets *** stars.
ADDITIONAL NOTE: If you rent the film, make sure that you get the subtitled and
not the dubbed version. The dubbed version has voices that are very hard to
understand and takes away from the unique performances in the film.
The Young-Uns: Two acts of violence are almost seen. (For instance, a man is
shown holding a knife in front of another man's eye with the intent on stabbing
him, but the camera cuts away and all we hear is a scream.) Besides the fact
that it's extremely bizarre, there is also some brief drug use. Good Age: 14 &
Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://www.homestead.com/teenagemoviecritic/mainpage.html

Author
Bryant Frazer
     The best poster art of 1995 is unquestionably the composite still
featured on ads for THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN, showing a muscular
redheaded man purposefully rowing a boat across a sea peppered with
floating mines.  At the bow of the vessel, a younger girl, perhaps 10
years old, looks back over her shoulder almost balefully.  They're en
route to what looks like a cross between a mist-shrouded palace and an
oil rig, matte painted in sillhouette against the moonrise.  It's said
that a picture is worth a thousand words, but this one teases, offering
glimpses of a story that exists in the imagination, and is not
necessarily dependent on the "reality" established by the film it's
meant to promote.
     That picture isn't taken directly from the film, but it may as
well be.  Its evocative power is indicative of the real strengths of
the filmmaking duo of Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Marc Caro.  These two
headstrong fantasists cut their teeth on music videos and television
commercials before settling in to make the much admired DELICATESSEN
(1991), a black European comedy about cannibalism.  Accordingly,
American audiences had their first real exposure to Jeunet and Caro
when art houses nationwide were blitzed with that film's trailer--a set
piece drawn straight from the movie itself, and involving the apparent
rhythms of lovemaking in an apartment building from hell and its impact
on everyday life in adjacent rooms.  To this day, even movie fans who
never saw the actual movie still harbor vivid memories of seeing the
brilliantly entertaining trailer to DELICATESSEN.
     That mastery of imagery and montage is what keeps Jeunet and
Caro's newest film from being a mere clutter of dazzling images.  CITY
OF LOST CHILDREN is something of a fable set in a city in either the
future or an alternate reality.  The movie has to do with a scientist
named Krank (Daniel Emilfork), who is aging prematurely because he
lacks the ability to dream.  Fighting to reverse the aging process, he
sends his blind minions out to kidnap the city's most potent
dreamers--the children--and bring them back so he can invade the
children's dreams and make them his own.  Circus strongman One (Ron
Perlman, the beefy guy from the posters) gets involved when his adopted
brother, little Denree (Joseph Lucien), is abducted by the Cyclops, who
see the world through one electronic eye and do Krank's bidding.
Events turn, and One teams up with the orphan Miette (Judith Vittet) on
a mission to invade Krank's laboratory and rescue his beloved brother.
The other characters in the laboratory include Krank's assistant, Miss
Bismuth (Mireille Mosse), a disembodied talking brain floating in a
fish tank (given witty, world- weary voice by Jean-Louis Trintignant),
and a battalion of clones (all of them played by Dominique Pinon).
     The actors are more than up to the challenge of breathing life
into the concept.  Perlman, a busy actor whose credits include THE NAME
OF THE ROSE, ROMEO IS BLEEDING, and last year's CRONOS, is entirely
credible as the simple strong man driven to his quest by love for a
child.  Daniel Emilfork's Krank is a bizarre yet pathetic creation, and
our distate for his persona is mitigated by our understanding of his
desperation (after all, we're the ones who paid money to visit someone
else's dream for an hour or two).  And whether it's Vittet playing an
orphan who's become wise and jaded beyond her years, or Lucien as the
toddler who's mostly unfazed by the pyrotechnics that have the other
kids screaming, the children here defy the Hollywood standard of
cinematic children who are by turns cutesy pies or obnoxious hams.
Since the children are the film's center, the metaphorical imaginative
core of a society that has perhaps forgotten the value of its dreams,
it's reassuring that the actors give unmannered performances that put
the histrionic antics of celebrity brats like Macauley Culkin in proper
perspective.
     Aided and abetted by Jean-Paul Gaultier's costuming, Caro's art
direction ensures that this city truly is something to behold, although
our visit is fragmented so that we have little opportunity to get a
sense for a whole environment.  For the most part, Caro and Jeunet
create their nightmare world by stacking their most striking visuals on
top of one another in a shot-by- shot montage that amplifies the
chaos.  But the real show-stoppers are the sequences that stretch the
film's tightly constrained sense of location while staying within the
episodic format (the best involves a spider's web, a shipwreck, and a
healthy sense of wonder), though even that doesn't shake the constant
feeling that we're watching master craftsmen at work, not peeking into
another universe.
     But when they work, oh boy, do they work.  Jeunet and Caro have a
keen sense of their characters, from the lead roles all the way down to
the bit parts, and the crucial dream sequences are marvelously surreal,
right down to the accompanying sound mix. (It's fitting that Sony is
releasing this one just before Christmas, because Santa figures in a
couple of the dreams, for better or for worse.) Angelo Badalamenti's
music is surprisingly effective throughout, and Miette's final
nightmare is nothing short of breathtaking.  The film contains a
remarkable number of digital effects shots, and indeed, is surprisingly
reliant on technical wizardry, whether it's allowing Pinon to play six
different parts on-screen at the same time, or enabling show- stopping
close-ups of Fleakins, the bug who offers up a flea's-eye view of the
world before shooting characters up with a strange poison.  The rich,
shadowy cinematography, which is a key part of the weirdness at work
here, is by Darius Khondji, who shot DELICATESSEN but also, probably
more famously, this year's Hollywood hit, SE7EN.
     But somewhere in the middle of all this, there's a story that
needs to be told, and the one here is just a little humdrum.  For all
its whacked-out creativity, THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN is a bit short on
ideas for what to do with itself.  The dream thievery is reduced to a
child-in-peril excuse to get our obligatory hero into the laboratory,
and Krank's invasion of dreams isn't even fully distinguished from what
we might expect from a Nightmare on Elm Street sequel.  And at the
climax, we're treated to a pretty rote escape-from-the-madman routine
that ends in a big explosion a la any number of American action
movies.  Would that a movie this wondrous weren't simultaneously so
formulaic.
     I'd hate to discourage any fan of the surreal from buying a
ticket, since it's a truly impressive piece of work.  Still, something
very important is missing.  It's all well and good to break out all the
wide-angle lenses, run amok with the set design, and frighten a few
children, but I do wish there was a little more light at the end of the
tunnel.  It seems that Jeunet and Caro are very satisfied with what
they have wrought, but it's hard to experience the film on a very
personal level, because we're never given the sense that anything real
is at stake, or that there's anything in the rather unpleasant world
presented to us that's really worth fighting for.  For all their
formidable skills, Jeunet & Caro need to balance all of the nightmare
and grimace with just a little bit of hope and magic.  I'm rooting for
them to deliver the goods next time -- but I'm not sure they have it in
them.
     Technical note: The credit scroll bears a designation that some
prints have been struck with digital sound, but the theater I was in
just turned the Dolby Stereo up to a full roar.  The almost deafening
volume was appropriate to the film, but the constant popping and
crackling from the Angelika's overloaded sound system was not.  Try to
see this one in a digital auditorium if you can.

Author
Ted Prigge
Directors: Marc Caro and Jean-Pierre Jeunet
Writers: Gilles Adrien, Marc Caro, and Jean-Pierre Jeunet
Starring: Ron Perlman, Judith Vittet, Daniel Emilfork, Dominique Pinon,
Jean-Claude Dreyfus, Genevičve Brunet, Odile Mallet, Mirille Mossé, Serge
Merlin, Rufus, Ticky Holgado, Joseph Lucien, Mapi Galan, Marc Caro,
Jean-Louis Trintignant
"The City of Lost Children" automatically gets major pointers for being a
stunning film to look at, and it gets a couple extra pointers for having
the respect to not insult our intelligence and waste our time with a really
crap story.  When watching this film, you should be in the same state of
mind that you are when watching last year's french Bruce Willis fantasy,
"The Fifth Element," because save for a little better quality and style in
this one, the two films share a similar idylism: that they're both
children's stories for adults, and eye candy for the intelligent who don't
want to really feel like having a whole lot of depth with their watching
but still want to be entertained in the most original way possible.
That's what one of the strengths of this film is: it's able to be
completely original and entertaining and incredible to just look at, and
this is nothing of shock since it's been directed by one of the most visual
pair of directors working today (although not really paired up anymore),
Marc Caro and Jean-Pierre Jeunet, who, back in 1991, made the incredibly
entertaining "Delicatessen" about a butcher who hires men to work in his
apartment building then cuts them up for food for the normal residents.  In
that film, they showed that they were amazing visualists, that they had a
wicked sense of humor, and that they could tell a story with characters who
were both as freaky as anything Fellini or Kafka ever dreamed up and also
sympathetic.  Who can watch that film and not feel some kind of connection
for Dominique Pinon's desperate clown, or for the butcher's mousy
daughter...or even the butcher?
"The City of Lost Children" is at once similar to that, in that it tells a
weird story in a wonderfully stylistic fashion, but different in that that
one was almost a satire on the results of war (the people were cannibals
because of a lack of food because of a war), while this one's a flat-out
children's story, similar to all those weird tales we heard when we were
kids about monsters harming children and the simple folk who had to save
them.  "The City of Lost Children" has all this.  It has a frighteningly
evil man, denizens of monsters, an almost backwards world where anything is
possible, and a hero in the form of a dim-witted, child-like circus
strongman who's chief brains are in the form of his partner, a young girl
who can't be over 10 years old.
But all of this is told as if it were a story that the writers came up with
when they were kids and only now are being able to make into a lavish,
special effects-laden film, much the same way Luc Besson made "The Fifth
Element," a story he imagined as a teenager, but told from the point of
view of an adult trying to be a kid again.  Both films had adult humor
laced with the right amount of kiddie humor that we all still enjoy, wacky
characters, and some truly amazing vistas to look at (I would rank both of
these as two of the best-looking films of all time).  What makes this one
better is a pinch of depth, weirder more memorable characters, and, well, a
better story told in a more original way.
The story deals with a monster of a man named Krank, played by Daniel
Emilfork, who has got to be the scariest-looking human being I have ever
seen.  Bald, and featuring a long face with a portruding mouth that makes
him look like Nosferatu's lost brother, Emilfork is a freaky creation, and
his character is a tragic one because his main flaw is that he cannot
dream.  Therefore, he kidnaps children, forces them to go to sleep where he
peers into their dreams...but has only found nightmares.  Yes, I know it
sounds weird, but stay with me on this one.
Krank basically rules the city or whatever it is the film takes place on
(like a floating city or something), but lives in a tower in the river next
to it with dozens of clones of one man (all played by Dominique Pinon, who
has one of the most flexible faces in history, allowing him for many
comical happenings), and with a freaky midgit woman played by Mirille Mossé
(picture a shorter, more anorexic version of that short lady from
"Poltergeist" and you have what this woman looks like).  He also controls a
group of men called the Cyclops, who have robotic sensors so they can see
out of a computer and hear extra-well.  Keep on staying with me on this.
Into the story comes the aforementioned circus strongman named One (played
by the ape-like Ron Perlman, who was the Beast on the TV show "Beauty and
the Beast"), who's very little brother (Joseph Lucien) is kidnapped by the
Cyclops, sending One on an odyssey to rescue him.  He eventually gets the
aide of a little girl named Miette (Juliet Vittet), an already-cynical
little girl who works for a pair of siamese twin school teachers (Genevičve
Brunet and Odile Mallet), who ask the kids to rob for them.  With so many
obstacles, it's a tough search, and it all leads up to a bizarre climax,
even more bizarre than you'd think.
Just by reciting this to you, I can tell that I don't totally understand
what goes on in this film, and it's really tough to find out.  The film is
so obsessed with being weird and introducing originally proposterous
characters as well as just looking great that it really doesn't tell a
plausible tale.  However, this is, in all reality, part of its overall
charm.  The film's style of storytelling takes several major risks,
featuring scenes that make little or no sense even after it has been
explained by another scene, and not even managing to really kick in till
around the fifty minute point, when the film's focus has finally taken
control.
The film isn't so much about storytelling as it is about creating a world
that is completely fresh and amazing to look at.  The world in the film is
like something out of a Melies film, only more dark and disturbing, and
there isn't one frame in this film that couldn't be frozen and hung on a
wall in an art museum.  I shouldn't even need to mention to you that
Jean-Paul Gaulthier did the costuming because you can immeadiately spot
when he has designed the costumes for a film.  The man just keeps on
topping himself - look at his ingenius costuming for "The Fifth Element," a
job that was so unrewarded that it's almost a travesty.  Everything that
makes up mise-en-scene really makes this one of the freakiest films to
watch, as well as the most fun because the story is always intriguing, and
a bit of a struggle to make through, I suppose.  And it only helps that the
actors in this film give their characters a bit of heart, like Ron
Perlman's lovable performance as the oafish One, and especially Daniel
Emilfork's creepy and sympathetic performance as Krank.
The factor that really takes this film over the top, though, is its wacky
sense of humor, as well as its sense of style.  Caro and Jeunet really know
how to make a film extremely wacky, and there isn't one character who's
boring in this film, including the several Pinon clones that run around in
Krank's fortress.  Of course, don't ask me what the film's truly about in
depth.  Is it a satire on the amount of humanity, judged by the way Krank
cannot dream?  Perhaps.  Is it about the struggle for normality?  I dunno,
and frankly, I don't give a damn why anything is here, if there's a purpose
for what's on screen.  Don't ask me why there are a bunch of clones who
can't figure out who the original is.  I don't know and I don't care.  I
could care less about what the film is truly about, and really all I know
is that it's certainly an experience I'd highly recommend to anyone with a
sense of humor.  What can I say about a film where the only voice of reason
and sanity is a brain inside a fish tank with the voice of Jean-Louis
Trintignant (from "The Conformist")?  I suppose all I can say "Groovy,
baby."
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
