Title
Review for Two Family House (2000)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TWO FAMILY HOUSE (2000) *** Directed and written by Raymond De 
Felitta. Photography, Michael Mayers. Editing, David Leonard. 
Production design, Teresa Mastropierro. Cast: Michael Rispoli (Buddy 
Visalo), Kelly Macdonald (Mary O'Neary), Katherine Narducci (Estelle 
Visalo), Kevin Conway (Jim O'Neary), et al. A Lions Gate release. 
104 minutes. PG-13. At the Art.
I know little about writer/director Raymond De Felitta except that: 
his first film was a short, Bronx Cheers, which had an Oscar 
nomination. His second film was the feature Cafe Society which 
debuted at the 1995 Cannes Festival in the Directors' Fortnight 
series. Its US release was super-minimal  as RDF distributed the 
film himself. He co-wrote the 1998 Shadow of a Doubt, then came Two 
Family House which received the Audience Award at Sundance 2000.
What I do know is that RDF had a beloved uncle called Buddy; that 
Buddy is the inspiration for Two Family House, not in every fact and 
detail but enough to make this into a veristic movie, verismo being 
an Italian term for everyday realism in life applied to art. And 
that Uncle Buddy would be proud of his nephew.
The setting is Staten Island in 1956 (and a bit beyond), among 
Italian-Americans. There is an Irish community too but the two 
groups keep apart, have no kind words for each other. 
Buddy, says RDF, was "a lovable  loser in pursuit of an elusive 
dream." His first dream was in the Navy, where he once sang nicely 
O Sole Mio before the famous Arthur Godfrey. Buddy was hoping to 
make it on  Godfrey's TV program. But his wife Estelle discouraged 
his venturing outside the more modest Italian lifestyle and 
occupations. Buddy, a factory worker, went on to more schemes that 
failed, then to his final dream: to buy a two-story house where he 
and Estelle would live upstairs, while he would transform the 
downstairs into Buddy's Bar.
He finds a dilapidated old place, but before he can begin to give it 
shape he discovers that upstairs live Jim, an older, foul-mouthed 
Irish-American drunkard and his far younger,  pretty and most 
pregnant Irish-Irish wife Mary. There's no way to get rid of Jim who 
has refused to pay rent for years yet can defy eviction thanks to a 
peculiar local law.
When Buddy and his buddies menace eviction by force, the hubbub 
precipitates the birth of Mary's child. It is a special case which I 
cannot disclose, but which results in Jim's disappearance. This is 
soon followed by Mary's eviction. Yet soft-hearted Buddy arranges 
for her to leave the tawdry hotel she moved to with the baby. He 
rents better quarters for them, and gradually he and the lass 
becomes friends, to say the least. 
What follows is a relationship and a string of events which are at 
the same time simple but also complicated, even complex 
developments. All this is redolent of Italian-American working class 
realism, types, valiant drinks at the local bar which is like a club 
for Buddy's friends, and of enough cigarette smoke to induce global 
warming.
I will not dwell on the march of time within the plot and spoil the 
viewer's fun. However I should mention that several of the actors 
are familiar to many from TV's The Sopranos; that the actress who 
plays the Irish Mary is, in fact a Scotswoman; that Estelle is a 
Class C termagant;  and that there are no Mafiosi, gangsters and 
others of that ilk around, not even in mentions or allusions.
The last point is refreshing. I remember when Frank Sinatra (whose 
ties with the underworld were blatant) went to bat accusing the 
media of caricaturing Italian-Americans as members of organized 
crime, and --I believe-- as screen clichés even if they were 
ordinary people. I am afraid that Sinatra had a point. Movies still 
used to stereotype  minorities until some years ago. Especially 
Italians.
For comic purposes some stereotyping was innocuous, but then the 
films made it clear that these were blatantly farcical exaggerations.
Think of Sig Ruman who played  outrageous Teutonic characters, 
always the butt of jokes:  Herman Gotlieb (A Night at the Opera), 
Dr. Steinberg (A Day at the Races), Dr. Wuthering (Love Crazy), 
Heinrich Stubel (A Night in Casablanca), Dr. Eggelhoffer (Nothing 
Sacred), Colonel Ehrhardt (To Be or Not to be), Schultz (Stalag 17) 
and more. Then think of the plethora of Italian-Americans over the 
full spectrum of Hollywood films, as often nice but always 
"realistically amusing" types.
The backlash nowadays is political correctness which tends to 
eliminate colorfulness, even when it is justified. I think Sinatra 
would have approved how Two Family House tells its tale "like it is" 
and with genuine warmth. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
TWO FAMILY HOUSE
(Lions Gate)
Starring:  Michael Rispoli, Kelly Macdonald, Katherine Narducci, Kevin
Conway, Matt Servitto.
Screenplay:  Raymond DeFelitta.
Producers:  Anne Harrison and Alan Klingenstein.
Director:  Raymond DeFelitta.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  104 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Sentimentalized stories of the 1950s have become so commonplace in
film that it's incredibly refreshing to find one that doesn't whitewash
the darker side of the happy days. Raymond DeFelitta's TWO FAMILY HOUSE is
in some ways a familiar feel-good story, but it gives its good feeling an
unexpected edge. The story's protagonist is Buddy Visalo (Michael 
Rispoli), a World War II veteran living in a predominantly Italian Staten
Island neighborhood in 1956. Buddy once had dreams of being a singer, but
those dreams were overwhelmed by his wife Estelle's (Katherine Narducci) 
desire for a normal life. While Buddy works in a local factory, he still
strives for something more, and jumps at the chance to purchase a run-down
two story house that he and Estelle can occupy upstairs while turning the
downstairs into a tavern. Unfortunately, the upstairs is already occupied
by Jim O'Neary (Kevin Conway) and his pregnant wife Mary (Kelly 
Macdonald), who are in no hurry to leave and have an obscure tenancy law
on their side.
     For a while, TWO FAMILY HOUSE looks like it might turn into a broad
comedy, with the Italians and Irish clashing loudly and perhaps
farcically. Then, on the day Buddy is prepared to throw the O'Nearys out,
Mary gives birth to an unexpectedly -- ahem -- dark-hued child, and Jim
abandons her. The somewhat guilty Buddy puts Mary and her child up in a
nearby apartment, and the two begin spending time together while Estelle
continues to scoff at Buddy's attempts at entrepreneurship. In fact, she's
scoffing at even more than that, as are Buddy's friends in a slightly
different way. What is ridiculous to them is the idea of anyone moving too
far beyond the proscribed ethnic, cultural and even geographic boundaries. 
Buddy's willingness to extend a hand to Mary, just like his desire to
pursue a career dream, suggests that the boundaries are a bit blurry. And
the idea of blurry boundaries makes everyone around Buddy more than
slightly uncomfortable.
     Even without its subtext, TWO FAMILY HOUSE is a funny, well-acted and
tremendously appealing drama -- so appealing that it might even be
perceived as fantastically generous to its protagonist. Rispoli delivers a
nicely nuanced performance as Buddy, a teddy bear of a guy trying to move
forward rather than look back in bitterness at missed opportunities or
failures. DeFelitta's brand of nostalgia includes the recognition that
most of his characters are racists; they toss around slurs with the casual
understanding that in their homogenous world, there's "us" and "them." It
would be easy to interpret Buddy's open-mindedness as anachronism, but
DeFelitta doesn't make him the good guy just because he helps the girl
with the black baby, nor are Estelle and Buddy's friends obvious villains
just because they use the "n-word." TWO FAMILY HOUSE builds its characters
by building a complete understanding of the world around them.
     DeFelitta does go a bit overboard in his use of voice-over narration
(told by Mary's son from a distance of forty years), and the film does
drag as it moves past the 90 minute mark. It occupies that treacherous
middle ground between comedy and drama where a film can either feel too
frivolous or not frivolous enough. Fortunately, DeFelitta understands how
to make his film about more than its obvious premise without resorting to
overly-weighty symbolism. Culture clashes tend to be represented on screen
either in strident sociology lectures or fish-out-of-water yuk-fests. TWO
FAMILY HOUSE explores melting pot growing pains in the context of a simple
story about a simple man. It's an achievement that's not nearly as simple
as it looks.

Author
Christopher Null
A sappy independent, Two Family House creates a romantic dramady out of
the two unlikeliest characters -- a tubby married Italian guy who lives
in Staten Island (Michael Rispoli) and a pregnant, Scottish import
(Trainspotting's Kelly Macdonald) married to a bum.
Love at first sight?  Not quite, but you can be sure writer/director
Raymond De Felitta is going to get us there in short order.
Indeed, if you buy De Felitta's rosy outlook on life, all it takes is a
pair of dreamers to make a love connection.  Buddy (Rispoli) has failed
at every entrepreneurial venture in his life; his latest scheme is to
open a bar in the house he just bought while he and the wife (Katherine
Narducci) live upstairs.  He even plans to provide the entertainment via
his celebrated crooning.  Too bad the place upstairs is occupied by a
drunk and his pregnant wife Mary (Macdonald) -- and we soon discover
she's pregnant by yet another guy when a half-black, half-white baby
pops out.  In fact -- the whole film is narrated by the newborn, even
while he's in the womb.  (Er... okay.)  Soon enough the bum is gone,
Mary is evicted, and somehow she and Buddy are in love and having an
affair.  Not one of those dirty, adulterous affairs -- one of those
nice, movie affairs.
All of this sounds sickly sweet to describe and it's even worse on
screen, where you have to contend with non-stop, mind-numbing narration
plus endless, syrupy mandolin music to remind us that Buddy is Italian. 
It all comes off like a bad episode of The King of Queens, just moved to
a different borough.
Not that it isn't without its moments.  Macdonald is cute (though
unlikable) and the same goes for Rispoli, too.  Nice house to visit --
but I wouldn't want to live there.
Director: Raymond De Felitta
Producer: Anne Harrison, Al Klingenstein
Writer: Raymond De Felitta
Starring: Michael Rispoli, Kelly Macdonald, Kathrine Narducci, Kevin
Conway, Matt Servitto, Michele Santopietro
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jon Popick
This Audience Award winner from the 2000 Sundance Film Festival is a
touching story of an everyday Joe trying to live out the American Dream
in the 1950s.  Two Family House is funny and, at times, heart-breaking
in its painfully accurate portrayal of one man's ambitious dreams nearly
crushing the life out of him.
The house in the film's title refers to 19 West Street in Staten
Island.  It's a ratty, dilapidated domicile with an upstairs rental unit
in a well-kept Irish section of Staten Island, but the house's condition
doesn't scare off machine operator Buddy Visalo (Michael Rispoli, Jackie
Aprile from The Sopranos).  Buddy looks past the rotting floorboards and
broken windows to see what the shack could be – a popular neighborhood
bar.
Like any Ralph Kramden-style dreamer from the ‘50s, Buddy's plans have
more than a couple of major obstacles to overcome.  The first and most
obvious is the filthy drunk Irish tenant (Kevin Conway ) and his young,
pregnant wife (Kelly MacDonald, My Life So Far) who live upstairs.  The
occupants won't pay rent and refuse to leave and, thanks to a bizarre
loophole in an obscure local law, they don't have to.
And like Kramden, Buddy also has a loudmouth wife who takes great pride
in rubbing her husband's nose in all of his failures, which admittedly
are numerous and quite hysterical.  Buddy has always resented Estelle
(Kathrine Narducci, The Sopranos) for forcing him to abandon his big
chance at a singing career several years earlier.  Now he just grits his
teeth when his better half announces that Buddy is `pregnant with
failure.'
Working double-shifts at the factory, Buddy sinks all of his money and
time into the bar, and his wife's incessant nagging leads him into the
arms of Mary, the pregnant girl upstairs.  Mary's life makes Buddy seem
like Nelson Rockefeller.  She's flat broke and her husband takes off
when she gives birth to a very non-Irish looking son.  Like in any film,
Buddy and Mary can't stand each other at first, but the two grow closer
and closer as House progresses.
Buddy reminded me of Kevin James from King of Queens – another
goodhearted, loveable oaf from one of New York's boroughs.  The
character is the embodiment of the American Dream, whether you're
talking about the ‘50s or present day.  I mean, who doesn't want to
start their own business and trade their wife in for a hot little Irish
number?  Of course, back then, it was a much bigger deal, and that's
part of House's reflective charm.
House was written and directed by Raymond DeFelitta (Shadow of a Doubt),
who gives the film the nostalgic feel of an American fable.  Plus he hit
the Sopranos casting trifecta with Rispoli, Narducci and Vinnie `Big
Pussy' Pastore.  DeFelitta also chooses a unique character to provide
House's narration, which supply the film's ending with a pretty stirring
scene.
1:44 - R for adult language and mild sexual content

Author
Steve Rhodes
Writer/director Raymond De Felitta's TWO FAMILY HOUSE, set on Staten 
Island in 1956, is a delightful movie that works on two levels.  On one, 
it is an amalgamation of the best of the 1950's sitcoms from "The 
Honeymooners" to "The Life of Riley."  On the other, it is a richly 
evocative drama that easily wins your heart.  Full of honest moments, 
even if always told with a comedic flair, the film feels like a blend of 
a true story and a fairy tale.
Buddy Visalo (Michael Rispoli) has a dream of being a famous singer.  
Once he almost realized it when Arthur Godfrey asked him to come in for 
an audition.  Buddy didn't, but Julius LaRosa did, and Buddy has forever 
since regretted it.  He is a blue-collar worker who makes his living as 
a machinist, but he has had a series of failed, small-business ventures.  
Finally, he sees a way to make his dreams come true.
He buys a dilapidated two-family house in which he plans to live in 
upstairs while singing in a yet-to-be-constructed bar downstairs.  This 
means that he and his wife, Estelle (Kathrine Narducci, "The Sopranos"), 
can stop living with her parents as they have been for the past 10 
years.  ("The Perry Como Show," which transfixes the in-laws, has been 
providing Buddy and Estelle the golden, one time per week when they can 
have sex.)  Estelle isn't wild about the bar idea and even tries to 
spend them into bankruptcy at one point so that Buddy will be forced to 
give it up.  She doesn't think much of Buddy or his pals, referring to 
them as "a bunch of knuckleheads."
The initial complication to Buddy's big idea comes in the form of two 
tenants, an obnoxious lush, Jim O'Neary (Kevin Conway), and his very 
pregnant wife, Mary (Kelly MacDonald, TRAINSPOTTING), who refuse to 
vacate the premises.  The arrival of their surprisingly half-black son 
breaks this logjam, causing Jim to flee, never to be seen again.  This 
also makes Mary into a social pariah, accorded status below that of a 
streetwalker.
Buddy, taking pity on Mary, arranges for her to be a "kept woman" in a 
secret apartment.  They form a strong but strange bond in which she 
insists on calling him Mr. Visalo and prefers that he refer to her as 
Mrs. O'Neary.  He cooks for her and confides in her, but their close 
relationship never appears to go much beyond a few shared kisses.  She 
tries to help him come to grips with his feelings, telling him that he 
shouldn't feel bad when he cries.  "You're a broad," he replies in his 
typical, 50s macho vernacular.  "You're supposed to cry."  
The film is narrated by her son as an adult, giving it an extra dose of 
realism.  One of the typical tales concerns Buddy and Estelle's 
"legendary fight" about their entire 11 years of marriage that went on 
late into the night.
The film's lush score by Stephen Endelman matches perfectly the bright 
and happy primary colors of Michael Mayers's cinematography.  The 
vintage automobiles are so overly perfect that they are like a running 
joke.  Every car is spotless and looks like it just left the dealer's 
showroom.  Staten Island in the 50s must have been free of birds and 
rain.
"I've got talent! I could be somebody!"  Buddy screams at Estelle in 
lines reminiscent of Marlon Brando's famous ones.  Buddy is an everyman 
character, whose big dreams may never come true, but realizing his 
smaller ones may prove just as satisfying.
TWO FAMILY HOUSE runs 1:44.  It is rated R for language and brief 
sexuality and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Lions Gate Films
 Director: Raymond De Felitta
 Writer:  Raymond De Felitta
 Cast: Michael Rispoli, Kelly Macdonald, Kathrine Narducci,
Kevin Conway, Matt Servitto, Michele Santopietro, Louis
Guss, Rosemary De Angelis, Victor Arnold, Richard B. Shull
   Before 1955, American audiences were used to seeing only
the handsomest young stars involved in romantic adventures. 
Delbert Mann's "Marty" changed all that by exploring true
love between two homely, lonely and desperate middle-aged
people played by Ernest Borgnine and Betsy Blair who
discover to their delight that for every lonely guy in the Bronx
who looks even slightly better than Quasimodo there's an
equally lonely gal who'd love to cook for him for the rest of
their lives.  While oodles of comparable films, particularly
indies, have come out of the woodwork since "Marty," all too
many have played up to the most obvious audience pleasers,
a good recent example being Stephen Kinsella's schlocky
"Double Parked," as insipid as it is predictable--a sitcom from
the get-go.
   What a pleasure, then, to take in Raymond De Felitta's
sincere, alternately funny and poignant drama about ordinary
working-class people from the Marty era, the 1950s, except
that in this case most of the folks are married and living
across the water from the Bronx.  This Staten Island saga,
filmed on location in that outer borough and also in Jersey
City and Bayonne, hones in on small but telling incidents in
the lives of the anonymous people living in ramshackle
homes, folks who may perhaps travel to Manhattan once a
year to see a show.  Staten Island in pre-Verrazano Bridge
days could as well be Fiji without the palms--that's how
isolated from the world so many of these people chose to be.
   In "Two Family House" the principal character, Buddy
(Michael Rispoli)--a name as familiar to working-class stiffs
then as Jennifer or Chad might be to today's debutantes--is
in prison.  The jail has no bars but is a brig constructed by
the fellow's milieu, particularly his demanding and critical wife
Estelle (Katherine Narducci).  Buddy was once scouted by
Arthur Godfrey during his military service, invited to audition
as a singer for Godfrey's TV show, but thanks to his
"practical" fiances warning, he passes that up and instead
launches a series of failed businesses.  Buying a two-family
house, part of which he plans to convert to a bar, he fails to
contemplate the presence of drunken tenant Jim O'Neary
(Kevin Conway) who, together with his pregnant wife Mary
(Kelly Macdonald) refuses to vacate the premises.  When
Mary's baby turns out to be black, her Irish husband leaves
her, unwittingly setting the stage for a romance between the
maritally challenged Buddy and the indigent new mom, Mary.
   With the help of an exquisitely restrained performance by
Michael Rispoli, known to viewers of the TV series
"Sopranos," De Felitta spins a trenchant tale of people who
live on the same island but who are worlds apart.  The
paisans from the neighborhood bar together with the woman
friends of Buddy's cantankerous wife Estelle have only
contempt for the hapless Mary--not so much for her strange
marriage to a drunken bum but for giving birth to a black
baby.  In fairness, we must say that in insular communities
like Staten Island at a time that knew little about political
correctness, such prejudice was common, just as people
freely accepted the frequent use of pejoratives to describe
those of other ethnic and racial groups.  
   Buddy's growing affection for Mary is not difficult to
comprehend given the restrictions imposed on him by his wife
and friends and particularly given the beauty of a lass whose
lovely Irish lilt could make you think she'd as well be named
Shannon or Erin rather than Mary.  De Felitta, who wrote the
screenplay as well and who perhaps is influenced by Spike
Lee, evokes humor from Buddy's banal chatter with his pals,
but even more captivating is his portrayal of the growing love
between Buddy and Mary who are, at first, as hostile as
landlord and tenant (which they were) but who find though a
series of spontaneous meetings that they have far more in
common with each other than they have with the spouses of
their own ethnic circles.  
   "Two Family House" is a small film, one which proves that
you can evoke emotions from an audience by showing real
people in critical situations who overcome their initial distrust
to work out gratifying solutions. The story is narrated
throughout by an unseen African-American, purportedly the
now-grown baby who bore witness to the developing bond of
the two people who nurtured him.  To no one's surprise, "Two
Family House" won the audience award at this year's
Sundance Festival.
Rated R.  Running time: 104 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Buddy Visalo (Michael Rispoli, "Summer of Sam") dreams of becoming a singer
after Arthur Godfrey catches him at an armed forces show and asks him to
audition.  Once Buddy's back from WWII, his fiance Estelle (Katherine Narducci, 
HBO's "The Sopranos") and her parents refocus him into a more
'practical' career working at a local factory and living with the in-laws on
Staten Island.  Eleven years later, when a ramshackle two family house is
within his financial reach, Buddy thinks he and Estelle can live upstairs and
convert the downstairs into a tavern where he can entertain in this year's 
Sundance Audience Award winner, "Two Family House."           
Estelle hates the house, but just knows that Buddy will lose it anyway.  She 
appears to be right when they can't get rid of their upstairs Irish immigrant 
tenants, the O'Nearys (Kevin Conway, "The Quick and the Dead," and Kelly 
Macdonald, "Trainspotting").  Things get even worse when the woman, Mary, who 
is hugely pregnant, gives birth to a black child.  Mary's abusive husband Jim 
abandons her and Estelle demands that Buddy throw her out to quell the 
neighborhood gossip.  This he does, but guilt nags at him and, even though
he's short on cash himself, he sets her and her child up in a pleasant little
local walkup.  Soon, Mary becomes the encouraging sounding board he's never
had in Estelle.
This is a nice little film, featuring some good performances.  Rispoli
is genuinely likeable, a decent man with modest ambitions.  His quandary
when Estelle demands he throw a young mother out on the street is written
all over his face.  When he finally lets his emotions out (to Mary), he
sinks to his knees and balls his fists in his eyes, then regains his
composure and tries to convince Mary (who's not buying it) that that really
wasn't like him.  His final scene with Estelle contains a simple gesture
that's incredibly moving.
Katherine Narducci makes Estelle frustrating for the audience when she
not only refuses to support Buddy, but belittles him to her girlfriends, 
yet we can only sympathize with her knowing that her behavior is driven by
fear and the parochialism of her 1950s community.  (De Felitta's script
helps her when Buddy's failed business ventures are chronicled in an
amusing montage.)  She's willing to help Mary until the color of Mary's 
child introduces concepts beyond her grasp.
Kelly Macdonald ("Trainspotting") is less engaging than the two leads,
initially suspicious, she barely warms up.  She is sweet when attempting
to purchase Italian groceries, mispronouncing everything, to learn cooking
from Buddy.
Writer/director Raymond De Felitta ("Cafe Society") has based his story
on his uncle, although he's given him a happier ending.  De Felitta shows
more strength in his direction than his writing.  While his dialog rings
true for its time and place (a lot of ethnic and racial slurs are flung
around), his story telegraphs its every move.  The film's climax begins
powerfully, but devolves into a stickily sweet romanticism that logically
doesn't ring true.
Still "Two Family House" is an engaging slice of life that I would particularly
recommend to the generation portrayed, the ones that begat us baby boomers.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
