Title
Review for Bis ans Ende der Welt (1991)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Kevin Patterson
Wim Wenders's UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD may be the first 2-1/2 hour film
that I thought moved too quickly almost every step of the way. It's about
so many different things at once that it ends up having time for none of
them: there's a cross-continental spy chase, a romantic triangle, a
possible nuclear disaster, and a meditation on technology and human
consciousness. I have heard that Wenders originally hoped to make a five-
or six-hour film, and it shows: there are traces of choppy editing,
characters disappear from the story for half an hour at a time, and
important plot and character points are merely glossed over in narration.
Conversations barely have time to start in this film: the characters get a
few lines, and then it's time to cut to the next scene.
The first hour of the film, for example, follows Claire Tourneur (Solveig
Dommartin) as she pursues Sam Farber (William Hurt), whom she met in an
airport, to various cities all over the world. There is clearly some
attraction between them, but he still seems wary of her presence and fears
that she might make things more dangerous, as he is clearly fleeing someone
important, and ditches her on more than one occasion. Still she continues,
undiscouraged. Perhaps Wenders wanted this to be some sort of great
odyssey, but all we ever see is a series of scenes in airports and hotels.
There's no time for the relationship between the two to develop, or for
Claire to consider why she keeps following him, because Wenders has to send
them gallavanting across the globe again before too long.
Aside from being rather unsuspenseful and repetitive, this portion of the
movie doesn't help us to relate to or understand the characters, because it
makes Sam seem very self-centered and unlikeable and makes Claire look like
a bit of an airhead at the very least. Adding to the muddle is Claire's
boyfriend (?) Gene (Sam Neill), who shows up to help her, apparently
unfazed that she's trying to run off with another man. I could understand
that perhaps he really loves her and figures this is what will make her
happy, but there seems to be absolutely *no* tension between the two of
them over this. "I don't think you quite understand the nature of our
relationship," Gene says to a puzzled private detective at one point; I
imagine the detective could keep company with most of the audience on that
one.
UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD does eventually take a turn for the better.
Claire has caught up with Sam (again), and he reveals to her that he has
been on the run from the U.S. government, trying to keep them from getting
hold of his new invention: a camera which records another person's visual
sense-data in a way that it can be transmitted to his blind mother. Claire
joins him on his flight from the authorities as the two continue to travel
the world, taking turns recording sights for his mother. Finally they wind
up in a remote area of Australia when several nuclear satellites
accidentally explode, rendering all communications dead and leaving them to
wonder if anyone else is left alive.
Eventually they make their way to a desert shelter, where they are joined
by Gene and a bounty hunter, both of whom had been on Sam's trail. There
they also find Sam's family, and an old conflict reignites between Sam and
his father, whom he thinks is ungrateful for all the effort he has made for
his mother. Meanwhile, the camera isn't the miracle Sam had hoped for. His
mother is mostly startled by how bleak and ugly the world seems compared to
when she had last been able to see, at age eight, and others, including
Claire, start using it to record their own dreams and soon become addicted
to watching their own mental images on-screen.
If this review seems to be jumping all over the place, that's partly
because the film does as well. But UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD is hardly a
disaster. Wenders has a distinct, poetic style of direction, and the scenes
in which he captures the characters' isolation when they think the rest of
the human population may have been wiped out are outstanding. The
post-apocalyptic element and the issues raised by the invention of the
camera were both fascinating, and in fact each of them probably could have
made for an entire movie all by themselves. Unfortunately, the compressed
pace of the film still allows for only cursory examinations of each.
Given that he was apparently limited to a shorter release than he wanted,
Wenders might well have done better to focus on just one or two of these
story elements. The spy chase in particular feels like dead weight, though
perhaps it would have led into the rest of the film more easily in its
uncut version. I guess Wenders had an epic in mind, but at best he ends up
with an outline for an epic, full of underdeveloped ideas and characters.
Still, it seemed like an outline for a pretty good epic, and hopefully the
director's cut will eventually gain commercial release.

Author
Shane Burridge
     Wim Wenders must have considered this his dream film (literally,
as the story turns out).  His earler road movies (ALICE IN THE CITIES;
KINGS OF THE ROAD; PARIS, TEXAS) and preoccupation with transient,
questing characters finally comes to a head with UNTIL THE END OF THE
WORLD, a road movie that travels all over the planet, no less.
     The year is 1999, "the year the Indian satellite went out of
control", so we are told, and Claire (Solveig Dommartin), a freewilled
young woman, is given the opportunity of a lifetime when she lucks into
a cache of stolen money.  At almost the same time she meets an
enigmatic stranger (William Hurt) who steals a small amount of her
find, and so begins their global game of hide-and-seek, as Claire uses
the rest of her money to chase him from continent to continent.  This
chase, which drags in others (not the least of whom is Sam Neill,
Claire's former lover), seems to be the thrust of the film until about
halfway through when it abruptly stops in Australia (the end of the
world?), changes gear, and introduces a secondary cast and a new
story.  Suddenly Dommartin, Hurt, Neill, and others are involved with
Max Von Sydow's (Hurt's father) experiments to digitally reconstruct
images from the neo-cortex.
     Opinions will be divided among many over which half of the film is
better--or at least more enjoyable--but for some UNTIL THE END OF THE
WORLD will be just too much: too long, too big and too slow.  At the
outset, the material looks tailor-made for a whimsical fantasy (who
wouldn't like to chase someone clear across the globe?) but Wenders has
a curiously practical approach.  It's hard also to get a handle on
Dommartin's character.  Her motivation for hunting down Hurt is
unclear--is it obsession?  Romance?  The thrill of the chase?  Or does
she look upon her actions as the last expression of freedom and
spontaneity (her character is established as capricious right from the
start) beneath the decaying orbit of the satellite that hangs above her
head like a Damocletian sword?  Whatever the reason, she and Hurt do
not make a terribly convincing couple--but then again, perhaps they are
never meant to be.  Like the others in the cast, Hurt and Dommartin are
almost swamped by the scale of events Wenders places them in.  State of
the art technology (as it would be in 1999) is in every scene, and an
impressive soundtrack of original songs, specially commissioned by
Wenders, plays constantly throughout the first half of the film.
     It almost seems like Wenders' grand game, but we can enjoy
watching him shuffle the pieces because he never loses sight of the
humanity of the characters--witness the poignant scene in which Hurt
interviews his sister and her daughter.  And a final shot, capturing
the meditative wonder in Claire's face, is truly special, causing one
to reappraise the title of the film.  It's not a film to get serious
about and find fault with--you'd rather just let Wenders indulge
himself and take you along for the ride.  Naturally, with scale as
large as this, UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD is best enjoyed on a big
screen--the video version suffers badly, not only in picture but also
in content, with half an hour pruned out of it.  See it in a cinema
with a good sound system, if you can.

Author
Grant Heinrich
Review: UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD.  Directed Wim Wenders (WINGS OF
        DESIRE) Lots of actors, including William Hurt, Solveig
        Dommartin, Sam Neill, Max Von Syndow and Ernie Dingo. 
     The Australian release of UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD is roughly 
three hours long, cut down from an original length that's rumoured to be
between five and seven hours long.  Even so, there's more than one movie
in the edited length of World: there's at least three distinct
sections, and enough stuffing -- in terms of ideas and incomplete,
possibly edited-out character development -- to make a few more movies
again.  Ambitious, in this case, is an understatement.
     UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD has three basic sections.  The first
hour is an ordinary chase movie through Europe and the US.  The action
then moves to Coober Pedy for the final two "acts."  Hurt's mother is
blind.  His father has invented a camera for the blind.  Hurt was
travelling around the world to film images for his mother.  (The scene
where Hurt films his sister and her daughter is my favourite of the
movie: the daughter tells the camera how she misses her mother, and
wishes the mother were there to meet the granddaughter.  It's simple and
moving, with superbly restrained emotional impact.)
     The film Hurt makes -- and it's effect on the mother -- is the
centre of the second section.  And the final third concerns "the disease
of images."  The father goes one step further with his camera, and 
records the dreams of Hurt and Dommartin, who become addicted.
     UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD is co-written by Peter Carey (the
narration is reminiscent of Illywacker).  It's filmed in 10 countries --
Wenders has said, in interviews, that "the constant
crew...were...completely wasted and out of their heads."  In some ways,
this shows.  There was too much material for one movie -- it's
disjointed and obviously heavily edited.  But for a director like
Wenders, severe editing is a plus.  And the constant introduction of new
themes and plots (and the way once-important plotlines are just
forgotten) doesn't distract from the dazzling ideas of the script.
     Very much worth seeing.  Inventive, affecting and more interesting
than most of the movies showing now.
(That review was followed up by a friend of mine, who said UNTIL THE END
OF THE WORLD was "good, but dull in places." But he's not good with long
movies.)
--- G M Heinrich  ( leroy@socs.uts.edu.au )

Author
Prentiss Riddle
     It is directed by Wim Wenders, stars William Hurt and Solveig
Dommartin (who you'll remember if you saw Wenders' gorgeous WINGS OF
DESIRE), and is written by Australian novelist Peter Carey (author of
the wonderful book and movie BLISS).
     Without getting into spoilers, I'll just say that the movie is set
in 1999, when a nuclear satellite accident is threatening to start off
an automated WWIII in the upper atmosphere.  Against this background boy
meets girl and boy, girl, and assorted bad guys chase each other across
four continents of high tech and urban decay.
     I'd describe the movie as equally influenced by film noir,
cyberpunk and magical realism.  The mix doesn't always sit well.  It is
as slow as the rest of Wim Wenders' languorous work, something I usually
enjoy, but the conventions of noir and especially cyberpunk would call
for speed.  Its plot meanders like a Gabriel Garcia Marquez novel,
playing with our expectations about beginning, middle and end, an effect
which worked beautifully in BLISS but doesn't seem to work here.
Wenders pays more attention to the science fiction aspect of his
cyberpunk theme than most so-called cyberpunk movies -- in fact computer
animation and HDTV effects play as important a part in the movie as the
stunning landscapes -- but at crucial points the technology leaves
reality behind and becomes magic or metaphor.
     Still, this movie is trying to do a lot of important and exciting
things.  The sense of "end times" which naturally occurs at the end of a
millennium still has many of us by the throat.  Yet we escaped the Cold
War by the skin of our teeth, and we no longer have a clear focus for
our sense of doom.  Maybe it's already time for movies which ask how
we're going to feel when we wake up on a bright morning in the next
millennium to find a day which is much like the one which went before it
-- dangerous, yes, but not necessarily the End of the World.
-- Prentiss Riddle ("aprendiz de todo, maestro de nada") riddle@rice.edu

Author
Jerry Saravia
UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD (1991) - Reviewed by Jerry Saravia
Wim Wenders' "Until the End of the World" is a fascinating, fractured, 
disconnected mess of a movie. Watching it recently for the second time, I 
found it less enthralling than I had initially. It is like watching a trailer 
for a film that is not quite complete. 
It is the year 1999 and an Indian nuclear satellite has spun out of control 
causing great alarm around the world. Claire Tourneur (Solveig Dommartin), an 
adventurous partygoer, could care less about a potential nuclear crisis. She 
loves to sleep endlessly and listen to rock and roll music, especially 
Elvis's "Summer Kisses, Winter Tears" (also sung in the film by David Lynch 
regular Julee Cruise). While traveling back home, Claire finds herself 
iadvertently involved with two bank robbers, a traveler wearing a fedora hat 
named Trevor Mcphee (William Hurt), who is being hunted by the government, a 
bounty hunter, and so on. This all takes them to a spiritual habitat in the 
Australian Outback where Farber's father, a crotchety scientist (Max Von 
Sydow), lives with his blind wife (Jeanne Moreau). 
I do not wish to reveal much more of the film except to say that the first 
half is brilliant moviemaking, exploring a world inhabited by videophones, 
digital video cameras, headsets that can record images, tracking devices, all 
told in an almost noirish, Godardian landscape (in fact, both Dommartin and 
Hurt seem to be doing variations on the characters in Godard's "Breathless" 
and "Pierrot le Fou.") Most of what the film shows has become a reality today 
in the year 2000, though videophones never took off. The ability to trace 
anyone anywhere is also a real possibility, even on the Internet. 
Once the characters settle in Australia, the film loses its urgency and 
potency. Basically, we are left with endless shots of people strapped to 
chairs while enduring dream hypnosis and other sleep-inducing phenomena so 
that a new kind of camera can record and visualize people's dreams. The 
characters in this section of the film become less interesting as well. Why 
the hell does Claire follow the listless Farber all around the world? Does 
she truly love him or does she want the money he stole from her? I think it 
may have been a mistake to show a femme fatale with a compassionate, sweet 
aura - the transition is simply not there and thus not believable. Dommartin 
seems to be playing the same angelic, melancholy character she played in 
Wenders' "Wings of Desire." Characters such as the devious bounty hunter, the 
sloppy government agent, the whimsical bank robbers, and Claire's boring 
boyfriend, an author (Sam Neill, who also narrates the film) all become 
ciphers literally kept in the background. 
Every sequence set in Australia feels disconnected and rushed, though the 
soundtrack and the sight of seeing the towering presences of Max Von Sydow 
and Jeanne Moreau keeps one glued as to what happens next. It all sort of 
feels choppy and not edited with smooth transitions from one scene to the 
next. The reason may be that Wim Wenders initially had a longer cut, 
reportedly five hours long and shown briefly at a university in 1996. I wait 
for the day when this cut becomes available and shown in cinema screens. 
Heck, if they did it for "Das Boot" and "The Last Emperor," they can do it 
for Wenders' film. 
Despite the flaws and narrative inconsistencies, "Until the End of the World" 
is brave, original, risky, full of ambitious ideas, and often a sight to 
behold (including the innovative use, at the time, of high-definition 
television). It is often compelling and moving enough to make one wish it 
were better. I am sure the longer, director's cut is the great film that this 
truncated version aspires to be. 
