Title
Review for Corruptor, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Mr. Bryan Frankenseuss Theiss
  As far as I know, Chow Yun Fat is the most charismatic man alive. If I was
smart when I was a kid, I would have trained to become Chow Yun Fat as an
adult. If there were some way I could pay money to actually become Chow Yun
Fat, I'd probably be saving up. There is something powerful about his presence
that I couldn't really describe with words. So insert you're cliche here - he's
The Man, he's the Master, he's God.
  I haven't seen all of his work, but I've seen enough of the basics (The
Killer, Hard Boiled, A Better Tomorrow) to see that he's a lot more than a
gunslinging badass. He's a great actor. Unfortunately, his American debut The
Replacement Killers was only interested in the gunslinging badass side of his
persona. He pulled off the role (with minimal English) and his charisma was
powerful enough to hold the movie. But fortunately The Corruptor - while no The
Killer - is a much better vehicle for his talents.
  The new film reminds me more of Hard Boiled than anything else - sort of an
American take on that brand of HK crime epic. There's a gang war, rival cops,
confusion about who's on which side. There's no shootout in a teahouse, but
there's one in a lamp store. There's even a scene where Wahlberg walks around
with a toothpick hanging out of his mouth, which may or may not be an homage to
Tequila's habit in Hard Boiled. Of course, The Corruptor's gun battles and
miscellaneous mayhem, while pretty extravagant by American standards, don't
have the same balletic grace and adrenaline pumping power of Woo's films. And I
would understand if someone found the portrayal of Chinese gangs, prostitutes
and crooked cops offensive in the context of an American movie (although I
think the movie -- perhaps due to the influence of Woo's films -- goes to
unusual length to add ambiguity and dimension to the
white-cop-comes-into-Chinatown scenario).
  I'm also a fan of Mark Wahlberg. I think his performance in Boogie Nights
should have won him an Oscar. He's talented enough to make me forget about his
past as a racist hoodlum and, worse, an extremely bad bubble gum rapper. But
like I told a co-worker before the screening, "He's not gonna rap, is he? Then
there's nothing to worry about." 
  Outside of Boogie Nights, Wahlberg mostly exudes a boyish innocence that
makes him very likable. I enjoyed his work in Traveller and The Big Hit (which
had some extremely bad comic moments but went far to establish Wahlberg as a
likable and agile action hero). His role here isn't quite as consistent, but it
works, and I'm not sure there's anyone else I would have rather seen in the
role. His best moments are on the too rare occasions when he gets a real
chemistry going with Chow, like in the scene where they're staking out a drug
house and he teases Chow by pretending to misinterpret his comment as a
confession of deep love.
  The shootouts are pretty long, but they never give you the same "Oh my god,
am I really seeing this?" shock of, say, the hospital shootout in Hard Boiled.
Still, they have more punch than standard Hollywood fare. I particularly liked
the drawn out gunbattle/car chase, even if the style is somewhere in between
the kind of fluid editing I prefer and the incomprehensible Bruckheimer style
that I usually despise.
  The storyline is fairly standard but it's more quick paced and complicated
than your usual cop movie. I'm embarrassed to admit that I couldn't even keep
up with a few of the story points. I don't think it's a particularly well
written film but it's better than I expected, improving as it builds. What
struck me is that by the end of the movie I really did care about Chow's
character and wasn't sure how I wanted the film to end. In the last act he has
become, by the usual action movie standards, "the bad guy," but Wahlberg and
the audience (me, anyway) still like him. In real life, I don't think crooked
cops - hell, straight cops - are exactly cool. (Sure, a society may need rules,
but you gotta wonder about someone who actually wants to be the guy to enforce
them. And then when they don't even want to follow the rules themselves, is
there any arguing that they are soulless bastards?) So I found myself torn
wondering if I'd rather see Wahlberg and internal affairs bust a corrupt cop
who had it coming, or see Chow - the man, the master, God - get away scott
free. And while I was struggling with this, I realized that the movie was
working on me.
  The Corruptor isn't the masterpiece we're all hoping King's Ransom (Chow's
long rumored reunion with Woo) will be, but it's light years ahead of the
could-be-straight-to-video formulaic junk of The Replacement Killers. It's
worth it just for the joy of Chow's acting - he's not just the cocky badass,
he's also the jokester, the brooder, the guy who's been betrayed, the guy who
cooks. It's a real role, and he eats it up. It's also notable that his English
skills have improved immensely - I think he speaks it better than Jackie Chan,
who's been trying for much longer. 
  I wish The Corruptor had opened big so that our man could be considered
"bankable." This is an actor who should get to do whatever the hell he wants.
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Author
Matt Williams
The Corruptor promises a mix of Hong Kong style action with a gritty New
York cop drama, and it partially delivers each.  The action sequences
are entertaining, but not electric; the drama is interesting, but hardly
original.
The Corruptor opens as a standard buddy cop flick, with rookie Danny
Wallace (Mark Wahlberg) being assigned to the Asian Crime Unit under the
reluctant tutelage of Nick Chen (Chow Yun-Fat).  Chen is the type of cop
who is willing to cause millions of dollars of damage if it means the
bad guy goes down.  He doesn't particularly appreciate being saddled
with a rookie, especially in these tough times.
Chinatown is under a severe gang war.  The long established Tong mob,
led by the venerable Uncle Benny (Kim Chan), is confronted with the
young and violent Fukinese Dragons.  The cops from the ACU aren't
expected to solve anything.  Rather, their job is to try and keep the
violence to a minimum in order to protect tourism.
It soon becomes clear that Detective Chen is on the Tong payroll... but
is he a bad cop?  That's a question the young Danny must answer, and
quickly too, as he soon finds himself approached by Tong agents. Will
the lure of quick cash amid a hopeless situation corrupt Danny as well?
Fans of Chow Yun-Fat will be happy to know that the Hong Kong action
superstar is much more at ease in his second Hollywood film than his
first, The Replacement Killers.  The bullets fly fast and furious, and,
though director James Foley is no John Woo when it comes to an action
sequence, he is able to make the action tense and somewhat exciting.
But the highly unrealistic action sequences seem out of place in this
gritty crime drama that, apparently, is intended to be steeped in the
truth. Even for those accustomed to taking their cop movies with a grain
of salt, The Corruptor proves hard to swallow.
One of the problems is with Mark Wahlberg's character.  He starts out
believably as a green rookie, stunned motionless at the first gunfight
he encounters.  However, as the film progresses, his character quickly
metamorphoses into a savvy super action hero, complete with an
encyclopedic knowledge of Chinese.  Audience members who leave to fetch
popcorn might think they've returned to the wrong movie.
Ignoring the film's excesses, the plot of The Corruptor is at least
interesting, if a bit routine.  The story of cops on the take has been
analyzed before by countless other films and TV shows.  The Corruptor
does manage to throw in an interesting twist or two, but it wraps things
up a bit too neatly...robbing the characters of the opportunity to make
a tough moral decision.
The action sequences of The Corruptor wouldn't be terribly compromised
if viewed on the small screen...a place where the cop drama elements
would seem right at home.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Steve Kong
I was once asked if I biased my film reviews based on the presence of a
particular performer. Definitely! My admiration of Chow Yun-Fat comes from
his collaborations with legendary action director John Woo (Hard Boiled,
The Killer, Once A Thief). And like anyone who loves the work that these
two have accomplished in Hong Kong, I await the day that these two will
pair up again to do another film together. For now, I have to live with the
above par releases of Woo sans Chow (Face/Off) and the below par releases
of Chow sans Woo (The Replacement Killers). So, I was a little disappointed
by the film The Corruptor, a Chow release without Woo at the helm. The
Corruptor is an above average cop-buddy movie that is lifted up by the
presence of Chow Yun-Fat but then dragged down by Mark Wahlberg and
director James Foley.
Similar to The Replacement Killers, the title of The Corruptor does not
refer to the character portrayed by Chow Yun-Fat. Nick Chen (Chow Yun-Fat)
is a detective in the NYPD Asian Gangs Unit. The AGU is run by a tight knit
group of cops, all Chinese. A bombing at a local convenience store changes
all this. A new gang in town kills a foreigner and the mayor is screaming
to have the AGU expanded. And before you can scream "buddy-film", Mark
Wahlberg (Boogie Nights) shows up.
Chen who is on the take from a Chinatown businessman, Lee (Ric Young),
re-evaluates his beliefs and actions when he has to take on the new
recruit, Danny Wallace (Wahlberg). When Lee tries to put Wallace on the
payroll, this tests Chen's loyalties -- as the film progresses, Wallace is
also forced to take a close look at his loyalties through a great twist in
the story.
The script by first-time pen Robert Pucci has enough twists in it to keep
the attention of the moviegoer looking for a film filled with double-fisted
gunfights, because the action in The Corruptor is sparse. And when the
action fires up, it is done with such MTV style shooting and editing that I
was expecting to find a complimentary airsickness bag.
The one thing that I despise most about the current crop of action films is
the use of the "Shaky Camera" technique. This is a technique in which the
director and cinematographer (Juan Ruiz-Anchia) decide that action is
enhanced by bouncing the camera around. Put this together with quick cuts
and razor sharp editing and what you get are action sequences that no one
can follow. If you've seen the car chase in Michael Bay's The Rock and
thought the camerawork and editing in it was horrible, wait till you see
what James Foley can do with the car chase in The Corruptor. This car chase
had me dizzy. I don't understand why directors haven't learned that the
"Shaky Camera" technique does not heighten the tension in an action scene,
but detriments it.
The one thing that saves The Corruptor is Chow Yun-Fat. And though Foley
does not use Chow's talents to their full potential, there is enough of
Chow in the film to make it a worthwhile screening. In every way Chow is
the epitome of coolness. Whether he has two guns in hand pumping 50 rounds
into a bad guy or just standing around talking to another cop: he is cool.
In The Replacement Killers, Chow was held back by his weak understanding of
English. In that film, his US premiere film, he was stoic and boring -- but
still cool. In The Corruptor, his English is much better -- by leaps and
bounds -- and he is freed to do what he does best: Act. In The Corruptor,
Chow is freed to show off his onscreen charm. His low-key humor shines
onscreen and that makes the film all the more better.
What drags down Chow is Wahlberg. Wahlberg tries to underplay his part,
playing his Wallace more like his character in Boogie Nights than a real
cop. The problem was that I never accepted Wahlberg as a cop. His
performance in The Corruptor was horrible. Wahlberg adds nothing to this
film except for some bare-chested scenes that are guaranteed to bring in
the female audience.
Director James Foley tries his best at putting together an action film, but
fails.  The action in The Corruptor lacks excitement and tension, it is
flat as can be. More often it's just a series of images flashed onscreen
with loud noises. Foley is able to keep the story moving, but unfortunately
he is unprepared for doing the action portion of the film.
I'm convinced that had two small changes been made to The Corruptor, it
would have come out a much better and more highly enjoyable film. The
changes would be the replacement of director James Foley with John Woo and
the recasting of Danny Wallace with a stronger actor than Mark Wahlberg. As
it stands, The Corruptor is still a Don't Miss film, but only because of
Chow Yun-Fat's presence in the film. See The Corruptor for Chow Yun-Fat.
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Greg King
The influence of Asian cinema on Hollywood has become
increasingly obvious, with directors like John Woo leaving their mark
on the action genre.  Bullets, bodies and blood fly thick and fast in
this brutally exciting action thriller that seamlessly combines the
kinetic energy and violence of the distinctive Hong Kong style of film
making with the slickness of Hollywood.  What is most surprising about
The Corruptor is that this riveting, blood soaked actioner comes from
James Foley, a director best known for his powerful character driven
dramas (At Close Range and After Dark, My Sweet, etc).
The action takes place in New York's colourful Chinatown
district, an area with its own unwritten codes and rules.  Chen
(played by legendary Hong Kong action star Chow Yun-Fat) is a veteran
detective who has policed the streets of Chinatown.  However, a long
time ago he fell under the spell of Uncle Benny (Kim Chan),
Chinatown's unofficial godfather, and has since walked an uneasy
tightrope between his two masters.  A vicious war erupts between the
old style Triads and the new Fukienese Dragons, and the body count
rises.  The heat is suddenly on Chen.  Complicating matters is the
discovery of a series of dead bodies of anonymous young Asian girls in
garbage piles throughout Chinatown.
Enter young Danny Wallace (Mark Wahlberg, from Boogie Nights
and The Big Hit, etc), an idealistic young cop assigned to Chen's task
force.  "You don't change Chinatown; Chinatown changes you," cautions
Chen, who develops an uneasy alliance and grudging respect for his new
partner.
Yun-Fat is at his coolest, laconic best here, and Foley gives
him plenty of opportunities to demonstrate the skills that have made
him so famous.  This is a much more exciting and violent film than The
Replacement Killers, his Hollywood debut, and should please fans of
the genre.  Wahlberg is also quite good here, and holds his own
alongside Yun-Fat.
The Corruptor is over plotted, but Foley doesn't allow the
mechanics of the story to slow the film down or get in the way of the
action.  He directs with bruising efficiency.  The film's undoubted
highlight is a brilliantly staged, breathtakingly exciting car chase
through the streets of New York that exacts a high toll amongst
innocent bystanders and sets new standards for the genre.
Juan Ruiz-Anchia's fluid camerawork and Howard Shore's crisp
editing bring a sense of energy to the film.  The Corruptor certainly
crams a lot into its incredibly taut and tight 110 minutes.

Author
Robert Workman
Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review
Chow Yun Fat continues his American invasion of sorts in the
action/drama flick The Corruptor.  This time, he's part of a squad of
cops in Chinatown that's been put on task to investigate a gang on the
rampage.  All's well until a new office in the squad, Mark Wahlberg,
stops in.
>From there, the story takes different directions, some more favored than
others.  How does one define a dirty cop?  Why is someone giving
Wahlberg some good tips on bad crimes in Chinatown?  And why is the same
Uncle Benny from Lethal Weapon 4 appearing in this film?!  Is he just a
popular Chinese villain or what?
Director James Foley does a credible job for keeping the pace, at least.
Some of the dialogue is kind of outta whack (I wished for closed
captioning in some parts of this movie- WHAT DID THAT GUY SAY?!), but
the action scenes are very well filmed.
Wahlberg holds his own with a performance that's a slight bit under what
he gave in last year's The Big Hit, but who cares?  It's Yun Fat's show,
and this actor truly delivers with some great lines, over the top
attitude and, of course, the ability to provide excellent gunplay.  The
guy's got more done here than he managed in The Replacement Killers, and
I'm sure his third movie will be even better.
The Corruptor's not a bad piece of work when it comes to cop films, and
it features  a terrific car chase scene where innocent people actually
play a part of, some of whom get slaughtered quite brutally.  At last,
no "get out of the way" ridiculousness, it looks hauntingly real.  I
only wish the story weighed in a little more, but, as is, there's plenty
to like here, particularly if you're a fan of Yun Fat's.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: March 12, 1999
Starring: Chow Yun-Fat, Mark Wahlberg, Ric Young, Jon Kit Lee, Elizabeth
Lindsey, Byron Mann
Directed by: James Foley
Distributed by: New Line Cinema
MPAA Rating: R (strong violence, language, sexuality)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/corruptor.htm 
THE CORRUPTOR can best be summarized as a movie about individuals who
are stuck in the gray areas of life. Many a film has been made about
this dubious ground which lacks morals and order, and survival is easily
half chance. But try as it might, THE CORRUPTOR, directed by James Foley
(GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS) cannot reach the level of intelligence necessary
to skillfully carry this theme. Instead, it's simply a plain old
detective thriller with neon lights and naked women put in for
"atmosphere." 
Chow Yun-Fat, making his sophomore domestic effort here after last
year's action thriller THE REPLACEMENT KILLERS, stars as NYPD Asian Gang
Unit officer Nick Chen. On the payroll of a local Chinatown mobster (Ric
Young) and faced with a surging wave of crime in his territory Nick is
also in the company of a new partner, Danny Wallace (Mark Wahlberg).
Although Danny reeks of inexperience, Nick takes him under his wing and
the two go on a mission of vengeance to clean up Chinatown -- despite
emotional baggage and an interesting plot twist. 
The script for this story is clever but not excessively so, the first
such piece written for the screen by Robert Pucci. It demands a lot of
energy from the director and the cast, hidden amongst awesome
pyrotechnics and furious gun battles, and unfortunately neither Foley
nor Wahlberg and Chow can deliver on that promise. Instead, the movie
comes off feeling like a fake, which pretends to have its supply of
adrenaline wound taut like a tennis net but never delivers on that
promise. Camera tricks and editing room finesse can only go so far to
hide these shortcomings. 
The rest of the script devotes itself to a detective story which is not
skillfully written. Although the plot may have been orderly and clear to
Pucci, on the screen it plays out in an unrefined fashion. Bits of
crucial information are bookended by half-finished subplots and become
lost among the flashiness of THE CORRUPTOR's visual side. This last bit,
the visuals, is perhaps the movie's most redeeming value, for there are
moments when the action is good and the plot is straightforward. Put
simply, THE CORRUPTOR falls into its own gray area: it does not succeed
and it does not fail, giving it the unfortunate disposition of being
easily forgotten. 

Author
Ross Anthony
Chow Yun-Fat (of Hong Kong action film fame and "Replacement Killers") is
cool. Cooler than 007 (I'd give him a 009 on the cool scale) but in a Clint
Eastwood, not spy/gadgetry, kind of way.
Take a not so simple game of who-can-you-trust?, fine cinematography, a
great amount of gun fire, a slice of prostitution on the side and you've got
the ingredients for "The Corruptor."
After stylishly swank opening credits, the picture explodes onto the
screen -- a bomb in Chinatown. Yun-Fat is the tough, slightly crooked cop
respected in his district. Mark Wahlberg ("Boogie Nights") plays the rookie
(refered to as "the boy") whose white face and green bottom aren't welcomed
on Yun-Fat's Chinese team. The two grudgingly befriend each other while
eliminating members of gang A (like targets in a video game) as they are
seduced into a corrupt loyalty by gang B.
Despite a few unlikely plot developments, "The Corruptor" is compelling from
start to finish. Yun-Fat, following up "Replacement Killers" with style, is
beginning to show his age. But like Eastwood and Connery, I don't expect him
to loose his cool any time soon.
Starring Chow Yun-Fat and Mark Wahlberg.
Directed by James Foley.
Produced by Dan Halsted at Illusion Ent./Newline Cinema.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
1 and a half stars
Off the beat, I'd say that Chow Yun Fat is a terrific actor.  A John Woo
veteran and an Asian action spectacle, Yun Fat effortlessly conveyed
brilliance in Woo's The Killer and Hard Boiled.   His Hollywood debut,
however, is another story.  What led him to choose two very messy
scripts - 1997's The Replacement Killers and this one - to begin his
American career is a mystery to me.  It's not that The Corruptor doesn't
show of its lead performer, it's just that its lead performer can't show
off his film. After the first ten minutes or so of The Corruptor, we get
a glimpse of what it could have been - but upon its completion, it's
clear that this film is a case of misused opportunities.  There are a
couple of well-choreographed action scenes and some unexpected twists in
the plot, but severely hindering this B&B (blood and bullets) soaked
caper is its scripting.  Jumbled and unnecessarily complex, the
screenplay never builds intrigue and seldom shows signs of getting
there.
Danny Wallace (Mark Wahlberg) is a new police officer in the Chinatown
Asian Gang Unit.  A turf war has erupted between two powerful gangs, and
corruption and double-crossing has filtered through the police force.
Star detective Nick Chen (Chow Yun-Fat) reluctantly partners with
Wallace, informing him that white cops are usually killed within days.
Whilst Chen battles to keep the peace in Chinatown, Wallace has
different intentions, and is reluctant to adhere to the tough
regulations of an almost foreign police force.
Perhaps dooming The Corruptor from the start is its two protagonists -
they are cliché and rather dull characters. Chow Yun-Fat has the ability
to play both the good guy and the bad guy with a flick of his eyebrows,
but here he doesn't get the chance to dazzle audiences or develop his
character emotionally. Nick Chen is a hard-hitting, dedicated cop - we
know that - but the film tries to make him more than that.  The
characterization of a violent but lovable man was done to perfection in
1998's Japanese film Hana-Bi, but here viewers are distanced from the
film's most important character.  Yun Fat is never a bad performer, but
bad films bring him down.  Mark Wahlberg plays a nerd cop (his role
bears similarities to Guy Pearce's in L.A Confidential) unconvincingly
and sheepishly.
There are few redeeming qualities in The Corruptor, a film that
disappoints on more than one level.  Poor scripting makes this film come
in a long second best to the likes of Payback and Lock, Stock and Two
Smoking Barrels, and that's disappointing since The Corruptor had more
potential than both of them.  Like looking at a blank page in an
otherwise fascinating book, this film doesn't match the high standards
of either Hong Kong or Hollywood films - in fact, it arrives well below
par on both accounts.


Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
The Corruptor is a big silly mess of an action movie, complete with
pointless plot turns and gratuitous violence.  It's not abhorrent, or
even blatantly unlikable, but it doesn't make a shred of sense.  And
whose idea was it to have the director of Glengarry Glen Ross direct an
action film?  James Foley knows a lot about characters and acting, and
those are the strengths of The Corruptor.  But the quiet scenes clash
with the ludicrous action nonsense, and the result is less like a movie
and more like a derailed train.
At least we have Chow Yun-Fat in the lead role.  Chow plays Nick Chen,
a Chinatown cop.  He's a good cop, as the first few scenes establish,
and he's very familiar with Chinatown.  That's probably why the
powers-that-be decide to team him up with a rookie named Danny Wallace
(Mark Wahlberg).  Nick and Danny begin by stepping on each other's toes,
but finally end up liking each other once they both get a chance to save
the other one's life.  
What happens after that is kind of a mystery to me.  I'm fairly certain
that the villains are all part of the Fukienese Dragons, led by a young
Chinese psycho named Bobby Vu (Byron Mann).  I'm also pretty sure that
Nick is on the payroll of Henry Lee (Ric Young), a gangster dealing in
prostitutes and other neat stuff.  I'm not quite sure why Henry Lee
decides to employ Danny, although this makes for some ridiculous (albeit
unpredictable) plot twists along the way.  There's also an interesting
subplot revolving around Danny's father (Brian Cox), but it doesn't have
much to do with the main story.
One of the problems, as I said, is that the movie doesn't make any
sense.  I don't blame this entirely on Foley, because he's obviously a
good director.  I'm more inclined to point my finger at Robert Pucci's
script, which doesn't seem to be in tune to the way normal people act. 
One scene early on had me particularly annoyed:  Nick confronts his boss
because he's angry about his new white partner.  He's shouting and
pointing his finger and stepping on the furniture, and I was thinking
that I would have fired him if he had done that to me.  (In addition,
the film takes a bite into race-related issues, and never develops them
at all.)
There are a lot of scenes like this one, and none of them are very
coherent.  There's also a considerable language barrier, given that Chow
and some of the other actors have thick Chinese accents.  The plot
itself never straightens out.  I'm not sure who or what the Fukienese
Dragons are, or why Henry Lee is associated with them, or what they do
as a group.  The Corruptor is an action movie, and so all these weird
plot developments are decorated with loud and violent action sequences. 
The sequences aren't bad, but they're not new; how many car chases
through Chinatown have you seen?  On that note, how many Chinatown cop
movies have you seen?  One too many, I'd imagine.
Foley's strength is clearly in characterization, and he does a pretty
good job here.  The scenes between Nick and Danny are very good, and I
actually got a feel for their characters; a bond forms between them that
holds parts of the film together.  Chow and Wahlberg are both good
actors; Chow is a pro, and can do this kind of stuff in his sleep. 
Wahlberg seems less at home in this atmosphere, but he's still fun to
watch.  I also liked the subplot involving Danny's father; Brian Cox's
performance is powerful, and his character makes a compelling moral
compass for Danny.  
But the film ultimately fails, mostly at the hands of insane
incoherence and overly-familiar action scenes.  A complicated plot can
be successful, but the story needs to make sense when it's over.  The
Corruptor never manages to make any sense -- it just keeps spinning out
of control until, finally, there's nothing left to hold on to.

Author
Joy Wyse
        This movie literally starts with a blast - as a building blows up. 
Incredibly, out of the wreckage stumbles a survivor, alive, but not for
long.  Four Oriental youths with assault weapons finish the job that they
had obviously started.  Such is life in New York's Chinatown.  There is a
struggle for control of the Oriental Mafia.  The Police, headed by Nick
Chen [Chow Yun-Fat], don't seem to be controlling it very well.  Enter
Danny Wallace [Mark Wahlberg] as the new cop on the beat, a square peg in
a round hole who doesn't want to be treated differently, although he is.  
Chen saves his life and in Chinese tradition, Danny's life now belongs to
him. 
This is definitely a guy movie.  Most fellows will like the fighting and
explosions, and the nudity - except for Wahlberg's nudity, that is.  That's
there for the girls.
The plot is a little trite, but it's OK.  There is a very exciting car
chase that is reminiscent of `Bullitt' and/or `French Connection', and it
is bloodier that both of them combined.  It's always been a wonder why
there weren't innocent bystanders killed or wounded in those movies.  We
remember the baby carriage that almost was hit, but the lack of danger to
innocent people is usually ignored.  Not so in the Corruptor.  Boy, they
shoot those extras as fast as they can!
New York City is not a very pretty or clean place up close, but some of
the shots taken at night make it look lovely.   All in all, the running
time is way too long, but you won't fall asleep in it.

Author
Vince Yim
   Despite being proclaimed as one of the coolest actors in the world,
Chow Yun-Fat's first Hollywood picture, The Replacement Killers, failed
to have the desired impact. However, his latest, The Corruptor,
reassures Chow's coolness factor.
   The Corruptor tells the tale of two New York cops: the head of the
Asian gang unit, Nick Chen (played by Chow Yun-Fat) and Danny Wallace
(played by Mark Wahlberg), the young idealistic cop who's partnered up
with Chen amidst recent tensions between two gangs, the Triads and the
Fukienese Dragons. Both of Chen and Wallace have hidden agendas, as Chen
has ties to the Triads while Wallace is torn between his loyalties to
Chen and turning him in for corruption. 
   Coming up with a good short plot summary for this film (at least
without giving away the story) is difficult, although that is one of the
charms of the film. While The Replacement Killers is a mindless
shoot-'em-up action film, The Corruptor has a complex storyline with
characters you actually care about, which gives the ending a lot more
impact (loyal fans of Chow Yun-Fat will know what I'm talking about).
While the film is not without its action sequences, they simply cannot
compare to the masterful bullet-ballets of Chow Yun-Fat's frequent Hong
Kong collaborator, John Woo.
   Not that they aren't memorable, though. The film has its share of
wonderfully violent shoot-outs and a nerve wracking car chase on a very
busy street. The end result is that a lot of stuff gets trashed and few
people get to walk away from the incident.  
   Chow's English has improved much since The Replacement Killers, which
is a good thing, especially since his dialogue consists of much more
than "I...need...forged...documents" and "I...need...guns." This is a
film that requires a bit of thought, albeit a bit much, as some of the
storyline tends to gets a bit muddled near the middle. Either that, or I
was just anticipating the next shoot-out too much.
   Simply put, The Corruptor is not a film that you can just turn your
brain off before you watch. The film is more than endless scenes of
bullets flying and bodies falling. Best described as an "intellectual
action film," it puts story and characters ahead of the action
sequences, while still including one of the coolest car chase scenes in
recent memory. As well, the two leads pull off very good performances,
especially when compared to their last films (although I really did like
The Big Hit, also starring Mark Wahlberg).
   While saying this film is better than The Replacement Killers isn't
saying much, the film can definitely stand on its own (even if I did
happen to like both of them). While not the best film starring Chow
Yun-Fat, it is definitely one of the better films around, which is
something sorely lacking in today's film market of mind numbing fare.
-- 

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
"The Corruptor" is a mixture of Hong Kong arcade-action cinema and Sydney
Pollack-esque New York crime drama, and what's surprising is that the hybrid
seems to work.        It concerns two New York City detectives -- played by Chow
Yun- Fat and Mark Wahlberg (who gets better every time I see him) -- who get
sucked into a complex plot of double-crossings and betrayals.  It's one of
those movies that makes more sense after it's over, but is quite a ride while
it's still unspooling.
Chow Yun-Fat's cop is one of those guys who "frisks" someone by smashing his
face into a brick wall while lifting the guy's cigarettes.  Wahlberg's
detective is more reserved and thoughtful, and has been assigned to Yun-Fat's
department to handle a possible organized-crime connection.  The two don't
like each other very much -- and in fact learn to hate each other's guts
enormously, especially after both of them may turn out to be dirty and on the
take.
And more than that I'm not sure I should give away, since at about the
halfway mark there are a series of revelations which, instead of seeming
tacked-on as gratuitous plot-twists, give everything we've seen before a new
and ominous resonance. (There's even a subplot about the Wahlberg character's
father, which at first seems gratuitous, but soon turns out to be organically
connected to everything.)  The movie, instead of getting dumber, gets smarter
and less beholden to formulas as it goes on.  That's rare.
After the visually-enticing but otherwise shallow "Replacement Killers"
(which I still admired for its bombasticity), Chow Yun-Fat now has his first
English- speaking dramatic role as a New York cop in "The Corruptor".  He
plays the role -- a tough-as-rusty-nails detective -- with all the
eye-rolling, evil-smirking over-the-top-ness that he brought to many of his
more outre' Hong Kong roles. But instead of seeming out of place, he hardly
seems to be able to catch up with the manic pace of the movie he's in: he
seems like a caged animal, trying frantically to chew its way out.  Wahlberg,
cerebral and at times exhausted, comes off as someone who knew exactly what
he was getting into from the moment he stepped on screen -- even if we don't
know what that is.  His performance fills in what we don't know factually by
being emotionally complete.
I was surprised to hear how universally derided "The Corruptor" was.  This is
a good, gritty film that knows its material well, and wraps it in a slick and
entertaining package.  A friend of mine slammed the film as being
"predictable".        Maybe its plot is predictable, but the way we get to the
ending we're expecting doesn't come the way we'd expect.  And if every story
were unpredictable, then fiction as a device would be semipointless: the
point is not to get something you can't anticipate, but to get it in a way
you can't anticipate.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        If Jackie Chan is the Beatles of modern action movies, Chow
Yun-Fat is the Rolling Stones: he doesn't want to hold your hand, he
wants
to kick your ass.  Already an action star in Hong Kong, Yun-Fat is
gradually
amassing a cult following in the States on the basis of recent films
like
"The Replacement Killers."  His fan base may soon swell, however: his
latest offering has the potential to make him a household name, just
as
"Rumble in the Bronx" did for Chan.
        James Foley's "The Corruptor" is mean, dark and ugly, but not
in a
bad way.  Drawing inspiration from the kinetic ballets of John Woo,
Foley
and his screenwriter, Robert Pucci, have created a story of intrigue
and
mystery in the streets of Chinatown, drawing as heavily from American
film
noir (there are shades of "Touch of Evil") as from the Hong Kong
gangster
genre.  Whereas most action films are content to throw car chases and
shootouts on the screen ad nasuem, Foley uses these items as building
blocks for an intricate plot involving betrayal, cover-ups, and
morality.
        Lt. Nick Chen (Yun-Fat) is in charge of an all-Asian precinct
in New
York's Chinatown region.  Chronically understaffed, the group has its
hands
so full with minor crimes that they never have time to investigate the
big
ones.  Capitulating to Chen's constant demands for more people, Chen
is
eventually given an additional officer: Daniel Wallace (Mark
Wahlberg), who,
in addition to being caucasian (and therefore unable to work
undercover), is
also inexperienced.  "He's worse than white: he's green!" explodes
Chen.
        Nonetheless, the detective agrees to give Wallace a chance,
and
although the two men dislike each other initially, they (surprise,
surprise)
eventually develop a mutual admiration which blossoms into friendship.
This
is one of the least satisfying aspects of "The Corruptor": its
reliance on the
cliched 'buddy cop' relationship, which seems to occur in every film
of this
kind.  It's been used as recently as last year's "Rush Hour," and is
handled
so tritely in "The Corruptor" that even the film itself seems bored
with it.
        Fortunately, the rest of the story is more daring.  Chen and
Wallace
are soon on the trail of a Chinatown crime lord, and the story becomes
as
much a mystery as an action movie.  Along the way they receive advice
and
information from the mysterious Henry Lee (Ric Young, who played Mao
Tse
Tung in 1995's "Nixon"), a businessman who seens to have his finger in
every pie in town, and who may or may not have the police force on his
payroll.  But loyalties change on the proverbial dime here, and the
villain's
true identity is kept safely hidden from the audience until the final
reel.
Be warned, however: the plot moves fast, and the movie expects you to
keep up.  Leave to go to the bathroom and you'll probably find
yourself
lost when you get back.
        The movie's title, "The Corruptor," is never explained: the
audience
is left to draw its own conclusion.  For me, Chinatown itself was the
corruptor: a society which hides its most devilish secrets in plain
sight, if
one knows merely knows where to look.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Corruptor (1999) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Chow Yun-Fat and Mark
Wahlberg. Directed by James Foley.
 Sometimes it's an actors charisma that carries a picture.
 On the surface, James Foley's Chinatown crime drama is nothing more than a
bloody, ultra-violent "B" picture.
 The characters are stock: the wise veteran cop who knows his away around
the territory, the eager, young rookie trying to fit in and prove his
abilities, and the sly, calculating crime lord, with the affable
personality that conceals a rattlesnake.
 The pleasure of "The Corruptor" can be attributed to two factors: a
slightly better than average script, and the personality of its star, Chow
Yun-Fat.
 This Hong Kong action star is making his second American film - the first
was "The Replacement Killers" - after a stellar stint as John Woo's
favorite actor in a series of gritty, violent dramas such as "Hard-Boiled."
 Chow is smooth, charming and deadly as Detective Nick Chen, head of the
AGU (Asian Gang Unit). He has strong ties to the Chinatown community, and
is not above accepting a favor or two from some of its "businessmen"
leaders.
 Chen is not a dishonest cop. He knows where to draw the line. His biggest
concern is defusing a gang war that is costing many lives as well as
hurting tourism in Chinatown.
 Enter Detective Danny Wallace (Mark Wahlberg), an idealistic young recruit
who wants to help clean up the community, but instead gets sucked into the
dark underbelly and double-dealing of Chinatown.
 Robert Pucci's script offers enough twists and surprises to hold some
suspense. It is also rather dark and bloody.
 Explosions and car chases abound with innocent bystanders mowed down with
abandon.
 And Foley tends to make you air sick with his continual swirling aerial
shots of New York City. One or two would have sufficed, but it seems he
needs to remind us every few minutes of the story's locale and that New
York is a chaotic composite of good and evil.
 Otherwise, "The Corruptor" is an engrossing little movie. One reason is
the contribution of Ric Young as the seductive crime lord, whose glib
manner entices all those around him.
 Wahlberg is sincere as Wallace, but this is Chow's movie.
 It would be fun to see him and John Woo re-team or see Chow in a film with
a stronger script. His potential is limitless.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Michael Dequina
Hong Kong action superstar Chow Yun-Fat is one of the most dynamic,
charismatic screen presences to ever hit the screen in any country.  Yet
for some reason, American filmmakers have yet to figure out how to properly
use him.  While his stateside debut, last year's _The_Replacement_Killers_,
was an enjoyable-enough no-brainer with energy to spare, it barely
scratched the surface of Chow's talent.  The same can be said of his
latest, even more disappointing American vehicle, James Foley's talky and
slow _The_Corruptor_.
Chow is allowed to smile a bit more in _The_Corruptor_ than he did in
_The_Replacement_Killers_, but the storyline is a bit more dour.  Chow
plays NYPD officer Nick Chen, who is in charge of policing the Chinatown
beat, where he has cemented ties with a dastardly crime boss (Ric Young).
When the peace is broken by a turf war, Chen is partnered with an
idealistic naif by the name of Danny Wallace (Mark Wahlberg).
This sets the stage for a serious exploration of loyalty and honor, which
New Line is eager to boast in the publicity materials as being similar to
Chow's collaborations with Woo.  Thematically that may be the case, but
despite the serious underpinnings of his work, Woo has always allowed
himself some fun in the execution.  _The_Corruptor_, on the other hand, is
earnest and sullen all the way through, and progresses at a snail's pace.
When the scenes of talking heads give way to action--which does not happen
often enough--there's no sense of urgency or excitement to the sequences.
Foley and writer Robert Pucci display little to no real interest in the
action element of this "action drama."  They seem more concerned with the
"drama," which is a problem when there are unnecessary, uninteresting plot
threads such as a red-herring plot involving dead prostitutes and Wallace's
relationship with his compulsive gambler father (Brian Cox).
The presence of Chow should have given _The_Corruptor_ a shot of
adrenaline, yet it doesn't.  Anyone who has seen Chow's Hong Kong
vehicles--especially his legendary collaborations with John Woo--can easily
see why the man is often revered as a god: he naturally exudes an
effortless, awe-inspiring cool.  Ironically, I think it's exactly this
trait that gets in the way of American filmmakers.  They are seemingly so
caught up in their awe of him that they tend to take him too seriously.
And anyone whose seen Chow's star-making films also knows that his sense of
humor--his defiant _refusal_ to take himself completely seriously--is what
makes him such an appealing actor.
Take that away, and one is left with a different kind of "cool"--as in the
uncharacteristically cold and rather aloof Chow seen in
_The_Replacement_Killers_ and now _The_Corruptor_.  In light of that, it's
easy to see why Chow has yet to catch on (and, with this film, continue to
have trouble catching on) with general American audiences.  That's
unfortunate not only because Chow and his ardent HK-era fans deserve
better, but the stateside masses deserve to see just how magnetic a
star--and how talented an actor--Chow Yun-Fat truly is.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, go to http://www.joblo.com/
Chow Yun Fat continues his ascent into the American action genre alongside
BOOGIE NIGHT-man (8/10) Mark Wahlberg, who stars in his second film for
director James Foley (This is Foley's follow-up to their previous gig FEAR
(8/10)). They're New York city cops, there's bad stuff happening in
Chinatown...have a blast!
PLOT:
As two rival Chinese underground factions fight the turf war in NYC's
Chinatown, good-time cop Wallace joins the Asian Gang Unit of the 15th
Precinct, under the watchful eye of top cop, Nick Chen. They must fight the
bad guys, work the underground, respect the feds, and avoid the plethora of
corruption running rampant on their streets.
CRITIQUE:
Is this an original idea for a movie? No way. Is this a good movie? You bet.
I thoroughly enjoyed this film from beginning to end. There were no dull
moments, lots of action, a solid story, a cool car chase scene, and plenty
of grit to rub into your scalp. Admittedly, I still have a problem
understanding every other sentence that comes out of Chow Yun-Fat's mouth,
but hey, at least most of Wahlberg's whisper-talk made its way across. It's
sad because I really do think that there were plenty of one-liners that were
missed by the audience because of Yun-Fat's muffled English pronunciation.
Having said that, I don't think it is the acting that draws people to go see
a movie like this in the first place, it's generally the action, the
interesting story line, and the capacity to keep you interested for close to
two hours. This movie was able to keep me entertained for that period, and
even tossed in some over-stylized direction for real Hong Kong effect.
This movie doesn't necessarily need to be seen on the big screen. It's one
of those movies that would go down great on a Saturday night at home with
your friends, beer and nachos. The plot is a little complex at times, but
all in all, it goes down like a bottle o' salsa alongside your nachos.
Slowly, but surely. There is a lot of corruption going on in this movie,
there are some nasty bad guys, bad good guys, and everyone in between. Half
the fun is figuring out who stands for what in the end. Think RONIN (7.5/10)
by way of YEAR OF THE DRAGON (7.5/10) through the dirty dealings of SERPICO
(7/10). Is this film gonna revolutionize the action genre and change your
view of all films action? Not a chance! It just doesn't carry enough
originality in its Chinese take-out box. But will it show you a good time,
quite a bit of violence and a decent plot for a few pockets of green? It
sure will! And if that's your gig, and you dig this kind of fun-junk, check
this gritt-meister out! Either way, the title of this film is still pretty
lame.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
The actor playing bad-guy Uncle Benny in this film, Kim Chan, played a
character with that same name in LETHAL WEAPON 4 (Courtesy of Rogert Ebert
via the IMDb).
Infamous writer/director Oliver Stone acts as executive producer on this
project, alongside Terence Chang, known to be director John Woo's right-hand
on his films.
Chow Yun-Fat's name is actually Yun-Fat Chow. He is born on the 18th of May,
1955 on Nam Nga Island, in Hong Kong.
Word on the street is that Mark Wahlberg is apparently dating his co-star in
his upcoming movie, THE YARDS, Charlize Theron. He's also known as musician
Marky Mark.
The man who plays Mark Wahlberg's dad in this movie, also plays the
character of Dr. Guggenheim in RUSHMORE.
This film is Robert Pucci's first full-feature script.

Author
Dustin Putman
The Corruptor 1/2* (out of * * * * )
Directed by James Foley.
Cast: Chow Yun-Fat, Mark Wahlberg, Ric Young, Paul Ben-Victor, Brian 
Cox, Andrew Pang, Byron Mann, Elizabeth Lindsey, Marie Matiko.
1999 - 111 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, nudity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed March 13, 1999.
One of the things I noticed most while watching acclaimed-director James 
Foley's ("At Close Range," "Glengarry Glen Ross," "Fear") first foray 
into the action genre, "The Corruptor," is that there were a lot of 
subtle signs of disappearances throughout, most notably filmmaking 
skill, intelligence, and even one of the fundamental things you need to 
survive: a brain. Chinese action star Chow Yun-Fat made his U.S. film 
debut last year in "The Replacement Killers," and although no award 
winner, at least it contained style and the much-needed appearance of 
the wonderful actress Mira Sorvino. Unfortunately, the style of the 
former film is replaced in "The Corruptor" with generic, deadeningly 
boring shoot-outs, and in place of Sorvino is the less-talented Mark 
Wahlberg who, like everyone else, sleepwalks through his role. 
Wahlberg stars as Danny Wallace, a young, caucasian cop who is partnered 
with Nick Chen (Yun-Fat), a detective in the 15th Precinct's Asian Gang 
Unit, to stop a gang war in Chinatown between the Fukienese Dragons, and 
the Tongs, led by Henry Lee (Ric Young). Wallace and Chen are basically 
the polar opposites of each other (aren't they always?), but gradually 
become good friends (don't they always?).
And that's it. That's the highly "intricate" story of "The Corruptor," 
which could have saved a lot of people the time and money if the 
filmmakers had realized this exact same premise has been done so many 
times before, and better, that it was pointless to make it again. To pad 
out the excruciatingly long 111-minute running time for such a one-note 
film, screenwriter Robert Pucci (who doesn't deserve to work in Holywood 
ever again) has opted to include a smattering of one-dimensional, 
cliched sub-plots, including one involving Wallace's money-grubbing 
father (Brian Cox), and another in which the two central characters' 
identities come into question. Although I had to dig pretty hard for 
this compliment, there is one (but only one) element that I felt had 
potential, and that was the relationship between Chen and a sweet 
prostitute named May (Maria Mitiko) whom he wants to get out of danger. 
Of course, this chance of adequacy was stripped to the bare minimum of 
involvement and development, and Mitiko, a promising new face, showed a 
lot of potential in a five-minute role (if that).
Aside from that ridiculously small distraction, "The Corruptor" really 
is a brain-dead action movie of the worst type, one without thought or 
excitement. All of the characters were thoroughly unlikable and 
uninteresting, and so when the main characters' lives were put into 
danger, I found myself wondering why director Foley would think that we, 
the audience, would even remotely care about what was happening. There's 
no time to get acquainted with anyone and no apparent screenplay to help 
us in even trying to. Like most of the recent reprehensible Jean-Claude 
Van Damme and Steven Seagal movies, "The Corruptor" is constantly on 
auto-pilot from anything resembling believability or originality, and so 
far Yun Fat has not in any way impressed me with his action star status. 
Although not a fan of Jackie Chan, at least you can always see that he 
is giving his own 200% in everything he does.
One of the most annoying elements of "The Corruptor" is in the 
stereotypical way that the villains are presented. Not only are we not 
given the chance to know the villains by name, but I was never really 
sure exactly what their goal was, except that there was an on-going war 
between the two gangs. At any rate, by the half-hour mark, I had already 
begun to understand the manner in which they were treated. It never 
failed: in every single scene in which the "bad guys" appeared, a 
repetitive, loud rap song would burst onto the soundtrack; I guess that 
was Foley's way of introducing them. Bad Guy = rap music. Okay, got it. 
If anything, this is the first movie I can remember seeing in which one 
of the baddies points a gun at a man, to which the targetted man 
responds, "no, hold on," and pulls out his own gun and shoots himself in 
the head!
As for the supposedly shocking twist during the climax, my b.s. detector 
was sounding off like a steam engine. This same "twist" is now being 
recycled over and over in every other action/cop movie nowadays, and so 
there's no use in hiding the secret. Suffice to say, either Chen or 
Wallace isn't who he says he is, and their newfound buddy-buddy 
relationship suddenly is put at stake. 
"The Corruptor" is a film that is so constantly struggling for ideas 
that it really is quite amusing when you think about it. Here we have 
director James Foley, a man who has made good films in the past, paired 
with Chow Yun-Fat and Mark Wahlberg (so very good in "Boogie Nights"), 
who most likely wasted at least a year of his life bringing this 
no-brainer to the screen. Someone should have really spoken up during 
the pre-production stage and broken the news that this was not a movie 
that was exactly begging to be made. With all of the rainforests being 
torn down and people dying of hunger in the world, it boggles the mind 
at why New Line Cinemas actually had the nerve to waste millions of 
dollars on a piece of wretched trash like this.
Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Homer Yen
Among the several friends that came with me to see this film, I'm
definitely in the minority when I say that there were some very good
elements about `The Corrupter' that merits the purchase of a ticket. 
But I have to caveat that by saying that to find these really good
elements, you have to be able to sit through a lot of bad elements.  
`The Corrupter' stars Chow Yun-Fat, an extremely popular Asian movie
star who possesses confidence, sass and style.  He transfers his
charisma successfully onto the screen as Lt. Nick Chen, a revered
officer that leads the Asian Gang Unit in New York City.  It's a very
tough assignment, and it's made no less difficult with the ongoing
power struggle between two rival ethnic Chinese gangs.  In one scene,
gang members bomb a small store with enough explosives to level a
square block.  When the half-alive, hapless victim stumbles out onto
the street, the gang members walk up to him and fire their weapons
until all of their bullets have been used.  The gang war is malicious
and body counts will continue to rise.
To help Chen, he is assigned green cop Danny Wallace (Mark Wahlberg). 
Chen looks at him with disgust.  He seems too soft.  But worst of all,
he's white.  It's a political decision within the force to bring in
Wallace.  Chen does his best to get him up to speed, although
grudgingly.  He saves his life more than once and tries to show him
the mentality of the Asian man.  In one lesson, Chen says while eating
his beef tripe soup, `if you want to be Asian, you've got to eat the
nasty stuff.'  Chen actually has some terrific scenes and his
character is complex yet well developed.  In fact, the Chen character
is what drives this movie. The movie itself plays out like the typical
story of two dissimilar cops who constantly bicker as they make their
way to the final showdown.  At some point, their relationship does
take an intriguing turn.  But the plot becomes mired in twists and
revelations that make the story too difficult to follow.  Heavy
accents also make some of the dialogue incomprehensible.  
The real joy of the film is Chen's character. He is a minority police
officer that has overcome many glass walls in trying to establish
himself but has trapped himself within the politics of the Asian Gang
Unit along the way.  We learn about his thought process, his secret
involvement with the rival gangs and even his poignant relationship
with a prostitute who is a victim of the gang's prostitution trade. 
Wahlberg's presence makes a nice counter story as he is also new to an
unfamiliar territory and needs to find ways to prove his worth.  But
his acclamation process onto the team is a series of coarse statements
by fellow Asian officers.  Among other things, they compare their
manhood, and I can only guess that these officers never saw `Boogie
Nights.'  Alas, I'm torn.  There was so much to like about the
characters, but so little to praise about the story.  Still, I'm
giving this a marginal recommendation, because I think that Chow
Yun-Fat deserves a nod and there seemed to be something definitely
good in there, but never had the right focus to get out.  Too bad.


Author
Harvey S. Karten
   If "The Corrputor" were widely shown throughout the world
and taken at all seriously, tourism as we know it in New
York's most popular ethnic neighborhood would grind to a
halt.  Directed by James Foley and photographed in a noir
style by Juan Ruiz-Anchia, Robert Pucci's tale of conflicting
loyalties features the usual shoot-ups and car chases that
threaten to make it yet another wide-screen video game.  Yet
the film is partially redeemed by a solid performance from the
magnetically handsome Chow Yun-Fat as a detective on the
take whose  relationship with his partner (played by Mark
Wahlberg) is at first contentious.  Once a proper view of his
colleague takes root, he becomes a sadder, wiser, reclaimed
man.  There's even the customary friction between the local
police and the FBI.  We've been through this theme quite a
few times before, and Robert Pucci's screenplay breaks no
new ground, but Howard E. Smith's editing helps to keep the
chases fleet, the explosions cataclysmic, and the body count
high.
   Director Foley's vision is of a Chinatown that hasn't a
single tourist or an honest Chou Wonton, but there is an
ample supply of happy hookers, forlorn illegal immigrants, and a pair
of battling gangs that make Pell Street look like a modern
Shiloh and Mott Street a contemporary Gettsburg.  
   A neighborhood compulsively on the take with the Tongs
and the Fuks (pronounced "Fooks and so-named because
they were originally from China's Fukien province) eager for
the lion's share of the spoils.  Heroin and hookers mean big
bucks for the squads of thugs who operate on this turf, the
latter supplied by Chinese illegals smuggled to the land of
liberty at a charge of $40,000 per and compelled to work off
their indentured servitude as prostitutes.  When Danny
Wallace (Mark Wahlberg) is assigned to the police precinct
manned mostly by Chinese-Americans, he incurs the hostility
of officer Nick Chen (Chow Yun-Fat), not because Danny is
white, but because, according to Nick, "he's green."  The
assignee comes across as a Goody Two-shoes who is more
eager than the ethnic cops to protect the good people of
Chinatown.  Though studies have recently shown that the
vast majority of police use their pieces not a single time in
their entire careers, Danny blasts away almost from his first
day on the new beat.  In fact the detective duo with their
9mm issue regularly mow down their opponents, who are
armed with Uzi-style firepower.  As is typical in this genre, the
two cops save in other's lives in turn, which bonds them
forever, but when Nick--who is in the pocket of mobster
Henry Lee (Ric Young)--is ordered to kill his colleague, he is
as conflicted as Paul Vitti in Harold Ramis's "Analyze This."
   Mark Wahlberg, a handsome performer who stood out in a
better role in the far superior "Boogie Nights" is soft-spoken
throughout and convinces no one in the audience (to say
nothing of his partner) that he's a cop, but the reverse is true
of Chow Yun-Fat who like Jackie Chan has shifted from the
Hong Kong action market to Hollywood's bigger bucks. 
Chow's every emotion shows easily on his finely-chiseled
face, though he did better when facing off with Mira Sorvino
in "Replacement Killers."  Under the direction of John Woo--
who is every bit the cop-picture director that James Foley is
not--he wowed his cult audience seven years ago with "Hard
Boiled," the all-time favorite of online film critic Steve Kong. 
"The Corruptor" is a convoluted clutter, even tacking on a
subplot involving Danny's desperate cop-turned-bad father for
no reason other than to confuse us further.  What  a shame
that director Foley had to be stuck with this project
considering his brilliance at the helm of one of the
touchstones of all movies dealing with the human capacity for
corruption, "Glengarry Glen Ross." 

Author
Steve Rhodes
In order to remove any possible doubt about its approach, THE CORRUPTOR
opens with an explosion loud enough to test the theater's audio system.
With never a subtle moment and few believable ones, the movie in its
next scene introduces us to the story's hero, a vicious cop named Nick
Chen, played by Chinese action star Yun-Fat Chow.  He kills a slew of
bad guys but leaves one alive so he can warn the others.  A cop on a
mission, his gun serves as judge and jury for the criminals.
As a guy with nerdy looking glasses named Danny Wallace, Mark Wahlberg
plays a cop assigned to work with Chen in fighting Chinese gangs in New
York's Chinatown.  Chen complains that Wallace is "worse than white,
he's green." In his first firefight, Wallace freezes as machine guns
blaze away at him.  After this inauspicious beginning, he switches and
becomes a wild man like Chen.  This is but one of many times the movie
requires a large suspension of disbelief.  The macho cops, for example,
engage the criminals in small wars but never bother wearing bulletproof
vests.
The two leads demonstrate little chemistry, and their love/hate
relationship is never believable.  Like two gunslingers in the old West,
they shoot off their weapons and their mouths without thinking.
Robert Pucci's script, involving gang warfare and police corruption, is
an absolute mess.  Director James Foley doesn't have a clue as to what
he wants to do other than stage gunfights.  Even if you forgive the
story's incomprehensibility and its lack of credibility, the action is
just a rehash of a hundred other movies.  The director gives his actors
big, noisy guns, puts them on opposite ends of the frame and lets them
fire away.  In one long, tedious car chase, in which scores of innocent
bystanders are slaughtered in order to clear or block the speeding cars'
path, your reaction is likely to be "Yeah, sure."
Excessive in every way imaginable, the movie feels more like a gory
video game than a motion picture.  With stupefying violence, the bad
guys and what goes for good guys, annihilate each other.  You may find
yourself looking on the armrest for the joystick.  And you may hope that
your quarter will run out soon.
THE CORRUPTOR runs a long 1:51.  It is rated R for strong violence, sex,
nudity and profanity and would be acceptable only for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
