Title
Review for Blood Simple (1984)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Chad Polenz
*1/2
1985, R, 96 minutes [1 hour, 36 minutes]
[drama/crime]
starring: John Getz (Ray), Frances McDormand (Abby), Dan Hedaya (Marty), M.
Emment Walsh (P.I.), produced by Ethan Coen, written by Ethan and Joel Coen,
directed by Joel Coen.
"Blood Simple" acts like some kind of genius, psychological thriller, but
all I saw was one of those B movies they show on UHF stations at 3 a.m. It is
a fair attempt at making a good, macabre, crime story, but not much works
here. 
The story revolves around some hick town in Texas where a young woman, Abby
(McDormand), is cheating on her husband Marty (Hedaya) with Ray, one of the
bartenders (Getz as Ray) at Marty's strip club. We don't learn much about the
affair except that Marty must be the typical, insanely jealous type. 
They sleep at the Ray's house, and then somewhere else, but nothing happens
to create for a plot. The story lingers on events that are of absolutely no
importance to the rest of the of story as a whole. There is some dialogue
pushing the story along, but it isn't very interesting because they're not
talking about anything relevant. 
Marty meets a generic P.I. (Walsh) who seems too bubbly and happy compared
to Marty's nearly psychotic attitude. The two characters clash like polkadots
and plaid. This isn't anything moody or intense, it's just plain dumb and
boring. Marty wants the P.I. to kill Abby and Ray, and so the P.I. stalks the
two, and forms an insane obsession with them.
Meanwhile, Abby and Ray get their own apartment in order to stop Marty from
harassing them, but suddenly the story becomes even more bizarre when the
P.I. kills Marty. From here on the events are just too strange to comprehend.
It's not artistically surrealistic, it's just typical B movie trash disguised
as an intricate crime story.
The characters all seem to be going crazy and there's no explanation for
this insanity. The film essentially becomes a horror flick by the end with
three dead bodies and no reasoning.
"Blood Simple" definitely has a tremendous amount of potential, but its
organization and execution are too bizarre for its own good.
visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Susan Granger
 First shown at film festivals in 1984, "Blood Simple" was the
first feature film by brothers Joel and Ethan Coen, who went on to
make not only "Fargo" but also "The Hudsucker Proxy," "Barton Fink,"
"Miller's Crossing," and two of my favorites, "Raising Arizona" and
"The Big Lebowski." This is the newly restored and re-edited
Director's Cut of their stylish crime thriller, introduced by
enigmatic Mortimer Young, a pseudo-film restoration expert who inanely
informs us that this version takes advantage of technological
breakthroughs made possible in recent years. It seems writer Dashiell
Hammett originated the slang phrase, "blood-simple," meaning the state
of fear and confusion that follows the confusion of murder, as in
"He's gone blood simple."  So the grim, sleazy story begins in Texas,
where a jealous saloon owner (Dan Hedaya) hires a cheap divorce
detective (M. Emmet Walsh) to kill his wife (Frances McDormand) and
her lover, a bartender (John Getz). But the detective gets a better
idea....and I'm not going to tell you what happens and ruin the greed,
lust, double-cross and betrayal plot if you never saw the original. So
how does this so-called Director's Cut differ? Not much. The running
time is still almost the same, so whatever revisions were made are
subtle. In fact, in the "New Yorker" magazine, Ethan Coen irreverently
quips, "A pace that was once glacial is now merely slow. Scenes that
were once inept are now merely awkward." Nevertheless, on the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Blood Simple: Director's Cut" still scores an
8, remaining an amazing, ironic debut thriller. I suspect its
re-release is a marketing device to whet our interest in their new
film, "O Brother Where Art Thou?" starring George Clooney, which will
be released this fall.

Author
Robert Marley
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Marley.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/c926bd960cb326e68825690800640c26?OpenDocument
Blood Simple
A film review by Robert Marley- Copyright Š 2000 filmcritic.com
-------------------------------------
The year is 1984. Reagan is looking forward to four more years as
president. Orwell's book by the same name is at the top of the
popularity bell curve. The Olympic games are held in Los Angeles and two
unknown guys named Joel and Ethan Coen decide to team up and write a
movie script. Their first step into the world of "Hollywood" is a little
film called Blood Simple featuring the debut of then-unknown actress
Frances McDormand. The title of the film comes from a slang term
invented by Dashiell Hammett to suggest a murderer's state of fear and
confusion, which suggests that the "perfect" murder is impossible. This
movie shows one such example of that blood simple state.
At the time it was released, Blood Simple wowed critics and audiences,
winning praise at film festivals all over the world with its unique look
at telling an interesting and creepy story on a shoestring budget. Now
16 years later, the Coen brothers have decided to clean up their debut
film and re-release it to the masses, making it even better.
This new release of Blood Simple is sort of a Director's Cut of the
movie. As Ethan Coen put it, "We've taken out some of the boring parts."
Because of that, the film is only 97 minutes long. But what is told
inside of those 97 minutes is truly riveting.
Julian Marty (Dan Hedaya) is a rich saloon owner, deep in the heart of
middle-of-nowhere Texas. He suspects that his wife Abby (McDormand) is
cheating on him, so he hires a sleazy, sweaty private detective (M.
Emmet Walsh) to find out and kill her and her lover. Of course, things
don't always go as planned, especially when it comes to murder... and
what happens next is probably one of the better examples of a modern
"film noir" concept.
The movie is also filled with the little things that make a Coen
brothers film unique. Watching it is like going on a ride. The camera is
always on the go, creating a sense of motion in almost ever scene.
Ironically, the things that have become the "signature" of a Coen
brothers film were done merely by chance at the time they were shooting
all of this. One particular example is a tracking shot down the length
of the bar in the saloon with a drunk passed out across the path of the
camera. The camera simply goes up and over the drunk, dropping back to
its original angle and tracking along the bar as if nothing had
happened.
The movie is dark, raw and bleak. The Coen brothers do a good job of
projecting that bleak, dismal look into the picture as the characters
stumble their paranoid way through the story. This makes for a morbidly
comical and fascinating experience for the audience. Ultimately, the
movie has just enough of a sick sense of humor that I'm sure Hitchcock
would have loved it.
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html"> 
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Kevin Patterson
Blood Simple  *** (out of four)
R, 1984
Directed by Joel Coen. Written by Joel and Ethan Coen.
Starring John Getz, Frances McDormand, Dan Hedaya, M. Emmet Walsh.
It might surprise some to know that Joel and Ethan Coen, who have brought such
unabated lunacy to our movie screens as "Raising Arizona"  and "The Hudsucker
Proxy," made their feature film debut with "Blood Simple," a grim and often
gruesome tale of revenge, murder, and literally fatal misconceptions in rural
Texas. It bears some resemblance, story-wise, to the Coens' recent "Fargo,"
but even the darkly satirical humor and the enjoyably quirky characterizations
that characterized that film are scarce here; "Blood Simple" is pretty much
cold and brutal from beginning to end.
The premise of "Blood Simple" is really just a slight variation on the
standard love-triangle/revenge scheme: sleazy bar owner Julian Marty (Dan
Hedaya) hires a shifty private detective (M. Emmet Walsh) to kill his wife
Abby (Frances McDormand) and her illicit lover Ray (John Getz). Things start
to go haywire when Walsh decides instead to fake the murder with photographic
trickery but, upon collecting the money, becomes uncertain as to whether or
not Marty is capable of keeping his mouth shut about the scheme.
To reveal any more details of the story would be to give away too much, but
what ensues is a series of bloody (and I do mean bloody) confrontations, each
triggered by one or more characters misunderstanding what is actually
happening. Every act of violence or deception in this film makes sense when
seen through the perpetrator's eyes, but we, the audience, are made privy to
the "big picture" and thus can recognize that each misdeed is somehow either
unnecessary or directed at the wrong person. This aspect of the story, along
with the intense atmosphere of repulsion and brutality - one gets the sense
that if guns and, in one case, shovels, were not available, some of these
characters would claw each other to death - are the most effective components
of the film. The Coens might have done well to title the film "Fear and
Loathing in Texas."
Some have labeled "Blood Simple  as a modern-day noir, but, while I am not an
expert on either genre, it seems more like a horror movie than anything else.
The Coens seem much more interested in the plot twists and the atmosphere of
confusion and paranoia than they do in the characters, and the final sequence
is nothing more than a showdown between the one (relatively) innocent
character and the only one of the murderers left alive. That said, "Blood
Simple" is a very good horror movie; the fear and suspense here are genuine.
The Coens also add plenty of quirky touches that nudge the weirdness meter
upwards, such as when a character enters an empty room and accidentally steps
on a gun, discharging it as it skitters across the floor, or when a murder
attempt unfolds in a way such that Abby mistakes her attacker for another
character who has in fact been killed earlier in the film.
That said, "Blood Simple" is not exactly flawless. For one thing, the
motivations for the killings are still a little thin at times; I can
understand that the characters had tracks to cover (or at least thought they
did), but I found it a little hard to accept that all of them would so quickly
resort to murder. And although they at least didnŐt have anyone get hacked to
death with a knife, the Coens also aren't quite immune to horror cliches; they
indulge in a prolonged
dead-guy-seems-to-have-come-back-to-life-but-then-we-find-out-it's-only-a-dream
scene that had me rolling my eyes. The film also ends so quickly after the
final confrontation that I found myself wondering if they had simply run out
of film.
"Blood Simple" is not quite the masterpiece of neo-noir that many seem to
think it is, but it's a decent movie and it showcases the Coens' ability to
handle suspense and violence in a visceral but non-exploitative manner. I
would firmly recommend it to all "Coen-heads" as well as anyone looking for
something original in a thriller.

Author
Ted Prigge
"Blood Simple" is a bit like a horror film interlaced with a film noir
backdrop: the film is filled with a bunch of frightening nightmares (like
being forced to kill someone, an overabundance of blood, being buried
alive, etc.), but the story is an ever-twisting bit of complex film noir. 
It's also the film debut of the now-famous Coen Brothers, Joel and Ethan,
and watching it today, one could easily deduct that the Coen Brothers had
not yet found their style, and therefore the film is kind of lacking or
something or other.  But when viewed as a real film, it's really an amazing
piece of storytelling, and one hell of a fun one at that.
The plot of "Blood Simple" is so complex and labyrinthine that to tell
everything would be to spoil half the fun of the fun of viewing it, as it's
a film that is always in motion, and is chock-full of suprises that are
really surprising (how's that for a concept?).  But the basic plot deals
with a seedy bar owner, Marty (Dan Hedaya), who's wife Abby (a very young
Frances McDormand) is found cheating with one of his bartenders, Ray (John
Getz), so Marty decides after much angered thought that he'll hire a
Private Investigator, Visser (M. Emmet Walsh), the same one who discovered
them for him, to kill them.
Up to this point, it's standard film noir and nothing really spectacular,
but then the film throws us for a loop, which I won't spoil, and the film
from that point on becomes a tense, nightmarish experience, filled with
twists upon twists upon twists, and ending with a final laugh, not on the
audiences' part, but on one of the characters.  What's most remarkable
about this film is that it doesn't try to throw the audience off with cheap
twists; instead it tells it to us as omnipotent viewers, knowing
everything, and because of this we watch helplessly as the characters on
screen stumble around without all the facts.
When one carefully thinks and comes to their own conclusion about this film
(this film is anything but condescending and insulting), one realizes that
no character is one hundred percent certain what's going on.  The film is
told so that the characters are often confused, and we follow each of them
around as they try and figure everything out, and often do things that they
wouldn't do if they knew everything.  One character walks in to a place at
the wrong time, and is forced to do a horrific act that will haunt him the
rest of the film.  And another character discovers that they have left
incriminating evidence around but don't know where it is.  And yet another
character has no clue what's going on until the final couple seconds of the
film.  Even a couple characters live with the guilt of things they did not
even do, but for some exaplainable reason think they did.  The plot of
"Blood Simple" is carefully constructed so that all this is assured with
intelligence and even wit.
This being the film debut of the Coens, we can see that they hadn't really
gotten their wacky, eccentric style down yet, which wouldn't erupt until
their next film, the hysterically funny comedy "Raising Arizona."  But no
matter; this film would be ruined with any of that kind of style.  It's not
the kind of film that would be good if it was hysterical or wacky.  But
this film does have the kind of great direction it needs.  It has lots of
great shots that are very remarkable, including a misleading tracking shot
which at first looks like a POV shot, then turns out to be just a low-angle
smooth steadicam closing shot.  And several sequences are intensely
crafted, like a long bit where one character tries to dispose of a corpse
(including a bit they would recycle in "Fargo"), and the finale, which is
one of the most frightening sequences filmed, ending perfectly with a
little cherry on top at the end.
The performances aren't really amazing or anything, save for M. Emmet
Walsh's, who's predictably brilliant (when isn't he?) as the unscrupulous
and wonderfully selfish crooked P.I.  He easily steals the film.  But Dan
Hedaya's also very good, even though it doesn't seem like he's good at
first (he's usually hysterically tense), but upon closer examination, he's
great as a man who has held all his rage up inside, and can't control
himself when he boils over in fits of rage.  Also good is Frances
McDormand, who mostly plays the frightened woman.  It's no Margie
Gunderson, but what are ya gonna do?  The only not too great performance is
from John Getz, who is remarkably down-playing his part.  Getz's forte is
playing pompous asswholes (in such anti-classics as "Men at Work" and
"Don't Tell Mom the Babysitter's Dead" - yes, I've seen them); here he
seems just a bit weak.
It's often been said "Blood Simple" is the best Coen Brothers film, or at
least a contender for best with "Fargo."  I personally think "Fargo" is a
better film, much more better realized and executed.  But "Blood Simple" is
still one of their best films, a masterfully crafted and executed thriller
film noir that surprises us with lots of twists, and some truly
awe-inspiring sequences which scare the hell out of us merely because we
the audience know to much and are not sure how to react to seeing a
character do something we know they shouldn't do but they don't.  It would
be easy to take "Blood Simple" for granted, calling it merely "a great
thriller."  It's not just that.  It's a film that is so carefully
constructed and so modest about it that it amazes you when you finally
realize it.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  BLOOD SIMPLE (director/writer: Joel Coen; screenwriter: Ethan Coen;
cinematographer: Barry Sonnenfeld; editor: Roderick Jaynes; cast: John Getz
(Ray), Frances McDormand (Abby), Dan Hedaya (Marty), M. Emmet Walsh (Privare
Detective Visser), Deborah Neumann (Debra), Samm-Art Williams (Maurice);
Runtime: 97; Universal/October Films; 1984) 
An auspicious debut for director Joel Coen and for the Coen brothers as a writer
and director team, as this film noir is delightfully thrilling. 
Texas bar-owner Marty (Hedaya) hires a seedy private detective, Visser (Walsh),
to snoop on his unfaithful wife Abby (McDormand-the wife of the director). He
brings back photos of her in bed with one of his bartenders, Ray (Getz). 
Marty is fueled by a quiet anger from within and arranges with the unscrupulous
private eye to murder the two lovers, as the private eye agrees to bend the
rules for $10,000. But the private eye decides to do it his way, and after he
collects his fee the twists in the plot lead to a series of misunderstandings,
guilt, and a double-cross. The misunderstandings result in a burial of someone
still alive, a gruesome shooting where the victim is also pounded to death by a
battery, and an impalement of a hand caught on a window sill which leads to the
victim being shot to death when mistaken for someone else. The double-cross
comes about when the hired killer doesn't kill the one he is supposed to. 
Blood Simple is highlighted by an absolutely wonderous performance that is both
sleazy and diabolical by M. Emmet Walsh. It also has some pretty funny dialogue,
as one bartender (Williams) complains that someone came into the bar and asked
for a discount for alcoholics. When the private eye tells his client the bad
news about his wife's affair, he also tells him the good news: "At least she
wasn't having an affair with the colored guy." Made on a shoestring budget, the
film sparkles because its characters are lively and quirky. I saw it on a
recently digitally-remastered video version where the director cut off a few
minutes of unnecessary dialogue. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
Steve Rhodes
In 1984 the Coen Brothers (director/writer Joel and producer/writer
Ethan) brought out their first picture, BLOOD SIMPLE.  A stylish piece
of film noir, it has exasperatingly slow pacing but devilishly demented
characters and a wonderfully wicked, labyrinthine plot.  Characters die,
or do they?  And killers keep accidentally leaving clues behind.
The Coen brothers make interesting movies.  Most people know their most
famous picture, the Oscar winning FARGO, but even the brother's failures
(The HUDSUCKER PROXY for example) contain large flashes of brilliance.
In order, one supposes, to celebrate roughly their first 15 years, they
are releasing a director's cut of BLOOD SIMPLE to the theaters.  They
claim to have taken out some of the boring parts and added in a bit as
well.  But the running time is about the same and the movie seems little
changed with the exception of a hilarious introduction.  The print is
clean and the sound sharp.
As the movie opens, a supercilious film preservation expert in his
library pauses in his reading and pipe smoking to provide us a little
history about the film.  He explains that the movie was a tremendous
success and started the entire indie craze.  After this delicious bit of
satire, the director's cut segues nicely into the original story.
Abby (Frances McDormand) is married to Marty (Dan Hedaya), the owner of
a cheap bar in a seedy Texas town.  M. Emmet Walsh plays a slime-ball
private detective whom Marty hires to investigate Abby's affair with Ray
(John Getz), a bartender at Marty's bar.
Typical of the film's terse dialog is an interchange between another
bartender, Meurice (Samm-Art Williams), and Meurice's blonde girlfriend.
"Nice guy," she says of Marty.  "Not really," Meurice replies.
The intriguing script is much better than the directing, and one is left
with a strong wish that the Coen brothers had done a much more
meticulous job of excising the boring parts in this director's cut.
Still, it is a fascinating little tale and amply demonstrates the talent
of these filmmakers.  (For a little extra fun, listen carefully and see
if you can recognize the female voice on Marty's answering machine.
It's an uncredited role, and the actress does not appear in the movie.)
BLOOD SIMPLE runs a remarkably slow 1:37.  It is rated R for violence
and would be acceptable for most teenagers.  (There is only a single
scene that will have viewers squirming.)
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 
