Title
Review for All Through the Night (1942)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ALL THROUGH THE NIGHT (1942) Directed by Vincent Sherman. 
Humphrey Bogart is shady Gloves Donahue, a master gambler with 
a touch of a Godfather. Everyone loves him. He and his  
sweet-pugnacious ma (Jane Darwell) dote on each other. His 
retinue is a big cast of familiar, typecast "funny" and/or 
"lovable"  Damon Runyonish characters. 
They're played by character actors ranging from Frank McHugh 
and William Demarest to Phil Silvers. An unimpressive Jackie 
Gleason has a bit part. He stumbles on a killing and a pretty 
(but unwilling) German agent (Kaaren Verne) who leads him to a 
nest of deadly Nazi Fifth Columnists (Conrad Veidt, Peter 
Lorre, Judith Anderson). They control a horde of traitors. 
The film consciously tries to reconcile patriotism, action and 
comedy, but exists solely on the level of unconscious camp.  
The dialogue is simplistic, approaching the moronic. "All 
Through the Night" is one step removed from Bob Hope (or 
Abbott and Costello) spy comedies, but has none of the  funny 
lines and zingers of Hope pictures. 
Moving in too pat and neat generic studio sets,for all his 
heroics and authority over those around him, Bogart is really 
a naive, simple-minded character. He plays--or rather 
reacts--in a rudimentary, light fashion, with Bogartian 
mannerisms that parody themselves. The year before Bogart and 
Lorre had been in "The Maltese Falcon." The year following, 
Bogart, Lorre and Veidt were reunited in "Casablanca"  But 
there's just no comparison between those other roles and 
films.  
Made in the fall of 1941(before Pearl Harbor), this flick 
amounts to  nothing filmically, yet won't put you to sleep. 
It's worth seeing as  prime evidence of the  period's 
mentality and conceptions, both Hollywoodian and at large. 
Among them: the incredible naivete and cliches about the 
super-organized, efficient  nasty Nazis; the dumb New York 
cops; the preposterously nice all-American gangsters, 
gamblers, con men, nightclub owners who bury the hatchet to go 
after the  sinister swine. Kaaren Verne is the generic 
nightclub singer. 
The film is not without racial stereotypes. In an atrociously 
self-demeaning "joke" Bogart's black servant says "Don't worry 
Miss, things ain't always as black as they look." 
There is also that standard Hollywood association of suave, 
often "Continental" manners and accents (Veidt speaks 
German-accented, but excellent English; Anderson goes for 
high-toned speech), with sinister people. On the other hand, 
the good ole' boys like "Gloves"  speak "Amurrican" say things 
like "buddy," "sister," and "scratch." 
The music,by Adolf Deutsch, has sometimes an interesting 
resemblance to the Max Steiner score for the later Bogart 
vehicle, "The Big Sleep." (Edwin Jahiel )
