Title
Review for Ed's Next Move (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I know that Americans love an underdog, but really...enough already.
It has gotten to the point in the marketing of independent films where
selling the meagerness of the budget and the film-makers' sacrifices in
getting their pet projects made has turned into a kind of bizarre
one-downmanship.  If your guy made his movie for $20,000, our guy made his
for $15,000; if your guy financed his movie with Visa cards, our guy sold
one of his kidneys to pay the caterer.  It is tempting to sell the
compelling story behind the movie (particularly if you arc concerned about
whether there is a compelling story _in_ the movie), but I believe that
there are negative consequences to turning every independent film-maker to
come down the pike into Horatio Alger.  These young directors are
experiencing success, but it is success with an asterisk, because the
audiences have been asked to appreciate their work not on its merit but
because they worked so darned hard.
     Take ED'S NEXT MOVE, for example.  Written and directed by newcomer
John Walsh, it is the story of Eddie Brodsky (Matt Ross), a Wisconsin
chemist who decides to take a big step when his long-time girlfriend
(Cathy Curtin) dumps him:  moving to New York to take a job in a genetic
engineering lab.  The big city is daunting, but Eddie begins to adjust
once he finds an apartment -- and a roommate named Ray (Kevin Carroll) --
and begins to get into a routine.  The one thing missing is a romantic
relationship, a special someone like Lee (Callie Thorne), a musician Eddie
keeps running into.  When he finally gets up the nerve to ask her out.  He
finds the road to true love is complicated by boyfriends, mousetraps, the
common cold and the double-edged sword of being a Nice Guy.
     ED'S NEXT MOVE is a perfectly pleasant little romantic comedy, an
unassuming and unpretentious character study which makes more than a
casual not to ANNIE HALL.  Walsh has fashioned an outsider's-eye-view
valentine to New York's idiosyncracies the way Allen fashions
insider's-eye-view valentines, and both films find neurosis getting in the
way of a potential romance; Walsh even cribs from ANNIE HALL's more
surreal moments, like a scene with translators interpreting the 
conversation in which Anne breaks up with Eddie which recalls ANNIE HALL'S
sub-titles scene.  Still, there is an appealing performance by Matt Ross
as a smart, likeable protagonist who, blessedly, is not a self-absorbed
aspiring artist of some sort like so many indie film protagonists, and
solid supporting work from Kevin Carroll as a ladies' man who is not a
stereotypical jerk.  Although Walsh provides few laugh-out-loud moments,
he also doesn't seem wrapped up in showing off his own cleverness, and the
result is a comedy which makes you feel comfortable.
     And that is about all it does.  There is a place for entertainments
like ED'S NEXT MOVE, and you could spend your seven dollars at the movies
in far worse ways, but it would not surprise me to see a rush to anoint
Walsh as the next Edward (THE BROTHERS McMULLEN) Burns or Kevin (CLERKS)
Smith.  Of course, we saw how short the honeymoon was for those two after
SHE'S THE ONE and MALLRATS, respectively.  There is a disturbing tendency
among critics (and yes, I include myself among them) to treat an
independent film like a high school play, where it is considered a great
show if everyone remembers their lines and no one trips over the set.  The
thing is that those high school actors and directors turn into college
actors and directors, and mere competence suddenly isn't quite as cute.
     Getting a film made -- independent or otherwise -- is a brutal
business, but a film is no more or less worthy of praise because it was a
labor of love.  ED'S NEXT MOVE has several things going for it, notably
young characters who have some ambition and common sense, but Walsh shows
no particular facility with a camera, and his story has virtually nothing
going on beneath its agreeable surface.  Basically, it is an amusing bit
of fluff which is quite similar to other bits of fluff you have seen
before, one which promises and delivers little more than a few inoffensive
smiles.  It is the independent film world's fickle romance with starving
artists which starts making promises which John Walsh and other young
directors -- armed a couple of years later with more money but the same
amount of talent -- might find themselves unable to keep.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     ED'S NEXT MOVE is a charming little low budget picture where the
actors seem less like actors than people on whom you are getting to
eavesdrop.  In the press kit, writer and director John Walsh says that
after failing to secure funding, he "decided to make the film the old
fashioned way: on credit cards."  I glad he did for this delightful
film had me in constant chuckles.  My only big laugh came in the
perfect conclusion, but every comedy does not to be a laugh riot like
TOOTSIE to be worth seeing.
     ED'S NEXT MOVE tells of the travails of Eddie Brodsky (Matt Ross
from TWELVE MONKEYS) as he moves from placid Wisconsin to the hectic
pace and strange rhythms of New York City.  Eddie earns his living
studying the genetics of rice plants and he comes to NYC to study under
an expert in the field, but having little money, he goes on a hunt for
an apartment to share.
     Actually, his life and this film is spent in search of a woman
with whom he can have a relationship.  Ross is terrific as the classic
awkward and shy guy, and his awkwardness mirrors the awkwardness of the
script, funny thought it is.  Although Eddie is twenty-five, his boyish
looks make him look much younger.  He had a girlfriend in Wisconsin,
but she dumped him and even compiled a list of her complains about him.
     Ray Obregon (Kevin Carroll) agrees to rent Eddie part of his
apartment, but when they meet, Ray starts bragging of his sexual
prowess.  Ray tells how he recently got into an elevator and four of
his ex-girlfriends were in it.  Depressed Eddie says, "Four women in
the same elevator.  I haven't been with four women in the same time
zone."
     There are several little imaginary vignettes in the film.  In one,
Eddie and his old girlfriend get together with translators who tell
each other what the other is really saying.  When his ex says she
doesn't like Eddie anymore, her translator says what she mean is,
"there's a guy at work who makes the zipper on my jeans melt."
     Another vignette involves the distribution of "Official Nice Guy"
ID cards.  Guys can use these when meeting a woman to show that they
been certified not to be a weirdo or a loser.  It is a great take-off
on the late night cable TV commercials.  All of the humor in the show
walks the fine line between dialog that you laugh at versus laugh with.
For me the script is precious and it works, but the two other reviews I
have seen of the show range from a near perfect rating to a near bomb.
Actually, I can understand both perspectives, but as Eddie says, "in
some things, the more I analyze them the less clear they become."
Don't analyze this film, just kick back and laugh with it.
     Predictably, Eddie does finally get a woman, Lee Nicol (Callie
Thorne), to go out on a date with him.  Her main problem with him is
that "You're so, so normal."  Before she arrives, Eddie gets in an
argument with Ray about his attitude about sex.  Eddie corrects him,
"Sex is not a transitive act.  It is an intransitive act."  Disgusted,
Ray informs him that, "If you talk like that to her, it will be a
non-existent act."  All three of the principle actors show promise, but
Ross is the best.  His false starts in kissing are classics, but the
funny setups provided by the script should get some of the credit.
     The picture is helped by an excellent score which is quite unusual
in a low budget film.  At first the music is dominated by jazz pieces
composed for the film and played by Benny Golson.  Toward the end of
the picture, it switches to funny folk songs sung by the San Francisco
alternative band Ed's Redeeming Qualities.  One of their best songs
ends with the line, "I wish there were more bad times to see you
through."
     ED'S NEXT MOVE runs only 1:28.  It is rated R for a few cuss
words, one very brief sex scene, and a two swing fist fight.  There is
no nudity.  I think this sweet and upbeat little picture would be fine
for all teenagers and probably some slightly younger kids as well.  I
had fun with the show and recommend it to all except those of you who
need a highly polished product.  The show gets ** 1/2 from me.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 25, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     This year's low-budget success story and darling of the festival
circuit, ED'S NEXT MOVE is one of a handful of recent pictures that is
truly deserving of its praise.
     The Manhattan-based indie traces a few weeks in the life of urban
greenhorn Eddie (Matt Ross), whose titular move is from the wide-open,
cheesy state of Wisconsin to the dog-eat-dog world of New York City. 
Eddie, a genetics researcher and rice breeder, faces the world alone --
a stranger in a strange land.  He lives in a cheap motel while he tries
to find a non-psychotic roommate, can't get a simple hamburger at a
restaurant, and finds his Midwestern sensibilities out of place in the
big city.
     It's here that Eddie meets Lee (Callie Thorne), a brassy hipster
trying to cut it as a musician.  Eddie, in fine romantic comedy style,
becomes smitten with Lee and tries to win her affections.
     The result is a fine comedy from newcomer John Walsh, who directs
his own script.  In fact, just about everyone associated with the film
is a newcomer, which works to the benefit of the picture by keeping
everything fresh.  Ross and Thorne are excellent actors, and because
we've never seen them before, it's easy to suspend disbelief enough to
buy them in their parts.  (Also good is Kevin Carroll as Eddie's
antithesis and roommate Ray.)
     With funny and fresh dialogue, a heap of production values
considering the low budget, and a wide-appeal story that neither
condescends to the audience nor enters the saccharine world of
big-budget romantic comedies, ED'S NEXT MOVE is a winner for just about
anyone's taste.  (This critic laughed his proverbial butt off, that's
for sure.)  Be sure to watch for "the mice scene" -- the only comparable
fall-down laughing sequence equivalent to last year's "banana scene"
from THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN.
     ED'S NEXT MOVE remains one of the better offerings of the year, by
giving us a romantic comedy about people who could feasibly be friends
of ours -- or could even be ourselves.  My only hope is that Walsh can
keep it up with his next picture.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
