Title
Review for Corky Romano (2001)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
THE THEORY:
Is it just me or does there seem to be a very distinct pattern to all of these
ex-Saturday Night Live comedians' movies? Let's break it down. They usually use
the name of the main character (the ex-Saturday Night Liver himself) as the
title of the film in two words. Check! They usually star a very dumb character,
who is clumsy, stupid or naďve (or all three) but has a big heart. Check! They
usually don't last more than 90 minutes. Check! They usually feature a total
babe (a no-name) as the co-star, a woman who under any other circumstance (this
being a Hollywood movie production) wouldn't cross the street to spit on the
star of each film, for whom she inevitably falls in love. Check! They are
usually produced by a man named Robert Simonds. Check! They usually have a
cameo, or small role, from a once "high-profile" older guy. Check! They usually
feature the main character in a "fish out of water" plotline. Check! They
usually have the lead come to some kind of understanding near the end, and take
part in an "emotional" scene. Check! Okay, okay...I think we get the picture.
The folks behind these movies aren't exactly driving the originality boat in
Hollywood, but I guess they have recognized some kind of niche in the
marketplace and are ready to jam it full of movies like CORKY ROMANO, BILLY
MADISON, JOE DIRT, HAPPY GILMORE and DEUCE BIGALOW, and hope to reap the
rewards.
PLOT:
Corky Romano's family is in the mob. Corky Romano is an assistant veterinarian
and doesn't speak to his family anymore. But now that Pops Romano is about to be
indicted on racketeering charges, the family needs a "nobody" to go undercover
in the FBI and steal their evidence on Pops. Naturally, they call on their goofy
relative Corky, to help them achieve their goal. Wackiness ensues?
CRITIQUE:
Humor is a very subjective thing. Even more so, movies based on "stupid humor",
which is the type of "funny" that this kind of flick is going for, is even more
subjective, and usually dependent on your mood and your appreciation for the
film's lead actor. In my case tonight, I was looking for some cheap laughs, I
really like Chris Kattan (his fruity smile alone cracks me up) and I got enough
guffaws out of this movie to recommend it to anyone looking for something very
simple, very stupid and pretty funny, for the most part. The movie is basically
Kattan. If you like his goofy characters, over-the-top gesticulations and
idiotic demeanor, you will likely come out of this film with many laughs
registered in your belly. I dug his take on this goofball and especially
appreciated a few scenes in particular, one in which he sees a dead body for the
first time, another in which he faces some skinheads and another, where he is
high on coke. They really cracked me up. The rest of the film is filled with
some laughs every now and then, helped by Chris Penn and Peter Berg, who played
the brothers really well, and I want to especially thank the men behind this
film for once again choosing an extra-sweet babe to star alongside the
big-headed Kattan. Vinessa Shaw, I'm not sure where you've come from, or if
you're actually the brunette sister of BILLY MADISON's own Bridgette Wilson, but
thank you for wearing that sexy nurse's uniform for a good part of the movie.
You've made my night that much easier to download. 
The plotline of this film obviously does not have much of a stranglehold on its
goings-on, but it was surprisingly passable. It did falter a little near the
end, when they made things a little "too easy" on everyone (and that whole Night
Vulture thing wasn't needed), and even went for a tear (what the hell?). See my
SNL-movie theory at the top of this review for more on that. But on the whole,
the story was obviously only there to serve the various "sketch" pieces set up
for Kattan's humor, and you either think they're stupid and funny or stupid and
unfunny. I thought the film was pretty funny for the most part, but noticed that
the biggest laughs came from the moments in which Kattan was given his space to
do "his thing". I didn't laugh when there were big set pieces like when he was
caught on the hood of the car, or when his head was placed in a shaker machine,
and definitely not when the midget kicked him in the head a la MATRIX/CHARLIE'S
ANGELS (guys...please, let's form a committee and stop with the completely
unoriginal MATRIX parodies already!). But most of the time, I laughed just
looking at dumb Corky's face and you gotta give out some massive props to Kattan
for that (whether the movie works or not, the poor bastard goes "all out"
here!). He also had an amazing nemesis on the FBI, who has his own moment to
shine as well (the guy's name is Brick Davis and the scene in which he cracks up
is hilarious!).
All in all, the movie does deliver the basics as described in my SNL-movie
theory above, tosses in the obligatory gay, fart, drug and retard jokes, and I
don't think that anyone should go into this movie expecting much else than that.
Basically, if you dig Kattan and his skits on SNL, you will likely enjoy this
movie. If you don't like Kattan or his skits on SNL, don't bother seeing this
movie and that'll be that. I think I offered the same advice to Tom Green
fans/non-fans for FREDDY GOT FINGERED and it just seems to make sense. 
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Billy Madison (7/10) - Freddy Got Fingered (5/10) - Happy Gilmore (8/10) - Joe
Dirt (5/10) - The Ladies Man (6/10) - Little Nicky (6/10) - The Waterboy (4/10)
- Zoolander (7/10)

Author
Steve Rhodes
Painful.  Painful.  Painful.  Watching and listening to Chris Kattan's comedic
schtick in CORKY ROMANO for a long hour and an half is like enduring the sounds
of the proverbial fingernails across a blackboard.  Kattan, last seen as the
organ donor in MONKEYBONE, uses spastic slapstick to get his laughs.  Playing
dumb for all he's worth, Kattan does charm some members of the audience, but
they can have him.  After CORKY ROMANO, he goes on my short list of the least
tolerable comedians.
The silly plot features Corky Romano (Kattan) as he goes undercover as an FBI
agent.  He is forced to do this by his crime family to recover the evidence
against Corky's father, Pops Romano (Peter Falk).  Corky, a doofus who
accidentally does all of the right things, works as an assistant vet at Poodles
and Pussies.  The film reaches its low point when a woman demands that he put
her fat cat to sleep.  
Inside the bureau Corky goes by the name of Agent Pissant, which most people
mispronounce.  This mispronunciation joke goes on and on, long past the time
when you're ready to cry, "Uncle!"
After five minutes, I was ready to run screaming for the exits.  Pops expressed
my sentiments best when he complained to his boys who were fawning over him. 
"Stop that!" he yelled at them.  "Stop It!"  Too bad the projectionist wasn't
listening.
CORKY ROMANO runs 1:26.  It is rated PG-13 for "drug and sex-related humor, and
for language" and would be acceptable for kids around 10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave the film **.  He said that it had a dumb plot, dumb
characters and a lot of strange parts, but he thought some scenes were funny.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 12, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Annette Cardwell
The one question that eats at me after seeing Corky Romano is why
Touchstone spent so much money marketing this throwaway film.  Since
June, I haven't been able to turn on the TV or go to the movies without
getting hit by some ad depicting Chris Kattan as the spastic Corky,
shrieking out A-Ha's "Take On Me" in his yellow Miata.  Why would Disney
sink so much cash into the Corky hype machine?  Honestly, I was hoping
that all the goofball ads were actually a front for a decently funny
movie.
Man, was I wrong.  Corky Romano is one of those throwaway, cliché-ridden
TV-star-to-film vehicles built upon the most rickety of plots. 
Fortunately for Chris Kattan's precariously positioned career, Corky
does have some good laughs, even if most of them are of the lowest-brow
variety.
Kattan plays the title character, the unsinkable assistant veterinarian
Corky who has a penchant for sunshiny '80s tunes, bright ties, and banal
coffee mug slogans ("You don't have to be crazy to work here, but it
sure helps.").  When his mob boss dad (Peter Falk) is about to be put
away on murder charges, his bungling, lughead brothers (Peter Berg and
Chris Penn) rope in innocent, black sheep Corky to infiltrate the FBI as
an agent and steal the evidence.  Predictably, hijinks ensue.
If the basic plot sounds bad, wait until you get into the inner-workings
of this clunker.  The writers will amaze you with the depth of their
inanity.  Corky's FBI agent identity is named Corky Pissant ("That's
pronounced Pees-ahn.  It's French.").  He becomes a first-rate agent by
accidentally stumbling Mr. Magoo-style onto the proper clues and talking
his way in and out of situations, which plays like something out of a
sitcom.  And not a good sitcom, I mean.  The Romano family brothers even
insult each other by farting in each other's face.  And in a scene taken
straight from There's Something About Mary, Corky gives a dachshund
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
But it's not a complete disaster.  The manic Kattan does occasionally
rescue some comic moments, including a bit featuring a cat in a fat suit
named Jesus and another involving schoolchildren, a German Shephard, and
a kilo of cocaine.  Plus, Berg -- whose career has obviously gone
downhill since The Last Seduction and Chicago Hope -- gives a great turn
as the illiterate brother Paulie.  And, it's nice to see that Richard
Roundtree of Shaft fame is getting work.
Unfortunately for those out there who can't truly appreciate animal or
fart jokes, Corky won't have much to offer you.  So the next time one of
those pesky ads appears on your TV, asking, "Who is Corky?" you can
simply reply, "Who cares?"
Director: Rob Pritts
Producer: Robert Simonds
Writer: David Garrett, Jason Ward
Starring: Chris Kattan, Vinessa Shaw, Peter Falk, Peter Berg, Chris
Penn, Fred Ward, Richard Roundtree, Matthew Glave
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Bob Bloom
 CORKY ROMANO (2001). 1/4 star out of 4. Starring Chris Kattan, Vinessa Shaw,
Peter Falk, Peter Berg, Chris Penn, Fred Ward, Richard Roundtree, Matthrew
Glave, Roger Fan and David Sheridan. Written by David Garrett & Jason Ward.
Directed by Rob Pritts. Rated PG-13. Approx. 88 minutes. 
 It's too bad. I was all set to blame Lorne Michaels for another comedic
disaster starring a Saturday Night Live cast member when I noticed Michaels name
does not appear anywhere in the credits. 
 OK, Lorne, you're off the hook for this one. 
 But someone needs to take the blame for foisting Corky Romano on an
unsuspecting public. 
 Corky Romano stars Chris Kattan, one of the less-than-funny SNL cast members,
in a movie that hardly qualifies as a comedy. Heck, it hardly qualifies as a
motion picture. 
 Corky Romano is an embarrassment, a sloppy, sophomoric feature. 
 Kattan plays Corky as a combination Jerry Lewis-Jim Carrey kind of manchild; a
naive innocent, kind of spastic, an uncoordinated idiot. He is an assistant
veterinarian as well as the outcast, youngest son of a reputed crime lord,
"Pops" Romano (Peter Falk). 
 Corky is drafted by the family to infiltrate the FBI and retrieve whatever
evidence the bureau has on his dad. 
 Of course it is all implausible nonsense, made moreso by the incompetence of
Kattan's Corky, who acts as if he can't even tie his shoelaces. 
 But, only in the movies, through a crooked computer hacker Corky is renamed
Corky Pissant and is a full-fledged FBI operative, skilled in five languages, an
Olympic marksman and just a superman among crimefighters. 
 It numbs the mind to think that screenwriters David Garrett and Jason Ward have
such contempt for their audience that they believe any intelligent FBI official
would believe a klutzy, nerd such as Corky is a special agent. It's insulting
and contemptible. 
 The screenwriters' plot is predictable; everything can be foretold a reel or
three before it happens. They don't create any characters, just throw us
familiar types. Illogical and implausible situations abound throughout. 
 Corky Romano is not funny and lacks any comedic pacing. 
 Plus Kattan can't carry the movie. He is funny in small spurts, but he does not
have the presence or weight to bolster a feature-length venture. 
 It is sad to see a great actor such as Falk reduced to playing such a
stereotypical character, nor is there anything funny about illiteracy nor
homosexuality, two areas the writers unsuccessfully try to mine for humor, but
come up with only pyrite. 
 The only good that may come from this entire folly is to give Lorne Michaels
second thoughts about mounting any features based on some of Kattan's SNL
characters. 
 Corky Romano is for the dogs, it stinks. It's about as funny as road kill. So,
I'd advise you to swerve around it. 
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He
can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Other reviews by Bloom can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on
golafayette. 
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom
