Title
Review for Seventh Sign, The (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Following the success of first ROSEMARY'S BABY and the THE EXORCIST,
there were a number of "Bible prophecy" horror films.  In them, the word of
the Bible took on new relevance as young people in them discover that all
the prophecies and strange symbolism are true and perfectly relevant to our
times.  Films like THE SENTINEL, HOLOCAUST 2000 (a.k.a. THE CHOSEN), and the
three-film OMEN series.  After a while they disappeared, only to return
about a decade later with THE SEVENTH SIGN.  As the run of this sort of film
goes, THE SEVENTH SIGN is probably above average.  Even without the big
Hollywood treatment that Twentieth Century Fox gave THE OMEN, this is a nice
suspenseful story well told.
     There are funny things happening in the world.  Off Haiti there are
fish dying and washing up on shore.  In the Negev Desert an entire village
is found frozen.  But  then weird things happen every day.  We see them on
the news over dinner and then they get forgotten.  Abby Quinn (played by
Demi Moore) sees and forgets a lot of news.  Her interests are more worrying
about the baby that she will very soon have.  She also worries about her
husband's career as a criminal defense lawyer (he is played by Michael
Biehn) and about the mysterious boarder (played by Jurgen Prochnow) who has
come to live above her garage.  The audience knows this mysterious figure
has been present at each of the strange events that has happened fulfilling
some sort of mission.  It all has to do with a prophecy of seven signs that
the end of the world is coming.  One of the signs has something to do with
Abby, but what sign, and why?  Well, since even the film is confused about
what the signs are (in fact, it outright contradicts itself), it is not
surprising that Abby does not know the signs.  The story unravels to a nice
piece of fantasy as will a good horror story.
     It is nice to see Demi Moore in a film that calls for her to be a
little more than just a yuppie.  On the other hand, this may be Michael
Biehn's most forgettable role, as a lawyer with little personality.  Not
that he had a lot of personality in TERMINATOR or ALIENS, but there he was
enough action so that you did not notice.  John Heard has a cameo as a
likable Catholic priest, somewhat recreating his role from HEAVEN HELP US.
THE SEVENTH SIGN is not a great horror film.  A year from now it will play
one month on cable (guaranteed!  It's a Tri-Star film) and then probably be
forgotten.  But it is a reasonable little exercise in Bible horror.  Rate it
a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SEVENTH SIGN, THE (director: Carl Schultz; screenwriters: George
Kaplan/W.W. Wicket; cinematographer: Juan Ruiz-Anchia; editor: Caroline
Biggerstaff; cast: Demi Moore (Abby Quinn), Michael Biehn (Russell
Quinn), Jürgen Prochnow (David, The Boarder), Manny Jacobs (Avi), Peter
Friedman (Father Lucci), John Taylor (Jimmy),  Rabbi William Kramer
(Rabbi Ornstein); Runtime: 97; Tri-Star Pictures; 1988)
A terribly unreal end of the world film, even though it is laced in the
everyday world of a family drama. It's a thriller stressing supernatural
shocks and fuzzy apocalypse dramatizations, that has the cast trying
hard to be convincing about all the hokum presented of bloody rivers in
Nicaragua, dead fish in Haiti as the sea boils, of birds falling from
the sky, the earth shaking, ice in the Israeli desert in the same place
as Sodom, and hailstones on Fairfax Ave. in L.A., as all are part of the
seven signs from God as noted in the biblical prophesies. The signs mean
that he's come to judge the world and only a pregnant Demi Moore through
her self-sacrifice can stop him from destroying it. If I said hard to
believe, I really mean this film was so ludicrous, that it was
impossible to believe. It's a biblical nightmare turned into a
connection with other horror movies, as Demi thinks she's having
Rosemary's Baby.
Abby Quinn (Demi) is the expectant mother who has lost one child during
pregnancy and is now fearful of losing another. She is living in Venice,
California with her lawyer husband Russell (Biehn). He's working on an
appeal to stop the execution of Jimmy (Taylor), a youngster who killed
his parents because God ordered him to do it. In order to get some extra
money, they rent a small room over their garage to David (Jürgen
Prochnow), who looks like he's straight from Lee Strassberg's Method
Acting School, but there's a more logical explanation for his strange
behavior, ghost-like presence and fiery eyes -- he's God's messenger,
The Christ, and has come to witness the destruction of the world unless
Abby would give the world hope by sacrificing herself to save the child.
David's a busy messenger, he's been all over the world breaking the
seals of the seven signs, as he is finding no hope for the world to
become a peaceful place worth saving.
What arouses Abby's suspicions about this strangely quiet guy or rather
this supernatural character, is that she discovers ancient Hebrew
manuscripts in his room - with the date of her child's expected birth of
2/29 on it, and with script written in an ancient Hebrew language. She
also was suspicions about the Guf story he told her, of sparrows singing
when a child is to be born and of how the last sign before the
apocalypse, is that the first soulless child will be stillborn, and the
sparrows won't sing anymore when they encounter a pregnant woman. She
got help in translating this from a Talmudic student (Manny Jacobs).
The film was so dreadfully out of touch with its own story, that it kept
piling on different situations which only made its far-out story even
more implausible. Lack of clarity became the only clear thing about the
film. There are dream-nightmare sequences that go back to ancient Rome
that Abby keeps having, there is a mad priest (Friedman) who is the
Vatican scientist confirming true miracles, but is really the Roman
gatekeeper who struck Christ and is now working to make sure the world
is destroyed while pretending to be working for Christ, and if that
weren't enough hokum, there is a series of natural disasters that the
population doesn't seem to be too concerned about but are really the
seven signs being enacted by God, and then there is Jimmy being thought
of as the last martyr, that his death will surely get the wrath of God,
which seemed to make no sense as to what God has to do with him killing
his parents. If this is what the filmmaker thinks God is, he has made
God out to be a lunatic.
The film lacked a decent script, meaningful acting, and credible
direction. It is a silly film --  but not one that was funny in a campy
way. The film's moral message that the world can be saved with hope,
seemed like mush.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
