Title
Review for Man of No Importance, A (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE is a tale set in Dublin in 1963.  It stars
Albert Finney in another of his wonderful performances.  He makes you
feel his character's joy and his pain.  Unlike his excellent role last
year in The Browning Version, this time we find him as basically a
happy and joyful character albeit one with an underlying sadness
whereas in the other show he played a sad person who repressed any
feeling of contentment.
     A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE is a bus conductor (the guy who takes the
tickets).  The bus in this movie is like none you have ever seen
before.  It is almost reminiscent of The Magic School Bus kid's TV show
on PBS.  Here the people on the bus are all regulars, and while riding,
they practice plays directed by their conductor.  They have great fun
doing this--most especially Finney.  Watch how much fun he is having.
It may make you want to spring into a character in the next dull
meeting you are at and start quoting lines from Oscar Wilde.
     The regulars on the bus are joined by a lovely young stranger
(Tara Fitzgerald) whom Finney talks into playing the lead in Oscar
Wilde's Soleme.  This is a "wicked tale" and gets Finney into trouble
with other locals.  There are many other well performed feature roles
(Brenda Fricker, Michael Gambon, Rufus Swell, and Patrick Malahide) in
what is ultimately a one person tour de force.
     The plot is predictable, but who cares.  You really have fun
watching all of the regulars on the bus and soon you begin to feel you
are one of them.  There is a key part of the rest of the movie that all
of the reviews I have seen have talked about, but I will not give it
away.  You will be able to guess it early on probably.  Suffice it to
say, that I think Finney is quite convincing with all parts of the
role.
     The grays and the steel blues of Dublin in the early 60s are a bit
melancholy but beautiful.  As one who loves old buses, this show was a
special treat. (By the way, if you like old buses, the best museum in
the world for them is the London Transport Museum).  The colors in the
cinematography were well chosen and quite evocative of the mood of the
piece.
     This is not a mega movie.  It is more like a little tone poem.
For what it is, it is well done.  Although it is bittersweet, it is a
feel good movie.  I left the theater singing the happy song from the
credits and feeling elated as if I now somehow was one of the regulars
and had some part in Soleme.
     The movie is carefully edited and runs 1:38.  It is rated R for a
little nudity, a little violence and adult themes.  Older teenagers
could see it with no problems.  I recommend this show to you and give
it ** 1/2.  Although it is not popular with most critics (lots of "who
cares" and mild thumbs down), I was happy to find that one major critic
(Peter Stack of the SF Chronicle) did like it and even more than me in
that he gave it his top rating.  I think the movie is good, but it is
not that good.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: February 14, 1995
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Pedro Sena
This is not a super interesting film, with over bearing plots and themes to
hammer you over the head with.  But it is a film that comes and goes and
will surprise you in the end, with its sense of wonder, and expectancy.
A popular man, who works as a ticket collector and seller in a bus line in
Dublin, has a fascination with poetical theatre, and he hopes one day to
stage a play, with the people that ride the route he works with everyday.
He has a big dream, and every person fits the vision he has.  The main
problem is that he wants to produce Oscar Wilde's Salome, which has great
poetry, but is specially known as a play that deals with sexual content and
innuendoes, that an un-educated audience may never appreciate.
And as the rehearsals start, just about every person that he got to
participate in the play is having some problem, including our bus man.
Salome, the play by Oscar Wilde, is about a special kind of freedom, rather
than anything else.  The lust the play brings about is not what it is about.
And, of course, all the situations that are regarding the sexes are off
limits, and treated with much disdain.
Our man, decides that he finally wants to live his fantasy, only to have it
turn sour on him.  But, even if his play and plans fall apart, he still has
the poetry to keep him going.
An excellent performance by Albert Finney, it is hard to find better actors,
this small film, stands up proud in design and conception. It is a wonderful
showcase of acting, from those around the bus man to the others in the
immediate family who begin discussing the ugly parts of the play behind the
scenes..... the vicious  misogynist feeling and other sexual situations.
A great film, really well done, and read ever so carefully and beautifully.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: Winter 1994-95 limited release 
Running Length: 1:38 
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, sex, nudity, violence) 
Starring: Albert Finney, Brenda Fricker, Rufus Sewell, Tara Fitzgerald, 
          Michael Gambon, Patrick Malahide, David Kelly 
Director: Suri Krishnamma 
Producer: Jonathan Cavendish 
Screenplay: Barry Devlin 
Cinematography: Ashley Rowe 
Music: Julian Nott 
Released by Sony Pictures Classics 
     As it turns out, the only thing of real importance in A MAN OF NO 
IMPORTANCE is Albert Finney's performance.  His turn as bus conductor 
Alfie Byrne is yet another extraordinary credit to add to an already-
impressive resume.  The man who played Tom Jones in the 1960s has matured 
into one of the best character actors of the 1990s, with memorable 
appearances in such films as THE PLAYBOYS, RICH IN LOVE, and THE BROWNING 
VERSION.  Even when these movies had little to offer, Finney's presence 
was a saving grace. 
     When he's not entertaining his regular passengers with readings of
Oscar Wilde, Alfie is a would-be director who delights in putting on
not-so-successful amateur productions.  In the past, he has been known
for doing "The Importance of Being Earnest", but this time around,
Alfie has chosen to attempt "Salome."  This decision is crystalized
when he finds the perfect choice for the title role--an enchanting
young woman named Adele (Tara Fitzgerald) who wanders on his bus one
day.
     But Alfie's personal life isn't nearly as joyful as his public
personae might lead others to believe.  Despite attempts by his sister
(Brenda Fricker) to find him a wife, Alfie steadfastly resists the
idea, primarily because women don't interest him.  However, the only
one to whom he has openly admitted his homosexuality (or "the love that
dare not speak its name," as Wilde called it) is himself.  In Alfie's
world of 1963 Dublin, tolerance for gays is in short supply.
     If A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE is anything other than a nicely-detailed
portrait of one unfulfilled middle-aged Dubliner, it's about the value
of friendship.  Although Alfie never finds the love for which he so
desperately searches, he discovers a far more valuable commodity.  In
Adele, he uncovers someone else who hides a secret.  The two are
kindred spirits and there are times when their interaction has a
closeness that lovers often strive for.  Then there's the driver of
Alfie's bus, a young man named Robbie (Rufus Sewell), to whom Alfie is
attracted.  Because Robbie is straight, Alfie never reveals his
feelings, choosing instead to pursue a platonic friendship.
     Perhaps the most glaring flaw A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE is the
weakness of the framing storyline.  Alfie is such an interesting
character that he deserves a more original plot.  A MAN OF NO
IMPORTANCE takes only "safe" risks, avoiding reaching for something new
or groundbreaking.  There's a familiarity to the material, and only so
much an accomplished actor can do with the script.
     "The only way to get rid of temptation is to yield to it," wrote
Oscar Wilde, but when Alfie tries to apply this lesson, the results
are--to put it mildly--unfortunate.  That life cannot be lived without
risk and failure is certainly one of A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE's more
emphatic messages.  And it's the choice of Albert Finney far more than
any other element of the production that allows this aspect of the
movie--as well as others--to succeed.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
