Title
Review for Bad ma ra khahad bord (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
THE WIND WILL CARRY US (Bad ma ra khabad born)
   Political hacks who are appointed by repressive
governments are not generally known to be intellectuals, so
that if writers, or playwrights, or filmmakers want to get
something critical past the censors, they'd better disguise
their allegorical works as non-political.  A good example of
Jean Anouilh's 1943 adaptation of Sophocles' tragedy,
"Antigone," about a young woman who rebels against her
uncle, the king.  Assumed by Nazi officials to be simply a
retelling of an old legend, this French drama was known by
every intelligent person in the audience to be critical of the
German occupation during the War.  When a oppressive
theocracy was set up in Iran during the 1960s there was
some question about the role of cinema and how the movies
could fit in with the fundamentalist Islamic society.  Abbas
Kiarostami has so far been able to pass muster with the
censors who presumably consider his films of no threat to the
regime.
   However Kiarostami's latest work, "The Wind Will Carry Us"
(whose title is taken from a poem about the beauty of nature
and the wonder of life), can readily be taken as a parable
about the regime currently in power in Iran, but its political
meaning is dwarfed by a more philosophic meditation about
nothing less than life and death.  At the same time the
filmmaker even deprecates his own arrogance by setting up a
character who can probably be taken for his stand-in.
   This slow-moving, deadly serious morality tale which in a
stretch could remind theater-lovers of a Christian parable,
"The Road to Damascus," has been filmed on location in the
Kurdistani village of Siah Dareh, built into a mountain 450
miles from Tehran and about 450 years from modern
technological civilization.  A man known simply as "The
Engineer" (as though this were a German expressionist
drama) is traveling with a crew of two by Land Rover to this
remote area presumably to look for treasure, or at least that's
the impression he gives to the villagers.  His squad is never
shown, allowing photographer Mahmoud Kalari to focus our
attention quite strictly on the Engineer, particularly on his
ambiguities and complexities.  A tall, lean fellow dressed
informally in blue jeans, a plaid shirt, and fashionable
eyeglasses, he is welcomed by the villagers almost as though
he were the Ayatollah himself, despite their lack of
information on his mission--which is, actually, not to look for
treasure but to record an ancient ritual set to take place when
an old woman dies.  Unbenownst to the locale, he is looking
out for his own career in Tehran (though we're not clear how
the photos he takes of a funeral procession can be so
important to his employers).  Despite his self-absorption, he
seems also to have a genuine interest in the townspeople,
and regularly pumps a young schoolboy, Farzad, for
information.
   The film is as spare and as studied as previous works of
Kiarostami, such as his best-known "A Taste of Cherry,"
about a man contemplating suicide.  The audience gets a
good look at the women of the village, most of whom are old,
with one in particular who has no problem shooting her mouth
off when an auto's fumes are polluting her tea salon while
another, have just given birth to her tenth child, is back at
work on the farm one day later.  
    The village, ostensibly not atypical of the areas in which
many Iranians live and eke out a living, is backward both
physically and politically.  The cell phone brought into the
town by the engineer might just be the first such contraption
of its kind ever seen by the people--who may be alien to the
concept of telephones altogether.  Politically, the government
seems to have buried the burg in its medieval ways,
symbolized plainly and literally by a man who is digging a
hole to set up telecommunications (or so he says) but who, in
an accident is buried alive and rescued just in time, taken to
a hospital for an administration of oxygen--which in
Kiarostami's allegory is what the whole country needs to
sweep away the dominance of fundamentalism. Even the
young girlfriend of the digger, from whom the Engineer
mooches a jug of milk taken directly from her cow, is living in
a cave not unlike the cavity described by Plato--a residence
devoid of love, beauty and truth.  As for the central character
played by Behzad Dourani, the filmmaker leaves one loose
end untied.  While the Engineer may choose to be of more
service to the villagers than he had been so far, he also
unethically takes pictures of the funeral procession despite
the feeling of the townspeople that photographs are a
violation of privacy and respect for the dead.    
   "The Wind Will Carry Us" is loaded with metaphoric
baggage, a somber, heavy, piece slow to the point of
ponderousness.  The film moves along like the turtle spotted
by the Engineer moving along at its own pace, kicked gently
on its back only to right itself up and continue its daily journey
to nowhere because any sort of life is preferable to death. 
This is a film not simply for an audience of foreign-film
enthusiasts but for a highly specialized cadre of buffs who will
appreciate the work as an effective antidote to the current
crop of MTV-ish, special effects action-adventure creations
that dominate the American screen.  
Not Rated.  Running time: 118 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
I don't know if my steady diet of reality television, but Abbas
Kiarostami's The Wind Will Carry Us seems a lot like Big Brother.  The
film plays like there are a bunch of hidden video cameras planted around
a tiny Iranian village.  As a viewer, I almost felt like I didn't belong
there – like a high tech eavesdropper.  It certainly doesn't seem like
anybody in The Wind is acting, as characters routinely turn their backs
to the cameras, uttering nearly inaudible words (thank God for
subtitles) that sound so natural, I doubt they were ever written in a
script.
The Wind takes place in the Siah Dareh, a pueblo-style town built into
the side of a mountain about 450 miles from Tehran.  Siah Dareh is in
the middle of nowhere and, according to one of its inhabitants, it was
purposely built to remain hidden to the world so it wouldn't be stolen.
It's also full of those cute little Gary Coleman-sized doorways.
The film's main character, who we know only as the Engineer (Behzad
Dourani), has brought a small crew of men to the dinky village with a
rather secretive mission, but the crew's assignment isn't the only thing
that Kiarostami keeps hush-hush in The Wind.  We hear the Engineer's
partners talk, but we never see them.  Ditto for a ditch digger that the
Engineer meets when he drives to the outskirts of town each time his
cell phone rings.  There's a dying woman in the town that seems to
figure into the Engineer's work, but we never see her, either.  In fact,
we never learn for sure what the Engineer is doing in Siah Dareh, but he
gives the townsfolk the impression that he's hunting for buried
treasure.
The Engineer befriends a studious young boy, who becomes his guide
through the history and customs of Siah Dareh.  The two share a love of
poetry (the title of the film comes from a poem), and their dialogue
flows so naturally, you'll swear they're making it up as they go along.
Every time the Engineer sees the boy, he asks about the dying woman.
The implication is that the Engineer and his crew are supposed to
document an ancient funeral custom that takes place in Siah Dareh.  But
he could also be the Angel of Death, too.
The main themes of The Wind do seem to concern life and death, but I
have a feeling that the whole film may just be Kiarostami's take on the
present political climate in Iran.  There's just something odd about a
guy digging a hole for what he explains will be part of a new
telecommunication system for a village that barely has electricity.
The Wind is chock full of some of the most beautifully shot landscapes
I've ever seen.  If there was a calendar for the film, I'd be first in
line to buy one.  Kiarostami's uncanny ability to omit large chunks of
the story and still keep the story interesting and understandable is
nothing short of amazing.
1:58 – NR but contains no objectionable material

Author
Laura Clifford
An engineer (Behzad Dourani) and his two unseen colleagues make their way to a 
small village with a secret mission (they discuss a cover story about looking 
for treasure).  They're met by a young boy who shows the engineer into the 
village.  The engineer asks about the house of an old woman, who is ill.  
Eventually we learn that it is her death that the engineer awaits, but he 
learns a lot about life during that time in Writer/director Abbas Kiarostami's 
("The Taste of Cherry") "The Wind Will Carry Us."
At the start of "The Wind Will Carry Us," we watch a utility vehicle wend 
its way through winding roads shimmering in a landscape of red earth and
golden fields dotted with bright green trees.  We hear the travellers
discuss the ambiguity of their directions which indicate looking for a 
single tree.  When they finally stop and ask a field worker, they're succinctly
told to go 200 yards past the next junction.  This woman in the field is 
the first face we see and she's already delivering one of Kiarostami's 
subtle jokes.
The engineer (his colleagues are never seen, only heard) becomes fast
friends with young Fahzad, who supplies the men with their morning bread
and supplies the engineer with updates on the old woman's health (she
didn't eat her soup today).  Otherwise he's always running off to school
where it seems he has a daily exam.  The engineer takes his tea at a 
local spot where the old woman who serves argues with
her husband about her work versus his ('every woman serves except your 
mother').  Across from the engineer's room, a young, very pregnant woman 
hangs the laundry of her nine children and tells him where to procure milk.  
When a nonpregnant woman returns the next, he believes it's her sister, but no, 
the newborn is simply swaddled across her back.
So the engineer essentially does nothing but wait, while everyone around
him labors.  His days are filled by the call of his cell phone, but he
can't get reception unless he drives up a hill to the cemetary.  There 
he meets a man digging a ditch (unseen again) for 'telecommunications.'
He has other encounters as well.  He picks up the local teacher along the road
who uncovers his true mission (apparently the young boy's spilled the beans).
Here's someone we do see, but learn we haven't seen at all - when the teacher
leaves the engineer's vehicle, we discover he's crippled.  The engineer's sent 
into a dark earth cellar where a young girl milks a cow for him while he
recites poetry for her (and the film gets its title), yet she refuses to
shine her lamp on her face.  A doctor tells him that he's called infrequently, 
giving him time to observe nature (to see).  The doctor prefers the present 
because 'even a drum sounds melodious from afar.'
Kiarostami lets his tale unfold slowly (and somewhat repetitiously) and
leaves many blanks for the viewer to fill in (just why is the engineer
trying to document a mourning ceremony?).  His contemplations on life and
death (perhaps most strongly contrasted by the engineer's mission versus
the doctor's philosophy) are presented with a low key use of humor.  (The
engineers unseen colleagues fill their days with pursuit of strawberries
and eventually appear to desert him.)
Kiarostami's location is stunningly well chosen, a white village (called 
the Black Valley, another enigma) built into the landscape so that it almost
disappears.  Nature is a strong motif, especially when the engineer's
capacity for cruelty is portrayed by his overturning of a turtle.  Later,
in the same spot, he watches a dung beetle working and smiles.
Cinematography by Mahmoud Kalari makes exceptional use of a bright and
simple color palette.  Long shots establish the surrounding areas of
the village and the intricacy of the village itself.
"The Wind Will Carry Us" is a thought provoking, beautiful film, but may
antagonize viewers who prefer a linear, mainstream story treatment.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
