Title
Review for Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil (1997)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Walter Frith
'Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil'
     In its running time of 153 minutes, I'm sure there is a fairly decent
movie contained within 'Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil'.  The
problem is that it has so many plodding scenes of irrelevancy that it makes
it difficult to appreciate the film fully.  Beginning in Savannah, Georgia
in 1981, it looks at southern culture, not stereotypes as some may think and
has a broad range of characters like the title suggests.  Some good, some
evil and some whose intentions remain unclear by the end of the film.  It
makes no secret of the fact that at its core it is not just a morality tale
but first and above all else it is a character study.
     John Berendt's novel is now a big screen motion picture directed by the
master 
of drawn out film making, Clint Eastwood.  Don't misunderstand, I love
Eastwood as much as the next person but in almost every one of his films
where he serves as director, there is a need to tighten up his film's
midsection badly.  It looks as if Eastwood feels it is necessary to show an
audience every single frame of his films and doesn't know what to leave on
the cutting room floor.  
     John Cusack is a writer for a New York City magazine who travels to
Savannah to write an article on the town's high society while attending a
party held by a dapper southern gentleman (Kevin Spacey).  He mingles, mixes
and observes the people in their genuine surroundings in perfect fashion and
comes to the conclusion that he will write a book instead.  He comes to this
conclusion after leaving the party and heading back to the scene later when
police and emergency vehicles surround Spacey's mansion and question the
party's host about the shooting of a man with whom Spacey has had an
unsuccessful confrontation about personal affairs.    
     Involved in Cusack's life before, during and after the murder trail
that follows 
are a young southern belle played by Alison Eastwood (Clint's daughter), the
town's transvestite (Lady Chablis) and a symbolic character named Minerva
(the wonderful Irma P. Hall) who is a voodoo worshipper and tries to
foretell spiritual clashes between this world and the next as the film
digests its plot line with an outcome debating whether or not justice was
done while mixing in religious overtones and shades of satire at the same time.
     In summing up the film best it would be appropriate to say that it is
painfully 
slow at times and has many scenes of dialogue not very interesting to the
film's central focus but after seeing the whole thing you'll find that the
film packs a peculiar power despite its shortcomings.  I'm just not sure you
would want to sit through it a second time.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
James Berardinelli
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL
Cast: John Cusack, Kevin Spacey, Jack Thompson, Lady Chablis, 
      Alison Eastwood, Irma P. Hall, Paul Hipp, Jude Law
Director: Clint Eastwood
Producers: Clint Eastwood, Randy Phillips, Arnold Stiefel
Screenplay: John Lee Hancock based on the novel by John Berendt
Cinematography: Jack N. Green
Music: Lennie Niehaus
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     One thing is certain about Clint Eastwood:  he doesn't play it 
safe.  Two years ago, he surprised just about everyone (and gave his 
fans a collective apoplexy) by directing and starring in an ultra-
sensitive tearjerker called THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY.  Now, 
following a romp through more familiar territory in ABSOLUTE POWER, 
Eastwood the director is back with this slow, moody adaptation of John 
Berendt's novel, MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL.  It's a 
compelling but meandering tale of lust, murder, sex, voodoo, and 
betrayal.  Despite the presence of so many titillating elements, the 
film's nearly somnambulant pace makes it easy for a viewer to lose his 
or her concentration.
     MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN is the story of New York journalist John 
Kelso (John Cusack), who travels to Savannah when TOWN AND COUNTRY 
magazine hires him to write a story about the much-ballyhooed annual 
Christmas bash held by millionaire Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey).  After a 
brief discussion with Jim's football-loving lawyer, Sonny Seiler (Jack 
Thompson), John meets Jim, who turns out to be a suave, appealing 
gentleman with extravagant tastes.  The writer is given a brief tour of 
Jim's opulent house, which was built by the grandfather of songwriter 
Johnny Mercer.  Over the course of the next twenty-four hours, as he 
waits for the party to begin, John meets some of the locals:  a man who 
walks an imaginary dog, a sexy young woman named Mandy (Alison 
Eastwood), an attorney-turned-housesitter (Joe Odom), and the brash, 
cocky Billy Hanson (Jude Law), who is Jim's lover.  Then, suddenly, 
after the party, when John is getting ready to go home, MIDNIGHT IN THE 
GARDEN turns into a murder story.  Jim shoots and kills Billy under 
mysterious circumstances, and the question of his innocence is put 
before a jury.  John, seeing the potential to expand his short article 
into a full-length book, begins his own investigation of the incident, 
and his detective work leads him to two more unusual citizens of 
Savannah: transvestite Lady Chablis (playing herself) and Minerva (Irma 
P. Hall), a voodoo priestess.
     As the title indicates, this film is about the everyday clash of 
"good" and "evil" in one man's life (John's life, to be precise).  It's 
actually a subtle battle -- nothing is as overwrought as what was 
presented in DEVIL'S ADVOCATE -- but it's a war nonetheless.  On one 
side is the opulent, decadent allure of Jim's lifestyle and friendship, 
which beckons seductively to John.  As is often the case, however, all 
is not as glamorous as it first appears to be, and there's also betrayal 
and disillusionment to contend with.  On the other side are the simple 
love of a woman and the recognition of true justice -- things that come 
without strings attached.  Throughout the film, John finds himself 
buffeted from one camp to the other, constantly groping for his own, 
personal truth.
     MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN would have worked better as a morality play 
had the "good" aspects of John's struggle been developed more fully than 
in a series of disjointed, uneven scenes.  His love affair with Alison, 
for example, seems almost like an afterthought, when, in fact, it's a 
critical element of his redemption.  On the other hand, this movie would 
have been more effective as a courtroom drama/detective yarn had it cut 
out these subplots altogether.  They slow down the pace and rob the 
narrative of tension.  In fact, MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN doesn't have the 
right running length, regardless of what it's trying to do.  It's too 
short for a dramatic exploration of John's crisis of conscience and too 
long for a more traditional murder mystery.  
     In many ways, MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN reminded me of Kasi Lemmons' 
EVE'S BAYOU.  It's not just the superficial similarities -- a Southern 
setting, voodoo, multiple perspectives of the same event, and a 
sensationalistic murder -- although they are there.  Rather, both movies 
investigate the gray moral area that exists when "good" men are led 
astray.  Both John and Jim fight to identify their own ethical comfort 
zone, and discover that it may not be in the same place.  And, as in 
EVE'S BAYOU, the power of the spirit (voodoo) becomes the ultimate means 
of delivering justice.  However, while I felt that there was a lack of 
atmosphere in EVE'S BAYOU, Eastwood does an excellent job of making 
Savannah come alive.  More than once, I was thirsty for a mint julep or 
glass of lemonade.
     One of the reasons MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN is a pleasure to watch, 
despite its lengthy running time, is the strength of the actors' 
performances.  John Cusack is perfectly cast as the film's 
representation of the viewer -- the everyman with a feckless charm.  
Kevin Spacey does an exceptional job making Jim a charismatic figure 
who, paradoxically, seems to be both open and secretive.  Lady Chablis, 
a real-life transvestite, makes the biggest splash (and will probably 
get the most press) with a delightfully comic, over-the-top 
interpretation of herself.  Equally outrageous, but accorded less screen 
time, is Irma P. Hall's Minerva.  And Australian Jack Thomspon, sporting 
an American accent, offers solid support as Sonny Seiler.
     It strikes me that the audience for MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN is 
likely to be a small, select group, not because the film is bad, but 
because it demands a certain temperament to enjoy a long, unhurried 
experience like this.  And, while the movie doesn't succeed in 
effectively developing all of the subplots and secondary themes in its 
complex tapestry, its main point -- that morality is a relative, not an 
absolute, quantity -- is presented in a striking fashion.  With MIDNIGHT 
IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, Eastwood has captured a peculiar yet 
involving slice of life.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Dennis Schwartz
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL (director: Clint Eastwood; cast:
Clint Eastwood has directed a so-so, pleasantly watchable,
leisurely-moving film, marked by two outstanding performances. One is
by Jack Thompson. He's the defense lawyer Sonny Seiler.  The other is
by Kevin Spacey. He's the gay nouveau riche millionaire Jim Williams,
big time party giver, and cultured antique dealer, who is on trial for
murder in Savannah. The film takes on the flavor of the nostalgic old
south, as it focuses this morality (the battle of "good" and "evil")
drama around the popular, supposedly, non-fiction book that was
written by John Berendt.
A New York writer, John Kelso (Cusack), comes to Savannah to write a
500-word story for Town and Country magazine about Jim William's much
publicized Christmas party. He is given a tour of the luxurious house
that he learns was built by the songwriter Johnny Mercer's grandfather
in 1860. He makes the acquaintance of a beautiful lady, Mandy (Alison,
Clint's real daughter), and a bland romance begins. He meets an
assortment of odd, Savannah characters, causing him to comment, "this
place is like a GWTW, but with acid." The characters include a man who
walks his invisible dog (the jazzman, James Moody), a transvestite
(Lady Chablis, who plays herself), a man who has horseflies circling
his head (they are attached to his clothes with thin pieces of
thread), a debarred lawyer who is now a squatter in a rich man's
house, and a voodoo participant, Minerva (Irma).
There were just too many zanies, causing me to overdose on them. So
much of the film seemed to be taken up by these artificial and
embarrassingly contrived characters, and not enough to the interesting
story that was developing.
To the film's credit, it takes no fixed position on the sexual
morality questions that come into play.
After the big Christmas bash, Jim's rough-trade boyfriend and his
hired furniture restorer, the violently brash, low-life Billy (Jude
law), gets into a conflict with Jim, and Jim kills him with one of the
pistols from his collection. We are led to believe that he does this
in self-defense. It seems that almost everyone in town has some sort
of a pistol, as much is made of the guests carrying pistols to the
party. So the killing by pistol doesn't become the big issue, but the
fact that Jim has come out of the closet, that does not seem to be
tolerated in Savannah's high society or by the ordinary folks who will
make-up the jury.
The film then turns into a courtroom drama, and Sonny Seiler shines as
the silky tongued, good ole country boy lawyer.
John Kelso hangs around town, seeing if he can make hay for himself by
writing a true book about the murder. The film then becomes about his
quest, as he struggles with his own questions about what is the right
thing to do. He is indebted to Jim for his graciousness, but is
conflicted by what the true situation of the murder might be. He is
non-descript, bereft of any real emotions, and his romance is
unbelievable. He just seems to get by with that cute smile of his.
The film suffers from any real emotion, as it is difficult to be too
concerned about the victim or the accused, or for that matter, any of
the denizens of Savannah.
It is interesting to note that the real Sonny Seiler played the judge.
Spacey's charm and wit carry this film about as far as it can go,
before the meandering story, and the non-mystery of the main event
come to fruition. We are left with a colorful, well photographed
piece, trying to subtly make a statement on morality. But that didn't
work for me.  Yet, I still found enough good things in the film to say
that it might not please everyone, but it did catch the proper
atmosphere in Savannah and provided an entertaining look at the people
who dwell there.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Although the movie previews were the first time I'd heard of MIDNIGHT IN THE
GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, it seems important to mention that it is derived from
John Berendt's best-selling, non-fiction book. Although rumors have led me to
believe it is a loose adaption of the book, this is still the source behind
the film.
In the movie, John Kelso (John Cusack) is a New York writer sent to the
lavishly quaint town of Savannah, Georgia to cover a locally famous annual
Christmas party for "Town & Country" magazine. The party is being thrown by
the extremely rich, genteel Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey), an antiques dealer
whose mansion consumes an entire block. It doesn't take long before John is
exposed to the many eccentric characters of the seemingly peaceful town,
including a man who walks a dead dog and another man who keeps house flies
attached to him at all times.
When John arrives at the party, Jim befriends him right away. On a tour of
Jim's luxurious estate, we are introduced to another key character: Billy
Hanson (GATTACA's Jude Law), a profane, often drunk, blue-collar employee of
Jim's . . . and also his lover! When Billy is found shot to death in Jim's
house the next morning, a murder mystery unravels and John quickly decides to
stay in Savannah with hopes of turning this into a definite best-seller.
Luckily the film doesn't fall into a John Grisham-like legal suspense
thriller, which is a good thing since it could have so easily done so.
MIDNIGHT stays fresh, original, and surprisingly upbeat. This is due in large
part to the spectacular debut of the Lady Chablis, a black transvestite who
plays herself (himself?). Chablis is never off the mark,  seemingly one up on
the script. Not only does she provide the biggest and best laughs, but she by
far provides some of the best acting of the year. She *should* get an Oscar
nomination, as long as they can figure out which category to put her in - Best
Supporting Actor or Best Supporting Actress?
The always charming John Cusack proves once again why he is so impervious to
failure. No matter what role we see Cusack in, he becomes the character with
ease, and this is no exception. Kevin Spacey, who is already developing quite
a following, is terrific as the Southern-gent turned murderer. But was it
cold-blood or merely self defense? Go see this movie and find out! It's well
worth it!
Clint Eastwood does quite a nice job directing this film. Visually enriching
and eloquent, MIDNIGHT possesses such a realistic (if not surreal) feel, that
you'll expect to find a cold glass of lemonade waiting for you outside of the
theater. The very end of the film, which I won't give away, is of special
note. I will say, however, that it was marvelously done and very intriguing in
it's almost afterthought-like way.
The most notable problems with MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL are a
few lacking characters, particularly John's supposed love interest Mandy
Nichols, played by Clint's daughter Alison Eastwood. Such a seemingly
important figure should have received a great deal more development and screen
time, but sadly she is wasted and becomes a feeble attribute to the film.
You'd think in a two and a half hour film that they could have paid more
attention to her. Aside from that, MIDNIGHT is really a well-done film that
will probably not receive as much praise and commercial success as it
deserves. I urge you to see for yourself.

Author
Seth Bookey
Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil (1997)
Seen on 27 November 1997 with Linda, Sandy and Lynne, and Miriam and
Justin, for $8.50 at Douglaston Movieworld. 
What's that old adage again? Ah yes! "The movie is never as good as the
book."  Truer words were never recalled as fiercely as they are for
*Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil*. Director Clint Eastwood was
lucky enough to get ahold of a novel that was on bestsellers lists for
years. It is unfortunate that the deep impression left upon me by the book
leaves me disappointed with this movie, which is longer than two and a
half hours. 
John Berendt's novel is written much like a Balzac novel--rich in history,
very much roman a clef, and it is not until all the players and their
stories are firmly in place that the "main action" or crisis for the
characters begins. 
In this case, it is the shooting of young Billy Hanson (Jude Law) by
nouveau riche Savannah aristocrat Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey). On the eve
of this event arrives *Town and Country* writer John Kelso (John Cusack),
to cover Jim's annual Christmas party, one of the most highly sought-out
invitations in Savannah society.
John becomes enmeshed in a variety of social intrigues and the quirky
Southern characters that propel them. There's Luther Driggers (Geoffrey
Lewis), who ties horseflies to his clothes and threatens to poison the
water supply; carriage-driving Joe Odom (Paul Hipp), who siphons
electricity to light his illegal tours and parties; Minerva (Irma P.
Hall), the local voodoo lady;  and who will ever forget The Lady Chablis
(played by herself)--the transvestite transsexual? 
There are also other ancillary quirkies to keep us entertained: the party
guest who blithely waves a pint-sized pistol around; the man who "walks"
an empty leash around the town square; the bulldog mascot that is treated
like royalty. 
All of this conspires to give an essence of living in Savannah; Berendt's
book is based on true characters. However, what made the book interesting
is absent in many ways in the movie. A book allows the luxury of depth and
imagination heightens that depth. Movies limit this. 
The film spends a lot of time in the courtroom when Jim Williams is
arrested for killing hustler Billy Hanson. It is known that he did kill
him, but the depth of *why* is not really explored from anyone but Jim
William's point of view. Instead of spending time court telling the story,
flashbacks would have been more elaborative--a movie technique ignored for
the most part. A Rashomon style storytelling would have added to the
extent of Billy's despicable nature.
Also rather uninteresting was the filming. Considering how colorful the
characters and the town are, why is there a dull, flat look throughout the
movie? At one point, the courtroom scenes almost look like they relied on
natural lighting. 
The Lady Chablis is the standout performance here. Flambuoyant and
buoyant, without her the movie would simply limp its way home. Also
interesting was Jack Thompson (I) as defense attorney Sonny Seiler, the
epitome of Southern gentility and chicanery. Alison Eastwood (Clint's
daughter) plays Mandy Nichols, who seems thrown in to provide a love
interest for John Cusack. She plays one useful purpose in the story, but
is otherwise wasted. She will probably make a good leading lady in her own
right one day, however.
The saddest part of this adaptation is that it is the the possibly the
first book about the South to garner this much attention since *Gone with
the Wind*, and it gets a typical Hollywood treatment that proves the "old
adage" once again. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Michael Dequina
Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil (R) *** (out of ****)
After spending three years on the bestseller list, John Berendt's
Midnight and the Garden of Good and Evil has been brought to the screen by
Clint Eastwood in a film that is not likely to stay too long at the top of
the box office charts--provided it even gets there at all.  While Midnight
is, in the end, an intriguing and handsome production, watching this very
long, leisurely paced film is like reading a book--not necessarily a bad
thing, but not exactly what one is in the mood for when watching a film.
At its core, the fact-based Midnight is a courtroom drama, documenting the
1981 trial of Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey), a wealthy Savannah antiques
dealer charged with the murder of Billy Hanson (Jude Law), one of the help
at Jim's estate and his sometime lover.  Writing a book on this sensational
case--and investigating the truth behind the fateful night--is John Kelso
(John Cusack, playing a fictional stand-in for Berendt), a New York writer
originally sent down to Savannah to write a Town and Country magazine
article on Jim's swanky annual Christmas party.
The plot, however, appears to be of little concern to Eastwood and
screenwriter John Lee Hancock, who, in trying to capture the feel of
Berendt's book, are more interested in the colorful array of characters
John encounters through his research and investigation.  Among those he
gets involved with are Jim's smooth talking attorney, Sonny Seiler (Jack
Thompson); Joe Odom (Paul Hipp), an ex-lawyer who dreams of opening a piano
bar; Mandy Nichols (Alison Eastwood, Clint's daughter), a free-spirited
flower shop worker in whom John develops a romantic interest; Minerva (Irma
P. Hall), a voodoo priestess who aids Jim's case; and, most notably, The
Lady Chablis (played by him/herself), a flamboyant transvestite who lived
with one of Billy's lovers.  Yet while these are all interesting people who
together make up a varied cross section of the Savannah population, most
have little more than a tangential connection to the main proceedings,
serving to further bloat the running time, which, as it stands, clocks in
at over two and a half hours.  The presence of a large, novelesque canvas
of characters is commendable, but Hancock cannot quite make it work
because, interesting as they are, they are not given much to do that is of
equal interest; the background players' main duty is to react to Jim's
crime and subsequent trial.  An exception to this would be Minerva, but
even this voodoo angle, which comes to play a major role, is not
incorporated into the story in the smoothest of manners, popping up out of
nowhere midway (to lend the film its title) only to resurface at center
stage in the final act.
Eastwood-directed films are known for their slow pace, and Midnight is no
exception.  Any slowly-paced film runs the risk of losing its audience's
attention, but Midnight does not, thanks to an engrossing plot hook and the
polished work by cinematographer Jack N. Green, production designer Henry
Bumstead, and the acting ensemble, which is strong across the board.
Spacey, not surprisingly, does a finely modulated job, managing to make Jim
sympathetic without diluting any of his unsavory nature; he just may have
nailed his second Oscar nod for the year (the first would be for his superb
supporting work in L.A. Confidential).  But as good as he and Cusack are,
the movie is stolen from right under them and all else involved in the
picture by The Lady Chablis.  True, he/she is playing him/herself, but
he/she does it with such brash, go-for-broke insouciance that everything
take a backseat to him/her whenever he/she is onscreen.  A Supporting Actor
nod should be in his/her future, but given the notoriously conservative
tastes of the notoriously conservative Academy, that can be safely ruled out.
Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil did keep me engaged all through
its lengthy running time but perhaps not in the way it should have.  As a
film, Midnight is a good _read_, paced slowly to accommodate thorough
exploration and digestion of the little details that are interesting if not
particularly important.  However, a bit more tightening and focus would
have made the thoughtful and literate Midnight a better _watch_.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court:
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html
"I can accept failure.  Everyone fails at something.  But I can't accept
not trying.
It doesn't matter if you win as long as you give everything in your heart."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Scott Renshaw
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Kevin Spacey, John Cusack, Jack Thompson, Alison Eastwood, The
Lady Chablis, Irma P. Hall.
Screenplay:  John Lee Hancock, based on the book by John Berendt.
Producers:  Clint Eastwood and Arnold Stiefel.
Director:  Clint Eastwood.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  151 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Here's a brain teaser for all you aspiring screenwriters out there:
how do you adapt MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, a 350-page
true-crime drama in which the crime doesn't occur until around page 170?
Before you answer, I should warn you that it's a bit of a trick question.
John Berendt's 1994 non-fiction novel, based on the author's experiences
while living in Savannah, Georgia in the 1980s, defies simple
categorization.  Part travelogue, part character study, part cultural
anthropology lesson and part courtroom thriller, it combined disparate
elements into the hypnotic tale of a unique place.  So that screenwriting
assignment might be better phrased as:  how do you adapt MIDNIGHT IN THE
GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, a 350-page true-crime drama which isn't really a
true-crime drama?
     John Lee Hancock had more or less the right idea when he chose to let
his screenplay wander and sprawl.  The backbone of the narrative involves
Berendt's fictional stand-in, a New York writer named John Kelso (John
Cusack) who comes to Savannah on assignment for Town & Country Magazine to
cover the city's most lavish Christmas party.  The host of that party is
Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey), a wealthy antiques dealer who instantly
charms Kelso with his wit, hospitality and fondness for Kelso's writing.
Then Kelso finds his assignment taking an unexpected grim twist when
Williams is charged with first-degree murder in the death of his assistant
-- and lover -- Billy Hanson (Jude Law).
     That covers the "plot" in a video-guide-summary sense, but it doesn't
begin to do justice to what MIDNIGHT is about.  Hancock's script wisely
retains Berendt's willingness to let a collection of colorful characters
carry the story in tangential directions, painting a messy but vivid
portrait of Savannah as (in Kelso's words) "GONE WITH THE WIND on
mescaline."  Among Kelso's odd encounters are run-ins with a voodoo
priestess named Minerva (Irma P. Hall) and a flirtatious relationship with
pre-operative transsexual The Lady Chablis (played by the real Lady
herself).  Director Clint Eastwood chooses an ideal, languid pace for
MIDNIGHT which turns it into the perfect Southern story:  in no particular
hurry to get anywhere, yet still intriguing in its richness of detail.
     In Berendt's novel, that fragmented approach turns the city of
Savannah itself into the story's principal character.  The Williams trial
functions primarily as a lightning rod for the attitudes and perceptions
of the city's inhabitants, in whom eccentricity is ultimately a matter of
degree.  There are, however, some vacuums Hollywood abhors, and MIDNIGHT
IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL tries to fill two of them with some pretty
ineffective stuff.  Instead of a story about a strange and mysterious
place, it is transformed into the story of a confidence-impaired writer on
a quest for True Love and Acceptance; instead of reveling in atmospheric
unpredictability, the script introduces a romantic interest (Alison
Eastwood) so token you could use her to ride the subway.  Hancock works
wonders with the novel's decade-long time frame, condensing events with
impressive economy.  He also strains to shove the story's square pegs into
the gaping round hole of studio picture paradigms.
     Hancock and Eastwood may very well have made the best adaptation of
MIDNIGHT possible within a studio system.  The acting is first-rate from
top to bottom (including a sly and charismatic debut by The Lady Chablis
as him/herself), Eastwood's technical team delivers typical excellence,
and many of the book's best situations are re-created with sharp humor.
There's just something vaguely unsatisfying about MIDNIGHT, and not just
in comparison to its source material.  This story cries out for a less
conventional treatment, though it's still fairly unconventional by most
standards.  The makers of MIDNIGHT had their heart in the right place, but
the result teases with the promise of an off-beat exploration it delivers
only sporadically.  Perhaps the answer to that screenwriting assignment is
even trickier than the question.  How do you adapt MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN
OF GOOD AND EVIL?  You don't.

Author
Boyd Petrie
Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil (1997)
Rated R for language and brief violence
----------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Kevin Spacey, John Cusack, Lady Chablis, Jude Law, Jack Thompson, Alison Eastwood.
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL's ad campaign is magnificent,
in my opinion.  I first heard about this film upon seeing a magazing ad
for it; not from previews, not from word of mouth.  Without seeing any
of the trailers, I immediately wanted to see it.  If you haven't seen
this ad, I will explain a little.  The ad shows a luscious green garden. 
This garden is shot with a wide angle lens, and in the background, a
small green statue stands alone.  Were it not for the ray of sunlight
hitting the statue, you probably wouldn't be able to see it.  The visual
style of this ad is quite incredible, and this alone made me want to see it.
Now that I said that, I must admit that I have never read the book
Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil.  Despite this, the film
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL is highly entertaining.  For
more than 2 and a half hours, I sat enthralled by the eccentric
characters portrayed on screen.  What makes it even more entertaining
is the fact that everything going on IS fact.  The novel, written by
John Berendt, is a non-fiction book, and realizing this makes it a lot
more fun to watch.  In fact, you don't necessarily watch this movie
-- you experience it.
A lot goes on in Clint Eastwood's film, and yet, it doesn't seem like
a typical Eastwood movie.  It doesn't seem like a typical Hollywood
film, period.  Eastwood is one of the few directors who have complete
control over every aspect of a movie (others include Stanley Kubrick
and Woody Allen).  However, perhaps a little help could have aided
Eastwood with his version of the best-selling book.  While it is
visually stunning, and very fun to watch, something is missing.  Was
it present in the novel?  Perhaps, but I can't be sure.  The motion
picture lacks emotional connection with the audience, with many
characters who seem distant and superficial.  Among them include one
of the main characters, John Kelso (John Cusack), a character loosely
based on Berendt himself.  Kelso is the narrator and the audience's
representation on screen, yet we can't really relate to him.  Cusack
has a very natural appearance, but his character was obviously
created for the film (I doubt Kelso was a physical character in the book).
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN begins with Kelso arriving in Savannah, Georgia
to cover a Christmas party for a popular magazine.  The party is hosted
by a rich Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey) who seemingly has something to
hide behind his suave persona.  Williams takes Kelso on a tour of his
house, and explains that there will be two parties: one that night,
and one the next.  The first is for bachelors only, and Kelso declines to
attend, but the next night, he does attend.  There, he meets a wide
variety of characters from women who plan on shooting their husbands,
to a greasy-haired sex toy (Jude Law).  That same night, Williams
shoots Billy Hanson (Law) in self-defense.  Unfortunately, due to some
mysterious coincidences, Williams is thrown into jail to await a trial. 
Perhaps Williams shot Billy for a different reason.  The final hour
and a half of the film mainly focuses on the trial, which is actually
the slowest part of the entire movie.  Before this, we get to see the
lifestyles of many of the characters.
The most interesting character is Williams, but the most fun to watch
is Lady Chablis (played by Ms. Chablis herself).  Chablis is a wildly
colorful character, who needs to go to a doctor in order to get female
hormone injections (if you know what I mean).  If you don't know what
I mean, Chablis is a transvestite.  Chablis steals many scenes and
gives one of the most memorable performances in the film.  In fact,
the entire first hour and a half is extremely entertaining, as we get
to watch all these wacky characters arrive on screen.  Perhaps the only
throw-away character is Mandy Nichols (Alison Eastwood), the love
interest of Kelso.  The relationship seems artificial, and Nichols is
one of the few "normal" characters present.  I wonder what purpose
her character really served other than to make ol' Pop proud.  Most
of the other characters, however, do have some different way of doing
things: one guy has flies attached to hiim and threatens to poison the
town's water supply if the food isn't good; another guy walks an
imaginary dog who died several years earlier.  Minerva (Irma P. Hall)
is a voodoo expert who helps Williams with his conscience, in a way. 
Then there is Sonny Seiler (Jack Thompson), the defense attorney
working for Williams.  Seiler is one of the best characters in the
film, and his courtroom scenes almost seen ripped from a John Grisham
novel.  And then there is Judge Oliver (played by the real Sonny Seiler)
whose reactions seem natural and unforced.  
The trial itself is the moral standing point of the film.  We learn
secrets hidden by characters, and some seem to play an outcome in
the trial.  Williams reveals that Billy was his lover, at which
point the jury seems fixated on convicting him... not for murdering
a human being, but for being homosexual.  With this revelation, other
characters also begin to reveal secrets, from an emergency room nurse
who bagged the hands of the victim, to the friend of Billy (who also
reveals homosexual tendencies).  Many of these courtroom scenes could
have been overacted and played foolishly, but Eastwood restrains his
actors and holds them back.  As a result, everything which occurs
seems very realistic.  We are not forced to having miraculous
discoveries which lead to the conviction or release of a character,
as in other courtroom dramas; instead, everything occurs at an easy
pace with no scene being rushed anymore than it has to.  The final
outcome subtley reflects the title perfectly: Midnight in the Garden
of Good and Evil.  
Despite all the characters and plots and subplots, the most impressive
thing about MIDNIGHT is the technical details.  Eastwood's Savannah
seems to jump right off the screen with lush greens and moody oranges. 
I could almost smell the moisture in the air.  The set design is very
impressive, though probably could have been even more outrageous than
what it is.  The most memorable aspect of this set, of course, is the
smaller version of the Lady of Justice statue.  This little green
statue has a face of mystery and wonder, holding one plate in each
hand (again, symbolic of the title).  Eastwood bookends the film with
this statue: one shot of it at the title scene, and one at the very end,
which holds as the credits roll by.  The cinematography, by Jack N. 
Green, adds a lot to the visuals, but Eastwood isn't another David
Fincher (THE GAME).  His visuals are relaxed and more unfocused.  The
music, composed by Lennie Niehaus, is haunting and pleasant to listen
to.  The adapted screenplay is one of the highlights, with smart
dialogue and an unusual story structure.  You can never tell where the
film might go next.  This unpredictability is very much welcome by
this reviewer, especially after seeing films like THE JACKAL.
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL is rated R for language and
brief violence.  Most of the language comes from Lady Chablis whose
comedy act is riddled with sexual innuendos and funny one-liners. 
MIDNIGHT is one of those few films which time seems irrelevant, as the
154 minute long film flew by.  If the movie does have flaws, it is
mainly from the lack of emotional connection with the audience.  In
fact, I'm pretty sure that MIDNIGHT was a very difficult film to
adapt for the screen.  Watching this movie makes me want to read the
novel, but I think that would just spoil the fun of this movie.  Maybe not.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Author
James Sanford
The last time he directed a screen adaptation of a best-selling book -
Robert James Waller's "The Bridges of Madison County" - Clint Eastwood was
working with a slender piece of fiction that required extensive reworking
and fleshing-out. With John Berendt's "Midnight In The Garden Of Good and
Evil," he faces exactly the opposite dilemma: You need not have read the
book to suspect that, even with its generous two-and-a-half hour running
time, the movie is a severely abridged version of a longer, richer story.
That said, it should also be noted that much of what Eastwood has managed to
capture is deliciously decadent, and it's crowned by a smashing performance
by the always-mesmerizing Kevin Spacey as Jim Williams, the story's pivotal
figure.
Even amongst the numerous eccentrics who populate sultry Savannah, Williams
is a true character, a suave antiques dealer who's amassed a fortune in the
past decade and isn't shy about showing off his money. "I'm nouveau-riche,"
he tells Town & Country magazine reporter John Kelso (John Cusack), "but
then, it's the riche that counts."
But in the shadows of his lavish lifestyle lurks a slightly sordid secret
life involving young hustlers and drugs. When Williams wraps up one of his
sumptuous Christmas parties by shooting a young man he's been arguing with,
he simultaneously blows off the door of his closet as well, and the
skeletons come tumbling out.
New Yorker Kelso, who's in town to cover the annual holiday bash, finds
himself perversely enchanted by Williams and the sundry other locals he
encounters in the Georgia town. "It's like "Gone With The Wind" on
mescaline!" he enthuses to his editor.
That proves to be only a slight exaggeration, what with a voodoo priestess,
a local lunatic who keeps horseflies tied to his shirt, and a devoted
servant who still tends to the ghost of a long-dead dog, all walking the
streets. Topping them all is The Lady Chablis (played by, uh, herself), a
showgirl who looks like Mary Wilson, talks like Cher, and behaves like a
less-inhibited Madonna.
Each of these people is intriguing, but "Midnight" can't find the time to
give each his/her due. Remember those "Want to know more?" buttons that
surfaced throughout "Starship Troopers"? You'll be wishing they'd pop up
here.
Eastwood packs many amusing and eerie moments into "Midnight," elegantly
evoking both the wearying heat and the wild heart of Savannah, and treating
his cast of eccentrics with a certain degree of dignity. By this time
though, he ought to have learned that nepotism doesn't pay: Casting his son
Kyle in "Honkytonk Man" handicapped that film, and putting daughter Alison
in "Midnight" is a similar mistake.
While by no means a disaster along the lines of Sofia Coppola in "The
Godfather III," Ms. Eastwood doesn't demonstrate much allure as the siren
who puts the make on Kelso; the part seems to cry out for an Ashley Judd or
a Mira Sorvino instead.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Clint Eastwood, in his ripe old age, is cashing one talent in 
for another. MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL is an 
Eastwood-directed film Clint isn't even in, and it's damn good. 
Adapted from a best-selling John Berendt novel based on true 
events, this movie is set in the bizarre Georgia town of Savannah, 
where people walk invisible dogs and attach horseflies to their head. 
And that's just the mayor.
        As director and producer, Eastwood contributes a self-
indulgent but very competent 150 minutes, neatly balancing drama, 
suspense and humor. Like all great movies, MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN 
has a lot of funny moments that spring from the characters 
themselves, and not from some contrived, juvenile intrusion. The 
acting, from big-time stars John Cusack and Kevin Spacey, is as 
good as you'd expect, but it's the supporting stable that gives the 
movie its offbeat charm.
        Cusack plays a free-lance reporter sent to Savannah to write 
a fluff story for Town & Country magazine about one of eccentric 
millionaire Spacey's parties. Lots of food, beverages and gunplay. 
Yes, an employee of Spacey's has a huge argument in front of 
Cusack and later turns up dead. It seems like a simple matter of self-
defense -- the guy threatened Spacey, shot at him, missed, then 
Spacey took him out -- but being a movie, there's much more to it 
than that, and Cusack decides to stay in town and write a book about 
the murder, a book which will eventually become a movie he will 
star in. The weird circle of entertainment.
        This is where the stable of supporting characters comes in. 
There's the requisite sexy woman (Alison "Nepotist's Daughter" 
Eastwood), the strange piano player, the voodoo woman and the 
transvestite. Miss Chablis deserves a paragraph of his/her own, as 
the stealer of every scene she appears in -- what would this movie be 
without the Castilian scene and her testimony? Chablis, playing 
herself, is five times funnier than reigning drag queen RuPaul, but 
never seems exploited as the movie's comic relief or out of place in a 
basically serious movie.
        There are also a fair share of courtroom scenes, which these 
days almost never seem welcome in a movie, but even here Clint 
manages to keep the movie fascinating. Certainly the 
characterizations of the judge and Spacey's lawyer both help 
immensely, as does having the fly-guy as the jury's foreman. It's here 
we realize the case boils down to an indictment of Spacey's 
homosexuality. Yes, Spacey had a sexual relationship with the dead 
man -- before he shot him, of course.
        MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL isn't a classic, 
but it is one of the better celebrity-directed, true-story best-seller 
adaptations out there. Likewise, no one from this movie will be 
getting any Oscar nominations, but the performances are all great. 
In fact, I'd almost recommend that the Academy add a Best 
Supporting Transvestite category.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America for more than 1/25th of a century!

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: John Cusack, Kevin Spacey, Jack Thompson, Lady Chablis, Alison
Eastwood, Irma P. Hall, Paul Hipp, Jude Law
Director: Clint Eastwood
Producers: Clint Eastwood, Randy Phillips, Arnold Stiefel
Screenplay: John Lee Hancock based on the novel by John Berendt
This is a movie that leaves its ending up for viewer speculation. The
mystery remains unresolved. Some people may find this style of vagueness
and lack of conclusion annoying. But, we must remember that much of
life's circumstances are a mystery, and no one may truly know the full
motives behind the foul actions of a crime.
In the quiet southern community of Savannah, evil takes root. A wealthy,
eccentric millionaire, Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey) is accused of
murdering a dead hustler (Jude Law) in his mansion  sending shock waves
through the community. Throw in a swig of good southern Voo Doo, about
how good comes a half hour before midnight and evil half past, and
you'll start needing a good swig of lemonade halfway through the movie
to help the crime go down better. Enter journalist and author John Kelso
(John Cusack), who is asked to write a feature article on our infamous
millionaire, but ends up unearthing more black magic and superstition
than he counted on.
The ending leaves one with an unearthly feeling of a graveyard. It makes
one wonder what happens to murderers, rapists and other criminals who
get away with the crime. This movie suggests that you will sow what you
reap, and even if you escape human judgement, beware the hand of fate
that holds the balance of good and evil in her hands. Her judgement may
come as quickly and as suddenly as a heart attack.
Once again, good direction from Clint Eastwood who has paced the movie
well. Kevin Spacey puts in a fine performance as a charming, deceptive
millionaire and John Cusack is believable as a reporter. This movie is
probably not everyone's cup of tea, but great thought provoking material
none the less.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Warner Bros./Silver Pictures
 Director:  Clint Eastwood
 Writer:  John Lee Hancock, from John Berendt's novel
 Cast: Kevin Spacey, John Cusack, Jude Law, Jack
Thompson, Paul Hipp, Alison Eastwood, Irma P. Hall, The
Lady Chablis
   Any film which holds that New York City is boring when
compared with Savannah, Georgia--and then goes right
about proving it beyond reasonable doubt--has got to have
something going for it.  "Midnight in the Garden of Good and
Evil" surely does: it is, as its principal character says, "like
'Gone with the Wind' on mescaline."  Effectively combining
Gothic ambiance with supernatural elements, a Rashomon-
like murder mystery, a gripping trial scene, and a host of
eccentric characters who learn to live together and love one
another, "Midnight" is a conceptual triumph, a true original.
Score yet another for Clint Eastwood, once again in the role
of director, whose stunning daughter Alison handles a fairly
demanding role with confidence.
   Photographed with lush colors by Jack N. Green in the
handsome central historic district of Savannah, "Midnight in
the Garden of Good and Evil" is a hefty two hours and thirty-
five minutes in length, its complexities justifying its ambitious
reach.  Centering on a court case far more intricate than that
shown in Paramount Pictures' "The Rainmaker" (released at
the same time), "Midnight" is one of the those stories which
expose outsiders to cultures of which they are only vaguely
familiar, unmasking parts of the world which change their
lives--and those of the local communities whose existence
they touch.
   The action is propelled by a visit from New York journalist
John Kelso (John Cusack) to the southern town of
Savannah, Georgia, to cover a lavish, annual Christmas
bash for "Town and Country" magazine.  The party is hosted
each year by antiques dealer Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey),
who made a fortune eleven years earlier reconstructing old
homes and has filled his own 137-year-old home with
expensive relics.  His is an area filled with people who march
to the beats of their own drummers, including a man who
walks an invisible Labrador Retriever, another who is seen in
the company of his pet horseflies, a lively widow who attends
Williams' functions with a drink in one hand and a small gun
in the other, and a violent young man who remains on
Williams's payroll despite his history of threats against his
boss.  Those who do not "make the cut" and must settle for
making their own festivities include a voodoo priestess who
communes with the dead and an outrageous transvestite
who does stand-up comedy at the local club.
   What changes the lives of the journalist, who had written
only one minor book, and the millionaire party-giver, who
mutates from the town celebrity to an inmate in the county
jail, is the death by gunshot of the frenzied Billy Hanson
(Jude Law) who, we soon learn, is Williams's homosexual
lover.  Pleading self-defense, Williams is nonetheless
indicted for Murder One: the outcome of the trial is
dependent in no small part on the community's prejudice
against homosexual affairs on the one hand and the
affection, on the other, which many have for young Billy--who
had serviced quite a number of both sexes to their
satisfaction.
   While the murder trial holds the story's center, director
Eastwood has lots of time to meander about the town,
closely developing several characters to show their effects
on the rather innocent Yankee who seems at all times on the
verge of opening his mouth in surprise.  Minerva (Irma P.
Hall), the voodoo priestess who speaks with equal ease to
squirrels and to the dead, meets the New Yorker at a
gravesite in the titled garden, a place in which good is
performed between the hours and 11:30 p.m. and midnight
followed by evil during the subsequent half hour.  She insists
that Billy's body cannot rise to heaven until justice is served,
and her machinations prove crucial to the outcome of the
case.  Much attention is given as well to the Lady Chablis, a
transvestite who plays herself in the film, and one whose role
is quite well acted though repetitious, overblown and by now
thoroughly hackneyed.  Perhaps the most vivid scene
displays not the party in Williams's historic home but the
debutante cotillion ball, an annual event in the lives of the
city's Black upper crust.  
   Filled with humor, metaphysical ruminations, and superior
ensemble performances especially by the inimitable Kevin
Spacey, "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil" is in no
small part an expression of love for an American South
which has all but passed by in our post-bellum era, an area
with pockets of individuality that easily rival urban centers
like New York, L.A. and Chicago.  Rated R.  Running Time:
155 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "This place is fantastic," John Kelso, the new reporter for "Town
and Country" magazine, tells his agent.  "It's like 'Gone with the
Wind' on mescaline."  There in Savannah to cover a famous Christmas
party, he finds himself right in the middle of a murder investigation,
so he decides to stay and write a book about it.
     Most critics have their least favorite genres.  One of mine is the
movie whose appeal derives solely from a string of extremely quirky
characters.  Conversely, one of my favorites is the courtroom drama.
The former genre is extremely prevalent whereas the latter has fallen
somewhat out of favor.  The few courtroom dramas that are released are
all too often mediocre.  Last year's best was the devastating
documentary, PARADISE LOST: THE CHILD MURDERS AT ROBIN HOOD HILLS
     As America's reading public knows, MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD
AND EVIL is based on John Berendt's wildly popular book by the same
name.  Since the film contains both a murder trial and a host of
eccentric characters, I went in excited but with reservations.
Although the movie, directed by Clint Eastwood, is not as good as I'd
hoped, it is a delicious satire on the South.  As a native Southerner,
I found the accents true, the culture believable, and the jokes
dead-on.
     The beauty of John Lee Hancock's script is the fine line he walks
between realism and parody.  All of the characters are believable, but,
with the exception of Kelso, each has his or her own special oddities.
Although Eastwood comments in the press notes on how impressed he was
with the way Hancock boiled a complex book down to its essence, more
pruning still would have improved the final product.  Paul Hipp, for
example, plays an inconsequential character named Joe Odom, whose whole
part could and should have been expunged.
     As John Kelso, John Cusack gives another great performance.
Unlike his wonderful acting in GROSSE POINTE BLANK, where he provided
the humor, in MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL he spends his
time in reaction shots.  Since of necessity Kelso has to hang around
with a black transvestite named Lady Chablis, Cusack has many
opportunities for displaying his shocked, wild-eyed look as Lady
Chablis hits on Kelso with abandon.
     As one of the almost completely comical characters in the show,
Lady Chablis plays herself.  She gets some hilarious one-liners, and
she has a gift for physical comedy that keeps the show from ever
dragging when she is on the screen.  And her slinky, sequined dresses
are to die for.
     In an old moneyed South, Kevin Spacey stars in the film as Jim
Williams, a nouveau riche antiques dealer.  ("Yes, I am nouveau riche,
but it's the riche that counts.")  He holds court in his block-long
mansion, and all the rich and famous come to call.  Spacey, with the
exception of his low key middle part, owns every scene he is in.  He
oozes charm and confidence from every pore.  With a little black
mustache and a sleek silk vest, he sets the gold standard for attire in
a fashion conscious city.  (The rich and famous at his parties have
their own stories.  One pair of grande dames discuss what caliber of
pistols their husbands had used to commit suicide.)
     Eastwood stages the scenes with such naturalness that you feel
right at home.  As the warm southern night air drives party goers
outside, they are serenaded by that southern minstrel, the lowly
cricket.  Ah, the living is easy.
     Into this den of gentility, comes a tattooed street hustler named
Billy Hanson, played by Jude Law from GATTACA.  Although Jim is known
to be gay, he does not speak of it in society.  Billy, Jim's lover, has
no such compunctions.  During Jim's famous Christmas party, Billy shows
up and threatens Jim with a broken bottle.  When Billy later turns up
dead in Jim's living room, Jim is arrested for the murder.  The bulk of
the movie has John doing investigative research for his book and
helping Jim.
     Along the way John runs into a string of the local curios.  My
favorite is the guy who keeps house flies on short strings so they all
buzz around his head.  There is a reason for this and for why he always
carries a bottle of poison with him, but I will let you find out.
Another guy walks a dog who died two decades ago.  And yes, there's a
good reason for that one too.
     Irma P. Hall appears in a small role as Minerva, the voodoo expert
who, one midnight, takes John and Jim to the Garden of Good and Evil.
"To understand the living, you got to commune with the dead," she
explains to John.
     Movie trials need good defense attorneys.  As Sonny Seiler, Jack
Thompson gives a relaxed performance as Jim's smooth-talking Southern
lawyer.  A college football fan so loyal that he leaves at key points
during the trial preparation to see his beloved Georgia Bulldogs play,
he nevertheless, subtlety outfoxes the prosecution.
     Finally, in a large cast Clint's daughter Alison Eastwood stands
out as an attractive woman named Mandy Nichols, who helps John in his
investigation.  And more.
     "Truth is in the eye of the beholder," Jim tells John.  "You
believe what you choose, and I'll believe what I know."  A film that
revels in ambiguity, it is a delightful piece of entertainment even if
not the major film that I expected.
     MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL runs a little too long at
2:15.  It is rated R for some profanity, some violence, and mature
themes.  It would be fine for most teenagers.

Author
David N. Butterworth
Somewhere between this year's "Absolute Power" and his latest film,
"Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil," somewhere between good and evil
itself, director Clint Eastwood forgot how to make a movie.
That in and of itself is hard to believe; Eastwood has had a successful
career spanning four decades.  What makes it all the more confounding is
what Eastwood had to work with: "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil"
is based on John Berendt's Pulitzer Prize-nominated novel, a work brimming
with intrigue, murder, and colorful Southern characters.  The setting is
Savannah, Georgia--hard to make that town look dull--and Eastwood has both
Kevin Spacey and John Cusack on board, two actors with more charm than the
entire cast of "Fletch Lives."
The plot is a simple one: John Kelso (Cusack) is a New York City journalist
who is hired to cover a swank Christmas party of Savannah's own Jim
Williams (Spacey), a nouveau riche ("it's the riche that counts") antiques
dealer.  Kelso's assignment is to produce a 500 word "literary postcard"
for "Town and Country" magazine but when Williams is suddenly and
surprisingly accused of murdering his sometime lover Billy Hanson (Jude
Law), Kelso's postcard evolves into an investigation that draws in the
town's melting pot of eccentrics.
It's been a long time since someone snoring in a movie theater drowned out
the actors' dialogue but the courtroom scenes are so stultifyingly
somnambulistic you can soon understand why.  The proceedings are
snail-pacingly slow, the star witnesses all seem half asleep, and by
verdict time you've forgotten what Alison Eastwood--who provides Cusack
with some superfluous love interest--is even *doing* in this picture.  Ah
yes...  She's the director's daughter.
In addition, the film surprises with some very shoddy editing (characters
"jump" across the frame) and--something you don't see very often--an actor
flubbing his lines.  Spacey, as usual, is dapper and beguiling as the
accused but the likable Cusack is nothing but jaw-dropping reaction shots.
Savannah, of course, looks lovely, a historical appreciation society's
dream dripping with Spanish moss and Southern hospitality.  It's a town
that has its fair share of weirdos--imaginary dog walkers, voodoo
priestesses, and overstuffed, heavily armed drunks.  ""Gone With the Wind"
on mescaline," as Kelso describes it.
Perhaps the most colorful character of them all is The Lady Chablis, a
transvestite diva played by herself, whose increasingly annoying presence
results in more open mouths from Cusack's character.  For a New York
writer, Kelso seems a teensy bit out of touch when he finally realizes that
she is, in fact, a he.  Chablis' antics at a debutante cotillion ball
seemed designed solely as a showcase for her questionable talents; her
nightclub act, if you can call it that, is a bust (no pun intended).
The film often seems too focused on The Lady Chablis and not enough on the
motivations and ambiguities of its central characters.  For two and a half
"leisurely" hours, "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil" just sits
there on the screen like an overbaked soufflé that has failed to rise.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(WB)
Directed by     Clint Eastwood
Written by      John Lee Hancock, based on the novel by John Berendt
Cast            John Cusack, Kevin Spacey, Jack Thompson, Lady Chablis,
                Alison Eastwood, Irma P. Hall, Paul Hipp, Jude Law
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Running Time    154 minutes
Reviewed at     The Carmike 7, Raleigh, NC (21NOV97)
     This one gets my vote for the year's most boring movie.  Taking his
twentieth (!) turn behind the camera, Clint Eastwood directs this
ambling, aimless adaptation of John Berendt's non-fiction bestseller,
about a Manhattan writer (John Cusack) covering the trial of a wealthy
Savannah socialite (Kevin Spacey) accused of murdering his gay lover
(Jude Law).  In the process of uncovering information for what he
decides will be a book, the journalist crosses paths with several
eccentrics, including a cackling voodoo priestess (Irma P.  Hall) and
the real-life drag queen Lady Chablis (played by herself).  While the
core story is certainly compelling, MIDNIGHT has nary a whiff of
dramatic urgency during it's long, long, *long* 154-minute running time.
(Shit, even the trial sequences are tame.  Have you ever seen such
polite proceedings?) On the up side, however, the locales are lush and
the accents authentic.  Making her acting debut (and scoring her fair
share of scenes), Ms. Chablis is remarkably unremarkable.  As is Spacey,
who underplays to the point of near disinterest.  Jack Thompson is a
stronger presence as the defending lawyer, as is Clint's daughter
Alison, as a love interest to the reporter.  She's a cutie.  Cusack,
however, is a loss-- a non-presence who wears the same slack-jawed
expression is every single scene.  Heaven help the straight man.  BTW,
was our projection bulb going bad, or were more than few scenes in need
of better lighting?

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I saw this film well after most people saw it, and it still was
nothing like what I expected.  I knew it was a murder story dealing
with the well-to-do in Savannah, Georgia, society.  I expected it to be
dark and very serious and dealing with festering family relationships.
However, I do not remember a 1997 film that had me laughing so much.
The comedy elements of this film are delightful, the characters I
expected initially I would end up hating in this expose turn out to be
likable and some even endearing.  If anything the comic elements of
this film reminded me of a more smartly written MY COUSIN VINNY or
perhaps DOC HOLLYWOOD.
     Town and Country Magazine has wanted for years to cover the annual
Christmas party of society baron Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey) of
Savannah.  He finally has given permission and they have sent John
Kelso (John Cusack).  At least two surprises await Kelso.  One is the
number of eccentrics Kelso finds in one small space of Savannah.  One
man, for the best of reasons, gives a daily walk to an empty dog
collar. Another has several real pets on tethers, but they are all
horseflies.  The other surprise Kelso finds is that he is the stand-
offish one, and the upper crust of society are anxious to pull him into
their circle and be friendly.  The only sour note is a bitter scene he
notes between Williams and a Billy, low-class apparent houseboy.  After
the party Kelso goes to bed with more writing material than he
bargained for, and is awakened in the middle of the night to see a
fleet of police cars at the Williams mansion.  Billy had returned after
the party and had a run-in with Williams that left Billy dead.  Kelso
quits Town and Country and decides to write a book about the trial and
Savannah in general.  He also becomes a de facto member of the Williams
defense team.  He gets embroiled in more local eccentrics, mostly
friendly, and tries to unravel for himself what happened the night of
the killing.
     Director Clint Eastwood takes his time, and 155 minutes of ours,
unraveling the story of the hidden secrets of modern Savannah society,
many of which would have been shocking in the 1950s.  Both the type of
character Williams is and his being played by the usually sinister
Kevin Spacey makes this smart, suave, affable, yet candid man a real
pleasure to see on the screen.  John Cusack is serviceable as the
point-of-view character, but not the most watchable actor on the
screen.  The actor who surpasses expectations is Australian actor Jack
Thompson as Williams's lawyer Sonny Seilor.  Some may remember Thompson
as the supportive father of a gay son in THE SUM OF US.  Of a more
comic turn is Savannah personality The Lady Chablis whose minor secret
seemed obvious to me before the character even appeared on-screen.  I
strongly suspected just hearing Chablis's voice through a door.  It is
something of a false note when characters in the film are surprised.
     After I was bored by THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, I was not
expecting a lot from MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL.  Now I am
sorry I was not able to see the film until after I made my top ten list
of last year.  The film was a true unexpected pleasure.  I rate it an8
on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Do not let the title fool you.   It could lead you to believe  this
was going to be one of the surreal films with corpses rising out of
graves.   Not at all . . . or at least only occasionally spooky.
Instead this is a tensely entertaining film about a murder and a
trial.   The acting by everyone is absolutely superb.   Good story
and great acting; what else could one ask for?
Based quite loosely on John Berendt's recounting of a murder in
Savannah, it will hold you in its grip from beginning to end.   John
Kelso (John Cusack) is a journalist who is sent by TOWN AND COUNTRY
magazine to cover a Christmas party given at the beautiful Savannah
home of wealthy, famous Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey) who is a
collector, an antique dealer, a restorer of 18th and 19th Century
homes.
What should have been a routine assignment for Kelso who would just
have to take notes on the lavishness of  the party, record who in
Georgia society attended, and other such trivia finds himself in a
room with Williams discussing the party.   Into  this room bursts
Billy Hanson (Jude Law), an obvious hustler who shouts at Williams,
knocks over an expensive antique grandfather clock and hurls threats
before he leaves in a state of drunkenness or excessive drugs.
All this is witnessed by the  journalist to whom it is obvious that
Billy lives with Williams as his lover.
When, a short while later, Williams shoots and kills Billy, (in
self-defense, he claims) the movie turns dark.   Williams is
arrested but because he is a prestigious member of Savannah society
he expects to be released at once on his own recognizance.  That
does not happen that quickly because the investigators have lots of
questions about Williams' version of what happened.
In a nice twist of irony, the film concludes exactly right.
Just about everyone in the cast is superb, from Cusack as the young
journalist, to Spacey, haughty, dignified, self-assured.   An
exceptionally able performance is given by Jack Thompson who plays
Sonny Seiler, Williams' defense attorney.
Special mention must be made of the transvestite known as The Lady
Chablis who is played by Chablis Deveau (a transvestite in real
life)  who provides both humor and pathos to the film, dominating
many of the scenes.  Add to the cast, Minerva, (Irma P. Hall) like a
one-woman Greek oracle who keeps popping up every now and then with
some pithy remark.  It was she who stole the film A FAMILY THING
with her performance in 1996.    Lastly, there is the entirely
unnecessary "love interest" played by Alison Eastwood who just
happens to be Clint Eastwood's daughter.
Do not expect the film to be faithful to the book.  See it on its
own merits which are plentiful.

Author
Jun Yan
The following review may contain spoilers.  Those who do not wish to be
spoiled should stop here, but anyone who is not a Kevin Spacey fan might
as well pass this film, and I'll explain why. 
It is unfair to call the entire movie boring and terrible.  Unfortunately,
it's likely the impression of the viewers as they walk out of the theater,
because the 2nd half of the film leaves very little favorable traces in
their memory.  I was quite fascinated and impressed by the first hour or
so of this movie, in which a New York reporter comes down to Savanah to
write a 500-word essay about the famous Christmas party given by local
celebrity Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey), an antique and art dealer who
specializes in reviving old houses of Savanah.  Through the eyes of the
reporter John Kelso (John Cusack), the audience are led into the bizzare
and interesting world of colorful characters, beautiful architecture,
voodoo practioner, and social small talks that you wouldn't expect to hear
anywhere else.  
I have not read the book, so I can only judge from what on the screen.
Although fregmented and seemingly unconnected, these elements are very
enjoyable as we watch Mr. Kelso stroll through the streets of Savanah and
Mr. Williams' Mansion filled with paintings, antiques, Faberge eggs, and
hundreds of other dazzling props all over the place.  My attention was
held tightly throughout the first part of the film with these scattered
pieces, until the murder takes place.  Mr. Williams shot his homosexual
lover Billy Henson (Jude Law) in his study on Christmas night.  He claims
self-defense, but the prosecutor put him on trial for first degree murder.
The big trial thing is supposed to be the center of the film, and the
second half of the film spend almost every minute on it, which basically
ruined the film.  
The second half of the film abandons the mixture of surprises, fascination
and fun of the first half, and focuses on 3 characters only -- Kelso,
Williams' lawyer Sonny Seiler (Jack Thompson) and a drag queen Lady
Chablis (played by him/herself).  At first funny and eccentric, Lady
Chablis quickly degenerates into a bunch of old drag jokes that lack
neither local flavor nor originality.  Seiler provides some really
overblown courtroom drama that is not nearly to the level of any episode
of "Law and Order".  Kelso is the least interesting character, which is
natural, since he's from the Big Apple, yet he is given a lot of time on
screen to go through the boring and predictable P.I. act trying to clear
Williams' name. 
I have a big problem with the screenplay (written by John Lee Hencock),
which handles this material so weakly and poorly.  The characters are
drawn only superficially while dumb and tiring "who-done-it" senario goes
on and on and on.  I found my mind drifting away and growing more and more
impatient everytime the camera returns to the courtroom.  The filmmakers
mistakenly believe that the audience care about the mystery of whether
Williams is guilty and whether the jury will convict or aquit him, both
totally beside the point.  I cannot care less about either, and am hungry
for more about the motivation, relationship and emotions of the
characters, especially that of Williams.  No real attempt was made to
describe his affair with Hanson, or with anyone else in town.  It is
particularly disappointing since Kevin Spacey gave such a mysterious and
intriguing performance as the art dealer. 
Kevin Spacey once again gains a commanding presence in every scene he is
in and makes me miss him in every scene he is not in.  He plays Jim
Williams with elegance, confidence, class, subtlety, and hidden
complexity.  Unspeakable charm oozes out of him and spills all over the
screen.  Looking exquisitely appealing with a thick mustache and grey
hair, he sustains a style that is similar to that of Jack Vicennce in "LA
Confidential" yet visibly different and distinct.  He contains so much
mystery in his character that I wish to know more -- is his relationship
with Hanson like that of William Somerset Maugham? why did he request
Kelso to cover his party? how did he make his fortune?  Most important,
how is his conscience after killing his lover?  Alas, he was given minimal
time and lines in the later hour and half of the film, which is a huge
mistake.  From a female point of view, I feel that the character's
homosexuality is not very convincing and a little contrived in Spacey's
performance, but I could be wrong. 
I have nothing against John Cusack, but he is not given too much to work
with here.  His character goes through a series of facial expression of
astonishment in the first half of the movie, and then a series of
expression of embarrassment with prolonged plot involving Lady Chablis'
affection for him.  He is simply not very interesting, and the filmmakers
make him even duller in an effort to emphasis the fact that John Kelso is
a straight man.  They even go as far as shooting a routine and sketchy
romance between Kelso and local blonde Mandy Nichols (Alison Eastwood)
that contributes nothing to the film.  Somehow I got the impression that
the filmmakers do not feel that a gay character like Jim William can carry
the film and the audience need a straight, plain character like Kelso to
root for, so Kelso becomes the center of the story.  But they truly
underestimated Spacey's charisma and capability. 
As Williams' line near the end of the film, "Truth is in the eyes of the
beholder."  I did not care for a moment to find out if he is indeed
guilty, or if the jury will let him go.  The character himself is far more
fascinating than any event happening outside of his mind and his slick
smiles (which tickles me every time he flashes them!).  The terrible
editing replaces the shots of beautiful Savanah scenery with dreadful
courtroom.  The voodoo lady Minerva (Irma P. Hall) never does provide any
words of depth or revelation no matter how fancy the acts are.
Allison Eastwood's character is incredibly blurry and dull that we
practically know nothing about her and her past by the end of the
film.  The happen ending feels ridiculously forced and dumb.  Jack N.
Green's cinematography is gorgeous, but like Kevin Spacey's performance,
it is not given nearly enough time.  Superficial, uninvolving, the movie
feels like a piece of good work that never happened.  I give the film a
C+.  However, Spacey makes the two and a half hour entirely worthy.  

Author
Michael Redman
MORE COLOR TO GARDEN THAN JUST FLOWERS
There's something about the American South that has always captured the
imagination of the rest of the country. Perhaps it's the easy-going tranquil
lifestyle, almost-courtly manners and abundance of charming eccentrics that
are so appealing. Or maybe it's the knowledge that just beneath the surface of
all that, there's a whole lot of _other things_ going on.
New York writer John Kelso (John Cusack) arrives in Savannah, Georgia to do a
500-word "postcard" article about the former. He's to attend the exclusive
elegant Christmas party of nouveau riche Jim "But it's the riche that matters"
Williams (Kevin Spacey) and describe the city's finest for "Town And Country"
magazine. The moneyed antique dealer is instantly personable in that "Here
have a drink and let me show you what else I own" way.
After the party it turns out that the journalist has a rendezvous with the
latter when his refined host kills a young hustler with a Luger he keeps in
his desk drawer. It is revealed that Williams' victim is his gay lover who has
been servicing many of society's elite of both sexes. Kelso smells a book
possibility and stays on. He agrees to investigate the case in exchange for
exclusive literary rights after Williams is tossed into jail and scheduled for trial.
What he uncovers is more than just what's going on under the sheets of the
beautiful sleepy delta town spared by General Sherman during his march to the
sea. The cast of colorful characters wouldn't seem out of place in an episode
of "Twin Peaks".
An elderly black man who walks an invisible long-dead Labrador with a visible
leash every morning. Society matrons discuss the handguns their husbands used
to commit suicide. A disbarred attorney-turned piano player whose life is an
eternal party and serves hors d'oeuvres outside the murder scene lives next
door to Williams' block-long mansion. An inventor screwed out of his royalties
keeps a swarm of pet horseflies with him, attached by strings to his clothes.
Minerva (Irma P. Hall), the local Voodoo priestess conducts a midnight ritual
at the grave of the murdered boy.
Best of all is a professional drag queen, the Lady Chablis (played by
her...err...himself). An outspoken bad girl with and a sense of drama and
style that leaves most of the real women in the dust, the lady is unsuccessful
in tempting Kelso to sample her "candy", although the two form an unlikely friendship.
As the writer tells his editor "Everyone here is drunk and heavily armed. New
York is boring!"
Based on John Berendt's massive best-selling book about his real life
experiences in the eighties, the film attempts to be a mixture of mystery,
courtroom drama and a search for morality. It's not snappy enough to succeed
as a detective tale. Although Williams' lawyer, the smooth good ol' boy Sonny
Seiler (Jack Thompson) has his moments, the trial scenes also don't have much
of a punch.
Thank heaven for the offbeat personalities. Like a lazy southern river, the
film is not in any hurry and meanders here and there, rounding this bend and
spending a little time before drifting elsewhere. The only reason it works as
well as it does is that there is so much to look at and take in. The
experience is like being a tourist wandering through unfamiliar territory. If
the movie relied solely on its plot, it would be a riverboat dead in the water
on a sand bar.
Clint Eastwood seems determined to direct films that are opposites of the ones
he starred in. No one could mistake this or his "The Bridges Of Madison
County" for a Dirty Harry movie.
Cusack puts in a fine performance as the wide-eyed big city Yankee constantly
demonstrating his awe at each new weirdness. He's accumulated quite a history
of roles and is becoming a personal favorite. Spacey is also in top form and
pulls off the difficult fusion of likable genteel socialite with a sleazy
underbelly. Hall's font of wisdom is endearing when she pops up throughout the
film talking to the dead boy and squirrels. Eastwood's daughter Alison is
enticing as Kelso's love interest although the role doesn't add much to the movie.
It is the Lady Chablis that steals the show. Just as you are starting to watch
the film through half-closed eyes, she appears on the scene with a burst of
energy. The lady has sparks shooting off of her wherever she goes. In a city
where everyone else strolls down the boulevard, she struts loud and proud.
At well over two hours, the film could have used some editing, but then it
wouldn't have that languid southern charm. It makes you wish that movie
theaters came equipped with verandas and mint juleps so you could sit back
with your feet up and feast your eyes.
[This appeared in the 11/26/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana]

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Clint Eastwood
Writer: John Lee Hancock (based on the novel by John Berendt)
Starring: John Cusack, Kevin Spacey, Lady Chablis, Jack Thompson, Jude
Law, Alison Eastwood, Paul Hipp, Irma P. Hall, Bob Gunton, Geoffrey
Lewis, Anne Haney
I'm not even going to pretend that I read the book, but something tells
me that this film pays too much attention to detail and not the style
and mood.  I have a feeling that the book is a hypnotic non-fiction
account which pulls the reader into its pure off-beatness of a pretty
bizarre culture.  Even though I really did enjoy this film, and was
throughly interested the whole time, it still has some flaws in it which
ultimately pull the film down from being a possible awesome film to a
near-miss.
"Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil," for those of you who don't
know, is based on an incredibly popular non-fiction best-seller by John
Berendt, who went to cover a Christmas party in Savannah, Georgia, and
eventually bought an apartment down there after being sucked into the
culture.  In the film, he is played by the awesome John Cusack, and
re-named John Kelso.  He's never truly defined or anything, but he's
very likable as played by Mr. Cusack.
The film follows him around as he meets all sorts of weird Savannah-ites
throughout the course of the film, such as a man who walks a leash since
the dog he's supposed to walk has died long ago; a man who has flies and
bugs tied to leashes (Geoffrey Lewis); a voodoo lady named Minerva (Irma
P. Hall - who else?); a cool, suave piano player named Joe (Paul Hipp);
and an interesting love interest named Mandy (played by Clint's
daughter, Alison).
But the main person he meets is Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey), a noveau
riche aristocrat who's throwing the party John is to cover.  As played
by The Amazing Kevin, Jim is a lovable man who's suave, always looking
cool (with a lovely moustache), and an air of southern tobacco around
him whenever we see him, even when he's not smoking anything.  Even if
he's not wacky like the guy with the dog leash or the flies, he's still
the most interesting character in the film.
The novel, apparently lacks any real form until about 140 pages or so
into it when the whole John Grisham part occurs: Jim shoots his male
lover (Jude Law), and there's a court case over whether he did it in
cold blood or in defense.  The film dives into this about a half hour or
so into itself, seemingly so a wider audience can appreciate it.  Of
course, there are many subplots that still go on, but none which are as
focused as this one, making some of them seem almost unnecessary.
The most interesting other subplot deals with the relationship between
John and the Lady Chablis (played by Nathan Lane...no, sorry, it's
played by the real Lady Chablis), a transexual or transvestite (forget
which) who is more feminine than Ellen Ripley (a cheap plug: go see
"Alien: Resurrection").  She's one of the more interesting characters in
a movie, and it's awesome that she/he really exists.  I'm sure she'll
never get a moment's peace after this, though.
However, the most uninteresting part is the love affair between John and
Mandy.  As played by Alison Eastwood, she's a fantastically cool
character who's always interesting for the sole fact that Alison plays
her so well.  She is not written as a very interesting character, but
Alison just becomes the role (a nice plug for nepotism - take note Mr.
Coppola).  Unfortunately the writing for their romance is under-written,
and seems way too forced.  I mean, she's dating or pseudo-dating Joe in
the beginning, but whatever happens to them quickly disappears when John
shows up on the scene.  Oh well.
The main problem with this film is the writing.  I think that making
John the central figure doesn't really work with the film.  Apparently,
John is hardly a big factor, but here everything works around him. 
Therefore, the film isn't as fascinating, since everything we see is
through his eyes.  I would just like to see a scene where the characters
inter-act without the presence of that "yank," which they call him
repeatedly.
Clint Eastwood is a good director, but has always been more of a subtle
director.  He was the perfect director for "Unforgiven," but I'm not
sure if he's the right choice for this.  He's never really been an
overly cerebral director ("Unforgiven" obviously excluded), and the film
never really makes any grand themes.  The film is really like a bunch of
disjointed tales taking place in the same town, and sometimes dealing
with another (usually the big plot).  There's depth to the film, but no
greater depth.  For instance, a bit at the end about perception is
wonderful, but has nothing to do with any other part of the film.
"Midnight in the Garden of Good an Evil" has so much potential to be an
absolutely awesome film, and yes, it's a pretty enjoyable film (if not a
tad long - 2 1/2 hours, by the way).  I liked it, but I can't really say
it succeeded in what it was supposed to succeed in.  So, like several
films of good intentions, it falls into the class of a "near miss."
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
