Title
Review for Girl Next Door, The (1999/I) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mac VerStandig
A copy of this review can be found at 
http://www.moviereviews.org/the_girl_next_door.htm
Always insightful, oftentimes humorous and sexy but never boring, The 
Girl Next Door is a wonderfully enjoyable documentary that will forever 
change the way you look at the pornography business and its stars. 
Following Stacey Valentine over her two year venture from an ordinary 
Oklahoman house wife to one of the biggest names in the world of adult 
cinema, the movie is an attention grabber that might just be one of the 
too few documentaries that make it big every year.
Adopted as an infant, raised in Oklahoma and abused as a child; Stacey 
Baker finds herself in a bad marriage at a young age and escapes to a 
new family in Los Angeles' world of pornography. Once in sex films, 
Stacey adapts a screen name of "Stacey Valentine" and finds her life 
split between the two Staceys. Ms. Baker seeks affection and security 
while Ms. Valentine ruthlessly goes through man after man on the silver 
screen. Stacey explains "sex is something just really hot and nasty and 
dirty and love is another thing." But her two worlds of oil and water 
clash violently when she starts dating Julian, another porn star.
The Girl Next Door reveals a lot about the adult movie industry. Viewers 
will come away from the documentary knowing trade lingo like "DP" which 
stands for "double penetration" and "Stunt Dick," both a noun and an 
adjective for the man on set who takes over if a star's penis 
doesn't work. (As an adjective, the man can "stunt dick" for the star 
and as a noun he is referred to as a "stunt dick.") Several trips to 
film sets reveal the nonchalant attitude of actors, who often have 
casual dialogue with the director and each other during there supposedly 
steamy scenes. By learning all of this through Stacey, someone that we 
get to know as a real human being, the industry no longer seems to be a 
gathering of perverts and big bucks, but rather an honest line of work.
On the other hand, the film hardly glamorizes pornography. Stacey warns 
"there are very few people that I would advise to get in the business. . 
. only if they love sex." We see her go through downs as well as ups, 
including the aforementioned bumps with Julian and, perhaps her lowest 
point, when she prostitutes herself to a fan. There is also somewhat 
disgusting footage of two plastic surgeries.
The movie is such a ravishing success because it shows all the aspects 
of Stacey and her work, both strong and vulnerable. Those not deterred 
beforehand by strong anti-pornography sentiments will enjoy this movie 
immensely. Although the year is still young, The Girl Next Door should 
be a major candidate for the best documentary of 2000.
