Title
Review for Mummy Returns, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Mummy Returns (2001) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Brendan Fraser,
Rachel Weisz,  John Hannah, Arnold Vosloo, Freddie Boath, The Rock, Oded
Fehr, Patricia Velasquez and Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje. Music by Alan
Silvestri. Written and directed by Stephen Sommers. PG-13.
 The Mummy Returns is like the desperate comedian who machine guns joke
after joke because he needs his fix of laughter like a junkie needs his
fix of heroin.
 This express train-paced sequel to the hit of a couple of years ago
piles thrill upon thrill and special effect upon special effect until
the audience nearly overdoses. As the final reel unspools you want to
stand up and shout, ěEnough already!î
 The Mummy Returns, at about two and 10 minutes, is relentless, never
giving the viewer a chance to catch a breath.
 Set in 1933, this sequel reunites all the main characters from the
original: soldier of fortune Rick OíConnell (Brendan Fraser), the brainy
Egyptologist Evelyn (Rachel Weisz), now Mrs. OíConnell, her
neíer-do-well brother, Jonathan (John Hannah) and the evil high priest
mummy Imhotep (Arnold Vosloo).
 The movieís plot is a bit complicated, dealing with several Egyptian
relics that, in the wrong hands, will unleash the forces of darkness
upon the world. Donít they always.
 Added to the mix is popular wrestling figure The Rock as The Scorpion
King, an evil warrior who has promised his soul to the dread god Anubis
in exchange for military might.
 Well, old Anubis took The Scorpion King and put him in charge of his
army of darkness.
 But now itís the Year of the Scorpion, and guess who is planning on
making a comeback.
 One interesting note about the feature: The Rock has been played up
very prominently is publicity about the film, yet his appearance is
rather brief and he barely utters a line. This is something like
bait-and-switch, so for those going to see this mainly for The Rock, be
warned.
 Another new character ó and the one who nearly steals the film ó is
Rick and Evelynís brainy 8-year-old son, Alex (Freddie Boath). Heís a
precocious little chap, who could have been rather obnoxious.
But director Stephen Sommers, who also wrote the script, takes such a
tongue-in-cheek attitude to the entire affair that you donít mind the
kidís wisecracks.
 The Mummy Returns is a fast-food movie; you view it, are entertained
and leave. It has no lasting impression. Itís a quick stimulation.
Nothing profound, nothing deep.
 Just cheap excitement, lots of stunts, lots of special effects ó some
of the computer generated images, though, are rather obvious ó and loads
of action.
 Is The Mummy Returns a good movie? No. But it does deliver what the
audience for this type of  outing wants ó a mindless rush that allows
you to put your brain in neutral for about 130 minutes.
 You donít critique performances in a movie like this because they are
secondary. Anyone could have played these roles and it wonít have made
an iota of difference.
 The Mummy Returns is the clarion call for the summer movie season; that
time of year when movies are long, loud and simplistic to a fault.
 So buckle up, summer is on the horizon and The Mummy Returns has just
jump-started the cinematic tour bus.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database site: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE MUMMY RETURNS, again directed by Stephen Sommers, is a film with a 
complex.  It's a relentless movie that seems in constant fear that if it 
ever slows down for a minute the entire audience will walk out.  Rarely 
pausing to smell the flowers or to provide the requisite motivation and 
background, the confusing story scurries around like the thousands of 
scorpions that take the place of Indiana Jones's snakes.
And speaking of Indiana Jones, the movie wants badly to morph into an 
Indiana Jones-type franchise, a movie it mimics constantly.  It also 
borrows liberally from the fight sequences of STAR WARS EPISODE I - THE 
PHANTOM MENACE and the creatures from GREMLINS.  Gone is the campy charm 
from the previous MUMMY.  Instead, we have lots of nifty computer 
generated effects and warriors and non-stop action.  This is the perfect 
movie for 12-year-old boys, since most have grown too sophisticated for 
Saturday morning cartoon mayhem.
The stars from last time are back.  Rick (Brendan Fraser) and Evie 
(Rachel Weisz) are now married and have an 8-year-old son, Alex (Freddie 
Boath).  Alex is a chip off the old block, curious and adventuresome 
like his parents.  This time Weisz gets many opportunities to flex her 
muscles, and she turns out to be a surprisingly credible action star.
Arnold Vosloo again plays the mummy Im-Ho-Tep.  Not content with a 
single villain, the sequel adds WWF's The Rock playing The Scorpion 
King, Im-Ho-Tep's competition.  Rick will have to take them both out or 
the world will end.  What seems to never end is the movie itself.  I 
lost count of the number of "endings" that were merely preludes to other 
fight sequences.
As a display of computer generated images, the movie does dazzle and 
impress.  It can also be imaginative with a Jules Verne inspired 
boat/dirigible being the most memorable.  
"You know," Rick confesses, "a couple of years ago, this would have 
seemed really strange to me."  That's the problem with the sequel.  
We've seen it all before.  The only idea that the director had for the 
sequel was "more."  More special effects and lots more fighting.  Its 
target audience will undoubtedly love it.
THE MUMMY RETURNS runs a long 2:01.  It is rated PG-13 for adventure 
action and violence and would be acceptable for kids around 11 and up.  
Younger ones could be severely frightened.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Christian Pyle
You know, nearly being killed by a 3000-year-old mummy might discourage some 
folks from pursuing a career in archeology.  But not the O'Connell clan.  
Eight years after beating back Im-Ho-Tep (Arnold Vosloo) and his dancing 
carrion, Rick (Brendan Fraser) and Evie (Rachel Weisz) are busy raiding tombs 
with their devilishly cute son Alex (Freddie Boath).  What they don't know:  
5000 years ago the Scorpion King (wrestler The Rock) sold his soul to Anubis 
in exchange for a demonic army of dog-men, and the time has come for Scorpy 
to rise again and take over the world.
Not everybody's in the dark.  The curator of the British Museum (Alun 
Armstrong) has a scheme to take over the army of Anubis, but he'll need some 
muscle.  So, he's raising Im-Ho-Tep from the grave again.  Why does he think 
that's a good idea?  
Mischievous Alex, the only one too young to know better, snaps on the 
Scorpion King's bracelet, making him the only one who knows the route to the 
lost oasis of Ahm Shere where the King and his army are resting in a golden 
pyramid.  When Im-Ho-Tep kidnaps Alex, Rick and Evie follow, along with 
Evie's no-good brother Jonathan (John Hannah), the Arabian knight Ardeth Bay 
(Oded Fehr), and a pilot named Izzy (Shaun Parkes).  Can this merry band whip 
two mummies and save the world?  I wouldn't be surprised if they pulled it 
off somehow.
I suppose it's only fair to mention that I was underwhelmed by the 1999 film 
to which  "Returns" is the sequel.  I felt that movie suffered from an 
identity crisis, unable to decide if it wanted to be "The Mummy" circa 1932, 
"Raiders of the Lost Ark," or "Army of Darkness."  Seemingly unaware that 
those movies had very different tones, "The Mummy" 1999 mixed elements from 
all three (and others) without any awareness that they clash with each other. 
 Even more so, "Returns" seems a bizarre gumbo of material borrowed from 
other films.  As a result, the movie leaves the viewer with the same uneasy 
feeling as a meal composed entirely of leftovers does.
Returning writer/director Stephen Sommers leaves little time for character 
development because the raison d'etre of this crowded pic is 
computer-generated battles with all manner of supernatural critter (including 
the slack-jawed henchmen from the last movie, the dog-men of Anubis, a bunch 
of mummy dwarfs, and the resurrected Scorpion King).  Sommers assumes that we 
a) know these characters and b) care what happens to them.  
The latter assumption is particularly false, due as much to bad acting as 
poor scripting. Brendan Fraser seemed an odd choice for a two-fisted 
adventurer in the first "Mummy," and he still doesn't seem to fit in his 
role.  He seems to have a gift for playing a good-hearted doofus ("Blast from 
the Past," "George of the Jungle," "Dudley Do-Right") but Action Hero is just 
not in his range.  Rachel Weisz doesn't bring much to the party either.  I 
liked her better in "The Mummy" because her character was out of her depth.  
In the sequel, Evie remembers she was a warrior princess in a previous life 
and starts kicking butt, making her more capable but less likable.  Also, the 
writers pressed too hard in asserting Evie as a respected scholar.  One line 
that made me wince was when she noted casually that people had been begging 
her "to take over the British Museum."  Weisz plays Respected Scholar about 
as convincingly as Denise Richards played Nuclear Physicist.
Wrestling fans beware, The Rock is hardly in the movie.  He is seen in a 
series of flashbacks at the beginning, but does not appear again as 
live-action.  (His character rises from the grave as a CGI beast).  I don't 
even think he has any lines.  However, those wanting some of his trademark 
trash talk should watch for a spin-off he's filming called "The Scorpion 
King."
Two actors who acquitted themselves well:  John Hannah and Oded Fehr.  Hannah 
is funny and charming as Jonathan.  His character is the only one not 
inflated beyond what the audience will buy or the actor can pull off.  As a 
result, Jonathan came off as the hero of the movie to me:  he's full of 
weaknesses and character flaws, but when his sister and nephew are in danger, 
he shows great courage.  Fehr has an easier job than most; all he has to do 
is look strong, handsome, exotic, and mysterious.  And he does it really well.
Bottom Line:  There's so much going on you may forget you don't care what 
happens to these people.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Stephen Sommers, from his screenplay. Starring Brendan Fraser,
Rachel Weisz, John Hannah. Running time: 129 minutes. Rated AA for violent
scenes by the MFCB. Reviewed on October 28th, 2001.
Synopsis: Ten years after defeating the mummy Imhotep (Arnold Vosloo), 
Rick (Fraser) and Evie (Weisz) must confront the immortal Egyptian menace 
again when his servants kidnap their son, Alex (Freddie Boath). With the 
assistance of their old friends, including Evie's brother Jonathan 
(Hannah) and enigmatic Ardeth (Oded Fehr), Rick and Evie must stop Imhotep 
from seizing the power of the Scorpion King (The Rock), an ancient warrior 
who controls the armies of Anubis, god of the dead.
Review: Although "The Mummy Returns" is by no means a model for all future 
movie sequels to follow, it's an enjoyable enough rehash of "The Mummy", 
1999's surprise hit. Writer/director Sommers hews closely to the original, 
but manages to throw in enough new material to keep viewers interested. 
The whole thing still feels like "Indiana Jones"-lite, and moves even 
farther away from its horror roots, but "The Mummy Returns" is fun summer 
popcorn fare nonetheless. The returning cast slide back into their old 
roles comfortably, and there is even a nice usage of the Egyptian mythos 
surrounding the Mummy to flesh out the background of some of our heroes.
For younger viewers, "The Mummy Returns" includes Alex as a point of 
entry, and fortunately Boath is not too cutesy or annoying. The inclusion 
of a new threat unaligned with Imhotep, the Scorpion King, is inspired, 
making the movie's final stages less predictable than would normally be 
the case. Visual effects are splendid, with the notable exception of the 
poor computer animation of the Scorpion King, which stands out like a sore 
thumb. Sommers' screenplay does feel sketchier and less cohesive than the 
first outing, though, and suffers from some appalling dialogue. When one 
character makes reference to the "next" Armageddon, the audience is left 
to wonder how we could have possibly missed the first one.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE MUMMY RETURNS, again directed by Stephen Sommers, is a film with a 
complex.  It's a relentless movie that seems in constant fear that if it 
ever slows down for a minute the entire audience will walk out.  Rarely 
pausing to smell the flowers or to provide the requisite motivation and 
background, the confusing story scurries around like the thousands of 
scorpions that take the place of Indiana Jones's snakes.
And speaking of Indiana Jones, the movie wants badly to morph into an 
Indiana Jones-type franchise, a movie it mimics constantly.  It also 
borrows liberally from the fight sequences of STAR WARS EPISODE I - THE 
PHANTOM MENACE and the creatures from GREMLINS.  Gone is the campy charm 
from the previous MUMMY.  Instead, we have lots of nifty computer 
generated effects and warriors and non-stop action.  This is the perfect 
movie for 12-year-old boys, since most have grown too sophisticated for 
Saturday morning cartoon mayhem.
The stars from last time are back.  Rick (Brendan Fraser) and Evie 
(Rachel Weisz) are now married and have an 8-year-old son, Alex (Freddie 
Boath).  Alex is a chip off the old block, curious and adventuresome 
like his parents.  This time Weisz gets many opportunities to flex her 
muscles, and she turns out to be a surprisingly credible action star.
Arnold Vosloo again plays the mummy Im-Ho-Tep.  Not content with a 
single villain, the sequel adds WWF's The Rock playing The Scorpion 
King, Im-Ho-Tep's competition.  Rick will have to take them both out or 
the world will end.  What seems to never end is the movie itself.  I 
lost count of the number of "endings" that were merely preludes to other 
fight sequences.
As a display of computer generated images, the movie does dazzle and 
impress.  It can also be imaginative with a Jules Verne inspired 
boat/dirigible being the most memorable.  
"You know," Rick confesses, "a couple of years ago, this would have 
seemed really strange to me."  That's the problem with the sequel.  
We've seen it all before.  The only idea that the director had for the 
sequel was "more."  More special effects and lots more fighting.  Its 
target audience will undoubtedly love it.
THE MUMMY RETURNS runs a long 2:01.  It is rated PG-13 for adventure 
action and violence and would be acceptable for kids around 11 and up.  
Younger ones could be severely frightened.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Robin Clifford
It has been eight years since our favorite legionnaire Rick O'Connell 
(Brendan Fraser) and beautiful Egyptologist Evelyn (Rachel Weisz) battled 
against a 3000-year old nemesis named Imhotep (Arnold Vosloo.) Now, it's 
1933 and deep within the bowels of the British Museum of London an ancient 
terror is about to be released on the unsuspecting world in "The Mummy 
Returns." 
When "The Mummy," loosely based on the 1932 classic starring Boris Karloff, 
opened in 1999 it was to record breaking box office numbers. Eventually 
racking up over $400-mil worldwide, it is the 31st highest grossing film, 
ever. So, you didn't expect a sequel? 
And, quite a sequel it is. Writer/director Stephen Sommers paid close 
attention to what worked and didn't in the first flick and honed it into a 
well-paced, sometimes funny, sometimes exciting, and always good looking, 
action adventure tale. 
Brendan Fraser and Rachel Weisz get the chance to develop, more fully, 
their characters from the '99 film. Rick O'Connell used to be an 
independent-minded adventurer who only had himself to care about. Now, he's 
a husband and a father and has a whole new set of responsibilities, but he 
still has the heart and soul of a swashbuckler. Fraser melds the two sides 
of Rick together with a skill and charm that I've grown to appreciate in 
the actor. Rachel Weisz gets to be an action heroine a la "Crouching Tiger, 
Hidden Dragon," as she goes toe-to-toe with her old nemesis, Anck-Su-Namun 
(Patricia Velasquez). Weisz handles the action stuff well and plays Evelyn 
as smart, capable and every bit as venturesome as Rick. 
There are other familiar faces from the first film with Arnold Vosloo 
reprising his role as the ferocious Imhotep, who wants to take over the 
world and still has the hots for Anck-Su-Namun. Oded Fehr is, once again, 
the stoic Ardeth Bay, a proud member of the Medjai, defender of the 
righteous and enemy of Imhotep. Both characters are more symbol than 
anything else. John Hannah is back as Evelyn's sniveling, high-maintenance 
brother Jonathan. 
Some new faces show up, too, with young Freddie Boath playing Rick and 
Evelyn's son, Alex. At first, the kid comes across as too cute. Oh, boy, I 
thought, another pretty, precocious child actor. But, Boath hangs in there 
and, as the story progresses, you begin to like the boy. Comic relief is 
provided on a couple of fronts with the evil Lock-Nah (Adewale 
Akinnuoye-Agbaje) determined to personally kill Alex and thwarted, by the 
boy, every time. Shaun Parkes provides both comedy and heroism as the owner 
of Magic Carpet Airways, a company that eschews conventional airplanes in 
favor of Izzy's homemade "dirigible." WWF champion Dwayne "The Rock" 
Johnson makes his "acting" debut as the Scorpion King who sold his soul to 
Anubis, but the incredible physical presence of the wrestling star is 
really relegated to special effects in the big finale. 
Of course, the reason most of us want to see "The Mummy Returns" is for the 
anticipated kick-ass F/X and they are in ample quantity here. The 
computer-generated images are used throughout, from the big battle scenes 
with a cast of thousands of CG creatures, like the dog-headed warriors of 
the dark lord, Anubis. There are lots of killer mummy effects, including 
hundreds of pygmy mummies that decimate the numbers of the bad guys. These 
little fellers have a distinctly spooky quality about them. 
The production is lavishly handled on all accounts. Veteran lenser Adrian 
Biddle gives the same quality look to the film that he provided for the 
first. When the action shifts from Egypt to London, the colors change from 
golden, warm hues to dark, colder colors. Costume and production 
effectively capture the 30's period details. There is a goodly influence 
from such groundbreaking adventures as "Raiders of the Lost Ark," 
"Gremlins" and "Around the World in 80 Days." 
"The Mummy Returns" is a full 2+ hours long but is so evenly paced and well 
told that you don't even notice the time. It's fun and full of adventure 
and has enough F/X to satisfy the most jaded action fan. I give it a B. 
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com 

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
If you're at all familiar with the legend of The Mummy, you already know its
producers phoned writer/director Stephen Sommers the morning after the film
opened to boffo business and told him to start preparing a sequel.  Now,
almost two years to the day later, The Mummy Returns hits the screen with
more action and an even dumber story, as completely far-fetched as that may
seem.  It makes the original look like the greatest story ever told, when,
in fact, it was a bloated, brainless action film that boasted only decent
special effects and some odd casting which stuck (some) arthouse talent into
a Hollywood blockbuster.
Returns is set almost a decade after the first film concluded, so here's a
little update on your favorite characters.  Dashing Rick O'Connell (Brendan
Fraser, Monkeybone), the former French Legion soldier, has unknowingly
become The Chosen One because of a tattoo on his hand that we never saw in
the original, even though his character mentions the fact that he got it in
an orphanage as a child.  Rick is now married to Evelyn Carnahan (Rachel
Weisz, Enemy at the Gates), who has made the remarkable transformation from
bumbling librarian to something akin to Linda Hamilton in Terminator 2.
Evie's brother Jonathan (John Hannah) is just as inept and unnecessary as
ever, and the mysterious Ardeth Bay (Oded Fehr, Deuce Bigalow) is still
hanging around for some reason.
Christ - who am I kidding?  It doesn't make a lick of difference who is cast
in these roles or what has happened to the characters since we've last seen
them.  Fraser, Weisz & Co. could have been replaced with dogs and chimps
wearing period costumes and the net result on the box office take would be
negligible (if not a little better).  Returns is like many films that suffer
from sequel-itis, finding half-assed ways to get the characters into the
story, loading up the dialogue with gems like "Oh, no - not these guys
again," as well as creating better bad guys (Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson) and
new and improved good guys (Freddie Boath, who plays the son of Rick and
Evie).
Returns kicks off with a scene set in 3067 BC, where we learn the confusing
story of the Scorpion King (Johnson) and his band of deadly Anubis warriors.
There's talk of curses and soul-selling and stuff, but there's so much
action packed into these first five minutes, it's hard to keep up.  Long
story short, the Scorpion King dies, but whoever finds his magic bracelet
can revive him, kill him and take control of his fearsome fighters,
presumably in hopes of world domination.  Oh, and if you're going to Returns
because you're a fan of The People's Champion, you'll probably want to leave
when this little intro is over because that's pretty much the last whiff
you'll get of what the Rock is cookin'.
The film then switches gears and takes us to 1933 (the Year of the Scorpion,
no less), where Rick and Evie unearth the Scorpion King's bracelet, which
accidentally finds its way onto the hand of their son.  This, of course,
means the Scorpion King will rise from the dead in just seven days and raise
all kinds of trouble (as well as, we assume, his eyebrow).  In the meantime,
a group of bad guys have located the remains of Imhotep (Billy Zane clone
Arnold Vosloo) and wake him up from his dirt nap so he can do battle with
the big SK and be reunited with his dead lover (Patricia Velazquez).  I'm
still not sure who I was supposed to be rooting for.
The protagonists do a lot of moving around here, using strange modes of
transportation (camel, double-decker bus, a wave, dirigible and train)
throughout several different locations in an attempt to accomplish something
that I'm not yet clear on.  One thing I do know is that it took way too long
to get there.  At the 60-minute mark, there's still five days left before
the Scorpion King is supposed to come back to life, and when he does, it's
like getting coal for Christmas.  During one five-minute span, the film rips
off Gremlins, Indiana Jones, Jurassic Park, Star Wars and Princess Mononoke.
But why stop there?  Returns evens pilfers scenes from its original, which
made me do one of those cartoon double-takes.
Sommers, whose previous film effort was the awful Deep Rising, has penned
one of the worst stories of the year, smacking of more unoriginality than
anything I've seen in a while.  Even the score from Alan Silvestri (The
Mexican) seems like a calculated cross between Star Wars and Superman. Sure,
the effects are good, but the whole Imhotep reanimation thing isn't nearly
as cool as last year's Hollow Man.  Returns does look nice, though, with
cinematographer Adrian Biddle returning from the original picture.
2:10 - PG-13 for action adventure and violence
