Title
Review for One-Eyed Jacks (1961)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"One-Eyed Jacks" is famous for being Marlon
Brando's sole effort as director.  At first,
Stanley Kubrick was the director, but a clash
of egos led to his abandoning the project.
Brando extended the shooting schedule from
sixty days to six months, and turned in a
four hour film.  Studio executives had the
film cut to 141 minutes, and the expensive
film lost money when finally released.
Who knows whether Kubrick's version would
have been much better.  Certainly Brando's
character would have been less heroic, and
his various romances would likely have been
downplayed.  The good news is that Brando's
version of "One-Eyed Jacks" is entertaining,
interesting and original.  It is also
clearly better than "Spartacus", the 1960
Kubrick-directed epic.
The story begins in Mexico in the year 1880.
Karl Malden and Brando are bank robbers
who are being tracked by Federales.  They
have only one horse, which can hold only
one rider.  Malden leaves Brando with promises
of returning with another horse.  He doesn't,
and Brando is captured, spending five years
in a squalid prison.
Brando escapes with Larry Duran, and the two
link up with bad-tempered bank robbers
Ben Johnson and Sam Gilman.  Brando learns
that Malden is now the affable sheriff of
Monterey, California.  The gang rides 900
miles (!) to Monterey, to rob its bank and
for Brando to exact revenge on Malden.
Various misadventures follow: Brando seduces
Malden's adopted daughter Pina Pellicer, kills
troublemaker Timothy Carey in self-defense,
and is whipped and jailed by Malden.  Finally,
there is an inevitable showdown between
Brando and Malden.
Brando is stone-faced and tight-lipped
throughout, but he remains charismatic and
likeable.  Slim Pickens has a great supporting
role as Malden's brutal deputy.  Malden also
gives a fine performance.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
