Title
Review for Cutthroat Island (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     What is wrong with this action scene?  A woman is standing on a
coach speeding under a low awning on a building that overhangs the
road.  Rather than be knocked off she jumps onto the awning, runs
through the building, pushing aside obstacles and dives out the window
on the far side landing back on the coach.  Well, there are two things
wrong.  First, the architecture has to be very contrived to set up the
scene in the first place.  17th Century Jamaica could not have had many
buildings with a second story that extends over a road.  But secondly
someone running an obstacle course will not go faster than speeding
horses that have no obstacles.  It makes for a nice action scene, but
given some thought, it just does not make sense.  That in a nutshell is
what is wrong with CUTTHROAT ISLAND.  It has too many good sequences
ruined by touches that do not bear close scrutiny.  This is a film that
fools you.  Just when you start warming up to it and get pulled into
the story, it does something stupid or poorly thought out and it loses
you again.  In the end it is the silly mistakes, the anachronisms, the
scenes that don't make sense, the sexual double entendres, and the
Bond-like wisecracks that sink a film that otherwise has a good action
plot and some impressive visuals.
     The year is 1668.  Pirates like Black Harry (played by Harris
Yulin), his infamous brother Dawg (played by Frank Langella), and his
daughter Morgan (played by Geena Davis) rule the blue waves of the
Caribbean (played by the blue waves off Thailand).  Harry, Dawg, and a
third brother each have a piece of a map to a fabulous treasure hidden
on Cutthroat Island.  Their father wanted them to share but that is not
what the brothers plan.  This is the basis for what would have been a
good fast-paced adventure film if the script by Robert King and Marc
Norman had not tried too hard to be cute.  But the credits are not over
before Morgan's lover is holding a musket on her and she is telling him
it won't fire because she "stole his balls."  Big yucks here, folks.
Too bad it totally ruins the period feel.  It is not long before Morgan
has inherited her father's crew and the companionship of an erudite
thief (Matthew Modine) who join Morgan on her.  Together they go off to
try to find the treasure.  And thereby hangs what could have been a
good tale.
     Perhaps the biggest blunder was to think that Geena Davis could
play a convincing pirate queen and a terrific swordswoman.  That just
is not her kind of role and even the best stunt doubles cannot fix
that.  Frank Langella is a bit better as the villainous Dawg, but then
he has some experience in swashbucklers.  And then just as you are
getting used to Davis in the role the film introduces Maury Chaykin of
UNSTRUNG HEROES as a writer who is a guest on the pirate ships getting
material for "a bestseller."  That was the word they used,
"bestseller."  (Boy, that 17th Century culture was a lot like ours,
wasn't it?  Now was that before or after the Kennedy assassination?)
Of course not all of the problems have to do with period feel.  There
is the over-trained monkey who apparently understands English, but just
enough to make very human gestures.  For one painful example Morgan
tells the monkey that she is the captain and the monkey salutes her.
And once again the viewer is reminded that this is all just a movie.
     Director Renny Harlin understands action scenes and does not worry
too much about the logic of his scripts.  He has explosive action
scenes of terrific sea battles and dramatic helicopter shots with
birds' eye views of magnificent pirate ships.  But he will also have
Morgan ready to make love to her doctor just moments after he removesa
musket ball from her lower abdomen.  Somebody desperately needed to go
through this film scene-by-scene and ask, "Does this sequence really
makes sense?"  With some films you could cannot take out the silly
ideas or you would not have a story left.  That is definitely not true
of CUTTHROAT ISLAND.  This is one film that you could tighten up scene
after scene and still have a good story and, in fact, a much better
piece of entertainment.
     This is a mediocre film with a really good old tyme swashbuckler
inside fighting to get out.  It needed a sharper cutlass.  Rate this
one a high 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Craig Good
So Jeff and I got to the crummy local 15-plex just a few minutes too
late to see "Sense and Sensibility" on Saturday.  The logical
alternative was to see "Cutthroat Island" instead. Right?  It turned
out not to be such a bad choice.
I'm not going to try to tell you that this is great cinema. It's not
going to make many top ten lists, and even this year I don't see it
grabbing a nomination for Best Picture of the Year. But was it fun?
Yup.
>From the first stunt set piece, where Geena Davis the pirate (if you
can't suspend that particular disbelief long enough for her to convince
you, don't bother going any further) plunges toward the ocean floor to
cut her father loose from the anchor which is pulling them both below
the waves, I began to make mental comparisons to "Goldeneye". I thought
that if that incomprehensibly dull Bond film had had one or two gags
that good, it would not have been such a disappointment. But the scale
and outrageousness of the gags in "Cutthroat Island" do nothing but
build from there, all the way to the explosive finale.
This is a pirate film which aims to please and, for the most part,
delivers.  Nobody said "Arrrgh, Matey" nor "keelhaul", but peg legs,
plank-walking, cannon fire and sabre duels are delivered by the
galleon. It may be obvious to point out that this is not a
finely-crafted character piece. Director Renny Harlin instead paints
with broad, bold strokes which are more often than not perfectly
appropriate. I mean, why have a boring establishing shot when you have
a good helicopter camera rig close at hand?
The dialogue doesn't so much sparkle as fizzle most of the time, with
occasional and worthwhile exceptions where it blazes. But the action,
gorgeous locations, and and production design deliver in such
outrageous proportions that it is possible to forgive many weaknesses.
Were I a pyro/FX man on this picture, I would have left the set every
night saying, "Man, I love my job". It's not just scale which makes it
work, although heaven knows this is huge, but the playful imagination
which went into nearly every setup. Call me perverse, but I found
poetry in the way giant cannons were catapulted through the air during
the point-blank sea battle. And Geena Davis' stunts (aided, no doubt,
by digital wire removal) were often *literally* over the top.
If you found this year's Bond flaccid and still hunger for a fun romp,
perhaps the turgor of Geena Davis will sate that appetite. It's no
"Citizen Kane", but in the end, "Cutthroat Island" delivered everything
I wanted but never got from "Goldeneye".

Author
Steve Rhodes
     From the director of THE ADVENTURES OF FORD FAIRLANE, Renny
Harlin, we have CUTTHROAT ISLAND.  It was one of last year's big budget
films costing almost $100 million dollars to make.  Unless it becomes a
big hit in the video stores, it is destined to be a megaflop.  You can
pay three bucks now and see it on pay-per-view.
     Unlike other expensive films where most of the money goes to the
superstars, here the money appears to be spent on the production.
Renny Harlin comes from the Cecil B. DeMille school of movie making.
The only difference is he does not have DeMille's talent.  What Renny
does know how to do is create explosion after explosion.  His motto is:
when the pace is in danger of slowing a bit, blow up something.  This
technique can work in a movie with more of a plot, as this year's
EXECUTIVE DECISION, but here it only serves to let people test out
their new subwoofers.  To Renny's credit, he probably made a
significant dent in the unemployment rate since there are thousands
upon thousands of extras.
     The plot is that in the 1600s "notorious lady pirate" Morgan
Adams's (Gina Davis) father dies.  She gets the crew of his ship to
elect her captain over her rival.  The election is ultimately decided
by a single person, but it does provide an early example of democracy
in action.
     She tells the crew that she has a map to buried treasure, but
there are two problems.  First she has only a third of the map.  To get
one of the other parts they will have to fight the evil Dawg (Frank
Langella) and his ship of rival pirates.  The other problem is the map
is in Latin, which none of them can read.  They solve this problem by
buying a doctor, William Shaw (Matthew Modine), who has been put in
prison for stealing and turned into a slave.
     The show pays only lip service to the idea of a plot.  This is a
pure swashbuckling action picture.  Here Davis attempts to be a female
Douglas Fairbanks.  She kills people left and right, and she gets in
numerous knockdown fistfights where she always wins.  Davis has
tremendous fun playing a pirate - wouldn't we all?  Too bad the
director did not worry more about whether the audience was having fun.
About 10 minutes of this is somewhat interesting, but then it is pure
repetition.
     The script by Michael Frost Beckner, Bruce Evans, and Raynold
Gideon has nothing of value to say.  It wastes little time with
character development or plot, best to get the actors to the next fight
as quickly as possible.  A typical line is Shaw's, "Congratulations
Madam.  Another town you've destroyed."
     The cinematography (Peter Levy) is full of bright lights and
strong colors.  The music (John Debney) is alive and pulsates with a
heavy beat right along with the sounds of the cannons and the guns.
The sets (Norman Garwood) are enormous, and the costumes (Enrico
Sabbatini) elaborate.  No expense is spared.  I have a friend who looks
for plotless action films for watching while working out on his
NorticTrac, this is perfect for that.  If your TV has a knob that turns
off the dialog, feel free to do so without worrying about losing out on
any content.
     Finally, in Renny Harlin's defense, he has made a single good
film.  His DIE HARD 2 is spectacular, and it has a strong narrative
drive.  I guess once you come up with one winner, the studios open
their bank accounts to you forever.
     CUTTHROAT ISLAND runs an unnecessarily long 2:03.  It is rated
PG-13 which is probably right given the violence level.  There is a lot
of violence, but it is pretty cartoonish.  CUTTHROAT ISLAND would be
fine for kids say 8 or 9 and up.  I was bored silly by it, but it does
possess an impressive sound and look.  I would advise catching one of
those short cable films that talks about the making of the movie
instead and skip the show itself.  The excerpts suffice.  I give the
picture a thumbs down and rate it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Nemanja Dundjerovic
     CUTTHROAT ISLAND is most likely the last movie producer Mario
Kassar of Carolco will do in a while, but it seems that Mr.Kassar
decided to go out in a blaze of glory.  CUTTHROAT ISLAND, starring
Geena Davis, Matthew Modine, Maury Chaykin and Frank Langella, directed
by Finnish Adonis-Director Renny Harlin is definitely a feast for the
eyes.  The plot (there was actually something resembling a plot!!!)
revolves around a buried treasure on Cutthroat Island.  Pirate Morgan
Adams (Davis) and her evil uncle Dawg (Langella)are simultaneously
chasing after it. Davis recruits Modine to read a map in Latin and some
silly romance is squeezed out of this.  The film's climax occurs when,
after 90 minutes worth of restless adventure, Morgan's ship and Dawg's
ship clash in the middle of the ocean. Needless to say, Morgan wins.
     Renny Harlin seems talented enough to realize that the script had
no potential except lavish chase, battle and fight scenes in 17-century
Jamaica.  So, he devotes most of the movie's $75 million budget to some
exceptionally engaging scenes.  The ultimate good vs.  evil clash at
the end of the movie lasts a good 25 minutes, and it is exceptionally
spectacular.  The movie is a roller-coaster from start to finish, and
Davis keeps coming across being too quick-witted for this lame part
(she does get to beat up a lot of guys AND blow Langella out of the sky
with a cannon at point-blank range).  The music in CUTTHROAT ISLAND is
spectacular (I'm running out of adjectives here) and it is used
effectively by Harlin to make most of the spectators deaf.  Overall,
CUTTHROAT ISLAND was full of quick pleasures, but the glossy coating is
very thin.  A question:  Why were there only two other people other
than my friend and me in the theater?  Did they not advertise the
movie?

Author
James Berardinelli
        In the "good old days" we had Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. and
Senior and later Errol Flynn.  They did the swashbuckling, the
fencing, the leaping from balconies.  We are now in the mid-nineties
and Renny Harlin is directing CUTTHROAT ISLAND with his wife, Geena
Davis as the prancing, leaping, fencing lead in the film.  In
addition to the above, a new bit has been added which, to put it
politely could be called "kick them in groin."   And Geena does just
that at least 20 times, with her feet or with her knees and the men
fall like, well, flies.
        Geena is aided by Matthew Modine while Frank Langella plays
her uncle, the villain.  All in vain.  The story is as old as
movie making with a bit of RLS' Treasure Island thrown in.    There
is a map that tells of buried treasure but, sad to relate, Morgan
(Geena Davis) only has part of the map.   And, what's more, it's in
Latin.  Luckily, at a slave auction of prisoners, Morgan spots
William Shaw (Modine) handsome and educated, so she buys him.  That
is not all; his education includes the ability to read Latin.
        Dawg (Langella), with shaven head and constant snarl, has
the other part of the map, so we are in for some great battle
scenes as "hand to hand" the frigates fire cannon at each other
while everyone leaps and waves swords (and do not forget the
"kneeing".)  When the battle is over, Morgan has a slight smudge on
one cheek but her clothes look newly laundered.   And so on.
        I almost forgot to mention that this great story took 4
persons to write (Michael Frost Beckner & James Gorman and Bruce
A Evans & Raynold Gideon.)  Screenplay by Robert King and Marc Norman.
-- 
Evelyn C. Leeper | +1 908 957 2070 | Evelyn.Leeper@att.com
"It is better to debate a question without settling it than
to settle a question without debating it."  --Joseph Joubert

Author
Ben Hoffman
        In the "good old days" we had Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. and
Senior and later Errol Flynn.  They did the swashbuckling, the
fencing, the leaping from balconies.  We are now in the mid-nineties
and Renny Harlin is directing CUTTHROAT ISLAND with his wife, Geena
Davis as the prancing, leaping, fencing lead in the film.  In
addition to the above, a new bit has been added which, to put it
politely could be called "kick them in groin."   And Geena does just
that at least 20 times, with her feet or with her knees and the men
fall like, well, flies.
        Geena is aided by Matthew Modine while Frank Langella plays
her uncle, the villain.  All in vain.  The story is as old as
movie making with a bit of RLS' Treasure Island thrown in.    There
is a map that tells of buried treasure but, sad to relate, Morgan
(Geena Davis) only has part of the map.   And, what's more, it's in
Latin.  Luckily, at a slave auction of prisoners, Morgan spots
William Shaw (Modine) handsome and educated, so she buys him.  That
is not all; his education includes the ability to read Latin.
        Dawg (Langella), with shaven head and constant snarl, has
the other part of the map, so we are in for some great battle
scenes as "hand to hand" the frigates fire cannon at each other
while everyone leaps and waves swords (and do not forget the
"kneeing".)  When the battle is over, Morgan has a slight smudge on
one cheek but her clothes look newly laundered.   And so on.
        I almost forgot to mention that this great story took 4
persons to write (Michael Frost Beckner & James Gorman and Bruce
A Evans & Raynold Gideon.)  Screenplay by Robert King and Marc Norman.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 12/22/95 (wide)
Running Length: 2:04
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Violence, sexual situations, language)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Geena Davis, Matthew Modine, Frank Langella, Maury Chaykin, 
      Patrick Malahide
Director: Renny Harlin
Producers: Joel B. Michaels, Laurence Mark, James Gorman, and 
      Renny Harlin
Screenplay: Robert King and Marc Norman
Cinematography: Peter Levy
Music: John Debney
U.S. Distributor: United Artists Pictures
     Renny Harlin, whose previous directorial efforts include DIE HARD 2 
and CLIFFHANGER, seems fond of big, explosive action pictures.  
Unfortunately, excepting his debut (the middle film in the DIE HARD 
trilogy), plot coherency hasn't been a particularly important attribute 
of his movies.  CLIFFHANGER was little more than a series of spectacular 
stunts linked together by a paper-thin story.  If anything, the strands 
of logic in CUTTHROAT ISLAND are even thinner.  Fortunately, as a 
spectacle for the eye and ear, this high seas adventure is more than 
capable of capturing its audience's attention.  Holding it for more than 
two hours is a different matter altogether...
     By his own admission, Harlin patterned CUTTHROAT ISLAND loosely 
after CAPTAIN BLOOD and THE SEA HAWK, with his real-life wife, Geena 
Davis, taking the Errol Flynn role.  However, while the special effects 
and explosions here far outstrip Hollywood's early pirate movies, 
storyline, characterization, and acting are vastly inferior.  Thus, 
while CUTTHROAT ISLAND may have cost $70 million to produce, it's still 
a pale shadow of its predecessors.
     The "twist" here, as already mentioned, is that the hero is a 
female.  Davis doesn't plumb her acting skills deeply in this shallow 
portrayal of Morgan Adams, the captain of a pirate ship called the 
"Morning Star."  It's 1668 in the Caribbean, and she's on a treasure 
hunt.  Millions of pounds of gold are reportedly buried somewhere on 
Cutthroat Island, but the map to the treasure location is in three 
separate pieces, and Morgan possesses only one.  Each of the other 
sections is held by her uncles.  While Morgan is willing to make deals 
and share the wealth to put the maps together, her Uncle Dawg (Frank 
Langella) would rather take the more expedient route of killing everyone 
who gets in his way -- including his niece.
     The love interest, Shaw (the male Olivia DeHavilland?), is played 
in typically lackluster fashion by Matthew Modine (replacing Michael 
Douglas, who bowed out at the last moment).  Modine has absolutely no 
chemistry with co-star Davis, and watching these two together is about 
as exciting as sitting through those dumb slideshow commercials that 
precede movies in many theaters.  Frank Langella, who has apparently 
joined Dennis Hopper and James Woods as good foaming-at-the-mouth stock 
villains, does his usual shtick, although he's somehow not all that 
menacing here.  
     CUTTHROAT ISLAND is more entertaining for its dumb storyline and 
overt silliness than for its nearly nonstop action.  Technology plays 
its part in what the film has to offer, as well.  Some of the visuals 
are breathtaking (especially a scene where a pirate ship explodes).  
Sound editing is excellent and the score (written by John Debney and 
performed by the London Symphony Orchestra) is suitably rousing.  
CUTTHROAT ISLAND is a mindless diversion.  If, for whatever reason, you 
decide to go, maintain low expectations.  Hoping for more than a bunch 
of loud bangs and ridiculous dialogue will rob CUTTHROAT ISLAND of its 
amusement value.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
