Title
Review for Sister My Sister (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Carrie A Gorringe
Directed by Nancy Meckler. 
Written by Nancy Kesselman, from her play, "My Sister In This House". 
Starring Joely Richardson, Jodhi May, Julie Walters, Sophie Thursfield.
   The infamous Le Mans case of 1933, in which the Papin sisters, 
employed as maids, hacked their employers to death, has been fertile 
ground for writers most notably Jean Genet and his 1948 play "The 
Maids".  No doubt the concept of murder as a means to personal 
transcendence appealed to Genet (at least in the theoretical sense), 
himself not immune to the lure of crime (he wrote his first novel, 
"Our Lady of the Flowers"  in 1942 while serving a long prison 
sentence).  Born illegitimate in 1910, abandoned  when young, in 
reform school by the age of ten, in and out of prison until 1948, 
surviving when outside by hustling and theft, Genet understood 
perfectly both the rage of being an outsider and the compulsion that 
such an outsider has to belong to the society that rejects him or her.  
Fortunately, he had sufficient talent  and, with it, was able to oblige 
the literary world to accept him on his own terms;  granted, he was 
helped along the way by the approximately 150 years of Romantic 
literary theory that proceeded him and which permitted him, in a 
paraphrase of Susan Sontag's succinct analysis of the Romantic 
mindset, to enter the abyss of human existence and then to report 
back to the greater world concerning his findings.  But Genet's 
characters were those who could not file reports, their voices 
having been stymied by socio-economic deprivation.  They act out of 
desperation and in extreme fashion, having no other means of 
personal liberation, even though their liberation is temporary and 
will probably lead to self-destruction.
   Nancy Meckler's directorial debut, "Sister My Sister", 
inevitably draws from this literary source but there is a historical 
dimension added to the mix (courtesy of screenwriter Kesselman, 
who studied the original case extensively).  Christine (Richardson) 
has been a loyal and devoted servant to Madame Danzard (Walters) 
and her frumpy daughter Isabelle (Thursfield).  Danzard is imperious 
to the point of tyranny;  she not only inspects the results of her 
maid's dusting with the proverbial white gloves, but she crushes any 
hint of autonomy emanating from Isabelle as if it were an insect 
crawling out from underneath a lettuce leaf on her salad plate.  It is, 
quite obviously, the type of repressive atmosphere that would break 
the will of the most tempered of spirits, and, as the narrative 
informs us, Christine and her sister Lea (May) were abandoned  in a 
convent while very young by an indifferent mother, and poverty 
leaves Christine little choice but to accept the caprices of Madame 
Danzard.  Nevertheless, by the time that Christine decides to bring 
her younger sister to the Danzard household to work as a maid, 
Christine and Madame Danzard have settled into a social detente 
which is somewhat unsettled around the edges (Christine's 
resentment of her inferior position vis-a-vis this domestic tyrant is 
already apparent, if of necessity muted), but functional.  The 
fragility of this arrangement is made apparent from the moment 
that Lea enters the household.  Lea, her spirit not as inhibited as 
that of her sister, chafes under the rigidity of Madame Danzard's 
rules.  Soon, under the force of Lea's personality, Christine is soon 
set on the course of rebellion leading to murder, a situation 
exacerbated by the sisters' increasingly incestuous closeness.
   "Sister My Sister" contains exquisitely measured 
performances from all of the principals at least for the first forty-
five minutes.  As portrayed by Walters, Madame Danzard has all the 
warmth of liquid nitrogen, and has the same upon those who are 
unfortunate enough to have to endure her presence, especially in the 
case of her daughter. Thursfield allows the character of Isabelle to 
subtly seethe with resentment not only over the physical 
attractiveness of the maids who serve her but also over the glaring 
irony that despite her mother's brutal treatment of them, they have 
more freedom than she, with all of her financial privilege, can ever 
hope for.   Isabelle's spirit is broken, its shards capable only of 
rising up on occasion to sting their owner in her spite.  Indeed, all of 
the characters in this bourgeois prison seem as if they are about to 
splinter into pieces at the first forbidden word spoken aloud.  During 
the first half of this film, Richardson gives Christine a sense of  
self-control that is at once  so palpable and so fragile that her eyes 
can convey a lifetime's worth of indescribable pain in one glance;  
her prickliness is such that it appears as if she might head into the 
stratosphere within two seconds if someone so much as brushed 
against her inadvertently.  May perfectly captures the facade of 
breezy insouciance and what lies underneath it that is necessary for 
Lea to become the catalyst for the tragedy about to unfold.  As the 
outsider who destroys the perverse equilibrium of the Danzard 
household,  and who must do so because she cannot conform to its 
demands, it is Lea who is the most deeply troubled of the four 
women.  She is willful and transcendent;  not wishing to serve 
others, she wants others to serve her.  And yet, given her socio-
economic position, she can act neither openly nor, it might be 
argued, consciously.  Therefore, Lea's only hope is to reestablish the 
interdependent relationship that she shared with her sister at the 
convent.  Only after that has happened can events proceed to their 
illogical conclusion.  
   It would seem from the above that "Sister My Sister" has all 
of the necessary elements for a successful film.  However, the 
central hinge of the script -- that of the incestuous relationship 
developing between the two sisters -- becomes less covert and 
subtle and far too explicit and clumsy.  The explicitness belongs not 
so much to the realm of pornography than to that of overblown 
melodrama ripe enough to verge upon the rotten. The maids' frantic 
search for sensuality within the family sphere bears no resemblance 
to the world of the titillatingly erotic, but it does belong to the 
realm of the desperate.  By virtue of an emotionally and financially-
deprived upbringing, Christine and Lea are so lacking in both 
opportunity and imagination that their lesbian relationship can not 
be seen as a liberating force for either of the participants;  indeed, 
their obsession with each other suggests the behaviour of two 
survivors of a shipwreck who know that their drowning is imminent. 
Yet, for all of the deeply evocative portrayals of these women by 
Richardson and May, and the sympathy engendered thereby, the affair 
itself assumes an almost risible quality to the extent that it would 
have severely undermined the narrative trajectory had there not 
been a flashback at the beginning of the film to remind the viewer 
that these increasingly indiscreet writhings on screen will have 
deadly intent by the final reel.  Only that thin thread prevents the 
film from going under by the force of its own stupidity.  The switch 
in acting style from restraint to hyperbole doesn't help matters very 
much, since it undermines the careful pacing that Meckler 
established from the beginning, not to mention any interest in how 
the film will end because the denouement has been given away.  As 
the film's pace becomes almost dizzying in its intensity, the 
suspense is killed right along with Madame Danzard and her 
daughter, and the maids' relationship merely stands there looking 
overblown. 
   In sum, Meckler should have realised how thin the line is 
between the suspenseful and the asinine when one is dealing with 
extremes of emotion.  Yet, "Sister My Sister" is worth seeing, 
provided that one can stomach the film's alternations between the 
realms of overwrought sexuality and violence.
-- 
Carrie Gorringe                           gorringe@utcc.utoronto.caFILM REVIEWS     http://www.demon.co.uk/london-calling/filmmus.htmlLondon Calling Internet           Indepedent Entertainment Magazine

Author
Jason Becker
This is an excellent film from Director Nancy Meckler. An adaptation of a true 
story of two sisters who become lovers; the performances by Joely Richardson 
and Jodhi May (the sisters) are inspiring. The intimacy between the two is 
touching and beautiful (and erotic). I especially liked the direction of these 
scenes - in particular, the breathing of the sister Lea.
The most convincing true love story since The Professional's Leon and Matilda.
I must also praise the screenplay. I thought that I might have to be 
patient with this film but that wasn't the case at all! From beginning to 
end the film had me hooked. 

Author
Christopher Null
     Now it's getting ridiculous.  This is the *third*
two-women-kill-an-old-lady movie in the last year.  While the first
two, HEAVENLY CREATURES and FUN, were both spectacular pictures, SISTER
MY SISTER is an unfortunate embarrassment.
     The aforementioned two women are Christine (Joely Richardson) and
Lea (Jodhi May), close-knit, questionably sane sisters employed as
maids for the domineering Madame Danzard (Julie Walters).  The girls
slave for low wages, and what they do earn is inevitably taken by their
greedy mother.  The theme of "All they have is each other" is truly
beaten over your head in no uncertain terms.  When things start to get
bad, the maids turn to the film's other theme for solace:  "There's no
problem a little incest can't cure."  When things get their worst, only
wholesale slaughter will do.
     The film claims to be "based on actual events" in 1932 France.
This may be true, but writer Wendy Kesselman (who somehow also wrote a
stage play for this) could have spiced things up a little bit,
especially considering the subject matter.  Instead, we're presented a
lifeless melodrama with as much fanfare as a week-old fish.  The cast
does a great job with what there is, unfortunately resulting in good
acting that is just terribly boring.  Director Nancy Meckler provides a
few nice touches, but not nearly enough to save the film from wallowing
in its pretense.
     Like most period pieces, the filmmakers obviously felt very
strongly about getting SISTER MY SISTER made without corrupting the
integrity of the story and the picture.  And like most period pieces,
this was accomplished only through a total disregard for the audience.
It's a surprising example of what not to do.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-E-mail request to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1994 
Running Length: 1:29 
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Sex, violence, mature themes) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
     Because of the universally negative reaction to incest, it's a 
subject rarely tackled by motion pictures -- especially when that incest 
is lesbian in nature.  Therefore, in its depiction of the twisted 
relationship between co-dependent sisters, SISTER MY SISTER is unique.  
Like HEAVENLY CREATURES, this tale of frantic love and brutal murder is 
based on a true story.  While Nancy Meckler's film lacks the 
completeness of Peter Jackson's, the two movies together represent a 
fascinating study of parallels in obsession-based murder. 
     SISTER MY SISTER opens with a brief prologue showing sisters 
Christine (Joely Richardson) and Lea (Jodhi May) as little girls.  It's 
clear that the younger Lea is Mother's favorite; the parental reaction 
to Christine borders on contempt.  The scene then shifts ahead some two 
decades, to a small provincial town in 1932 France.  Christine, working 
as a maid for Madame Danzard (Julie Walters) and her plain daughter 
Isabelle (Sophie Thursfield), has managed to persuade Lea to join her in 
service.  Reunited at last, and out from under their mother's control, 
the two sisters rejoice.  Meanwhile, Madame Danzard finds the 
arrangement quite suitable, since she gets two maids for the price of 
one. 
     But Christine and Lea's relationship has already been poisoned by 
their mother's favoritism.  Lea, painfully shy and uncertain of herself, 
needs Christine's approval for everything.  The older sister, on the 
other hand, harbors a barely-concealed rage that occasionally finds form 
in tempestuous explosions.  She protects her sister with a fierce 
jealousy that goes beyond the rational.  As time passes, the sisters 
spend almost all their free hours cloistered in their upstairs room, 
hiding from a world that they no longer feel a part of.  In the process, 
their relationship crosses the line from platonic to sexual.   
     One of the most unusual elements of SISTER MY SISTER is that it's 
peppered with comic moments.  However, rather than lightening the mood, 
the humor deepens the story's uneasy tone.  Put simply, we get the 
feeling that we're laughing when we shouldn't be, and that sensation is 
exactly what the director is aiming for.  Intense performances by Joely 
Richardson (I'LL DO ANYTHING) and Jodhi May (THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS) 
possess an unsettling quality, and the entire movie leaves a lingering 
impression.  Character motivation is not as detailed as in HEAVENLY 
CREATURES, and certain elements of the protagonists' pasts remain 
ambiguous, but there's enough to lend resonance to the climax.  
     The greatest failing of this film is its flat presentation of 
Madame Danzard and her daughter.  Julie Walters gives a hilarious, over-
the-top performance as a prototypical high society snob, but there's 
nothing real about Madame Danzard -- she's a pure stereotype with barely 
a trace of any human sensibility.  This kind of simpleminded portrayal 
belongs in a different motion picture.  Meckler is somewhat ambivalent 
about Isabelle, occasionally lumping her with her mother in the 
caricature mold, but at other times allowing the audience to glimpse a 
more evenhanded personality.   
     SISTER MY SISTER is daring, and would have received more attention 
had the superior HEAVENLY CREATURES not reached the screen first (both 
movies went before cameras at about the same time).  The story raises a 
lot of questions about where the division lies between healthy and 
diseased love, and the sorts of tragic results that can come when humans 
are subjected to unreasonable repression.  Although those easily 
offended will find SISTER MY SISTER unbearable, even the most liberal 
viewer will leave the theater affected by the naked passions laid bare 
during the course of the film. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
