Title
Review for Glaneurs et la glaneuse, Les (2000)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Robin Clifford
The gleaners of yesteryear were peasant women who rummaged for the bits of 
wheat left over from the harvest. Documentary filmmaker Agnes Varda studies 
the modern day foragers of France who now glean (or, gather) everything 
from grapes to garbage to clocks without hands in "The Gleaners & I." 
This is an uneven little documentary that benefits, greatly, from its 
untapped subject matter. As far as I know, there has not been another film 
to cover the lifestyle of the gleaners of the world, and the grandma of 
French New Wave cinema, Varda, gives us a unique view into an unusual 
world. 
The original gleaners had been such a presence in the old agrarian culture 
of France that it eventually became the institutionalized right of the 
practitioners of the gathering art. Today, legal statutes guarantee that 
the traditional rights of the gleaner continue, unfettered, following the 
harvests throughout the country. We learn about the differences between the 
gleaners, who turn the earth to find their treasures, and the pickers, who 
invade the vineyards and orchards after the harvest. There is even a 
subculture that reserves the right to glean oysters following that harvest. 
Varda goes on to compare the nature of gleaning and the similar methods 
that the urban homeless use to garner enough to eat and live, without 
money, in the cities. The marketplaces that carry the fresh produce for the 
urban areas, at the end of the day, become the place for the scavengers to 
go to search for anything that is left behind. Fresh fruit and veggies, 
cheese, meat and fish are gathered to feed those who take the time to live 
off of the land. 
Varda's roving video camera follows other modern gleaners who choose to 
collect the cast-asides of society, like TV's, refrigerators and stoves, to 
repair and sell to survive. Still other foragers use the public's detritus 
for more esoteric uses, like artistic expression. Today, gleaning is not 
just for wheat gatherers anymore. 
Agnes Varda captures some fascinating moments during the course of "The 
Gleaners & I," but as I said earlier, the effort is uneven. Some of the 
more interesting stories and styles are given short shrift, while other, 
less interesting, subjects are given far too much air time. Varda also 
intrudes herself in the film (the "& I" of the title) in an effort to show 
that she, with her video camera, is simply another gleaner let loose on the 
world. When the documentarian chooses to be a subject and not just an 
observer, attention is taken from the real subject. She indulges, in one 
far too long a scene, in taping a dangling lens cap from a camera left 
running. The dance of the cap reps Varda's own gleaning of the images she 
captures, accidentally or not. Mostly, her intruding is an annoyance in 
what is otherwise an interesting documentary. 
I give a qualified recommendation for "The Gleaners & I" since it offers a 
view into a world unknown to us. In fact, with the American obsession with 
rights of privacy and property, the gleaner could not even exist here, but 
continues to thrive in France. I give it a C+. 
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com 

Author
Jonathan Richards
THE GLEANERS AND I (Les Glaneurs et la Glaneuse)
     In New York City, people put out their unwanted furniture one night 
a week, and in my garret days my apartment and those of many of my 
friends were furnished with items rescued from curbside a step ahead of 
the trash collectors.  I still have a piece or two of these foraged 
treasures.  Like most of us, I am a sort of gleaner.
     Traditionally, gleaners are people who gather what's been left in 
the fields after the crop has been harvested.  By extension they're 
scavengers, people who live off the fat of the land and society's 
careless excess.  By further extension they're artists who turn waste 
into beauty.  And by one more extension, they're Agnes Varda, the 
extraordinary French filmmaker known as the Grandmother of the New Wave, 
who has been creating films for nearly half a century (Cleo From 5 to 7; 
One Sings, the Other Doesn't).
     In her wonderful new documentary about people who, out of 
necessity, principle, obsession, or just for the fun of it, gather up 
the discards of a disposable society, Varda herself is a gleaner of 
stories and people on the fringes of everyday life.  Armed with her 
digital camera, her photographer's eye, her irrepressible wit, her 
curiosity, and her social conscience, she gathers the gatherers into a 
film that is informative and funny and wise.
     Les Glaneurs, a famous 1867 painting by French Barbizon painter 
Jean-FranE7ois Millet, shows three peasant women in a wheat field =
gathering up what had been left behind after the harvest.  Varda visits 
this painting at the MusE9e d'Orsay, and then takes us out on a =
gleaning expedition of her own.  We go to potato fields and apple 
orchards, market stalls and restaurant dumpsters. We meet patrons of a 
rural bar who explain the difference between "gleaning" and "picking", 
and a black-robed lawyer who quotes statute and verse on ancient 
gleaning rights established back in 1554 by the young King Henry IV.  We 
visit with a salvage artist whose medium is what people cast aside: 
"Where others see a cluster of junk, I see a cluster of opportunity."
     There is not quite enough material here even for this film's modest 
82 minute length, and so it tends to double back on itself from time to 
time.  But the people are amiable, and Varda is in no hurry.  From time 
to time she shows us shots of her own graying hair and liver-spotted, 
wrinkled skin as she muses about the always surprising phenomenon of 
aging.  From a junk pile, she salvages a clock with no hands.  Varda, in 
her 70s, is not one to countenance waste, and she makes it clear she is 
committed to gleaning abundant riches out of what remains of her time 
here. 

Author
Laura Clifford
THE GLEANERS AND I (Les Glaneurs et la Glaneuse)
Septuagenarian filmmaker Agnes Varda ("Vagabond"), frequently called the 
grandmother of the French New Wave, caught a bit on television about the 
amount of money lost by a wheat farmer if his combine wasn't adjusted
properly.
This made Varda, an art lover, recall the famous Millet painting 'Les
Glaneuses'
and the idea of taking to the road to investigate this rural activity and
its modern counterparts gave birth to her award winning documentary, "The 
Gleaners and I."
Varda's film is an unusual combination of a diary reflecting on her own
aging, a road trip, and the documentation of the economic, societal, cultural 
and artistic reasons that people have for gathering the refuse of others.
While sometimes Varda's digressions indulgently stray too far from her
main theme, for the most part she's found a rhythm that can tie rural,
post-harvest gleaning to a court case involving homeless youngesters who 
vandalized a market.  When she veers from a family who've discovered an 
abandoned vineyard to spend a minute on her own camcorder's dangling lens
cap, 
frustration felt by the viewer is quickly assuaged by her good natured spirit.
Of course, Varda makes a point that filmmakers themselves are gleaners,
and that dancing lens cap footage may just be proof that one man's wasted
videotape is another's art.  Varda uses famous paintings of gleaners to
segue to stories of artists who recycle trash to create new works.  Then,
in another aside, Varda ventures into a second store because she's charmed
by the sign (''curios' is common, but 'finds' is more inviting,' she says) and
fatefully discovers an oil painting of gleaners in the field!
Varda has conversations with the many types of gleaners she comes across.
There's a chef who charges $100 a plate for meals he prepares from his
gleanings and a financially secure man who only eats from the trash in
protest of the waste he sees all around him.  A funny sequence gets as
many interpretations of the law that governs the gleaning around oyster 
beds as people providing them.  Varda admires a 'Trash is Beautiful'
educational program that teaches kids about recycling, then notes that 
they're only exposed to pretty pieces of plastic and have probably never
shook the hand of a garbageman.
At 82 minutes, "The Gleaners and I" covers a lot of territory.  Not only
does it provoke thoughts about waste in general, it engages us with an impish 
senior still breaking new ground in the art of filmmaking.  As Varda cuts from
a shot of her own wrinkled hand to a Rembrandt, she reflects 'It's always
the same, a self portrait.'
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
