Title
Review for Rajio no jikan (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Rick Scoggin
About a week ago my wife and I just wanted see a funny movie. We
took a chance on a film at the Portland International Film
Festival, a recent Japanese movie titled Welcome Back, Mr.
McDonald. The whole movie takes place in a Tokyo radio station
where a live radio drama is being done. With the housewife author
in the studio, the prima donna lead actress demands a major
script change and soon the other actors are insisting on their
own script changes. The seat of the pants rewrites, live acting,
special effects and chaos, all on the edge of going completely
out of control, is hilarious. As soon as things slow down a bit,
something else is uproarious. My wife and I hadn't laughed so
long at a movie in a long time. The local movie reviewer was less
than totally enthusiastic about this movie because of the
"determined lightness of the material." And though he gave the
movie a B-, he admitted that "charm and fun are in high supply."
But sometimes you want to go to movie just to laugh a lot and
have a good time. You don't want high art or messages all the
time; you want to see well done hilarity. And this movie really
was a funny, funny surprise, that you could laugh out loud at. My
wife and I are hoping that this will be like Shall We Dance from
Japan a couple years ago. After we saw that at the International
Film Festival, it gained wider distribution a few months later
and was a hit in the US. I'd urge everyone who wants a funny
comedy to see this if it comes around to your area in a film
festival sometime in the future. And it's a family movie! Anyone
over 10 would love this. There is no sex or bad language! I'd
rate this a solid B+. Keep your eyes open for it!
For more movie reviews (including foreign films and classic
movies), conservative commentary, or classical CD reviews go to
www.ricksreviews.com
Conservative Commentary:
www.ricksreviews.com/conservativeopinion.htm
Movie Reviews: www.ricksreviews.com/moviereviews.htm
Classical CD Reviews: www.ricksreviews.com/classicalcdreviews.htm
* Sent from RemarQ http://www.remarq.com The Internet's Discussion Network *
The fastest and easiest way to search and participate in Usenet - Free!

Author
Foong Ngai Hoe (Y.Yoshi)
Drama Behind the Drama
=================
Radio can be visually engaging, since everything happens in the
listeners imagination. So I was told while attending radio production
lectures. So Ushijima, the producer in 'Welcome Back Mr. McDonald' says.
And hes right. Remember those late-night radio dramas; those
soap-operas on the airwaves? Even in this digital age, theres still a
certain charm to this medium.
'Welcome Back Mr McDonald' (McDonald) is a film about what goes on
behind a live radio drama, 'Unmei no Onna' (Woman of Destiny). Miyako
Suzuki, whos otherwise just another Japanese housewife, takes part in a
drama writing competition held by a broadcasting station and wins on her
first ever script. Naturally, shes thrilled that her script will be
heard live on the stations midnight programme, but with the show going
on air soon, the shows star, Nokko, insists on changing the heorines
name  and before one knows it, everyones changing the script --
impromptu -- even as the show is being broadcast.
>From Ritsuko and Torazo, the characters become Mary Jane and Peter
Michael (and then Donald McDonald). From Japan, the locale is switched
to Chicago. And what was a Japanese romance between a pachinko woman and
a fisherman soon becomes an exaggerated melodrama involving a woman
lawyer, a NASA pilot, and whatnot. The final straw for the soft-spoken
housewife comes when Nokko decides to kill off the hero at the end of
the story.
'McDonald' revolves around the drama behind the drama. As the cast and
crew for 'Unmei no Onna' find themselves in deeper trouble with each
script-change, the drama within the studio quickly overshadows whats on
air, as egos clash and tempers flare  all to hliarious effect.
'McDonald' features a solid cast of personalities like Akira Fuse,
Toshiyuki Hosokawa, Jun Inoue, Keiko Toda, and Toshiaki Karasawa, to
name a few. The cast is so comfortable in their respective roles youd
assume they really enjoyed working on the film. And just as well too,
since its the interesting characters in 'McDonald'  rather than the
plot -- that really drive the story. For instance, Miyako, the hapless
housewife/script-writer, has become so emotionally attached to her alter
ego and heroine, Mary Jane (who was Ritsuko), that the idea of an
unhappy ending becomes unbearable.
'McDonald' is a mainstream production. While it does make fun of Japans
obsession with things American, its still a typical laugh-a-minute
comedy. The film doesnt try being too plausible. In fact, some of the
things in the film  like the way they interrupt the transmission with
one commercial after another  isnt something professionals in the
business can get away with. Besides, not many studios do their dramas
live anymore for obvious reasons.
Yet by not resorting to slapstick, and by craftily relating the drama
off air to the live show, youd soon be wooed into believing that yes,
anything CAN happen. The idea isnt fresh, and the plot is a simple
albeit outrageous one, but every character in the show is so endearing,
you just cant think otherwise.
If theres a blemish in 'McDonald', its the films slow start.
'McDonald' really picks up when Nokko begins making her demands, but
until then it's rather unhappening. With so many characters appearing
right at the start, some in the audience might also be be grappling with
whos who for a while. But then, these are things youre likely to
forgive by the end of film.
'McDonald' made me laugh. 'McDonald' made me cry (mostly from laughing
too much, actually); and most of all, this fel-good comedy made me walk
out of the theatre with a stupid grin on my face. And mind you, I dont
do that often.
Whoever said radios dying this day and age? It has never looked any
better on the screen.

Author
Steve Rhodes
A live radio drama is the setting for writer/director Koki Mitani's
enchanting, screwball comedy, WELCOME BACK, MR. MCDONALD.  Even if it
doesn't generate many laughs, it's good-spirited tone will put a smile
in your heart, and its rousing ending will likely have you applauding.
The tension mounts on the set as the first production of a new radio
drama series is getting under way.  They'll be live shortly with an
original drama by housewife Miyako Suzuki (Kyoka Suzuki).  She proudly
won a writing contest with her first script, a would-be autobiographical
drama titled "Woman of Destiny."  (That she learns that she was the sole
entrant diminishes her pride only a little.)
Played as an heroic milquetoast by Kyoka Suzuki, the writer becomes the
dramatic lead in what is mainly a comedy.  The shy writer would be
scared of her shadow, if she were only brave enough to look at it.
Although she doesn't like it, she allows herself to be pushed around by
a bunch of egocentric actors, who demand more changes in the script than
you can count.
The temperamental star of the radio drama, Nokko Senbon (Keiko Toda),
demands the first of a series of alterations to the narrative.  She
wants a foreign name, Mary Jane, for her character.  And she doesn't
want to work in a mundane pachinko parlor, instead she demands to be a
high powered New York lawyer.  (Typical of the story's comedy is the
change they make as the drama is on live.  Figuring that their
machinegun scene would have to be in Chicago, they change everything to
Chicago seconds before the actors speak their lines.)
Once Senbon gets her requests, everything falls apart in real-time.  The
writer begrudgingly makes the adjustments as fast as she can.  The movie
imparts a real feel of the excitement of both radio drama and of a live
production, both dying art forms.
The film, while at first seems easy to write off as trivially
uninteresting, soon grows on you as the eminently likable characters
work their charms.  With such a wonderful, hard-working ensemble cast,
the movie could have succeeded with a bad script, which this one isn't.
Oh, it isn't much of one, but it constantly surprises you in simple but
magical ways.  And the picture is beautifully filmed in warm inviting
colors by Kenji Takama and Junichi Tozawa.
In a movie with a large number of delightful little moments and
characters, none is better than an old guard (Shirô Namiki).  Once a
sound effects man, he now passes his time as the building's guard by
playing on his Gameboy.  It is to him the director turns in a moment,
actually several moments, of panic.  The guard knows all of the tricks.
Machine guns are easy, you just need a box of pistachio nuts -- he
points out that Americans prefer using corn, but pistachios are better.
"Try not to put so much faith in your machines," he admonishes the
director.  The movie thus seems to be telling studios, by implication,
not to put so much faith in expensive special effects.  Concentrate
instead on the basics, starting with the acting.
WELCOME BACK, MR. MCDONALD runs 1:40.  The film is in Japanese with easy
to follow English subtitles.  It is not rated but would be a G, as it is
appropriate for all ages.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
With Masahiko Nishimura, Toshiaki Karasawa
     Welcome Back Mr. McDonald is flat-out hilarious.  On the surface 
it's a screwball comedy about a live Tokyo radio drama that comes 
unraveled.  On the next level it's about making movies, about show 
business, about the unlimited potential for disaster in a collaborative 
medium which gives sanctuary to Godzilla-sized egos.  And moving along 
to another level, it's about contemporary Japanese society with its 
pressures to Westernize and its pressures to maintain tradition.  You 
can worry about all those levels on your own time, but first, you'll 
just have to sit there and laugh.
     A young housewife (Kyoka Suzuki) has won a contest (she was the 
lone entrant) with her script for an original radio play, a soapy 
romance called "The Woman of Destiny".  The dress rehearsal goes 
smoothly, but shortly before airtime the lead actress (Keiko Toda) 
declares herself uncomfortable with her character's name and demands 
that it be changed.  It seems a fairly harmless bit of temperament.  But 
it's the first stone that starts the avalanche.  I won't even tell you 
what name she settles on, or try to walk you through the frenetic plot 
developments that careen with the speed and unpredictability of 
electrons zipping off the walls of an atom.  But once the harried 
producer (Masahiko Nishimura) has opened the door by agreeing to the 
name change, there's no kicking it shut again.  Each change requires 
another, in geometric progression, until chaos reigns during the live 
broadcast.
     This is one of the most delicious showbiz send-ups since Soapdish 
and Broadcast News.  It may not have the character development of those 
classics, but it's got the freshness and the madcap pace, and it shines 
with both derision and affection for the medium it lampoons.  It's a 
first film by writer-director Koki Mitani, who was the founder of an 
alternative theater company called The Tokyo Sunshine Boys.  He adapted 
his own stage farce to the screen, and although the action is largely 
confined to the innards of a radio studio, it never feels constricted. 
     Screwball comedy has pretty much gone the way of the running board 
and the vinyl record.  The modern substitute is gross-out humor, a form 
that puts a low premium on wit and a high value on bodily sounds and 
fluids.  Welcome Back, Mr. McDonald harkens back to a comedy style that 
provoked a wonderfully satisfying laughter.  Welcome back, indeed.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: Very funny TV-like situation comedy of people trying to
put on a live radio play and having to change the plot many times mid-
broadcast.  The territory it covers is very, very much like the
American cable TV show "Remember WENN."  Somehow the plot seems a
little thin for a feature film, but still a lot of fun.  Rating: 6 (0
to 10), 1 (-4 to +4)
   - Written and directed by Koki Mitani.
   - Staff of radio station is putting on an amateur play that won a
     contest.  Turns out that this was really the only entrant in the
     contest.
   - The play is not screened by all parties involved and the initial
     changes are to correct the redundancy of "lift up."  A prima donna
     actor insists on a name change.  This is the first spark of a
     firestorm of plot changes.
   - Story within story gets more and more contrived and absurd.
   - Story could have been done on American Movie Channel's "Remember
     WENN."  In fact something very similar probably was done.
   - Some of the contrivances of getting around restrictions on the
     script are fairly humorous.
   - Fairly believable set of script changes.  Director said that all
     had happened at one time or another to him when working at a
     station.  A good reason why radio drama is taped.
