Title
Review for Regeneration (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Teachers sometimes learn more from their students than
pupils learn from them (in fact they almost always do).  So
why should psychiatrists be any different?  In the classic case
of an analyst's being affected more by his patient than the
latter is influenced by him, Peter Shaffer's play "Equus," Dr.
Martin Dysart questions the vitality of his own life after hearing
of the unabandoned midnight rides of the obsessive Alan
Strang.  In the film "Regeneration," directed by Gillies
Mackinnon, based on Booker Prize-winning author Pat
Barker's novel, a psychiatrist is so distressed, upset, moved
by his shellshocked patients that he is in danger of
experiencing a breakdown himself.
   Allan Scott has adapted the book to the screen, a difficult
conversion in that Pat Barker's novel contained no scenes of
actual World War I battle.  Scott appended several scenes
from the trenches to give the audience a visual and emotional
understanding of what went through the minds of the Scottish
soldiers to cause them such anguish that they could no longer
fight.  In one case, that of Billy Prior (Jonny Lee Miller), the
officer went completely mute and could not recall the
traumatic event or events that rendered him incapable of
speech and therefore unable to command his unit.  In the
more politically and philosophically interesting situation,
Siegfried Sassoon (James Wilby), an officer who received the
Iron Cross for bravery and one who is loved by his men, is
sent to the mental institution though he is perfectly sane.  An
educated man, he had written a pamphlet criticizing the British
government for pursuing what he calls a war of aggression
against the enemy, not a battle between English angels and
German devils.  Cynically enough, the hospital--with its
spacious grounds and caring professional care--exists not to
grant men who are serving their country the honest treatment
which is due.  Its purpose is to patch them up so that they
can be returned to active duty, the staff judged by their ability
to carry out this task.  It falls on the shoulders of Dr. William
Rivers (Jonathan Pryce) to persuade the very sane Siegfried
Sassoon to recant his declaration so that he may avoid
scandalizing the government any more.  If he refuses to
recant, he may have to remain in this safe sanitarium for the
duration of the war; but in doing so, he is likely to be afflicted
with the same survivors' guilt that threatens to envelope Billy
Prior.
   If the names Siegried Sasson and Dr. William Rivers sound
familiar, that is because the film and the book are based on
real characters.  Siegfried Sassoon is not only a brave soldier
who proves himself twice in combat but a mentor to the most
famous British bard of World War I themes, Wilfred Owen
(Stuart Bunce), whom Sassoon advises to stop writing poetry
about love and instead to transcribe lyrics from his own war
experiences.
   Director Mackinnon takes us from the muddy trenches
which saw much of the fighting in the First World War to the
hospital (actually a 13th century castle outside Edinburgh) and
back again to the front to give the viewers a realization of how
combat can provide the stress which leads to nervous
collapse.  He hones in on an experimental treatment actually
used by a Dr. Yealland (John Neville), shock therapy which
uses pain to compel patients to shape up and which works--
though it provokes questions of whether the end justifies the
means.  He explores a tender love affair between Billy Prior
and a local factory worker, a romance which helps the
formerly mute officer to recover his sanity without the anguish
of Dr. Yealland's questionable methods.
   Perhaps we're all overwhelmed by Steven Spielberg's
success in showing us the horrors of war in "Saving Private
Ryan" to be taken in by the obviously far less expensive
"Regeneration."  With Mackinnon's movie released just weeks
after Spielberg's, we're unable to appreciate the terror faced
by these officers in the trenches during the period 1914-1919. 
The pallid battlefield mise en scene is wholly unconvincing,
and in one particular instance--when Sassoon leads a furious
solo charge against a German bunker after seeing a friend
killed by a sniper--he looks like a kid playing army with his
pals.  Despite noble attempts by veteran actors Jonathan
Pryce, James Wilby and Jonny Lee Miller, their interplay lacks
chemistry, appearing more like a chit chat between friends
over afternoon tea.  
   "Regeneration" certainly has its purple heart in the right
place but the overall impression is one of a dour, inert
meditation more suitable to the printed page than the celluloid
stage.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     REGENERATION, inspired by some actual events from World War I, 
tells the story of the imprisoned poet, Siegfried Sassoon.  Sas, a 
military officer played by James Wilby from MAURICE and HOWARD'S END, is 
sent to a Scottish hospital when he writes an illegal pamphlet against 
the war.  The authorities figure that, once ensconced in a hospital for 
the shell shocked and insane, his protests will be completely 
discredited.
     Sas, the winner of a medal for bravery at the front, is not your 
typical conscientious objector.  Sas is the type of officer who arranges 
for his men to have tea after any long march.  He is not against all 
wars.  It is just that he thinks this one has become hopeless and is 
being needlessly prolonged.
     As Dr. William Rivers, Sas's sympathetic doctor, Jonathan Pryce 
gives a sincere performance.  Caring for his charges is inducing a sort 
of shell shocked behavior in the doctor as well.
     Stuart Bunce plays Wilfred Owen, who is claimed to have produced 
some of the best poetry to come out of the war.  Sas mentors Owen, who 
is a fellow patient.
     Jonny Lee Miller, as Billy Prior, comes mute to the hospital.  The 
film explains that mutism is an affliction that only struck the upper 
classes during the war.  The lower classes developed completely 
different problems.  Even diseases it seems are class conscious.  Once 
cured of his mutism, Billy goes on to form a romantic entanglement with 
Sarah (Tanya Allen), a local "munitionette."  Their small love story has 
a natural, unforced quality that the rest of the film lacks.
     Although the stories in the film are moving, director Gillies 
MacKinnon (A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE) is never able to weave them into a 
compelling whole.  The battlefield scenes shown in flashback are 
singularly unrealistic looking.  One attack has the men slowly falling 
like toddlers lying down for a nap.
     The movie's visuals can be stunning.  Set in a bleak but sharply 
lit Scottish winter, Glen MacPherson's cinematography will have your 
bones shaking as you admire the beauty of the countryside.
     A few times REGENERATION says something enough out of the ordinary 
to make you think.  Typical of these is Billy's reflection that a battle 
charge is just like sex, "exciting and ridiculous."  Too bad more of the 
movie wasn't as provocative.
     REGENERATION runs 1:53.  It is rated R for war violence and would 
be fine teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
