Title
Review for Night at the Roxbury, A (1998)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Steve Rhodes
Two brothers with the sexual sophistication of AUSTIN POWERS and the IQs
of DUMB & DUMBER lead a SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER life in A NIGHT AT THE
ROXBURY.  Although the story is set in the late 1990s, the brothers live
a disco life firmly grounded in the times of THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO and
54.  Their lines are lifted straight out of JERRY MAGUIRE and one of
their weddings is taken directly from THE GRADUATE.  Other movies make
guest appearances as well.
A NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY, featuring "Saturday Night Live" stars Will
Ferrell and Chris Kattan as Steve and Doug Butabi, is a comedic groaner.
This is a comedy, whose one joke consists of two guys bobbing their
heads to the film's wonderfully energetic music.  The joke wears thin
very fast.  Like synchronized swimmers, the brothers, always dressed
gaudily in iridescent blues and purples, move their heads and hands to
the pulse of the music wherever they are, whether it be in a crowded
elevator or a car.  The later is dangerous since Doug keeps breaking the
car window with his dancing head.  Everything the brothers do they do
together, right down to their morning nose hair trimming ritual.  They
are their own 2-person drill team with perfectly coordinated movements.
Some of you will find funny their routine of putting candy in the nose
of one brother and then in the mouth of the other.  If so, then you are
likely part of the target audience for A NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY.  Most
viewers, however, will find it a film with a few genuine good laughs but
not many.
Filmed by Francis Kenny in grainy, over-saturated colors, the movie has
a cheap appearance that looks almost like it was shot on videotape and
later transferred to film stock.
To the extent that the movie has a plot, it revolves around the two
brothers' wanting to get into an exclusive disco-style nightclub named
"The Roxbury."  They want to talk the owner into funding their idea for
a new style of club -- don't ask -- so they can stop working at their
father's flower shop.  In a film that works best at the physical comedy,
the brother's dancing style comes straight from the NFL playbook for
offensive tackles.  A dangerous twosome to be around, they fling their
partners around the room like steel balls in a pinball machine.
The brothers are two obnoxious 20-something virgins who make crude
passes at every woman they meet, but their dates manage to outdo the
guy's tacky come-on lines.  "If I said you had a nice body," asks one of
their dates.  "Would you hold it against me?"  Another explains her
sexual sophistication.  "Remember, I go to college," she remarks
seriously.  "Translation: Drunken orgies with occasional Cliff Notes."
If you've seen the movie's annoying trailers, you've already seen the
best parts.  Compared to A NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY, the sporadically funny
MAFIA! from earlier this summer is a comedic masterpiece.
This much is certain.  After you leave the theater, even if you forget
most of the lame humor, which is likely, the music will stay with you.
Buy the CD and skip the movie.
A NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY runs just 1:27.  It is rated PG-13 for brief
nudity, sexual situations, and a little profanity and would be fine for
kids 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Luke Buckmaster
A NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY
Cast: Will Ferrell, Chris Kattan, Dan Hedaya, Molly Shannon, Richard
Grieco, Loni Anderson, Elisa Donovan, Gigi Rice, Meredith Scott Lynn,
Chazz Palminteri
Director: John Fortenberry
Screenplay: Steve Koren and Will Ferrell & Chris Kattan
Australian theatrical release: May 13, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
1 and a half stars
If you fart-ass around all your life, it seems, you will be led to
greater things.  At least, that's what happens in A Night at the
Roxbury, a comedy of errors that was a big one to begin with.  There was
barely enough material here to maintain a five minute skit, let alone a
ninety minute feature that bumbles, stumbles and fumbles through its
running time. If you're akin to this type of silly, silly humor, the
film might be goofy enough to warrant a sitting - but otherwise, I'd
advise everybody to stay well clear of this tiresome piece of humdrum
filmmaking.  In defense of the film, I can honestly say that I did enjoy
it, before the ridiculously unintelligent characters became irritating,
and before the script became boring and problematic.  Trouble is, that
happened about fifteen minutes in.
The Butabi brothers - Steve (Will Ferrel) and Doug (Chris Kattan) - are
the coolest disco regulars around.  At least, they think they are.
Steve and Doug spend most of their nights waiting outside of nightclubs,
fantasizing that one day they might run their own club.  One night they
are particularly frustrated for not being allowed inside the prestigious
'The Roxbury,' - the number one spot in Los Angeles - and it becomes
their ultimate mission to get inside the building and party-hardy.
After a lucky mishap, Steve and Doug find themselves dancing in the
bright lights of The Roxbury, with two women (Elisa Donovan and Gigi
Rice) who mistake them for high rollers.  The story plods along, and
Steve gets caught in a marriage he doesn't really want to commit to, and
Doug becomes even greater a social outcast.
The acting by Saturday Night Live regulars Will Ferrel and Chris Kattan
is predictably awful; the only time they appeal is amongst the bright
and blurring lights of discos.  Granted, there is not much they could
have done with their irritatingly simplistic dialogue.  Most prominent
in the film's many flaws is its script, which succeeds in creating two
daft characters who appear as foreigners even in their own environments.
What it doesn't do is make their wacky adventures very interesting.
Unlike the colorful escapist film Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, the
world in A Night at the Roxbury doesn't offer Steve and Doug enough
obstacles to encounter.   That makes the film's jokes rely almost
entirely on dialogue, which is rarely funny.  To give you an example of
the type of humor A Night at Roxbury generates, I'll close with a short
conversation between the two main characters:
Doug: You can take our car, and you can take our keys, but you cannot
take away our dreams!
Steve: Yeah, because we're sleeping when we have them!


Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  John Fortenberry
Cast:  Chris Kattan, Will Ferrell, Dan Hedaya, Molly Shannon, Richard
Grieco, Loni Anderson, Elisa Donovan, Gigi Rice, Meredith Scott Lynn
Screenplay:  Will Ferrell, Amy Heckerling, Chris Kattan, Steve Koren
Producers:  Amy Heckerling, Lorne Michaels
Runtime:  87 min.
US Distribution:  Paramount
Rated PG-13:  sex humor, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
When I was sixteen, I was driving a bunch of my friends around town,
and it was way past my curfew.  We were having a great time until I got
pulled over by someone tailing me closely with his brights on. 
Stupidly, I stopped, and I saw someone get out of the car behind me. 
Suddenly, there was a large gentleman standing next to my open window. 
He asked, "You guys like skinheads?" and proceeded to punch me in the
face, breaking my nose.  He started pulling my friends out of the car,
and I thought we were going to die.  It is perhaps the most frightening
thing I've ever endured.
And yet, this situation is much funnier than A Night at the Roxbury,
which is a pathetic and limp excuse for a comedy.  I'd rather get
punched in the face by skinheads than ever sit through this film again,
because, on top of being boring (there is *one* joke in this movie),
it's really quite a pitiful experience.  "Saturday Night Live" has never
been a must-see show for me (I was born long after the original
"classic" episodes with the original "funny" cast), but now I submit
that an SNL skit is a worse choice for a film than a video game (both
groups have their anomalies, which include Wayne's World and Mortal
Kombat).  A Night at the Roxbury is creatively defunct and lacking in
the most crucial arena:  comedy.
I did chuckle in the beginning, however, as director John Fortenberry
introduces us to Steve and Doug Butabi (Chris Kattan and Will Ferrell). 
It's funny for a few seconds that they swing their heads in unison to
music emanating from nowhere.  It's sorta funny to watch them walk down
the street and deliver crude pick-up lines to women who hate them.  It's
mildly amusing to see that they still live at home (in the same room),
and work retail in their father's silk plant shop.  But, you see, an SNL
skit is usually about five minutes -- and that's normally four minutes
too long.  This film is apparently runs 87 minutes, and that means that
86 of those minutes are spent either 1) looking at the Butabi brothers
swing their heads again, 2) listening to Dan Hedaya and Chazz Palminteri
deliver awful lines, or 3) watching a pointless and insipid plot grind
its gears and expire into a pathetic lump of screenwriting cliches.
The plot, should you give a flying rat's ass (I only use that line
because it's put to such good use in the film), centers around our
beloved brothers trying to get into the biggest club in town.  You
guessed it -- it's the Roxbury!  You see, Richard Grieco gets them in
(yes, Richard Grieco is in this movie, drowning in makeup and looking
ultrasupercool).  It turns out that the club's owner (played by an
unbilled Palminteri) really likes the brothers, and wants to use their
ideas with his next club.  In addition, we have a subplot in which the a
social climbing bimbo (Molly Shannon) wants to marry Steve, and so the
brothers have a fight which leads to Doug moving into the guest house of
their father's estate.  
Like I said, the film is funny for about one minute.  After that, you
start to realize the original reason for this concept being a skit:  it
doesn't have depth, or characters, or anything that would make you want
to sit in a theater for 87 minutes.  A Night at the Roxbury serves best
as a reminder that "Saturday Night Live" and its producer, Lorne
Michaels (who is responsible for this film and many others) should stop
wasting their money and ours.  
I don't know how talented Kattan and Ferrell are, but neither is
particularly loathsome here.  I didn't hate watching them, but, as I
said, it just gets boring.  The two men also co-wrote the film, and I
don't entirely blame them -- to stretch this concept from five to 87
minutes must have seemed like an impossible task.  Apparently, it was. 
I doubt they had much choice in the matter, and the fact that they at
least wrung one minute of laughter out of the refuse pile is . . . well,
it's pretty sad.
The rest of the acting is either unfunny or just plain bad.  In
addition to Grieco (does anyone even remember "21 Jump Street?"), we
have a cameo from Loni Anderson, who has no lines.  Then there's Hedaya,
who always acts the same; here, his sameness is intensely annoying. 
Palminteri is one of those actors I just don't like, so his "Did you
grab my ass?" running joke is about as funny as the book of Revelation. 
Molly Shannon seems to have some spunk, but she mostly just comes across
as a nuisance.  Mixed in with all these performances is this God-awful
story, which even takes itself seriously in one scene towards the end
(when the Butabis make up).  
There were a few other people at my screening of A Night at the
Roxbury, and most of them laughed about as frequently as I did (however,
the Token Laugher sat right behind me, which was kind of irritating). 
There are really funny movies out there -- funny movies with depth and
insight.  There are also funny films that don't aspire to anything, but
keep the jokes coming so constantly that you don't really care.  A Night
at the Roxbury attempts no depth, and just isn't funny beyond its
premise.  If anyone ever tells me that they're planning on seeing this
film, I'll suggest that they save themselves the trouble by finding some
skinheads instead.  And I won't be kidding.

Author
Scott Renshaw
A NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY
(Paramount)
Starring:  Will Ferrell, Chris Kattan, Molly Shannon, Richard Grieco, Dan
Hedaya.
Screenplay:  Will Ferrell & Chris Kattan and Steve Koren.
Producers:  Amy Heckerling and Lorne Michaels.
Director:  John Fortenberry.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (sexual situations, adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  83 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     As evidence of my exodus from the Land of Hip, I offer the confession
that it's been about three years since I've seen an episode of "Saturday
Night Live."  I gave up on producer Lorne Michaels 'round about the time
he was turning "SNL" sketches into hideous excuses for feature films, from
THE CONEHEADS (shudder) to STUART SAVES HIS FAMILY (shudder shudder) to
IT'S PAT (full grand mal seizure).  The show that used to be cutting edge
had turned into a pop culture butter knife:  dull and pointless.
     If A NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY is any indication, I haven't missed much
from "SNL" other than an attempt to recapture past glory by regurgitating
old premises.  Steve (Will Ferrell) and Doug Butabi (Chris Kattan), the
socially intept, utterly oblivious night-clubbing L.A. siblings whose
attempts to "score" from one of the film's plot lines, are pretty familiar
creations.  The Butabis are basically a post-disco gloss on the
Czechoslovakian brothers played by Dan Aykroyd and Steve Martin twenty
years ago, they of the wide-open shirt collars and "wild and crazy guys"
finger-pointing.  Only the lingo appears to have changed.  You say tomato,
I say tomahto; you say "foxes," I say "babes."
     I'm not suggesting that a film based on the Czechoslovakian brothers
necessarily would have been funnier than this one.  It's almost axiomatic
at this point that trying to turn a five minute sketch into a full-length
feature is a very, very bad idea (particularly when those five minute
sketches are only funny for the first two).  The fact is, it's briefly
amusing watching the Butabis' synchronized head-swaying to the beat, or
listening to them spew out decrepit pick-up lines.  But the rest of A
NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY demonstrates exactly what kills sketch-to-feature
concepts:  once the sketch material is exhausted, you've got to humanize
characters that are much funnier as broad caricatures.  Doug and Steve,
even though they still live at home with their parents (Dan Hedaya and
Loni Anderson), are really guys with a dream to create their own nightclub
with the help of Roxbury owner Mr. Zadir (an uncredited Chazz Palminteri).
Do you think the Czechoslovakian brothers would be hysterical as earnest
immigrants who decide to clean up their act and improve their English
skills?
     When A NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY isn't just plain boring, it's actually
kinda sad.  In case the taut visage of Loni Anderson wasn't frightening
enough, the film wheels out Richard Grieco as himself, doughy and
mascara-covered.  The idea that Grieco still carries enough clout to get
our loser protagonists into the ultra-exclusive Roxbury is one of the 
film's best jokes; Dana Carvey would have dismissed him in an old "SNL"
sketch with an admonition to "wait at the bar."  It's nearly as sad
watching other "SNL" cast members (Molly Shannon, Colin Quinn, Mark
McKinney) turn up as though they were in need of Lorne Michaels' charity.
And it's saddest of all being a member of the audience watching the script
scramble in search of a concept on which to hang something vaguely
humorous, and watching director John Fortenberry's clunky comic pacing.
     Ultimately, there are about five decent laughs and another handful
of chuckles in A NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY, and I was counting those in the
stony audience around me, not my own.  I'll give Ferrell and Kattan credit
for a clever combo-poke at SAY ANYTHING... and THE GRADUATE, and I'll give
major credit to the music supervisor for coming up with great song cues
for a number of scenes.  Otherwise, A NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY continues two
noteworthy "Saturday Night Live" traditions:  loser brothers infatuated
with trendy night-spots, and generally unwatchable feature films.  Looks
like I could pick up right where I left off.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
Look no further than A NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY for evidence of the decline of
two institutions: "Saturdy Night Live", which hasn't managed to be funny in
over a decade and a half, and American comedies in general.  ROXBURY is so
wan, so thin and juiceless, that it barely classifies as a movie.  It also
commits the cardinal comic sin: it's not funny.
ROXBURY gives us the Butabi brothers, Steve and Doug (Will Ferrell and
Chris Kattan), who are in themselves clones of an earlier SNL routine, the
"Wild and Crazy Guys".  The post-high-school Butabis are still stuck in
their parents' house, work for dad's flower shop, and head out when the sun
goes down in futile attempts to get into upscale nightclubs and score with
the ladies.  After countless rejections (in a movie like this, anything
that happens so much as twice feels "countless"), they get lucky and wind
up weaselling their way into the ultrahip Roxbury as part of the entourage
of a TV star (Richard Grieco).  All along the way we get a barrage of
hit-and-miss gags -- the best of which have already been played to death in
the trailer.
It's a little distressing how the movie manages to play host to many
different pieces of action without making any of them funny, or even
interesting.  F'rinstance, Father Butabi (Dan Hedaya, they guy who looks
like Harry Dean Stanton's weaselly brother) and Mom (Loni Anderson, of all
people), are barely milked for a single joke.  Their function is to stand
there and look bewildered.  A neighboring businessman's daughter, Emily
(Molly Shannon), gets a mad crush on Steve -- as part of a larger plan to
manipulate them into mergingin their businesses as well as their bodies --
but they dimness of the boys is so absolute that we hardly care they're
being suckered.  What fun is that?
Lacking a story, or even a real moment of comic invention, the ROXBURY
creators threw everything else they could think of at the screen, and hoped
some of it would stick.  Fights, weddings, Wayne-and-Garth antics, and on
and on.  For some reason I was reminded of the equally lamentable TOMMY BOY,
which featured SNL alumns Chris Farley and David Spade, landlocked in a
script that was equally barren of entertainment, and equally overstuffed
with things to attract, but not keep, our attention,

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
A Night at the Roxbury (1998)
Will Ferrell, Chris Kattan, Molly Shannon, Richard Grieco, Dan Hedaya, 
Loni Anderson, Mark McKinney, Lochlyn Munro, Chazz Palminteri, Dwayne 
Hickman, Colin Quinn. Screenplay by Will Ferrell, Chris Kattan and Steve 
Koren. Directored by John Fortenberry. 
PG-13, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
The first question, of course, is why? Why take a Saturday Night Live 
sketch that was annoying, repetitive and dull in its three-minute form 
and expand it into a feature-length film? The few SNL sketches that made 
financially or artistically successful transitions to the big screen 
(''The Blues Brothers,'' "Wayne's World'' and Al Franken's 
underappreciated comedy/drama ''Stuart Saves His Family") were based on 
characters who were at least interesting. The most painful SNL movies 
("The Coneheads" and "It's Pat") sprung from one note characters in one 
joke sketches. 
In the case of the Butabi brothers, we're talking about half note 
characters in no joke sketches. For those of you lucky enough to have 
missed their endless SNL appearances, here's a complete description of 
the sketches. Dressed in bad outfits, the boys bop their heads to a disco 
tune and bash their bodies into startled women. That's it. Which again 
begs the question, why, why, why make a movie out of this?
Enough whining. They made one and my job description dictated that I see 
it, then write about it, so here we go. "A Night at the Roxbury" is bad. 
There are infrequent humorous moments, a few good supporting performances 
and a genuinely funny wedding scene, but these are most certainly not 
enough to salvage this sad little movie.
Here's the run-down. Steve and Doug Butabi are two clueless losers who 
accost women in the few L.A. nightclubs that will grant them entry. Steve 
(Will Ferrell) is a nervous breakdown waiting to happen and Doug (the 
reptilian Chris Kattan) is his surly brother, angry over the second class 
treatment he receives from his father. The boys live with their folks 
(Dan Hedaya and Loni Anderson) and work in Pop's artificial flower store. 
Dwayne Hickman, manager of the neighboring lamp store, is anxious to pair 
his daughter (Molly Shannon) with Steve, and father Butabi loves the idea,
 envisioning an expansion of his store should the union ever occur.
The brothers finally gain entry to the trendy Roxbury when Richard Grieco,
 anxious to avoid a lawsuit after rear-ending the boys' vehicle, ushers 
them into the nightclub. They bond with club owner Chazz Palminteri and 
pitch their peculiar idea for a disco (don't ask), while Colin Quinn, the 
owner's right hand man, glowers in the background. Two opportunistic 
women latch onto the brothers. Quinn keeps the boys away from Palminteri. 
Dad cuts off their use of the car, the brothers become estranged, a 
wedding is arranged, blah, blah, blah.
The film's only redeeming moments come with the wedding scene, which 
offers genuinely funny references to "The Graduate," "Say Anything" and 
"Jerry Maguire." Molly Shannon's performance as a sexually assertive 
young woman is appealing, as are cameos from former "Kid in the Hall" 
Mark McKinney and Lochlyn Munro (whose spirited work as Cliff salvaged 
the otherwise disposable "Dead Man on Campus"). 
Aside from that, the film offers virtually no rewards, although I found 
Ferrell and Kattan's desperate attempts to add depth to their empty 
characters perversely fascinating. I also found it impossible to take my 
eyes off Richard Grieco, looking doughy and smarmy in a frightening cameo.
When "A Night at the Roxbury" hits cable, it might be worth a viewing, if 
only to see the depths reached by Lorne Michaels' latter day SNL projects.
 Until then, stay as far away from the Roxbury as you possibly can. Don't 
reward drivel like this with your hard-earned dollars.

Author
Homer Yen
Well, as I check my score card for what I've done this holiday
weekend, it reads Good Ideas: 0 and Dumb Ideas: 1.  I don't know what
I was thinking when I decided to watch this movie.  But in my defense,
I can only say that it was SOMEONE ELSE who urged me to see this with
him.  The film that I'm talking about is `A Night at the Roxbury,' one
of those offerings based on a Saturday Night Live skit.  
Wayne and Garth, these two are not.  Rather, we meet Doug and Steve
Butabi (the actors' names are not worth mentioning), two eternal
partyers whose greatest ambitions in life seem to be finding a way to
get into the hottest night club in the city, the Roxbury.  Driving in
their dad's BMW and donning metallic disco suits right out of Miami
Vice, they try to bribe the bouncer to get into the club.  `Have you
met my friend Washington and his friend Roosevelt,' they confidently
say as they pull out spare pocket change.  Their second greatest
ambition seems to be oozing out as many silly pick-up lines as is
humanly possible in order to start a conversation with a girl (`Let me
see that label.  Just as I thought - made in heaven,' says one of the
brothers).  And, like the losers that they are, they fail to do either
for much of the film.
However, as fate would have it, an accidental meeting with
`what-ever-happened-to' Richard Grieco gives them the all-important
ticket to get in.  Their sad lives take on a whole new direction. 
They make an important contact with the club owner who believes that
these two brothers have uncanny insight into the club scene.  And they
are mistaken as rich swingers by two voluptuous young women.  But
their newfound popularity does not impress their father, who has other
plans for them.
The unfortunate thing about this film is that this is a one-joke
movie, and the brothers are the joke.  Actually, there's about 10
mintues worth of tolerable stuff.  Alas, too long for TV and way too
short for a feature-length film.  Thus, there just isn't enough
material to sustain the 83-minute movie.  There's no plot to be found
and everything that these two do seem to culminate in an opportunity
to execute their trademark move of snapping their heads in unison to
the funky beat of Haddaway's europop song, What Is Love.  I was amazed
that none of the two suffered from whiplash.  To take up more film
time, there is a subplot involving the daughter of the businessman
next door who wants to marry Doug.  This creates not only friction
between the brothers, but their unlikely pairing will also agitate
audience members as well.  She's educated and a forebearing witch. 
Meanwhile, Doug is a complete loser.  How did these two ever get
together?   I suppose that if I can ever figure out the answer to that
question, I'll have figured out why I decided to go and see this
movie.  If you're looking for entertainment, you won't find it at the
Roxbury.


Author
Jamie Peck
A NIGHT AT THE ROXBURY
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
The "SNL" incarnation of "Roxbury," as fans of the show already know, 
follows the plight of two wild-and-crazy-wannabes (played by Will 
Ferrell and Chris Kattan) as they peruse - and get thrown out of - the 
L.A. club scene for violently pelvic-thrusting pretty ladies, all the 
while bobbing their heads to the beat of Haddaway's dance hit "What Is 
Love?" Not much meat to build an 87-minute story on, and boy, does it 
show. For those keeping track, the movie's biggest accomplishment is 
giving these loser siblings names - Steve and Doug Butabi. 
The Butabis ambition, for lack of a better word, is to one day gain 
passage into the Roxbury, a swank, Studio 54-esque nightspot that celebs 
like Richard Grieco (playing himself) frequent. Once Steve (Ferrell) and 
Doug (Kattan) finally make it inside, due to a Grieco-involved auto 
mishap that's perhaps the most complicated thing about the film, the 
Roxbury angle is pushed aside for some boring business involving trampy 
golddiggers, brotherly dissension and Steve's impending nuptials with 
the heiress (Molly Shannon) of a lightbulb enterprise. 
At least that last development allows for an uproarious wedding climax 
that manages to pull off witty jabs at "The Graduate," "Say Anything 
..." and "Jerry Maguire," all one right after the other. And although 
those spoofs are probably "A Night at the Roxbury"'s sole claims to 
hitting the comedic bullseye, there is enough sporadic lowbrow silliness 
to impress those looking for a cinematic good time a la "Dumb and 
Dumber" - these guys make those guys look like Stanford grads. Ferrell 
and Kattan must be, er, complimented for their ability to, uh, lose 
themselves in their characters. 
Loni Anderson shows up with that scary cleavage of hers as the Butabi's 
plastic surgery-addicted mom, and Chazz Palminteri does a turn as the 
Roxbury's owner, a goateed lothario fond of asking various friends and 
patrons, "Did you grab my a--?" But the former refrains from speaking 
much and the latter isn't even billed - it seems that even the on-hand 
talent was aware of how unevenly unhip "A Night at the Roxbury" is. Oh, 
sure, those that eat the Butabis up in their weekly fragmented "SNL" 
format will really love this ... but what is love, really?

Author
Susan Granger
        This clunky, clueless comedy is aimed directly at the
"Saturday Night Live" crowd, as producer Lorne Michaels takes a simple
skit and fashions a full-length feature, directed by John
Fortenberry. Will Ferrell and Chris Katten play two socially inept,
dumb-and-dumber losers whose heads bop in unison to the catchy
Haddaway song "What is Love?" Not that they know much about it, of
course, since most of their time is spent babe-watching. Sadly, no
"hottie" (their name for attractive members of the female gender) will
even acknowledge their stares and they certainly couldn't get in the
door of the exclusive nightclub, the Roxbury. Think Studio 54. Or
could they? On such a trivial premise, an entire film has been
constructed.  Dan Hedaya is their gruff father, who owns a
fake-flowers shop in Beverly Hills, while Loni Anderson, as their
plastic surgery-addicted mom, flashes what appear to be huge,
collagen-enhanced lips. Chazz Palmintieri plays the paranoid club
owner (wisely without billing) and Richard Grieco appears as the
Butabi brothers' favorite celebrity, not much of a stretch. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "A Night at the Roxbury" is a goofy,
tepid 3 - about two silly, senseless simpletons.

Author
Michael Dequina
_A_Night_at_the_Roxbury_ (PG-13) 1/2* (out of ****)
Two party guys bob their heads to Haddaway's dance hit "What Is Love?"
while getting themselves into trouble in nightclub after nightclub.  It's
barely enough to sustain a three-minute _Saturday_Night_Live_ skit, but
_SNL_ producer Lorne Michaels, _Clueless_ creator Amy Heckerling, and
Paramount Pictures saw something in the late night television institution's
recurring "Roxbury Guys" sketch that would presumably make a good feature.
Emphasis on the word "presumably."  _A_Night_at_the_Roxbury_ takes an
already-thin concept and tediously stretches it far beyond the breaking
point--and that of viewers' patience levels.
The first five minutes or so of _Roxbury_ play very much like one of the
original "Roxbury Guys" skits.  With "What Is Love?" blaring on the
soundtrack, the brotherly duo of Doug and Steve Butabi (Chris Kattan and
Will Ferrell) bob their heads, scope out "hotties" at clubs, and then bump
a select few with violent pelvic thrusts.  There is one crucial difference,
however--these guys speak.
That little fact has been used as justification for the film's existence,
that the Butabis' newfound capacity for speech would open up a whole new
set of doors for the characters.  The doors opened by director John
Fortenberry and screenwriters Steve Koren, Ferrell, and Kattan are new,
that's for sure, but they all lead to comic dead ends.  There is no story
per se, only a loosely structured and linked series of subplots.  The
brothers literally run into (or, rather, get run into, as in by car)
Richard Grieco of _21_Jump_Street_ fame, and through him they gain entrance
into the exclusive Roxbury club.  There, they meet a hotshot club owner
(Chazz Palminteri, conspicuously uncredited--can you blame him?), who takes
an interest in an idea of theirs.  Meanwhile, the bros' overbearing father
(Dan Hedaya) wants them to stop clubbing.  When Doug refuses and the
dimwitted Steve obeys his father, a rift is created between the two.
The narrative messiness of _Roxbury_ would have been forgivable if all
that went on were the slightest bit funny, but virtually none of it is.
The assembled press audience mostly sat stonily silent throughout the
entire film, with the one big exception being a big laugh near the end.
Alas, the joke--a rather lazy takeoff on _Jerry_Maguire_--will only strike
a chord with people who have seen that film.  Granted, a lot of people
_have_ seen _Jerry_Maguire_, but the fact that the film's best joke is
completely dependent on one's familiarity with another film says a lot
about _Roxbury_'s lack of inspiration.
That lack of inspiration can be traced back to the insipid characters
themselves.  Like too many of the skits on the current incarnation of
_Saturday_Night_Live_, "The Roxbury Guys" is a one-joke sketch that never
once suggests that the characters have enough comic life in them to survive
outside of the sketch context.  After watching one of the "Roxbury" skits
on SNL, this is what you come away with from the characters: they bob their
heads to "What Is Love?", bump unsuspecting women, and... that's all.  After
watching _A_Night_at_the_Roxbury_, you'll be left with exactly the same.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Matt Williams
Ah, yet another film has emerged from the apparently bottomless fool's
goldmine known as Saturday Night Live.  Very rarely, an unexpected movie
gem will emerge from the skit-based comedy show.  But that is not the
case with A Night at the Roxbury, which successfully translates a vapid
and empty skit into a vapid and empty film.
For those of you unfamiliar with the skit, the film thoughtfully
provides a quick example right off the bat.  The main characters are
Steve and Doug Butabi (Will Ferrell and Chris Kattan), two pathetic
losers who (unaware of their loserdom) constantly try to pick up women
at nightclubs.
The movie fleshes out the skit somewhat (not a hard task, given that
there's practically no substance to start with).  During the day, Steve
and Doug work for their father (Dan Hedaya) at his fake flower shop.
But at night, their dreams turn to scoring at the local nightclubs
(including the elusively exclusive Roxbury).
One night, their dreams come true, and the bumbling duo manage to get
into the club of their dreams.  There they mingle with celebritys
(Richard Grieco), try to work a business deal with the owner (Chazz
Palminteri), and are targeted by a couple of gold-digging women (Elisa
Donovan and Gigi Rice).
At first, the Roxbury guys seem to fit the mold cast by successful
SNL-to-film skits such as Wayne's World or The Blues Brothers.  There's
a pair of wacky and slightly dimwitted protagonists, and...well, that's
where the similarity ends.  But the filmmakers seemed to miss one key
difference: those successful films featured both strong, endearing
characters, and a pair of the era's finest comedians performing at their
peak. A Night at the Roxbury has neither.
The Roxbury guys is (next to It's Pat: The Movie) the flimsiest Saturday
Night Live skit ever to cross the film adaptation threshold.  It truly
is based on one joke:  the losers who don't know they're losers.  As a
film, one joke will never make it...particularly when the same joke has
been at the core of several films this year already (Almost Heroes, Meet
the Deedles and BASEketball come to mind).
That leaves the movie up to Ferrell and Kattan.  But their performances
are rote and uninteresting.  They've turned in much better performances
on Saturday Night Live...but then, we weren't confronted with them as
the same characters for a full hour and a half.
The movie is amusing for about the length of a 3-5 minute skit.  There
are a few minor chuckles scattered throughout the picture, so it's not a
total loss...but nothing worth 90 minutes of your time.
A Night at the Roxbury aims little higher than its skit...and you could
hardly pick a flimsier skit upon which to base a feature film. It's a
one-joke movie that doesn't even have a good joke.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
James Brundage
A Night at the Roxbury is a night to forget.
It's all a conspiracy towards cheap movies. It's all a conspiracy towards
cheap movies because some of them have become not an object to entertain but
a calculated bomb. Something that was made cheap, made quick, and made bad.
They [the movie execs] know it will bomb. They know that people will come
out of the theater feeling as if they wasted their money. But, friends,
Roman, countrymen people who will hat the movie with a religious passion
they also know we'll see it, and they know they'll make up their budget.
It's something they do with their Madison Avenue boys. They teach them mind
tricks and manipulations, slights of hand, scams, lies, and cheats. They
teach them how to make the worst movie seem like a pile of good jokes,
glitz, and glamour. They did such a thing to A Night at the Roxbury.
To sum it up in a sentence: A Night at the Roxbury is a cheap, dumb movie
that makes Firestorm and The Wedding Singer look like fine art, made by a
couple of members of the BAA (Barfly Association of America) who act
themselves on Saturday Night Live weekly at the exact moment when we decide
to turn off our TV sets and go to bed. There is no humor; there is no
redeeming value. There is no possibility of fun at this movie. Sure, a few
very stupid eight-year-olds laughed behind me once or twice, but, aside from
that, the theater was silent enough to hear crickets. I have nothing against
SNL. I loved Wayne's World, like most of the works of Adam Sandler, and
would never say a bad word against Chris Farley. It's just that this wouldn'
t work as a skit. It wouldn't work as anything. Wait no. It would work very
well for target practice.

Author
Eric Vinegart
Saturday Night Live regulars, Will Ferrell (left) and Chris Kattan,
play joined-at-the-hips (and neck) brothers in A Night at the Roxbury.
Directed by John Fortenberry and Peter Markle.  (see image at:
http://thevinegar.webjump.com/home.htm
TEMPE MILLS CINEMA, AZ--This movie had us in non-stop stitches from
beginning to end. All those promotional clips that have been on TV for
the past month came from the first five minutes of the movie. If you
thought they were funny, see the rest of the movie. It's hilarious.
How does one go about making a movie about a couple guys whose only
claim to fame is synchronized head-bopping on SNL to exactly one song?
Easy. Write an interesting script around tried-and-true ideas, add
some good lines and satire, and voilŕ, you end up with an excellent,
well-done, very entertaining flick.
Will and Chris are idiot brothers forced by their father to work
begrudgingly in the family flower business during the day. At night
they pursue their life-long ambition to loose their virginity in
failed attempts to get into the Roxbury in Beverly Hills, CA, the only
disco act worth going to. The only problem, the place is so popular
and the waiting line so long that by the time the brothers make it to
the front door, The Roxbury closes, all the while bearing witness to
guys with one-hundred-dollar bills and movie stars like Richard Grieco
who get past the doorman without fuss.
The script authors (Steve Koren, Will Ferrell and Chris Kattan)
cleverly devised a way for our boys to get into the Roxbury. Their
flower-shop van is rear-ended by Richard Grieco, who fears a law-suit
and is surprised to see the idiots are too star-struck to think about
the car accident they just had, but not about getting into the
Roxbury. Grieco happily takes them in, even introduces them to the
owner, which has the added benefit of enhancing the financial
appearance of the idiot brothers in the eyes of a couple of gold
diggers (Elisa Donovan and Gigi Rice) who bet their time and bodies on
Will and Chris. What follows are some of the best slap-stick dancing
routines ever. The music is superb, and could have only been made
better had the producers added Patrick Hernandez's Born To Be Alive.
The Choreography at times was a parody of an era gone by, for example,
the Bee Gees and their Stayin' Alive. It is nostalgic for those of us
who remember that far back, and the technique is a clever adaptation
that worked well in Forest Gump.
One of the funniest scenes is when the gold diggers discover that Will
and Chris don't have any mone y, and dump both on the spot, even
expressing violence and anger that they gave sex away. An
art-imitates-life poke at shallow women. It's a scene that's an
approximate parody of The Vinegar's own Rolf Luedeke's editorial this
week National Organization for Men (NOM) Replaces NOW. Ted "Unabomber"
Kaczynski, himself rejected for not having money, will identify well
with this scene, if he ever watches the movie.
Of course, the script wouldn't be complicated enough without adding
Molly Shannon, the girl next door who has had a crush on Will since
they were kids, and who Will has had an aversion to in quest of
good-looking disco blondes (proof that men will turn down perfectly
good women when there are Bay Watch babes always lurking nearby).
Nevertheless, Will's father wants him to marry Molly anyway, but
thinks idiot Chris is standing in the way and sends him into
guest-quarter exile. During the wedding ceremony, Will's heart isn't
exactly into getting married, and when his brother appears on the
balcony with a ghetto blaster and more head-bopping music, Will thinks
worse of the knot-tieing idea and runs to Chris. Definitely an SNL
parody of The Graduate where Katharine Ross changed her mind for the
screaming Dustin Hoffman in the church balcony.  I found this scene a
riot, however, it went over Brandi's head -- she was born seven years
after The Graduate first appeared. The scene has a good punch line
when Molly Shannon marries, instead, the step-in buddy/weight-lifter
(who looks like he could pass for the son of Gary Busy) and who has
been lusting for a good-looker for a long time, but ready now to take
anyone. More art-imitates-life stuff -- not even muscles can
substitute for money in the real world.
The idiots' mother is played by Loni Anderson, whose Barbie-doll looks
don't play well anymore (she's a bit old), and whose cleavage looks
like someone botched a tracheotomy too low down.
I recommend this movie for anyone who wants to have a lot of fun or in
need of a lot of laughs. Go with a date. Brandi laughed non-stop, as I
did, and a deaf-mute might have concluded I was tickling her
continuously for 105 minutes.
Š Copyright 1998 The Vinegar.    All rights reserved.
More good stuff at:  http://thevinegar.webjump.com/home.htm
