Title
Review for Institute Benjamenta, or This Dream People Call Human Life (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz

INSTITUTE BENJAMENTA, OR This Dream People Call Human Life
(director/writer:The Brothers Quay; screenwriter: Alan Passes/from texts
by Robert Walser; cinematographer: Nicholas Knowland; cast: Mark Rylance
(Jakob), Gottfried John (Johannes), Daniel Smith (Kraus), Alice Krige
(Lisa), 1995-GB)
Strange is the norm for this exquisitely made first full-length live
action feature from the American-born (they work in London) identical
twins, Stephen and Timothy Quay, who have previously achieved cult
status for their animation films. This dream-like fantasy film, probably
a fairytale story gone amok, filmed in the style of German Expressionism
ala "The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari," and most reflective of a Kafkaesque
type of story depicting a man trapped by absurd circumstances and his
mistrust of society, as the film sets a nightmarish tone. It is loosely
based on the novella 'Jakob Von Gunten' by the Swiss author Robert
Walser.
The Institute Benjamenta is a boarding school for servants, where the
lessons are taught by the siblings, the eccentric despot Johannes
Benjamenta (Gottfried John) and the fragile beauty, Lisa Benjamenta
(Alice Krige). She teaches by being repetitive to the point of being
ridiculous and surreal, as the course of study consists of repeating the
lesson over and over, such as the lesson in setting the dining table, as
ritualistically the would-be servants keep repeating in unison what
their ethereal teacher tells them, as she paces back and forth in front
of the blackboard holding onto a pointer made of a deer foot. There are
deer antlers that hang on the walls and pine cones and needles on the
floors of the classroom. The use of deer must hold some symbolic meaning
to the story, but I would only be guessing as to exactly what.The
lessons take place in a dilapidated building, with a creepy looking and
uninviting interior, setting the claustrophobic atmosphere the film
thrives on. The ceilings in the student's rooms are too low to stand up
in (ala Dr. Caligari).
The film follows its story through the eyes of Jakob von Gunten (Mark
Rylance), who is first seen knocking on the school's door and looking
through the peephole at a monkey, as he is about to enroll. He states
that he came to this place-which seems to be cut off in time and
location from the rest of the world- looking for a chance to be of
service to someone in this life. He will remain here until the school
crumbles, as it seems to be coming to a slow but sure end, as the
director announces no more students will be taken in after Jakob.
What is the reality of life if everything can be turned upside down and
what does reality mean, might be some of the things the film is
questioning, that is, if one were looking for a theme to this intriguing
tale, filmed in a grainy black-and-white monochrome, which added to the
film's evocative mood. Another theme might be the Jesus motif, of how
can one be like Christ, a humble servant, in a society that craves order
and for people to know their place in that order. Jakob asks, "Is there
anything Jesus could do for us in this world?" The answer seems to be,
become a servant.
The film succeeds in being a hypnotic work of much visual merit, that is
different in scope and in intention than other films, probably defying
classification into a type of genre it belongs to. There is hardly any
dialogue, and the sparse dialogue that is there, does not seem to be
that pertinent to the story, as the actors recite their lines as if they
were puppets on a string being manipulated by the Quays. The sister
asks, at one point, "Am I living in a fairy tale?"
But it is the aesthetics that seem to count for what are the dramatics
of the film. Its story of the high and the low in status, each accepting
unconditionally their place in society are examined in a most bizarre
fashion in the student's and his master's mannerisms, as all the
repressed students who willingly serve at their master's discretion go
through their eerie robotic movements, and the story has the look of a
spellbinding fairytale.
What is also shown, is how twisted and sexually repressed the siblings
are, him in need of Jakob as his confidante and slave, showing how
fearful he is of life, while she is caressing Jakob's cheeks as if to
comfort herself, but it could also be a tabu romantic gesture toward
Jakob, indicating their separation is due to class differences. And, of
the eight students, Kraus (Daniel Smith) stands out as one wholly
accepting of the arrangement of servant and master, accepting without a
peep of protest the school's dehumanization policy.
The film runs its course with alternating moods of exhileration and
tedium, but proves itself to be visually stimulating overall, with every
scene showing the contrasts between the light and dark of life. There
was also the memorable weird scene in the beginning of the film, where a
face appears distorted through a goldfish bowl.
At the film's conclusion, Jakob questions what he has learned, if he has
really become insignificant, implying that instead of things being a
mystery, such as the face in the gold fish bowl, knowing about things
can be attained by doing what is habitual, as when Kraus teaches him how
to clean the bowl, which is enough for him to learn.
What it all means is subject to one's imagination (so much of the film
is purposely left unclear), as Jakob wrestles with whether he should
rescue Lisa from her melancholy life. But, this unsettling film is,
nevertheless, diverting in a positive intellectual way, even as it is
subject to much speculative interpretation. You can look at it as a
visionary poem or as an allegory on life, either way, the film is
original and stimulating, if one can take the very slow pace of its
camera work and its tenor of dull melancholy and its inconclusiveness
into proper consideration.
The film was stylishly scored by Polish composer Lech Jankowski.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dave Cowen
It seems strange when watching a film which consists almost
entirely of images which can only be called unique to think
obsessively while viewing the movie about how derivative the 
movie really is.  While INSTITUTE BENJAMENTA features some of 
the most striking images seen in any film this year, the plot 
and characterizations which drive the film seem to be taken 
from other recent films -- mixed together, and put together in 
a way that can be best described as puzzling.
This decade has brought us a surprising number of moody, ethereal
films about attending a school on servitude in an European country:
Lars Von Trier's 1991 EUROPA (ZENTROPA in the US) featured an
American who traveled to Germany immediately after World War II
to offer the Germans some "sympathy" by serving on a passenger car
on the Zentropa line.  Guy Maddin's 1992 CAREFUL was an incredible 
acid-trip sendup of the German "Mountain Film", featuring a main 
character who goes to school to become a servant.  Both EUROPA and
CAREFUL featured incredibly innovative images -- EUROPA, shot in
cinemascope and fluctuating between black and white and color.
often featuring both on the same screen, and CAREFUL with its 
garish tinted colors and deteriorated look.  Both films are very
different from one another, and both, in my opinion, are of great
value.
INSTITUTE BENJAMENTA also takes place in a school, one where Jakob
(Mark Rylance) is training as a butler under the watch of Lisa
(Alice Krige) and Herr Benjamenta (Gottfried John).  The film 
spans the time in which Jakob joins the school, and ends at the
school's demise.  The Brothers Quay use the school less as a 
statement on servitude or any other topic but as a funhouse in 
which to play their visual tricks: the camera often shoots across 
the room to reveal the writing on an obscure contraption, or 
purposefully blur as to make an image look like something else.  
Little is established other than the basics: after Jakob enters 
the school, he becomes a troublemaker -- but becomes respected 
both by Lisa and Herr Benjamenta, both of whom view him as a 
confidant.  While Jakob, and many of the other characters spend 
much of the film engaging in talk that could at best be called 
philosophizing, little of it holds together, and the film seems 
to lack any sort of coherant meaning.
Instead, the viewer focuses on the images: often startling, and 
often beautiful in a gothic sense.  The Brothers Quay obsess on
dust and thread -- INSTITUTE BENJAMENTA is one of the few films
in which there is such a thing as a "gratuitous thread shot".  
Light and shadows flash across walls, as if the sun is moving 
through the film at a much faster rate than in real life.  The
film is sprinkled with odd visual jokes and puns which are often
as obscure or obtuse as they are funny.  
Unfortunately, there isn't much else in this film to admire.  The
use of a butler school seems completely perfunctory, and there 
isn't anything on that topic to be found here that wasn't already
covered in more depth in EUROPA or CAREFUL, nor do the images seem 
as shocking or beautiful when compared with the elegance of the 
aforementioned two films.  While the Brothers Quay are extremely 
capable when creating stop-motion animation, they seem lost as 
to what to do with the human element, and much of the film seems 
to be filler to take the film from image to image.  Ultimately, 
INSTITUTE BENJAMENTA is something of a beautiful, confusing bore.
If you're interested in seeing INSTITUTE BENJAMENTA, I'd instead 
recommend seeing EUROPA or CAREFUL (the latter of which is playing 
at the Music Box theater in Chicago in less than a month).
-- 
signed: ESCHATFISCHE, david     h t t p : / /w w w . f i s c h e . c o m
(esch@fische.com) ------------------------------------------------------

Author
Lax Madapati
Cast: Mark Rylance, Gottfried John, Daniel Smith, Peter Whitfield, 
      Joseph Alessi, Jonathan Stone, Cesar Sarachu, Peter Lovstrom,
      Uri Roodner and Alice Krige
Director: The Brothers Quay
Screenplay: Alan Passes and The Brothers Quay
Cinematography: Nicholas D. Knowland
Music: Lech Jankowski
        Institute Benjamenta or This Dream People Call Human Life is the first
full-length live action feature of the cult masters of stop-motion animation, 
the Brothers Quay (Stephen and Timothy Quay). It is loosely based on the 
novella `Jakob Von Gunten' by the Swiss author Robert Walser and also borrows 
sporadically from his other works. 
        Set in a dream-like world where fantasy frequently collides with 
reality, this film narrates through our protagonist Jakob (played by Mark
Rylance), the tale of a school for the training of servants, run by siblings 
Lisa and Herr Benjamenta (played by Alice Krige and Gottfried John), whose 
curriculum constitutes the endless repetition of each single lesson 
meticulously until honed to perfection. Lessons vary from arranging cutlery on
dining tables to saying the right words in domestic situations and adopting a
servile  tone to converse with prospective employers. The film begins with 
Jakob's entry into the institute and enrollment. As it progresses with his 
training and subsequent involvement with the other students of the institute 
and with Lisa and Herr Benjamenta, he witnesses the school's slow dis-
integration and eventual demise.
        There isn't much of a script here and the Brothers Quay's style of
narration is very jarring and uneven. Most of the actions of the characters
involved in the institute's activities seem to be with apparently no reason or
motive at all. For example, Jakob is provided with a room with such a low
ceiling that he cannot stand erect anywhere in the room. Lisa seems to have a
fondness for Jakob that may or may not be love for him and it is never made 
clear. The drastic actions Lisa takes towards the end comes abruptly and as a 
surprise to the viewers and this action was never justified by any on going 
proceedings until then. Is it because of the guilt she feels of her feelings 
toward Jakob? Or is it fear that it may elicit the consternation of her brother
? Most under-explained and puzzling is Herr Benjamenta's character and his 
deeds.
        What is good about the movie though is the brilliant use of lighting
in most of the scenes and the sudden horizonally swivelling cameras which are
trade marks of Brothers Quay, as can be seen from their stop-motion animation
works like Epic of Gilgamesh (1981) and Rehearsals for Extinct Anatomies (1988)
Some of the scenes have such exceptional work from the technical crew that the
effect is one of dreaminess and Kafkaesque surrealism. The Brothers Quay seem 
to have a penchant for playing real life characters like puppets from one of 
their animation projects. This amazing (and sometimes unsettling) effect for 
the most part has to do a lot with the fine and controlled body language of
all the characters involved in the proceedings - the 8 students and 2 owners 
of the institute. It is in ground-breaking scenes like these that the Brothers 
Quay excel and provide a good reason to watch the movie. 
        Mark Rylance seems to be a specialist in playing characters in a
dispassionate and sometimes nonchalant style as seen from his other works,
notably the recent Angels and Insects (1995). Alice Krige does well in a rather
under-developed character but the outstanding one is Gottfried John as Herr
Benjamenta. He succeeds in bringing out the fears within Herr Benjamenta and
in the process, frightens the viewers, though why he does all that he does is
left unexplained. The rest of the cast is adequate. The music for the most 
part matches up with the mood and atmosphere of the visuals, with abundant
use of piano and percussion by first-timer Lech Jankowski.
        Maybe this is a film where the visuals take more importance than the 
story and characters. Sometime midway through the film, we are offered
a close-up of the guiding policy of Institute Benjamenta adorning a plaque on
a wall in the classroom - "less but very meticulous". The same thing may very
well have been the guiding policy of the Brothers Quay in making this film. 
Rating: On the SuperNova Scale *** / *****
        The identical twins Stephen and Timothy Quay (a.k.a. Brothers Quay)
were born near Philadelphia in a town with a large European immigrant popu-
lation which fuelled their interest in European culture. They moved to London
in the late 60s to study at the Royal College of Art between 1969 and 1972
where they made their first (and now lost) short films. After spending some
time in Holland in the 1970s, they returned to London to team up with fellow
RCA alumnus Keith Griffiths (who would act as producer on all their subsequent
films) and formed Koninck Studios and have since produced animation as well as
art films, cultural documentaries, TV commercials (Honeywell, Walkers Crisps 
etc.) and music videos which include the ground-breaking video for Peter
Gabriel's award-winning song 'Sledgehammer' and more recently, music videos 
for 'Sober' and 'Prison Sex' by the artist Tool.
        The Quays' films include documentaries on Punch and Judy, Stravinsky 
and the art of Anamorphosis, as well as films inspired by the literature of
Kafka, Bruno Schultz and Robert Walser. Their work also include decors for
theater and opera productions based on the works of Prokofiev and Tchaikovsky.
In 1995, they designed the decors for the English National Opera productions
and this year, they will design the sets for Janacek's 'The Makropoulos Case'
at Covent Garden.
