Title
Review for Escape from L.A. (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Paramount)
Directed by    John Carpenter
Written by     John Carpenter, Debra Hill, and Kurt Russell
Cast           Kurt Russell, A.J. Langer, Steve Buscemi, Georges
               Corraface, Stacy Keach, Michelle Forbes, Pam Grier, Jeff
               Imada, Cliff Robertson, Valeria Golino, Peter Fonda
MPAA Rating    "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Running Time   100 minutes
Reviewed at    General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh, NC (9AUG96)
     In this better-late-than-never sequel to his 1981 cult classic
ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK, director John Carpenter has envisioned the future
of Los Angeles as an island penal colony for America's least wanted.  In
the year 2013, any citizen caught engaging in acts illegal, immoral, or
fattening is expelled from the country.  That is, unless they choose
electrocution over deportation.  Zap.  Into this picture steps "Snake"
Plissken (Kurt Russell), that one-eyed, whispering wonder who, again, is
in the custody of the United States Police Force.  Like last time, the
deal goes something like this:  Snake has ten hours to land on Los
Angeles Island, recover a mysterious "black box" that was stolen by the
President's radical daughter, and return with the goods in hand.  If
he's a good boy, he'll be given both a pardon and an antidote to the
deadly virus that he's been intentionally infected with.  Sound
familiar?
     In addition to the ripe right-wing references and about a thousand
brutal barbs aimed at Southern California-- how well will jokes about
aftershocks, immigrants, and plastic surgery play in Peoria, anyway?--
we're also treated to such schlocky sights as a collapsed Capital
Records building, a sunken Santa Monica Freeway, and an underwater
Universal Studios.  Just ask for Babs.  The tone is expectedly tongue-
in-cheek and a spirit of anarchy pervades nearly every scene.  And, yet,
even with a super-cool supporting cast (Peter Fonda, Steve Buscemi, Pam
Grier, to name a few), the movie just doesn't *move*.  Call it what you
will-- flat, under-powered, a long sit, slower than a slow-moving white
Bronco-- but ESCAPE FROM L.A. is a risky recommendation at best.  Unless
you're a fan of the original, you might want to skip this one.
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Steve Kong
In the year 2000 Los Angeles is flattened and separated from mainland US by a 
large earthquake. The President of the United States predicted this incident. 
And after the earthquake, the President makes it possible for the term of 
office to be life-long. This is no regular President either, he flies in the 
Air Force Three and is a very religious person. L.A. is turned into a prison 
island, where the murderers, rapists, thieves, and atheists are sent for the 
rest of their lives.
Snake Plissken, a well known military man and now criminal, is caught and 
given an offer. The offer comes from the President. His daughter after 
spending some time, together with a bad gangster on L.A. island, in a virtual 
reality world, has now run away. She's run away with a very dangerous weapon, 
and the President's offer to Snake is to get the device back. Snake would then 
be forgiven for all his past wrongdoings. Snake doesn't really want to do it, 
but is convinced into it after learning that he has a deadly virus coursing 
through his system. And, using a classic movie device, the virus is a timed 
virus. Snake on has less than a day to get the device back before he dies. If 
he gets the device back, he gets the antidote.
Escape From L.A. is a grand escapist film. It takes us to the Island L.A., 
which looks like sets from Blade Runner after a large earthquake. The action 
in Escape is wildly over the top and satisfyingly fun. The action ranges from 
underwater submarine rides to surfing a tsunami. Kurt Russell's Snake is a 
tough guy with a low grumbling voice and a dark sense of humor. 
I have not seen Escape from New York, which was the "prequel" to Escape From 
L.A., so I cannot give a comparison to it. 
Escape From L.A. is an awesome two hours that tries to be nothing more than 
what it is, an action film. There is a large dose of violence in the film that 
makes the film unsuitable for the younger crowd and the squimish. If you like 
action films don't miss Escape From L.A.


Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  John Carpenter, Stacy Keach, George Corraface, A. J. Langer,
Steve Buscemi, Cliff Robertson, Valeria Golino, Peter Fonda, Pam Grier.
Screenplay:  John Carpenter, Debra Hill, Kurt Russell.
Director:  John Carpenter.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     "Snake is Back" proclaim the posters for ESCAPE FROM L. A., and from
multiplexes across the nation, I can hear the answering cry of, "Who?"
Let's face it, this isn't exactly Indiana Jones we're talking about --
Kurt Russell's Snake Plissken last graced theater screens fifteen years
ago in ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK, when a significant percentage of today's
action film audience was somewhere between puberty and mastering solid
food, and that film was not what one would call a classic of the genre.
But Russell is a born again action hero after the success of STARGATE and
EXECUTIVE DECISION, so he has once again donned the eye-patch (as well as
the titles of co-writer and co-producer) for another futuristic adventure.
The result is an attempt at self-satire which comes off as a tiresome
exercise in pyrotechnics and cheap blue screen effects.
     In ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK, Snake was forced to rescue the President of
the United States after Air Force 1 crashes inside a prison colony which
once was Manhattan.  This time around, the location is Los Angeles, broken
off from the continent after a massive earthquake and turned into a
dumping round for undesirables by a morally authoritarian President (Cliff
Robertson).  But it isn't the president Snake needs to find; instead, it
is the First Daughter (A. J. Langer), who has stolen an experimental
weapon in an act of defiance.  She intends to bring it to Cuervo Jones
(George Corraface), an international criminal who rules Los Angeles and
plans to invade the U.S.  Snake is made an offer he can't refuse:  bring
back the weapon in ten hours, or die of a designer virus introduced into
his blood.
     It is a good thing Carpenter, Russell and company waited so long
between NEW YORK and L. A., because even those who actually saw the first
film probably have forgotten enough not to notice that ESCAPE FROM L. A.
is virtually a point-for-point remake of the original.  In New York, Snake
meets Brain (Harry Dean Stanton), a former running buddy who once left
Snake high and dry and whom Snake insists on calling by his real name; in
L. A., Snake meets Hershe (Pam Grier), a transsexual former running buddy
who once left Snake high and dry and whom Snake insists on calling by
his/her real name.  NEW YORK had snake on a time clock before something
introduced into his body kills him; ditto for L. A.  Both find Snake
chatting with a sympathetic woman who is promptly blown away, and both find
snake in an athletic contest for the amusement of the villains.  The
number of duplicated details is quite astonishing, actually.  At least
everyone involved did their homework.
     The twist they try to place on ESCAPE FROM L. A. is that it is
supposed to be funnier, almost a parody of the original.  I say "supposed
to" because John Carpenter may be one of the most humorless directors of
the last twenty years, taking even bizarre material like BIG TROUBLE IN
LITTLE CHINA and deadening it with his brooding style.  His idea of a joke
in ESCAPE FROM L. A. is showing every possible Southern California
landmark (Hey, it's Universal Studios!...Hey, it's the Queen Mary!) or
making a quick reference to every possible stereotype of Los Angeles
living, and to show that he isn't taking anything seriously with some
low-tech special effects, including a computer-generated submarine voyage
which makes TRON look positively state-of-the-art.  A few of the gags are
clever, like a shot at L. A.'s front-running sports fans; others can't
find a comfortable place between gruesome and silly, like a gang of
cosmetic surgery victims always in search of fresh body parts.  ESCAPE
FROM NEW YORK was overly somber, but it was lean and efficient and quite
good at creating its desolate urban landscape.  ESCAPE FROM L. A. finds
Carpenter making scattershot attempts at humor, and the experience is like
being tickled by a robot.
     There are a few simple pleasures to be found in the performances,
including Kurt Russell's laconic Snake.  It's one of the best (if
unintentional) jokes that despite the fact that everyone in the world
seems to know who Snake Plissken is, he has probably been able to escape
capture because he has no discernible personality.  Russell does a guttural
Clint Eastwood impression, and makes a solid anti-hero.  Steve Buscemi
also has fun as Cuervo's sniveling assistant Maps-of-the-Stars'-Homes
Eddie, and Bruce Campbell makes an almost unrecognizable appearance as the
Surgeon General of Beverly Hills.  Mostly, though, ESCAPE FROM L. A. is a
collection of fragments and missed opportunities where it is expected that
a multitude of sins will be hidden by big fireballs (motorcycles tend to
explode as though hit by nuclear warheads upon contact with the ground in
a John Carpenter film).  Snake may be back, but he doesn't have much to
say, and what he does have to say has been said before.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A giddy, wild sci-fi farce that keys in on a ROBOCOP-style view of
the future and contains more laughs than you might expect.
The original ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK was a halfway-serious futuristic thriller
that turned Manhattan Island into a giant maximum security prison, and then
dumped the President of the United States into it. To rescue him, we had
one-eyed Snake Plissken (Kurt Russell, who up until then had a roster
mostly of Disney movies), and the combination of fairly unique ingredients
made the movie a long-standing pulp-SF-and-fratboy favorite.
ESCAPE FROM L.A. is not simply a sequel, but a sly self-parody that has
endless fun inverting the same conventions it seems born to exploit. There
are some scenes that are just impossible to take straight: how about Peter
Fonda teaching Snake how to catch a tube in what looks like the
post-apocalypse version of Big Sur? Or a basketball game to the death? Or a
plastic surgery clinic filled with Beverly Hills zombies?
The plot is the thinnest of excuses onto which to graft one weirdly
hilarious sequence after another. The President (a far-right lunatic)
drafts Plissken for a mission: rescue his daughter, who's absconded with
the control block for a doomsday device. She's hijacked Air Force Three and
sent it screaming right into the heart of L.A. -- which in this world, has
not only been forcibly seperated from the rest of the country by an
earthquake, but is a dumping ground for "undesirables" (i.e., anyone who
would look even slightly out of place in a Norman Rockwell painting). You
have the choice of deportation or electrocution at the border. They also
have a nifty little coercion for Snake: a fast-breeding disease that will
kill him in eight hours unless he gets back to them with the goods. Nice of
them to think of everything.
We're in overdrive right from the start. Snake is jammed into a one-man sub
and shot at L.A., and skims across all manner of submerged and trashed
landmarks. If you live in the area, you're guaranteed a few laughs at
seeing your least favorite eyesores in ruins. (The biggest eyesore of all
is at the very end of the movie, along with a line of dialogue that will
convulse all comers. I am not ruining that one.)
EFLA is almost like a slightly bigger-budgeted version of the kinds of SF
movies that used to come out more often, like REPO MAN and ANDROID. While
EFLA isn't nearly as much of a real cult item as the former or as
emotionally involving as the latter, it's nice to see that John Carpenter
still has a good soupcon of the anarchist/indie-producer spirit in him. The
last scene in the movie should be a clear indication of that -- it leaves
us wide open for endless possibilities. Like, say, ESCAPE FROM PLANET
EARTH. Heh heh heh.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kurt Russell, Stacey Keach, Georges Corraface, A.J. Langer, 
      Cliff Robertson, Steve Buscemi, Pam Grier, Peter Fonda, 
      Valeria Golino, Michelle Forbes, Bruce Campbell 
Director: John Carpenter
Producers: Debra Hill and Kurt Russell
Screenplay: John Carpenter & Debra Hill & Kurt Russell
Cinematography: Gary B. Kibbe
Music: Shirley Walker and John Carpenter
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     Los Angeles has now been destroyed twice in one summer.  Is this 
wish fulfillment for audiences or for the men and women who make movies?  
Either way, both apocalyptic scenarios are visually impressive, offering 
arrays of death and disaster as L.A. is reduced to a smoldering shadow 
of what it once was.  In John Carpenter's ESCAPE FROM L.A., the cause is 
a mega-earthquake, not an alien attack as in INDEPENDENCE DAY, but the 
results are similar.  
     The prologue to ESCAPE FROM L.A. takes place shortly after the 
conclusion of ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK.  On August 23, 2000, the "big one" 
hits the west coast, severing Los Angeles from the mainland.  The new 
President of the Moral United States (Cliff Robertson, giving an eerily 
Reagan-esque performance) declares that L.A. is no longer part of the 
country.  It becomes the deportation zone to which all those convicted 
of moral crimes are sent.  Los Angeles is viewed as an island of 
depravity and violence, populated by psychos, criminals, and other 
assorted weirdoes -- not that different, some would argue, from what 
it's like today.
     Fast forward to 2013, where we once again meet the infamous 
criminal, Snake Plisskin (Kurt Russell, reprising the role he first 
essayed 15 years ago).  For a second time, the government needs him for 
a rescue-and-retrieval mission.  This time, the object of his quest 
isn't a person, but a thing.  The President's daughter, Utopia (A. J. 
Langer), has stolen the remote control unit for a doomsday weapon and 
given it to a guerrilla leader (George Corraface) on Los Angeles Island.  
So Snake, who has been injected with a virus that leaves him ten hours 
to live, has to go in, complete his mission, and escape to get the 
antidote.  
     If this premise sounds an awful lot like that of ESCAPE FROM NEW 
YORK, it's no coincidence.  John Carpenter isn't just making a sequel to 
the 1981 cult classic, but, armed with a considerable budget, he's also 
doing a partial remake (much like the tactic employed by Robert 
Rodriguez with EL MARIACHI and the subsequent DESPERADO).  ESCAPE FROM 
L.A. follows an almost-identical trajectory to its predecessor, only 
this time all the action takes place against the backdrop of the 
Hollywood Hills rather than under the shadow of the World Trade Center. 
     All things considered, ESCAPE FROM L.A. is a significant 
improvement over the first Snake Plisskin adventure.  The action 
sequences are better paced and directed.  The erratic, tongue-in-cheek 
comedy of NEW YORK is back, but, in this picture, it is supplemented by 
a barbed satire of family values and political correctness.  Best of 
all, however, the basic premise is satisfactorily explored rather than 
just existing as a jumping-off point.  In the previous outing, Snake was 
dropped in the midst of a generic New York that could have been any 
abandoned city.  Here, Los Angeles is clearly Los Angeles (or, more 
appropriately, what's left of Los Angeles), and we are given a tour of 
both the changed geography and the bizarre cultures rising from the 
ashes.  This aspect of the movie, rather than any other, makes ESCAPE 
FROM L.A. a more fascinating piece of film making.
     There's a shade less atmosphere in L.A. than in NEW YORK, but the 
production values and set design in the sequel are still top-notch.  
There are some truly breathtaking sequences, such as the spectacle of a 
tsunami bearing down on the coast or an overhead shot of what became of 
Disneyland.  Borrowing from BLADE RUNNER and other futuristic features, 
Carpenter has made ESCAPE FROM L.A. visually striking, and, if audiences 
aren't already exhausted by this summer's other action fare, it should 
play well.
     The only returning actor is Kurt Russell, who slips effortlessly 
into his character as if a decade-and-a-half hadn't passed.  Little has 
changed -- Snake still talks with a Clint Eastwood-like rasp, sports a 
heavy five o'clock shadow, and openly despises authority.  It's a 
tribute to Russell that, after so long, he can accurately and 
effectively re-create his first action role.  Though Snake may have 
aged, the self-deprecating, angry core that makes him more than a mere 
caricature hasn't changed one bit.
     The supporting players are all new.  Most of them aren't on screen 
for very long, and, as a result, don't leave much of an impression.  
Bruce Campbell, for instance, has a wacky two-minute sequence as the 
Surgeon General of Beverly Hills, then isn't seen again.  Valerie 
Golino, Pam Grier, and Peter Fonda fall into the same near-cameo 
category.  Steve Buscemi plays another in his gallery of strange people 
-- a double-crossing "Map of the Stars" salesman.  George Corraface 
isn't a very effective villain, especially compared to Isaac Hayes' Duke 
of New York (although they both drive similar style cars).  Stacey Keach 
is the top military honcho in charge of sending Snake into L.A.  
Suitably hard-bitten, he's a worthy successor to the late Lee Van Cleef.
     ESCAPE FROM L.A. is the first sequel directed by Carpenter, and, as 
such, represents a change of direction.  It's also the best film he's 
done in quite some time, although considering his recent resume -- 
VILLAGE OF THE DAMNED, IN THE MOUTH OF MADNESS, and THEY LIVE -- that's 
not saying much.  Will Snake be back again?  Probably not, but if he 
does return, at least there's no shortage of possibilities for the 
title.  Anyone for ESCAPE FROM CHICAGO?
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Michael Redman
Walking into the theater, I was expecting a teched-up sequel to the 15
year old "Escape From New York". Seeing only four people seated, I
should have guessed that the word of mouth wasn't phenomenal. After the
first few minutes of the film, I could see why.
The earlier film, also starring Kurt Russell and directed by John
Carpenter, featured a post-apocalyptic NYC turned into a prison island
populated by off-beat an colorful gangs. Tough (but lovable) Guy Snake
Plissken (Russell) is recruited by the powers that be to rescue the
President who crash landed in the middle of the mess. To keep Snake on
track, he is booby-trapped so that if he doesn't deliver the Prez within
a time limit, he dies.
Once inside the city, our antihero locates the chief executive and
fights his way out, guns a'blazing. Zillions of bullets zoom towards
Snake with his name on them, but he emerges virtually unscathed, ready
to deal with the governmental double-cross.
Why talk so much about the original? The plots of both films are nearly
identical. Substitute New York with "Los Angeles after the big one" and
President with "President's daughter and mysterious black box" and
you've got "Escape From LA".
In this version, the Christian right has taken over the country and
sentenced the whores, atheists, meat-eaters and smokers to LA. It's
debatable which side of the wall is the actual prison. If it weren't a
deportation facility, it would be marketed as the perfect vacation spot.
Like many films with Roman numerals in their titles, this is no sequel.
Sequels continue the story: this is more of a re-make. Even worse, this
is a shabby re-make.
The original gave us an occasionally humorous, entertaining action film
where the effects worked even though some things didn't make sense. Now
that they've spent six times what the first one cost, we get an
over-the-top tedious movie with badly done models and poor computer
animation where nothing makes sense.
There are attempts at humor. If you think that Snake Plissken and Peter
Fonda surfing a tsunami down Wilshire Boulevard while trying to catch up
with a convertible sounds hilarious, this may be the film for you.
Russell does as much as he can with his Clint Eastwood impression and is
the only thing consistently worth watching. On the other hand, Carpenter
should be ashamed. Perhaps his next movie should be "Escape From Bad
Films".
[This appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
8/22/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Laurence Mixson
Starring Kurt Russell, A.J. Langer, Steve Buscemi, Georges Corraface,
Pam Grier, and Cliff Robertson.
Review by Laurence Mixson (jarls@datasync.com)
Escape from L.A. is like a xerox copy of something. When viewed at a
distance, or by people who haven't seen the original, it looks okay. But
when examined close-up by those who dealt with the first one, the flaws
and imperfections are gaping.
Escape from L.A. follows the return of Snake Plissken, who Kurt Russell
first brought to the screen 16 years ago in Escape from New York. Back
then, Kurt was trying to break away from his Disney-status in a raw,
unconvential film, directed and written by one of my favorite
directors(if you're a regular reader of my reviews, you'll know, my
favorite directors are Ridley Scott, Quentin Tarantino, John Carpenter,
James Cameron, Robert Zemeckis, Steven Speilberg, and Kevin Smith.) 
Snake Plissken is the classic anti-hero, a guy who breaks the rules but
won't kill innocent people and eventually winds up going on heroic
missions. His two distinguishing features are his eye-patch and the
snake tattoo on his chest. Oh yeah, and those cool threads: black combat
boots, tight leather pants and a vest. As a matter of fact, he's kind of
like a biker, only smaller and with less hair. And no hawg.
Escape from New York took place in 1997, when Manhatten Island had been
turned into a maximum security prison where all of the US criminals were
dropped. Snake, a recently-convicted criminal headed for New York, opted
to go in and save the President, who had been kidnapped after an
emergency landing there, in return for a full pardon. Then again, he
didn't have much of a choice. The doctors implanted him with a poison
before he went that would detonate in a certain time period, and only
administered the antidote until he had safely rescued the President.
What set the film apart back then was that it wasn't your typical action
flick. Shot on grungy sets with B-lists stars and a relatively low
budget, it had a grainy, film-noir feel to it. Unfortunately, Escape
from L.A. doesn't try too hard to recapture that feeling.
Like I said earlier, Escape from L.A. is like a copy of Escape from
N.Y., right down to the plot. Except this time, it's set in the year
2013, when an earthquake has seperated L.A. from the rest of California.
For some reason or another, L.A. has also been turned into a huge
dumping bin for America's scuzziest criminals. Also, America isn't the
America we know and love anymore; it's now a virtual dictatorship, run
by a President-for-Life(Robertson), who oversees the US in an amusing
extreme-right wing fashion: There's now no cursing, drinking, smoking,
violence, red meat, etc. 
It turns out that the President's daughter, Utopia(Langer)has helped
hi-jacked Air Force 3 and crashed it in L.A., and is holding The
Doomsday Device, which, with one press, will shut down all of the
earth's power. So the government thinks to itself, "Hmm, we need someone
who can go in, get the device, and get back out. Let's see, Plissken did
the same exact thing in New York 16 years earlier, so why don't we use
him?" Fortunately for the government, and the plot of this movie, Snake
Plissken has committed some sort of crime and can, in return for a full
pardon, go in and attempt to get the Doomsday Device and the President's
daughter(so the President, a real strict parent, can execute her). Of
course, they've once again injected him with a virus. And bad
one-liners.
Anyway, the movie never picks up, even when Snake hits L.A. It looks a
lot like New York, only the buildings are shorter. And they're more
people. And, for some reason, the special effects are really, really
bad. You'd think with a big release like this, they'd give it a decent
FX budget. Of course, knowing John Carpenter, he could be using the bad
FX to give the movie a more campy feel, which it definitely revels in.
But if that's what he intended, it sure doesn't work. 
Not that this movie is totally bad. I did give it **. There are lots of
amusements and high points. Like, for example, at the L.A. Deportation
Center, where people who are going to be sent to L.A. have the option of
being electrocuted instead. Or the scene in which Snake is kidnapped to
be the donor of parts to people who've had one plastic-surgery too
many(this scene has Bruce Campbell of Evil Dead film in a cameo as a mad
doctor). Steve Bescumi is good in his role as Map-to-the-Stars Eddie, as
is Pam Grier, playing a trannsexual who Snake used to hang out with and
was called Carjack. Now he, uh she, uh, IT is known as Hershe Las
Palmas. It's just too bad that these few small moments of humor and
wittiness don't make up for the serious defaults this movie has, like a
boring villain named Cuervo Jones(Corraface), bad FX, and a horrible
ending that not only rips off the first one, but does it poorly and
carries it on WAY too long. Plus there's that feeling I kept getting
while watching it that I was basically watching the 1981 movie, except
with a few plot changes and a general dumbing-down of the script.  
I do save a little hope for this series, however. A line that's been
used both in the ads for Escape from L.A. and in the movie itself is,
"He survived Cincinatti. He escaped from New York. Now he must
face...L.A." I seriously hope this is hinting at sequel set in
Cincinatti BEFORE Escape from New York. Because I know that, just like
Chasing Amy did with Kevin Scott's New Jersey trilogy, the third film
can overcome the deficiencies of the second film and recapture the magic
from the first.
