Title
Review for Reine Margot, La (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Pedro Sena
Not since Ken Russell's THE DEVILS has a film come up so brutal, and yet so
well pointed in its purpose.  Generally, brutality is used as a literal
example of the viciousness which people tend to have towards each other.
More often than not, it comes out as selfish, meaningless and rather
pathetic.  Like THE DEVILS, this film, does have its share of carnage and
intoxicating images, which could easily make the very church sick, knowing
the image that it has carried for many years.
But I suppose that it is the fact that this film easily attacks the
religious sense behind it, that makes it stand out as THE DEVILS  did.  As
such, it is not a film for just about anyone.  But aside from its carnal
instinct, it is a marvelous film, that tells its story very well.  It also,
clearly, shows why the French had so many internal problems, one of which
could be excused so easily on the church and the faith that was accepted by
the throne and the royalty.
It was 1572, when the French crown is making an attempt to extend itself,
and find a way to make the country stronger.  And for it to do that, it  had
to set up several marriages of convenience.  And some of these
marriages were not perfect, although others worked.  This one involved the
King's sister, who was to marry Henri of Navarre, with the idea of bringing
the independent area with long ties to the Spanish crown under wraps. But to
make matters difficult, the Navarre area, had embraced the Protestant faith,
which did not sit well with the Queen mother Catherine, and the jealous
brothers.
And the unhappy marriage is not consummated for quite sometime, as they seem
to be having their own problems of acceptance of each other.  Margot,
independent of spirit and body, still, on occasion takes to the streets to
pick up a man for a few strokes.  And one day, she comes across one that is
far better of a lover than others. La Mole becomes a dream for her, and, as
is everything else that she likes, he also happens to be sided with the
Protestants.
The revenging brother tries to kill the king, and Henri de Navarre, so he
himself can become king.  And eventually, be it one of his mother's ploys or
his own, they finally succeed in killing the king. And a puppet is set up.
La Mole becomes the perfect case.  With one swing, the new king will have
gotten rid of two tormentors.
And Margot will have been destroyed.
The end states that Margot exiled herself to Navarre and though she divorced
Henri, they remained friends for a long time.  The new king of France, got
there by the death of his own brother who may have  been accidentally
poisoned by one of the mother's ploys to get rid of Henri.
The film is incredibly well photographed, and like THE DEVILS, it also
brings across the serenity after the terrible destruction. It also uses
music very nicely.  But the serenity only lasts a while until another charge
takes place.
While the film may not quite be a great expose of the French history, it
does show, clearly, the corruption that was around these courts, and how
many got to where they were.  As long as they are in favor, they went along
with the courts.  And as soon as they were out of favor, they were dead.
That simple.  And at all turns, the new
king is thanking God for his good fortunes, which were quite good, even if
he had to protect himself.
Isabelle Adjani is excellent, in an impossible role, as is Vincent Perez as
her lover.  The rest of the cast is well suited, and all the visible
characters are well rehearsed and well designed.  It's hard to find
something out of place.
A great film, though the brutality will turn many people off.  But it is
very well done.

Author
Max Hoffmann
French, with subtitles
Directed by Patrice Chéreau
Cast: Isabelle Adjani, Virna Lisi, Vincent Perez, Julien Rassam,
Jean-Hugues Anglade and Pascall Greggory
     (Warning: very bloody violence and explicit sex; all justified by
the actual historic events depicted.  Do not attend if you cant stand
visceral brutality.)
     This is a GREAT movie: fascinating, entertaining, enlightening,
sensual, top-notch performances and very very accurate for 16th Century
historical look and feel.  Although the costumes are magnificent, they
are often sweaty and bloodstained.  You can almost smell the crowd.
     Set in 1572 France, torn by religious wars between Catholics and
Protestants.  Queen Mother Catherine DeMedici (Virna Lisi in an
astonishing performance) continues to rule France, even though her son,
King Charles IX, has come of age.  The film opens with a marriage
between the Kings Catholic sister, Margot (Adjani), and Henri of
Navarre (Daniel Auteil), a protestant King.  Dimly light scenes
accurately capture sweaty, night interiors as we see tensions mount
between Catholic and Protestant roommates on the eve of the
celebration.
     The St. Bartholomews Day massacre of Protestants (who were wedding
guests of the court) is depicted with visceral realism.  It leads to
intrigue and blood letting that would make any DYNASTY viewers head
spin.  Not for the squeamish or feint of heart.  The screenwriter chose
not to soften the incredible atrocity of the massacre, which provides
for some intense imagery; ladies of the court delicately stepping over
bloody corpses that are being stripped by looters.
     The photography is magnificent, and this is the first historical
film in recent memory with highly believable lighting.  Except for one
dramatically overlight cathedral, most of the interiors seem to be lit
only by grimy windows or candlelight.  Much of the plot revolves around
the newly weds being held in the Louvre as virtual prisoners.  You
share their paranoia about what might be lurking in the inky dark
shadows.
     A good portion of this films visual gifts are provided by four
handsome French actors, who intersect with Margot in a variety of ways
as her brothers and/or lovers.  Its easy to imagine that Pascall
Greggory, as Anjou (next in the line of succession) may well be drawing
from past life memories.  He looks gooood in that long hair and
mustache, and he knows how to broadcast a sense of authority by the way
he rides a horse.  Jean-Hugues Anglade, the smoldering male lead from
BETTY BLUE, plays King Charles.  Heart throb Vincent Perez is luscious
as the Protestant lover, despite the grimy makeup and sweaty costumes.
Queen Margots motivation is no mystery here.  Isabelle Adjani has
evidently discovered a secret fountain of youth; no face lift scars,
and she looks virtually identical to her film persona of 20 years ago.
Be prepared to hate her.   ;-)
     This film will stick with you for a long time.  I highly recommend
seeing it on the big screen, which would prove more revealing for the
magnificent costume detail.  I fear that much of the subtle nighttime
detail would fade into black pixels when viewed on video.  I also find
subtitles more subconscious in larger type in a darkened theatre.  This
is also the kind of film that stirs a lot of audience energy that you'll
miss in your living room.
     Due to the film's historical accuracy, there are no clear cut
protagonists.  Like the courtiers themselves, you may find yourself
dizzied by the constantly changing tides of power and intrigue.  Unlike
most popular Hollywood films, QUEEN MARGOT does not rewrite history to
make any of the characters more appealing than they probably were in
real life.  Thats one of the reasons I liked the film.  Its also one of
the reason others may hate it.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     QUEEN MARGOT is about a period of French history (1572) of which I
know little.  I am a big history buff, I love costume dramas, and I have
seen the excellent trailers for QUEEN MARGOT so I was looking forward
to this show.
     In France, Queen Margot, a Catholic, marries Henri of Navarre, a
Protestant, in an arranged marriage that neither wants.  That much is
clear.  It is also obvious that the two religious camps hate each other
and that war is about to break out.  Everything else including who all
of the minor characters are and why is a total fog for the first hour
of the movie.  Eventually, you figure it all out and then you realize
that the problem with the movie is not that it is incomprehensible.  The
problem in the movie is that it was poorly crafted from the beginning.
     How do I start in describing this disaster of a movie?  Let's start
with the cinematography.  It was filmed with cameras with dirty lens or
so it seemed, and they used a low contrast film that made the picture
hard to see, dark and depressing.  The set decoration, with the possible
exception of the cathedral scene, was bland and totally without
imagination.
     Perhaps the worst parts of the movie are the costumes and the
makeup.  On the one hand, I love seeing beautiful women in movies, and
this picture was filled with them.  So why am I complaining?  On the
other hand, are we really supposed to believe that every single woman,
rich and poor, in France looked like she just stepped out of a
photoshoot for Vogue with million dollar clothes and tons of makeup
whereas every single man looked like an alcoholic bum who had not taken
a bath in years and had the look of grease dripping from his beard?  Sad
to say they got an Academy Award nomination for this clothing too.
     The acting was of the lets all look pained and deliver our lines
in a low whinny whisper school of acting.  Isabelle Adjani looked
marvelous in the picture, but too bad they forgot to tell her this was
not a photo session and she had to act.  Henri (Daniel Auteuil) looked
like he had gas in most of the movie.  I hope he gets to feeling better
soon.  All of the other actors and actresses in the movie managed to be
even worse than the two leads which was hard to do.
     The director (Patrice Chereau) had no idea what kind of movie he
wanted to make, and it showed.  He provided lots of bloody scenes in an
attempt to enliven this dreary and boring movie, but to no avail.
     The movie runs on and on and on at an exhausting 2:23.  It is rated
R for numerous bloody decapitations, murders of all types, rape, sex,
and scenes reminiscent of the bodies in Nazi concentration camps.  I do
not recommend it for any human being and certainly not for teenagers or
younger.  It is in French with English subtitles.  I give it 1/2 of a
star for reasons that totally escape me--perhaps Adjani's smile is
worth a half a star.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: February 3, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Isabelle Adjani, Daniel Auteuil, Jean-Hugues Anglade, 
          Vincent Perez, Virna Lisi, Pascal Greggory, Julien Rassam, 
          Dominique Blanc 
Director: Patrice Chereau 
Producer: Claude Berri 
Screenplay: Daniele Thompson and Patrice Chereau based on the novel by 
Alexandre Dumas 
Cinematography: Philippe Rousselot 
Music: Goran Bregovi 
Released by Miramax Films
In French with subtitles 
     The ageless Isabelle Adjani, one of France's most beautiful faces, 
has an undeniable screen presence.  And, with his lean, well-toned body 
and finely-sculpted features, Vincent Perez is equally pleasing to the 
eye.  However, put them together with the expectation that they'll play 
off one another, and the love affair that's supposed to sizzle instead 
fizzles.  Not only is there no chemistry between these two, but the cold-
as-ice Adjani never thaws, and Perez shows that in France, like 
elsewhere, physical attractiveness does not equate to acting talent. 
     Fortunately, there's a lot more going on in QUEEN MARGOT than the 
relationship between Perez' gallant La Mole and Adjani's title character.  
The film's primary focus is the bloody sixteenth-century struggle between 
French Catholics and Protestants, and the resulting political intrigue in 
the court of King Charles XI.  QUEEN MARGOT opens in 1572 at the 
ostentatious wedding of Margot--the Catholic daughter of Catherine de 
Medici (Virna Lisi) and the brother of Charles (Jean-Hugues
Anglade)--to Henri of Navarre (Daniel Auteuil)--the leader of the
Huguenots.  While this arrangement is intended to secure peace between
the rival religious factions, it is a marriage of convenience only.
Margot makes it clear that Henri is not welcome in her bed.
     Six days after the marriage comes the Saint Bartholomew's Day
massacre, an event that sees the wanton slaughter of thousands of
Protestants, including the king's confidante.  Henri, like many of his
subjects, is forced to convert to Catholicism to save his life.
Meanwhile, Margot has taken a new lover--a brave and dashing Huguenot
by the name of La Mole.  Yet the I CLAUDIUS-like scheming and political
machinations have just begun.
     Most of QUEEN MARGOT is a top-notch historical epic featuring
impeccable costumes and grand scenery.  Unlike the "typical" French
film, this is not at all talky.  In fact, amidst the swordfights,
carnage, and battle scenes, there are occasions when dialogue is at a
premium.  QUEEN MARGOT is a sumptuous movie--except when the focus
switches to the poorly realized romance between Margot and La Mole.
     Perhaps the most chilling sequence in QUEEN MARGOT depicts the
dumping of hundreds of lifeless bodies into mass graves.  Echoing
Holocaust horrors, it's not a unique cinematic picture, but this type
of scene is rarely associated with anything other than Nazi
concentration camps.  It serves as an unpleasant reminder that
atrocities litter the entire spectrum of human history, not just the
present and recent past.
     Directed by Patrice Chereau and produced by Claude Berri (the
director of such epics as JEAN DE FLORETTE/MANON OF THE SPRING and
GERMINAL), QUEEN MARGOT never becomes tiresome despite a substantial
running length (actually, more than 30 minutes were trimmed by Miramax
from the original cut).  There is enough energy to drive this film
through its few slow spots on momentum alone, and Chereau fortunately
doesn't subject us to too many scenes with only Adjani and Perez.
Featuring the likes of Daniel Auteuil (UN COEUR EN HIVER), Jean-Hugues
Anglade (KILLING ZOE), and Virna Lisi, the rest of the cast is
impeccable.
     QUEEN MARGOT has enough pomp and pageantry--not to mention
melodrama--to alienate viewers who don't enjoy that sort of film.
However, for those who appreciate bigger-than-life historical sagas,
Chereau's entry is often impressive and almost always entertaining.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Raymond Johnston
Directed by Patrice Chereau
Starring- Isabelle Adjani, Jean-Hugues Anglade, Virna Lisi,
     For those of you who thought "I, Claudius" lacked intrigue or
Polanski's MACBETH was weak on the swordplay, there is QUEEN MARGOT.
Following the decade long trend of big-budget costume dramas from
France that began with DANTON and has escalated upward, comes this
lavish historical drama with something for everyone, and perhaps too
much for some.
     A special English-language introductory text tries to explain the
political situation of 1570s France, and a chart of the succession to
the throne placed in the theatre lobby help somewhat in deciphering the
convoluted story. Early on it becomes clear that it is Protestants
versus Catholics, men versus women, young versus old, and washed versus
unwashed in a relentless brawl of Royal plots and purges.
     Just when the viewer becomes complacent that this is another regal
fashion and frolic painting come to life,  the film quickly changes.
Highly volatile action scenes erupt and dissipate quickly, bringing a
sense of urgency and realism to the film. No attempt to soft peddle the
dark events of the age is made. Hand to hand violence seldom reaches
this level outside of a George Romero zombie film. As quickly as it
began, the action falls down into a slow simmer, a hanging threat over
the rest of the film.
     Playing the role of twisted puppet master is Catherine de Medici.
Similar to Lydia in "I, Claudius," she is a demon matriarch who will
stop at no foul plan to solidify her power. Virtually all the dark
deeds in the highly complex story are at her instigation. Virna Lisi,
1960's glamour icon, makes no attempt to find a good side to her
character. She plays Catherine as an aging Black Widow spider in
unflattering gowns and make-up. Parenthetically, the character of
Catherine de Medici figured into the plot of the recent NOSTRADAMUS.
Nostradamus does not figure into the plot of this film.
     The title role goes to the beautiful Isabelle Adjani as Queen
Margot. Her wedding and its aftermath are the crux of the film. Besides
the action, QUEEN MARGOT offers a liberal dose of romantic intrigue.
Queen Margot and others in the court take their arranged marriages
lightly. The intensely passionate story of Queen Margot and her lover
is sure to satisfy costume drama fans that prefer romance to violence.
Ms Adjani elicits sympathy for her character, who is more of a pawn
than a player in these chaotic times. Some of the romance novel ploys,
like wandering the streets in a mask looking for an anonymous lover,
may strike some as far fetched. In this film's grand scheme of excess,
it is not too far fetched.
     Jean-Hugues Anglade, who appeared recently in KILLING ZOE, gives
another unrestrained performance as one of the Medici clan. This time
the production is so large in scale, that he fits in quite well. The
grand subject matter of the French court really lends itself to a broad
acting style.
     Parts of Portugal are sometimes unconvincingly substituted for
France, but that is a minor problem in an otherwise astonishing film.
Fans of both action and romance should be quite pleased by this film,
if one element does not deter them from the other. From set and costume
design to story and performance, this is one of the best films of the
year. That it is getting a special one-week-only year-end release
alerts one that it is a contender for Best Foreign Film awards.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     The time is the late 1500s.  Religious wars are raging in France.
Catholics, such as Catherine de Medici (Verna Lisi) who was the Queen
Mother was on one side while the Protestants were on the other.  It was
not about God; it was about power and who gets to rule.
     It is at this point that the Queen Mother decides to lessen her
problems and seek a peace by marrying her beautiful daughter, Margot
(Isabelle Adjani) to the Protestant Henri of Navarre (Daniel Auteil).
Charles IX (Jean-Hugues Anglade) was one of three brothers of
Catherine.  All three brothers are believed by historians to have been
in love with their beautiful sister, Margot, to the point where incest
is suspected.  Given that it was rumored that she had bedded at least a
dozen prior to her marriage, the stories about her are believable.
     What makes the film difficult to follow is that much of it was
filmed in the dark so that it is difficult to know who is who when a
battle breaks out in which many thousands of people died including most
of the guests who Henri of Navarre brought to the wedding.  With
historians differing about who started the massacre, the audience is
left on its own.  What we do know is somewhere between 2,000 and
100,000 were massacred that day.
     It is the strong acting by the stunning Adjani that helps hold the
story and the film together while the audience will learn something
about history.
Directed by Patrice Chereau from a story by Alexandre Dumas.
