Title
Review for W.I.S.O.R. (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Rachel Gordon
What a tough sell this film must have been: Documenting the development
of an engineering device that would automate the fixing of broken steam
piping underground at the flip of a switch.  Set against the backdrop of
other advances in technology, with a focus on what robotics has done for
humans so far, W.I.S.O.R. may be smart, but does anyone care?
Of course, we're supposed to care.  After all, steam pipes burst all the
time, flooding streets, exploding buildings, killing innocent people,
and causing nasty traffic jams.  These pipes date back to the early 20th
century and it's time they got updated to the rest of civilization.
So ConEdison (purveyor of gas and electricity in New York City) set
Honeybee Robotics to the task of creating a device that would weld
ruptures in underground systems with help of a human interface.  It's no
small feat, as it's never been done before, so there are no predecessors
to work from, and even the schematics of the underground systems are
questionable.  It's a seemingly impossible task, even for a large
corporation used to building robots for IBM.  But it will happen, and
the end result will be W.I.S.O.R., or welding and inspection steam
operations robot.
Michel Negroponte, who came to understandable recognition after his
successful debut with Jupiter's Wife, tries to make this subject
interesting.  It starts out with gusto, a short energetic cartoon of
what W.I.S.O.R. will eventually do, brief shots of the men making it
possible, and some horror scene news footage that prompted ConEdison to
take action.  But not halfway through the film, it is difficult to
stifle a yawn.  The engineers bounce scientific theories back and forth,
prove themselves frustratingly wrong, and get back on the horse time and
again.  To make matters even more annoying, the robot they are making is
given a voice that mimics them.
The archival footage that is interspersed to break up the development of
the machine has some interesting historical perspective.  However, the
voice over is a condescending one, as if it were speaking to mere 5-year
olds (who of course would never sit through a film like this).
Visually speaking, it doesn't matter which section of the "robo-welder"
they are working on, though each piece gets an exhausting length of
time.  Again, Negroponte tries to make up for this in shifty camera work
mixed with slow and fast motion, but all this creates is an eyesore. 
For some reason, the screen also changes from black and white to color
at random.
The redeeming values are few and far between.  It's respectable that
Negroponte would try to teach the masses about such a subject and that
the subjects aren't portrayed as perfect geniuses of noble personality. 
The structure of the film is pleasantly tight; none of the scenes are
particularly over-extended.  But while it is human tendency to turn to
technology to fix things, and some of these advances are fascinating,
W.I.S.O.R. just doesn't make the grade.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
