Title
Review for My Life's in Turnaround (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dorothy Pomerantz (Dorothy Pomerantz)
     It seems like there's a definite trend nowadays towards making TV
shows and movies about nothing.  Yes, I do think Jerry Sienfeld helped
this along--but for some reason this nothingness has been associated
with the 20 something crowd.  Maybe it's because of SLACKERS, I don't
know.  But MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND takes nothing and makes it about
something.  Not about something so much as about getting off your ass
and doing something.  In SLACKER and REALITY BITES , the kids never
actually do anything.  The movies end and we are content knowing that
maybe they found love or maybe they found something to do with their
days, but they didn't reall accomplish anything.  At the end of MY
LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND, you know they actually did something, created a
piece of art, because you're watching it.
     MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND is about two guys (the authors, directors,
producer, stars) who decide to make a movie.  They have no ideas, no
script and maybe no talent.  They seem to think that they don't need
any of this stuff though, people will want to watch what they do,
though we're not exactly sure what that is.  They're only guidance is
their friend Sarah who runs a talent agency and puts up with a lot of
shit from them.  She tries to "get them meetings" with various
producers but they manage to mess them all up with their lack of
direction.
     Everyone says they need a star attached to the project.
Miraculously, they run into Phoebe Cate and Martha Plimpton
(separately) and charm them into starring in their film (for which they
have no idea or script).
     If this sounds boring and weird, it isn't.  You are compelled to
watch what it is these guys do, although they don't do much of
anything.  They're just really funny.  It's a pleasure to watch.  I and
most of the rest of the audience laughed the whole way through.  They
are like your funniest friends entertaining you for an hour and a
half.  Their language is complete with words not found, casual
obscenities and "like"s and "umm"s.  They charm Martha Plimpton into
joining the film by relating some truly gross but somehow funny
stories.  It's hard to know if these guys really understand what
they've got.  It's easy to confuse their screen personalities with their
real personalities because the movie seems so autobiographical.  But
they both end up with beautiful girl friends and its all very neat.
     The  film does lapse into unnecessary sentimentality at some
points.  Jason (who is always surrounded by fourteen-year-old models)
is dealing with the fact that his father was more successful them him
at that age and that he ultimately killed himself.  It's a useless plot
device to give the character a little more depth, but it doesn't come
in to much.  And when it does, it's accompanied by corny piano music
which also fades in the background mercifully quickly.  The rest of the
soundtrack is pretty good stuff though.
     The other problem I had with this film is that they were pretty
shitty to women but they got the girls in the end.  It was a little
like they said, well, our methods don't work in real life, lets make
our film personalities live out that dream.  Although they are charming
and funny--they're guy-guys to the worst degree and I was a little mad
about that.  Also, they treat their friend Sarah terribly and she just
goes--oh, you guys.  They are cute, but I don't know how many thinking
girls out there would want to date them.
     The two guys were actually at this screening which was a
surprise.  They're a lot fatter in real life then they appeared on
screen which I thought was strange.  But they were pretty down to earth
about the whole film making thing.  I hope they get the opportunity to
do more stuff, because I really enjoyed this movie and I think they
might have potential.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Eric Schaeffer, Donal Lardner Ward, Dana Wheeler-
           Nicholson, Lisa Gerstein, Debra Clein 
Directors:  Eric Schaeffer and Donal Lardner Ward 
Producer:  Daniel Einfield 
Screenplay:  Eric Schaeffer and Donal Lardner Ward 
Music:  Red Hays 
Released by Arrow Releasing 
     "Turnaround", as used in Hollywood, refers to a project in develop- 
ment that gets shelved until and unless someone agrees to pick it up. 
     MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND is a case of art imitating life imitating art 
imitating life - or something like that.  This movie chronicles its own 
genesis and making in a fictional-that's-almost-documentary-like 
fashion.  Weird?  To say the least.  Funny and insightful?  Without a 
doubt.  A success?  That depends on what you enjoy in a movie.  For me, 
it is. 
     The story behind MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND is fascinating, and that's 
one of the reasons why the film is so entertaining.  Eric Schaeffer, a 
New York City cab driver, and Donny Ward, his bartender friend and room- 
mate, spontaneously decided to make a film.  The problem was that they 
didn't have a script - or even the idea for a script ("I think this whole
idea thing is overrated") - nor did they know the first thing about 
production, direction, or camerawork.  They were also nearly broke.  But 
through determination borne of ignorance and stubbornness, and aided 
with unbelievably good luck, this movie was made. 
     The price tag was $22 thousand, with the photography done on 16 mm 
film.  Half the involved people were convinced, even after the production 
wasunderway, that the project would not be finished.  However, months 
later, MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND has been snapped up by Arrow Releasing, 
is opening the Seattle Film Festival, and has gotten the co-directors a 
$10 million picture deal with TriStar.   
     I laughed a lot more during this film than during any of this year's 
so-called comedies out of Hollywood.  Sure, most of those pictures have a 
few laughs to offer, but none match the level of constant hilarity 
attained by MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND.  From wit to zaniness, the movie 
spans the comic spectrum, with few - if any - of its jokes falling flat.  
Quite an achievement for a pair of first-timers. 
     The dramatic side of the story, which admittedly is neither deep nor 
profound, presents an interesting character study.  Both protagonists 
are bizarre loners who gravitate towards each other, and practically no 
one else. Their own words probably best describe them:  "We're not going 
to meet anyone.  We're just going to die weird and dumb." 
     By now, the anti-Hollywood brand of satire is no longer original, but
MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND still has a few things to say in this area.  Most 
of these coalesce in a scene featuring John Sayles as a big-time 
producer who catalogues the five different categories of commercially 
viable movies, then goes into a towering rage when he discovers that 
he's being pitched either an art film or a documentary.  Sayles is 
magnificent here, at his over-the-top best. 
     Also making cameos are the likes of Phoebe Cates and Martha Plimpton, 
playing themselves.  Not surprisingly, both met the directors in a 
manner similar to what's portrayed on screen.  Plimpton's raunchy scene 
with Schaeffer and Ward is, like the Sayles sequence, a definite 
highlight.   
     One of the problems with really funny movies is that they tend to 
tire the audience out, and this is evident with MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND.  
As the film draws to a close, the humor is still bubbling, but those 
watching are close to being "laughed out."   
     Those familiar with recursion may get the feeling that they are 
watching the cinematic equivalent here.  There's something inherently 
odd about viewing a picture doing a fictional chronicle of its own pro- 
duction. Nevertheless, that is one - and only one - of the many charms 
of MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND, a unique and surprising motion picture from 
two delightfully offbeat filmmakers. 
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
