Title
Review for Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Far better than the unfunny TO WONG FOO..., PRISCILLA combines a
Damon Runyan-ized version of the drag life with some really heartfelt
moments.
"The Sixty-Four Thousand Dollar Question," drawls transsexual Bernadette
(Terence Stamp), in response to the simple query: "Why? Why do you do it?"
What, indeed, would possess anyone to dress up in outlandish costumes and
lip-synch to Abba and CeCe Peniston? PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT,
doesn't really have an Answer, but it has an aggregate of little bits of
understanding that sorta kinda add up to an entertaining story.
Bernadette and her two cohorts (Hugo Weaving and Guy Pierce) have a drag
stage show in Sydney. Hugo's character's wife runs a casino in Alice
Springs, and they're desperate for cash -- they need some kind of
attraction. With the kind of headstrong fortitude that's rarely seen
anywhere except in the movies, they throw themselves into a customized bus
and set out through the desert.
The movie then turns into a kind of outback-meets-drag version of EASY
RIDER, but with a lot more predictability. The first time they stop off in
town, they get off the bus wearing the loudest outfits they can muster, and
try to order a drink, and get into a drinking contest with a butch barmaid.
Even odder is a stopover with a mechanic and her deranged mail-order bride,
although where that scene ends, the movie takes some interesting new
detours. Unfortunately, a good deal of what comes in between is filler --
the breakdown in the desert, the warm reception by a gang of aborigines,
etc.
The mechanic, Bob (Bill Hunter) is one of the more sympathetic people in
the movie, and he winds up sticking around and putting the antics of the
others into context. Not only that, but he starts serving as a real foil
for Bernadetter, an intelligent person who is obviously getting fed up with
the limited substance of her life. Also interesting is Hugo's character --
his wife and child are far more comfortable with the idea of his way of
life than he is, and it takes him a long time to get used to that.
PRISCILLA is loopy and funny in places, but the real substance of the movie
lies in Terence Stamp's character -- a credible person trapped in some very
oddball circumstances. And once that hits home, a lot of the rest of the
movie seems a little superfluous. PRISCILLA is not a bad movie, but not an
exceptionally good one, either. I suspect the definitive movie about drag
really has yet to come along.

Author
Max Hoffmann
THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT 
-- Australian 1994, 107  min
Director & Screenplay: Stephan Elliot
Producer:  Al Clark, Michael Hamlyn
Camera: Brian Breheny
Editor: Sue Blainey
Cast: Terence Stamp, Hugo Weaving, Guy Pearce, Bill Hunter, Sara Chadwick
Print: Polygram International
     A lengthy, standing ovation in SF's venerable Castro theatre ended
the world premiere of what may prove to be the festival's runaway hit!
A neary full house in the 2,000-seat venue proved that a 10:15 PM
show time on a Sunday night couldn't dampen the film's appeal: take
three drag queens, a wardrobe that wouldn't fit in Imelda Marcos's
closet, add a bus, a soundtrack full of 70s disco divas and a trip
across the outback to Alice Springs, stir up the ingredients with
several secrets, unexpected plot twists and romance, and you have a
prescription guaranteed to lift your spirits.  PRISCILLA is  high camp
comedy, with mainstream appeal that succeeds on nearly every level, a
definite "cross over" candidate if it finds the right distribution.
Imagine the funniest, most life-affirming moments from HAROLD AND
MAUDE, LA CAGE AUX FOLLES, STRICTLY BALLROOM, and BAGDAD CAFE and
you'll have some sense of what a jewel this film is.
     It's worth the price of admission for the costumes and wigs alone!
We haven't seen anything this outrageous since Von Sternberg took
Marlena Dietrich's eyebrows to new heights.  Although the premise for
this film might scare away the less imaginative film goer, for the rest
of us there's something supremely liberating about seeing a silver-lame
coated drag queen, straddling the top of a speeding bus like a champion
water skier, trailed by a 50-foot mylar scarf, lip-synching Opera!  I
don't know about you, but that's something I just can't see too often!
     PRISCILLA is a far cry from PARIS IS BURNING, with its sad,
clown-like drag queens vainly trying to latch on to someone else's
faded glamour.  These girls tear through the heartland of Australia's
homophobia, like a sequined Conestoga wagon, blazing new trails into
the frontiers of possiblity and self-discovery.  Each encounter leaves
the people they meet changed, mostly for the better.  They're living
proof that Goddess placed drag queens on the planet to bring life and
color into our sad and dreary lives.
     Hugo Weaving (of PROOF) as "Mitzi" gets an offer to do a four-week
gig in Alice Springs.  He's joined by Guy Pearce as "Felicia" and
Terence Stamp as "Bernadette" to go westward-ho, scattering sequins and
adventures along the way.  Stephan Elliot's script has almost as many
juicy one-liners as sequins and rivals THE WOMEN for deliciously
bitchy humor.  The screenplay often steers the audience's attention one
way, and then pulls the punchline in another.  Bernadette joins the
trek because his twenty-five-year-old lover has just died.  As the
crane shot descends over the sequined crowd gathered around the grave
site, everyone in the audience immediately draws the conclusion that
the young man died of AIDS.  Heading towards the limo, Berndatte
steams, "cheeky little bugger, he was bleaching his hair in the
bathroom, was overcome by the peroxide fumes, passed out and hit his
head on the tiles!  I told him to go to a salon."
     Although there is one fag bashing, and several intense encounters
with homophobia, neither the characters nor the film ever wallow in
self pity, or take on the status of a victim.  The three drag stars
take life face on, on their own terms, often trading successfully on
their underdog status (much the way the first ROCKY did).
     Terence Stamp (FAR FROM THE MADDING CROWD, THE COLLECTOR) in
his first comedic role, gives a touching and inspired performance as a
tired but regal transsexual who's seen it all.  Unlike other mainstream
actor's, who go over the top doing drag, Stamp brings a quiet sense of
dignity to his Tallulah-esque diva.  If the film gets sufficient
distribution, Stamp may have to make room on his mantle for a little
gold statue next spring.
     Stamp garnered some of the best on-liners in the film, and aims
them with the accuracy of a heat-seeking missile.  He's a scene stealer,
equal to Eve Arden in STAGEDOOR.  When Guy Pearce as "Felicia"
confesses he's always had a fantasy about climbing Ayer's rock in full
drag and heels, Stamp regally flips his tresses, closes his eyes,
counts for just the right beat and rasps, "just what this country
needs, another cock in a frock on the rock!"
     Elliot's script fleshes out his characters quite nicely, belying
most of the stereotypes usually related to drag.  (It's revealed early
on that one of the trio has been "batting for both sides" so to speak,
giving rise to a brief, healthy dose of "heterophobia.")  Speaking of
fleshed out, Guy Pearce needs little help in that arena.  His scantily
clad form, often out of drag, is the stuff of a calendar publisher's
dream!  Pearce is the perfect foil for Stamp's world weary comic
timing.  Hugo Weaving's Mitzi, the more responsible member of the
party, keeps one eye on the road and the uncertain future ahead, in a
highly compelling performance (with considerable "sticking power" for a
comedy).
     Characters encountered along the way are as rich and endearing as
any found in BAGDAD CAFE.  Bill Hunter as the garage mechanic, who
chucks his conventional lifestyle to join the merry trio, makes a
strong mark on the film.  As does Sara Chadwick as the kind of mother
that is the stuff of Jesse Helm's worst nightmares.  I'll avoid any
more plot spoilers, but will say that the "ping pong" scene must be
seen to be believed.
     In the director's talk, Elliott revealed that the costumes by his
friends Lizzy Gardener and Tim Chapell were done on a literal shoe
string.  My favorite was the 60's miniskirt outfit made of cheap
plastic sandels!  Elliott revealed that the natural "bounce" for Stamp's
bosom was achieved by filling condoms with moisturizer.  One scene with
a heavy embrace had to be re-filmed when the condoms popped!  Several of
the costumes used during club performances make eye popping visual puns
(including the Sydney Opera house).
     Any budget restraints on the film were belied by the stunning
camera work and keen sense of lighting.  Frequent interior shots on the
bus never approached claustrophobia due to the variety of imaginative
camera angles.
     Incidentally, director Elliot had originally planned to use real
drag queens.  But as he put it, when he ran an ad announcing the
opportunity to trek across the outback in drag, covered in flies, he
only had one applicant, so he used real actors.  Stamp was chosen from
a list of actors who were considered to be playing "against type."
Elliot never imagined that Stamp would actually accept.  If the film is
seen by the right audience in LA, Stamp's the decision to play
"Bernadette" may prove to be the shrewdest move of his career.
     PRISCILLA doesn't have distribution yet, but it's under
consideration by Polygram.  FAX this review with your vote to see it
to:

Author
Heather Picker
"The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert"
     Written and Directed by Stephan Elliott.  Starring Terence Stamp, Hugo
Weaving, and Guy Pearce, with Bill Hunter.  1994, 102 min., Rated R.
     The premise of "The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert," is
simple.  In fact, the whole movie is rather simplistic, it is a buddy/road
comedy with a twist, being that two of the three main characters are female
impersonators, and the third is an transsexual who was once at the top of her
profession in a revue called Les Girls.  Tick, also known as Mitzi (Hugo
Weaving) opens the film with a performance at a bar, lip-synching to "I've
Never Been to Me."  He sells Wo-Man cosmetics on the side, and when he is
extended the opportunity to perform at a casino in Alice Springs, he calls upon
his friends Adam (a.k.a. Felicia, played by Guy Pearce, best known as Ed Exley
in "L.A. Confidential") and Bernadette (Terence Stamp) to join him.  
     They hit the road from Sydney, Australia, in a bus christened Priscilla,
Queen of the Desert, and run into many problems, personally and otherwise, as
they make their way to Alice Springs.  Their emotional baggage includes Tick's
heretofore big secret that he is married and has a child (surprise, surprise,
his wife is a lesbian), Adam's troubled childhood and dealing with his mother's
reaction to his sexuality, and Bernadette's struggle with a mid-life crisis. 
Along the way they encounter bigotry and the beginnings of resolutions to their
own problems, which, in Bernadette's case, comes in the form of Bob (Bill
Hunter), a mechanic who climbs aboard Priscilla for the last leg of the journey
to Alice Springs after being humiliated and dumped by his wife, and who becomes
quietly interested in Bernadette.
     "The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert," is an enjoyable comedy
with a few problems.  The stereotypical, one-dimensional bigots are overused,
and some may be upset at the missed opportunities to go beneath the gaudy
exteriors of our protagonists, but while that would have been an interesting
angle, it would also have been a completely different movie, and I liked this
one as it was.  The retro-infused soundtrack features disco favorites and
older, campy fluff.   On-stage performances, confidently pulled off by the trio
of lead actors with great charisma, decked out in amazing costumes (which won
the 1994 Oscar for Best Achievement in Costume Design--Lizzy Gardiner and Tim
Chappel), are Priscilla's strongest suit.  
     Weaving, Pearce, and Stamp work well together, and all turn in solid
performances.  Weaving doesn't have to show much emotion until the end, when
dealing with having to be a father to his son, and Pearce, who most recently
starred in "Ravenous," is showcased in Priscilla as extremely versatile; he was
by far the most believable in his portrayal of a drag queen.  Stamp doesn't
make a particularly lovely lady, but has some of the most emotional scenes in
the film, which he handles with a subtle dignity that makes him stand out.  The
script is spiked with profanity and funny barbs shot from character to
character, but is occasionally slow-moving.  A sample of the one-liners: The
introduction of a dog named Herpes ("If she's good she'll heal") and Felicia
asking a video store clerk "Do you have the  Texas Chainsaw Mascara?"  Stephan
Elliott, who wrote it, is also a competent director.
     DVD Details: A PolyGram release.  Standard and widescreen versions are
both available on the disc, with the widescreen version presenting the film in
it's original 2.35:1.  The transfer is almost flawless, the most minute details
of the intricate costumes and scenic Outback setting are visible.  The sound,
DD 2.0, is equally impressive; the fun soundtrack is crisp and clear.  There is
little in the way of extras, composed mainly of the original theatrical
trailer, a teaser trailer, and biography/filmographies of the cast and
filmmakers.  A PolyGram DVD sampler, and trailers for "When We Were Kings,"
"The Portrait of a Lady" and "Fargo."  There is French dubbing and Spanish
subtitles, additionally.  Interactive menus and scene selection.  
     Notes: Available on video and DVD.  The DVD will be discontinued as of
June 30th, 1999, so if you want it get it while you can.  Rated R for
profanity, sexual situations, and adult situations.
     The Verdict: Entertaining blend of comedy and drama, highlighted with
terrific acting and must-see musical numbers, "The Adventures of Priscilla,
Queen of the Desert" is an often hilarious road trip that will please viewers
who like offbeat films with mainstream themes.
mailto: Ahber16@aol.com
Review courtesy of http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Terence Stamp, Hugo Weaving, Guy Pearce, Bill Hunter.
Screenplay/Director:  Stephan Elliott.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     You know the times are a-changing when drag queens are to be the
subject of *two* movies in the space of one year.  We're not talking
about SOME LIKE IT HOT or TOOTSIE or MRS. DOUBTFIRE; we're talking
about genuine, larger-than-life, cattier-than-Felix drag queens.  You
might not think it the most marketable of subjects, but production is
underway on a studio project featuring Wesley Snipes, TO WONG FOO,
THANKS FOR EVERYTHING, JULIE NEWMAR.  And the thunder of that film is
being stolen by the deliciously lightweight Australian import THE
ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT.  While it's gentle and
respectful of its characters, it's also a big, goofy musical filled
with belly laughs.
     PRISCILLA opens in Sydney, where cabaret drag performer Tick (Hugo
Weaving) receives a call from an old friend asking him to provide the
entertainment at a resort hotel in the outback.  Tick (who performs as
"Mitzi") enlists the aid of two friends for the act:  Adam (Guy
Pearce), a high-spirited young queen stage named "Felicia;" and
Bernadette (Terence Stamp), a transsexual veteran of Les Girls.
Together, they set off across the outback in a bus dubbed Priscilla,
Queen of the Desert.  However, Priscilla proves to be something less
than a royal coach, and its many breakdowns serve as preludes to a
series of culture-clash encounters between the off-beat threesome and
the considerably more conservative townspeople they meet along the
way.
     Perhaps the wisest decision made by writer-director Stephan
Elliott was not to spend too much time contriving an excuse for
Priscilla's passengers to go west.  He is concerned primarily with
getting them on their way and letting the characters carry the story,
and at that he succeeds.  The three principles are marvelous characters
spectacularly performed.  Hugo Weaving, who was so impressive in
Jocelyn Moorehouse's 1992 feature PROOF, anchors the trio as the
anxious Tick, who fears revealing to his cohorts that the "friend" he
is helping out is actually his partner in a marriage of
convenience...and the mother of his son.  He is also frequently forced
to act as referee in the squabbles between Adam and Bernadette.  Guy
Pearce plays Adam as completely carefree, a flamboyant youth who has
had little experience with confronting ugly prejudice.  Bernadette, on
the other hand, is much more experienced, and grows impatient with
Adam's giddy bitchiness.  As Bernadette, Terence Stamp delivers a
knock-out performance, summoning a uniquely genuine femininity to
accompany a light-hearted world-weariness.  This is no campy drag act
he turns in, but a sensitive and funny study of a character who has had
to deal with the singular challenge, as she describes it, of "being a
man one day and a woman the next."
     Stamp is also a treat in PRISCILLA's marvelously staged musical
numbers.  While Mitzi and Felicia perform with sass and energy,
Bernadette goes through the motions professionally but looking exactly
like she "did this *years* ago."  Costume supervisor Emily Seresin
deserves special kudos for the wild outfits which highlight the film;
particularly noteworthy is an impromptu performance of "I Will Survive"
for an audience of aboriginals (accompanied by digeridoo), and the big
show at the resort featuring numerous gaudy costume changes.
     There is one truly unfortunate element in PRISCILLA, and it really
leaves a bad taste in the mouth.  A rural gentleman named Bob (Bill
Hunter) who befriends the "girls" has a Southeast Asian mail-order
bride, and she is a horrendous shrieking stereotype.  Her character,
and accompanying performance launching ping-pong balls from a portion
of her anatomy, are truly unworthy of this film.  But if you're willing
to grit your teeth through her appearance, PRISCILLA will prove to be a
mostly delightful piece of entertainment, suprisingly wise and
touching.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  8/94 (varies) 
Running Length:  1:32 
Rated: R (Language, sexual themes, crossdressing, violence) 
"What this film does for the drag scene is what Sean Connery did for 
the secret service.  It glamorizes it." 
          - Michael Hamlyn, producer of PRISCILLA 
     THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT is about the most
fun you can have with three guys who like to dress up as women.  There
are movies of MRS. DOUBTFIRE's ilk, which treat crossdressing as a
joke, then there's JUST LIKE A WOMAN, which has its maudlin moments.
Somewhere in between is PRISCILLA, which takes the matter seriously,
but delivers a lot of laughs while doing so.
     The latest export from down under, PRISCILLA is the story of three
drag queens--Bernadette/Ralph (Terrence Stamp), Mitzi/Tick (Hugo
Weaving from Jocelyn Moorehouse's PROOF), and Felicia/Adam (soap star
Guy Pearce)--on their way across the Australian desert to play a gig.
Along the way, their bus Priscilla breaks down, and they have to rely
on help from strangers.  And, while crossdressing performers are
accepted in the big city, their welcome in a less urban setting is not
always warm and friendly.
     The dance numbers are lavish and fun to watch, whether they're
performed in the middle of the desert, atop a bar in some
out-of-the-way town, or on a stage in Sydney.  Mostly seventies disco
hits (including once-popular tunes by Gloria Gaynor, the Village
People, and Abba), these songs are lip-synched and gyrated to with
gusto by the transvestite trio as they don garish costumes and even
worse makeup to wow their audiences.
     There are moments of seriousness amidst all the zaniness as the
twin specters of intolerance and homophobia (two sides of the same
coin) cast a pall over the proceedings.  Give director Stephan Elliot
credit for not dwelling overmuch on these instances.  He knows that
their mere inclusion is sufficient to get the message across.
     The often-ribald comedy varies from amusing to hilarious.  Most of
the best lines are too "colorful" to repeat here.  PRISCILLA is not a
film for those who are made uneasy by Benny Hill.  The end credits
(during and after) contain some of the movie's most inventive humor.
Early departers deprive themselves.
     While each of the three leads is good, the standout performance
belongs to normally-serious veteran actor Terrence Stamp, who has
previously appeared in such diverse outings as BILLY BUDD and SUPERMAN
(I and II).  Here, he brings a quiet dignity to the role of
Bernadette.  That's not easy to do considering some of the outrageous
costumes he's required to wear.
     THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT is a great deal
more appealing than many might suppose it to be.  It's a road movie
that's anything but typical or traditional.  So, whether or not you
share the proclivities of Bernadette, Mitzi, and Felicia, the trio's
cinematic cabaret is nevertheless something to smile and laugh your way
through.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
