Title
Review for Ripe (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
     The most depressing thing about RIPE is that you can spot the core of
emotional honesty buried beneath the layers of lurid melodrama and clunky
symbolism.  While male coming-of-age stories litter the film landscape
like LOST WORLD ticket stubs on a multiplex floor, film-makers appear far
more uncomfortable with tackling the sexual awakening of girls.  That was
reason alone to hope for the best from Mo Ogrodnik's tale of 14-year-old
fraternal twins Rosie (Daisy Eagan) and Violet (Monica Keena), who survive
a car crash which claims the lives of their parents then set off alone on
a road of discovery.  That road finds them stowing on the truck of
groundskeeper-cum-handyman Pete (Gordon Currie) into a military base, 
where they hope to hide out until their faces are no longer on every
newspaper.  The two girls find themselves confronted there with unfamiliar
feelings, to which each responds in a different but equally destructive
way.
     Writer/director Ogrodinik opted to frame RIPE as a sort of surreal
cautionary tale, a KIDS-like warning on the perils of unsupervised youth.
The girls' parents appear in flashback just long enough to make it clear
that Rosie and Violet had a dysfunctional childhood (Daddy was fond of a
little game involving a shotgun and hiding out in the closet), while the
army base leadership looks about as effectual as something out of McHALE'S
NAVY.  There is an absurdity to the things the girls get away with, from 
shoplifting to wandering through an ammunition shed, but that absurdity is
probably part of Ogrodnik's point.  It is the foundation for a compelling
tale of adolescent traumas, as a pair of troubled teenagers face the
changes in their lives and their bodies without the benefit of adult
counsel.  If anything, RIPE may be a feature length public service
message on the importance of sex education.
     It is here that the surrealism and metaphorical heavy-handedness
squash RIPE like a rotting pomegranate.  Rosie and Violet (named as
flowers-about-to-bloom with kick-your-butt-through-your-brainpan
subtlety) represent widely divergent reactions to the first flush of
sexual awareness, but that is all they ever become:  representations.
Real-life 14-year-olds Eagan and Keena (when was the last time you saw a 
high school student playing a high school student?) do impressive work
with extremely difficult material, but it is not enough to create
characters which are written as types.  Nothing in RIPE feels authentic;
it is a parade of numbingly obvious fore-shadowing and ridiculous
situations which shift the emphasis from sensitive observation to
spectacle.  This shift lends an unnecessary sleaziness to scenes of
masturbation and loss of virginity which might have been effective if the
situations felt natural.  
     The shock value and controversy of RIPE may be good for box office,
but they're bad for narrative truth.  A less self-consciously
"provocative" RIPE could have been the kind of honest drama which a mother
and daughter could share and learn from together.  Instead, this RIPE will
likely become more popular at the corner video store with middle-aged men
in trenchcoats.

Author
James Berardinelli
     I'm having a hard time deciding whether RIPE is disturbing because 
it tells a powerful, unconventional story about friendship and the 
maturation process, or because it offers themes and images that border 
on prurient and sensationalistic.  The truth is probably a little of 
each.  Much as I appreciate some of the ideas first-time director Mo 
Ogrodnik is attempting to convey, this sometimes-preposterous movie 
pales in comparison to another currently-available girls' coming-of-age 
story, ALL OVER ME, as well as to last years' sisters-on-the-run entry, 
MANNY AND LO.  
     There's no denying that RIPE gets under your skin.  It's a creepy 
film, and, though Ogrodnik may flounder in the deeper dramatic waters of 
her tale, she proves to be exceptional at generating suspense.  I don't 
think RIPE was intended as a thriller per se, but much of the final 
half-hour plays like one.  The movie managed to surprise me on a few 
occasions, and it deserves points for that alone.
     The main characters, a pair of fourteen-year old fraternal twins, 
Violet (Monica Keena) and Rosie Wyman (Daisy Eagan), represent two 
halves of one person.  Violet, the pretty one, radiates sensuality, and, 
as she goes through the physical changes of adolescence, she becomes 
intent upon exploring her own sexuality.  Rosie, the tomboy, embodies 
rage and violence.  She too is undergoing a transformation, but hers is 
potentially more dangerous.  While Violet masturbates in a storage shed, 
Rosie perfects her aim on a shooting range.  An ever-widening chasm 
develops between these once-inseparable sisters.  
     RIPE opens with a scene of the six-year old girls (played by Donia 
and Janna Silver-Smith) being terrorized by their father.  It then 
flashes forward eight years to a fiery car wreck, where Mr. and Mrs. 
Wyman perish, but Violet and Rosie escape alive.  They go on the run, 
ending up at a military base where they stay with Pete (Gordon Currie), 
the young, long-haired, civilian groundskeeper.  While Violet spends her 
time flirting with Pete, whose sole ambition seems to be deflowering 
her, Rosie makes friends with Ken (Ron Brice), a sympathetic M.P. who 
gives her a gun and teaches her to use it.  
     One of the things RIPE does is to illustrate some of the 
difficulties experienced by a woman coming of age in a male-dominated 
society.  A reason that Ogrodnik set this film on a military base is to 
deepen the sense of masculine supremacy (the army represents the apex of 
machismo), and, as a result, emphasize Violet and Rosie's solitude.  
There is no female role model for the girls; they're entirely on their 
own.  When Violet has her first period, there isn't anyone she can turn 
to for help and advice.  Pete, the closest thing she has to a friend, is 
too embarrassed and uncertain to offer any real support.
     There are times when RIPE appears to cross the line into 
exploitation, however.  Looking down the open necks of the girls' 
shirts, the camera peers relentlessly at their budding breasts.  
Pubescent nipples are frequently outlined against tight-fitting tee-
shirts.  While it could be argued that this is meant to enhance our 
awareness of the twins' sexual maturation, the questionable approach 
almost seems designed to entice pedophiles.  
     Monica Keena (the youngest member of the comatose man's clan in 
WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING) and Daisy Eagan (Jessica Lange's daughter in 
LOSING ISAIAH) are striking as Violet and Rosie.  They're teenage 
actresses portraying teenagers, and neither falters.  One of the reasons 
RIPE's uneven storyline pulls draws us in is because Keena and Eagan 
make their characters real, even though the plot often seems anything 
but that.  None of the supporting cast members stand out, but then no 
one has as much screen time or presence as the two leads.
     With the threat of danger lurking around every corner, RIPE is 
certainly meant to make us feel uneasy.  The subject matter is 
difficult, and the director doesn't avoid all the pitfalls.  
Dramatically, the film is a little disappointing.  Unlike KIDS, which 
was shockingly believable, RIPE occasionally uses scripted violence to 
usurp the place of character development.  Movies like HEAVENLY 
CREATURES and FUN have done this sort of friendship/bloodshed story in a 
far more compelling fashion.  Nevertheless, despite the missteps, there 
is enough provocative material in RIPE to make it of passing interest to 
anyone whose curiosity is piqued by the subject matter. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As any film festival goer knows, there are many movies made that
are so bad that their chance of finding a distributor for a theatrical
distribution are slim.  A direct-to-video deal is probably their only
hope of making money from the production.  The preposterous film RIPE
miraculously did find a distributor.  Perhaps the controversial topic
of underage sex sounded profitable.  This shamelessly exploitive
picture does not deserve a theatrical release even if first-time writer
and director Mo Ogrodnik tries to be sincere.  The result reeks.
     Rosie and Violet Wyman are fraternal twins played by Janna and
Donia Silver-Smith at age 5 and Daisy Eagan and Monica Keena at age 14.
As the show opens we find that their father likes to chase the
5-year-old girls with a loaded rifle.  We also learn that Rosie has an
obsession with killing animals as the animals have sex.  The highly
predictive script leaves no doubt that both of these behaviors will be
repeated later and with much more devastating effect.
     When a car crash kills the 14-year-old twins' parents, they
rejoice and go hide in an army base with the worst security imaginable.
They live in the base house of a civilian named Pete (Gordon Currie).
Although their pictures are on the front page of every newspaper with
World War III sized headlines about them, no one on the base realizes
the missing girls discussed in the newspaper are Rosie and Violet.  The
soldiers are too busy most of the time singing cliched songs like, "I
don't want no teenage queen; I just want my M-16."
     Carefully titillating without running afoul of the child
pornography laws, the girls go braless and run around with their
panties showing.  Although many scenes come within millimeters of
showing their private parts, none do.  The girls have sex, but again,
the director holds off just enough to keep from getting in trouble.  In
America you can show anything you want so long as the actors are
adults, but if they are under 18, all of the rules change.
     The director wanted to make a serious film.  One scene has Violet
shocked with her sudden onset of menstruation.  Pete comes in to
console her with "I'm sorry, (pause) God."  Currie's exceedingly bland
performance makes Pete less a character than a visual wallpaper for the
girls act in front of.  In a film where the actors seem to be competing
for the worst acting of the year award, Currie takes away the prize.
     To make sure that you realize how troubled and rebellious these
kids are, the script even has them take a Ferris wheel just so they can
spit on other riders.  The manipulative story wants us to sympathize
with the girls even when they commit crimes large and small, but their
characters are never developed beyond cliches so it becomes almost
impossible to care about them.
     The director seems incapable of getting even the small things
right.  When the girls go on a shoplifting spree, they open their
purses and their blouses and pour the loot in.  Never do they try to
hide their actions, and never does the clerk notice.
     The show's frequent lack of any background noise makes viewing
incredibly tedious.  RIPE does have one redeeming feature.  Eventually,
it does end although not before its preordained and tear-jerking
conclusion.
     RIPE runs 1:33.  It is not rated but might be NC-17 given its
subject matter.  There is sex, nudity, profanity, and drug usage.  The
movie is not appropriate for teenagers.  I detested the film and
recommend you not have to sit through it.  I give it just 1/2 of a
star.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
