Title
Review for Tito i ja (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
10-year old Zoran (Dimitrie Vojnov) is growing up in 1954 Yugoslavia, a 
country under the tyrannical thumb of Communist Marshall Tito (Voja 
Brajovic).  Zoran has chosen Tito as a hero-figure, writing in a school 
composition that he loves the Marshall even more than his own mother 
(Anica Dobra) and father (Predrag Manojlovic).  This earns him a spot in 
a group making a walking tour of the land of Tito's roots, in which, not 
coincidentally, his girlfriend Jasna (Milena Vukosav) is also 
participating.  Under the leadership of the overly-zealous Comrade Raja 
(Lazar Ristovski), the tour becomes more of a trial than a pleasure, and 
Zoran learns what it is to feel disillusionment.
In a year that has seen numerous "boy's-point-of-view" stories, this is 
one of the better entries.  However, instead of going for the nostalgia 
and sentimentality that many of these movies attempt, TITO AND ME is 
basically a straightforward tale with a light touch and a serious 
message.  Zoran is forced to face the disappointing truth that childhood 
heros are often little more than self-constructed icons with 
personalities nothing like those attributed to them by a worshipful 
youth.
The most interesting portion of TITO AND ME is the first half, which 
concentrates on Zoran's home and school life.  His initial relationship 
with Jasna is presented realistically with all the uncertainty of a 
child's first crush, and the confused interaction of the two families 
living within Zoran's house is at once funny and poignant.  
The latter half of the film deals with the walking tour through 
Yugoslavia's hinterlands, and this is only fitfully successful as Zoran's 
disillusionment is brought forcefully to the fore.  Some of the comedy 
during these sequences seems both out-of-place and occasionally cruel.  
The bulk of Zoran's disillusionment comes through his changing impression 
of the group's leader, Comrade Raja, a man who seems the perfect image of 
Tito.  However, it isn't long before Raja takes a dislike to the earnest 
young boy, making him the object of his scorn.  Soon, everyone in the 
group has turned their backs on Zoran, including Jasna and, although the 
boy never comes to openly hate Raja, it's apparent by the film's climax 
that the two are in direct opposition, and that Zoran has learned a 
difficult lesson.
There's a lot of comedy in this film - some overt, but as much subtle.  
TITO AND ME often succeeds because of its light tone; a lugubrious movie 
with the same sort of message could easily turn the audience off or put 
them to sleep.  Perhaps the only mistake is that instead of creating a 
believably-menacing Raja, the choice was made to turn him into a 
caricature.
With the exception of Lazar Ristovski, whose buffoonish Raja is over-the-
top, the acting is excellent.  Young Dimitrie Vojnov should especially be 
singled out for his natural, unaffected performance as Zoran.  It is in 
large part due to his effortless portrayal that TITO AND ME is effective.  
Numerous black-and-white clips of the real Tito are used throughout the 
film and, while these are interesting for historical reasons, they create 
a slight artistic problem.  The actor who plays Tito (Voja Brajovic) 
looks absolutely nothing like the real man.  As a result, with so many 
shots of the legitimate figure, it becomes difficult to accept the actor 
in the role.  Admittedly, however, this is a small problem.
TITO AND ME is a fine, fresh motion picture with a universal theme.  You 
don't have to have been raised in 1954 Yugoslavia to understand or enjoy 
this movie, which has a deceptively strong message for such a breezy 
tone.

Author
Max Hoffmann
Rating: 8 on scale of 1->10
Country of Origin: Yugoslavia/France
In Serbo-Croatian with English subtitles
Running Length:   105 minutes
DIR/SCR: Goran Markovic
PROD: Markovic, Zoran Masirevic, Michel Mavros, Zoran Tasic
CAM: Racoslav
ED: Snezana Ivanovic
CAST: Dmitrie Vojnov, Lazar Ristovski, Anica Dobra, Pedrog Manojlovic
Rating: none.  Appropriate for family viewing for kids old enough for subtitles.
IN A NUTSHELL: quirky, endearing comedy about a young boy in 1954's
Tito-ruled Yugoslavia.  Unable to cope with his extended dysfunctional
family and cramped quarters, he spends more and more time in a fantasy
world where Tito is the benign father figure.  This causes humorous
fiction in his dissident family (a little like 60's activists having a
child turn Republican.) The break-down of a party-line teacher's
control over a summer camp hike resembles the crumbling of Yugoslavia
itself.  The lead child actor occasionally gets on your nerves, as does
the repetitious soundtrack, but worth seeing.  Probably better at a
theatre than on video.
     The film is a clever combination of filmed action spliced with
high camp Tito newsreels, melded to a zany mambo soundtrack.  Young
Zoran is overweight, and an outcast with most of his family and school
mates.  He retreats further and further from reality, seeing Tito as a
romantic idol.  He stuns his school by winning the essay contest that
will have him go on a "young pioneer" camp/march and meet the Dictator
himself.  The film follows the giddy path that eventually confronts
young Zoran with his idol, clay feet and all.
     A smug, dyed in the wool Commie teacher takes out his own sense of
powerlessness on the hapless youth.  Many viewers will share my
observation that this Commie teacher is remarkably like the "my country
right or wrong" Republicans that  many baby boomers had as teachers in
grammar and high school.  (Back in the 60's I had a high school English
teacher who gave us our "party-approved" reading assignment, "The
Bloody Red Hands of Ho Chi Minh" ... from Reader's Digest! ...  Welcome
to California.)  Apparently it's a universal phenomenon for failures in
the job market, with thwarted ambitions to end up the keepers of our
children's minds.  This teacher resembles a scruffy Tom Selleck, with
all the charm of a J. Edgar Hoover.
     Amusing sidelights are cast by Zoran's "artist" parents (a
musician dad who ends up playing sax in seedy night clubs, and his
jealous/possessive ballerina mother who grates the holier than though
live-in sister-in-law.)
     A great film to brighten up the next rainy Sunday afternoon.
Check it out.  The ending may be a bit syrupy (shades of KARATE KID)
but the film is full of heart and good belly laughs.
