Title
Review for Simple Plan, A (1998)
Number of Reviews
41

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) This film provoked a strong emotional response in me. The
doomed scheme, the naÄve players, and the sad, twisted music filled me
with dread and made me squirm in my seat.
A Simple Plan is a neo-noir, a crime film whose downward spiral is a
black hole from which there is no escape. Scripted by Scott Smith, it
was based on his novel. It starts with a forlorn Bill Paxton explaining
in voiceover, "I was a happy man." Past tense. 
Hank (Paxton), his brother Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton, who is superb in
the role), and their friend Louis (Brent Briscoe) are in their truck on
a secluded road. It is the middle of winter and snow covering the fields
and the roads blends with the nondescript white sky. A fox crosses their
path and Louis and Jacob insist on stopping to track it down.
The three come across an old plane crash. The plane is covered in snow
and the pilot is long dead. Further exploration reveals a duffel bag
full of money, piles of stacks of hundred dollar bills. A quick debate
reveals only two options: report the money to the authorities, or split
the money three ways. 
Jacob and Louis, being a little dimmer than Hank, want to split the
money three ways and become instant millionaires. Hank sees that their
plan won't work if someone finds the plane and knows the money is
missing. He agrees to split the money, but only if they agree that
nobody collects a share until AFTER the plane is found. If the money is
missed, they can always turn it in or burn it. If nobody mentions the
money in connection with the plane, they will keep it.
Hank takes the money to his place for safe keeping and almost instantly,
the paranoia creeps into their lives. What about the footprints in the
fresh snow? Can Hank be trusted? Can they keep their stories straight?
The paranoia leads to mistakes, as it always does in this type of film.
The mistakes lead to attempted corrections, which in turn lead to more
mistakes. The downward spiral is as fascinating as it is foreboding.
Several factors add to the doomed, queasy feeling of this film. Danny
Elfman's amazing score should have been nominated for an Oscar. The
orchestra plays a sad, folksy tune, but the strings are about a
quarter-step out of tune, adding a gut-wrenching twang to the
soundtrack. The bleak, lifeless, wintery setting and cinematography are
reminiscent of FARGO. The omnipresence of crows presage death and
disease.
In addition, the characters are well-formed. Jacob and Louis are best
friends from high school. They haven't done much with their lives since
then. They are not too bright, a bit too greedy, and far too mistrustful
of each other to be likely to pull off their heist. Hank is a little
smarter, but he hasn't escaped the small, poor farming community he was
born in. All in all, they are a sad bunch, and perfect for this film.
With so many things done so well, you'd think this would be an excellent
film. But like PLEASANTVILLE, it crumbles under the pressure of critical
thought.
For one thing, Hank (the college graduate) and Jacob (his slow-witted
brother) are too completely different to be brothers. The gap in
intelligence between them cannot be explained by college attendance, as
the film suggests. The plot required most of the characters to be dumb,
but a smarter character was needed for contrast and leadership, and so
the college educated brother was introduced.
For another, the practical problems of spending hundred-dollar bills in
a small town was never brought up, even though other problems were
mentioned and dealt with. Perhaps the point was that none of them were
smart enough to think of it. Still, the movie should have addressed it.
I don't think it's too much to ask of screenwriter Smith to be one step
ahead of the audience. I was disappointed to have thought of something
that the characters and the film hadn't.
And finally, the film's great tragic ending -- the fate of the brothers
-- was not justified. After dozens of other problems were resolved with
great desperation and tenacity, the film's final solution should have
been even more desperate and tenacious. Barring that, it should have
been a great sigh of resignation. It was tragic and moving, but it was
also easy and premature.  
A Simple Plan is on many "ten best" lists, and I'm glad for it. I really
enjoyed the film, particularly the way it moved me and made me squirm.
But there were too many problems for it to be a really great film.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Jason Wallis
A Simple Plan is a different kind of thriller. While the common
dime-a-dozen suspense film pits the hero against an outside force, all of
the enemies dealt with in this film come from the inside, making the events
that unfold all the more disturbing. Most movies of it's kind deliver cheap
thrills, but this one poses some very frank and tough questions about
paranoia, trust and man's natural capability of evil. After years and years
of formula rehash, A Simple Plan is a very welcome breathe of fresh air. 
Based on Scott Smith's best seller about the deceit and ultimate tragedy
that follows the discovery of millions of dollars by three ill-fated men,
this is as eerie and effective as any thriller I've ever seen. Instead of
rushing the story ahead with unnecessary twists and turns, causing the plot
to be chalk-full of gaps and holes, director Sam Raimi lets the suspense
build slowly, giving us one piece of the puzzle at a time. Even if the film
as a whole had been disappointing, this would still be a prime example of
the art of direction. 
But that's not to say that this isn't just as fine an achievement in other
areas. If the screenplay doesn't grab you right off, you'd better check
yourself for a pulse; Bill Paxton plays Hank Mitchell, a content middle
class feed store manager who, along with his brother Jacob (Billy Bob
Thornton, who could be looking at his second Oscar) and Jacob's friend Lou
(Brent Briscoe), finds roughly four and a half million dollars tucked away
in an abandoned crashed plane. Deducing that it's most likely drug money,
the trio decide to keep the loot for themselves. After all, if someone
comes looking for it, they can always just burn the cash, erasing any
evidence that connected them to the downed aircraft. Figuring this to be a
fool-proof and simple plan, they agree to wait until the plane is uncovered
by the authorities before they split up the money and hit town; all they
have to do is wait. But before they know it, their allegedly "simple" plan
has spiraled into a web of trickery and deceit that will eventually claim
more than one life. 
The acting is also top of the line. As the conspiring brothers, Paxton and
Thornton turn in the performances of both their careers, the former
riveting you with his increasing lust for the money, and Thornton tugging
at your heart strings as the put-upon and neglected Jacob. Both are fine
pieces of work and should not be looked over in favor of showier parts when
Oscar time rolls around. 
However, as accomplished as everything is (including technical aspects like
music and film editing), A Simple Plan belongs to Raimi all the way. Famous
for his rock'em and shock'em gore flicks in the Evil Dead trilogy, he
finally finds his footing to reveal himself as a major talent. I'm just as
big a fan of The Evil Dead as the next guy (perhaps even more so), but this
is the really strong evidence that Raimi is a true master of his
profession. 
*Homepage at http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
Lifelong drinking buddies, from a small town in the middle of nowhere,
accidentally come across a ticket to financial freedom. In order to
secure the millions that they+ve discovered, one devices a plan, which
they unanimously pursue.  One lets his wife in on the secret, and while
she initially is against it, relents, and becomes a partner in the
crime.  Needless to say, complications arise, and these everyday folk
find themselves committing vices that they never dreamed of committing.
The men struggle against all sides to prevent the possible prison
sentences.  Suspicious outsiders close in, and (I+m not giving anything
away in saying this) untimely deaths occur.
The movie is, of course, _Waking Ned Devine_.  The delightfully droll
English comedy stars Ian Bannen and David Kelly who live in a seaside
Irish village, where they find that the winner of a national lottery has
died, ticket in hand, ecstatic smile on face.  The two plan to collect
the money for themselves, by fooling the lottery officials of the
original ticket-buyers+ whereabouts.  The laughs come from these
complications, the quirkiness of its characters, and through two madcap
scenes of laugh-out-loud slapstick, which I will not disclose here.  And
yet...
And yet, watching this film, I was reminded of _A Simple Plan_, a
cinematic thunderbolt still a-fresh in my mind.  It starred Bill Paxton
and Billy Bob Thorton (an Academy caliber performance) as two brothers
who discover four million dollars on a crashed plane in a nearby
wildlife reserve.  They decide to "hold" the money, and if nobody claims
it, take it for themselves.  That film had tackled the moral
implications of its plot on a much more serious, yet unpredictable
scale.
In both films, greed opens its doors to worse crimes.  In _A Simple
Plan_, the protagonists+ plotting leads to impending doom.  In _Waking
Ned Devine_, the devising takes on a happier note.  In one, the end
result is hell on earth.  In the other, it appears to be a greater good.
What makes this all the more confusing is the differences between the
two sets of plotting characters.  When Paxton and his wife (Bridget
Fonda) want the money, it is for their future plans--a child is on the
way.  But when Ian Bannen and his wife (Fionnula Flanagan) want the
money, they are retired, have been content with frugal living, and face
it--their future is, ahem, limited.  For the former pair, it is criminal
for them to participate in the plan, albeit with honorable reasons.  For
the latter pair, it is not only good, but circumstances appear that it
was divinely-ordained that they receive their fortune, for what appears
to be the paltriest of intentions.
Because it is a comedy, _Waking Ned Devine_ has no room for asking the
greater questions.  Even if you fully root for the characters, and exit
the theater with the light-comedy sign-of-approval--the goofy grin, the
film leaves open the possiblity that, due to simple economics, the
characters+ standard of living will not be affected at all, and all of
that mayhem occurred in vain.  I don+t think the filmmakers intended for
there to be a sting in that film, which is unfortunate, because had it
had one, it would have been a better film.
Still, considering the curse that January puts upon new releases, you
can+t do any worse than these films.  _Waking Ned Devine_ is nothing
more than satire-lite, a "Get out of jail free" card for two-hours of
greed indulgence.  _A Simple Plan_ is more serious, more economical in
delivery, more surprising, more shocking, more thought-provoking, more
memorable, with great performances and a heart-stopping script...   but
with less humor.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- movienation@xoommail.com
I know it seems ungrateful to discuss a well-crafted, well performed movie
like A Simple Plan on the basis of its flaws, but there isn't another
honest way to do it, and anyway, there's only two of them.  The first one
isn't even anyone's fault.  Originally, director Sam Raimi had tried to
shoot the movie in Ohio, but the script called for there to be massive
quantities of snow everywhere, and it was too warm last winter for that in
Ohio.  Production was moved to Minnesota, where there was plenty of snow.
However, it was easier to change the setting than it was to change the
accents of stars Billy Bob Thornton and Bill Paxton.  As a result, A Simple
Plan ends up looking like Fargo but sounding like Deliverance.
I really don't want to talk about the other flaw.  Partly because it's a
spoiler, and I don't like putting spoilers in movie reviews or critics that
put spoilers in movie reviews.  Partly because you'd never know about it if
you hadn't read the book first.  And partly because, despite the flaw, A
Simple Plan turns out to be a pretty good movie nonetheless.
The book and the movie both start out the same way.  Paxton and Thornton
play brothers Hank and Jacob Mitchell.  Hank is educated, intelligent, and
married, while Jacob is uneducated, dim, and lives alone in a filthy
hovel.  (Thornton's character is dim, but sweet and goofy, a world apart
from his character in Sling Blade.)  They are joined by Jacob's redneck
friend Lou (Brent Briscoe, also from Sling Blade) on a visit to their
parents' grave that turns into an impromptu hunting trip that turns into
the discovery of $4.4 million in used hundred-dollar bills found in a
downed plane.  The "simple plan" of the title is that Hank will hold the
money until the plane is found and it's safe to split the proceeds and
leave town.
A movie isn't a movie without conflict, and conflict soon develops.  Things
aren't helped when Hank's manipulative, pregnant wife Sarah (Bridget Fonda)
enters the picture and proceeds to scheme ways to protect her husband from
the incompetence of his cohorts in crime.  And then, one night, fueled by
booze and distrust, the situation explodes... and this is where the flaw
happens.
The novel, written by Scott B. Smith, is wonderful, but it's very
coldblooded and cruel, much more than the movie.  The filmmakers made the
decision to tone down some of the more evil and heartless aspects of the
novel.  I understand their reasoning, but I can't agree with it.  As a
result of a bad choice midway through the movie, the ending becomes painful
and false.  What should be gut-wrenching and powerful instead becomes
foolish and almost laughable.
I take nothing away from the principal actors.  When the casting was
announced, I thought that Paxton, Thornton, and Fonda were the best team
that could have been assembled, and I still think so.  Paxton does a
steady, workmanlike job in a steady, workmanlike part.  Thornton pulls
another Southern Gothic portrayal out of his repertoire and does his
customary, outstanding job.  Fonda has the most difficult role, changing
back and forth from a nurturing wife and mother to a calculating
conspirator in rapid-fire mode, and she's sharp and convincing.
The performances are enough to recommend this movie, especially accompanied
by the bleak Minnesota scenery which provides an effective backdrop to the
bleakness of the story.  But fans of the book will walk away feeling
disappointed and cheated.  The novel is a classic morality play,
illustrating the limits of greed and corruption, but the movie doesn't come
anywhere near close to reaching those limits.  The real crime in A Simple
Plan is that it isn't evil enough.
MovieNation:  Movie Reviews in Black and White
http://members.xoom.com/movienation
movienation@xoommail.com
"No children have ever meddled with the Republican Party
and lived to tell about it."  -- Sideshow Bob

Author
Matthew Dalton
 It is a volcanic, unsettling, nerve-torturing picture that is one of the best
films I had the pleasures of watching last year.
 Adapted from the novel by Scott B. Smith (he also wrote the screenplay) and
directed by Sam Raimi, Simple Plan plays like a fox.  It stalks, it winds up,
it strikes.
 The story is fairly simple: Two brothers (Bill Paxton and Billy Bob Thornton)
stumble apon a downed plane in the woods near their hometown.  The plane is
filled with $4 million in cash.  They, along with Jacob's (Thornton) buddy,
decide to keep it and split it into three ways.  Hank (Paxton) says that he
will keep it until spring, when the snow melts and someone will find the plan.
If there is no word of the missing money,  they'll take their share and move
out of town.
 All of this seems quit nice. Sarah (Bridget Fonda), Hank's wife, especially
likes the plan.  This is her chance to get out of the library job she hates
and, possible, lead to other enjoyments.
 Hank is uneasy about the plan, especially after the simple plan goes awry.
 I will not tell anymore.  You will have to find out what happens to Hank,
Jacob and the rest.  
 The film reminded me of Fargo, but, without the Coen brothers' jokes.  A
Simple Plan is dead serious at its subject matter, and all the more effective.
 Plan is more effective than Fargo, yet, Fargo achieved such greatness with
its script and acting that I would rank it slightly higher than Plan.
 Both are about money and crimes and moral choices.  Yet Plan makes these
choices seem like the biggest in your life.  And they are, for Hank and
company.
 A Simple Plan is taut and riveting.  A film so intriguing, I sat, spellbound,
through it twice.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
A SIMPLE PLAN (1998) *** 1/2 Directed by Sam Raimi.Written by Scott B.
Smith, based on his novel. Photography, Alar Kivilo. Editing, Arthur Coburn
and Eric L. Beason. Production design, Patrizia Von Brandenstein.  Music,
Danny Elfman. Cast: Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thornton, Bridget Fonda, Brent
Briscoe , Gary Cole, Becky Ann Baker, Chelcie Ross, Jack Walsh .Produced by
James Jacks and Adam Schroeder. A Paramount release. 120 minutes. R
(violence, language)
That boy from Michigan, Sam Raimi, made his first films at 18 and 19,
became a cult-director at 23 with The Evil Dead (1982), and has not stopped
directing, writing, producing and acting in movies and TV to this day. He
specializes in  horror flicks, cartoonish or comic bookish, and in parodies
of other genres. Raimi is not on the roster of great American filmmakers
--like his friends the Coen Brothers with whom he has often collaborated--
is not everybody's cup of tea--certainly not of mature audiences with
"taste"-- but does have a following.  Now, at the old age of 40, Sam has
made the pants just right with a gripping, serious, psycho-sociological
thriller, realistically made and acted.
A Simple Plan (ASP) is an ironic title for a sadly complicated imbroglio.
Hank (Bill Paxton) works at a feed-fertilizer store in  an anonymous small
Upper Midwest town. (The film was shot in Delano, Minnesota, with some
footage in northern Wisconsin when in search of ideal snow conditions). His
wife Sarah (Bridget Fonda) is nine months pregnant with their first child.
The couple is beautifully affectionate.
Hank's older brother Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton) seems to be not quite all
there. He lives alone in a rather dilapidated house, has no fixed
employment, is regularly on relief. His buddy and drinking companion, bluff
Lou (Brent Briscoe),  is often out of work, deeply in debt, and something
of a town drunk.
On New Year's Eve, the three men are brought together by a visit to Hank
and Jake's father's grave. In a wildlife reserve area they stumble on the
wreck of a small plane hidden by snow and ice. The pilot is dead. A bag
contains four million four hundred thousand dollars.
What would you do in this situation? Lou says keep it: "It's the American
Dream in a damn gym bag." Jacob, a follower and no leader, acquiesces. Hank
hesitates. I quote from memory: "The American Dream is to work for money,
not to steal it." But still...
They figure out that all signs (the absence of news about a plane having
disappeared, etc.) point to a stash of illegal money, no doubt from drugs.
Hank is swayed, moves from ethics to a strategically simple plan. Keep the
money, wait and see what happens, divide it when the time is ripe. He
insists that he will keep the bundle and that no one will mention it to
anyone else. So the first thing he does is to take it home... and tell
Sarah.
Her reactions rapidly escalate from the right thing to do to more elaborate
"keep it" schemes. She reinforces her opinions by sending away for papers
(she works in the local library) which prove that this is ransom money for
an heiress abducted by a gang that left many dead people behind.
This is where my plot-telling ends. What follows is an exponentially
growing mess, excellently paced, rightly devoid of the humor that Raimi is
partial to (as well as his friends the Coens in their films, including the
snowy Fargo), strong in the protagonists' characterizations (with Sarah
becoming a sort of junior Lady Macbeth), unexpected yet credible turns as
the "perpetrators" inexorably paint themselves into a corner.
The tangled web we weave when first we practice to deceive is here the
damnedest and tangledest possible. Hank bears the largest moral burden of
all. A smart man, the only college graduate in the group (and in town, I
suppose), he has scruples. But the concatenation of events, so much money,
and his companions' errors make him lose his head.
>From the start, this is a bloody affair. It keeps getting bloodier, but not
gratuitously so. From the start, this very noir ("black" in French) movie
set in gorgeous expanses of white, virgin snow, as it imparts the feeling
of an inexorable march to catastrophe. It does this with cold, believable,
suspenseful and gripping logic. In some ways, ASP evokes the doomed heist
of a very different thriller, The Killing, an early Stanley Kubrick gem.
ASP is neither a simple nor a simple-minded story, nor escapism, fun, or
entertainment. It's painful and depressing to watch, but then this is real
cinema and a corrective to the no-brainers that make up 99 percent of film
production.
There's a perfect match between images and events, tempo and psyches.
There's also a growing depth and awareness in family relations, with
revelations about the brothers' parents and Jake's seemingly simple mind.
Major credit goes to the first-time script-writer for adapting his own book
so cleverly. Major credit goes to the production designer Patrizia Von
Brandenstein (one of the best) for her discreetly eloquent sets. The music
score is unobtrusive.
Cinematographer Alar Kivilo-- about whom I knew nothing and found little
more than a fine track-record almost entirely in TV-- is a revelation.  He
does wonders with splendidly photographed snow on the land and as it falls
(no easy feat); with tricky focusing and changes of focus that keep the
foreground sharp (e.g. the ever-present crows perched on trees) as well as
the background; with economical, meaningful camera positions and movements;
with tracking shots of animals.
Symbolism runs through the picture: a beautiful fox killing chickens (a
literary allusion to D.H.Lawrence?); the leitmotiv of blackbirds observing
the scene (an allusion to Poe's Raven or to Hitchcock's The Birds?); others
too, but they don't come at you and hit you with obviousness,
The performers are all perfect. Billy Bob Thornton has the most showy, odd
part, but there's veristic quality acting by everyone, including the
smaller roles:  the ambiguous, friendly yet mysterious sheriff (Chelcie
Ross); he equally cool Gary Cole who shows a different kind of cool in the
current comedy Office Space.
Verisimilitude does get strained a bit, but rarely. I wonder how Sarah, at
work, in the boondocks, gets the newspapers so quickly. (Yes, this is the
information, fax and internet age, but still...) Why is college graduate
Hank working in a feed store?  Small things like that.
ASP also wins is in its choice of subject. Greed, the title of a great
Hollywood classic of 1925, could be the title of this film too, and of the
heading of millions of news items --since the profit motive rules the
world.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Sam Raimi grew up a close friend of the Coen Brothers.  All three
want into filmmaking.  The Coen Brothers specialized in crime films.
Raimi, focusing on a younger audience, made a variety of films, but he
was best known for his horror film trilogy, the EVIL DEAD films.  Now
Sam Raimi is moving into Coen brothers territory with a serious and
dark crime thriller set somewhere in the frozen North Central states in
the cold of winter.  The plot is a familiar one.  Three people have
come into a lot of money they must keep secret.  But three is a big
crowd when it comes to four and a half million dollars.  The setting is
like FARGO, and the basic situation is like THE TREASURE OF THE SIERRA
MADRE.  The plotting is like a serious version of the too-recent VERY
BAD THINGS, but serious makes all the difference.
     Scott B. Smith wrote the screenplay based on his own novel.  The
opening image of the film is a fox making a quick raid on a hen house,
snatching what it can get and running with it.  While that really is
the event that sets the plot in motion, the "grab what you can and run"
scene also sets the tone for what is to come.  In A SIMPLE PLAN Hank
(played by Bill Paxton) works in the feed and grain, but hopes his
college education will bring him something better for his wife Sarah
(Bridget Fonda) and the daughter he will have in a few days.  Sarah has
learned to accept Jacob, Hank's grungy brother (Billy Bob Thornton),
but not Jacob's redneck friend Lou (Brent Bisscoe).  Jacob and Lou
similarly are a bit contemptuous of Lou's comparatively manicured
existence.  Ordinarily these tensions would never be spoken, but events
are about to stress all the relationships.
     One frosty winter day Hank, Jacob, and Lou come upon a plane
crashed in the woods.  On board they find a dead pilot and a satchel
with 44,000 one hundred-dollar bills.  If all three people can
cooperate perfectly it should be no problem hanging onto the money.
Right?  But of course the presence of the money will test each of the
men's relationships with the others and Hank's relationship with Sarah.
Sarah, Jacob, and Lou each has a different idea of what to do with the
money and they do not all mesh.  Hank wants to wait until things die
down and then leave town.  Jacob sees the money as his opportunity to
buy back his father's farm and make it work again.  Lou is in unhealthy
debt and wants to pay off some loans and live high.  Hank will discover
entirely different people inside the skins of the people closest to
him.  And one of them is himself. As Sarah observes to Hank late in the
film, "Nobody would ever believe that you would be capable of doing
what you've done."  The plot is composed like a chain with each event
leading to the next and all lead to chaos.
     As in FARGO, the icy setting becomes a character in the film
itself.  These are people who are worn down from just fighting the
climate.  It casts a pall over the entire film.  Raimi accentuates the
gray of the weather by filming with muted, depressing colors.  A SIMPLE
PLAN is a compelling ride through an alien moral landscape.  While much
of the chaos that is the plot is predictable, some of the places the
plot takes us are quite unexpected.  I rate it 7 on the 0 to 10 scale
and a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo/
Champion of the camera pyrotechnics, director Sam Raimi reins himself
in for this film, and takes on the impression of the Coen brothers on a
date with Alfred Hitchcock, in this good old fashioned small town
thriller that has everyone asking themselves the same question..."Would
I keep the money?" 
PLOT:
Two brothers and a friend find $4.4 million on a crashed airplane in a
nearby snow-ridden forest. The boys agree to hang on to the money until
the spring, and see if anyone comes looking for it. If nobody claims
for it by them, they agree to share the spoils among themselves, and
never tell anyone else about it. Somewhere along the line, their
"simple plan" goes awry and the plot thickens. 
CRITIQUE:
Magnificent film blends all the best elements of a suspense with a
solid cast of players, a beautiful landscape a la FARGO (7/10), and a
labyrinth of twists and turns that will have you gnawing at your
fingernails in anticipation of the next morally-questionable
booby-trap. Sam Raimi has crafted one of the best thrillers of the past
few years, and does so without the aid of his wonderfully creative
camera tricks. This film works on all cylinders because Raimi, and
screenwriter Smith, groove the characters out of real people with real
problems and real concerns on their minds. The people in this film are
just like you and me, and that is what makes this thriller so much
deeper and grittier than most. It's based in the reality of the moment,
and the consequences that each and every one of us could face in the
advent of a simple, everyday cover-up. One thing leads to another in
this film, and then another, and then another, until the dark reality
of the situation finally succumbs the group, at which point,
well...you'll see!
All of the actors in this movie are amazing, but Billy Bob Thornton
pulls off another fantastic showing, as the hick brother who lacks in
the brainpower but makes up for it via his abundancy of conscience.
This movie is for all those people who love to sit in a theatre, watch
a movie magically unfold before their very eyes, and chew on the stream
of questions rattling off in their brains..."What's gonna happen
next?"..."What would I do in a situation like this?"..."How the hell
are they gonna get out of this one?"
This movie is fun and entertaining to watch because it doesn't give us
all the answers up front. It slowly unveils the layers of the story as
the minutes of the film tick by, and the tension from the suspense
sinks in. The cinematography of this movie is lush and creamy, the
actors are rock-solid and the plot is a wonder in the science of
twisting and turning. Forget all of those crappy big-budgeted,
big-starred Hollywood pictures that are coming out this winter season,
and go see a movie that truly embraces all of the good old-fashioned
notions that make up a great suspenseful film. This film is a tasty
delight for all those who love the mystery and the fascination of a
cool thriller, and who enjoy watching real characters live out
extraordinary circumstances. 
So would I keep a sack of $4.4 million if I found it in the middle of a
forest tomorrow? After seeing the degradation of human values that
crossed the lives of every single person in this movie, I would say
"no". 
Unless of course...I had a simple plan to get away with it all.....  :)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Ben Stiller, John Dahl and John Boorman were three other directors that
were at some point associated to the making of this film.
A scene with Billy Bob Thornton and Bill Paxton was lost by Northwest
Airlines in January 1998 while in transit from Minnesota to Los
Angeles. The missing scene had been shot in Minnesota. The film was
insured.
Sam Raimi requested some advice from his old friends who once helped
him on his EVIL DEAD movies, the Coen brothers, in regards to the
shooting of this movie in the snow. When Raimi isn't directing or
writing, he's busy as the executive producer of the blockbuster
syndicated TV series "Xena: Warrior Princess" and "Hercules: The
Legendary Journeys." He also co-wrote two films with the Coen brothers.
The first was CRIMEWAVE (5/10), and the second was THE HUDSUCKER PROXY
(6/10).
Bill Paxton's father plays the part of Mr. Schmitt in this movie. 
"A Simple Plan", the novel also written by Scott Smith, spent seven
weeks on the New York Times best-seller list in 1994. Smith originally
conceived the project as a screenplay before choosing to write it as a
novel. Smith wrote A SIMPLE PLAN while living in New Orleans. The
kernel of the idea for the novel was something he first came up with as
a graduate student in a screenwriting course at Columbia University's
writing program. 
This film was filmed in the early months of 1998 in Delano, Minnesota.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Once in a blue moon, a film will come along and will grab you by the throat and
never let go - it will also make you identify with actions committed by human
behavior under certain circumstances. "A Simple Plan" is that kind of film - a
rip-snorting, understated morality tale told with finesse and acute observation
by a director who's not known for restraint, Sam Raimi ("Darkman," "The Evil
Dead"). 
Bill Paxton stars as Hank Mitchell, an accountant for a small feed store in
the frozen tundra of Minnesota. Only this town is not populated by the
stereotypical denizens of "Fargo" - these are ordinary people about to be
overcome by extraordinary circumstances. Hank is an average, righteous Joe,
living a complacent, innocent existence with his wife, Sarah (Bridget Fonda).
Hank's fate lies in the woods when he's accompanied by his inarticulate
brother, Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton), and his alcoholic friend, Lou (Brent
Briscoe). The threesome inadvertently discover a small plane lodged in the
snow, and there appears a miracle in the form of a duffel bag: millions of
dollars in cash. Naturally, the three men are at odds of what to do with the
money - Hank decides he'll keep it since he's an accountant and can manage it.
The truth is that neither one knows how to deal with such a sticky situation.
Hank tells the boys to keep their secret quiet while he does just the opposite
- he tells his gleamy, smiling wife when he throws the cash on the table. Lou
is no better when he spills the beans to his shouting wife. The only one who
seems capable of maintaining secrecy is Jacob because he has no one to turn to
anyway, except his brother. 
"A Simple Plan" shows how men and women act when money enters their path, and
how their behavior changes drastically. This is not fresh cinematic territory -
it's Treasure of Sierra Madre in a frozen hell - but what's new is how
compellingly the story is told. Hank appears to be the hero of the story but
slowly he's consumed by random acts of violence, and we see that the money
means more to him than anybody else. Jacob also shows that he's not a complete
idiot, and we're never sure what his true agenda is outside of wanting to stay
in an old, decrepit house where their father used to live. Lou is a drunk who
teases Hank's manhood, and all he wants is some money to pay for late bills.
Only Hank's wife remains the solely sensible one of the lot - she makes the
decisions and tells Hank what course he (and the story) should take, and it
always, ironically, results in calamity. 
"A Simple Plan" is adapted from a 1993 novel by Scott B. Smith, who penned the
script as well, but this story does not unfold under expected pretenses, namely
countless twists and turns. Actually, the movie is not quite noir - you might
call it a bleak drama that transcends noirish expectations with its full-blown
character portrayals. There are still no heroes, but that's besides the point -
these people are undone by the money that slowly reveals layers in their
personalities. Amazingly, the money becomes less and less important to them as
the film rolls along to a horrific finale in the woods, unveiled with
unexpected, sudden shocks and a twist of fate unheard of in the movies in quite
some time.
Bill Paxton is sheer perfection as Hank, flawlessly wavering between
nervousness and anxiety. Is he as righteous as he thinks he is, or does he
possess a creepily violent side? Billy Bob Thornton cuts another rich
characterization with his dim-witted, stringy-haired, vague Jacob, who holds a
grudge against his brother, Hank, and who dreams of going on a date with a
simple gal. Bridget Fonda gives one of her finest acting jobs to date as the
intelligent Sarah who wants more out of her bland existence. She expresses her
rage in a touching, heartfelt speech where she expounds on unaffordable dinners
and coupons acquired to save money. 
"A Simple Plan" moves along at a controlled pace, involving us at every turn
and allowing us to empathize with each of the characters and their motives. The
script doesn't satirize nor condescend the characters. Instead, writer Smith
makes them believable and congruent to their actions. This is not just the
result of a stirring screenplay and weighty performances, but it is also due to
Raimi's simple, unpretentious direction. And the snowy landscape and muffled
sounds contribute greatly to the atmosphere - we really feel the literal
coldness of the surroundings, as in "Fargo." 
"A Simple Plan" may have an unsatisfying ending thematically whereas ambiguity
could have resulted in richer, deeper parallels. That is surely a minor carp
for a film that makes us realize the severe consequences that come with
criminal actions - we must always pay a price no matter how strong we are. 
Check out more reviews at JERRY AT THE MOVIES located at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/

Author
Jeremiah "Spassvogel" Rickert
Starring: Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thornton, Bridget Fonda
Directed by Sam Raimi
Synopsis:
     Three men discover 4.4 million dollars in a downed plane that has
been hidden in a wildlife preserve.  They decide to stick to a simple
plan: hold onto the money until the springtime, when the plane is sure
to be discovered, and tell no one about it, not even wives. Once they
can be sure that no one is looking for the money they plan to split it
three ways and leave town.  They figure the money is most likely
drug-money and therefore it's "not really stealin'."  The three men are
Hank Mitchell (Bill Paxton), a basically straight-up family man, his
brother Jacob Mitchell (A totally immersed Billy Bob Thornton), who is
unemployed and a bit slower than his brother Hank, and Jacob's drinking
buddy Lou (Brent Briscoe), another beer-swilling good ol' boy.  Little
by little, their simple plan becomes more and more complicated until it
starts consuming people one by one.
     This film's biggest asset is the screenplay.  Written by Scott B.
Smith, adapted from his own novel, the film has nearly perfect pacing
and as the tension surrounding the plan begins to wind up, the plan
itself begins to unravel, slowly at first, and then in torrid gasps.
All of the resolutions of the plan that the three men come up with:
don't tell anyone, even wives, everyone has to agree to leave town, and
so on, are violated one by one by one.  The first thing that Hank does
when he gets home is dump the money on the table and tell his wife
(played with a very subdued cunning by Bridget Fonda) everything.  She
then gets involved, and suggests taking some of the money back to the
plane to when it is found, they'd think that it fell out or something,
for no one would leave behind $100,000 if someone had found the cash,
would they?  Her complication of the plan leads to the death of a farmer
who happens to be in the area when they're planting the money on the
plane.  It's only downhill from there, as more and more people are
killed for the sake of the plan.  Sooner than they hoped, an FBI man
comes to town with information on the plane, but there are doubts to
whether he's really an FBI agent, or one of the people who lost the
money.
     Most of the performances are top-notch, especially that of Billy
Bob Thornton as the slower brother Jacob.  Jacob is almost a foil for
Hank, the upstanding straight-arrow family man.  He may be slow, but his
motivations are the least greedy of the bunch.  At one point in the
movie, after so many have died and the money seems to be an imminent
reward, Jacob asks Hank "I'm gonna be happy now, right?"  Really all
Jacob wants to do is to remodel their father's farm, but that means he's
not going to leave town as was part of the plan.  Jacob ends up being
the most observant one of them all.
     Sam Raimi had a lot to prove with this film in many ways.  As he's
most well known for his comedy/horror films and his hyper-kinetic camera
work, this film was in a way a make it or break it for him as a
mainstream filmmaker.  For the most part, he avoids his camera-tricks
and lets the characters carry the film.  There are number of
Hitchcock-ian references, from Psycho's crows, who are an omnipresent
witness to the crimes that are concealed for the sake of the plan, and a
Birds-esque scene where Hank is seemingly attacked by some startled
birds in the fuselage of the downed plane.  The cinematography has a
definite Fargo-esque pedigree to it, but considering the locales of the
film and of Raimi's long associations with the brothers Coen, that does
not seem surprising.  The film starts off with what appears to be a
reference to "It's A Wonderful Live" when Hank walks through the town
wishing everyone a happy new year.  Just as the audience begins to think
of him as George Bailey, he soon begins to look like Norman Bates.
     The film is really a downward spiral of desperation, on the part of
just about every one of the characters who have a relationship with the
4.4 million dollars.  A lot of filmgoers will probably be put off by the
rather un-hollywood ending, but hopefully it won't overshadow the
wonderful performance by Billy Bob Thornton and the great screenplay by
Scott B. Smith.  It's perfectly paced and both Smith's script and
Raimi's direction precisely control the tension of the film, winding it
tighter and tighter as the plan begins to unravel.
Of the $4.00 I payed for the film, it was worth every penny, $4.00


Author
Scott Renshaw
     A couple of years ago, I began reading Scott Smith's novel A SIMPLE
PLAN and never made it to the halfway point.  There was nothing
particularly wrong with the plot -- a moody cautionary tale about the
resulting spiral of guilt and violence when three men find $4.4 million in
a wrecked plane -- nor did Smith's prose style offend in any way.  The
simple problem with A SIMPLE PLAN was the narrative structure, in which
Smith told the story as a first person account by one of the men.  It
seemed to me a terrible mistake, one made identification with one specific
character too explicit.  Intriguing though the premise may have been, I
couldn't get past hearing Hank Mitchell's voice while watching his story
unfold.
     Sam Raimi's screen version of A SIMPLE PLAN shows how easy it can be
to improve on a novel when point-of-view is its only real flaw.  Raimi
casts Bill Paxton as Hank, a hard-working family man in a snowy Minnesota
farm town.  One New Year's Eve, Hank -- along with his brother Jacob
(Billy Bob Thornton) and Jacob's drinking buddy Lou (Brent Briscoe) --
takes an unexpected detour into snowy woods, where they discover the
downed plane, a dead pilot and a bag full of $100 bills.  Suspecting the
money must be ill-gotten, Lou and Jacob are intent on keeping it, and
manage to talk Hank into a compromise whereby they'll sit on the money
until the plane is found in the spring.  If no one comes looking for the
money, no harm done, and three millionaires made.
     Only there is harm done.  Greed begins twisting the three men,
already divided into shifting factions -- educated Hank vs. unemployed
Jacob and Lou, the two Mitchell brothers vs. the outsider Lou -- into
ever-more-extreme methods of covering their tracks.  It also begins
twisting Hank's wife Sarah (Bridget Fonda), who eventually becomes the
most determined to keep the cash at any cost.  A SIMPLE PLAN offers an
object lesson in any number of cliched moral bon mots:  crime doesn't pay,
there certainly isn't any honor among thieves, and love of money is indeed
the root of all evil.  It's a tale of what we're made of at our core, and
how little it takes to strip away the civilization in a man like Hank and
turn him into a savage.
     That probably doesn't sound like the kind of material one usually
associates with Raimi (THE EVIL DEAD, DARKMAN), a director whose camera
often seems to need a dose of Ritalin.  He certainly tones down his
hyperkinetic visuals, but he loses none of his energy, which is why A
SIMPLE PLAN never feels like a simplistic morality play.  He merely 
harnesses that energy into scenes of superbly crafted tension, where the
moments before critical decisions linger with almost unbearable
anticipation.  Raimi allows you to feel the weight of every bad choice,
every life-threatening turning point.  He does it not by letting Hank
explain to you what he's doing, but by giving you a moment to consider
what you would do in his place.  It's a thriller as full of genuine dread
as anything a major studio has produced in recent years.
     It's also a thriller full of genuine pathos, thanks to a masterful
supporting performance by Billy Bob Thornton.  As the simple-minded Jacob,
a life-long loser who believes money might finally make him somebody, he
is the film's true moral compass.  As confused as he is physically
grotesque, he provides the sense of emotional consequence most plot-driven
thrillers lack.  The one drawback to Thornton's intense work is that he
makes his castmates look weak by comparison; Bridget Fonda's calculating
Sarah rings particularly false at times.  A SIMPLE PLAN overreaches its
grasp a bit during the final act when a sinister figure arrives to 
threaten the plan, but by then Raimi and Smith have gotten you so wrapped
up in what their characters will do next that you're willing to follow
wherever they lead.  Smith's first-person narrative in written form made
this a tale of one man's descent.  On the screen, A SIMPLE PLAN lets you
identify with every character and experience the chilly, chilling dark
night of several souls.

Author
Michael Dequina
_A_Simple_Plan_ (R) ****
_Very_Bad_Things_ (R) ****
        _A_Simple_Plan_ and _Very_Bad_Things_ are films of two opposing
genres--drama and comedy--but both are actually so similar that their
titles could very well be interchangeable.  Both are about botched secret
schemes that lead to downward spirals of transgression; both are bound to
leave audiences unsettled--and both are among the most memorable films of
the year.
        Although his filmmaking career has spanned twenty years, Sam Raimi has
always remained on the fringes of Hollywood, scoring no big box office hits
but amassing a fiercely devoted cult following and with his trademark brand
of dark humor (more often than not tinged with gore) and wildly kinetic
camera work.  More than a few Raimi cultists weaned on the likes of his
_Evil_Dead_ trilogy will undoubtedly cry "sellout" after seeing
_A_Simple_Plan_, which neither looks nor feels like a traditional Raimi
film.  Instead, it looks and feels like  a simply "traditional" film: no
flashy camera work, no excessive violence, no macabre humor.
        Thematically, on the other hand, this adaptation of Scott B. Smith's
bestselling novel is exactly what one would expect from the auteur.  Bill
Paxton and Billy Bob Thornton play Midwestern brothers Hank and Jacob
Mitchell, who, with friend Lou (Brent Briscoe), discover a downed plane
containing a dead body and a bag full of money--$4.4 million, to be exact.
Their plan, as the title states, is simple: split the money between them,
but only after the plane is discovered and it is determined that the
authorities are not tracing the cash.
        As they say, "the best laid plans of mice and men often go awry," and
that's exactly what happens.  As jealousy, greed, and suspicion enter the
picture, a tense and ever-twisting turn of events follows, in which the
most innocent characters reveal their more sinister tendencies--and vice
versa.  This theme of the ever-shifting tides of evil within people is a
perfect fit for the dark sensibilities of Raimi, and he made a wise
decision in keeping his showy visual tendencies in check.  Any of Raimi's
usual visual theatrics would have detracted from Smith's tightly-wound
script, and his restrained approach intensifies the suspense of the story.
        Adding to the complexity and power of the story are the actors, whose
multidimensional performances create complex characters the audience
sometimes hates yet maintains a certain empathy for.  Thornton is likely to
receive the most attention for his heartwrenching turn as the sad sack
Jacob, who may be slow-witted but is nobody's fool.  Equally as impressive
though certain to be overlooked in Thornton's shadow is Paxton's subtle,
slow burn as the often-conflicted Hank.  Bridget Fonda's role as Hank's
wife Sarah seems simple at the start, but as the character gradually takes
on sharper edges, so does Fonda's performance.  The film's richness of
character lends its  conclusion a poignant and haunting impact.
        As badly as the characters in _A_Simple_Plan_ behave, nothing they do
comes off quite as reprehensible as the deeds perpetrated by the characters
inhabiting _Very_Bad_Things_, the audacious writing/directing debut of
actor Peter Berg.  Stuffed with scenes of stylishly shot splatter, this
film is as violent as any that has been released as this or any year--and
it's all played for _laughs_ (coincidentally, much like Raimi's earlier
work).  That shameless, eager-to-shock energy, with a crafty script and a
flawless ensemble cast to match, make this beyond-black comedy a very good
thing indeed. 
        A few days before his wedding to Laura Garrity (Cameron Diaz), Kyle Fisher
(Jon Favreau) heads to Las Vegas for a big bachelor blowout with his
buddies: self-improvement-obsessed realtor Robert Boyd (Christian Slater),
quiet auto mechanic Charles Moore (Leland Orser), straightlaced family man
Adam Berkow (Daniel Stern), and Adam's boorish younger brother Michael
(Jeremy Piven).  Mix these five men, gallons of booze, pounds of cocaine
and marijuana, and a stripper into a hotel room and something bad is bound
to happen--and it does.  A rather grisly "complication" during sex with
Michael leaves the stripper dead, and the ever-cunning Boyd comes up with,
yes, a simple plan to correct, as he calls it, the "105-pound
problem"--bury her body in the desert.
        Predictably, this rash decision just leads to more trouble.  What isn't so
predictable, however, is the severity of the troubling situations Berg puts
his characters in.  These developments will undoubtedly offend some, but
most people would be laughing too hard to be offended.  An obvious
comparison would be to the Farrelly Brothers' surprise sensation
_There's_Something_About_Mary_, but the brands of humor are distinctly
different; whereas the Farrellys dabbled in "gross-out" bodily function
humor, Berg's violent variety of comedy can best be described as "shock"
humor.  But however different their specific sensibilities are, the
Farrellys and Berg share the same go-for-broke attitude when it comes to
generating laughs, going so far as to seem to dare the audience not to
laugh.  "Shock" gags would not mean anything if they didn't organically
emerge from the story, and like _Mary_, the very bad things of the title
are firmly rooted in the script.
        But there's more to Berg's assured writing than his ability to jolt the
audience into laughter; there are also some juicy roles, and each cast
member tackles their respective job with aplomb.  The characters truly take
shape, and the actors achieve liftoff, after the stripper incident, when
everyone experiences different types of emotional fallout.  The fact that
Kyle's increasing anxiety can be palpably felt while not exactly seen is a
tribute to Favreau's firm grasp of the character, who tries to maintain a
veneer of composure throughout.  Adam becomes mad with paranoia, leading to
some effectively hammy hysterics by Stern.  Nicely playing off of him is
Piven, whose all-attitude Michael undergoes the most dramatic arc in the
film.  Slater's often irksome Nicholson-channelling works like a charm for
Boyd.   As his self-improvement philosophy becomes increasingly, shall we
say, dark, Slater's devilish Jack-like grin and swagger could not be more
perfect; it's his best performance since _True_Romance_.  As the wedding
date nears and the tension mounts, the chirpy Laura seems less like
herself--or is that _more_?--and Diaz obviously has a blast.  Even a
relatively peripheral player like Adam's wife Lois (Jeanne Tripplehorn)
takes on greater depth as things get more and more horrifying; only Orser's
barely-heard Moore remains an enigma, but I believe that was the point.
Berg falls a little short at the end; his ultimate resolution doesn't quite
live up to the raucous build up, but it closes the film with an
appropriately acidic sting.  (_A_Simple_Plan_ opens December 4;
_Very_Bad_Things_ opens November 25)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: January 22, 1999
Starring: Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thornton, Bridget Fonda, Brent Briscoe,
Chelcie Ross, Gary Cole
Directed by: Sam Raimi
Distributed by: Paramount Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (violence, language) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/simple.htm
The setup is familiar: a group of characters land themselves in a
boatload of trouble and devise a simple plan to get out of it. The plan,
needless to say, never goes as intended, and hence the plot of the
movie. A SIMPLE PLAN, directed by Sam Raimi (DARKMAN), is entirely of
this vein -- as the title indicates. But even more so, it's a fine
example of a stylishly directed thriller: screenwriting, camerawork,
editing, and sound all come together to make this movie a truly
involving experience. 
Bill Paxton headlines a cast of noteworthies as Hank Mitchell, an
educated Midwesterner struggling to make ends meet. His wife Sarah
(Bridget Fonda) is expecting a baby, and his job at the local grain mill
may not cover their expenses. His brother Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton) is
even worse -- he hangs out with the town drunk, Lou (Brent Briscoe), and
lives in a derelict apartment. So it's a fortunate turn of events for
the threesome when, out hunting, they find over four million dollars
inside a snow-covered plane wreck. Lou and Jacob want to spend the money
immediately, but Hank insists on keeping the money until spring; if no
one comes looking, then each man will get his share and they'll all
leave town. 
When it wants to be, A SIMPLE PLAN is a very gutsy movie. Most of the
time, however, it relies on subtlety to create a tense atmosphere. For
instance, most of the paranoia and incriminating doubt that the
characters experience is completely unnecessary -- the characters build
it up inside of themselves. Similarly, the writing in certain scenes
(such as the one where Hank and Jacob attempt to evince a confession
from Lou) is shrewd to the point of impossibility; the Scott Smith
script runs in circles before it hits the viewer in the face. On the
other hand, it also calls for stark imagery like a flock of ravens
attacking Hank or several bloody shooting deaths. But most importantly,
the biting irony of the script's ending should not be missed. 
The cast is well-chosen. Bill Paxton and Billy Bob Thornton work well
together, and their contrasts and similarities are what anchor the
movie. In most respects they're different individuals, bound only by
their family name, but in the movie's brief moments of character study
it's possible to see their likenesses. Interestingly enough, Jacob is
often a much more intelligent character than he appears; his role, from
start to finish, is an extraordinary one. Thornton masters it in fine
form. Other supports are also effective, especially Bridget Fonda as
Hank's wife Sarah. 
A SIMPLE PLAN is not unreasonably complex, and can only be faulted for
occasional moments of dullness. There are a number of possible Academy
Award nominations for this picture, although they will certainly it will
certainly be the dark horse. Certainly a worthwhile watch. 

Author
Bob Bloom
 A Simple Plan is not a simple movie to watch.
 It's a film that, on its surface, shows the depths to which greed drives
some people. It is a story of moral corruption and murder.
 Three men - Hank, his younger brother, Jacob, and Jacob's friend, Lou -
find a plane that has crashed deep in the woods. In the wreckage they
discover the body of the pilot plus a bag containing $4.4 million.
 Realizing the money must be either stolen or drug money, they decide to
hide it until spring, then divide it three ways.
 Of course, from the outset, everything goes awry. First, an innocent
farmer is accidentally killed when Jacob tries to stop him from entering
the woods. From that point, events escalate, and the body count rises.
 But the question you are left to answer is: Were these good people to
begin with who were corrupted by the discovery of the money? Or, were they
morally weak and was the discovery the catalyst that unleashed their baser
instincts?
 Hank (Bill Paxton) seems to be a decent guy. He has a boring job at the
feed store, and a loving, pregnant wife (Bridget Fonda) at home. Hank is
the practical individual. He's the one who stashes the money and devises
the plan to keep it hidden until after the snows melt.
 All his level-headedness, however, cannot halt the freight train of
disaster that unfolds once he conceals the money.
 The unemployed Lou (Brent Briscoe) is a big-mouth, drunken lout who is
eager to get his share of the loot immediately.
 The moral core of the film is anchored by Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton). Also
unemployed, Jacob is a bit dim-witted, usually going along with whoever
devised the latest plan.
 Jacob, though, wants to use his share of the money to buy back and restore
the family's farm, lost after their parents' death.
 One lie builds upon another as the trio find it more and more difficult to
contain their secret.
 Hank loses his moral compass, rationalizing the violence that ensues.
 One problem with the film, adapted by Scott B. Smith from his novel, is
the character of Sarah, Hank's wife.
 Her transformation from a decent woman appalled by her husband's actions
into a greedy, grasping harridan is too sudden and inexplicable.
 Director Sam Raimi, best known for his horror outings such as The Evil
Dead, Army of Darkness and Darkman, uses the cold and isolation of the area
to dominate the film. You feel the breath of the characters as they
contrive their misbegotten plans and watch in horror as those dreams slowly
disintegrate.
 A Simple Plan is a disturbing movie. The characters gain your sympathy
while they simultaneously appall you. A Simple Plan is a film that
demonstrates how weak the moral fiber can be when it is severely tested.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
A Simple Plan (1998)
Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thornton, Bridget Fonda, Brent Briscoe, Jack Walsh,
 Chelcie Ross, Becky Ann Baker, Gary Cole. Screenplay by Scott B. Smith, 
based on his novel. Directed by Sam Raimi. 123 minutes.
Rated R, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
"Don't worry. Nobody would ever believe you're capable of doing what 
you've done." So it goes in the strikingly effective thriller, "A Simple 
Plan," where even words of consolation come with a sting. For the 
production, writer Scott B. Smith reworked his hit novel into a focused, 
economic script, which director Sam Raimi has crafted into that rarest of 
creations, a movie that is better than the book. To best enjoy the film, 
I'd suggest you not read the rest of this piece until after you've 
returned from the theater. If you choose to continue, remember that 
you've been warned. 
"A Simple Plan" chronicles the results of a fateful decision made by 
three men on a winter day outside their small, Midwestern hometown. When 
Hank (Bill Paxton), his brother Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton) and Jacob's 
friend Lou (Brent Briscoe) come across a downed plane containing a dead 
body and a bag with over $4 million in cash, they huddle to discuss what 
they should do. 
Hank wants to turn everything over to the police. After all, he and his 
wife Sarah (Bridget Fonda) already have a wonderful life. Hank is a 
respected member of the community with a good job, and the couple has a 
baby on the way. Everything is fine just the way it is. But Jacob and Lou,
 both poor and miserable, have different ideas. After much arguing, they 
come up with a simple plan. Hank will hold the money until the plane is 
discovered by others and the subsequent investigation completed. Once 
they are sure that the authorities are finished, they'll split the bounty,
 leave town and move on to better lives elsewhere.
But, of course, matters rarely go as planned. All too soon, distrust and 
greed stir up unresolved issues from the men's pasts. The film has an 
amazing number of twists and turns, including several violent moments, 
but nothing ever feels contrived. This is storytelling at its most 
genuine, with detailed, believable characters and considerable acumen. 
"A Simple Plan" is set against a background of snow, effectively 
establishing a crisp, stark atmosphere that aides the film immeasurably. 
The ominous tone builds slowly and surely; even the periodic bursts of 
gallows humor serve to underscore the ever increasing sense of dread. 
Director Raimi handles Smith's words beautifully, aided by a superb cast 
who make every sentence crackle with authenticity. 
As the mistrust grows, relationships are examined and reexamined, and the 
effect is mesmerizing. Most thrillers are content to just follow the 
central plotline, but this film pokes and prods areas rarely examined. 
Jacob and Lou express their resentment over the way Hank talks to them, 
and we get an insightful glimpse into the middle American class system, 
where individuals with less education, little money or weak social skills 
are marginalized by the better schooled. 
Listen to the exchanges between brothers Hank and Jacob, forced into 
intimacy by circumstance, and you'll understand how easy it is to put 
human beings into neat, categorized little boxes; to use selective 
memories to create nostalgia for a glossy, comfortable past that never 
was. As an average man in way over his head, Bill Paxton gives the best 
performance of his career, and Billy Bob Thornton is nothing short of 
phenomenal as Jacob, a grimy outcast who is far more observant and 
intelligent that he appears to be. 
Watch Hank and Sarah, who start the film content with their storybook 
existence together, only to have their perception of the good life 
perverted by the lure of wealth. It's fascinating, and frightening, to 
witness their change in attitude. Bridget Fonda is a wonder to behold, 
transforming from a blissful mother-to-be into a woman who views all she 
once treasured as a trap, a purgatory of repetitious mediocrity from 
which escape is mandatory. 
"A Simple Plan" is a stunning psychological study of lives unraveling, of 
promises betrayed and hope turned to dust. Early in the film, a character 
refers to the cache of money as "the American dream... in a gym bag." 
Raimi and Smith's powerful "A Simple Plan" shows the consequences of 
pursuing a dream at the expense of your own humanity.  

Author
Jon Popick
Scott B. Smith adapted his best-selling novel for the screen and the
result, A Simple Plan (****), is not only one of the best films of the
year, but also a dark-horse candidate for a Best Picture nomination.
Hauntingly beautiful and brutally horrifying, the final reel creates a
level of tension (equaled this year only by David Mamet's The Spanish
Prisoner) that would have knocked Hitchcock's socks off.
Sam Raimi (The Quick and the Dead) directs this powerful tale of two
brothers who, together with a friend, find `the American Dream' - $4.4
million inside a plane that crashed in a wildlife preserve near their
home.  Like an incident played out earlier this year in Very Bad Things,
a group of ordinary men put into an extraordinary situation ask
themselves, `What if we don't call the police?'
Hank's (Bill Paxton) first reaction is to go to the authorities. Who
could blame him?  Of the three, he has the most to lose.  A respected
member of the community and college graduate, Hank is the only one with
a job Â– a dead-end position at the local feed and grain mill Â– and his
lovely young librarian wife, Sarah (Bridget Fonda), is expecting their
first child in a few days.  But older sibling Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton)
and his friend Lou, two unemployed dimwits that vie for the coveted
title of `town drunk,' finally talk the reluctant Hank into keeping the
loot.
Jacob and Lou's  plan is a simple one Â– hold on to the money, wait until
the spring and see if anyone comes looking for it once the plane is
discovered. Hank agrees, but under the conditions that they keep it a
secret and he retain the money in the interim.  Hank also threatens to
burn it all if he gets the slightest inkling that the authorities are on
to him.
Of course, Hank tells Sarah as soon as he gets home, and the next
morning she suggests a way to enhance the plan. She thinks that Hank
should take $500,000 back to the plane so that whoever finds it in the
spring won't believe anybody else had been there.  And he can't tell
Jacob because he would probably re-steal the $500,000 on his own. Sarah
tells her husband in an almost morose tone, `We'll have to be careful.
That's how we'll have to be from now on.'
Needless to say, this greed causes things to spin out of control very
quickly and very horribly.  Again, like in Very Bad Things, the picture
shows that the true nature of man is to do anything to cover his/her own
ass in an all-out attempt to grab whatever you can get your hands on.
At one point, Sarah tries to comfort Hank by telling him, `Nobody would
ever believe you're capable of doing what you've done.'  Now that's a
supportive wife, huh?
Strangely, the true conscience of A Simple Plan is Jacob.  The weight of
the big score and the resulting lying, cheating and murder has all but
crushed any remaining spirit that faintly flickered within him.
Completely drained, Jacob asks his younger brother in a particularly
moving scene, `Do you ever feel evil?'  He doesn't answer.  He doesn't
have to.
A Simple Plan is a virtually flawless film.  The acting is first-class Â–
Paxton (Mighty Joe Young) has never been better and the nearly
unrecognizable Thornton (Armageddon) is all but guaranteed an Oscar
nomination (as is Smith's screenplay).  Danny Elfman's creepy score is
perfect and Raimi's direction is also one of the year's best, bringing
to mind the previous snowy success of Fargo.  In fact, the Coen brothers
worked on Raimi's first feature (1983's Evil Dead) and aided him with
tips on how to shoot this film's bleak snow scenes properly.  Raimi also
effectively blends settings together with clips of a fox ravaging a hen
house.
Unnerving, almost to the point of viewer discomfort, A Simple Plan is a
brilliant example of what a modern thriller should be Â– dark, drab and,
most importantly, not Virus.
(2:01 Â– R for language, extreme violence and brief nudity)

Author
Nick Amado
Starring: Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thorton, Bridget Fonda
I know what I would do with $4.4 million if I found it in a previously
undiscovered airplane crash site, especially if I were with Jacob and
Lou. (Huh?) Well, in any event, that is the situation Hank (Paxton)
finds himself in. He and his dim-witted brother Jacob (Thorton) and
tubby friend Lou (Brent Briscoe) come upon a large bag of cash inside
a plane wreck. Against his better judgement, Hank decides to go along
with the idea of keeping it rather than going to the authorities. The
rest of the film is a question of who is going to die to keep this a
secret, and is it worth it? A Simple Wish lies along the lines of Very
Bad Things, Clay Pigeons and even Fargo, and is kind of wrapped all
into one little dark bundle. Oh, and its much better than any of
those.
Sam Raimi took a departure from his normal freak-show horror-monkey
films and made this stylish and intriguing picture. He really lets the
audience sit back and watch the events unfold rather than force them
down our throats as many directors prefer to do. I think Raimi knew he
had a winner on his hands and decided to direct the picture on a
natural flowing course.
One of the film's components can be linked to a recurring theme in
Terrence Malick's The Thin Red Line. In Malick's three hour
bore-a-thon, he makes an interesting attempt to link Mother Earth to
his war story. It seemed nothing more than an occasional pretty cut to
a field of flowing grass, a small bird, or a flowing body of
water. Sure, there were obvious metaphorical connections, but there
was no subtlty to his efforts. Raimi does a fine job of tying in a fox
in a chicken coop and birds of prey to signify the future of the
characters. I think most viewers may miss the comparison, but it is a
very intriguing ingredient in the film.
And then there's Billy Bob Thorton, who is proof that the independent
film industry is vital to the life blood of Hollywood. If it can
continute to produce people like Thorton, Hollywood will be ok. He
gives a fantastic and devastatingly deep performance here. It is not
as engrossing as his Carl Childers character in Slingblade, but is is
just as complex, if not more so. Jacob is slow and simple, and yet we
so often see him deep in thought. I wondered if he was thinking about
things that he would never say (or didn't know HOW to say) or if he
was just taking a long time to think about the thing he just
said. Here he really proves his worth as one of the best character
actors in the industry.
Though the plot is somewhat unoriginal, it has a very appealing new
twist in its characters. Paxton gives one of the better performances
of his career as the straight and serious leader of the group (a far
cry from Chet in Wierd Science). Perhaps Bridget Fonda is miscast as
his advice-giving wife, but she certainly doesn't do anything ruin the
picture. A Simple Plan can be included in the group of recent small
Hollywood films that is just dark and pretty un-redeeming. But at
least this one has an important message, unlike so many of its
counterparts.
* * * 1/2 out of * * * * stars
Å 1999 Nick Amado       namado@concentric.net
check out my movie reviews at www.writerboy.com/nick
(or I'll come to your house and read all my reviews outloud in Miss Piggy's voice)

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
'A Simple Plan' contains that wonderful adjective, a modifier that 
usually is what is says, simple.  But words in our language are often 
charged with connotations that have other plans.  
The opening shots establish the protagonist Hank (Bill Paxton) in the 
small Wisconsin town where he works as a bookkeeper in a grain mill.  
Hank's wife Sarah (Bridget Fonda), who shelves books in the local 
library, is pregnant with their first child.  Their love seems pure, 
their lives innocent, until one evening when Hank's brother Jacob (Billy 
Bob Thornton) visits.  Intending to place a poinsettia on their father's 
grave - cold weather notwithstanding - the brothers drive into the snowy 
country.  With them in the truck is Jacob's drinking buddy Lou (Brent 
Briscoe) and Jacob's dog.  Before long the trio find themselves in the 
woods, the dog disappeared, tensions heating up between the unemployed 
ne'er-do-well Lou and the college boy Hank.  What puts a stop to the 
tension is the discovery of a crashed plane;  Hank investigates and and 
finds a dead pilot and a large duffel full of money.  Will they keep it?  
Give it back?  Are there other choices beside these two?
Thus the scene is set for a modern allegory, perfect chances for greed 
and betrayal and treachery to take over the plot in the same way they do 
in Chaucer's 'The Pardoner's Tale.'  The fate of the money is almost 
irrelevant;  it's like Hitchcock's macguffin.  It's enough to say the 
story of three honest men who return over four million dollars is not 
worth watching for two hours.
Much of what makes the film successful is the way in which decisions 
seem to make themselves.  Almost nothing is premeditated, and no matter 
how much Hank the new father intends to remain harmless, he travels into 
deeper trouble.  Bill Paxton does a solid job transmitting the feelings 
of a likable average Joe.  We admire his humanity as he proves himself a 
warm husband and caring brother.  When his life conflicts with outside 
forces, though, Hank displays his real character.  He's a formidable 
enemy to Lou; their jealous relationship is one of the main pivots of 
the story.  "Who would you choose, if you had to," Hank questions Jacob, 
"me or Lou?"  It's clear that, when put in tight situations, Hank 
intends to emerge alive and free, and hopefully wealthy.  Key to his 
performance is the sympathy of the audience, which Paxton is able to 
engage even after Hank veers into savage behavior.
The best acting in the piece, however, is done by Billy Bob Thornton as 
big brother Jake.  Already the recipient of a Best Supporting Actor 
Award from the Online Film Critics Society, Thornton is bound to command 
other nominations and acclaim for this role.  If Bill Paxton plays  Joe 
Average, Thornton plays the subtly wise loser, a Mortimer Snerd of a 
man.  Sporting longish hair, bad teeth and duct-taped eyeglasses, Jacob 
seems a comic character tramping straight into tragedy.  And what's 
nearly ludicrous is that we remain sympathetic to his plight even after 
he too commits heinous acts.  That's the queer magic of the film -- that 
it serves as a canny study of the innocence and remorse of men after 
they've forfeited all claims to mercy.  In his expressions - the 
now-trademarked pouchy cheeks and piercing eyes, Thornton is able to 
transform Jacob into an unlucky Everyman, a big brother who is not quite 
right but who, at the same time, is wise and protective.
As Lou, Brent Briscoe does a delightful reprise of Rub, the best friend 
of Donald Sullivan, in 'Nobody's Fool.'  Lou is just a bit brighter, but 
more tragically flawed.  Briscoe plays him with a straight-forward 
presentation, and Lou comes off as a drunken dumbass, another character 
who rushes into action before he is even able to think.  In another 
supporting role, Bridget Fonda seems under-utilized as Sarah, Hank's 
wife.  Fonda is good with the deadpan seriousness of a woman not quite 
happy with her life.  She often surprises us with her suggestions;  we 
can feel Sarah's presence in Hank's actions even when she is offscreen.  
The settings of the film are functional, the wintry scenes beautiful and 
symbolic.  From the forest where the wrecked plane lies, to the 
middle-class kitchen where an ordinary couple schemes about the 
unspeakable, the locations in the film do not call undue attention.  
Likewise, music serves a fairly transparent role, at times sustaining 
suspense with a score built around stark piano chords.
The final quarter of 'A Simple Plan' does smack of contrivance, but not 
enough to impede the immensely sad narrative of greed and its 
reckonings.  Director Sam Raimi reins in his film just before it can go 
over-the-top with violence, though I would not suggest dragging along 
anyone under 16 to see it.  


Author
Walter Frith
If any conclusions are to be drawn from 'A Simple Plan', one could not
just dismiss it as simply another morality play about the darker side of
the human conscience.  It shows us more than anything else that every
single human being has the potential for good and/or evil.  Of course,
everyone knows that as well but what makes this film so much better than
most morality tales is that the majority of films that showcase good vs.
evil usually have their players rooted in character as the film begins.
Not so with 'A Simple Plan'.  The film begins with ordinary people who
possess all the decency you could ask for.  Bill Paxton portrays a
family man whose wife (Bridget Fonda) is expecting a baby any day now.
Paxton works at a modest job for modest pay. His older brother (Billy
Bob Thornton) is a screw-up and has an IQ a little below Forrest Gump's
and a personality similar to one of the Newhart show's "Daryl"
brothers.  Thornton's best friend (Brent Briscoe), along with the two
brothers, find a bag of money stashed in some plane wreckage and the
total is somewhere around four million dollars.
There is a struggle of wills about what to do with the money.  Thornton
and Briscoe want to keep the money but Paxton is all for turning the
money in.  He says that you're supposed to work for the American dream,
not steal for it.  Paxton eventually agrees to go along with the scheme
of things and keep the money and the three of them all become embroiled
in a quagmire of crime involving greed, deceit and most horrible of all,
murder.  Complicating things further is the advice that Fonda gives
Paxton about what her husband should do about covering his tracks so
nothing can be traced back to him.  Every shred of advice backfires and
lands the players in this movie further and further into the moral
abyss.
Now comes the tricky part.  How do you make a film like this truly
entertaining?  You can't.  Director Sam Raimi, known mostly for horror
films makes a horror film of sorts that showcases reality but because
it's real doesn't mean that its enjoyable.  Certainly, the film isn't
entertaining from a high powered point of view.  It has a deliberate
slow pace and is a film many will want to see only once.  This doesn't
mean that it's a bad movie.  I am recommending it for two key reasons.
First and foremost, the performance of Bill Paxton.  After years of
playing second string supporting characters, he gets the chance to shine
as a leading man in a heavy drama and proves he can handle a monumental
part where he's in 99% of the movie.  Next is Billy Bob Thornton.  After
turns in 'Sling Blade' and 'Primary Colors' where he demonstrated his
range, he comes across as a never do well simpleton who isn't evil, he's
just lead down its path easily.
Much like 'Fargo', 'A Simple Plan' is set against the winter tundra
backdrop of Minnesota for an even darker and more stark look at the
bleak.  Sam Raimi uses a surrounding central theme of visual content in
the form of black crows that encircle many scenes as a metaphor for the
film's tone.  There isn't a wasted character in the entire production
and as 'A Simple Plan' draws to a conclusion, it serves not so much as
an entertainment piece as it does a mirror for audiences to take a look
at their own sins and repent for them as they see others in a much
sadder predicament.  A standout film that keeps reminding us that no one
is above the moral spectrum of perfection.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
greg king
Set in Delano, a small town in America's midwest, during a
bitter winter, A Simple Plan invites obvious comparisons to the Coen
brothers' Fargo.  However, this violent, darkly comic, character
driven thriller has a darker and more frightening undertone.  A Simple
Plan shows how evil can be created out of the most banal
circumstances, and how greed and money can change even ordinary
people, driving them to acts of violence.  The wintry landscape,
evocatively photographed by Alar Kivilo, is the perfect backdrop for
this bleak, chilling and coolly ironic tale of greed and murder.  The
Mitchell brothers and a friend stumble upon a crashed plane buried
under the snow.  Inside the plane they discover the dead pilot, and a
bag containing $4 million.  After some discussion, they decide to keep
the money.  College educated and essentially a decent family man, Hank
Mitchell (Bill Paxton) suggests that they hide the money away for six
months, waiting until the snow thaws and the plane is found.  If
no-one claims the money, then they will divide it between them.  It
sounds a simple enough plan.
But immediately things go wrong as greed, suspicion and
mistrust sour the uneasy relationship between the three men.  The
violent, abusive, unemployed alcoholic Lou (Brent Briscoe) demands his
share of the money.  Hank's older brother Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton)
is unemployed and lonely, but also a little simple and too trusting,
and capable of inadvertently revealing their secrets.
Desperate to keep their secret while protecting his wife Sarah
(Bridget Fonda), Hank is forced to make some appalling decisions and
then live with the terrible consequences.  His actions lead to brutal
murder and cover up, and he seems to be digging himself deeper into
trouble at every turn.
As it explores the tragic consequences of Hank's actions, this
tautly crafted and intelligent psychological thriller also has a
strong moral undercurrent.  Its denouement delivers a terrific irony.
Scott Smith has adapted his own tense novel for the screen, and is
protective of the novel's dark, psychological territory.
The performances of the cast are superb.  Working together for
the first time since the chilling thriller One False Move, Paxton and
Thornton are both excellent, easily conveying their struggle between
essential decency and uncharacteristic greed.  Fonda makes the most of
her role as Sarah, the shy librarian who soon reveals her own amoral
streak.
A Simple Plan is one of those deliberately slow paced films in
which the violence slowly escalates.  An almost straight forward and
conventional thriller, A Simple Plan is an unusual choice for director
Sam Raimi, better known for his dark, comic-book-like horror films
(Darkman, The Evil Dead, etc).  While the film lacks Raimi's usual
visual flourishes, it is still full of effectively rendered scenes of
menace, slowly building suspense and moody atmospherics.  **** greg
king http://www.netau.com.au/gregking

Author
Dennis Schwartz
A SIMPLE PLAN (director: Sam Raimi; cast: Bill Paxton (Hank), Billy Bob
Thornton (Jacob), Bridget Fonda (Sarah), Brent Briscoe (Lou), Gary Cole
(Baxter), Becky Ann Baker (Nancy), Chelcie Ross (Carl, The Sheriff),
Jack Walsh (Tom Butler), 1998)
This is Raimi's attempt to go mainstream with an art film thriller that
might have an appeal to an  audience that likes films that give them
some ideas to ponder. This wintry morality tale, its bleak snowbound
midwestern atmosphere reminds me a lot of FARGO, without the comedy, as
it examines the character of three small town locals who have no worldly
experience, but have adjusted in one way or another to their lot in
life.
Hank Mitchell (Paxton) figured out that it is the simple things in life
that make one happy and he's a lucky man because he got everything he
basically wants: a pregnant wife that he loves, a respectable job in a
feed store, a college education, a home, and the respect of the
townspeople where he has lived all his life. His brother Jacob
(Thornton) is his opposite: a born loser, he can't hold a job, has never
even kissed a woman, drinks heavily, is uneducated and lacks all his
wits; Nevertheless, he gets by, satisfied to be living a rather plain
and childlike life, satisfied to go hunting and chat with someone who
talks his talk; his crony Lou (Brent), a married 40-year-old, who is
unemployed, the town drunk, a high school drop-out, and of a volatile
nature.
Their three lives would change forever when chance intervenes and they
find a crashed plane buried in the snow with 4.4 million dollars. The
question arises what should the three of them do with the money.
Hank, the responsible one of the trio, decides that they better come up
with a plan, a simple plan, and that if they don't want to turn the
money over to the police, which is what he suggests they do, then they
must agree to let him keep the money until the spring, so that when the
plane is discovered, they will at least know if this is stolen money.
The trio are all perfectly cast, with Billy Bob Thornton in a supporting
role, becoming caught with his brother in a series of bad judgments that
results in the most terrible consequences for them. Billy Bob is
particularly outstanding in his true-to-life characterization of such an
individual.
Sarah (Bridget) makes the most of her small role as the rational wife
who gets involved with her husband's plans and connives to help him
alter his plans. But as a result, her interference makes things  worse.
Things get completely out-of-control for the trio, as things turn
awfully bloody. This is a dilemma for the filmmakers, there seems to be
something devoid about this tale that can't surface, except in outwardly
visual terms, as we clearly see how morality is drawn in terms of black
and white. There is the great shot of the snow in all its whiteness and
the black crows surrounding the downed plane, as this sighting of where
the money is seems to be a symbol for the film's morality play.
The result of all the trio's bungling, is that things are no longer
simple for them, as greed and their extended version of the American
dream, but this time earned the too easy way, via a suitcase full of
money found in the snow, becomes too much for them to handle with any
sensibility, as all their character flaws become magnified, and they
begin to get careless and talk too much of what they found. Jacob's
character ranges between vulnerability and menacing danger, as the bonds
between brothers is tattered and redefined for ever, as the brothers
must face up to who they really are and how they will both relate to
Lou, as even the placid and morally proper Hank has begun to spiral
downward, almost lost in a nightmare he no longer has control of.
This is a strong gut-wrenching suspense film, one of the top ten of
1998. But the film is just lacking something, and I think that thing it
needed, was a breath of vagueness about what is morally right or wrong
in order for the story to remain on an even psychological/spiritual keel
and not descend into a literal Biblical morality theme. Raimi did a
superb visual job, carefully weaving a noir tale without any heroes or
apparent villains, a difficult task to do, but one that he succeeds in
without question. My feeling is, that in due time, we will look back at
this film and wonder how it was overlooked by so many, as it will become
recognized as one of the great suspense classics.
Å  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen

Looking it up on the IMDB, I think the only Sam Raimi movies I've seen
are "Darkman", "Army of Darkness", and the Sharon Stone western, "The
Quick and the Dead."  Except for "Army", I've missed the Evil Dead
movies that first put him on the map.  The strongest impression of
Raimi, though, comes more from "Hercules" and "Xena", if only because
Ted Raimi and Bruce Campbell are regulars.  Much clever goofiness in
these shows.
I finally got around to seeing Raimi's "A Simple Plan" this weekend,
and you can't easily travel further in tone from "Xena" or "Army of
Darkness."  Here we have a moral fable, where reasonable decisions made
by decent folk lead down a path where decency is thrown out for the
sake of fear and greed, and where small, innocent choices spiral out of
control.  While good luck may be the reside of good design, the film
plays out a converse, with a simple plan contorting into disaster in
the face of accident and unforeseen consequences.
The basic plot is the story of a trio of friends who stumble on a lot
of money.  They decide to keep the windfall from themselves, even
though the circumstances look suspicious.  They have to hide it, for a
while at least, or questions will be asked.  We've seen this before,
but Raimi and his actors handle these familiar parts very well.
A recent, similar film is the British "Shallow Grave", where three
flatmates fall into a bundle of cash when their new boarder dies.  Not
a bad film, it is more a cautionary tale about the effective disposal
of unwanted corpses and why people may want hacksaws in the big city:
it's a body dumping black comedy.  While there's the familiar flavor of
desperate greed and paranoia in the film, the main difference is that
the people from "Shallow Grave" are all heartless urban assholes
(clearly shown in the first 5 minutes) whose ultimate fates you don't
particularly care about, while "A Simple Plan" features rural workers
scraping by meagerly, carrying believeable hopes and memories.
Skin-deep yuppies living in the present, whose windfall only increases
the degree of skin-deep yuppism, or ordinary folk with histories and
futures, for whom the cash is a desperately transforming experience:
which makes for the more better story?
I don't want to talk too much about the plot, mainly because there's a
certain pleasure in seeing it unfold, seeing how the innocuous choices
lead to treacherous ground, which leads to even worse choices.
Instead, I'll reassure you that the early animal metaphors, which seem
overly heavy and obvious, really do figure in the plot later.  They
don't exist in a vacuum, even if the whole fox in the henhouse thing
really is a laying it on a bit thick.  It's a fine film.

Author
Kevin Patterson
It's now become something of a standard operating procedure for reviewers
to describe A SIMPLE PLAN as "cold," "icy," or "chilling." At the risk of
indulging in a clichÃ© or seeming too overly cute (it's partly a reference
to the weather in the film), I'd have to say that all of those words would
be perfect descriptions for this unsettling morality tale about little
evils leading to big ones, as three men decide to engage in what seems like
a harmless white lie in a win-win situation.
A SIMPLE PLAN takes place in the wintry climate of rural Minnesota, where
people are few and far between, where the ground is covered with snow for
miles on end, and where there's enough open land that a small plane could
crash out in the woods without being discovered right away. That's exactly
what happens in this film, as Hank Mitchell (Bill Paxton), his brother
Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton), and their friend Lou (Brent Briscoe) go
traipsing through the wilderness after their dog. This particular airplane
has evidently been there for quite a while, and inside is not only the
long-dead pilot but a sack containing over four million dollars in cash.
Despite Hank's initial reluctance, they eventually decide to keep the money
themselves, rationalizing that it's probably illegal drug money and
agreeing to wait six months and then split it up if no one comes to claim
it.
Except, of course, that it's not as easy as that. Jacob makes a slip and
almost lets on to the local police chief that they know something about a
missing plane. Hank's wife Sarah (Bridget Fonda) gets involved and suggests
that they put some of the money back so as to deflect any possible
suspicion upon the plane's discovery. Somebody gets too close to finding
out what's happening and is promptly knocked unconscious by a paranoid
Jacob. The deceits and cover-ups escalate until finally one of the three
men finds himself in a situation in which he sees no other option than to
murder an elderly man lying helpless in the snow at his feet. Soon, the
shaky alliance between the three starts to crumble as they realize they
can't trust each other with their terrible secret. More dead bodies pile
up, and those left standing continue to bury themselves alive under an
accumulating heap of lies, guilt, and murder.
Director Sam Raimi and screenwriter Scott Smith put the audience right
where we probably don't want to be: that is to say, right there with the
three anti-heroes as they devise scheme after scheme to cover their tracks
and grow increasingly paranoid and violent. We hate what they're doing,
but, like it or not, we do identify with them and sense their desperation,
because at their roots, these three are not bad people. They're ordinary
people who did a bad thing and are trying to escape the consequences. The
first time one of them kills somebody, Raimi keeps the camera on his face
as he looks away from his victim: he's not a cold-blooded killer at heart,
and he doesn't want to think about what the morality of his desperate
split-second decision to destroy another human life. And neither do we, for
that matter: between this scene and several others, A SIMPLE PLAN had me
shrinking back in my seat from the implications of what was happening on
screen more than any other film in recent memory.
A SIMPLE PLAN takes a somewhat satirical view of the class divisions
between the somewhat successful Hank and the blue-collar, unemployed Jacob
and Lou. The latter two are the ones who first suggest keeping the money
and essentially bully Hank into silence when he protests that they should
take it to the police. Yet once things get out of control, Hank proves
himself to be far more capable of cold-hearted violence and manipulation
than the other two. Jacob, on the other hand, is more upset over the things
they've done and also realizes that he doesn't want to take the money and
go build a "well-to-do" life somewhere else: he wants to use it to buy
their father's farm and make a living for himself in his hometown.
While one could certainly find a "love of money is the root of all evil"
message in A SIMPLE PLAN, I think that the lesson Raimi and Smith are
pushing is a little more basic: they're trying to show us the trouble you
can get into from a lapse into spur-of-the-moment moral relativism. If I
did have to pick a philosophical clichÃ© to attach to this film, I think it
would be more like, "Every choice has a consequence." Or two, or three, or
ten, as the case may be. The title, of course, is a rather appropriate
irony, in that there is nothing the least bit "simple" about the elaborate
deceptions and cover-ups in which the characters eventually find themselves
caught up.
It would be easy to "Hollywood-ize" a story like this, either by staging a
violent action climax in which the wrong-doers get their comeuppance or by
turning it into an amoral dark comedy caper. Fortunately, the filmmakers
are smart enough to see this story through to the end on its own terms. In
fact, the possibility of exposure and imprisonment is only of secondary
concern here. Instead, Raimi and Smith focus on the psychological and
spiritual damage to those who have participated in these schemes, as the
characters grow to despise what they've become to the point that one of
them literally cannot live with himself any more. This is a wise artistic
choice that actually strengthens A SIMPLE PLAN as a cautionary tale: it
seems to say that getting caught is almost irrelevant, because in the end,
your conscience will inflict due "punishment" for your misdeeds.
A SIMPLE PLAN is not the kind of film that is always especially "fun" to
watch, nor should it be. It does, however, feature some of the best
character-writing of the year, and it provides an insightful and probably
all too truthful look at the self-serving side of the human psyche. This
one probably won't be raking in a fortune at the box office, and it will
probably be mostly overlooked when it comes to the award ceremonies, but
Raimi and Scott can and should be proud of having made a film as unusually
(and unsettlingly) honest as this one.
Film Reviews Page:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Bill Chambers
Scott Smith's novel A Simple Plan was overrated, a humourless
modern-day, snowbound gloss on "Macbeth" with an unsatisfying ending.
How surprising it is, then, that Smith's own screenplay adaptation of
the same material is a rich and emotional modern-day, snowbound gloss on
"Macbeth". Raimi, creator of such frenetic cult films as Evil Dead, Evil
Dead 2, and Darkman, strapped himself in a strait-jacket to direct A
Simple Plan, a leisurely-paced thriller that has much in common with
friend Joel Coen's restrained Fargo.
It is a quiet winter in a small Midwestern town. Lou (Briscoe) and
brothers Hank (Paxton) and Jacob (Thornton) Mitchell happen upon a
crashed airplane during a hunting trip. The pilot is already a feast for
the vultures, and a bag of money sits unclaimed on the floor beside him.
The three men decide to take the money-$4.4 million-and keep their
discovery a secret; they will split the money only after the spring
thaw, once the plane is recovered by authorities and any inquiries about
the money have been dismissed. The trouble is, Jacob and Lou are close
to destitute and willing to break the pact, and Hank's own very pregnant
and very greedy wife (Fonda) finds out about the loot, too.
Even if you've read the book, A Simple Plan offers many surprises. (The
movie's climax is much stronger.) An obvious and tired maguffin, the old
briefcase full of money routine, seems fresh and original here. That's
because this time out, the people who after the dough are genuine
sympathetic sadsacks-candidates for an episode of Springer. Danny
Boyle's Shallow Grave featured a similar set-up (albeit within the cosy
confines of a London flat), but his characters were morally bankrupt
from the get-go-they mistreated each other out of pure, undiluted
avarice. A Simple Plan's trio of thieves lead generally miserable lives;
if they can get past their initial hunger for the cash, they might just
have a chance at saving themselves from a life of disconsolation.
I give: the best reason to see A Simple Plan is the performance of Billy
Bob "Sling Blade" Thornton as the anemic, tormented Jacob. For about the
first third of the film, a goofy-looking Thornton functions as little
more than a punchline, cinematic punctuation to get a laugh from the
audience. Yet as the plot thickens, Thornton comes to life in one of the
most memorable supporting performances in recent years; gradually,
Thornton peels back the layers, and we get the sense that Jacob is the
less-educated but clearly smarter of the siblings. Watch the sequence
when Jacob begins to imitate Hank, mercilessly insulting him in the
process; his motivation for doing so is eventually made clear, but
Thornton never once Â‘winks' at the audience. I haven't believed a
character like this in a good long while.
Actually, Raimi yields terrific work from all his principals, and his
directorial presence is felt, if not explicitly seen (with the exception
of one gleefully gratuitous, totally shocking signature camera move). I
mentioned earlier that it recalls Fargo, and I mean in spirit, not in
tone. Both films are dark-hearted, and they share a love of the locale;
Rami's film is (surprisingly) much less jokey and less satirical. (I
loved Fargo, but it's more witty than moving.) A Simple Plan is a
less-than-mainstream suspense movie that really pays off on its
promises. Its bleakness is uninviting but worth the trek to the theatre.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   A critic for a prestigious magazine recently began his
review of "Enemy of the State" by speculating that "there's a
bomb ticking inside each of us waiting for the right
opportunity to set itself off."  Psychologists and historians
have long told us the same thing in similar ways: that
civilization is just a thin veneer for a torrent of violence that
lurks beneath each of us.  Another expression popular with
those who like to think pessimistically about the human
condition is, "There's larceny in all of our hearts."  The most
outwardly law-abiding person will participate in a criminal act
if the reward is great enough and the chances of punishment
meager.  What would you do if you found a ten-dollar bill in
the street?  Turn it in to the police station, which is the only
legal way to handle the situation?  Sure you would.  What if
you found four million dollars on a deserted country road? 
You could always keep it, rationalizing that it's probably only
drug money and that you're not stealing from a poor, honest
Joe.  Then again, if it's drug money, you might think twice:
maybe the Mob is involved and the last thing you want to do
is become tracked by ruthless gangsters.  Speculate on yet
another situation.  You find four million dollars, you're willing
to take a chance that you can get away with the theft, but two
other guys are with you at the time of the discovery.  Now,
there's the rub. It's no secret that many, if not most criminals
who get caught are tracked down because somebody
squealed for one reason or another.  How do you know your
pals will be able to keep quiet?  How do you know they won't
gang up against you in order to split the dough 50-50 instead
of dividing it into three neat piles?  Or that they can keep
their big mouths shut and keep even their wives in the dark?
   In "A Simple Plan," a psychological thriller directed against
type by cult horror maven Sam Raimi ("The Evil Dead,"
"Dead by Dawn," "Maniac Cop"), three friends do indeed find
over four million dollars in a newly discovered plane wreck, a
strike which obviously changes their lives for the worst in
ways they should have anticipated.  The most rational,
intelligent, and educated of the three, Hank (Bill Paxton),
immediately smells a rat.  Realizing that his two accomplices
are his slow-witted, unhappy brother, Jacob (Billy Bob
Thornton) and the town's loudmouth drunk, Lou (Brent
Briscoe), you don't wonder that he wants to turn the money in
and, failing that, to keep it safely hidden away from the other
two for several months.
   Slow moving at first, "A Simple Plan" grows steadily in
tension as director Raimi, working with an intricate script from
Scott B. Smith, continually raises the ante.  The film is
replete with Hitchcockian devices, principally with the
schemes of a flock of black birds, some of whom are waiting
to get back to the meal they are making of a dead man's
eyes, others pecking at each other as metaphor for the fate
that awaits the newly minted criminals.  Raimi is eager to
show humankind's corruptibility, as Hank--an upright guy
whom one of his buddies accuses of having a stick up his
rear end--succumbs to greed.  Surprisingly, the most ethical
character of all, Hank's wife Sarah (Bridget Fonda), becomes
the leading proponent of a plan to keep the money despite
her insistence that she and her husband are doing jes' fine
on what they are living on.  Even Hank--an intuitive person
who at the beginning of the story describes his good fortune
in following his father's formula for happiness--becomes
overcome by avarice.  After all, doesn't he already have what
he needs to be content--a good wife, a fine job, and friends
and neighbors who like and respect him?
   True enough, but then just as necessity is the mother of
invention, so is invention the mother of necessity.  We got
along fine before we had computers and cell phones, but try
living without them now.  Hank was doing dandy before he
discovered the 4 mil, but of course now he absolutely must
have it, even if keeping it will result in more bodies strewn
about the snowy countryside than Shakespeare manufactured
for his Elizabethan stage.
   Bridget Fonda looks younger than she's appeared in years
and is persuasive as the good wife who, having 44,000
hundred-dollar bills poured across her living room table
decides that she can no longer live decently on her
husband's income.  She's had it with going to restaurants
only on special occasions, skipping appetizers, and then
coming home for dessert.  Billy Bob Thornton projects the
picture of unhappiness, a guy with a silly rug covering a pea-
sized brain who has never kissed a girl and thinks that even
a million dollars cannot help him to...well, you know the old
joke.  Bill Paxton, as usual, is Mr. Nice Guy who is
debauched by dough which turns out, as they say, to be the
root of all evil.
   All in all "A Simple Plan" is a well-made film, a thinking
person's thriller which eschew Sam Raimi's usual graphic
gore in favor of the playing out of a metaphoric chess game. 
Julius Caesar would have enjoyed the way the three guys
and a gal play the game of divide and rule, a quartet laid low
by greed, envy, sloth, and a big mouth.

Author
Louis Proyect
Although "film noir" more or less died off as a genre in the 1950s, it
continues to reverberate in such conscious homages as Roman Polanski's
"Chinatown" and the work of the Coen brothers ("Fargo," "Blood
Simple," etc.) We can now add to this body of work Sam Raimi's 1998 "A
Simple Plan."
In the classic noir film we encounter desperate men and women who turn
to crime because society allows them no other outlets. Since radical
politics never appears as an option, the only way to escape class
oppression might be to rob a bank as depicted, for example, in "Odds
Against Tomorrow". The themes of such films are actually traceable to
the great naturalist novels of the late 19th century, which also
depict an underclass struggling against a web of formidable economic
circumstances. 
Film noirs would almost inevitably make their debut during the Great
Depression, when the inescapable reality of economic hardship would
inspire screenwriters such as Abraham Polonsky to depict the opposite
side of a Tom Joad. While Tom Joad, ever the idealist, declares his
intention to change America in the final moments of "Grapes of Wrath,"
a typical film noir character ends up in the clutches of the law only
regretting having been captured.
It was almost inevitable that the long, economic decline of the 1980s
and 90s would eventually spawn a neo-noir genre. Although I doubt if
Sam Raimi's "A Simple Plan" is the first such film, it certainly is
one of the most explicit. It tells the story of three men living in
the rural farmland of the northern United States who stumble across a
downed small airplane in the forest in the dead of winter. The plane
contains the pilot's corpse and a duffel bag containing over four
million dollars. On the spot they decide to keep the money to
themselves. They convince themselves that their "simple plan" can not
go wrong and as we expect from the classic noir films, everything does
go wrong.
Two of the men are brothers. Hank Mitchell (Bill Paxton) is an
accountant at a feed mill, while his brother Jacob (Billy Bob
Thornton) oscillates between low-paying odd jobs and welfare. Jacob's
best friend is Lou (Brent Briscoe), the town trunk, who resents the
college-educated Hank. You know that there is going to be tension
between the two when in the early scene when they discover the loot,
Lou accuses Hank of using high-falutin' words like "insinuate." Why
the fuck couldn't he use a simple word like "hint".
Although Hank has the trappings of a successful man, he too is barely
scraping by, like a clerk in one of Dickens' novels. His pregnant wife
Sarah (Bridget Fonda) is expecting her first child and when she learns
of their discovery not only encourages him to keep the money, but even
resort to further crimes in order to cover their trail. At one point
when he complains to her about the risks involved, she lashes out at
him. Is he going to be satisfied working at the feed mill his entire
life, waiting until his boss dies in order to get a raise? What about
their child? The other kids would laugh at her in school when she is
forced to wear hand-me-downs. And, finally, what about her? Sarah
knows that there is a better world out there and the only keeping her
from it is the lack of money.
Even though Hank is close to the bottom, his brother Jacob is even
lower. He lives in a cheap apartment and dresses shabbily. His
eyeglasses are kept together by adhesive tape. He is too poor to date
and spends most of his time alone or getting drunk with Lou. This is
not the bounteous farmland depicted in television commercials, but the
real one in which farms collapse and their owners are reduced to
poverty, just like Jacob. In a poignant scene at their abandoned
family farm, Jacob tells Hank that his dream is to buy back the farm
and start it back up. With millions available, he simply wants to
return to his roots. We discover that one of the reasons the farm
collapsed was that their father could no afford to keep it going while
Hank remained in college. Finally facing foreclosure, he drove his
truck into a tree and killed himself.
Their "simple plan" unravels almost from the beginning. Lou is at odds
with Hank and Jacob is torn between the two men. Raimi's direction is
superb as he captures the bleak and desperate mood of men trapped in a
situation which allows them to neither return to their original
innocence before discovering the money, nor a successful realization
of their criminal dreams.
Raimi is an odd figure. His best known film was "Darkman", a feverish
treatment on a comic book character who, after being disfigured in a
fire, seeks revenge against the criminals who were responsible. He is
also the producer of the highly successful tongue-in-cheek mythology
TV shows "Xena" and "Hercules". I was surprised to discover him
capable of such a nuanced film. Highly recommended.
Marxist discussion is at: www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html

Author
Jon Popick
Scott B. Smith adapted his best-selling novel for the screen and the
result, A Simple Plan, is not only one of the best films of the year,
but also a dark-horse candidate for a Best Picture nomination.
Hauntingly beautiful and brutally horrifying, the final reel creates a
level of tension (equaled this year only by David Mamet's The
Spanish Prisoner) that would have knocked Hitchcock's socks off.
Sam Raimi (The Quick and the Dead) directs this powerful tale of two
brothers who, together with a friend, find "the American Dream" - $4.4
million inside a plane that crashed in a wildlife preserve near their
home. Like an incident played out earlier this year in Very Bad
Things, a group of ordinary men put into an extraordinary situation
ask themselves, "What if we don't call the police?"
Hank's (Bill Paxton) first reaction is to go to the
authorities. Who could blame him? Of the three, he has the most to
lose. A respected member of the community and college graduate, Hank
is the only one with a job Â– a dead-end position at the local feed
and grain mill Â– and his lovely young librarian wife, Sarah
(Bridget Fonda), is expecting their first child in a few days. But
older sibling Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton) and his friend Lou, two
unemployed dimwits that vie for the coveted title of "town drunk,"
finally talk the reluctant Hank into keeping the loot.
Jacob and Lou's plan is a simple one Â– hold on to the money,
wait until the spring and see if anyone comes looking for it once the
plane is discovered. Hank agrees, but under the conditions that they
keep it a secret and he retain the money in the interim. Hank also
threatens to burn it all if he gets the slightest inkling that the
authorities are on to him.
Of course, Hank tells Sarah as soon as he gets home, and the next
morning she suggests a way to enhance the plan. She thinks that Hank
should take $500,000 back to the plane so that whoever finds it in the
spring won't believe anybody else had been there. And he can't
tell Jacob because he would probably re-steal the $500,000 on his
own. Sarah tells her husband in an almost morose tone, "We'll have
to be careful. That's how we'll have to be from now on."
Needless to say, this greed causes things to spin out of control very
quickly and very horribly. Again, like in Very Bad Things, the picture
shows that the true nature of man is to do anything to cover his/her
own ass in an all-out attempt to grab whatever you can get your hands
on. At one point, Sarah tries to comfort Hank by telling him, "Nobody
would ever believe you're capable of doing what you've done."
Now that's a supportive wife, huh?
Strangely, the true conscience of A Simple Plan is Jacob. The weight
of the big score and the resulting lying, cheating and murder has all
but crushed any remaining spirit that faintly flickered within
him. Completely drained, Jacob asks his younger brother in a
particularly moving scene, "Do you ever feel evil?" He doesn't
answer. He doesn't have to.
A Simple Plan is a virtually flawless film. The acting is first-class
Â– Paxton (Mighty Joe Young) has never been better and the nearly
unrecognizable Thornton (Armageddon) is all but guaranteed an Oscar
nomination (as is Smith's screenplay). Danny Elfman's creepy
score is perfect and Raimi's direction is also one of the year's
best, bringing to mind the previous snowy success of Fargo. In fact,
the Coen brothers worked on Raimi's first feature (1983's Evil
Dead) and aided him with tips on how to shoot this film's bleak
snow scenes properly. Raimi also effectively blends settings together
with clips of a fox ravaging a hen house.
Unnerving, almost to the point of viewer discomfort, A Simple Plan is
a brilliant example of what a modern thriller should be Â– dark,
drab and, most importantly, not Virus.
PLANET SICK-BOY:  http://home.eznet.net/~jpopick/

Author
DeWyNGaLe
Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thornton, and Bridget Fonda star as three people caught
up in murder, stealing, and lies in the new thriller A Simple Plan.  The hype
for this movie has been big, even back in November when it was originally
supposed to be released.  The all star cast is what will get most crowds to
flock to see this drama/thriller.  
Bill Paxton plays Hank, a happy guy with a wife, nice job, and a nice house. 
Bridget Fonda plays his wife, Sarah.  Sarah is pregnant, and the two must raise
money for the baby.  Hank and his brother Jacob, played by Billy Bob Thornton,
along with a friend Lou, played by Brent Briscoe are all out in the woods when
they discover a bag of money in a plane.  The plan is simple.  Hank will keep
the money until the plane is found, and when it is, and if no one is looking
for the money, the three will split the 4.4 million dollars contained in the
bag.  Hank must confront Sarah about what he has found, and the plan the three
men have made.  The money is taken care of by Hank throughout the movie, while
other events take place leading to the conclusion of the long story.  Hank has
to be especially careful considering he has the money in his home.  He is even
good friends with some police officers, which make his chance of getting caught
even higher.
A Simple Plan consists of a problem that many films have.  The characters are
too ignorant to take the money to the police right away, and as you have
probably guessed, many problems occur along the way.  The film is much like I
Know What You Did Last Summer, only the three men are the bad guys.  I almost
found myself rooting for the police in this one.  The characters besides Jacob
and Sarah are unlikable and underdeveloped.  
There are two key points that made A Simple Plan successful.  Although the
characters were unlikable, the performances were great.  The actors got you to
feel how you were supposed to about their roles.  The other thing that makes A
Simple Plan a winner is that the story is presented to the audience in a
creepy, original way.  The music and setting are what brought out the overall
presentation.  I thought the isolated woods were a great place to hold a tense
thriller like this one.
A Simple Plan keeps a tense pace, but it slows down in many scenes throughout
the movie.  Some of the unnecessary scenes could have been cut to maintain the
interest of the audience.  Bridget Fonda and Billy Bob Thornton give stand out
performances, stealing the scenes that they take part in.  Bill Paxton plays
the same character that he does in much of his movie roles, but still gives a
satisfying performance.  The actors in A Simple Plan put you in the character's
shoes.  They let you feel the horror that they were growing through.
The Bottom Line- The makers of A Simple Plan had a simple idea, but took it all
the way. 

Author
Nigel Bridgeman
Starring: Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thornton & Bridget Fonda
Written by: Scott B. Smith
Directed by: Sam Raimi
Billy Bob Thornton, who had a sudden rise to fame with 1996's Sling Blade
after spending years as a virtually unknown actor and writer, is becoming
one of the most versatile - and most accomplished - American actors around
at the moment. As Jacob, the simple but at times very bright loser brother
of Bill Paxton's Hank, Thornton gives a performance which should leave an
indelible mark on all but the most hardened viewers.
Three men, Hank (Paxton), Jacob (Thornton) and their friend Lou (Brent
Briscoe) stumble upon a plane wreck which, upon closer inspection, yields a
rotting corpse and a bag full of money. Jacob and Lou want to pocket the
cash. Hank, the smarter - and perhaps more naive - of the three, insists on
leaving the money for the authorities to find. Eventually, they agree to
keep the cash safe until the plane is found, and then split the money three
ways. Things start going wrong, though, with greed and violence weaving
their ways through their plan. Disaster is sure
to strike.
Director Sam Raimi, of The Evil Dead and Darkman fame, has made an
excellent and thought-provoking film, worlds away from the comic horror
films which made his name. While there are a couple of moments which might
remind one of his earlier work, Raimi has made an intelligent and mature
departure which will hopefully be
a sign of even greater films to come.
Scott B. Smith's screenplay, based on his novel (which I haven't read) is a
fine example of escalating tension. While it does remind one of Danny
Boyle's Shallow Grave without the abundance of black humour, it keeps the
drama that should really be a part of such a story on morality, or the lack
thereof, found in a film with this subject matter. Alar Kivilo's
cinematography reminds one of Joel and Ethan Coen's Fargo, with the bleak,
snowy landscape almost becoming another character. Danny Elfman also does
well with his moody, finely-written score.
If there's a flaw in the film, it's that it goes on for just a little too
long. Just when we think that they are about to wrap things up, Raimi and
Smith decide to let the film go on a little further. While this isn't
really a bad thing, it
did become a little frustrating at times (this may have been due to the
fact that I had consumed a large Sprite beforehand). The performances are
excellent, with the usually annoying Paxton in fine form and Bridget Fonda
giving a scene-stealing turn as Hank's scheming wife.
This is an excellent showcase for Thornton's fine skills as an actor and a
great change in direction for Raimi, who could very well have a career
ahead of him as an accomplished director of dramatic films. Fingers
crossed, though, that this doesn't stop him from making another Evil Dead
sequel.

Author
Thomas Skogestad
(Re-)view January 10, 1999 at Cinemateket, Oslo, Norway
http://www.nfi.no/nfi/cinematek/
Directed by Sam Raimi (The Quick and the Dead, Darkman, The Evil Dead
series)
Written by Scott Smith, based on his novel
Cinematography by Alar Kivilo
MPAA rating: R for violence and language. (The book however is, as I
remember, more explicit)
Expectation rating: A bit worse than expected (mainly because I found
the middle part to be a bit dull). Roger Ebert gave it a four star
review, and while he is a critic that uses the full scale, and I often
agree -- such as Dark City being the best film of 1998, he must have
seen a better film. I read the book about five years ago and hugely
enjoyed it.
The opening of A Simple Plan reminded me a bit of The Sweet
Hereafter. The landscape is snowy and cold, and is filmed what I feel
is in a rather crisp manner (which also reminds me of Fargo (which I
loathed)). One can almost sense the cold. But the movie far from the
eye popping delights of The Quick and the Dead, instead Raimi has made
a more constrained film -- which probably is for the better. This is
probably not a movie that would have been improved by lots of odd
shots.
The movie also reminded me of Affliction, as the lead characters all
seem to be hoping for and seeing a possibility to lead a better life
than their father, and they see a chance for such a dream to come
true. This chance is uncovered in a snow covered field, where an
airplane has crash landed. In the plane three men find Å¤The American
dream ... in a gym bag.Å¥ Affliction too was set in a snowy landscape.
It really seems very simple. Just hold on to the money until spring,
and if no one claims it, they'll be safe to spend it and their hope
of experiencing the American dream can come true.
But the snow melts, and so might several of the character's hopes.  As
in Å¤Return to ParadiseÅ¥, some of the characters are presented with a
chance to do the right thing. But doing the right thing might not
result in a better result than something more selfish.
The movie's biggest strength is that it fact makes sense. I have seen
many movies based on books that just seem like selected scenes from
the book visualized, eschewing anything remotely resembling a coherent
story -- for example Clear and Present Danger. The biggest problem
seems to over-familiarization with the story. The writer perhaps feels
that he doesn't have to present scenes that are clear to him, but the
lack of which only baffles an audience which has not read the book.
This is definitely not the problem with A Simple Plan, even though the
screenplay is by the book's author. The movie is always clear on where
it's going, and always makes sense. I'm sue a lot was cut, but really
I can't remember what. Even a minor scene involving a man complaining
that he has paid for too much grains is included. The man only comes in
on Mondays, but he claims that he has been charged for one purchase
too many. Turns out ... well, see the movie.
One should be warned against seeing the trailer. It reveals several
scenes from the ending moments (which yes, like in the book, it is a
downer), several plot developments, and much of the beginning. But
much of this is not spelled directly out during the trailer, so if
you're lucky, you'll have forgotten about all of this when you see the
movie.

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thornton and Bridget Fonda
Directed By Sam Raimi
Running Time: 2 hours 1 minute
What would you do if you find $4 million in unmarked dollars in a crashed
plane, and no-one was around to see you take it? This dilemma faces
Minnesota residents Hank (Paxton) and his brother Jacob (Thornton) along
with best friend Lou (Brent Biscoe) in this mostly enjoyable, tense thriller
from Evil Dead director Raimi. The film follows the increasing craziness
that occurs as the three friends, plus Hanks wife Sarah (Fonda) try to hang
on to the money without being caught. Naturally, it all starts falling
apart, often with violent results.
A Simple Plan seems a step back in direction for the talented Raimi. The
inventiveness seen in the Evil Dead trilogy and The Quick and the Dead is
nowhere to be seen here. Raimi has directed the serious material a little
bit too seriously: the direction occasionally plods. A shame really, this
film could of used some of Raimi witty directing to help speed up the films
rather overlong running time. The film looks far from amateurish, it just
looks like any normal, average, thriller, which is disappointing seeing as
this is the same man who brought us a disco dancing headless corpse in the
funny Evil Dead II.
A Simple Plan also raised that reoccurring question for me: how the hell did
Bill Paxton get a career in acting? His monotonous, deeply irritating tone
does no favours, and he isn't exactly a domineering force on screen. I
assume the filmmakers were looking for a typical nice guy, instead they got
dull. There's no denying that Paxton tries, he just (as usual) fails. He's
just not versatile enough to make the transition from everyday good guy to
evil guy, he forever remains dull throughout the whole movie.
Anyway, that's the flaws dealt with. Thankfully, A Simple Plans good points
outweigh the bad ones. Firstly, the films major saving grace is an excellent
performance by the excellent Billy Bob Thornton. If Billy Bob can get a good
performance out of Armageddon, he can get one here, and a good performance
he does. His nervous, none-too-bright Jacob is down to earth and human, and
is very watchable. The audience will certainly be able to side with him, and
will lose interest in Paxton well before they do with Thornton. He's just a
great actor. Fonda, looking frumpy and plain, is great as the scheming wife.
She's the real brains behind the plan, playing loving mother and mischievous
bitch very well. She has a real presence in the movie. The supporting cast
aren't bad: Brent Briscoe is fun as the loudmouth friend, and the other
minor roles help the film go along.
Secondly, A Simple Plan also has a good story and script. Sadly, it has been
unfairly compared to Fargo, and despite the fact that's it snowy and
involves money, the films are largely different. The script is a character
study of interesting characters, which helps, and the tense scenes are well
done. There's some great edge of the seat moments, especially after the
(many) brutal murders that occur throughout the film. Unfortunately, the
film occasionally gets a bit too bogged down in dull dialogue, which doesn't
help the running time go by any faster. These moments are few and far
between, luckily.
But there's one final flaw which makes A Simple Plan quite as enjoyable as
it should be: it leaves a slight bad taste in the mouth. Some of the murders
are just plain mean, if relevant to the plot, and the ending is a bit, well
'off'. But, in all honesty, I've seen nastier films, so overall, A Simple
Plan gets a thumbs up from me, and is a well crafted thriller that is worth
watching.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Money has a bad reputation these days, and rightfully
so.  In addition to being "the root of all evil," it has the
power to divide loyalties, skew perception, and terminate
previously healthy relationships.  Its lure can cause the most
gentle of people to rationalize (and justify) criminal behavior.
Even those who would never contemplate robbery or theft find
themselves singing a different tune when confronted with
millions of dollars, a moment in which loyalties can change
on the proverbial dime.  But is wealth worth the loss of
one's innocence?
        Hank Mitchell (Bill Paxton) is an honest, intelligent man
content with his hand in life.  His lovely wife Sarah (Bridget
Fonda) is expecting a child, and although money is tight, they
manage to get by.  Hank's dim-witted but friendly brother Jacob
(Billy Bob Thornton) stops by periodically, sometimes bringing
his drinking buddy Lou (Brent Briscoe) with him.  Although
Lou and Hank despise 

Author
Matt Williams
Crime doesn't pay.  Particularly in a world where the rule of Murphy's
Law is absolute.  That's the lesson learned by the characters in  the
well-acted, brilliantly written and intensely gripping drama, A Simple
Plan.
Hank Mitchell (Bill Paxton) has a good, if not perfect, life.  He has a
decent job, a loving wife (Bridget Fonda), and a baby on the way.  But
all of that is about to change.
One day Hank, his dimwitted brother, Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton), and
Jacob's dimwitted drinking buddy, Lou (Brent Briscoe), make an
interesting discovery in the woods:  a crashed plane containing over $4
million in presumably dirty money.
After some minor deliberation, the three men tentatively decide to keep
the money.  And, wouldn't you know it, things invariably start to go
wrong.  As the walls start to close in, the men must not only struggle
to keep their stories straight, but also face the pressures of greed and
doubt which tempt them to turn against one another.
Director Sam Raimi, best known for his Evil Dead films, at first seems
an unlikely choice to direct this much more traditional, character
oriented thriller.  However, here he shows a mastery of the subtle
touch.  He is able to create a tangible atmosphere of unease as what
seemed to be a simple plan grows more and more convoluted over time.
The story of A Simple Plan, adapted from Scott B. Smith's novel, is well
constructed.  The many twists and turns throughout the film are
reasonable, yet unexpected.  The characters are strongly written as
well.  You get the sense that all of the characters here are constantly
thinking (even though it's an activity that not all of them do well).
Billy Bob Thornton turns in yet another brilliant performance as the
pathetic Jacob.  Though there are some similarities between this role
and his performance of Karl in Slingblade, he manages to make Jacob a
unique creation that stands on his own. At first, Jacob is seemingly
just a dim bulb...but there's much more to this character than what
first appears.
Billy Bob Thornton isn't the only one here who can act...and this
picture is full of examples.  Bridget Fonda deserves kudos for her sharp
portrayal of perhaps the craftiest character in the film.  Bill Paxton
does an excellent job as the desperate everyman.  And Gary Cole delivers
a good turn as Baxter, an FBI agent who is hunting down the lost plane.
With a fascinating screenplay, masterful direction, and excellent
performances, A Simple Plan is a truly suspenseful drama,  and one of
the year's best films.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Victory A. Marasigan
A Simple Plan is a taut, gripping thriller-drama about a pipe dream
which becomes reality...and then strips three unsuspecting men of their
innocence.  At the film's outset, Hank Mitchell (Bill Paxton) considers
his life acceptable, if not spectacular.  He has a loving wife, a baby
on the way, and he's respected as a member of his midwestern community.
There may be hints of a strained relationship between him and his
hyuck-hyucking older brother Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton), but it's
nothing either of the boys feels deserves discussion. If asked, Hank
probably wouldn't consider changing a thing.
Hank's content perspective on life is skewed when, along with Jacob and
his brother's slovenly buddy Lou (Brent Briscoe), he discovers a crashed
puddle-jumper carrying over $4 million.  "No one's looking for this
cash," rationalize Jacob and Lou. "Who's gonna know?"  Hank, the only
one of the trio with an education and a steady job, tries to fight the
notion of keeping the money.  After some goading from Jacob and Lou,
Hank opts to store the cash and see what happens.  It isn't long after
taking the money home that Hank begins to feel his conscience
weakening.  But it's already too late.  Murphy's Law has already gone
into effect.  Before the boys can even begin to appreciate the
life-changing heft of their "lucky" discovery, an innocent man is dead
and people are talking.
Thornton's performance as Jacob is probably the best thing about the
film, laying to rest any post-Sling Blade doubt that Billy Bob is a
great actor.  Jacob is a simple man, a social outcast with with no
dreams to pursue.   His slow toothy drawl betrays his lack of
"book-larnin'," but some of the things that come out of his mouth
indicate a sharp if underused intelligence.
Director Sam Raimi, best known for his bizarre Evil Dead horror series,
is for once aesthetically subdued in his direction.  His camera seems to
care more about the actors on the screen than their visually brilliant
surroundings.   Perhaps this is because the director realized that the
way in which the three men's situation spins out of control is thrilling
in itself, without fancy cinematography getting in the way.  The
sheet-white nothingness of thesnow-covered town adequately illustrates
the moral void these men must traverse.
As another tale of money and murder in the snow, this film is sure to
breed comparisons to the well-crafted murder-and-money flick Fargo.  But
A Simple Plan works on a different level, addressing issues of family
discord and individual self-worth throughout its shocking story.  By the
time poor Jacob woefully asks his brother, "Do you ever feel evil?" it's
clear this film is no Fargo rip-off.
Only towards the end of A Simple Plan are we reminded that we're
watching a movie.  The final act plot twist is all too contrived and
convenient. Thankfully, it leads to a compelling ending with logical
implications.  When all is said and done, we are left with the notion
that sometimes what's best for us is what we already have.
Reviewed January 25, 1999 at Loews White Marsh Theaters, White Marsh,
MD.

Author
Steve Kong
When I read Scott B. Smith's book A Simple Plan, I was enthralled with the
book almost all the way up to the end. When I heard that a film based on
the book was coming out, I was excited to see it.  Is this film as good as
the book?  And did it live up to my expectations?
One winter day, two brothers, Hank (Bill Paxton) and Jacob Mitchell (Billy
Bob Thornton), and Jacob's friend, Lou, find a crashed plane in a snowy
field. What they find inside the plane is intriguing: a duffle bag with
$4.4 million dollars in it. What does one do? What would you do? These
three strike a deal, a simple plan to keep the money. They take the money
and hide it until summer comes. When the snow melts and someone finds the
plane, they'll see if anyone is looking for the money. If not, they split
the money between themselves.
Sounds easy enough, but three's a crowd Â– and we all know how hard it is to
keep a secret between three people. To make matters worse Jacob and Lou are
drunkards and don't have well and stable lives like Hank. Jacob and Lou are
poor and with every passing day that money looks more enticing to split
early. A Simple Plan follows Hank who before the money, lived a fairly
normal life. His wife (Bridget Fonda) is pregnant with their first child
and he holds a stable job at a local feed store as an accountant. But, the
large amount of money is just too big a draw for everyone involved and the
simple plan starts to unravel rather quickly. Lines are drawn, sides are
picked, and eventually everything is spinning out of control. All moral
beliefs that the characters might have held fall to the wayside in order to
clear a path to the money. This movie is a superb look at ordinary people
stuck in an extraordinary situation.
The script by Scott B. Smith fixes all the flaws that were in his book. The
biggest of them was the ending of the book. The ending in the book gets way
out of hand and goes overboard into absurdity. In the film, Smith writes a
more believable and satisfying ending. Kudos to Smith for translating an
already impressive book into an even better film.
Sam Raimi is best known for his more eccentric work like the Evil Dead
series and Darkman. With A Simple Plan, Raimi graduates into the more
serious side of filmmaking and also expands into a genre with a wider
audience. Not lost though is Raimi's style. He has a very distinct style in
his films; the offbeat humour and the subtly over-the-top feeling in some
situations. Two strong images that Raimi introduces in the film are the
opening chicken-fox images and the continuous one of the crow. I hate
talking about symbolism, but the crow was a particularly effective one.
"They just wait till something dies," one of the characters observes. Using
the crows, Raimi and Smith makes a simple observation that these characters
are not driven by evil, but they are driven by nature.
Bill Paxton is a face that most people recognize but can't connect to a
name. He's an actor who does a lot of supporting roles (Titanic, True Lies)
and sometimes he holds a leading role (Twister). With A Simple Plan he
should gain that much needed name/face recognition that he deserves. His
performance in A Simple Plan is right on the nose from what I thought his
character was like in the book.
Billy Bob Thornton, like always, gives a wonderful performance. The look
that he adopts for A Simple Plan is absolutely revolting, but strangely
enough it works. Thornton is able to make us sympathetic to him, even
though we see that his character is a lazy drunk.
Fonda is not given as much to do in the film as her character had in the
book. In the book her character is changed from sweet and innocent to
conniving and sneaky. And although this change does happen in the film, it
doesn't happen as well as it did in the book.
The cinematography and film score are worth mentioning. The cinematography
by Alar Kivilo is gorgeous. The snow fields are most memorable, but there
are small moments like the one in Jacob's apartment that stand out. The
film score by Danny Elfman is brilliant. Subtly urging the audience in
different directions, Elfman writes a score that fits the film like a
glove. Although this score is not as good as some of Elfman's other works,
Batman and Midnight Run for example, it is a score to remember.
A Simple Plan is not simply a good movie. A Simple Plan is one of the best
movies I've seen so far this year. Don't Miss A Simple Plan on the big screen.
[Rated R for violence and language. Running Time: 121 Minutes]
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Matt Prigge
Writer: Scott B. Smith (based on his novel)
Starring: Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thornton, Bridget Fonda, Brent Briscoe, 
Chelcie Ross, Becky Ann Baker, Jack Walsh, Gary Cole
It's been a good long while since we had a good old fashioned thriller, 
where mostly everything goes right for the audience and wrong for the 
characters, but it's been even longer since I saw a thriller that 
actually *shock* cared for the characters, not merely judged them but 
actually allowed their human foibles, flaws, and strengths to emerge so 
radiantly. I'd saw that it's been at least a couple decades, even as far 
back to the great Hitchcock thrillers, though I'm hardly comparing "A 
Simple Plan" to, say, "Rear Window" or "Strangers on a Train." Yet it's 
almost as good. It's simple, yet strangely complex, and astonishingly 
rewarding, because instead of moving from plot point to plot point, and 
merely laying out they-might-be-caught overtones, it instead concerns 
itself with the moral corruption and depths of greed that its 
protagonists can go to, all without ever judging them as either evil or 
even immoral. Elegantly directed by Sam Raimi (yes, the same), "A Simple 
Plan" concerns itself with the discovery of a crashed plane and within a 
bag full of millions of dollars by an upright, moderately financially 
stable working man (Bill Paxton), his dim-witted brother (Billy Bob 
Thornton), and his drinking buddy (Brent Briscoe). Without anyone 
around, and the possibility that no one would come looking for it, the 
three debate and debate but finally reach the decision that yes, they 
will keep it, but until any authorities or possible owners of the cash 
come looking, and so they generally don't flaunt anything they don't 
want to flaunt, they'll keep it stored away in the custody of Paxton.
The possibilites of this circumstance are much diverse: a) they could 
endlessly play cat and mouse with the authorities; b) they could try to 
fight off the rightful owners, who are either villainous or just; or c) 
they could fight amongst themselves. "A Simple Plan," though borrows a 
little from each of these. A little tiff with the cops here, a subplot 
involving an alleged FBI agent (a chilling Gary Cole) there), and a bit 
of inside feuding over here. But, as Austin Powers would say, that's not 
necessarily its bag (baby). What I most admired about this film, and 
what makes this a far superior and unique thriller is that it's 
successfully able to have its cake and eat it too. It effectively 
involves some of the traditional thriller cliches, like the ones 
mentioned above, but at the same time, it involves itself more deeply 
with the way the characters become morally corrupt and what price they 
have to pay to have what they think is happiness in a black duffle bag.
So while steps are taken to neatly cover things up, and these subsequent 
steps go miserably awry, the film choses to never loose the sight that 
in covering things up to the extent that these characters have to, they 
are slowly losing their souls and their humanity. In one early scene, 
Paxton and Thornton have to make a trip back to the plane to return some 
of the money so it doesn't look like it was all stolen (not a bad idea), 
when Thornton screws up (as he does continuously throughout the movie), 
and Paxton has to do some major covering-up (read: homicide). Instead of 
a quick murder and immeadiate hands-washing, Raimi shows a lengthy, 
painful shot from a low-angle onto Paxton's face as he tries to sift 
through his emotions and reach a conclusion. There's a similar shot 
afterwards of Paxton watching the murder he's committing and taking in 
all the horror which is also wonderfully effective, but the previous 
shot is even better: more morally complex and more gut-wrenching. In 
short, probably the best piece of direction Raimi's ever done, 
demonstrating once again that sometimes the simplest way to do something 
yields the best results (for further proof, watch "Persona"'s "sex 
scene" and witness what may be the best scene Ingmar Bergman's ever 
done).
But the film hardly stops here; it follows completely through and rarely 
loses sight of its characters humanity and the depletion thereof. Yet it 
also moves from step to step in such a graceful method that we never 
feel like the film is merely stamping out the plot points of the story. 
When the time comes for Paxton to start becoming selfish and thus 
diabolical (with aid from his pregnant wife, played by Bridget Fonda, a 
pal to Raimi), he does, and soon the horror of the situation is 
escalating to tragic heights. There's at least two grand shootouts, and 
at least one of them may be one of the greatest shootouts in cinema 
history, and when they arrive, they don't come with masochistic delight 
but with cringe-inducing horror. During the one, I was actually sinking 
into my chair, with the mantra "they can't do this, can they?" streeming 
through my head. In fact, this film, which is getting many comparisons 
to the Coen's [superior, but forget about it] "Fargo," has many similar 
moments of manic insanity, attributed to the major amount of subtlety 
and restraint with which the directors direct what, in other hands, 
would be over-the-top distractedness (imagine, I suppose, Robert 
Rodriguez directing this...then again, after seeing the "Evil Dead" 
films, I'd hardly assume Raimi would be able to pull something like this 
off, although there are moments of the film which are easily dubbed 
"Raimi" moments, a rifle-shot notwithstanding).
Instead, Raimi directs with maturity and a gentle touch, easily letting 
the story and characters co-exist, while still letting some of the more 
traditional Raimi elements come out, like some offbeat comic touches. 
Most particularly, Billy Bob Thornton's character, Jacob, is a brilliant 
creation. His dim-wittedness is often hilarious (for most of the film, 
every line he uttered was greeted with howling laughter), but there's 
authenticity to the performance that strangely enough makes sure that 
we're not totally laughing at him. The chuckles he gets are not 
necessarily ones of full-condescension because Thornton is so damn real. 
Jacob's a multi-dimensional character, and while being stupid, we see 
that as not so much a flaw, but a strength to his character: his 
simplicity is endearing and many of the acts he commits are out of a 
strong inner strength and belief system, primarily towards the middle 
where his bud and co-conspirator begins to make some heavy waves 
concerning the money. The final third of the film spends much time with 
him, and many of the touches upon his character, not only by Thornton 
but also by screenwriter Scott B. Smith (adapting his own book, by the 
way) are just great. I particularly admired a back story about an old 
high school girlfriend, told by Thornton with such sincerity and 
acception that the cruel story is reversed to near-sweetness and further 
strength of his saddened character. Thornton is absolutely brilliant in 
this performance, by far the best performance he's ever given and 
further proof that he's the best character actor in contemporary cinema 
(if you don't believe me, go back and watch his wonderful performance in 
"Primary Colors," a performance that would have been nominated for an 
Oscar if this hadn't been in the same year) because he's easily able to 
slip into a character, and make him completely and utterly believable. 
He brings so much weight to the film that, as it is with most character 
actors, it's difficult picturing anyone else in the role.
The rest of the cast is great too, from Paxton's declining working man 
to Chelcie Ross' amiable town sheriff. Even Fonda shows off her talents 
nicely. And if I had any complaints about the film, it's that the plot 
is almost too simplistic, and that at times, it seems too much like an 
exercise, like a cruel test on humanity that still pays attention to the 
humanity involved. And the occasional narration is, as it usually is, 
annoying (narration should be used with extreme caution, especially when 
you're trying to set things up and/or express emotions - didn't Raimi 
watch the first murder scene?). And, the thing that can most usually go 
wrong with a movie, the ending is basically amiss. I won't reveal it, 
but it's way too cruel and too much of an outsider set-up, as if the 
appearance of a plane wasn't already too much of that anyway. For a film 
that deals so much and so intimately with the humanity of the characters 
involved, this is the wrong ending. Imagine a character-controlled 
ending; otherwise, it's like if in "Crime and Punishment" if the police 
had caught him instead of him breaking down and confessing...not that 
I'm at all comparing "A Simple Plan" to Dostoevsky. The ending does 
work, despite my protestations, but to me, there was something 
incessantly nagging and unsatisfying about it; but if you had no qualms 
and were happy as a clam with it, then just ignore me and go about your 
day. But despite my mere claims, make no mistake that I was completely 
and utterly edge of my seat throughout, and even sometimes curdling up 
by the situations that occured, not because of any kind of gore factor 
(which is, thankfully for this, very minimal), but because the film 
places its characters in situations and gives them such painful things 
to overcome that I've frankly not seen much like it in quite awhile. At 
least not since the previous worthy Hitchcockian masterpiece.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hillls/8335/

Author
Kevin W. Welch
Sam Raimi has directed a harsh, depressing thriller here. Like
all good thrillers, A Simple Plan has a strong caution for us
all: Be careful about wishing for too much money, because you
might actually  get it and then you have to try to keep it.
Hank Mitchell works in a feed mill in a small Minnesota town. His
wife, Sarah, is pregnant. His brother Jake is sort of slow but is
a good, loyal sibling whoÅ¡s been denied a lot in his life. Jake
is best friends with Lou, the loutish town drunk who isnÅ¡t nearly
as funny as he thinks he is. On New YearsÅ¡ Eve  the three of them
visit the MitchellÅ¡s parentÅ¡s gravesite and by dumb luck (a fox
runs in front of their truck, causing an accident), they discover
a crashed airplane with a corpse and 4.5 million dollars in cash.
They think briefly about turning it in to the cops but they
quickly decide to keep it, as long as Hank holds the money. If no
one comes looking for it by the spring, theyÂŒll all split the
money and leave town. In the meantime, they promise to keep quiet
about everything. This is the simple plan, the first of many.
Everything is so simple--at any given moment, they are just this
far from having the plan work.
Nothing works, of course. This first plan unravels almost
immediately. These arenÅ¡t the brightest characters ever to grace
the silver screen. By that I donÅ¡t mean that this is an idiot
plot that relies on everyone acting very stupid. Rather, these
people are by turns cunning and blind to the flaws in their plans
in ways that are agonizingly realistic. You know that any three
men who found four and a half million dollars would really act
this way. You also know that their plans will unravel, in this
way or some other way, leaving behind a great deal of misery.
Hank always thinks of a new plan, or else Sarah thinks of a plan
for him. Every new plan has a problem, and every problem ends up
with someone getting killed. The movie moves, slowly and
painfully, to what seems like an inevitable conclusion, when
suddenly the plot twists and twists again. You know all along the
broad outlines of  the ending. What actually happens, though, 
heats up the plot more than you would think possible while also
revealing unsuspected depths in the main characters.
A Simple Plan is filmed in winter weather so dreary it almost
seems like a black and white movie. While Bill Paxton as Hank is
a little flat as a reluctant schemer, Billy Bob Thornton nails
JakeÅ¡s village idiot role to the wall, and Bridget Fonda is
astounding as a small town Lady MacBeth. The plot is tightly
woven for the most part, though certain key elements seem to rely
on shoddy police work (one professionally conducted autopsy
should bring the whole Simple Plan to a screeching halt, for
example). Overall, though, A Simple Plan is well-made, intense
and harrowing in the extreme.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"It's gonna work," Hank tells his co-conspirators in a scene late in A
SIMPLE PLAN.  "It's gonna work.  It's perfect."
The problem is that this plan is just the latest in a long line of
simple plans, each designed to cover up the botched implementation of
the last, that have led these once honest people into a hell on earth.
Scott B. Smith's script for A SIMPLE PLAN, based on his best selling
novel, is a carefully crafted character study with challenging moral
dilemmas.
As the story opens, Hank, his brother Jacob, and Jacob's friend Lou
discover a small plane buried in the snow.  Inside it is a bag full of
over four million dollars, which they figure must be drug money.
Hank, played by Bill Paxton from TWISTER, is the group's brain and
conscience.  A college-educated man in a backwoods town, he reluctantly
agrees with Jacob and Lou's plan to keep the money, but only until they
can figure out if it's safe or not.  Hank insists that he be the one to
hide it and keeps threatening to burn it if anything goes wrong.  He has
a very pregnant wife and a middle-class lifestyle that he doesn't want
to jeopardize.
Bridget Fonda plays Hank's wife, Sarah.  Starting off with the most
scruples, Sarah loses them the fastest.  She is soon directing her
husband, the nominal head of their little group of naive criminals, in
one illegal venture after another.
With a large set of bad teeth and dirty, stringy hair, SLING BLADE's
Billy Bob Thornton plays Jacob as a sympathetic character, a country
bumpkin whose brain is a couple of beers shy of a six-pack.  Jacob has
an uncanny ability to turn their simple plans for success into complex
disasters.  He is a middle-age man whose only "girlfriend" came from a
dare back in high school.  One girl earned $100 from her friends by
agreeing to go steady with Jacob for a month.  He even got to hold her
hand once, but he's never kissed her or any other female.
Jacob's buddy Lou (Brent Briscoe) is his mental equal.  The unemployed,
and perhaps unemployable, Lou's claim to fame is that, at 40 years old,
he's known as the town drunk.
Concealing their ill-gotten gains proves much trickier than they ever
imagined.  When they aren't causing their own difficulties, external
circumstances conspire to throw obstacles in their way.
The press notes appropriately invoke the name of Hitchcock.  Hitchcock
would have naturally been drawn to this tale of average people caught up
in a web from which they seem incapable of extricating themselves.
Director Sam Raimi and production designer Patrizia von Brandenstein
purposely created a bleak set with a black-and-white color scheme.  They
saw the story as having the stark simplicity of a poem, and they wanted
the viewer's attention focused on the characters.
Among the world's worst criminals, only a little luck and a never-ending
series of schemes keeps them going.  Along the way, however, greed
causes them to start turning on each other.  The director, never missing
a beat, keeps the audience guessing the story's resolution until almost
the last minute.
A SIMPLE PLAN runs 2:01.  It is rated R for violence and profanity and
would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
James Brundage
Starring Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thorton, Bridget Fonda
Written by Scott B. Smith (Based on his novel)
 Well, it's about time.  Everyone has been bugging me, nagging me, telling
me to see A Simple Plan, and, for weeks on end, I haven't.  In fact, it has
been so long since it first came out that I was about to give up and watch
it when it comes to video.  But, out of the blue, it comes to a relatively
close theatre and I decided to spend a night going to it.  Boy, am I glad
that I did!
 A Simple Plan is, obviously, a film about a simple plan to evenly divide
4.4 million in dirty money among three country folk who stumble upon it in a
plane wreckage.  But, as the tension of sitting on the money until the plane
is found by others and they know the coast is clear, the relationship
between them disintegrates into a complete paranoia.
 I think I can praise this film best by comparing it to others.  Taking it's
cue from Fargo, A Simple Plan makes use of a snowy Minnesota landscape to
portray bleakness, both moral, physical, and emotional.  Taking off of The
Dark Half, it uses crows to provide a subconscious menace to the viewer.
Also, taking off of Very Bad Things, it uses a complete absence of morals to
accentuate their importance.
 This is not to say that this film is a patchwork effort.  It is a
full-fledged original work, taking on the age old theme of easy money and
its difficult consequences, and, like Ramni's The Quick and the Dead,
radically challenging its limits and potentials.  It transforms the genre of
murder mystery into a morality play.  It takes something completely simple,
and shows how the simple plan all too quickly becomes devastatingly complex.
 The film opens and closes lyrically, both with shots of winter and Bridget
Fonda putting books away at her job.  It then quickly switches to some of
the finest single shots of the year (second only to the imagery of a dying
bird in The Thin Red Line) of a fox in a henhouse, as the idiom goes.
 This kind of symbolism runs rampant in the film, but does it in such a
fashion as to not detract from the sublime tension of the mystery set in
front of us.
 The simple plan, hold the money until the plane is found, goes terribly
wrong.  Before you know it, murders are being covered up, alliances are
being made, sides are being taken.  The three friends are quickly divided
and changed into enemies.
 My pick for Best Supporting Actor goes with Billy Bob Thorton, who delivers
the performance of his career as Jacob, saddened younger brother of Paxton's
character.  He has no job, he has no wife, he has no life.  The most
heart-wrenching moments of the film come as Jacob wrestles with his own
concepts of morals and deals with what he has done: played part in three
murders, one of whom is a close friend.
 I stated earlier that, like Very Bad Things, A Simple Plan uses an absence
of morals to illustrate their importance.  This is not quite correct.  There
is a definitive dearth in morals of Paxton's character up until the end (and
what a shocking ending it is!), but morals themselves are clearly the major
item generating tension: not the money.  Greed, however, is the driving
factor of Bridget Fonda, who plays what at first comes off as a devout
housewife of Paxton, only to reveal a greedy, self-absorbed woman when the
beauty is peeled away like the skin of an orange.
 Yet again, as has happened about ten times this year, I am faced with a
film I am able to write a paper on but limited to writing a review.  I can
only urge you to see it for yourself, and enjoy.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast:  Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thornton, Bridget Fonda, Brent Briscoe,
Gary Cole.
Screenplay:  Scott B. Smith, based on his novel.
Producers:  James Jacks and Adam Schroeder.
Director:  Sam Raimi.
This is not a simple plan about finding a plane load of money and
getting away with the cash. This is more about a parable of greed, and
how money can become the bane of your life. Yes, there are elements of
Â‘Fargo' here (the snow and cold), although not as vivid in the blood and
gore department. It shows how greed can set of a chain of events leading
to death and the destruction of lives. And how at the end of the day,
the things that matter most are love, truth and honesty.
Although in one sense it may seem tedious, making a movie about the
ugliness of greed (not box office material), it does become tedious, not
because of the morale ending, but because one expects the movie to end
that way. This becomes apparent after the first murder to cover up the
crime, the rest of the movie just spirals downward from there. The
characters in this drama are a mixture of simple and intellectual folk,
brothers and friends, who all fall prey to the avarice of money. They
should have perhaps thrown in someone sensible, level headed and not
affected by greed to give the party more balance.
Commendable is the exceptional performance of Billy Bob Thornton, whose
portrayal of the simpleton brother was masterful. Bill Paxton also gives
a powerful performance as the greedier younger brother, whilst Bridget
Fonda is convincing as the greediest wife, who indirectly causes the
most problems. Fill a room full of greedy people and several million
dollars, and you will end up with a simple recipe for a blood bath. It's
not a simple plan, when you shoot everyone you love for money, unless
you're the Menendez brothers.

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Scott B. Smith, from a novel by Smith
Ingredients: Rural town, folks who find 4.4 million dollars and hide it
Starring: Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thornton, Brent Briscoe, Bridget Fonda
Synopsis: 
Near a rural Minnesota town, a morally upstanding married man, his
brother, and a friend stumble upon a crashed airplane filled with 4.4
million dollars. Instead of reporting it to the authorities, the men
decide to keep the money and keep the discovery a secret. After the
first lie is told, the situation snowballs into a web of lies, deceit,
murder, and betrayal.
Opinion:
I love the screenplay to this film; it's the material that classic
Alfred Hitchcock films are made of. Imagine, for example, a
salt-of-the-earth Jimmy Stewart kind of protagonist, and some cheerful
opening husband/wife scenes similar to Frank Capra's IT'S A WONDERFUL
LIFE (1946). Now have the guy make a moral blunder and watch the bad
karma escalate into more lies, deceit, claustrophobia, and even a
murderous cover up until the situation finally unravels into a
tumultuous ending. This is the kind of classic A SIMPLE PLAN might have
been.
A SIMPLE PLAN however, doesn't take this approach. In director Sam
Raimi's interpretation, the movie becomes a slow paced, cautionary farm
tale that uses too many interspersed scenes of winter snow and rural
animals such as foxes and crows to supply suspense symbolically rather
than physically. And Instead of showing a lot of before/after contrast
as the protagonist's simple life becomes horribly derailed, A SIMPLE
PLAN slowly works its way into it - - for example, not showing idyllic
life with the wife until well after the 4.4 million is discovered. This
slows down the pace of the movie, and blurs the dramatic impact. 
A SIMPLE PLAN is interesting, intelligent, and scenic, and features
superlative dramatic performances by the entire cast, especially Billy
Bob Thornton. If only A SIMPLE PLAN were done in the Hitchcock style it
would be a real classic, instead of merely a great acting performance.
Copyright Å  1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com
