Title
Review for One False Move (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Frank Maloney
     ONE FALSE MOVE is a film directed by Carl Franklin, from a script
by Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson.  It stars Cynda Williams, Bill
Paxton, Michael Beach, and Bill Bob Thornton.  Rated R, for violence,
strong language.
     ONE FALSE MOVE is a quirky and surprising thriller.  It begins with
a scene of horrifying brutality and violence.  One thinks that he or she
has seen this before and knows what is going to follow: vengeance, cops
and druggies, mayhem and high-speed car chases.  But even at the
beginning one knows he or she is in for something different, if just
because of the camerawork that makes one's skin creep.  And then a
sudden change of pace and place, with some comedy thrown in, and the
disorientation is complete.  This is not going to be a routine Hollywood
formula film.
     By the time the film comes to its conclusion, it has widened its
aims and taken charge of a surprisingly broad territory.  Racism,
justice, abuses of all sorts, prejudices, the gap between rural and
urban, all these are fresh as the last headline.  The story is sharp as
a crease, powerfully told, with plenty of twists and turns to keep
anyone off balance.
     The story, by the way, or at least the script, was co-written by
one of the actors, Billy Bob Thornton, who plays a white-trash coke head
who is barely under control at the best of times.  He and his co-writer
Tom Epperson provided a script full of taut writing, tight plotting,
full of energy and discipline.
     The other actors are equally up to the demands of the script as
Thornton.  Cynda William as Fantasia is the touch point, the pivot, of
the story.  It's her mysterious, ambiguous role in the story that
provides the most interest.  She is the worst of the worst, yet driven
by the tenderest of emotions.  She's elegant, beautiful, treacherous,
passive, possessed by more demons that would seem possible to pack into
her small frame.
     Michael Beach is the third member of this particular menage.  An
ex-con with a genius IQ, a passing resemblance to Malcom X, and a taste
for knifework.  He's cold and focused and very scary.
     The cops include Jim Metzler as Dud Cole and Earl Billings as John
McFeely, two LAPD officers who find they have to work with the hickish
Dale "Hurricane" Dixon, played by Bill Paxton.  This is more Paxton's
movie, more Dixon's story, than anyone else's, although the script tries
to fool you into dismissing him as a swaggering rube.  And he is due for
some come-uppances, some course corrections for his life.  At first he
appears irritating, foolish, headstrong, childishly self-involved,
mostly harmless even if thoughtlessly racist and casually abusive of his
powers.  His wife (Natalie Canerday) puts her quiet wisdom on display
when she sums him up with: "Dale doesn't know any better -- he watches
TV.  I read nonfiction."
     Paxton may play Hurricane a little too broadly at first, but in the
latter parts of the film his characterization takes on depth, dimension,
color, and complexity.
     A word of praise should also go to the musical score by Peter
Haycock and Derek Holt and to the photography of James L. Carter.
     Finally, let me say something briefly about the director, Carl
Franklin.  He has managed to give us a portrait of life on both sides of
the color line that is probably unique.  He finds the contact point
between human folly and inhuman crime.  He lets one of the characters
speak a line that rings loud since the LA riots: "Looking guilty is
being guilty for black people."  But he puts it in the mouth of Fantasia
after she has fully joined in her companions crimes.  He is a very
assured director, and I await with pleasure his next film.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo/
Carl Franklin's breakthrough directorial film, joined Billy Bob
Thornton and his then-roommate Tom Epperson's critically-acclaimed
script, to become one of the best rated movies of 1992.
Thumb-rater-critics Roger Ebert and Gene Siskel respectively
acknowledged this film as the number one and number two rated film on
their annual top 10 best movies of the year list.
PLOT:
One white-trash huckster, his girlfriend Fantasia, and a cold, black
College grad are on the run from the police after they dispense of some
folks in a drug-related robbery. Headed towards her childhood town,
Fantasia and the quibbling duo, take every precaution to avoid
detection, but their respective weaknesses soon draw the L.A. police
and a local small town Sheriff, right onto their butts. 
CRITIQUE:
Gritty, engaging, enjoyable and laced with spurts of graphic violence,
this film presents us with several well-drawn out characters from
different backgrounds, and recounts a tale of greed, drugs and
accountability. The star of this film is definitely the script and the
characters so well portrayed by the respective actors in this film. The
story is evenly-paced and easy to handle, with the plot leading you
down several paths at once, twisting and turning when need be, and
adding several elements of the ol' small town humour. I really enjoyed
this movie because it was an original plot that had me extremely
interested in the characters and their eventual outcomes. 
Bill Paxton was the standout in my mind as the perfectly naďve, but
enthusiastic small-town hick cop who reveled in the mere presence of a
couple of more seasoned L.A. cops. There is one particular scene in
which the out-of-town cops are speaking about him, without their
knowledge of his presence nearby, which will always be stapled in my
mind as an uncomfortable classic. Paxton's reaction after that scene
was superb, and left you feeling deeply for the man by the end of the
movie. Billy Bob was also excellent as the "good ol' boy" without the
deepest of consciences, and Michael Beach as the coldest, most ruthful
character that I have seen drawn to screen in a while. All in all, this
movie was an amazing achievement in the genre, and matches the Coen
brothers' classic BLOOD SIMPLE (8/10) and even John Dahl's RED ROCK
WEST (8/10). Even the ending was semi-ambiguous as to leave us with our
own conclusion. The characters are rich and lively, the script highly
involved, and the movie a solid piece of entertaining cinema.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Billy Bob Thornton and Cynda Williams (who plays Fantasia in this film)
were a married couple during the filming of this movie, but divorced
soon therafter. As of 1998, Billy Bob has been married and divorced
four times.
Bill Paxton does not particularly like being recognized as "Chet" from
1985's WEIRD SCIENCE (7.5/10). I wonder if it has anything to do with
the fact that he's transformed into a piece of turd by the end of film?
Director Carl Franklin was an actor by profession, before taking his
shot at directing. He had bit parts in various movies, and a handful of
TV shows including "The A-Team", "MacGyver", "Roseanne" and "The
Streets of San Francisco".
Michael Beach (who plays Pluto in this film) also played a cop named
Wurlitzer in 1993's TRUE ROMANCE (9/10).
Billy Bob Thornton and Bill Paxton re-teamed as costars in yet another
great small-town thriller, in 1998's A SIMPLE PLAN (8/10), as directed
by Mr. Sam Raimi.
Among the formative events of Billy Bob Thornton's childhood was the
forging of a friendship with Tom Epperson, with whom he would later
collaborate on several movie scripts, including this one. In 1977,
after quitting College after two semesters, and convinced that he had a
future in rock music, Thornton hooked up with his pal Epperson, who'd
become an aspiring novelist, and the two of them went seeking fame and
fortune in the Big Apple, where they managed to stick around almost
long enough to unpack before fleeing back to Arkansas in terror. By
1981, Thornton and Epperson had nerved themselves up for a second shot
at the big time, and, mindful of their lately discovered aversion to
East Coast living, headed for Los Angeles. Thornton scraped together
$200 to make the trip by driving a truck to Slidell, La., after his
supernaturally insightful mother helpfully prophesied that he would
"have some business" in a town of the same name. The pair worked odd
jobs and wrote scripts, and, two years after their arrival, Thornton
turned a serious eye to performing for the first time since high school
and began taking acting classes (He had a part in 1989's CHOPPER CHICKS
IN ZOMBIETOWN). A long dry spell ensued, and by 1984, the aspiring
actor was living so lean he suffered a near-fatal malnutrition-induced
heart failure brought on by weeks of eating nothing but potatoes. After
receiving high kudos for the script of this movie, Billy Bob finally
broke through in 1996, with his directorial debut of SLING BLADE
(6.5/10), which he also wrote and starred in.

Author
James Sanford
ONE FALSE MOVE
(IRS)
 Originally given a brief theatrical run in 1992 --just long enough to
attract the attention of some major critics-- and quickly shuttled to video,
director Carl Franklin's "One False Move" is a tight, tense little thriller
that's most notable today as a launching pad for the careers of Bill Paxton
and Billy Bob Thornton. Thornton co-scripted (with Tom Epperson) this tale
of three drug-dealing killers who cut a bloody path from Los Angeles to the
sleepy hamlet of Star City, Arkansas, the hometown of Fantasia (Cynda
Williams), the least psychotic of the trio. Keeping the peace in Star City
is Dale "Hurricane" Dixon (Paxton), an underworked police chief with dreams
of someday being a supercop. Dale wants very badly to impress the two L.A.
officers (Jim Metzler and Earl Billings) who've arrived in town, unaware of
the fact that his idols ridicule him behind his back. Even though Dale never
seems to listen to anyone but himself, when he accidentally eavesdrops on
the big-city cops making fun of his ambitions, his face all but cracks from
the silent pain surging through it.
 It's this kind of attention to character that sets "One False Move" apart
from the usual crime drama as Thornton and Epperson somehow manage to offset
the story's gorier moments --including a savage opening sequence featuring a
multiple murder-- with some smart twists. There's a terrific backstory
between two of the main characters that turns out to be a crucial plot
pivot, and Dale ultimately reveals himself to be much more than just a
high-energy hick in a violent, well-handled climax.
 "One False Move" has too many flaws to qualify as any sort of classic:
Franklin routinely oversells the comic relief, and Thornton was a better
writer than he was an actor at this point. Paxton's outstanding work is
something to see however, Michael Beach is truly scary as Thornton's quietly
menacing partner, and Williams shows she's a talent whose potential has not
been tapped as effectively in the movies she's done since. "One False Move"
is also historically important as a film that helped pave the way for such
later independent filmmaking triumphs as Quentin Tarantino's "Reservoir
Dogs" and "Pulp Fiction": Like those creations, this was a picture that
dared to veer outside the boundaries of traditional cinema and to take its
audience along for a dizzying ride. James Sanford
