Title
Review for Virus (1999)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Robert Workman
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
Damn that Y2K bug.  It's got a head start in this movie starring Jamie
Lee Curtis and another Baldwin brother (William this time) in a story
regarding a crew of a tugboat that comes across a deserted Russian tech
ship that has a strangeness to it when they kick the power back on.
Little do they know the power within...
Going for the gore and bringing on a few action sequences here and
there, Virus still feels very empty, like a movie going for all flash
and no substance.  We don't know why the crew was really out in the
middle of nowhere, we don't know the origin of what took over the ship
(just that a big pink flashy thing hit the MIR), and, of course, we
don't know why Donald Sutherland is stumbling around drunkenly
throughout.  Here, it's just "hey, let's chase these people around with
some robots".
The acting is below average, even from the likes of Curtis.  You're more
likely to get a kick out of her work in Halloween H20.  Sutherland is
wasted and Baldwin, well, he's acting like a Baldwin, of course.  The
real star here are Stan Winston's robot design, some schnazzy CGI, and
the occasional good gore shot, like picking into someone's brain.  So,
if robots and body parts really turn you on, here's your movie.
Otherwise, it's pretty much a sunken ship of a movie.

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
Taking a leaf from the Daleks' book, a sentient informational lifeform
tries to invade Earth. Fortunately, it is defeated by Jamie-Lee Curtis
and one of the lesser Baldwin brothers. Unfortunately, it is defeated by
Jamie-Lee Curtis and one of the lesser Baldwin brothers.
It happens every year, regular as clockwork. No one knows why. They dash
unthinkingly towards their doom, the horde sweeping over the edge into
the abyss. Perhaps it is the rhythm of nature. Perhaps it is something
primal. But every year, a film crew tries to remake "Alien".
There are minor differences of course. Sometimes the monster is a robot,
sometimes a mutant. Sometimes the victims are trapped in the arctic,
sometimes in a city. And sometimes they are a bunch of schmucks stuck on
a Russian freighter in the middle of the Pacific. 
Of course trawling the depths of such suckiness can sometimes be
tremendously entertaining, such as the loopily wet "Leviathan", the
colourful "Hardware", the demented "DeepStar Six". But connoisseurs of
crap can be tragically let down when something doesn't suck as much as
it nearly does. And let's face it: Jamie-Lee Curtis in a sou'wester is
no ones idea of fun.
For those of you that didn't catch "Virus" at the cinema (which from the
box office figures is - well - everybody), the story goes like this: the
crew of the "Minnow" are in trouble. Their cargo barge is taking water.
Their ship is running into a hurricane. And their skipper is Donald
Sutherland. The uninsured cargo barge sinks and Donald retreats to his
cabin, to clutch a pistol and gaze at a photo taken during his youth.
"I've let you down, boy," he sighs. If you weren't watching closely, you
might think he was talking in character. But Gilligan (Curtis) spots a
disabled Russian freighter and they board, hoping to make a mint in
salvage. Unbeknownst to them, a huge cloud of static electricity has
drifted across space, zapped Mir, telneted down to the ship and is
looking for more copies of Microsoft Office to infect. Unbeknowst that
is, until they find the sole demented Russian survivor for some quick
plot exposition.  (Courtesy of Joanna Pacula, whose chief qualifications
for playing a Russian scientist seem to be the fact she has short hair
and a funny surname.) See, it _is_ just like "Gilligan's Island". 
Let me cut to the chase: it's lucky the "Minnow" has such a fearless
(and large) crew because they die one by one or get turned into
bio-mechanical killing machines. Ginger is left alone in the critically
important generator room and just like the dizzy-headed movie star he
is, goes to investigate a noise and is strangled by a powercable. The
Howells and Maryanne split up and blunder around alone in the ships dark
corridors until they get eaten. The Professor rigs up a complicated
device so he can escape the ship. Of course, it's a long standing law of
trashy monster films that characters die in order of increasing
socio-economic standing. The Professor, being the token black, is thus
doomed never to see the end of the film. But for those who like to keep
their finger on the pulse of popular culture, it's a hopeful sign of
progress that he dies after the alcoholic, the Cuban and the redneck.
(And after the Maori, who has a Sydney accent.) My, what a long way
we've come. And true to 20 years of playing twitchy villains that betray
everyone, Donald Sutherland betrays everyone. Tragically, Jamie-Lee is
half-drowned, burnt and soaked with petrol but just refuses to take her
clothes off. Damn.
Oh, there's some nice Harryhausen style effects as robots chase
Jamie-Lee and Baldwin X around the ship, but it's largely just a dull
routine affair, not even bad enough to be good. I'm sure that the rights
have been sold and in a few years we'll see a cheapie sequel starring a
different Baldwin brother. [*/misfire] and a nagging chest cold on the
Sid & Nancy scale.

Author
David Nusair
Starring Jamie Lee Curtis, Donald Sutherland, Billy Baldwin
"Virus" is a monster movie without a monster.  Any movie with a hurdle
that large to overcome had better be pretty damn good otherwise.  Sadly,
"Virus" does not deliver, on any level.
The movie opens with the Russian space station Mir about to transmit
something (we never find out what) to a big boat with lots of satellites
on it.  Sudddenly, a wave of colorful lightning comes flying through
space, and winds up destroying Mir and using it to transmit itself to the
aforementioned big boat.  Cut to seven days later, we meet Donald
Sutherland and his band of seafaring vultures.  See, they spend all their
time sailing around looking for dead-in-the-water ships to rescue, and
then collect the reward money.  At least, I *think* that's what they do. 
Along with many other things in the film, their reason for being out in
the middle of the ocean isn't really explained.
So, they stumble upon this big boat with lots of satellites on it, and
decide to haul it back to Russian waters.  The only problem is, the crew
starts disappearing one-by-one and turning into Borg.  Yes, Borg. 
Complete with the red laser beam in place of an eye.  Apparently, this
alien lifeform can only survive if inside something electrical.  So, it
creates make-shift machines and uses humans for "spare parts".  
Blah, blah, blah.  I could go on forever describing the ludicrous
so-called plot, but I won't.  Suffice it to say the most original thing
about this movie is having Donald Sutherland play an Irish man (!). 
Everything else in this movie has been taken from other (better) movies. 
For example, many of the machines resemble those found in the little-seen
Japanese movie, "Tetsuo-The Iron Man".  And the plot is right out of
"Aliens".  
The funny thing is, I was actually expecting to enjoy this movie.  I have
a soft spot for cheesy monster movies, like last years under-appreciated
"Deep Rising".  But "Virus", as I mentioned earlier, doesn't even have a
monster.  It just has a big pile of circuits and wires and expects the
audience to fear this ridiculous looking contraption.  
"Virus" is the type of movie that really makes you wonder what the
screenwriter was thinking about when he wrote it.  Besides the lame
"monster", it's chock full of dialogue that no real person would ever say,
and situations that no real person would ever allow themselves to get
into.  For example, there is a scene late in the movie in which one of
the characters actually attempts to *negotiate* with the alien!  Now, I
don't know about you, but if I came upon a lifeform that viewed mankind as
a virus to be eliminated, I doubt that I would attempt to reason with it. 
That makes about as much sense as a baby squirrel calmly asking a fierce
predator to spare his life.
Finally, "Virus" isn't scary.  The least the filmmakers could have done
was to make the movie just a little scary.  As it is, it's about as
frightening as a box of cookies.
Skip "Virus".  If it's a cool monster movie you want, rent the far
superior (and the granddaddy of this genre) "Aliens".

Author
Michael Dequina
You got to love January--where else can you find such cinematic schlock
that studios not only spent millions of dollars on, but also believed
would make millions for them in return?  It seems that every January at
least one studio dumps a pathetic excuse for a sci-fi thriller upon the
moviegoing audience.  In 1997, it was _The_Relic_, which should have
remained undiscovered; last year, it was _Phantoms_, which will surely
continue to haunt the careers of all involved, especially Hollywood "it"
boy Ben Affleck.  This year's selection (sacrifice?) is _Virus, a
thoroughly ridiculous sci-fi yarn whose abundance of unintentional laughs
fail to compensate for the lack of thrills.
_Virus_ had been bounced around Universal's release schedule like a hot
potato, most recently scheduled for a July opening.  Universal's official
reason for this latest shelving was the conflict with another Jamie Lee
Curtis starrer, _Halloween:_H20_; but watching the film, it's obvious
that the true reason was something much simpler: the film just plain
stinks.  _Virus_ does get off to an interesting enough start, though,
when a mysterious electrical force of alien origin makes its way onto a
Russian ship through a transmission with the Mir space station.  Days
later, the high-tech is found abandoned by an American shipping crew, who
decides to poke around.  Of course, this proves to be a deadly mistake,
for the alien life form has taken over the ship.
As with any action flick, the film is only as good as its villain, and
once _Virus_ offers a glimpse of our alien, all hopes of a decent thrill
ride are instantly dashed.  The alien lacks a body, so it constructs its
own out of parts found on the ship.  It sounds somewhat interesting, but
in execution is laughable, especially some fearsome creatures which are
little more than video cameras atop metal spider legs.  Oooh, scary.  The
more elaborate creations, featuring human body parts mixed with
electronics aren't especially frightening because the audience has seen
it before--it's just another gloss on _The_Terminator_.  The "main"
creature is especially disappointing, a large mass of scrap metal that
bears a striking resemblance to the unmenacing title robot adversary in
the dreary sequel _RoboCop_2_.
I haven't yet mentioned the actors because, frankly, they don't really
matter in a film such as this.  Even so, it must be noted that there is
some dreadful performances on display here.  Vying neck-and-neck for
worst acting honors (no small feat here) are Donald Sutherland and Joanna
Pacula, both varying grades of ham as the Yank crew captain and the only
survivor of the Russian crew, respectively.  Billy "refer to me as
William" Baldwin fares better here than in his previous action role in
the famous folly _Fair_Game_, but that's not saying much.  By default,
Curtis comes off best, but her earnest performance would be better suited
for a more intelligent, exciting script, one where "What the hell was
that?" and "What the hell is going on?" don't make up 95% of the
dialogue.
The latter quote is likely one that will be asked by audiences as they
are watching _Virus_, and the former once they walk out of the theatre. 
_Virus_ is one of those cinematic disasters that leaves one wondering
what the hell everyone involved--from the cast and crew to the studio
production heads who greenlighted the project--were thinking.
Michael Dequina
Chat Forum Host, The Official Michael Jordan Web Site
http://jordan.sportsline.com
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown


Author
Matt Prigge
Writers: Dennis Feldman and Jonathan Hensleigh (based on the comic book 
by Chuck Pfarrer)
Starring: Jamie Lee Curtis, William Baldwin, Donald Sutherland, Joanna 
Pacula, Sherman Augustus, Marshall Bell, Cliff Curtis, Julio Oscar 
Mechoso
I suppose I'm not extremely surprised that "Virus" comes to us from a 
deciple of James Cameron (John Bruno), and if I strain real hard, I 
could even say that it's an obvious given, particuarly looking from the 
standpoint of Mr. Cameron's early works. In fact, "Virus" is yet another 
in the long line of action/horror/paranoia thrillers from the "Aliens" 
vein: a group of people are dropped into a mysterious situation only to 
find a mortally-threatening entity is out to get them, a textbook 
example hailing all the way back to the early talkies, and maybe even to 
the first pictures, albeit redeveloped by Cameron in his 1986 
blockbuster that earned him esteem and bigger budgets to come in his 
future. No such thing will happen to Bruno, whom I believe worked in 
some capacity on that quasi-landmark feature; while Bruno may have 
studied under Cameron's wing for years and years, I'm beginning to 
wonder at what capacity, and what exactly did he learn from him. In 
fact, "Virus" should at least be mediocre; the fact that Bruno could 
have worked under a man like Cameron - a director who, if anything, just 
knows how to make a movie - and then make a film like "Virus" is just 
another detraction fairly aimed at this Z-grade schlockfest of a film, 
albeit a Z-grade schlockfest with a respectable budget.
The film seems to not only borrow it's plot from last year's 
similarly-fated "Deep Rising," but also from a clunkish B-movie from the 
'80s called "Leviathan," an underwater thriller starring Peter Weller, 
Richard Crenna, Hector Elizando, and Daniel Stern about a group of 
miners who stumble upon an alien lifeform that was part "Alien," part 
John Carpenter's twisted remake of "The Thing." "Virus," again, has a 
similar, uh, selling point: a group of sailors on a boat stumble upon a 
Russian cruiser that is dead in the water. They get on. They break up 
into pairs and investigate. And they find an alien lifeform on board 
that comes in the form of energy, has taken over all the machines on 
board, have meshed the machines with parts from corpses, and have deemed 
humankind their enemy because of a misquote in the dictionary (ha ha).
Not that any of this is for a second scary or the least bit involving; 
not only does this film start off with a chintzy Bond-ian opening (the 
destruction of the cruiser via a satellite transmission from Mir), 
destroying any of the suspense in what could happen, but it also fails 
to bring us any interesting chracters. Of its motley crew, it only 
choses as its potentially eccentric cast of characters a lead woman 
skipper, a masculine potential-romantic-interest, a drunken captain, a 
black technician, a tatooed aborigine, a manic Russian survivor, and a 
couple other candidates for alien food, none whom are the least bit 
interesting or more dimensional than a thin, plain piece of writing 
paper. And it's not the traditional argument for films like these, where 
you may in fact want them all to be eaten (even "Aliens" played with the 
karma of the arrogant soldiers, but this was more of a plus-side for the 
film as a whole than the opposite); instead, as another cliche goes, you 
just don't give a damn. I almost don't even have to say that the acting 
from everyone ranges from sub-par to horrific, the former being Jamie 
Lee Curtis in the lead showing off what a strong female lead she is (and 
she is, just not really here) and the latter being - and it pains me to 
say this as he's a particular favorite of mine - Donald Sutherland, who 
plays the captain so poorly and without a second of credibility that 
this will go down as the performance-of-which-he-should-be-ashamed. Like 
Anthony Hopkins for "Legends of the Fall" (the line "Scrooooooo 'em" has 
been thus embroidered upon my membrance). Or Peter O'Toole in 
"Caligula." Great actor, horrific performance. It happens every now and 
then, and it only helps Sutherland's career that no one, except for an 
elite few, even bothered to see this film.
Though it has sat on the shelves of Universal Studios for about two 
years, waiting until it can be released and make as much money as it 
possibly can (read: early January, when everyone's still trying to catch 
up on the potential Oscar-nominees), it does show that Universal shelled 
out a pretty penny to make this film: it's laden with complex machinery, 
boasts respectable production design, and it may even feature believable 
special effects...if, of course, I, or anyone else, could see them. 
"Virus" mostly takes place on a large, abandoned cruiser, and mostly at 
night until the dawn, and mostly without the use of lights, not so much 
for the productivity of the alien creatures in their pursuit of their 
human prey, but more so because, as the Hollywood cliche seems to go, 
"If it's dark enough, then the special effects will be more believable." 
And if you don't believe me, go back and rent "Godzilla," and tell me if 
there's even one shot where we see Godzilla either a) in his entirety in 
one wide shot, or b) n the light so that we can at least see him (well, 
you don't really have to sit through it again; just take my word for 
it).
But all of this doesn't matter since "Virus" is basically just one loud, 
cluttered mess of a movie. The action scenes are muddled and as 
difficult to follow as any action movie I've ever seen (my, um, favorite 
part was the scene where a trio of them end up somehow on the outside of 
the ship, during a five minute bouillabaisse of tidal waves, rain, and 
any other ocean-extremeties the film can cook up, then end up back in 
the ship when one of them is revealed to have apparently drowned - well, 
I must say, thanks for telling me afterwards because I sure couldn't 
figure it out when I saw it). Imagine the first attack of the aliens in 
"Aliens," shot from the POV of the soldiers and then the authorities in 
the battle car if it was all hard to follow and done without any 
dramatic intensity, and that's basically the whole of "Virus": one 
horribly-directed action scene after the other, capping it off with a 
proposterous gadget that saves the day and at least a couple of the 
original cast members.
And my god, it's a long damn sit. With no interesting characters, no 
dramatic urgency, no tension, not one good moment of action, and no 
mesmerizing visuals, it's a wonder that it even got made. We already 
know that big movie studios' mentality is shallow at best, and movies 
like "Out of Sight" and "Saving Private Ryan" give you more faith in 
them, but movies like "Virus" manage to drain a little more out of the 
pool. I almost wish that instead of making this movie, John Bruno had 
gone cinema verite and captured the meetings with Universal heads when 
they gave this film a green light. They read the script, they knew they 
were entrusting millions upon millions of dollars into a director who 
might have very well been a Cameron hack (and he is), and they still 
went ahead with the project, only to have Bruno and company shit back in 
their face. Even though I hold Universal in contempt for making this 
horrible movie, I'd say even more contempt should be aimed at Mr. Bruno 
for making a movie that could be this bad. In fact, shouts of "Egad, 
man, what were you doing when you worked for Cameron anyway?" are not 
only justifiable, but encouraged.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Dustin Putman
"Virus" is the type of cliched, vacuous film that has been recylcled so 
many times before that you wonder why anyone would even bother putting 
work into making it. Strangely enough, on the same mid-January weekend 
last year, another film was released like this, "Deep Rising," about an 
ugly monster on a cruise liner. Prior movies with the almost exact same 
storyline include 1989's "Leviathan," 1989's "Deep Star Six," and all 
four "Alien" pictures. "Virus," in comparison, is a servicable thriller, 
well-made and produced, but since it doesn't include one moment of even 
remote originality or intelligence, it sinks under the weight of the 
water that the film was shot on.
Based on a series of comic books, "Virus" concerns the crew of an ocean 
salvage tugboat, which becomes extremely damaged during a violent 
typhoon. After discovering that the boat is slowly sinking, (un)lucky 
for them, a huge ocean vessel that appears to be dead in the water turns 
up within the confines of their radar screen. Once the team reaches the 
Russian ship, they go on board to find that the place is seemingly 
deserted. After turning the power back on, however, there gradually are 
signs that something else is on the ship, and the electrical equipment 
is oddly working by itself. One survivor finally does turn up, Nadia 
(Joanna Pacula), who informs the suicidal and stern captain (Donald 
Sutherland) and one of the crew, Kit Foster (Jamie Lee Curtis), that a 
mysterious alien life form hit the Santi Mir space station which then 
was transported down to the ship, taking over the minds of all of the 
electrical machines and thinking that humans are viruses that should be 
completely wiped out.
If "Virus" sounds like all of the previously mentioned movies, you're 
correct. Although the technical artistry is fairly impressive to bring 
the mechanical creature to life, the film itself doesn't appear to have 
a brain in its head. The film sticks so close to the worn-out 
conventions of the "creature" genre that it is amazing anyone would 
spend the money and time filming it when they could be making an 
original film.
The actors are all very good and have all proven their acting abilities 
in the past, but they are sorely wasted here and do not really even have 
characters to play. In her second return to horror in the last year, 
Jamie Lee Curtis once again proves to be a strong and resourceful 
heroine, but that is about it. Although 1998's "Halloween: H20" was also 
a disappointment, at least she was given a few scenes to develop a 
character, unlike here. Donald Sutherland has fallen on hard times 
recently by starring in thoroughly disposable films, such as 1994's "The 
Puppet Masters," although I just watched him in the superb 1978 sci-fi 
classic "Invasion of the Body Snatchers," where he was fabulous. The 
last of the three top-billers is William Baldwin, but it is fairly hard 
to say if he is good or not in the picture, since he has nothing to do.
Basically, "Virus" is another one of those films where a group of people 
walk around and investigate a space ship/ocean liner/haunted house until 
the deadly and equally grotesque and slimy creature pops up and kills 
them one-by-one. It is not the worst of its type, but it is far from one 
of the best, and when exactly are studios going to give up recycling 
such shameless and overdone plot gimmicks such as this? As long as some 
of them keep making money, I suspect the answer is never.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Robert B. Marks
     Virus is a movie with a great deal of potential.  The idea
of an alien being, composed entirely of energy, coming to Earth
is one which could be developed in any number of interesting and
intelligent ways.  Unfortunately, in this movie, it isn't.
     What could have been an interesting piece of science-fiction
quickly becomes sci-fi (the SF writer's word for "crap").  When
the alien life form beams itself into the computer of a Russian
research vessel in an odd electrical storm (somehow managing not
to short out the computer in the process), it immediately begins
to build robots and tries to take over the ship, killing the
crew.
     And then the crew of a small tugboat, commanded by a wooden
Donald Sutherland (who looks almost embarrassed at his role),
finds and decides to salvage the deserted Russian ship.  Ignoring
the obvious signs that something is wrong (such as bullet holes
and blood splattered all over the place), they restore the power
and are soon set upon by the evil intelligence which sees mankind
as a virus to be removed; an idea obviously used only to provide
an excuse for it to want to kill people.
     What follows is a very poor impression of _Star Trek: First
Contact_.  Supposedly horrific cyborgs stalk the crew, wanting to
turn them into spare parts.  And, just to show off the FX, each
new monstrosity is revealed before it actually begins to do
something even remotely frightening, destroying what little
suspense remains.
     The movie, like most Hollywood sci-fi horror flicks, is also
filled with stupid characters.  Donald Sutherland's Captain
Everton manages to ignore every single rational idea available,
and comes off looking like an idiot.  Crew members routinely
disobey simple instructions, resulting in several entirely
predictable results.  And, to make matters worse, there is not a
single two dimensional character present, much less a three
dimensional one.
     In the end, _Virus_ is an uninspired waste of money and
time.  While it is slightly amusing in some places, for the most
part it is predictable and almost boring.  It is one of those
movies that is best watched as a TV rental.
     So, the final score: 1.5/5.  Sometimes amusing, but not even
worth a half-price show.

Author
Walter Frith
The true invigorating art of science fiction and horror is quickly
fizzling out in Hollywood.  Like comedy (especially in television),
these genres are extremely hard to succeed at.  Never easy but often
attempted, the absurdity of many of them rarely pan out into becoming
unintentional comedies but that's what happens in 'Virus'.
The opening scene unravels like a cheesy bad dream in the South Pacific
where a Russian ship carrying satellite and computer technology and in
contact with the MIR space station, suddenly becomes paralyzed when a
strange force field in outer space sends a shock wave through MIR and
directly connects it to the ship.  Many pieces of equipment are
destroyed, the crew is seemingly incapacitated and things fade to
black.  
FADE IN: An expedition team is traveling through the South Pacific.  Led
by the captain (Donald Sutherland), he is hauling cargo using a platform
connected to a towing line that's connected to his barge.  Other members
of his team are William Baldwin and Jamie Lee Curtis, both of whom give
extremely bland performances as the banality of their characters suffers
from an over extended screenplay of intimate shock value throughout its
running time and a lot of action scenes that don't flow smoothly but
rather come off as short controlled bursts of energy and not as genuine
moments of excitement.  A raging typhoon forces the captain's cargo to
be cut for fear of bringing down the entire vessel.  The crew finds the
Russian ship and figure out that maritime law allows them to salvage its
remains and walk away with approximately 30 million dollars.  They soon
learn that like the rules of old fashioned material greed dictate, there
is no such thing as easy money.
The film takes a sharp turn here after a somewhat promising start.  The
basic premise is simply that the force field that struck the ship from
MIR is breathing life into a new form of alien technology that allows
mechanical parts to assemble themselves and gives them the will to kill
humans and use them as spare parts in mechanical assembly.  Sort of like
the Borg from 'Star Trek: The Next Generation'.  Oh, where is there a
nuclear device when you need one?
Gale Anne Hurd who has worked in a producing capacity for such films as
'The Terminator', 'Aliens', 'Tremors', and 'Dante's Peak', takes another
stab at her craft with 'Virus' and the film's title, I'm sure, is no pun
intended at making fans sick of it after about the first half hour.  Who
is John Bruno and where did he come from?  Another failed attempt at a
new director trying to teach an old genre new tricks and it doesn't
work.  After serving as a miscellaneous crew member for such films as
'Terminator 2: Judgment Day', 'Die Hard 2', 'The Abyss', and 'Heavy
Metal', Bruno is not suited to the top chair on the set of a motion
picture.  His direction of the film is bogged down under a lot of dark
and hollow scenes of repetitive energy.  The film fails for primarily
one reason: lack of scene diversity. If you're going to make a film
that's set primarily in one location for the entire running time, you
had better have a dynamite screenplay but this one is more like a weak
sparkler.  'Virus' put me in mind mostly of 1998's 'Sphere' where a
strange alien force was at work by the sea.  Maybe that's why both films
look watered down!
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
"Wretched" is the word to describe "Virus", a film so patently bad that I
damn near felt an affection for it.  It's hard to make a good movie, but to
make a movie that's a failure on every single imaginable level is, in some
ways, tougher.        It's very difficult to get this many people, all at once, to
abdicate any of quality work.
"Virus" plays like a rip-off of both "Deep Rising", another terrible movie
from last year, and any of the "Star Trek" episodes that feature the Borg. 
It starts off with some kind of space cloud "infecting" a Russian orbital
station and using the station's antenna to send some kind of computer virus
to a communications ship in the ocean below.  The virus appears to want to
take over humanity, or something, but its methodologies and M.O.s are never
clear.
Anyway, the aforementioned ship gets discovered by a tug crewed by Kit Foster
(Jamie Lee Curtis) and Steve Baker (William Baldwin).  The tug's captain
(Donald Sutherland, doing one of his wacko roles) wants to claim the ship for
salvage, but it isn't long before they discover Something's Not Right Here.
The ship's steering itself, for starters.  In such circumstances, the
characters are advised to find the screenwriter and beat him to death for the
crime of rampant laziness and unoriginality.
It gets worse.        The virus manages to build robot incarnations of itself and
use those to transform the crew members into things that look like rejected
test reels for the Cenobites from "Hellraiser".  The master creature is
laughingly reminiscent of a Pop Art junk sculpture, and looks about as
threatening.  It drills through bulkheads and barks out idiotic pulp-movie
dialogue in a voice that sounds like my car's "Your door is ajar" warning on
very bad drugs.
According to the movie's press kit, the movie was drawn from a Dark Horse
comic series with the same name.  Dark Horse is a comic imprint that
specializes in strong, compelling stories.  My guess is that they
liposuctioned the story out of the comic before filming it.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Matt Petras
    A highly intelligent life form that is completely electronic in nature,
beams itself onto a Russian science vessel. Well, this is the point where
the movie strays from becoming a decent and original movie and simply
becomes a predictable sci-fi thriller. Anyhow, this life form takes control
of the computers on the Russian vessel then starts creating highly advanced
robots to help it in its gruesome task of exterminating the virus' known as
man. The original crew of the Russian vessel is all but exterminated, and
then a hapless crew on a tug discovers the derelict ship and tries to
salvage it. No more needs to be said as to what happens and where the
conflict lies, the movie is that predictable.  The story is full of very
shallow characters that don't do much other than subsist. The captain of the
tug, played by Donald Sutherland, makes irrational choice after irrational
choice leaving the audience wondering as to how he has survived long enough
to reach his age (looks to be in his 60's). To add to this we're shown this
motley crew that at times seems to be highly skilled in specific fields, and
at others seems barely capable of basic tasks. Some of the supposed
capabilities of the characters leads one to wonder what they are doing on a
tug transporting cargo in the middle of the pacific, in a typhoon no less.
None of the characters seem to work together at all; they are always
bickering and vying for some form of control. This makes no sense what so
ever and only takes away from the story, a story that is full of holes and
is extremely predictable.
    All the flaws of the actual story are only helped along by the special
effects. The waves that are generated to be part of the typhoon make it look
like boat was is small model sitting in a tub and someone is simply creating
waves. It looks genuinely fake, granted trying to recreate a typhoon or
hurricane cannot be easy by any stretch of the imagination but having the
storm approach in a style similar to the huge wave of Deep Impact only ends
up looking corny and amateurish. Also on the topic of flaws, the robotics
that the advanced life form creates seem to move extremely slowly, why? If
this life form that is so advanced as to be able to create these robotics,
should it not be able to create them move faster? Regardless, the special
effects in this movie in many cases take away from the film rather than add
to it.
    As to the actual casting for the movie, finally there is nothing to
complain about. The actors were superb, but then again it is highly doubtful
that chimpanzees would have had difficulty acting the roles. Having the cast
that was present probably saved this movie from being an absolute
catastrophe. Watching these actors act this story out made it bearable, if
barely. The one saving grace of this movie is that it was highly action
packed and there always seemed to be something happening.  So if you are
going into this movie not expecting to see anything grand and are only going
to kill some time and watch a mediocre sci-fi thriller then you won't be too
disappointed. As the movie is but the latest in a genre that was originally
created by Aliens, it does little more than try to cash in on that aspect.
This movie would be best left for video and even then you might be advised
to simply wait for one of the major networks to air it on TV.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
This film was supposed to be released in the summer of 1998. It was pushed
back. Then, it was supposed to be released in the fall of 1998. It was
pushed back again. Now, in January 1999, the film based on an original
series from Dark Horse Comics called "Virus", is finally being released to
the public.
PLOT:
A Russian carrier gets hits by an electronic life form, unknown to mankind,
which begins to study and meche elements of the humans onboard with all of
the robotics engineered on the ship. When a stray boat accidentally bumps
into the grand carrier, and the crew hop aboard the empty vessel for a
looksie, they find loads of dead bodies, and computer-infested robots
buzzing around in every shape and size. These new life forms see the human
race as a virus, and would like to extinguish it from the universe.
CRITIQUE:
This is not a great movie. It's not even a good movie. It's a standard, by
the numbers, science-fiction derivative of the healthy ALIENS and TERMINATOR
series, which offers a few simple shocks, some engineered tension, another
politically correct cast, and special effects that don't add up to much more
than a lot of machines mangled together in metals and lights. None of the
robots in this film impressed me much because I figure that if you've seen
one robot with lights, gadgets, buzzes and hoses flapping all around, you've
pretty much seen 'em all! And despite this film brandishing quite a few of
these android-puppies, some of which were hybrids of humans, I can't say
that they did much to impress, scare or excite me. Having said that, it is
to note that the plot was also as thin as Jack Nicholson's hair, and the
actors campy in some scenes, movie-stupid in others.
The good thing about this lame duck film was that it knew not to overplay
its obviously mediocre presentation, and did us all a favour by slapping the
whole affair within a time package of a buck and a half. I was never really
bored in this picture, and did enjoy Donald Sutherland's salty ol' dog of a
sea captain, but will admit to longing for the legendary shots of Jamie Lee
Curtis in all her form (For interested parties, please note that there are
no T or A shots of the lovely Ms. Curtis in this picture). The rest of the
supporting cast was negligible, and the shots of the vessel being attacked
by a typhoon looked more like a model boat in a bathtub, but I suppose the
film can be considered brainless fodder for those interested in this type of
thing. So remember, it's quick, it's redundant, it offers some action and
mediocre effects, no boobie shots, and some campy acting by Sutherland. If
you enjoyed either SOLDIER (6/10) or EVENT HORIZON (6/10), you will most
probably enjoy this one as well. It's the science-fiction crazy cousin that
no one likes to talk about, but with whom we've all shared a conversation at
one time or another.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Jamie Lee Curtis' big-screen film debut was in John Carpenter's original
HALLOWEEN (6/10). Her mom is PSYCHO's Janet Leigh, and her dad, Tony Curtis.
She has been married to former-"Saturday Night Live" star Christopher Guest
since 1984. In 1983, she dated English rocker Adam Ant for nine months. She
became Baroness, Lady Haden-Guest, when her husband inherited the Barony in
1996.
Screenwriter Dennis Feldman also wrote the original SPECIES (7/10), while
the other writer on this pic, Jonathan Hensleigh had a hand in ARMAGEDDON
(7.5/10), THE ROCK (6.5/10) and DIE HARD 3: WITH A VENGEANCE (6/10). He also
happens to be conveniently married to the producer of this film, Gale Anne
Hurd, who herself had a child with legendary director, Brian DePalma, named
Lolita. She was also once married to director James Cameron for a few years,
during which, she conveniently produced some of his films including
TERMINATOR (8/10)-which she co-wrote with him, ALIENS (8/10) and THE ABYSS
(7/10).
William Baldwin graduated from SUNY-Binghamton, where he studied political
science. He has been married to singer Chynna Phillips since 1995. He has
brothers named Alec, Daniel and Stephen, who are all actors in their own
right.
Donald Sutherland is a hoser at heart. He was born in Saint-John, New
Brunswick in Canada, and graduated from the University of Toronto. He also
fathered actor Kiefer Sutherland.
This is director John Bruno's first solo directorial film. He also
co-directed one movie before this one with James Cameron and Stan Winston
called T2 3D: BATTLE ACROSS TIME. He is an Academy Award winner (for THE
ABYSS) and six-time Oscar-nominee in the field of visual effects. He
actually quit his post as visual-effects supervisor on a little picture
called TITANIC (7/10) because what he really wanted to do was direct.
Actor Marshall Bell, who played Woods in this film, made history as the
first person to die in an episode of TV's "Tales From The Crypt". In 1989's
pilot episode "And All Through The House...", he got a fireplace poker right
through the head.
Actress Joanna Pacula, who plays the Russian woman in this movie, is
actually Polish in real life.

Author
Jamie Peck
VIRUS
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Given the set-up, "Virus" sounds like yet another "Aliens" rip-off with 
a germ of an interesting idea thrown in for good measure. But what's an 
"Aliens" rip-off without a rag-tag team of assorted grunts and 
mercenaries to stop by this floating haunted house to infiltrate and 
investigate? "Virus"' comes in the form of high-seas scavengers who have 
just lost the barge they were tugging back to a presumable net gain. 
When the Irish cap'n (hammy Donald Sutherland, sounding like he got his 
accent inside a Lucky Charms box) and his motley crew spy the 
evil-infested boat, it's salvage salvation. Silly mortals. 
Starting here, the movie adheres to strict genre predictability. A lone 
survivor (Polish actress Joanna Pacula, very good here) is discovered 
and provides requisite plot exposition. People venture into dark 
corridors armed only with flashlights and never return. Sutherland's 
navigator, played by Jamie Lee Curtis, gets her Sigourney Weaver mojo 
workin' and guides the good guys in an attempt to kick interplanetary 
butt. Cast members get killed off in reverse credits order. It's a good 
thing director John Bruno is a skilled special effects craftsman, 
because "Virus"' technical terrors offer eye-popping amusement even when 
the story takes frequent naps from creativity. 
Like its own creepy creatures, "Virus" ends up cobbled together out of 
bits and pieces from similarly-themed fright flicks. In some respects, 
it almost plays like a remake of last January's awful "Deep Rising," but 
this movie is better than that one because a formless mass of 
otherworldly intelligence is a more compelling adversary - and story 
concept - than some anonymous sea monster that suddenly surfaces from 
the ocean's briny bowels. Curtis is also a fun heroine to have on your 
side (especially when she's in "Halloween" go-girl mode) but the manner 
in which she finally books it to safety is best described as 
plot-convenient. 
The likeable William Baldwin tags along as a swarthy engineer and 
Curtis' leading man, but there's no time for romance; their sole 
intention is survival. But what about the film's intentions? If you 
crave science-fiction, don't mind story holes, logic lapses and genre 
copy-catting and have 90 minutes to burn - the movie is pretty 
well-paced despite its ultimately squandered potential - then this 
"Virus" is worth catching. Everyone else, however, is better off staying 
in bed, drinking lots of fluids and popping some antibiotics.

Author
James Brundage
 From the producer of Terminator 2 comes... (*gasp*) an expanded version of
the first five minutes of Terminator 2.  You all know the five minutes: the
time where the robots are killing every human being in sight.  Well, that's
basically the entire movie of Virus.
 In Virus, a super-intelligent electronic life form has inhabited first the
space station Mir and then a Russian science ship.  Everybody except for one
person on the science ship goes kaput.  A tug populated by scavenging
psychos happens upon the ship and decides to salvage it, so they reactivate
the power and, in doing so, the psychotic robots. In the immortal words of
"Seinfeld", yada, yada, yada.
 The yada, yada, yada?  The robots try to kill them for the next two hours
while I try to stay awake for the remainder of this boring horror flick.
 In the 80s, the golden age of slasher films, and in the 50s, the golden age
of B-movies, you could watch a horror film and laugh.  I did not laugh once
during this foray into the stupid and unoriginal.  The film is as patched
together as the robots it features: It steals from Relic, Terminator,
Terminator 2, Every Star Trek episode featuring the Borg, etc, etc, etc.
 I'm only glad I'm going to see The Thin Red Line tomorrow.  After this and
Varsity Blues, I'm ready to take a flame-thrower to Hollywood.
 If you haven't seen it, don't.  For those of you who've already made the
mistake that cost them two hours: Who's With Me?!

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Chuck Pfarrer and Dennis Feldman, adapted from the Dark
Horse comic VIRUS
Starring: Jamie Lee Curtis, William Baldwin, Donald Sutherland, and
Joanna Pacula
Ingredients: alien creature, troop of well armed crew members being
stalked
Synopsis:
With their tugboat damaged by a hurricane, the tugboat crew seeks refuge
in the eye of the storm, only to find another ship there: a huge,
deserted Russian space research vessel called the Volkov, equipped with
dozens of machine rooms and mechanized labs. Exploring the Volkov, the
tugboat crew comes upon the scientist Nadia (Joanna Pacula), the frantic
sole survivor of some sort of massacre. Nadia claims that an electronic
life form has invaded the ship by satellite and that the alien is using
the Volkov's power and labs to manufacture cyborg-like creatures in an
attempt to destroy mankind. The alien life form uses humans for spare
parts.
Of course nobody believes Nadia until people start disappearing and
showing up as spare parts on robotic attackers. Can Foster (Jamie Lee
Curtis), Steve (William Baldwin), and the others defeat the alien aboard
the Volkov before it takes over the world? Lucky for them the scientific
research vessel happens to contain an ample supply of guns, ammo,
missiles and thermite grenades.
Opinion:
I love the cast of VIRUS. Donald Sutherland as a creepy sea captain;
Jamie Lee Curtis as the heroine; William Baldwin as a seaman; it can't
get any better than this. VIRUS also has good effects, courtesy of
director John Bruno who happens to be a special effects expert. VIRUS
marks his debut as a director. I even like the bad guy: a ruthless,
faceless, personality-free, alien life form made of electricity trapped
in the circuitry of the ship.
What VIRUS lacks, however, is suspense. VIRUS works like a 50s B-movie
with an upgraded budget. People stumble along, weather a few attacks,
and at last find a loud way to end the thing. Ideally in a movie you
want the good guys to face a deadly opponent they know nothing about.
Through narrow escapes and small clues they should slowly learn enough
to theorize a way to beat the thing. But in VIRUS finding out about the
enemy is done too quickly and easily; it's just a matter of believing
whatever Nadia says, rather than thinking about clues. Similarly, in an
ideal technothriller, the audience should be shown some of the devious
traps the alien might be planning, in order to ratchet up the suspense
factor when the unknowing heroes are shown. But in VIRUS the audience
never gets shown the sneak peak, so a lot of opportunity for suspense is
lost.
There are also some unanswered questions concerning the incongruous
behavior of various characters. What does Captain Everton stand to gain
from his actions? Why would a special forces expert become hysterical
when all the civilians are calm? These actions don't make sense.
Suspense is when you know a character well enough to see that his
personality is going to put him in big trouble with the upcoming
situation he doesn't know about. But when characters act unbelievably,
some of that juicy anticipation is lost.
In short, it's fun watching the cast of VIRUS ham it up, and there are
plenty of high tech booms and bangs in this movie for amusement. But
VIRUS could be much better with a healthy dose of basic suspense.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Matt Williams
You always have to be careful with the initial releases of any calendar
year. January is a traditional dumping ground in which the studios
release films that they don't believe are good enough to even merit a
shot at getting awards, nor entertaining enough to benefit from the
high-traffic holiday box office.  Such a film this year is Virus, a high
tech zombie movie that resembles, in more ways than one, last year's
January-release: Deep Rising.  Both are sci-fi thrillers set aboard a
boat.  And both deserve to be sunk as quickly as possible.
In Virus, Jamie Lee Curtis stars as Kelly Foster, the navigator of the
Sea Star, a tugboat under the command of Captain Everton (Donald
Sutherland), who (at some point before the movie starts) has gone
completely mad.  It's up to Foster and the ship's engineer Steve Baker
(William Baldwin) to keep the tug in one piece. Everton has led the ship
into the middle of a typhoon, where they encounter something
mysterious:  an abandoned Russian scientific vessel.
Upon exploring the derelict ship, the crew of the Sea Star discover
plenty of unusual phenomena.  The entire Russian crew is missing (except
for plenty of bloodstains here and there), there is evidence of gunfire
throughout the ship, and many systems have been smashed or otherwise
destroyed.
But that is only the beginning, as the crew of the Sea Star are about to
find out.  An energy-based life form from outer space has inhabited the
ship's computers.  It controls all the ship's systems, and is building
cyborg robots to further its control.  The alien considers human life to
be a noxious virus that must be eliminated (though in a way that will
provide plenty of spare parts for the next cyborg...).
It is in this way that, you can be certain, everyone who dies will be
back as a bad guy later in the film.  The film never explains why the
alien life form even bothers creating these cyborgs.  It is not as if
they are more powerful than the purely robotic creations.  Nor do they
seem more efficient or more intelligent.  Perhaps they were created out
of boredom (there's certainly enough of that in this movie).
Virus falls into the same trap as many sci-fi horror films.  It's full
of seemingly smart characters who do extremely stupid things.  (Hmmm...
an abandoned ship in the middle of a typhoon, filled with blood and
signs of violence?  Let's split up and wander aimlessly through the dark
corridors...)
The actors in Virus aren't given much to work with, and they don't give
a lot in return.  Donald Sutherland's campy performance (with a
mumble-mouthed on-again, off-again accent) may qualify as the worst in
the film...but at least he was trying something different.  Jamie Lee
Curtis and William Baldwin simply stroll through the film with nary an
ounce of effort.
The robot designs in Virus are halfway interesting, and the high point
of the film.  But, they're hardly worth wading through the rest of the
film just to see.  Very few things would be...
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
DeWyNGaLe
On August 14th, 1998, Virus was supposed to be released.  Six months later it
was finally released in theaters.  I hoped in this six months time, they
improved the quality of the movie, but unfortunately, I wasn't impressed.  The
cast is great, the plot is original, and the setting isn't really all that bad.
 If a little more effort and time was put into Virus, it really could have been
good.  It may be another action flick on a boat, but it isn't the worst of
them.  William Baldwin, Jamie Lee Curtis, and Donald Sutherland star.  When a
mysterious force takes over a satellite in space, everything is killed.  It
travels through the computers, controlling them.  The remains of the satellite
plummet into a ship directly below it on earth.  The ship is wiped out by this
"virus", as it travels along.
An American ship containing a crew of researchers finds this ship.  The crew
contains Steve, played by William Baldwin, Foster, played by Jamie Lee Curtis,
Captain Everton, played by Donald Sutherland, Richie, played by Sherman
Augustus, Woods, played by Marshall Bell, Hiko, played by Cliff Curits, and
Squeaky, played by Julio Oscar Mechoso.  Their boat is sinking, so they must
board the Russian ship that they see.  They board the ship and find everything
to be destroyed.  They become scared when they find blood covering the walls. 
Strange things start going on on the ship.  Little robot creatures that walk
are abducting the cast one by one.  The critters use their bodies to walk and
talk and kill.  The survivors find out that the aliens are trying to start a
new species on earth, and they need humans and electricity to operate.  They
want to take over earth. 
The crew goes through a lot to try to stop this form of life.  They find a
survivor from when the ship was taken over by the life form.  Her name is
Nadia, played by Joanna Pacula.  She explains to the crew what is going on and
how all this came to be.  She explains the life form to them and tells them
what happened when the species took over the ship.  She is much help to them,
and she tries her best to tell them what is going on.  They must sink the ship
to get rid of them all.  They plan on detonating the ship to sink it, but the
aliens discover the plan and destroy the detonator.  More twists and turns
arise, but Virus pretty much sticks on one thing for way too long.  Not many
things go on during Virus, which makes it boring to watch.
The thing that kept Virus from becoming good was the acting.  William Baldwin
and Donald Sutherland do pathetic jobs of acting.  The acting was fake, and you
could tell they were acting.  You couldn't believe their roles at all.  They
didn't let you feel the terror that they were going through unlike Jamie Lee
Curtis did.  Sherman Augustus also did a good job of acting.  Richie was the
only character that I cared lived or not.  Most of the characters are
underdeveloped and unlikable.  Another thing that was bad about Virus was the
fact that it was extremely predictable.  I could tell what was going to happen
at every moment.
It may sound like I hated Virus, but there was a bright side.  The concept was
very good, and it could have gone a long way with a better cast.  The special
effects were great.  They looked very realistic, and it seemed like they
weren't even produced by computers.  The aliens look very realistic and creepy.
 Some of the concepts may be extremely unoriginal, but all in all the alien
concept was pretty good.  Virus could have been great, but it turned out to be
another pointless horror/sci-fi movie.
The Bottom Line- Special effects aren't everything.   

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: John Bruno
Cast: Jamie Lee Curtis, William Baldwin, Donald Sutherland
Screenplay: Dennis Feldman, Jonathan Hensleigh
Producers: Gale Anne Hurd, Mike Richardson
Runtime: 
US Distribution: Universal
Rated R: sci-fi violence/gore, language
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
The most interesting thing about Virus is that the title of the film
does not refer to the clunky robotic animals that try to kill our
heroes.  Alas, it refers to our heroes!  As it turns out, the alien race
that sends a computer virus to earth (via the Mir space station) thinks
of the human race as a virus -- perhaps even a cancer -- that needs to
be eradicated before it spreads any further.  After all, we have taken
up this entire planet, and if they let us live for another billion years
or so, we might advance beyond our solar system and into the next one.
But the human race doesn't have much to worry about.  After all,
there's a woman named Foster (Jamie Lee Curtis) out there stopping the
computer virus.  She's the chief navigator on a sea vessel; travelling
with her is Captain Everton (Donald Sutherland), Steve Baker (William
Baldwin), Woods (Marshall Bell), Squeaky (Julio Oscar Mechoso), and
Richie (Sherman Augustus).  They're all sailing in a typhoon one lovely
evening when they stumble across an enormous, abandoned Russian
satellite ship in international waters.  Lucky for us, we already saw
that the computer virus has taken over the ship and eliminated everyone
on board.
The evil Captain Everton thinks he's going to take the ship in and get
a reward; he convinces his crew that there's going to be big money, so
they try to salvage the ship.  Soon, however, when it's apparent that no
one is on board and that the ship has no power, they realize that
something bad must have happened.  Finally, they meet Nadia (Joanna
Pacula) who explains their situation:  a computer virus has taken over
the ship!  It's creating bio-mechanical life-forms to eliminate the
human race!
Virus is a truly dumb action thriller, one of negligible intelligence
and innovation.  When considering the entire film, you will realize that
it lacks a single original scene.  It's a direct rip-off of nearly every
James Cameron film (Aliens, The Abyss, and the Terminator films are the
most plagiarized); more importantly, it's basically the same movie as
last year's Deep Rising.  I liked Deep Rising simply because it's funny
-- it knows it's silly and derivative.  Virus takes itself seriously. 
And, in the most serious manner possible, it steals from every good and
bad film of the genre, showing you countless familiar scenes, and
sporting a cookie-cutter plot that any film of the sci-fi/horror genre
could fit with a little trimming.
But what is so amazing about Virus is how poorly the whole thing has
been thought out.  Okay, let me get this straight -- the alien race
(which is never really explained) is basically sentient electricity. 
They need to make themselves physical, so they use a space station to
get onto a ship (which is surrounded by water, but who cares about
that).  On the ship, they make a bunch of clunky, immobile robots that
somehow kill three hundred people.  After that, they start using the
dead people to create half-human, half-machine creatures that look like
the Terminator but are much worse at walking around.  
The leader, of course, is a big creature.  Every film like this has a
big creature at the end, but the big creature in Virus is so big that it
has to tear down the walls to move around.  Virus is indeed a cliched
film, but the central flaw lies in the fact that the computer virus just
isn't very threatening.  It's established that they can simply turn off
the power to stop it, but the virus has sealed the power room by the
time our heroes get there.  
On one level, Virus is almost passable fun.  It's really gory, and a
few of the scenes have interesting camp appeal (the director, John
Bruno, worked on a lot of Cameron's films).  There's also a nice array
of actors, even though none of them do any acting (except for Donald
Sutherland, who does a lot of very bad acting).  The bottom line,
however, is this:  Virus is a bad movie.  It rips off a lot of good
movies that are worth seeing.  In that order, I recommend that you rent
any one of the Alien films, simply to admire the qualities of a creature
that actually threatens our heroes.

Author
Justin Felix
VIRUS (1999)  
A film review by Justin Felix.  
Copyright 1999 Justin Felix.  
This review also appears in the Shrubbery at
http://www.theshrubbery.prohosting.com/0299/movie2.html
All of my film reviews are archived at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix 
Written by Dennis Feldman and Jonathan Hensleigh.  
Based upon the comic book VIRUS by Chuck Pfarrer.  
Directed by John Bruno.  
Starring Jamie Lee Curtis, William Baldwin, and Donald Sutherland.  
Rated R (contains violence, profanity, and excessive gore)  approx. 90 mins.  
Synopsis:  An energy life force from outer space smashes through the Mir
space station and rockets down to a huge Soviet ship.  A week later, a
sinking salvage boat named the Sea Star trapped in the eye of a typhoon
encounters the Soviet ship.  The Sea Star's ragtag crew boards the Soviet
vessel and discovers the alien life force is creating biomechanical
lifeforms with spare parts from machines and people.
Comments:  So, what do you get when you mix ALIEN, THE ABYSS, LEVIATHAN,
DEEP RISING, SCREAMERS, TERMINATOR, and STAR TREK: FIRST CONTACT with just a
touch of HALLOWEEN in a blender (if mixing movies in a blender were, indeed,
possible)?  Well, you'd get VIRUS, Universal's much delayed new sci-fi
thriller.  This film, to the best of my recollection, was supposed to come
out in August, but someone in the studio was nervous about having two horror
films starring Jamie Lee Curtis come out at nearly the same time.
(Dimension's HALLOWEEN: H20 was released around that time.)  So, Universal
opted to bury the movie in mid-January among several high-quality Oscar
contenders and romances for upcoming Valentine's Day.  Smart.  Those of us
who want to see this movie, me for instance, have to battle knee-high snow
drifts and frozen car doors just to get to the local theater.  Winter season
in Ohio, like most of the Northeast, has been especially cruel this year.  
Nonetheless, I managed to get out to see VIRUS on opening night, and I'm
glad I did.  Though by far not an original movie, VIRUS contains enough cool
special effects for its audience to overlook its many inherent flaws.  One
of these flaws, as you may well deduce from my opening comment, is that
VIRUS "borrows" heavily from many other sci-films.  The basic plot comes
directly from ALIEN.  This plot has been used, to varying degrees of
effectiveness, in countless motion pictures.  Basically, the screenwriter
puts a group of people on a ship, or some other isolated area, and has them
hunted by some sort of alien or monster.  Usually, this creature kills all
but one or two of the crew, and this (these) survivor(s) kill(s) the
creature in the end.  The creature in VIRUS is an
alien-energy-life-form-thingie creating all sorts of different biomechanical
monsters to terrorize the crew of the doomed Sea Star.  You'll recognize
these creations right away if you're a sci-fi fan.  Tiny mechanical spiders
from RUNAWAY.  Human-sized Borg people from STAR TREK: FIRST CONTACT.  Etc.  
To be honest, this creative "borrowing" really didn't bother me all that
much.  They say it's hard to be original.  I don't know.  Technically,
though, the special effects in this film are surprisingly effective.  Some
may not like them because they are, at times, quite gruesome, but most will
probably get a kick out of them like my brother and I did.  Besides, certain
parts of this movie are so absurd that they lend enough disbelief to counter
any real disgust one may get from seeing dismembered body parts and the like.  
The actors in VIRUS do a lot to offset any genuine terror the movie may
engender.  Donald Sutherland, a longtime character actor who has appeared in
such classic sci-fi films as INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS and PUPPET
MASTERS, is ridiculously over-the-top as the Sea Star's greedy captain.  One
set of lines he delivered halfway through the film had the entire theater
laughing; it was *that* cheesy.  William Baldwin plays the male lead.  Is it
just me, or does Billy Baldwin seem like an actor you just can't take
seriously?  He almost always looks goofily perplexed.  One of the minor
characters tried to play the best Queequeg he could (someone put tattoos
over his face to make him look even more like the harpooner from MOBY DICK).
Only Jamie Lee Curtis is really convincing here.  Curtis is an accomplished
actress capable of many genres.  She can do comedy, action, and drama
equally well.  But, first and foremost in my mind, Curtis is a horror
actress, the Scream Queen.  She had her start in such early slasher films as
TERROR TRAIN, PROM NIGHT, and the quintessential slice-and-dice classic
HALLOWEEN.  She was also quite memorable in John Carpenter's overlooked
atmospheric ghost story THE FOG.  It's good to see her back in her element
again.  In VIRUS, she first seems to assume a Ripley-like (the heroine of
the ALIEN saga) character, but, surprisingly, she doesn't stay "tough"
through the movie.  Instead, she becomes so terrified as to be nearly
paralyzed.  Nobody can pull this off better than Curtis.  She was perfect as
the threatened babysitter in the original HALLOWEEN, and she pulls off the
scared-out-of-her-wits female lead without the camp the other actors put
into their roles.  
Overall, VIRUS is an entertaining sci-fi thriller which makes for a pretty
good Saturday afternoon matinee feature.  Fans of the genre will pick up on
a number of the sources for the creatures and storyline, but they'll still
enjoy it.  What variation of the same theme will Hollywood churn out next?
Let's hope it's even better than this.  VIRUS, after all, is a huge step
above the insipid DEEP RISING, last winter's
horror-on-a-huge-ship-floating-in-the-middle-of-nowhere movie.
VIRUS is rated R for a lot of violence and gore sequences.  It gets pretty
intense at times, so I wouldn't recommend parents taking the youngsters to it.  
