Title
Review for Paragraph 175 (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/61643a1b84f35f7c88256936001fa860?OpenDocument
There have been hundreds of Holocaust documentaries in our time, and
Paragraph 175 is certainly one of them. The new angle here is that, for
what may be the first time, homosexual survivors of the Holocaust
atrocities have come forward-some hesitantly-to tell their stories. The
problem, shameful as it is to admit, is that the flood of Holocaust
documentaries that came before have stripped this film of its potential
fire and intensity. From beginning to end, I caught myself thinking,
"Yes, these are horrible stories. Now tell me something new." And that
something never came.
The film gets its title from Paragraph 175 of the German Penal Code of
1871, which states, "An unnatural sex act committed between persons of
male sex or by humans with animals is punishable by imprisonment; the
loss of civil rights may also be imposed." According to the film, this
law was later modified by the Nazi party to include a broader definition
of homosexuality and, of course, the loss of civil rights was uniformly
imposed. It was finally abolished in 1969.
For obvious reasons, Paragraph 175 might be called a groundbreaking
documentary. It is, for example, a rare examination of Nazi-era
homosexuality (like Cabaret without the singing). The direct,
charismatic subjects of Dr. Klaus Müller's interviews (most of whom are
in their 90's) display a degree of comfort in their own sexuality that
is disarming and fresh. The film does great credit to the world's gay
communities in that it exposes a deep and joyous human spirit within the
men it introduces. And, within that spirit, there is sorrow and shame.
The shame of these victims lies not in their sexual preferences, but in
the horrible punishments they endured. One man reveals in a trembling
voice that his ass still bleeds from the tortures he endured.
It is important that the horrors of the Nazis be documented, but it is
also important that each subsequent film continues to delve to new
depths and challenge the revelations of those that came before, lest we
become desensitized to the information itself. Paragraph 175 does take
on relatively fresh subject matter, but it painfully short in the
revelation department. It only corroborates what we already know about
the horrors of that time-and vaguely, too. The narrative, ultimately, is
restrained and impotent.
The salvation of this picture is the humanity it contains. The men we
meet here are vital and smart, reminiscing fondly about their youth, and
morosely about the tragedies they've suffered. And, in the end, it is
their spirit that touches us.
http://www.tellingpictures.com/films/5.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
