Title
Review for Lake Placid (1999)
Number of Reviews
26

Author
Kent Johnson
Of all the films in which TV shows have graduated to the big screen,
this left-handed spinoff of ALLY McBEAL, which might be better entitled
ALLY GOES TO THE LAKE, has to be the oddest.  The film is written by
ALLY McBEAL writer/producer David Kelley and the premise is, What would
happen if Ally, that neurotic, abrasive city girl (here a paleontologist
rather than a lawyer and named Kelly [sounds like "Ally" and is also the
writer's last name...]) had to camp out in the woods and interact with
the local sherrif, game warden and an eccentric millionaire mythology
professor?  Kelly is played by Bridget Fonda, who acts like and is
costumed to look like Ally McBeal.  While Bridget was very good and very
sexy, one wonders why the part wasn't played by Callista Flockhart.
(The possible answer is that Fonda was Kelley's first choice for the
Ally McBeal TV series, but she turned it down in order to stick with
feature films, so this was his chance to have her play the role.)
Oliver Platt (who was Kelley's first choice for the lead in THE
PRACTICE, but also turned it down to stick with feature films) is
excellent as the eccentric millionaire mythology professor and Brendan
Gleeson (I WENT DOWN, THE GENERAL) and Bill Pullman are very good as,
respectively, the sheriff and the game warden.
LAKE PLACID reminds me of the Dashiell Hammet novel THE THIN MAN, in
that while ostensibly a mystery novel, the mystery is actually the least
interesting part of the book.  The interaction between the characters
Nick and Nora is the interesting part and the mystery actually
interrupts it -- yet, the mystery is the hook that gets the reader to
pick up the novel in the first place.
In LAKE PLACID, ostensibly a monster movie, the interesting part is the
witty sniping between the four disparate main characters.  The dialogue
is artificial and not very believable, but it's clever, original and
hilarious.  The crocodile hunt, the excuse for these characters to be
together in the first place and the hook that gets the viewer into the
theatre, is actually the least interesting part of the film.  In fact,
once the characters know what they're up against, it's obvious that the
croc is outmatched unless the characters behave stupidly.  The beginning
and particularly the middle of the film, the parts with the most
character conflict, are the most entertaining.  The film cools down
rapidly in the last third when it has to concentrate on the croc hunt
and character reconciliation.  Since it's only OK as a monster movie,
some viewers may be disappointed, but those who can appreciate witty,
well-written comedy will enjoy it tremendously.
Sample dialog (paraphrased from memory):
[The professor is setting traps which the local sheriff objects to]
Professor [yelling]:
"These traps might just save your life and you should be concerned about
saving your life because it will give you that much more time to fuck
your sister!"
Note:  The characters don't know what they're up against until the
middle of the film and the theatrical trailers were similarly designed
to give no hint of what the monster might be.  The film might have been
more effective if viewers had gone in without that knowledge, but of
course the two-month barrage of giant croc TV ads (which the characters
in the film somehow incredibly managed to miss) spoiled any chance of
that.
David Kelley's next projects are the movie MYSTERY, ALASKA and the
private eye TV series SNOOPS, starring Gina Gershon.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Bridget Fonda, Bill Pullman, Oliver Platt, Brendan Gleeson, Betty
White
Synopsis: 
Paleontologist Kelly (Bridget Fonda) goes to Maine to investigate an animal
attack and meets up with Jack (Bill Pullman) from the Fish and Game
Service, Sheriff Keough (Brendan Gleeson) and eccentric mythology
professor, Hector Cyr (Oliver Platt). The heroes discover that a 30-foot
man-eating crocodile is the culprit and decide they must catch it.
Meanwhile old Mrs. Bickerman (Betty White) is rooting for the reptile. 
Opinion:
As reptiles, crocs don't have the metabolism to be insatiably hungry (they
get hungry only once every two weeks). And fatal hippo attacks outnumber
croc attacks in Africa. Like many scary beasts, crocs are an endangered
species, having been terrorized by that scariest animal of all, the modern
human. So LAKE PLACID wasn't meant to be realistic.
Not really a horror flick but a campy satire LAKE PLACID has its humor. I
had heard LAKE PLACID was about a giant alligator (a corruption of the
Spanish word el largato) in Black Lake, so I envisioned a 1950s B-grade
black and white flick where privileged folks with scientific gear and names
like Kay and Mark and Sheriff run around a lagoon trying to capture a
mysterious menace while superstitious locals fearfully look on. 
LAKE PLACID does the same kind of envisioning, if only to poke fun at old
B-movies. The camera introduces a beaver with JAWS-type music. Then Kelly,
Jack, Hector and Sheriff are cast as terribly sardonic and satirical people
who think every one else is a weirdo. They approach the adventure as if it
is a sarcasm contest. And instead of terrified villagers, Betty White shows
up as a snide and foul-mouthed local who is rooting against the authorities
and for the crocodile. Everyone in the movie is sarcastic. It's good for a
chuckle or two.
The movie characters can't fathom why a 30-foot saltwater crocodile would
be living in a cold lake in Maine because salties are warm water animals.
But who knows? Salties in Australia and Indonesia get past 20 feet, live to
a hundred years, and swim across oceans. As evolutionary survivors crocs
have been around as long as the dinosaurs, having endured cataclysms that
killed off the dinosaurs and later cataclysms that killed off large
prehistoric mammals such as woolly mammoths and sabre-toothed tigers. Maybe
Betty White wasn't rooting for the losing side.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Steve Miner.
Cast: Bridget Fonda, Bill Pullman, Oliver Platt, Brendan Gleeson, Betty 
White, Meredith Salenger, Mariska Hargitay.
1999 - 82 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, blood, and profanity).
Reviewed July 18, 1999.
"Lake Placid," plain and simple, is a sorry excuse for a 
"creature-in-the-water" movie, even on the basis of the cliched subgenre. 
Most of the fault has to be put on director Steve Miner who, for reasons 
unknown, insists on making each of his movies ridiculously and shamefully 
short (this is also what severely hurt the otherwise stylish, suspenseful, 
84-minute "Halloween: H20"). Perhaps Miner just wants the audience to think 
his films are fast-paced and exciting, which they may be, but I have extra 
news for him: they also come off feeling utterly empty and leave a negative 
taste in your mouth. Having to spend approximately $7.75 on a movie ticket 
doesn't help matters, either.
Here's the deal: when a scuba diver is torn in half within a small Maine 
lake, New York paleontologist Kelly Scott (Bridget Fonda), whose boyfriend 
(an unbilled Adam Arkin) has just broken up with her, is assigned to travel 
down to the lake and examine the tooth that was found on the corpse's body. 
Once down there, she meets up with game warden Jack Wells (Bill Pullman), 
mythology professor Hector Cyr (Oliver Platt), and two county sheriffs 
(Brendan Gleeson, Meredith Salenger) to investigate the death. They soon 
discover the culprit is a giant, 30-foot-long crocodile that has leaked in 
from the ocean (yeah, right!), and that casually is able to eat large bears 
and cattle without a moment's thought. 
"Lake Placid" is dumb filmmaking. If it wasn't for David E. Kelley's 
surprisingly snappy dialogue within the otherwise haphazard screenplay, the 
movie would be a complete misfire. As is, the film not only is short, but it 
is cheap-looking, despite its $30-million price tag. Although the animatronic 
crocodile is somewhat realistic, the computer-generated shots are beyond 
cheesy (as they were in 1997's similar, but superior, "Anaconda"), and 
practically the whole film seems to be set in the same exact area of woods 
right beside the lake. Due to the length, and just as the case was with 
"Halloween: H20," there is a first-act and then it rapidly switched to the 
third-act. My question to Miner and perhaps Kelley is, "didn't anyone tell 
you that there is supposed to be a second act leading up to the climax?"
In the true bottom-of-the-barrell horror vein, "Lake Placid" portrays a group 
of dimwitted characters who do the most stupid things at the most dire times, 
such as scuba diving even while knowing that there is a vicious crocodile 
lurking about, or running into the water to get away from the reptile! These 
sorts of genre tactics usually can slide by with me just because I get a sick 
satisfaction watching people being stalked by someone and/or something, but 
the film isn't the least bit scary, or even suspenseful. Not once was I able 
to not predict when the crocodile was going to pop out of the water, and all 
of the big action scenes (there aren't many to begin with) were shown in the 
trailers. To top things off, not only are the human characters written below 
normal intelligence, but so is the crocodile who, in one scene, stares at its 
potential food but waits until the person is safe before it attempts to 
attack. 
In the acting department, Bridget Fonda is feisty and resourceful, if a bit 
of a whiner, as the strong-willed heroine, and former- "Golden Girl" Betty 
White is a scene-stealer as elderly farmer Delores Bickerman, who feeds her 
cattle to the crocodile on a regular basis and recites obscene lines of 
dialogue such as, "If I had a dick, I'd show you where to suck it." 
Meanwhile, Bill Pullman is the token potential love interest of Fonda's, 
Brendan Gleeson plays his bumbling sheriff character to a hilt, and Oliver 
Platt often overacts to the point of annoyance, but garners one or two 
laughs. Meredith Salenger, who made a splash in the '80s with such films as 
"The Journey of Natty Gann" and "Dream a Little Dream," returns after a 
sizable big-screen absense with the thankless, thoroughly one-dimensional 
role of another sheriff, and based on her strong performances in the past, 
she deserves far better.
The only thing "Lake Placid" ultimately has going for it is its witty 
dialogue. The premise is old-hat by now and, coincidentally, is stunningly 
close to 1982's fellow horror-comedy, "Alligator." It may tickle your funny 
bone now and again, but not for long periods at a time, and on the same 
weekend in which the terrifying masterpiece, "The Blair Witch Project," goes 
into limited release, the only thing horrific about "Lake Placid" is that 
director Miner actually thought he was making a good movie.
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
        Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
In Lake Placid staying alive is easier than you'd think, with a 35 ft.
crocodile prowling the waters. All you have to do is talk: none of the
characters with significant dialogue are killed, though they sorely need to
be. Viewers sometimes bemoan the conventions of the horror- movie--all the
little faux pas you can make that get you dispatched: investigating noises,
having sex, refusing to see the 'truth,' separating yourself from the group,
etc. Just as distressing, though, is when there's no justice at all, when
those genre-taboos are breached and the transgressor doesn't get his or her
desserts. This is Lake Placid, set in King-country, where the ecosystem's
been seriously thrown out of whack by a crocodile big enough to take a
grizzly bear out in one bite. What's a grizzly doing in Maine? It doesn't
matter. There's crocodiles too. The lake isn't even called Lake Placid.
It all starts with the embittered sheriff (Brendan Gleeson) trading quips
with a scuba-geared ecologist, setting the bickering tone for the rest of
the movie. Yes this ecologist dies and dies ugly. Yes, a tooth is recovered
from his corpse which effortlessly attracts another game warden-type (Bill
Pullman), a museum curator running away from a broken relationship in the
city (Bridget Fonda), and one Hector Cyr (Oliver Platt), croc specialist
extrordinaire. The sheriff is already there, grumbling in place, acting as
reluctant guide. Not a bad opening sequence, all in all, and the group
dynamic Steve Miner (everything from Wonder Years to H20) kickstarts is
distracting enough that when the crocodile finally begins snatching the
supporting cast away, it initially catches us off guard. However, this group
dynamic is also what pulls the movie down for the death roll: all the
one-liners incessantly traded back and forth about the city, the country,
the bugs, men women and love, etc, finally just get in the way, or, only
succeed in establishing the movie firmly enough on land that the crocodile,
for all it's technical splendor and appetite for expendable crewmen, is
upstaged.
In addition to these four core characters there's a little old lady who
lives on the lake, makes cooing sounds to herself, and has a soft spot for
the crocodile and a little dab of profanity for everyone else. Typically,
she'd be the token comic foil for the movie, rounding it out, but in Lake
Placid, slapstick is already part of camp life. Brendan Gleeson's sheriff
falls into every crocodile trap Hector Cyr sets. Which isn't their only
point of contention: while the sheriff wants to kill the beast, Cyr wants to
swim with it. It's a mystical thing with him. Soon enough everyone has to
take sides, switch sides, sit on the fence, all that.
Which is to say we're not in the water. Which is to say we never get the
sense that these characters are in any real danger. Who would deliver their
lines if they were dead?
On the plus side, there is an animatronic cow suspended from a helicopter,
as well as a surprise at the big kill scene. Think Anaconda, but don't
accidentally compare the two. In Anaconda people die, suggesting that the
monster might actually win this time. Lake Placid doesn't even flirt with
that. We root for the croc not because of the amount of meat it can grind
per frame, but because, when pitted against the seeming invulnerability of a
good-natured crew in the vital process of bonding, it's the underdog.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones
for more like this, check out http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        The first preview for "Lake Placid," cleverly edited so that you
weren't exactly sure what kind of large creature was terrorizing a
wonderful cast of Bill Pullman, Bridget Fonda, Oliver Platt, and Brendan
Gleeson, gave me reasonably high hopes that this might be one of the
summer's better creature features.  But soon the print ads were ablaze with
words like "funny" and "witty," words that made me nervous.
        As it turns out, "Lake Placid" works much better as a comedy than
it does a horror flick, and that's the biggest surprise here.  In fact,
it's often extremely funny, and credit has to go to writer David E. Kelley
(creator of "Ally McBeal"), director Steve Miner (who's come a long way
since cutting his teeth on a couple of early--and very unfunny--"Friday the
13th" movies), and that afore-mentioned foursome of terrifically able
performers.  I've said it twice now but I'll say it again: this is a *very*
nicely cast movie.
        Although all four play stereotypical characters, the acting is at
such a level that each of the archetypes work.
        Gleeson, the least familiar of the four (he was in the little-seen
indie hit "I Went Down" and, more recently, in John Boorman's "The
General"), is first on the scene, chaperoning a beaver-tagging diver in a
Maine lake.  His Sheriff Keough is sensitive to sarcasm and a little bit
slow on the uptake.  Anyway, something attacks the lone swimmer and
Gleeson's character winds up pulling him into the boat and finding him half
the man he used to be.  Gross-out scene #1.
        They call in Jack Wells from Fish and Game (Pullman) and he's soon
joined by big city paleontologist Kelly Scott (Fonda), who doesn't want to
be there.  Kelly is an Emily Post-type who sprays Raid about her person and
is shocked to hear that there aren't any toilets.  Jack doesn't want her
there either so you know they'll wind up sharing a tent and, perhaps, a
toothy encounter or two.
        Finally, expert tracker/millionaire Hector Cyr (Platt) shows
up--and *nobody* wants him there--but he suspects they're dealing with a
30-foot migratory crocodile and he knows a thing or two about catching
them.  Not soon after, something tips over their boat and it's gross-out
scene #2.  That's pretty much it for the gross-out scenes, unless you count
a severed head and an amputated toe, each crawling with worms.  The latter
elicits a dialogue that best exemplifies the kind of humor found in this
movie.  "Is this your deputy?" asks Hector, offering the detached appendage
to Sheriff Keough.  "He was taller..." gulps Keough with a delightful
deadpan.  Platt is hysterical, with Gleeson ever his match.
        Turns out it *is* a croc ('odile, that is), and it's pretty
convincing looking in the water.  However, Stan Winston ("Jurassic Park")
must have worked on this film during his lunch break, because the
larger-than-life reptile is not very realistic once it gets up on land, and
two shock scenes of the beast attacking on terra firma are quite obviously
computer generated.
        Fortunately, there's humor to spare in a film that doesn't even
pretend to be another "Jaws" (that dishonor goes to Renny Harlin's "Deep
Blue Sea," due out at the end of the month).  No, "Lake Placid" is a
different fish altogether.  It's got it's scary moments, that's for sure.
And it's got a few gory scenes.  But best of all it's got Pullman, Fonda,
Platt, and Gleeson and it's very, very funny.

Author
Eugene Novikov
"I didn't know crocodiles could swim across oceans!"
"Of course not! That information is concealed in books!"
Starring Bill Pullman, Bridget Fonda, Oliver Platt, Brendan Gleeson,
Betty White. Rated R.
I believe it was Wes Craven who first had the brilliant idea to combine
horror and comedy with A Nightmare on Elm Street back in 1984. The
obligatory gruesome killer no longer had to glumly and wordlessly chase
his victims. Craven's butt-ugly and imposingly menacing Freddy Krueger
didn't just turn unlucky teenagers into a bloody pulp, the bastard
spewed wisecracks as well.
Since then, the horror-comedy genre has become quite popular, with its
most notable success being the glorious Scream series: two (so far)
witty, scary and nearly parodic slasher films that have built a
remarkable fan base. So it's only fitting and, quite frankly,
inevitable, that Hollywood's best and brightest wind up experimenting
with this lucrative hybrid. David E. Kelley, the writer and creator of
such tv smash hits as Ally McBeal and The Practice takes a stab at it as
the screenwriter of Lake Placid, a snappy (no pun intended) and witty
but not scary variation on Jaws.
Delivering one-liners is an artform and few do it with more panache then
Oliver Platt, one of the stars in this flamboyant creature-feature about
a gigantic crocodile that preys on those unfortunate enough to boat or
dive in Lake Placid, Maine. Investigating the vicious reptile are a slow
but lovable small-town sheriff (Brendan Gleeson), a cocky official from
Fish and Game (Bill Pullman), a pretty lady from the New York Museum of
Natural History (Bridget Fonda) and a filthy rich eccentric who worships
crocodiles (Platt). The four of them seem to bite off more than they can
chew when they get up close and personal with the crocodile in order to
learn more about how it got all the way to Maine.
When it is clear that they are dealing with a very dangerous and an even
more aggressive animal, the characters wage a cinematically familiar
battle: do they kill the thing or do they try to trap it? The latter
choice is clearly more humane and is preferred by the museum gal and the
croc-worshipper while the other two characters would rather take the
more sure-fire approach. It's a shame that instead of making a choice
writer Kelley and director Steve Miner manage to have their cake and eat
it too with a throwaway, ludicrous plot twist.
At its best, Lake Placid is enjoyable nonsense. It has some wonderful
lines ("Had any bear attacks recently?" "Bears don't attack people
underwater." "Probably a beaver then.") and has some fun with its
crocodile premise, but it's inconceivable to brand the movie as "good".
The main problem, as I see it, is that while the wisecracks that the
characters lambast each other with are admittedly funny, the plot itself
takes a back seat to them. The film moves from one sarcastic one-liner
to the next with no consideration for its pacing or its storyline.
To the film's credit, the crocodiles look good (although I wish we'd
seen some beavers) and we do see some nifty shots of heads being bitten
off and severed toes lying on the ground. Then again with state of the
art technology at every clown's fingertips seamless special effects tend
to no longer come as a surprise (although I must admit I was taken aback
by the caliber of what I saw in What Dreams May Come). That's very
unfortunate because for the avid moviegoer, films that inspire a genuine
feeling of awe and amazement like Jurassic Park did when it was first
released are becoming increasingly difficult to come by.
I really liked Brendan Gleeson as the sheriff: he is funny, refreshingly
self-deprecating and a hell of a lot of fun to watch. I similarly
enjoyed Oliver Platt who took a break from being exclusively a character
actor (and he's a terrific character actor too) to star in a movie
that's trashy fun and give a performance that fits the same description.
On the other hand Bridget Fonda and Bill Pullman constantly come off as
either annoying or flat and I was surprised to see such inept
performances from such accomplished thespians.
There's nothing wrong with enjoying a movie like this as long as you
don't heap any undue praise onto it. It's not a cinematic
accomplishment. It's not a great film or even a good one. It can,
however, be fun: if one is in the mood for a campy monster movie rather
than, say, a moving character study.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Yes, it's true.  The right cast can save what would otherwise be an
awful movie.  Steve Miner's LAKE PLACID is living proof.
Think about it.  A horror movie about a killer crocodile who
mysteriously shows up in a lake in Maine and starts noshing on the
locals.  Does that or does that not sound like an instant candidate for
your list of the worst movies of the year?  Well, it isn't.
A horror movie that's proud to be a parody, LAKE PLACID doesn't have a
pretentious bone in its body.  The talented cast never makes the mistake
of taking the movie seriously, and David E. Kelley's biting script is
filled with deliciously sarcastic humor.  LAKE PLACID is the type of
movie that the supercilious THE HAUNTING should have been.
When we first see the lake in Maine that would have been called Lake
Placid (that name was already taken), Sheriff Hank Keogh (Brendan
Gleeson) is busy listening to music in his boat as a scuba diver works
below.  Something attacks the diver, but he can't get the sheriff's
attention.  By the time the sheriff pulls him in, he finds that
something has completely eaten off the bottom half of the diver.
Since there is a crocodile tooth left in the deceased, someone calls the
big museum in New York.  Of course, they send a paleontologist, Kelly
Scott, to investigate.  Crocodiles are closely related to the dinosaurs,
you see.
(We just got back from Australia, where we stayed at a cabin near a
lagoon where until recently a large crocodile lived, so the movie had a
certain resonance.  We also learned some crocodile facts, like the way
they never kill large game by eating them.  Instead, they always drag
the victim into the water and drown it first.  Also, they can't run very
far on land, but they can out swim any human in the water.  The movie
ignores all of these facts, but in such a broad comedy it is trivially
easy to suspend disbelief.)
As the big city woman Kelly Scott, Bridget Fonda is great as a woman who
thinks camping out means the Ramada Inn.  She's always worried about the
availability of toilets and the cleanliness of the glasses.  She also
can put people in their place faster than the crocodile can snap its
jaws shut.  "Could you be a little more condescending," she tells the
head of the small investigative mission, Game Warden Jack Wells (Bill
Pullman), when he thinks it's too dangerous for her.  "I don't deal well
with subtlety."
The other delightful highlights of the cast include a rich
crocodile-worshiping mythology professor Hector Cyr (Oliver Platt) and a
foul-mouthed farmer, Mrs. Bickerman (Betty White), who raises cows for
reptilian food.
When they come across a maggot-infested human toe, Hector picks it up.
"Is this the man who was killed?" he asks the sheriff, who despises
Hector.  "Seemed taller," the sheriff replies in his typically laconic
fashion.
Although the movie has a lot of dead spots, there are several large
laughs in it.  My personal favorite occurs when the crocodile attacks
the helicopter.  Perhaps the wisest part of the movie is that it has the
good sense to be very short.
LAKE PLACID runs 1:22.  It is rated R for violent creature attacks and
related gore and for language and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Manchester City Centre)
Released in the UK by Fox on March 31, 2000; certificate 15; 82 minutes; 
country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Steve Miner; produced by David E. Kelley, Michael Pressman.
Written by David E. Kelley.
Photographed by Daryn Okada; edited by Marshall Harvey.
Our brains need a constant level of the chemical dopamine to stay alert. 
That's why people can become addicted to smoking -- nicotine gets them used 
to a dopamine high which their brains have trouble functioning without. I am 
a non-smoker, but now I have found a movie that made me need a cigarette, by 
deadening my brain with its unrelenting dullness.
I would have settled for some popcorn, actually, or even a bag of Jelly 
Babies. Anything to perk me up. But once I'm in the auditorium, the lights go 
down and the film starts, I always stay put. Trapped, in this case. Agonised. 
"Lake Placid" runs only 82 minutes and yet feels interminable. It's one of 
the year's worst films.
It's a monster movie, I guess, although the villain is just a big crocodile 
who rips people to shreds in a large stretch of water in Maine. For no 
significant reason, museum researcher Kelly Scott (Bridget Fonda) is sent by 
her boss to investigate the situation, joining wildlife experts Jack Wells 
(Bill Pullman) and Hector Cyr (Oliver Platt), and grumpy local cop Sheriff 
Keough (Brendan Gleeson).
The plot is a silly routine of people venturing into the water, getting 
munched by the big croc and our heroes solemnly trying to conjure a solution. 
Gleeson snarls over every development with a phoney New England accent. Platt 
makes pathetic wisecracks. And Fonda shrieks and jumps, as attractive airhead 
heroines are supposed to do in cheesy B-pictures such as this.
Steve Miner, the director of the film, and David E. Kelley, who wrote and 
produced, clearly think they've made a movie that is so bad it's good. But 
the untalented men, whose credits include such crap as "Halloween H20" and 
"Ally McBeal", don't have the mastery of tone needed to pull off comedy or 
horror, and so "Lake Placid" is flat and embarrassing. It contains neither 
the silly sincerity that makes cheap horror flicks laughable nor the 
entertaining cheese of films like "Whatever Happened to Harold Smith?", 
because the filmmakers don't have the courage to go over-the-top -- something 
that is absolutely necessary to achieve their goal. Most disastrously, there 
are ironic wisecracks in the dialogue, just to remind us that the film is a 
comedy. It's as if Miner and Kelley knew their general approach wouldn't 
work, and so threw in all the comic material they could think up, just to be 
on the safe side.
Some pathetic writers will give "Lake Placid" positive reviews, just to show 
they know that it's not supposed to be taken seriously. But the film is not 
funny or hip, it's a miserable waste of time. Even its actors look sluggish 
and depressed. Unlike us, they got paid to show up.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Jamie Peck
Rating: **1/2 (out of ****)
20th Century Fox / 1:23 / 1999 / R (language, violence/gore)
Cast: Bridget Fonda; Bill Pullman; Oliver Platt; Brendan Gleeson; Betty
White; Meredith Salinger
Director: Steve Miner
Screenplay: David E. Kelley
The biggest mystery in "Lake Placid" doesn't concern how a 30-foot Asian
crocodile migrated from its native continent to a seaside New England
community, but rather if the David E. Kelley credited with the
screenplay is the same David E. Kelley behind current TV lawyer hits
like "Ally McBeal" and "The Practice." The answer: a surprising yes. If
Kelley's trying to broaden his range and/or media success with this
sassy monster mish-mash, then mission partially accomplished.
While "McBeal"'s skinny Calista Flockhart fends off charges of anorexia
and bulimia, Kelley's Lake lead visibly noshes just fine - on anything
and everything in mouth's reach, in fact. He's the aforementioned
centerpiece of this clownish creature feature, a gargantuan reptile that
attracts the attention of provincial authorities and big city scientists
after leaving one of his chompers in a partially-consumed scuba snack.
All of the diver goes into the water, but only half comes up. This
casualty happens in the opening sequence, which makes obvious the
movie's sly agenda.
Enter "Lake Placid"'s human cast, an attractive crew of underdeveloped
but engaging personalities. Chief among them are Bridget Fonda, a
recently-dumped paleontologist with some amusing neurotic tics, and Bill
Pullman, a fish and game warden not given much in the way of interesting
traits. They team up with the local sheriff ("The General"'s Brendan
Gleeson) and an eccentric mythology expert (the wonderful Oliver Platt)
to investigate their surroundings, and this latter pair's ongoing
rivalry constitutes a great deal of "Lake Placid"'s offbeat enjoyment
factor.
Also present for potential animal nourishment is none other than Betty
White, and the ex-Golden Girl cusses a blue streak as a batty town
resident who isn't afraid to let loose some hilariously profane barbs
when provoked. The mere inclusion of this character further proves that
"Lake Placid" shouldn't be taken at horror-flick face value, but instead
relished as Kelley's mostly successful attempt to invest his trademark
wit and sarcasm in a genre typically associated with only unintentional
humor.
Unfortunately, Kelley doesn't seem to want to script the whole show with
a wink, as evidenced by a throwaway budding romance between Fonda and
Pullman and several other serious sidetracks. "Lake Placid" runs a tight
83 minutes, hardly allowing time for any genuine lulls, but there are
some jarringly uncomfortable tone shifts. Good thing the movie moves at
a clip under the direction of Steve Miner, who, as evidenced in his
"Halloween: H20" last summer, still knows how to both keep tongue firmly
in cheek and stage an effective decapitation.
Of course, the audiences that will turn out for "Lake Placid" could
probably care less about the levels of irony found in this
"Jaws"-with-jokes. They'll want their fill of the film's cold-blooded
main attraction, of which they'll get a satisfying dose: This Stan
Winston-masterminded special effect - all imposing girth, teeth and
stare - is such a nifty sight that many will exit heralding, "What a
croc!" Those unenamored of "Lake Placid" might utter the same - only
with a K on the end of the last word.
Š 1999 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit The Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/
"'20 Dates' tells the story of Myles Berkowitz, a man who wants to make
a film, and to fall in love. These areas are his two greatest failures,
professional and personal,' so he decides to make a film about going out
on 20 dates. By the film's end, he has won the love of the lovely
Elisabeth - maybe - but his professional life is obviously still a
failure." -Roger Ebert on "20 Dates"

Author
Walter Frith
I'm puzzled by the fact that in 1998 the American Film Institute rated the
original 'Jaws' from 1975 #48 on its all time list.  Don't misunderstand.
The ratings were not based just on being the BEST in the minds of those who
rated the list of films involved but included the movies with the biggest
historical impact and cultural significance.  Having gotten that out of the
way, why was 1952's 'Singing in the Rain' #10 all time when the musical in
this day and age has practically dried up and vanished yet we still have
predatory films laced with thrills and humour the way 'Jaws' portrayed its
subject matter.  Heck, in 'Lake Placid' a human head even pops out at you
the way one did from the bottom of the boat in 'Jaws'.
In today's surroundings, you can certainly make a film with gritty special
effects that look realistic enough.  This seems understood already but look
at 1997's 'Anaconda', a film with horribly digitized special effects where
the crop marks on the giant snake stood out so much that you could
practically feel them if you touched the movie screen.  Things have been
cleaned up a lot here.
'Lake Placid' is directed by Steve Miner ('Friday the 13th 2+3').  Miner
tastefully edits his picture here so that the gore is generally quick like a
lightening bolt (perhaps a wee bit longer than that) but he stretches out
the laughs to overlap any squeamish feeling audiences may have about all the
blood and guts.
'Lake Placid' is an end of the century 'Jaws' rip-off in an endearing sort
of way, and the material is dumbfounded and irreverent entertainment that
somehow works.  I suppose you could argue that 83 minutes isn't enough to
justify a ticket price of nearly ten dollars but you will get several laughs
to soften the blow and many of you will like the film's strange brew of
different ingredients.
The film begins in Maine as a small town sheriff named Hank Keough (Brendan
Gleeson) and a diver are out on a black coloured lake and the diver gets
bitten in half below the waist and the investigation begins!  This film has
nothing to do with Lake Placid, New York.  The title is irreverent as they
joke that they wanted to give the lake in question that name but it was
already taken.  A game warden, Jack Wells (Bill Pullman) is called in from
the local area as is paleontologist Kelly Scott (Bridget Fonda) from New
York City.  They are later joined by Hector Cyr (Oliver Platt) who is a
mythology professor who likes and worships the presence of crocodiles.  His
character is thrown into the mix for comic relief and is similar to the Matt
Hooper character portrayed in 'Jaws' by Richard Dreyfuss as the shark
expert.
In typical 'Jaws' like fashion, the crocodile isn't seen right away but much
later on in the film and there isn't much of an explanation as to how one
identified to have Asian origins could end up in a lake in New England.
Despite the gaps in logic, there is plenty of off beat and original humour
penned by David E. Kelley of television's 'The Practice' and Ally McBeal.
One of his characters includes a potty-mouthed Betty White.  Yes, that's
right.  Betty White of 'The Mary Tyler Moore Show' and 'The Golden Girls'.
She plays a widow living on the lake who sort of treats the croc to free
meals made of full living cows and her now deceased husband?
A 30-foot crocodile may seem like a stretch (no pun intended) to believe
they could exist in the type of places they do in this picture but if you
want a good scary picture a bit more effective, look for 1980's 'Alligator'
as it is better and uses Chicago as its setting where a bigger population is
threatened that seems more exciting but 'Lake Placid' is still that form of
entertainment where the 'boing' sound would have matched its goofy but
effective scenes.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Christopher Null
     It's crocodile season, opening the hunting period on an animal that
has been woefully underused in the horror movie litany to date.  But
unlike most horror/thriller pics, this one features a script by David E.
Kelley, best known as the creator of TV's `Ally McBeal.'
     So there's some promise here.  But does this monster movie rise
above recent crap like ANACONDA or JAWS 3-D?  A little.  It's better
than ANACONDA, anyway.
     High concept plot: Giantest crocodile on earth stalks Black Lake
(*not* Lake Placid) in Maine.  When a guy gets eaten, local fish and
game warden (Pullman) and New York paleontologist (Fonda) come to
investigate.  Croc chase ensues, with help from `eccentric millionaire
mythology professor' Platt and local yokel sheriff Gleeson.
     About the only thing that rescues LAKE PLACID from drecksville is
Kelley's flair for sarcastic dialogue, which punctuates just about every
line from the mouth of every character  and is most notably funny
coming from Betty White (local eccentric lake dweller).  But witty
repartee a five-star movie does not make.
     Coming in at about 80 minutes running time, witty repartee does
make for a passable way to spend an hour.  Too bad they couldn't have
just worked this plot into an episode of `Ally McBeal.'
Director: Steve Miner
Producer: David E. Kelley, Michael Pressman
Writer: David E. Kelley
Starring: Bridget Fonda, Bill Pullman, Oliver Platt, Brendan Gleeson,
Betty White
http://www.foxmovies.com/lakeplacid/
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Brandon Herring 
Rated R for violence and gore, and for language.
Starring: Bill Pullman, Oliver Platt, Bridget Fonda.
'Lake Placid' is definately not your typical creature attacking people movie,
ok so maybe it is, but this one is enjoyable, and clever. Actually it comes off
more of a comedy than a horror film. Well the ending is kinda scary, but in
most horror/comedies they are. I will admit that 'Lake Placid' isn't an Oscar
Worthy film, but it does come off as an inventive movie that is original and
funny.
Bridget Fonda plays a palentologist who after finding out her boyfriend is
cheating, is forced to go to Lake Placid and investigate a tooth, after a man
is bit in half. She gets there but really doesn't understand why she is there.
Bill Pullman plays a man also investigating what happened, along with the
sherriff and a rich croc obsessed man, they go out and find what is going on.
What they find though isn't great. A huge and I mean huge crocodile is living
in Lake Placid, over 150 years old, he has migrated here for who knows why. 
They have to fight against the croc and try to trap him so they can study him
and see where he came from. Betty White plays a woman who lives on the shores
of Lake Placid, and well you'll have to see the movie to find out. Her
character is very funny and foul-mouthed, which is surprising to hear Betty
spew words and phrases that are pretty bad, but funny. 
To me the movie came off as a spoof of Jaws. With the opening sequence, and
some others, it is not original and is. When you watch this movie, you
definately notice the smartness and cleverness of it. David E. Kelly who is the
mastermind of The Practice and Ally McBeal, writes this movie with ease and
surprisingly does a great job. The characters have smartmouths, two foul, and
some great one-liners. 
But believe me, don't take 'Lake Placid' too seriously or you won't like it.
But it is a movie that can be enjoyed as a fun 'popcorn' type movie. But I
guess it rates above the 'popcorn' rating. Sit back, watch the movie, laugh,
scream, and whatever you want. Even though the movie is R, and I put violence
and gore. There's really not that much gore, but what there is might seem kinda
gross to some. 'Lake Placid' is a smart, clever, funny, and scary movie that I
enjoyed and I think you will too.
Reviewed: July 21, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Jon Ridge
     "I just have this feeling that everything is completely safe," 
says the local sheriff, late in LAKE PLACID.  I don't think anyone 
in the film, or watching it, would disagree with him
This has got to be one of the worst creature flicks ever, because 
its creature, a giant crocodile, is so terribly lifeless.  Timid, too:  
a character played by Oliver Platt (he's an, um, croc-spert) is swimming 
very slowly backward, away from his subject, the crocodile following 
closely, and never once is there an attack at the opportune time.  Later, 
Bridget Fonda - forgive me, actual character names didn't stick - is 
engaged is some kind of underwater battle (and, BTW, when you finally 
do resurface, maybe be more out of breath so we can at least pretend you 
were down there that long) with the crocodile, as it languorously 
swings open its long jaws just at the potential victim's feet, but only 
tries for the kill once Fonda is safely behind a tree big enough only 
to shroud her tiny frame.  Could she outswim the beast, when we've already 
seen it swiftly lunge ashore and drag both a cow and a bear into the
water?  Not likely.  But, there's a trend:  no actor with star billing 
is killed.  Or, severely injured; not one of them.  Only in the beginning, 
with a diver tagging beaver, and then with a town deputy, do deaths occur.  
Ok - I sound morbid; don't mean to, it's just that with something that moves
as quickly as this crocodile does on land, to have it be so laidback
and non-threatening the rest of the time, namely during confrontations 
with most of the cast, is boring.  Earlier, the Platt character explains 
that freshwater crocs do not usually attack _in_ the water.  So, what about 
the aforementioned diver?  Or, Fonda's narrow escape?
Contradictions in logic aside, LAKE has a pleasant, sunny look, and 
some witty, insult-laden dialogue for Fonda.  All of which is cute, while 
it lasts; you can literally feel the film run out of energy and resources 
and plot, and then all but evaporate from the screen.  100 minutes seems 
like 30, here, because there's nothing going on.  And, every time our
monster makes an appearance, the effect is that of a wet blanket thrown 
over a wet blanket.  It moves too slow, but maybe that's because of it's 
age (150 years, we are told); plus, there was all that swimming from Asia.  
And, when it takes to land, it will thrash about, chomping every which 
direction, but will not make contact.  How unbelievably dull.
     Best line:  hard to choose one more ridiculous than, "Don't throw 
heads at me!"

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Lake Placid" comes along just in time, at the very moment
that we need an antidote for the pretentiously arty horror film
that's oddly scaring its youthful audience, "The Blair Witch
Project."  Where "Blair" is dismaying in its dismal naturalism,
"Lake Placid" is filled with just the right measure of special
effects.  Where "Blair" has dialogue which is lamely
improvised, "Placid" has talk which is clever, witty, sharp,
edgy.   The 30-foot Asian crocodile--which plays the role of a
villain that ultimately evokes a surprisingly sentimental
response in the macho men out to blow its head off--comes
from the remarkably authentic-looking digital effects of its
designer Stan "Aliens, Jurassic Park" Winston.  About the
only thing unbelievable about this refreshing entry into
obligatory summer viewing is that Bridget Fonda's character,
Kelly Scott, is dumped by her boss in favor of a co-worker. 
This may provide director Steve Miner and writer David E.
Kelley with the motivation to get the woman out of her New
York office and into rural Maine.  But only a madman could
even think of jettisoning such an individual whose
rejuvenating features and amusingly caustic repartee would
be cherished by any man in possession of his own wits.
   Except for a brief shot of Manhattan's West Side in the
opening sequence, this film, sporting a comedy-horror genre,
takes place entirely in Maine.  This can be taken as an
homage to the monarch of mayhem, Stephen King, who
might view it with a dash of envy.  The plot gets under way
when Kelly, hair coiffed in an ugly bun-like order as befits a
paleontologist, is sent to Maine by her womanizing boss--who
is motivated by bones other than those in the dinosaur
section of the Museum of Natural History.  Having never
studied animals outside the hallowed halls of the museum,
she is plunged into culture shock when she meets up with
some of the macho men of Miner's Black Lake.  In some
repartee that evokes the contentious conference between
Jane Fonda and Alan Alda in Neil Simon's "California Suite,"
she plays city girl to country boys Jack Wells (Bill Pullman), a
fish-and-game warden, and Sheriff Hank Keough (Brendan
Gleeson)--while she awaits the arrival of millionaire crocodile
fanatic Hector Cyr (Oliver Platt).  Tentative about timber
territory and far from a devotee of ticks and tents, she
queries the new men in her life about bathroom facilities:
"How will I wipe myself?  I can just wipe my ass with poison
oak so I can fit in with the natives." This brings on the Maine
male's reply, "You know, you really do not have to tell people
you're from New York."
   Kelly soon discovers that when heads rolls in Maine, the
woodland folks mean something different from what
executives intimate in New York.  After a diver turns up angry
by half, the troupe go after the croc but with different
agendas, pitting reptile maven Hector Cyr (who wants to drug
the beast and return it to Asian waters) against Sheriff
Keough and Fish-and Game Warden Jack Wells (who want to
blow its head off).
   Betty White provides touches of eccentric charm as an
idiosyncratic lodger whose affinity for the lizards is even
greater than Cyr's and who gives new meaning to Bart
Simpson's favorite quote about having a cow.  But Oliver
Platt steals the show as the bizarre multi-millionaire who can't 
help riding poor Sheriff Keough.  When Keough insists,
"Crocodiles can't swim in salt water," Cyr responds, "That can
remain your secret."  Audience members who do not travel
the arty film circuit may never have seen Brendan Gleeson in
his powerhouse performance as the eponymous "The
General."  He gets no opportunity to show that kind of depth
this time around as the anti-urban sheriff, but you've got to
admire how this talented performer can alter his speech from
an almost encoded Scottish to a brogue Irish to the current
demands of the American Northeast.  
   Of course every viewer is going to recall "Jaws," perhaps
the scariest of the aquatic operas, made ever more
hair-raising with its signature soundtrack.  "Jaws" is almost
deadly serious compared to "Lake Placid," the latter best
appraised as a fun movie that helps get us through this heat
wave.  Any story that can get Bridget Fonda to discard that
silly museum-worker's hair design and to signal her liberation
from urban rigidity by letting it all hang down can hardly be
criticized.  

Author
Chad Polenz
Lake Placid
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = okay/average)
1999, R, 82 minutes [1 hour, 22 minutes]
[horror]
Starring: Bill Pullman (Game Warden Jack Wells), Bridget Fonda (Kelly Scott), 
Oliver Platt (Hector Cyr), Brendan Gleeson (Sheriff Hank Keogh); written by 
David E. Kelley; produced by David E. Kelley, Michael Pressman; directed by 
Steven Miner.
Seen July 18, 1999 at 5:20 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #15, with Shawn O'Shea for free using my Hoyts season pass. [Theater 
rating: ***1/2: very good picture and sound, okay seats].
Watching `Lake Placid' you get the feeling the entire film was 
written, produced, shot and edited in one day. It has a light, care-free 
attitude that it doesn't really want to be taken seriously (it better not) 
and that it's just what a bunch of big-shot Hollywood execs do on the weekend.
Let's look at the facts here - we've got a bunch of semi-big actors 
(big enough names for people to recognize, but small enough not to demand too 
much money) in a relatively low-budget, small-scale flick created and 
produced by trendy television and modern b-movie guys. You can tell they 
couldn't possibly expect us to take this seriously by releasing in the middle 
of a cut-throat summer movie season filled with mega-budget, blockbuster 
special effects and superstars. The running time is just barely over an 
hour... I guess they expect us to go see it while we wait for the next 
`Phantom Menace' showing.
Anyways, I'm not going to rip this film to shreds as many other 
critics have done. In fact, for a film that doesn't seem to have much effort 
put into it, it's actually not that bad!
I can't count how many times I and other critics have said the key to 
pulling off a horror flick as simple as man vs. beast, ghoul, monster, etc. 
is to keep the atmosphere lighthearted and dialogue witty. Once they stray 
into the so-fake-it's-totally-unrealistic-and-cheesy territory they'll 
usually lose us. Well, `Lake Placid' does dabble in that area both for campy 
humor and theme, but also to seriously push the story along.
It's about four characters and their hunt for a killer crocodile in a 
secluded lake off the coast of the Atlantic Ocean in Maine. It's a calm lake 
with no waves and the water is as black as night. 
`They wanted to name it Lake Placid, but they found out it was 
already taken,' says the local yokel sheriff, Hank Keogh (Gleeson) to New 
York paleontologist Kelley Scott (Fonda), who is sent up to the 
lake-with-no-name after a rare reptilian tooth is found in the body of a 
diver whose legs were bitten off by a mysterious creature in the opening 
scene.
That statement alone probably sounds pretty campy right? Well, it 
gets better (or worse), turns out Kelley agrees to go out into the wilderness 
just to get away from her boss who has just dumped her for her best friend. 
Not surprisingly, Kelley is a stuck-up bitch who can't stand nature and 
freaks out every time something involves hands-on work. Every horror movie 
has at least one screaming woman in it and there's plenty for Kelley to 
scream at here, such as when Keogh finds the head of a moose in the lake or 
during many scenes whereby the crew is out hunting for the monster and it 
suddenly sneaks up on them.
The other `crew' members are local Game Warden Jack Wells (Pullman) 
and international crocodile enthusiast Hector Cyr (Platt). These characters 
are exactly what you'd expect: Wells takes the situation seriously and acts 
like a dorky 8th grade boy calling Kelley `ma'am' every 10 seconds, and Cyr 
is really a nutcase who practically worships crocs and points out that they 
have been worshipped and feared by ancient civilizations and religions around 
the world. He has a slew of high-tech equipment which he failingly tries to 
convince Keogh and Wells will be able to subdue the croc enough for him to 
have it transported to safe captivity.
How did a crocodile end up in a lake in New England? The filmmakers 
never answer that question, only through lame one-liners or vague, unfounded, 
general rationalizations - the kind only eccentric movie characters can get 
away with saying (`Someone in Hong Kong probably flushed him down the toilet' 
- ugh!).
There isn't much to say about the plot other than the obvious - it's 
about a bunch of people trying to hunt down a killer crocodile while being 
scared out of their minds. And yessirebob all the horror cliches abound - the 
noise in the bushes that just turns out to be one of the other characters, 
the journey to the beast's home despite all common sense, the sex jokes and a 
mysterious sub-plot that doesn't have any significance until the end.
That sub-plot, about an old woman living in a cabin on the lake is 
really weird. Betty White co-stars as this woman who has a surprisingly foul 
mouth and makes a lot of really funny, albeit shocking remarks. This element 
single-handedly saves the film from being a complete waste of time and keeps 
the atmosphere light.
The ending itself is actually kind of suspenseful, much more 
thrilling than horrifying. There's even a surprise twist and the final shot 
is quite funny.
I have a feeling everything surrounding `Lake Placid' will also have 
that feeling of little-effort-but-in-good-spirits. Critics probably won't 
like it, but they shouldn't waste their time and energy bashing it either 
since it's one of the few non-blockbuster movies that is actually critic 
proof. People are going to see this thinking it's either scary or campy fun, 
but the truth is, it has only a little of both and too much of nothing else.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 230 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Associate member of The O.F.C.S. (Online 
Film Critics Society)

Author
Jamey Hughton
Lake Placid is probably the best rampaging crocodile movie I've ever
seen. Oh wait... it's the only one I've ever seen. Yes, ruling out
1980's Alligator (which, of course, was about a rampaging alligator),
Lake Placid is in a league of it's own. Or... is it?
The set-up is short and sweet. After a mysterious and grizzly murder on
a small lake in Maine, local Sheriff Hank Keough (Brendan Gleeson) calls
in the necessary officials. They include Fish and Game warden Jack Wells
(Bill Pullman) and New York palaeontologist Kelly Scott (Bridget Fonda),
called in to investigate an unusually large reptilian tooth found at the
murder scene. After they bicker for a while about the greeny locales and
buggy atmosphere, the group stumbles upon something very interesting
inhabiting the lake. Hint: it's not a giant mutated beaver.  It's a
30-foot crocodile which has supposedly swam all the way from Asian
waters and found a home in the peaceful confines of Black Lake. And so
they have to blow the croc up before it manages to chow down on more
local residents.
Actually, there is only one local: an eccentric old woman (played by
Betty White) who has adopted the big reptile as a pet, and feeds it her
own livestock on a regular basis. Former Golden Girl White spews out
many obscenities at the officials when they try to interfere, especially
when  they start asking questions about the strange disappearance of her
husband. Lake Placid was written by David E. Kelley (creator of Ally
McBeal and The Practice) in a campy, ludicrous but shamelessly
entertaining fashion. The croc hunt is merely an excuse to unite
Kelley's quirky characters in a unique situation. Yes, this film is
essentially a comedy with a premise that could be easily mistaken for
horror.
Nevertheless, a large portion of the budget has been dedicated to making
the monster look appropriately convincing. Creature effects Stan Winston
has created an excellent animatronic croc, and the computer generated
effects are, for the most part, largely impressive. Unfortunately, there
is a depressing lack of crocodile action to be found. The best scene
happens early on, when the beast attacks a helpless bear by slamming it
around like a sack of quivering potatoes. There are many brief scares,
but nothing entirely prolonged to hold your excitement for a period of
over four or five minutes. In a movie that clocks in at just under
ninety minutes, the thrills and chills are few and far between. Luckily,
Lake Placid does have a delightful sense of humor to at least compensate
for some of these shortcomings.
The cast tries hard to salvage the material. Fonda is originally fun,
but it soon becomes clear that Kelley is using her character as the
`woman in distress', and little more. She falls out of a boat about
eighteen times, and whines constantly to the dismay of the local law
enforcement. Pullman is earnest and charming, but carelessly wasted.
Chemistry between Kelly and Tom is flat and unconvincing from square
one, and their romantic interludes are too hollow to be relied upon on
such a regular basis. Needless to say, the movie belongs to two of the
supporting players. Irish actor Brendan Gleeson breaks through the
restrictions of his two-dimensional character and delivers an enjoyable
portrait of a distraught small town sheriff. And Oliver Platt continues
his string of authentic loons, playing an uninvited mythology professor
named Hector Cyr who regards crocodiles as treasured, `godly' creatures.
The insults exchanged between Hector and the sheriff are consistently
the best and funniest in the movie.
But somewhere, the fun expires. While Kelley's script delivers
unexpected laughs, it becomes unclear whether they are intentional or
lamely forced. And the actors can only do so much for the characters,
until their presence becomes meandering and pointless.
Of course, similarities to Jaws are obvious. How could you make an
underwater creature feature without avoiding them? Lake Placid is
ridiculously plotted, silly summertime entertainment for less demanding
viewers in need of bloody carnage. But folks, for a horror/comedy about
a lakeside man-eating crocodile, this ain't half bad.
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:  http://welcome.to/movieviews
......................

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Every summer needs its monster movie - think "Jaws" - and this
one has the added comedic touch of David E. Kelley, creator of TV's
"Ally McBeal," "Chicago Hope," "L.A. Law," and "The Practice."
Bridget Fonda stars as a paleontologist who is sent from museum in New
York City to a tranquil lake in Maine to verify a shard, a supposed
fossil, which turns out to be a tooth from a primitive, mysterious
predator who has killed a member of the Fish & Game department. That's
where Bill Pullman comes in. He's the perennially cool Fish & Game
Warden. Right away, there's friction because she's not only annoyingly
phobic about the wilderness but she's also arrogantly embittered about
men and love. Then there's Oliver Platt, a rich, wacky, world-renown
mythology professor, and Brendan Gleeson, the irascible sheriff. These
neurotic, off-beat, disparate characters band together to discover
what's devouring not only the wildlife but people - on land and in
Black Lake. It turns out to be a 30-foot crocodile that has migrated
to New England and been adopted as "a pet who lives in the wild" by a
local eccentric, played by Betty White. The elusive reptile is
terrifyingly realistic - thanks to the special effects creativity of
Stan Winston ("Aliens," "Jurassic Park").  Producer/writer David
E. Kelley and director Steve Miner (sequels 2 & 3 of "Friday the
13th," "Halloween: H20") supply enough absurdly inventive satire,
derived from the eclectic characters, to keep what could have been a
prosaic horror/thriller afloat. But the title is a bit misleading -
this has absolutely nothing to do with the summer tourist haven of
Lake Placid, New York. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Lake
Placid" is a gruesome but surprising 6. It's a hip, caustic
creature-feature with an unexpectedly snappy, comedic bite.

Author
Samuel Pederson
The best thing about, "Lake Placid" is that it's only 80 minutes long and when
it's over you're glad that you didn't waste more than an hour and a half of
your time. It's nothing more than a bad rip-off of, "Jaws" (and I think that's
being kind.) It was written by David E. Kelly ("Ally McBeal") as a
horror-comedy but fails at both, miserably. I was never scared and I think
that I only laughed once. The crocodile even fails in comparison to the snake
in, "Anaconda." 
The plot begins when a man is eaten in half by the giant crocodile in Black
Lake in Maine. That brings the local sheriff (Brendan Gleeson) and a
Fish-and-Game warden (Bill Pulman) to investigate. Also, a paleontologist
 (Bridget Fonda) from New York is sent to look at a tooth and an eccentric
millionaire/crocodile lover (Oliver Platt) flies in because he wants to swim
beside the beast. Soon there is tension between everybody because half the
people want to kill the croc and the other half want to save it. There's also
an eccentric old lady (Betty White) who lives by the lake and has a few
secrets. 
As I mentioned before Kelley and director Steve Minor (H20) don't go for a
serious approach towards the material but they also don't have anything sly or
satirical or witty to say either. The Betty White character is completely
unfunny and none of the other characters are really that interesting, they're
all basically idiots. If they had any brains the croc wouldn't have been that
much of a challenge to catch and they wouldn't have put themselves in half of
the situations that they did. But then again, if they were smart there
wouldn't be a movie. Basically, "Lake Placid" is best undiscovered.

Author
Greg King
A recent resurgence of interest in creature features has given
us a huge snake in the risible Anaconda and super smart deadly Mako
sharks in Deep Blue Sea.  Now comes a giant 30 foot man eating
crocodile terrorising a peaceful lakeside community in upstate Maine.
When a deputy is mysteriously bitten in half on the lake, the
local sheriff calls for some assistance.  Nervous palaeontologist
Kelly Scott (Bridget Fonda) arrives from New York, hoping to escape an
office romance gone wrong.  Fisheries and game warden Jack Wells (Bill
Pullman) also arrives to either capture or kill the beast.  Laconic
local sheriff Hank Keogh (Brendan Gleeson, from The General, etc) is
initially resentful of their interference and their big city ways.
But the strangest expert to arrive on the scene is Hector Cyr (a
wonderfully over the top Oliver Platt), an eccentric mythology
professor who prefers to swim with the crocodiles.  He says that most
ancient civilisations deified the crocodile.  However, he and Keogh do
not exactly get along, and their disdain for each other adds another,
more comic dimension to the film.
Having established these colourful if somewhat clichéd
characters, the film then moves onto the water and the hunt for the
crocodile.  The thin plot climaxes in a wonderfully bizarre finale as
these odd ball characters try to trap the huge crocodile using a cow
suspended from a helicopter as bait.  It's just one of many quite
hilarious moments in a film that is surprisingly entertaining.
Lake Placid refuses to take itself seriously, and its
irreverent tone works a treat!  In some ways, this fanciful,
entertaining piece of hokum also reminded me a little of Alligator,
the early 1980's B-grade creature feature written by John Sayles.
Lake Placid comes from the pen of David E Kelley, the creator
of some of this decade's best and most offbeat tv shows (Picket
Fences, Ally McBeal, The Practice, etc).  Kelley's strengths lie in
his ability to create quirky characters and his gift at writing smart,
witty dialogue.  The film just crackles with sly asides and a
sarcastic humour that alleviates the tension.  In particular, the
barbed exchanges between Keogh and Cyr are a delight.
Gleeson's wonderfully droll, sarcastic performance easily
steals the honours here, although tv veteran Betty White (The Mary
Tyler Moore Show, etc) is also a delight as a foul mouthed widow who
knows more about the unusual inhabitant of the lake than she lets on.
The slowly developing romance between Scott and Wells doesn't always
work, and just slows down the action.
Veteran horror director Steve Miner (the original Friday The
13th, the recent Halloween H20, etc) handles the film with assurance,
although it's obvious he has taken a few pointers from the classic
Jaws in his staging of early crocodile attacks.  Some superb,
impressive special effects have created a realistic and frightening
crocodile.
But the strongest impression one takes away from Lake Placid
is Kelley's smart, clever dialogue, which has more bite than the
crocodile itself!

Author
James Sanford
         There seems to be at least one every summer, that oddball
little thriller that comes out of nowhere to provide considerably more
jolts and laughs than the average $100 million-budgeted blockbuster. In
1997, there was the ultra-spooky "Mimic." Last year, "Disturbing
Behavior" offered an amusingly demented take on the teen horror genre.
And this summer, we have "Lake Placid," a frequently hilarious gross-out
that features A-list stars such as Bill Pullman and Bridget Fonda on the
trail of a giant crocodile which has invaded the waters of Maine.
 Yes, even the title is a joke. The mysterious serene body of
water where most of the action takes place is actually named Black Lake.
"They wanted to call it Lake Placid," sheriff Hank Keough (Brendan
Gleeson) explains. "But somebody said that name was already taken."
 The screenplay by TV's David E. Kelley ("Ally McBeal," "Chicago Hope")
delights in such goofiness. "Never been to Maine before?" Fish and Game
officer Jack Wells (Pullman) asks paleontologist Kelly (Fonda). "I have
good hygiene," she answers. "I'm not welcome."
 Kelly has been summoned from her job at a New York museum to
help hunt for clues as to why a diver was decapitated while probing the
depths of Black Lake, although her intense dislike of timber and ticks
-- and her talent for falling out of trucks and tumbling into the water
at inopportune moments -- hardly makes her a natural candidate for the
job. She also has a very low tolerance for gore and accuses Keough of
playing upon that. "Don't throw heads at me!" she shrieks when he leaves
the remains of one of the creature's victims at her feet.
 The tensions at the lake are further heightened by the arrival
of Hector Cyr (Oliver Platt), a nutty millionaire who believes
crocodiles are "divine conduits" and swims with them for some sort of
spiritual reinforcement. Cyr is immediately unwelcome and when he
insists on going along on an expedition, Keough suggests a perfect
accessory for the trip. "I brought a porkchop along for luck -- maybe
you could hang it around your neck," the sheriff tells him.
 But though the crackling dialogue suggests a screwball comedy,
"Placid" stays true to its drive-in movie roots, providing several
vicious attacks (the first appearance of the monster is particularly
startling) and some genuine suspense along with the humor. As in any
creature feature, people regularly go wandering off into the brush when
they hear strange sounds or incorrectly assume they've taken care of a
problem, only to have it jump up and bite them in the butts. "Placid"
was directed by Steve Miner whose "Warlock," with Julian Sands and Lori
Singer, was a similarly clever (albeit far less slick) variation on
shocker conventions.
 Though Pullman can't do much except look squinty-eyed and
stoic, Fonda, Platt and Gleeson, the marvelous character actor who
played the title role in director John Boorman's "The General" a few
months back, appear to be loving every minute of this nonsense. A
scene-stealing Betty White pops in and out of the picture as a
salty-tongued senior who knows more than she's willing to let on.
 Best of all, Kelley and Miner manage to squeeze it all into a
lightning-paced 82 minute package. Instead of wearing out its welcome
with a dozen false endings like so many thrillers do, "Lake Placid"
simply shakes you up, lets you go and leaves you laughing. And how can
you not like a movie that explains the appearance of an Asian-Pacific
crocodile in the U.S. by having a character remark that "someone in Hong
Kong must have flushed him down the toilet"? James Sanford

Author
Christian Pyle
"Lake Placid" marks yet another entry in the series of "predator pics" that
were a screen staple in the late 1970s (post-"Jaws") and were revived recently
by the godawful "Anaconda."  "Placid" claims to be a "horror/comedy"-it's
directed by the same guy who did "House"-but its attempts at humor are actually
less funny than deadpan seriousness of "Anaconda."
Paleontologist Kelly Scott (Bridget Fonda) is sent up to Maine to examine a
tooth removed from a body that had been bitten in half on the lake. 
Discovering that the tooth belongs to a crocodile (which shouldn't even be in
this hemisphere), Kelly goes croc-hunting with Game Warden Jack Wells (Bill
Pullman) and Sheriff Hank Keough (Brendan Gleeson).  They're joined by an
unwelcome guest, Hector Cyr (Oliver Platt), a scholar who worships crocs and
searches all over the world for them.  Along the way, the merry band meets Mrs.
Delores Bickerman (Betty White), a weird old lady who lives out on the lake.
You know what to expect from this movie:  lots of shots where the camera is the
eyes of the predator (croc cam) swimming toward someone's dangling legs while
"Jaws"-like music plays, one character (Hector) who's obsessed with the croc
and stupidly endangers the rest, another character who insists that the
predator can't possibly exist.  Unlike its slippery cousin "Anaconda," "Lake
Placid" wants to present its formulaic plot tongue-in-cheek, which is
self-defeating.  The result is neither scary nor funny; it's just tedious.
While director Steve Miner has several horror films on his resume (including
two installments of "Friday the 13th" and "Halloween H20"), screenwriter David
Kelley (best known as the creator of TV series like "Ally McBeal" and "Chicago
Hope") doesn't seem to have the stomach for a chomp 'em up flick.  The body
count is surprisingly low and doesn't include any of the major characters, and
most annoyingly Kelly and Hector insist that they capture the crocodile alive
rather than killing it.  ("Lake Placid" manages to have it both ways-I'll let
you discover how for yourself).
The croc itself is mostly computer-generated, of course.  Like the snake in
"Anaconda," the thirty-foot monster crocodile doesn't seem real; it moves too
quickly and in ways that seem unnatural.  "Lake Placid" also offers little
explanation for why a giant crocodile is in Maine.  There is a lot of
semi-mystical mumbo jumbo about how "we really don't know much about
crocodiles."  They would have been better off going with something like the
urban myth about alligators in the sewers.  A movie like this doesn't have to
offer much of an explanation (radioactive mutant? creature from outer space?),
but it does have to give the audience something to hang their disbelief on.
Pullman and Fonda seem to be plodding through the movie on auto-pilot.  Most of
the time, they're probably thinking about killing their agents or wondering if
making this movie marks the end of their careers.  Platt and White, on the
other hand, seem to be giving their best efforts, and they manage to squeeze a
few chuckles out of this sorry script.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.wpd.net/madreview/

Author
Ross Anthony
Kind of a cuter smaller version of the recent "Godzilla," "Lake Placid" is
actually a slightly better movie. Where "Godzilla" makes the head hurt,
"Placid" splashes up a bit fun. A solid "B" movie.
Basically, something big in a New England Lake bites a swimmer in half, so
paleontologist (Bridge Fonda) flies in from New York to investigate. She
teams up with a handsome ranger guy, small town sheriff,  and hippie
crock-doc who likes to backstroke with the dragons.
The dialogue between the four is throw-away sarcasm; still, a few beauts
slither through. And honestly, the interaction between the sheriff and
crock-doc is very amusing. It nearly takes over the movie and it should.
There's a scene where the fearless crock-doc jumps into the sea-monster's
waters, finding himself face to jaws he advises the beast, "I know biting my
head off right now might seem viable ... but it would cheapen you."
The mysterious reptile below the surface is the least implausible of the
unlikelies in this picture, but if you're willing to swallow them whole, you
might just have fun. Further, you'll get to see Betty White swearing like
one of the South Park gang. Now that's a good time.
Starring Bill Pullman, Bridget Fonda, Oliver Platt. Directed by Steve Miner.
Written by David E. Kelley. Produced by David E. Kelly and Michael Pressman
at Phoenix/20th Century Fox.
Grade ......................................... B
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Marty Mapes
** (out of 4) Lake Placid is a bad movie. But for a bad movie, it's
pretty fun. It has a good cast and it's "over the top." What else could
you call a movie featuring a wild animal death match between a crocodile
and a bear? (Okay, maybe Discovery Channel: The Movie.)
Lake Placid comes from a long line of ferocious animal movies with
titles like Tarantula! and Piranha! Its ancestors never rose very high
on the movie food chain, and Lake Placid doesn't rise any higher. It is
unmistakably a b-movie.
The ferocious animal in this movie is a gigantic crocodile and he's now
in Maine. Nobody knows how he got here, but there you have it. The first
sign of his presence is the disappearance of a few people from Black
Lake -- that plus the exaggerated, dark, symphonic soundtrack telling
you when to jump. Now, some people are starting to investigate.
Four people ultimately converge on the lake to investigate the mystery:
the local sheriff (Brendan Gleeson, fresh off his tour de force in The
General), a rep from Fish and Wildlife (Bill Pullman), a New York museum
paleontologist (Bridget Fonda), and a comically-eccentric, independently
wealthy, only-exists-in-the-movies, mythology professor (yes, mythology)
played by one of my favorite actors, Oliver Platt.
Leaving the monster aside, Pullman and Fonda were supposed to be the
love interest. Kelly (Fonda) had been dumped by her boss/boyfriend who
sent her to Black Lake ostensibly to look at the tooth from a recent
autopsy -- but really so that the boss can be alone with his new
girlfriend. Jack (Pullman) is a lonely man, just waiting for the right
girl to come along. The plot suggests that they were supposed to have
some chemistry, but there was never any spark between them. They were
one of the flattest screen "couples" in a long time.
On the other hand, there was some great chemistry between the professor
(Platt) and the sheriff (Gleeson). No, it was not sexual chemistry, it's
just that they had the most interesting relationship in the movie. The
sheriff was starting to get fed up with all the visitors to the lake.
Inevitably, they would end up in his boat, and inevitably they would
make all kinds of smart remarks to him.
The professor is just such a person, but three times as annoying.
Platt and Gleeson saw an opportunity to make their badly written
characters into something more interesting. They fed off each other and
escalated their little tiffs into show-stealing performances. Their
arguments were the best thing in the movie. I am sure their electric
relationship was completely unplanned and entirely to the credit of
these two very good actors. I wouldn't say they saved the movie -- it
was still pretty bad -- but they certainly made it more enjoyable.
In contrast, the comic relief was supposed to come from Betty White
playing Dolores. Dolores lives at the lake and takes care of the croc.
It is supposed to be funny that she cusses, swears, and feeds the beast
meat. Actually, it was kind of funny that she would take care of the
croc, but to have sweet old White swearing like a sailor just revealed
how uninspired and desperate David E. Kelley (the screenwriter) and
Miner were.
As for the movie's main character (the crocodile), he was almost
entirely rendered on a computer. For the most part, he was convincing
and was often worth marveling at. The image of a huge crocodile
advancing on a truckload of people was pretty tense, and surprisingly
believable. And when the thing moved, he had the look and feel of a real
reptile, not some computer-generated "reptile" formula.
So even though I know how bad this movie really is, I have to say I had
some fun. Still, I cannot in good conscience recommend it. It really is
a b-movie. The plot is pure formula, the lead characters were flat, and
the whole thing just crumbles under scrutiny. If you go, take your
lowest expectations and you might have some fun.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     You have to know what you can expect from writer David E. Kelley --
and what you _can't_ expect -- to have a chance of enjoying the
determinedly quirky LAKE PLACID.  Determined quirkiness has been the
defining characteristic of Kelley's better-known television work, from
"L.A. Law" through "Picket Fences" and "Ally McBeal."  He delights in
creating eccentric characters, giving them outrageous things to say, and
hoping that our amusement and affection for those characters will carry us
through stories where his main goal is Making a Social Statement.  This
isn't a master of plotting we're talking about here.  If you can swing
with Kelley's off-beat sense of humor, you're in good shape; if not,
you're in for a long night of eye-rolling and teeth-grinding.
     For LAKE PLACID, his first thriller, Kelley abandons the social
commentary entirely to give his goofy characters plenty of room to work,
in a genre where plotting isn't particularly vital.  The result is an
occasionally hilarious insult comedy only occasionally interrupted by a
monster movie.  The setting is Black Lake, Maine, where the recent
separation of a Fish and Game investigator from the lower half of his body
has local sheriff Hank Keough (Brendan Gleeson) looking for answers.  Help
arrives from Fish and Game investigator Jack Wells (Bill Pullman), as well
as New York paleontologist Kelly Scott (Bridget Fonda).  When crackpot
millionaire mythology professor Hector Cyr (Oliver Platt) joins the search
team, tensions mount, then escalate when it becomes clear that the killer
they're looking for is a 30-foot crocodile.
     The combination of tightly-wound urbanites and laconic locals
provides most of the comic fodder in LAKE PLACID.  Hector heckles Keough's
weight and backwoods roots; Keough mocks Kelly's aversion to the outdoors.
Even Betty White gets in on the act as a foul-mouthed lake-dweller, firing
decidedly non-"Golden Girl" salvos of epithets.  When it works, it works
wonderfully, particularly when Platt and Gleeson square off.  Platt always
shines when given the role of the big-mouth, making him an ideal actor for
Kelley's tart zingers.  Gleeson, meanwhile, lends Keough a restraint and
dignity you wouldn't expect from a character who's a skeet for put-downs.
Movie-goers who can enjoy a film simply by revelling in quotable lines,
including a sly shot at Woody Allen's infamous "the heart wants what the
heart wants" comment, are in for a real treat
     Those expecting something akin to an actual thriller, on the other
hand, are in for a disappointment.  The first hour of LAKE PLACID includes
a couple of graphic dismemberments and a few animal carcases, but not much
else in the way of scares.  In fact, the entire premise generally seems
like an excuse to put these four characters in the same place and let them
snipe at each other.  Two of those characters, Pullman's and Fonda's,
don't even contribute much to the kookiness quotient (Fonda in particular
plays Kelly with too much Ally McBeal stridency).  And as clever as
Kelley's writing can be, it's distracting when he calls attention to his
own cleverness (a notion to which any number of "Ally McBeal" detractors
can attest), or grows infatuated with the lack of restrictions on an
R-rated film's dialogue.  LAKE PLACID is basically a one-type-of-joke
film.  How quickly one tires of that one type of joke will go a long way
towards determining one's enjoyment.
     Fortunately, Kelley and director Steve Miner don't give that joke
much chance to grow tired, wrapping up the proceedings in a tidy 80
minutes.  That includes a corker of a conclusion, with more tension and
narrow escapes in five minutes than in the rest of the film combined.  The
climax is almost enough to fool you into thinking LAKE PLACID was actually
a thriller, instead of a farcical comedy with expensive mechanical
reptiles.  Kelley has already proven himself a writer for very specific
tastes, and LAKE PLACID isn't a tremendous stretch in his oeuvre.  It is,
however, very funny when it's supposed to be.  You just have to be
prepared for something unconventionally effective when the creator of
"Ally McBeal" does JAWS.

Author
James Brundage
Starring Bill Pullman, Bridget Fonda, Oliver Platt, Brendan Gleeson, and
Betty White
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 No one, and I mean no one, hates horror movies more than I do.  As a genre,
the horror movie was doomed from the beginning.  Seeing that the genre is an
offshoot of Halloween, I shouldn't have to say more, but I will.  It is, as
a whole, the lowest of the low for screenwriters (I'm not counting porn).
It is the point where a director realizes that he will never do a good movie
no matter how adeptly he handles his camera.  It is the point at which an
actress realizes the true currency of Hollywood, which lies somewhere around
the upper middle chest.
 Yet, when you see people like David E. Kelley, Bridget Fonda, and Oliver
Platt signing on to a horror movie, you have to wonder.
 So I started reading the reviews.  The previews didn't excite me at all, in
fact, they tempted sleep, but whenever the critic at Time jokingly called
the film "Ally McBite", I was hooked.
 Although the imdb registers Lake Placid as a horror/comedy, its comedy to
the bone.  Not only is it comedy, but it's the kind of sublimely funny humor
that comes in the form of every horror movie.  Like Scream, Lake Placid
knows that the horror movie never was and never will be original, and
embraces this fact.  And, in embracing this, decides to make fun of the
genre as a whole by adding in off-kilter humor.  Lake Placid gives you no
unexpected twists as far as plot is concerned but every twist it can as far
as humor is concerned.
 For instance, you have Betty White finally breaking the typecasting of a
nice, demure old lady that she got into while on "Golden Girls", when she
plays the hermit-by-the-lake from hell.  One of my personal favorite moments
in the movie is when she says, "If I had a dick, Sheriff, this is when I'd
tell you to suck it."
 You also have the overweight sheriff that is suspicious of anyone not from
his own town, the scorned woman in Maine on assignment from a boss that left
her for a coworker, the man who worships crocodiles in short, every age-old
character need for a horror film, which is its main marketing ploy.
 Lake Placid may be funny, but it isn't as funny as all of us would like.
To pick on something, and I mean really pick on something, you've got to
know it to the bone.  Kevin Williamson, a child of the 80s, knows horror
movies front and back and thus was able to make Scream, Scream 2, and I Know
What You Did Last Summer highly intelligent spoofs of horror movies that
already existed and do some really brilliant satire.  Although Lake Placid
is funny, it is nowhere near as satiric as Scream was.
 Lake Placid does not derive its jokes from the formulas of horror movies.
It does not take its chances to pick on Jaws, Jaws 2, or Alligator.  It
doesn't make the characters go out of their typecasted shells as Scream did.
Instead, it puts them in different shells: those of a dark comedy.
 Admittedly, I laughed during this film.  I enjoyed this film, but the
question of recommending this film remains.  As a horror movie, it is just
as good as anything else yeah, that bad.  As a comedy, it is a little bit
below par.  So, although Lake Placid may be funny and enjoyable, your money
would be better spent by renting Scream again.
To subscribe for free movie reviews send a blank email to
MK2K-subscribe@listbot.com
To unsubscribe from this list, send a blank email to
MK2K-ubsubscribe@listbot.com
If you would like to see a movie reviewed, please email me at MK2K@usa.net

Author
Frankie Paiva
Creature features are always popular, take one part cliched script, add two
parts awesome special effects, and one cup of stars and you've got a success.
Obviously this is usually never true, but in Lake Placid, it works.
A deputy is bit in half right before the sheriff (Brendan Gleeson) in the
town's lake by a giant crocodile. The top of the man is taken to the morgue
where they discover a tooth hidden among the flesh and carnage. Kelly (Fonda)
has just been dumped by her boss for another co-worker, when news of the tooth
is delivered he sends her down so he can have some private time with his new
friend. 
Two other characters show up, game warden Jack Wells (Pullman) who constantly
has a macho smile and denim wardrobe about him and mythology professor Oliver
Platt who views crocodiles as godly and loves to take swims with them. 
Lake Placid will keep you laughing more than anything else, the two minorly
frightening scenes of the film aren't that exciting so they fill it with humor,
a wise choice. A good choice especially with Betty White as Mrs. Delores
Bickerman a SSU (seriously screwed up) woman who feeds her cattle (and her
husband) to the crocodile. Finally, Hollywood has made a movie so hilariously
bad and totally outrageous that you can enjoy it. Come along for one heck of a
bad movie that's bad enough to be good, which earns my *** stars.
