Title
Review for Paths of Glory (1957)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Paths of Glory" is one of the greatest war films ever made, an indictment on 
war and the complex morality behind the decisions made in trench warfare. 
What helps make it so complex and involving in every scene is the direction 
by Stanley Kubrick and the exquisitely precise and multilayered screenplay by 
Kubrick, Calder Willingham and Jim Thompson. 
Set in France in 1916, the film begins with the arrival of General Broulard 
(Adolphe Menjou) at a French chateau where he meets with General Mireau 
(George Macready) to discuss the golden opportunity of taking the "Ant Hill," 
a no man's land held by the Germans. The notion is that if Mireau takes the 
command, he may be promoted and it is also an event for the media to focus 
on. Mireau, the determined optimist, immediately tells Colonel Dax (Kirk 
Douglas) of the news, much to Dax's dismay. Dax defends his position by 
quoting from Samuel Johnson ("patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel") 
and feeling his men are not up to the task so soon. Accompanying Broulard is 
Major Saint-Auban (Richard Anderson, best known for his role in "The Six 
Million Dollar Man" TV show) who refers to the soldiers as having a herd 
instinct, or stated as "an animal sort of thing." Dax corrects the major, 
reminding him they are human after all. Nevertheless, Dax is convinced of 
taking the "Ant Hill," perhaps in fear he will be rep
laced by someone who will not take proper care of his men. Thus the colonel 
tells his men that they must be prepared to attack, though the fact that the 
weather will be clear and sunny as opposed to foggy and cloudy establishes 
this battle as a losing proposition. 
"Paths of Glory" has two scenes of battle, one quiet and serene and the other 
noisy and confusing. The first scene is of a patrol organized to navigate no 
man's land. They include the alcoholic Lieutenant Roget (Wayne Morris), 
Corporal Paris (Ralph Meeker) and Private Lejeune (Ken Dibbs). The area is 
already littered with shell holes, corpses, lots of wire and rubble. Lejeune 
is inadvertently killed by Lieutenant Roget, the first accused of "cowardice 
in the face of the enemy" by Corporal Paris. 
The other battle is of course the taking of Ant Hill, which becomes a 
haelstorm of explosions and bullets in and around the trenches. The men fear 
getting too close to the German wire because of the intensity of the 
explosions, and are almost killed by General Mireau who is infuriated that 
they would stay in the trenches to avoid enemy fire. Three soldiers under 
Dax's command are arbitrarily chosen to be court-martialed and face execution 
for "cowardice in the face of the enemy." One of them is Corporal Paris, who 
is ironically picked by Lieutenant Roget.
"Paths of Glory" follows the trial leading to the execution, seen as justice 
for men who refused to fight, and Kubrick and the writers Willingham and 
Thompson ask tough questions with little in the way of a clear-cut 
resolution. Should these men be executed for acting cowardly and not 
advancing in no man's land? Is General Mireau any less guilty for almost 
having his men killed by their own troops for not advancing? At one point, 
Colonel Dax even asks to be set as an example for his men by being executed, 
but is instead left as a defense lawyer for the three charged men in the 
court martial proceedings. What Kubrick shows, and what has become a staple 
of his later work, is that the powerful men at the top, namely General 
Broulard and General Mireau, see these soldiers as nothing more than animals 
and treat them as such, stating that if the enemy fire was so intense, the 
result would have been corpses littered around the trenches, not cowards. 
Ironically, during the penultimate final scene in the chateau, Gen
eral Mireau reminds Broulard that the man he stabs in the back is a soldier. 
The inhumanity and lack of sympathy is powerfully shown in Kubrick's treatise 
on war, and lead the way to many more ambiguous moral lessons in human 
behavior in films such as "Dr. Strangelove" and especially "A Clockwork 
Orange." 
Based on the 1935 World War I novel by Humphrey Cobb, "Paths of Glory" is 
emotionally wrenching and thrillingly realized. Every sequence is masterfully 
composed and framed, including the dolly shots through the trenches where Dax 
and General Broulard frequently travel while explosions are heard in the 
background. The court martial sequence in the chateau is as tense and 
nail-biting as the execution itself.
The dialogue is also crisp and direct. I loved the conversations between 
Broulard, Mireau and Dax in the chateau, a setting for a different kind of 
battleground where words and strategies are exchanged in reference to the 
lives of the soldiers. Backstabbing and political ambition are primary goals, 
though Dax is an idealist - he cares for his men and says or does nothing as 
a means of promotion from his rank. The higher-ups are of different mindsets, 
and it is extraordinary to watch Kirk Douglas's blunt, sympathetic Dax, 
Adolphe Menjou's arrogant, pitiless General Broulard, and the cold, 
remorseless General Mireau brilliantly portrayed by George Macready commingle 
and argue over the reality of war's traumas and heartaches. 
"Paths of Glory" is a tough, demanding work that generated a lot of 
controversy over its cynical presentation of how men of power handle their 
own men in the face of war. But there is beauty too, as evidently shown in 
the final shot where a German farm girl (Suzanne Christian, who became Mrs. 
Kubrick at that time) sings a sentimental song from the "Musical Memories of 
Germany" and causes the audience of soldiers to weep when they were initially 
jeering her. I also like what could be a throwaway moment where Private 
Arnaud (Joseph Turkel, who later appeared in "The Shining") describes how 
being shot down and killed instantly is preferable to being wounded. There is 
humanity in these men, these soldiers who fight in the trenches for the 
benefit of pleasing some higher-ranking officials and, of course, to win the 
war. Here is an anti-war film that sticks to its guns and shows, in the words 
of Ernest Hemingway, that war is a crime no matter how justified. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Brian Koller
"Paths of Glory" is an excellent anti-war film
that dramatizes the enormous gap between the
enlisted men who do the fighting and the officers
who take the credit.  "Paths of Glory" was banned
in France for many years, but the story, based on
a true incident, is timeless and can apply to any
military or political situation.
The setting is France in 1916.  World War I
has dragged on for two years, and become a
stalement of fortified trenches and heavy
casualties.  Commander Broulard (Adolphe Menjou)
asks General Mireau (George Macready) to
have his decimated division take the "Ant Hill",
an impregnable fortress, promising Mireau
a promotion if he succeeds.
Mireau orders Lieutenant Dax (Kirk Douglas) to
carry out the mission, which is a complete failure
with heavy casualties.  To place blame elsewhere,
Mireau then orders the court martial for cowardice
(under penalty of execution) of three arbitrarily
chosen soldiers (Ralph Meeker, Joseph Turkel and
Timothy Carey).
Douglas is perfectly cast for the role.  He
seethes with indignation throughout.  Emile Meyer
gives an excellent performance as a priest.
Macready, whose character is a pompous jerk,
is also excellent.  There are only a few battle
scenes, but they are well done.
"Paths of Glory" isn't perfect.  Bert Freed's
alcoholic sergeant character is a bit muddled.
The three unlucky soldiers show extreme
cowardness and bitterness prior to their
execution, especially pathetically sobbing
Carey.  And perhaps the depiction of military
brass as cynical, ambitious and self-serving
is a little overdone.
Directed by Stanley Kubrick, "Paths of Glory" was not
a box office success, and was not nominated for any
Academy Awards.  Kubrick and Douglas teamed up again
three years later for "Spartacus", an inferior but
much more successful film.  Kubrick would make
another anti-war film, "Full Metal Jacket", thirty
years later.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz

PATHS OF GLORY (director/writer: Stanley Kubrick; screenwriter: Jim
Thompson/Calder Willingham/ from a Humphrey Cobb novel; cinematographer:
Georg Krause; cast: Kirk Douglas (Colonel Dax), Ralph Meeker (Corporal
Paris), Adolphe Menjou (General George Broulard), George Macready
(General Paul Mireau), Wayne Morris (Lieutenant Roget), Ralph Meeker
(Corp. Paris), Richard Anderson (Major Saint-Auban), Joe Turkel (Private
Arnaud), Christiane Kubrick (German Singer), Jeffrey Hausner
(Proprietor), Peter Capell  (Colonel Judge), Emile Meyer (Priest), Bert
Freed (Sergeant Boulanger), Kem Dibbs (Private Lejeune), Timothy Carey
(Private Ferol), Fred Bell (Shell Shock Victim), Harold Benedict (Capt.
Nichols), John Stein (Capt. Rousseau), 1957)
Stanley Kubrick's first big financed A film and first film with a major
Hollywood star. Kirk Douglas who liked the script, thinking it would
give him a chance to work on a quality film with a strong social
message, thereby getting his production company to back it. Kubrick
prior to  this film was a photographer for LOOK magazine and directed
the low-budget films "The Killers" (46) and "Killer's Kiss" (55). The
film is based on a true event and was filmed in Germany, with the German
extras playing the French soldiers in the trenches.
The film must have ruffled many feathers, because it was banned in
France for about 20 years. The U.S. army refused to show it on its
theater release date. It was also banned for a time in Austria,
Switzerland, Belgium, and Germany. This antiwar film, one of the best
ever made, much like Renoir's masterpiece "The Grand Illusion," does a
great job of criticizing the role of the French military higher-ups in
WW1. The movie turns most of its attention to the action taking place in
a military courtroom court-martial and the interplay between the
officer's political manuevering for power. It culminates in the
unjustified court-martial for cowardice of three randomly picked
soldiers, showing how callow the military is for taking these soldier's
lives in so arbitrary a fashion. Its battle scenes played like a
documentary, with striking attention turning to details of life in the
trenches and how the men stood up after being confined to such dark and
squalid circumstances, contrasted with how the staff officers live in
the luxury of chateaus. Kubrick's masterpiece was more cynical and
gritty than Renoir's very poetic and humane indictment of war. One
reason why this was so, was because it hit harder at those who were its
subjects and as a result many country's reacted so vehemently as to
officially oppose the film.
It should also be pointed out, that the ambitious Kubrick rewrote the
original script to give the film a more traditional Hollywood upbeat
ending to it, much to Kirk Douglas's surprise and disapproval. Kubrick,
reportedly, wanted the film to be a box office success and was willing
to forgo artistic integrity. The controversial ending might be termed a
cop-out by many, while others found its sentimentalities quite
appropriate and cynical enough.
The two did not get along well on the set, but that did not stop Douglas
from years later requesting the very talented Kubrick to direct
"Spartacus (60)," the last Hollywood type of film Kubrick ever directed.
Incidentally, in my opinion, the major flaw in Paths of Glory wasn't the
taut script, which was lucid and hard-hitting, but it was in Kirk
Douglas's egomaniacal performance (though a strong performance and the
best one in Kirk's career). But, as forceful and necessary as Kirk's
performance was, it still allowed the film to become centered around
him, rather than on the universality of the story unfolding in its very
natural and engrossing way about the horrors, evils, and insanity of
war.
Kubrick aimed for a critique both of war and of class systems. He
accomplished this by pessimistically and cynically showing how the
privilege class cares only about themselves and how its power is
corrupting.
The action picks up in France in 1916. We are told that World War I has
dragged on for two years and that it became a stalemate of fortified
trenches and heavy casualties.War began between Germany and France on
August 3, 1914. Five weeks later, the German army had come within 18
miles of Paris. There the battered French miraculously rallied their
forces at the Marne River, and in a series of unexpected counterattacks,
drove the Germans back. The Front was stabilized and shortly afterward
developed into a continuous line of heavily fortified trenches
zigzagging their way five hundred miles from the English Channel to the
Swiss frontier. By 1916, after two grisly years of trench warfare, the
battle lines had changed very little. Successful attacks were measured
in hundreds of yards - and paid for in lives by hundreds of thousands.
The film opens with the French General Staff deciding from the safety of
their luxurious chateau far off enemy lines that it is time to attack
the `Ant Hill' tomorrow. The object of the attack is an impregnable and
fortified hilltop held by the Germans, without any strategic value.The
two cunning and detestable generals- the commanding staff general,
General George Broulard (Adolphe Menjou), who asks the field general,
Paul Mireau (George Macready), to take this impossible suicide mission,
despite knowing it will kill most of the men. At first, Mireau says he
can't do it, he will lose too many men. But then Broulard says that a
promotion awaits, there will be consideration for another star. Mireau
then consents and arrogantly visits the troops in the trenches,
accompanied by his ass-kissing aide, Major Saint-Auban (Anderson). He
manages to slap a shell shocked soldier (Bell) while rallying the
troops, saying there is no such a thing as shell shock, as he transfers
him out of his outfit, not wanting cowards.
The general confers with the company commander of the 701st, Colonel Dax
(Kirk Douglas), a criminal trial lawyer in civilian life, and appeals to
Dax's patriotism to go through with the attack. After Dax says it is not
possible to do, Mireau says, "Show me a patriot and I'll show you an
honest man." Dax replies, quoting from Samuel Johnson, "Patriotism... is
the last refuge of the scoundrel." Finally, Dax is convinced to lead the
attack when he is threatened with loss of command. He then becomes
subservient to the general and says he doesn't want to desert his men.
The attack the next morning is a colossal failure, as the men who do
attack are mostly killed. It is made worst by a commanding officer's
cowardice, Lieutenant Roget (Wayne Morris), who never orders his men to
leave the trenches, leaving the first line of soldiers without backup.
Mireau watches the battle begin from the safety of his chateau, drinking
a toast to France as the battle begins. Mireau soon becomes upset at the
men for not taking the Ant Hill and for stopping their attack, and
orders the artillery commanders to fire on his own troops, which they
refuse to do, even when threatened with court-martial. They ask for that
command to be a written one.
The next day Mireau meets with Broulard and requests that a 100 men be
randomly chosen as scapegoats and executed as a lesson for cowardice in
battle. This is to serve as a lesson for the rest of the troops, he
warns. Broulard suggests that they make it 12 men. But Mireau, not to be
undone in the generosity of the moment, says let's make it 3 and have
the 701st's three commanding officers choose one from each outfit.
Broulard says we better get a court-martial for them and make it legal.
Dax when he hears of this insanity, asks to be the accused's defense
counsel and is granted that right.
Dax will meet the men chosen to die, as he goes to their cell. They are
Corporal Paris (Meeker), Private Arnaud (Turkel), and Private Ferol
(Carey). All of them express shock at what has happened to them and how
they were chosen. Corporal Paris was chosen by  Lieutenant Roget because
the officer murdered Lejeune (Dibbs) on patrol and Paris knew that.
Arnaud, a former medal-awarded hero, was chosen by a random drawing of
lots. The weepy Ferol was selected because his captain believed he was a
"social undesirable." Since the trial is fixed, the men are found guilty
and are given a last meal in their cells, which they think is drugged.
They are also visited by the priest (Meyer), who hears their confessions
and offers what Arnaud calls sanctimonious pat answers for what has
happened to them. Being drunk from the meal's wine, he attacks the
priest but is knocked down by Paris, causing him to be placed on a
stretcher when the men are executed in the morning.
Dax had told Broulard about the artillery commanders charging Mireau
with ordering his own men fired upon the night before the execution,
giving him the written statements of all the witnesses who will confirm
that this happened. But the general refused to stop the execution,
instead he waited for after the execution to tell Mireau that there will
be an investigation about that matter so the military name is not
stained. Later, he calls Dax in and informs him that he can have
Mireau's position. Angrily, Dax turns him down, as Broulard looks at him
incredulously, as if he were a fool, saying you really cared about
saving those three men, you are an idealist. Dax angrily reproves the
generals on their despicable and inhumane actions and is forever shut
out of the privileged military club.
As Dax leaves the general, he comes across the men in a tavern where a
young German woman (his wife Christiane) is forced to sing as the men
act like brutes. When she starts to sing and tears roll down her face,
they eventually become quiet and are moved to softly sing with her. Dax
is told by his sergeant (Freed) that orders have come and that it is
time for he and his men to return to the front. Dax tells him to give
the men a few minutes.
The film is direct and powerful. It wouldn't have been banned for so
long if it didn't hit home with its hard message. There is no doubt
about its message being man's inhumanity to man, that war is insane, of
military incompetence, of class differences resulting in special
privileges for some, of hypocrisy, and that power is corrupting.
It is magnificently shot, as the trenches are frighteningly real and
incomprehensible to understand until seen. Kirk Douglas is overwhelming
in his stabilizing role, in my opinion too much so. But, nevertheless,
his anger is warranted, as he is the emotional glue that holds the film
together and gives humanity some measure for hope. Though I came away
from the film feeling no hope. I was cynical of everyone's motives,
including Dax's. After all, he still led the men to their slaughter,
even when knowing this would be so. To call him a hero, as the ending of
the film implies by its crass sentimentality, as it shows him going back
to the front, left me cold. A real hero, someone who is brave and beyond
reproach, would have become a pacifist after that incredulous suicide
battle plan and mock trial. He would have walked away from the war.
Adolphe Menjou and George Macready came through with outstanding
performances, each one an incarnation of Machiavellian evil. When on
screen, their performances are like machine gun fire directed at you.
There is much to chew on idea-wise, despite how simple the film might
appear on first viewing it, and thereby lies its true greatness, as it
seems to make a timeless argument against war; and, as in most Kubrick
films, it is not dated, in fact, it seems to get better with age.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Stanley Kubrick began the art of dehumanization in film early in his
career.  One of his earliest and least well known films is 'Paths of
Glory'.  At a running time of only 88 minutes, the film is a perfect
example of what film is supposed to do:  Get to the point and get off
it.  I don't think I've seen a more sweeping film about war with such a
short and most appropriate running time.  War films often repeat
themselves by showing the injustice of its subject matter as men die in
senseless battles.  Lives are lost at the hands of a court in Kubrick's
most alternative film about conflict.
The blind insanity of war can be summed up in 'Paths of Glory' by one
statement made by Kirk Douglas: "Patriotism is the last refuge of a
scoundrel."  Now, I don't agree entirely with that statement --- and
that quote, I'm sure, is not meant to be taken to the extreme.
Patriotism is a wonderful thing but like religion, politics and anything
else in life, it's best taken in moderation.
The result of extreme patriotism leads to the execution of three
innocent men in the French army in 1916 during World War I.  A fanatical
French general named Mireau (George Macready), orders his lower level
officers to engage his men in a suicide mission during an attack in
battle, and when the mission fails because of the refusal of committing
men to a certain death, one man from each of the three divisions is
selected almost at random and are made scapegoats for the failed attack
and are subsequently tried for cowardice which carries the penalty of
death.
Colonel Dax (Kirk Douglas) acts as counsel for the men.  Dax is the
example of an officer who strives for a fair trial on behalf of the
men.  On the day the trial is announced IT IS CARRIED OUT THAT DAY!
There are no formal stenographic notes kept, the trial is biased in
favour of the prosecution and the audience will quickly recognizes it as
a kangaroo court.  It is one of the greatest injustices in the history
of war.  Perhaps, dare I say, more of an injustice than dying on the
battlefield.
The three men to be executed are portrayed by Joseph Turkel, Timothy
Carey and Ralph Meeker.  Each one is a well developed character and
while it would have been easy to make them caricatures, their roles are
well thought out and are portrayed just as impressively as any other
character in the film.  Kubrick adapted the screenplay based on the book
by Humphrey Cobb.  As he does in many of his films, Kubrick strains the
human condition in a most unsentimental way and his films have never
been tame and this film shows no mercy for any of its stark subject
matter allegedly based on a true story which was made public a few years
after the war ended.
Kubrick uses his camera the way he does in all his films.  He plunges
them into our souls with characters who rarely crack a smile and with
dark and haunting shadows accompanying them. Adolphe Menjou portrays
General Broulard in this, one of his last films, and is sort of on the
fence in how his character will be judged by future film historians.
His character is perhaps one of the most debatable in the film as to
where his loyalties stand.
As Kubrick's films about war evolved throughout film history from 'Paths
of Glory' to 'Dr. Strangelove' to 'Full Metal Jacket', the man with the
vision of film serving as a tool to judge society well ahead of its
time, Kubrick has managed to find tragedy, excitement, humour and traces
of sarcasm which will cause selected audiences to mock what they don't
understand.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm
For browsers without java enhancement or if you experience problems with
the above link, go to:
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/mainpage.htm
