Title
Review for 
Number of Reviews
13

Author
unknown
First-time writer/director Bernardo Gigliotti's ORDINARY MADNESS is a
little bit of a mystery and a little bit of a comedy.  And therein lies
the problem -- it's not a lot of anything.
The film does have one strong thing going for it -- Denise Gentile's
compelling and alluring screen presence as Faye, the mad seductress at
the heart of the story.  The director never seems quite sure what to do
with her, but Gentile steals all of her scenes anyway.  She has a
passive-aggressive attitude that suggests she's vulnerable when she's
anything but.  Dressed to the nines, Faye has an elegance that's several
orders of magnitude above the old suburban home in which she lives with
her invalid husband, Albert (Gary D. Mosher).
Faye snares young male borders like a spider with her web.  She's not an
easy woman, however.  She chooses her men, not the other way round.
The busy story has several subplots including one about a tough parole
officer and another concerning some bad blues brothers.  The awful
singing duo, Larry Funk (Robert Musgrave) and Warren Funk (Alan
Gelfant), call themselves The Funk Brothers.  Larry's mantra is "Right
on!"  He says this as often as most people clear their throat.  These
blues brothers by night are gardeners during the day.  They get the
film's few genuinely funny lines, the best being when they claim that
their music is popular in Japan.
As is obvious from the beginning, the movie turns macabre in the last
act.  The mysterious Faye demonstrates her capacity to control
situations.
Denise Gentile tries her best to save the picture but can't.  The
writing is too loose and the other acting is credible only in fits and
spurts.
ORDINARY MADNESS runs 1:34.  It is not rated but would be an R for
sexual situations, violent images, drug usage and language.  The film
would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film is being shown now as part of San Jose's Cinequest film
festival (www.Cinequest.org).
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
unknown

ROUGE (director: Stanley Kwan; cast: Anita Mui (Fleur), Alex Man (Yuen),
Emily Chu (Ah Chor), Leslie Cheung (Chan Chen-Pang), 1988-Hong Kong)
This is a visually appealing Hong Kong ghost story film, that is highly
stylized, told from the perspective of a courtesan, Anita Mui (Fleur),
who committed suicide with an over-dose of opium and sleeping pills,
also giving the deadly dosage to her unsuspecting male suitor, Leslie
Cheung (Chan Chen-Pang), in 1934, when his wealthy parents would not
allow him to marry her, cutting him off from the family wealth because
he refused to stop seeing her. Her plan was, that she would rather be
with her lover in hell, then to not be with him in this world. Things
didn't work out though, as she never met him in hell, having no way of
knowing that he survived. We now see her as a wraith in a modern and
thoroughly changed Hong Kong, a place that leaves her confused as she
tries to contemplate the different changes in the city 50- years later,
as she enters a newspaper ad office, hoping to place an ad in the paper
to locate master 12, as she once called him, believing that he is now
reincarnated in this world.
The film is evocative, its strength lying mostly in its poetical
presentation, as it masterfully weaves a visual work of great scope.The
essence of the story does not depend on whether you believe in ghosts or
not, though it would help if you could not be entirely reluctant to
accept the possiblity that there could be life-after death, as the
film's main story, is based on the knowledge that everything in life is
transitory, that even love is questionable when thought of in eternal
terms.
Fleur, still dressed as a 1930s courtesan would be dressed, appears out
of place in this modern capitalistic society, that has forgotten not
only its ancient roots, but its recent past. She befriends the perplexed
young head of the ad office, Alex Man (Yuen), who becomes frightened
when she follows him home after work and he realizes that she is not
human. He is, only, too human, living with his cute girlfriend Emily Chu
(Ah Chor), who is a reporter on the newspaper. When Yuen tells her he
took this strange woman back to their place, she is jealous, then her
curiosity gets the better of her when she examines her and discovers
Fleur does not have a heartbeat. She listens to her story and, thereby,
agrees to help Fleur track down her missing lover, though she has
horrible feelings about what Fleur did, not believing suicide is needed
as a proof for love.  The contrasts between old and new Hong Kong is
accomplished in a very revealing manner, as the young couple come to
look at their relationship in a deeper way than they ever had before,
and look back on a Hong Kong that no longer exists with the help of
their ghostly guide.
This film fascinated me on many levels, but mainly, it made me wonder
about unfulfilled expectations in this world and how the netherworld
could really exist as a domain for such things that remain unresolved.
It questioned what it is one really believes in and how easy it is to
stray away from what one believes in. It allows us the opportunity to
ask ourselves, if we can really believe in spiritual things without
being spiritual ? Can love be so enduring ? Is there something worth
dying for ?
This is truly one of the best films to come out of Hong Kong in the
modern era. Even its ironical ending, is handled with great dignity and
care. Even if you are not convinced by the logic of this super-natural
tale, the beauty of its characterization is enough to make up for any
shortcomings you might have thought this film had, such as the
improbability of such vivid ghosts being so openly seen by everyone,
after all, you should make allowances for the fact that these are not
the Shakespearian ones we might be more culturally receptive towards.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
unknown
Out for Love, Be Right Back (Yetzika L'hapes Ahavah, Techef Ashuv) -
Israel, 1997
Israeli drama/documentary by Dan Katzir, a young filmmaker from a
prominent Tel Aviv family. Katzir arrives in film school in Tel Aviv,
newly out of the army, and starts filming his own life and his search for
a girlfriend. This is an admittedly loathesome start for any film, and
it's been done dozens of times (20 Dates, last year), but it becomes
extremely compelling once we get to know him, his family, and the eventual
girl, a lovely brunette named Iris. As Katzir gets to know her, he also
confronts his own family history, ranging from an great-uncle who was
president to his grandfather, slaughtered in the Tel Aviv airport by
Japanese terrorists in the 1970s. 
Katzir is extremely young (21 when starting the film, newly out of the
army) and his politics and sensibilities are informed by the contemporary
youthful post-Zionism and skepticism of the army. As he says, he'd rather
be on the streets of Tel Aviv, sitting in cafes and looking for a
girlfriend. But politics inevitably intrude on his artistic dreams: his
romance with Iris coincides with the traumatic period of Israeli politics
during the middle-1990s, from the peace with Jordan to the assassination
of Rabin to the mass terrorism in the heart of his beloved Dizengoff
Square. As Iris enlists in the army, eventually joining the officer's
training program, he has to reconcile his own disillusionment with the
army with her dreams and his own family history.
After a bit of a slow start, this becomes a very moving and fast-paced
story, especially as Katzir realizes how much his own life and ambitions
are entangled with Israel's as a nation. At 55 minutes, it's brief and
tightly edited. The music selection illustrates an odd sense of humor,
ranging from sentimental Israeli army ballads to mid-century French cafe
chansons by Edith Piaf. Well recommended. Katzir's website at
http://www.katzirdan.com has info on this film and other projects.

Author
unknown
Hopelessly underdressed at the premiere (shorts, ratty gymies and a neon
jacket), I couldn't easily blend into the sea of very well-dressed Japanese
celebs and esteemed guests. My father once told me "never be embarrassed by
what you're wearing," so I grinned and nodded and held my head high as if
they were the ones who'd attired far too needlessly.
The director (at the Academy's podium) opened his picture with a short
sentence, "Our Ninja are stronger than ...." I didn't quite get that last
word, though the point seemed obvious.
"Owls' Castle" saturates the white screen with rich color. The hues so
intense, you can almost taste them. The feel of the motion across the screen
suggests some medium other than film. Though, I have no inside information
on this, I suspect many of the sequences where partially or entirely filmed
on high quality digital tape. This is not at all a criticism. Digital cinema
is more or less inevitable, film stock being so expensive to purchase,
duplicate and distribute.
Unfortunately, the feel, color and texture of the picture, where perhaps
it's most redeeming qualities. The plot ... a group of Ninja watch their
town get destroyed and ten years later seek revenge, is complicated a bit by
politics. The pace is needlessly slow, dragging the production over the two
hour mark. While the acting is strong and the main character (Ninja Juzo)
endearingly likeable, the relationships between the characters fall
secondary to cinematography which alone simply does not carry the
production.
Interestingly, Shinoda brings a kind of 1970's American Western feel to the
film with it's staleness and Japanese traditional music punctuated with a
20th century classical score. The beginning is enticing and the climax
nearly wonderful. I enjoyed the idea of the heartless Ninja, so committed to
mission that he's lost a sense of himself and cannot even love. However,
this concept is sorely underplayed, Juzo seldom seeming less than content --
 it's impossible to pity him.
Owls' Castle. Copyright Š 1999. 93 minutes. Rated R.
In Japanese, penned with English subtitles.
Starring Kiichi Nakai, Mayu Tsuruta, Riona Hazuki, Takaya Kamikawa.
Director: Masahiro Shinoda.
Screenplay: Masahiro Shinoda and Katsuo Narita.
Producer: Masaru Kakutani and Masaru Koibuchi at Fuji Television Network.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
unknown
Glen Goei (pronounced "Gwee") born and raised in Singapore, graduated from
Cambridge in England and won the lead role opposite Anthony Hopkins in M.
Butterfly. He's produced and directed several stage plays, "That's the Way I
Like It" is his feature film directing debut.
Despite a long day of talking with journalists, Glen welcomes me with a big
smile and lots of energy. I start in with my most pressing question.
RA: Did you make any attempts to contact John Travolta to play ... himself?
GG: No, I didn't. I'm just this small time independent struggling filmmaker.
It just never occurred to me. The reality is that I'd never even get to him.
Besides I couldn't pay him even for one minute. On his salary I could make
twenty films. He's probably never even heard of Singapore. Of course, it
would have been wonderful. It would have been out of this world.
RA: How about the actor who played John in your film ... was he a
Singaporean local?
GG: No, born and bred in New York ... in Brooklyn. Found him there ... he's
Italian.
RA: The Kung Fu scene is, well, slightly over edge. Why not just go all the
way, but let Ah Hock wake up later in the street, Bluto's first punch having
put him out?
GG: So he wakes up and realizes it was all a dream?
RA: No, not all a dream, just the fight with Bluto.
GG: I mean the whole film is all tongue-in-cheek anyway. But in hindsight, I
might have added another five seconds of fight.
RA: Oh come on, there were plenty of emotional moments.
GG: Well, comedy is more fun when you have heartfelt scenes and similarly,
heartfelt scenes become more heartfelt because of the comedy. Life is a
bittersweet comedy.
RA: That's a good attitude, you should make movies.
RA: Now, let's talk about the gay brother...
GG: He's a transsexual. It's different ... very very different. But anyway,
don't worry about it. Go ahead use gay as the short form.
RA: Well, the film has the feeling of the golden oldie...
GG: ...yeah, Hollywood formula. I literally picked up a how to write a
Hollywood script book and followed it chapter by chapter. But I added in the
social realism to add substance. So it wasn't just a comedy. That's why you
get the edgier moments in the film. I also added the whole subtext, which
was this whole thing with East and West cultures clashing. And I also used
actors who weren't exactly good looking. I used a lead who wasn't a good
looking lead. I wanted it to be a story of the working class underdog. But
you know what? He's good looking by the end. He can act, he can dance, he's
funny. You get drawn to him. Lot's of women love him because he makes you
laugh. So, I used the formula, but started breaking all the rules.
RA: Getting back to the gay brother ... the formula would have worked
without this subject matter, though it worked well with it, but why did you
choose it?
GG: I was pushing the stakes up. I was trying to find a reason why the
brother would want to commit suicide, then I worked backwards from there.
The only reason he would do that is if he was kicked out of his family. If
you're disowned by your father, you might want to kill yourself especially
in 1977 in a traditional Asian family. And in Singapore, homosexuality is
still illegal. So unconsciously I was trying to say, hey maybe you all
should learn to accept other people's sexual identities. People have asked
me if the father was a metaphor for the government. It wasn't meant to be,
but it could be seen that way.
RA: Ah Hock and brother rarely converse over this topic, why is that?
GG: I see a lot of Hollywood films and a lot of things are overly spelled
out. For me, I wanted to make a film that was representive of the culture.
In the Asian culture very little is said.
RA: How long did you have the script before putting it all together on film?
GG: Ten days. I went into pre-production a week later. But that's 'cause I'm
reckless. In hindsight, it was complete craziness. I had raised the money
for a different project and I couldn't cast that film because it was about
fourteen year old kids. So I was in deep ****. I thought I'm not going to
compromise if I can't cast it. So I woke up the next morning and wrote this
film. It's actually very personal for me. A lot of my own experiences are
put in the film as any first time filmmaker does. And indeed that was my
teenagehood. It was all about Bruce Lee and John Travolta. They are the two
icons I celebrate in the film. The 70's were the best decade I every had --
thanks to these two guys.
GG: I have a three picture deal with Miramax. One to be shot in Manhattan.
RA: So you went back to shoot the picture in Singapore?
GG: Thirty days, and I did my entire post production in Sidney.
GG: We don't have a film industry in Singapore and the closest city was
Sidney. But more importantly, I've so enjoyed the Australian films of the
past eight, nine years like "Priscilla," "Shine," you know, a lot of great
films. People are very friendly. A stunning city. The quality of the film
industry is as high as Hollywood. In fact all the top Directors of
photography in Hollywood are Australian.
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
unknown
---Check out this review with images at 
http://artyfarty.8m.com/slaughterhouse_2.htm---
"Every memorable horror movie needs a strong antagonist. sLaughter House's 
Pigsby Malone delivers, again. Uglier than Freddy Krueger, more sadistic 
than Jason Voorhees, weirder that Norman Bates not to mention far more 
humourous than the Crypt Keeper, Pigsby is on a seperate pedestal entirely 
so far as villains are concerned.
In this outrageous sequel to The sLaughter House, the former 'Laughter House 
Clown Training Institute' opens again for 'business'. For those who came in 
late, Pigsby was the ClownMaster before a Satan-inspired nuclear accident 
rendered him and his trainees into horrible mutants who try to entertain to 
death any foolish humans who came near the sLaughterhouse. As in the first 
movie, Pigsby and his mindless minions again dollop out their special brand 
of shock entertainment to the unwitting victims; a bunch of airhead 
teenagers in search of a makeout nest.
You want decapitations? You got'em! Blood splattering everywhere? Like mist! 
Impalements? Plenty for all! Convulsing organs wrenched prematurely from a 
'volunteer, spasmodically squirting pustuous bile, in the magic show to end 
all magic shows? You won't believe your eyes.
You'll die laughing...all over again, with sLaughterhouse II."
"sLaughterhouse 2 and its predecessor are films in the tradition of 
Halloween, Friday the 13th and Nightmare on Elm Street. The story, while 
clichéd, provides for the shock horror entertainment that audiences are 
looking for in this kind of film.  The special makeup effects by Ray Wolfe 
and his team are astounding to say the least, and Pigsby's face is even more 
expressive and realistic than before. Victor Caliph, again as Pigsby gives 
him a  larger-than-life physical presence. And unlike the first film where 
they brought Dariel Andazola in to dub Pigsby's voice, they have actually 
used Mr. Caliph's, which is just as phlegmatic and even spookier."
-New York Film Review
I thought I would include these quotes because they are quite good and I 
agree quite a lot with what they say. sLaughterhouse 2 is the sequel to the 
1991 movie sLaughterhouse set in an evil clown school filled with creepy 
monter-clowns. A bunch of teenagers (four to be precise) stumble into it, in 
this film, a bad move!
The hapless teens are quite pleasant to watch, except when they are being 
impaled! Julia Mooreton plays Julie, a cheerleader out looking for some fun. 
Freddy Samuels, of TV's 'Daydream' fame is quite good as Julie's love, Jim 
the Quarterback of the high-school football team. Nancy McLintic plays Suzy, 
the worrier of the group and Julie's best friend, with a special sixth 
sense. She cautions them to not enter the sLaughterhouse when she says 
"Look, you guys, I have a feeling about this place." Foolishly, the others 
don't listen to her. The other main character is Billy, Jim's wisecracking 
buddy, played by Haskell Cunningham. At the start he and Suzy hate each 
other and are only exploring around because their best friends are there. 
But by the end they have grown to love each other, and when Pigsby finally 
dumps them into the acid, their skeletons float up in an embrace. Their last 
words to each other are "I love you". The romance was quite touching and it 
is sure to appeal to the female members of the audience.
While Steven Snow's screenplay is quite corny, it has some quite funny 
one-liners especially from Billy and of course, Pigsby. Before the night 
watchman is killed, Pigsby asks: "Do you want to hear a killer joke?" He 
then proceeds to scream so loudly in his ear that his brain explodes. I 
frankly went in, expecting a Horror movie with comic bits thrown in. While 
it is quite a good movie, it just wasn't what I was hoping for personally. 
The other problem, is that the film switches from being deadly serious at 
parts, to mocking itself at others, and then back again. I simply hope that 
when the sequal is made (and I guarantee they'll make one) the writers 
figure out what sort of film they're trying to make.
Michael Welton is quite a good director, but sometimes he tries too hard and 
it is not as successful, as it could be. There are some quite strange, 
scary, funny touches in places, like the blood oozing from the letterbox and 
the bowling game with skulls. Some things are gratituosley violent though. 
This is not a film for young children, I'd recommend 15 and above. The 
music, by Johann Simmet is perfect for the film. Highlighting every scene 
and quite spine tingly and scary.
In the words of Pigsby, 'Sit back and relax. You're going to have the time 
of what's left of your life!'


Author
unknown
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Manga Entertainment
 Director: Rintaro
 Writer: Asami Watanabe, story by Clamp, Satsuki Igarashi,
Mokonaapapa, Nanase Ohkawa, Mikku "Mick" Nekoi
 Cast: Tomokazu Seki, Junko Iwao, Ken Narita
   When the Japanese anime people get together to make a
political movie they are not going to be concerned with the
latest development in the race for the Akita City Council or
with the progress of the anti-noise lobby in Narita.  Anime
folks are prone to deal with nothing short of the
apocalyptic: the end of the world.  This is a theme not
unknown in America, which recently saw Peter Hyams direct
Arnold in "End of Days" and Don McKellan ask "where were
you on the final night of the earth" in "Last Night."  Where
Americans are the last word in special effects, first prize goes
to Japan in the sheer color and audacity of its animated
features.  Remember the marvelous "Princess Mononoke,"
which was Hayao Miyazaki's take on the final struggle
between good and evil (a major theme of the Zoroastrian
religion as well, by the way)?  Given the penchant for color
and design of Miyazaki (and let's not forget Satushi Kon's "A
Perfect Blue"), don't be surprised if the integrity of plot is not
uppermost.  If you go to "X" expecting anything like a linear
narrative or slow-moving, step-by-step development of story,
forget about it.  Don't worry if you don't comprehend much of
what's going on or see redundancy in the explosions of
buildings, laser beams that dwarf the rays and shafts of "Star
Wars," and characters who can fly through the air and are
nonetheless vulnerable to thrusts of the sword.  The biggest
audience laugh of the 98-minute film comes about 3/4 of the
way through when one of the central characters says,
"What's going on here?"--the understatement of the evening. 
Look for color, texture, animation, and the sheer joy that the
animators must have had in pushing graphic software to the
limit.
   But if you insist on the age-old need for a plot to give you
half an understanding of the fable, the world is about to end
(so what else is new)?  Only one man, Kamui, can save it. 
He faces the big decision: side with the fear-inspiring
Dragons of Heaven who opt to preserve Tokyo and the rest
of the world with all its problems, or take arms with the
Dragons of Earth who are intent to destroy our planet to save
it. (Huh?)  In a Jekyll-Hyde dualism similar to a theme
explored in "Princess Mononoke," whichever side Kamui
takes, his brother, whom he had early-on sworn to protect
forever, automatically becomes his bitter enemy pledged to
fight Kamui to the death, Star-Wars style.
   The director of this colorful bit of nihilism, Rintaro, has
been in the anime business for over 30 years, known in the
U.S. for directing the TV series "Kimba the White Lion" and
"Astro Boy."  The animation is done by Clamp, aka four
women from an all female animation studio.  The market for
this product is the massive number of comic book fans in the
U.S., say about 14-17 years old, usually associated with the
brightest people in their special-progress high-school classes. 
In Japan, in fact, the word is that this age group is going
more to anime films than to the reactionary passe stuff
peopled by human actors.  If one insists on interpretations of
the allegory, the two brothers represent humankind at war. 
Though alle menschen wierden bruder (says Beethoven in
the fourth movement of his ninth symphony), remember that
the tale of Cain and Abel ended in a not so fraternal manner. 
Are we doomed to be killed by our fellow creatures who look
more or less like us but have different political or religious
ideologies?  It sure looks that way if you go along with the
flow of "X."  Aside from that, a happy ending and we all go
home.  All of us, that is, who are about 16 and chose to see
and probably groove on this film while they could--somehow
knowing that ten years from now, they could see the same
thing and say, "Huh...I really went for something like this?"
Not Rated.  Running Time: 98 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
unknown
 A documentary with James Newton, Thomas Edison, Harvey Firestone, Henry
Ford, Charles Lindbergh. Not Rated (nothing offensive).
James Newton is one fortunate fellow. The 94-year-old Floridian can tout
being intimate friends with some of the world's most influential people.
Yes, Thomas Edison, Henry Ford, Charles Lindbergh and Harvey Firestone
were all Newton's cronies and the man is quite proud of his relationship
with them. Uncommon Friends of the 20th Century, a new documentary
narrated by Walter Cronkite claims to tell Newton's story; in reality,
however, it is only a mildly diverting history lesson, and not a very
complete one at that.
The film tackles its subjects almost methodically, starting with Edison
and wrapping up with Lindbergh. Insight isn't this 63 minute
production's forte; we do, however, get enough interesting tidbits to
hold our attention for its mercifully short running time. We learn, for
example, that Thomas Edison loved children and did his best to boost
their self-confidence. We discover that Lindbergh's greatest foe on his
journey across the Atlantic was sleep. Firestone, evidently, was the
"human portrait of dignity". We are given countless little factoids like
that which, while interesting, don't amount to much.
Much of Uncommon Friends feels utterly authentic, with genuine, well-
edited footage of its subjects and compelling narration by the
dependable journalist Cronkite. Unfortunately the film is intercut with
"dramatic reenacments" that are lame, inept and horrifyingly cheesy.
They undermine the film's otherwise prevalent sense of verisimilitude,
making it seem phony, somehow contrived (especially in retrospect).
This is a very conventional documentary hiding behind a rather original
facade. You see, it has very little to do with James Newton, and the
material they put in about him is little more than a justification to be
able to put his name in the synopsis and name the film Uncommon Friends
of the 20th Century. This doesn't, I suppose, negatively affect the
movie if judged on its cinematic merits, but it does add to its
fabricated feel.
Considering all its flaws, Uncommon Friends of the 20th Century is
really better than it deserves to be. Truth be told, I enjoyed it
despite its reenactments, deceitful title and hollow structure. The
movie ends, as many documentaries do, by updating us on the current
status of its (alleged) subject. As we were being told that James Newton
lives in Florida with his wife, likes long walks on the beach, etc., All
I could think was "Who cares?" But the stories of Edison, Firestone,
Ford and Lindbergh, American legends, still manage to be compelling.

Author
unknown
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Six top Hollywood filmmakers take an entertaining and
provocative look at the issues of the millennium in a new SHOWTIME
series titled "In the 20th Century." Using archival material,
interviews with experts, and newly-shot footage, these feature-length
documentaries will air on a monthly basis, beginning Monday, June 14,
at 10 P.M. with "Marriage in the 20th Century," hosted by director
Garry Marshall, who has been married to the same woman for 36
years. In addition to his own family experience, he has often explored
the topic in his work - from "The Lucy Show" and "Happy Days" to
"Pretty Woman" and the upcoming "Runaway Bride." His favorite
characters are often looking for love and hoping for a fairytale
ending that comes with a marriage proposal and a ring. Using the set
of "Runaway Bride" as a starting point, he embarks on a journey which
reveals how marriage has changed throughout the century. Whether it's
a civil ceremony presided over by a justice of the peace or a more
colorful visit to a drive-up wedding chapel in Las Vegas, where the
bride is given away by an Elvis impersonator, he reveals that the ways
in which couples marry are as varied as the reasons they decide to
take the leap. Marshall candidly delves into inter-racial and
homosexual marriage, plus the once-taboo issue of divorce. I felt that
this heartfelt homage to marriage was at least a half-hour too long,
as Marshall repeatedly emphasizes that, despite the pitfalls, people
will inevitably continue the search for a happy ending. If you miss
Monday night's segment, it will be repeated on June 30 at 12:15
A.M.. Future episodes include Barry Levinson on "The Future," Robert
Townsend on "Sex," Norman Jewison on "Comedy," Gregory Nava on "The
American Dream," and Robert Zemeckis on "Smoking, Drinking, and
Drugging." They all should be worth watching.

Author
unknown
"A failed yakuza.  The lowest of the low."
        Nothing's easier than making a movie about hookers and hitmen,
because you don't need to know anything about people--you just need to have
seen a lot of movies.  Miike Takashi might know a great deal about people,
but you wouldn't know it from RAINY DOG; all you know is that he has
doubtless seen a lot of movies, many of them involving hitmen and hookers.
Perhaps he once worked in the Japanese equivalent of that video store where
Quentin Tarantino worked, for he is similarly adept with the conventions of
gangster movies.  He deploys those conventions with effortless enthusiasm,
but relies on them too much, to his detriment.
        RAINY DOG is one of those doomed hitmen thrillers, where it is
patently obvious within the first five minutes that the central character
will be shot to death in the final scene.  The marked man in this case is
Yuji (Aikawa Sho), a "failed yakuza" slumming it in Taipei.  He earns a
living performing hits for a triad boss.  One day, a woman he once slept
with appears at his door with a young boy in tow.  She tells Yuji that the
boy is his son, then she leaves.  Yuji ignores the boy, but relents in
time, allowing him into the apartment.  The boy, following the hitman
around, dogging his heels, becomes a kind of externalization of Yuji's
conscience and sense of honour.  Appropriately, he is mute.
        As is usually the case in this kind of movie, the hitman is not so
much a character as an existential cipher.  Yuji is a taciturn fatalist
whose emotional numbness and isolation is perhaps intended to embody some
deeper notion about the human condition, but doesn't.  Aikawa is fine in
the role, but he fails to bring the requisite doomed nobility to the part.
He is just a worn-down man doing a job, beyond caring.  He doesn't give a
damn, and neither do we.
        Aikawa is not helped much by his director; while Miike has a
natural, low-key, unpretentious style which invigorates most scenes, he
devotes little of his energy to bringing Yuji to life.  When Yuji kills,
the murders are depicted dispassionately.  No flashy angles, no stylish
flourishes.  It is a refreshing contrast to the aesthetic hysterics of John
Woo et al., but weary realism cannot elevate Yuji to the level of an
anti-heroic icon, which is what is needed if the film is to succeed on its
own terms.
        Most of what is good in the movie instead happens at the edges.
The rain which falls incessantly on the alleys and rooftops of Taipei
provides a suitably grey and melancholy backdrop.  Lilly, a prostitute who
maintains a web-site where she describes herself as a beautician, is a
character with promise, but the movie doesn't give her the chance to
develop.   There is a good scene in which Yuji and another Japanese hitman,
who has been trying to kill him for three years, have a guardedly polite
conversation over lunch.  When they're done, Yuji beats the other man
senseless in an alley; such is the nature of their relationship.
        It's a shame that the film insists on coming back to the redundant
hitman plot.  Predictably, Yuji kills a gangster and earn the enmity of his
brother, who swears revenge.  Events proceed as they must, to the showdown,
where the amoral hitman, faced with death, finds a vestige of humanity in
his heart.  Yawn.  It is unworthy of the director's talent.
        Miike studied at Shohei Imamura's Japanese Academy of Visual Arts
and was his assistant on ZEGEN and BLACK RAIN.  His work seems influenced
by the older director: both are fascinated by the outcasts of society, both
have a mordant sense of black humour, both have set movies in Yokosuka (a
U.S. military base during the post-World War II occupation).  But the
similarities only go so far.  Imamura would never have made RAINY DOG,
because his work focuses on people first and narrative conventions second.
Miike gets it the wrong way round here.  Of the three films I've seen by
him, the only one which forges ahead into unfamiliar territory is THE BIRD
PEOPLE OF CHINA; by not much of a coincidence, it is also the best one I've
seen.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com)
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)

Author
unknown
   "Humanity" ("L'Humanite") is a film not so difficult to
classify as it is simply to sit through.  Almost diametrically the
opposite of a standard Hollywood creation, "Humanity" puts
little emphasis on plot, even less on what we usually think of
as beauty, virtually none on music or cinematography or slick,
professional acting, and even less on anything resembling
clever turns-of-phrases and the like.  Bruno Dumont filmed
his scenes almost wholly in the small working class, Northern
French town of Bailleul--not far from Lille--the stylization =
restricted almost wholly to unusual close-ups of parts of
people's bodies.  While Dumont paces his story at about the
same pace as his countryman, Eric Rohmer, his dialogue is
as unlike Rohmer's as it is from Jerry Bruckheimer's.  =
   So...what's it all about, Alfie?  "Humanity" is about nothing
less than life and death, sex and violence, pity and tragedy;
in short, about what makes us living human beings.  Dumont
is obviously inspired by the late, great Robert Bresson who
expressed himself on film "as a poet would with his pen"
(according to Jean Cocteau).  Like Bresson he is a
philosopher with a camera whose films ("The Life of Jesus"
for example) contain only the bare essentials that he wants to
explore, and he explores this limited material with a rigorous
attention to detail.  Even in his display of a series of paintings
in the current film, he mimes Bresson in avoiding beautiful
images in favor of "necessary" ones, and like Bresson he has
no use for skilled, professional actors.
   In this long movie that plods ahead like molasses crawling
up a tree in January, and with a storyline used as an excuse
for some statements about life, Dumont spreads before us a
few days in the life of a small-town police officer, Pharaon De
Winter (Emmanuel Schotte), who has a burning, unrequited
lust for a neighbor, Domino (Severine Caneele).  Pharaon
once had a woman friend and a baby who both died two
years earlier and he tags along as a fifth wheel to Domino
and her insensitive, bus-driver boy friend, Joseph (Philippe
Tullier).  Reacting with horror to the rape-murder of an
eleven-year-old girl, Pharaon is so sensitive, so unlike
Joseph, that he agonizes with unfiltered emotions to the
heinous crime.  So visceral is his torment that in the dramatic
opening scene, he is caught in close-up by Dumont's
photographer, Yves Cape, running along the countryside,
huffing and puffing, until he collapses to the ground, hugging
the muddy earth as though he were embracing the core of life
itself.  =
   If Pharaon is the essence of sensitivity and Joseph the
extract of indifference, Domino is the elixir of earthiness.  The
large-boned, amateur actress, Severine Caneele, comes
across looking faintly transsexual, an earth-mother who gives
in boldly and joyously to her sexual urges.  Cape's camera
hones in as graphically as any in recent years on sexual acts
engaged in by Joseph and Domino, showing Domino as a
woman who is barely concerned when she is accidentally
observed by Pharaon--who has dull-wittedly swung her door
open and stands unblinkingly witnessing her performance.  In
one unforgettable image, the camera closes in on her entire
pelvic area, displayed as an adult copy of the same bodily
segment shown in closeup of the little dead girl lying in the
field.
   What rivets us to the screen throughout the extended
running time is director Dumont's singular emphasis on life's
details, which we observe through Pharaon's eyes.  The big,
bull neck of the hardworking but barely competent police
chief (Ghislain Ghesquere) receives the same attention as a
gigantic hog lying in the barn being suckled by a litter of her
piglets.  Pharaon, used by the director to represent life's
humanity, compensates for his dullness of mind by his
unusual sensitivity.  When an Algerian drug pusher is brought
in by the police chief for questioning and left alone in the
room with De Winter, Pharaon more than compensates for
his intellectual numbness and unblinking expression by his
tactile genius.  He puts his hand around the prisoner's neck
and smells him as would a dog, indicating his empathy with
the accused and at the same time representing to us that
compassion and kindness lie not in our verbal acumen or
quickness of mental alertness but in our more basic, physical
mammalian faculties.
   What Dumont has succeeded in giving us--or those of us
who have the discernment, patience and sitzfleisch to settle
in for a look at this director's universe Bressonian universe--is
a gaze at the essence of humanity, which reaches us
because he does not distract us with anything resembling a
Hollywood form.  Dumont's picture takes place in a
commonplace, vapid town with everyday, insipid people. =
Because of Dumont's minimalism, we are all the more able to
perceive the complex passions, jealousies, and struggles to
understand what for good and evil makes us all human.  This
picture, which has divided its audience from the first showing,
was the surprise runner-up for top ribbon at the Cannes Film
Festival, its two principal theps taking home the top prize for
their performances.
Not Rated.  Running time: 148 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
unknown
     At this writing we are just back from Baltic Europe and I thought you
might find of interest some comments I made on my last trip, to India when I
went to see a sort of horror film in Hindi.
     During the Great Depression when people were working long hours for
small rewards, the film industry decided that people need glamor in their
lives. Movies became more glamorous and movie theaters became movie
palaces.  You paid your few cents for a ticket and you entered a world of
opulence.  Most of the palaces are now history or falling apart.  In India,
however, where the world's largest film industry still thrives, the concept
of the movie palace is still going strong.  The Raj Mandir in Jaipur is the
second-best theater in all of Asia according to the Lonely Planet guide.  It
is an impressive building, with mirrored interiors, pink decor, and rounded
rampways to higher floors.  The theater's capacity is about 1300 people.  As
we approached, a huge movie board announced it was showing Kumar's KHAL-
NAAIKAA.  For as little as Rs7 for the front row to Rs18 for the Diamond
Box, you can see a film on the big screen (about twenty-five feet high and
fifty feet wide).  (A rupee is about three cents.)  We each got into line.
They have separate lines for men and women.  No hanky-panky in line!  The
women's line went faster so Evelyn bought the tickets. We went inside and
admired the interiors for a while, then the lights dimmed.
     KHAL-NAAIKAA is about two-and-a-half hours long and the plot was not
hard to follow even if it was entirely in Hindi.  What helped especially was
what Evelyn pointed out how familiar the plot actually was.  This was
Bombay's two-and-a-half-hour musical remake of THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE
CRADLE.  Now we never bothered to see this film, but we did hear what the
plot was and it was pretty much all there, including the governess's weird
motive for her evil and even a greenhouse murder that exactly repeated the
scene in the coming attraction for the American film.  Just why anyone needs
a greenhouse in India would be anybody's guess.  Mr.  Kumar is not one to
take only partial advantage of the unenforcibility of copyright law.  He is
a very thorough thief. But what about is this about it being a musical?
Well, just about all Indian films are musicals regardless of subject matter.
This was the very first psychotic killer musical we had ever seen, but we
bet others in the audience had seen more than enough psycho-killer musicals.
Before I get to the film itself, I want to mention one more thing about the
theater itself.  The ceiling of the screening room is highly fluted and
apparently at least two birds were nesting there and at inopportune times
would fly in front of the screen.  Kumar was often very creative in how he
put in his production numbers. The heroine is singing a production number
on television at one point and the villainess reaches into the television
screen and pulls out the heroine and the two sing together.  A second grab
at the heroine causes her to fall back into the screen.  All during this
scene the Venetian blinds, which are white on one side and red on the other,
flash from red to white and back.  Rebecca DeMornay is fairly attractive and
the part calls for her to be seductive.  The Indian woman who plays the same
role does fill the bill.
     One of the things that helps the understanding is that there is a lot
of English language used in the film.  Scenes in a doctor's office are in
English and a fair number of English phrases are used at odd moments.
People say, "I love you," in English.  It seems odd to go to Jaipur to see a
version of THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE, but you do learn a fair amount
about Indian culture from the experience and it is a comfortable and
pleasant three hours.

Author
unknown
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = okay/average)
1999, no MPAA rating, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
Starring: Francisco Aliwalas (West Cordova), Potri Ranica Manis (Mrs. 
Cordova), Wayland Quintero (Eduardo `Danger' Cordova); produced by Douglas 
Bachman; written and directed by Francisco Aliwalas
Seen May 13, 1999 at 9:10 p.m. at The Spectrum Theatre (Albany, NY), theater 
#5, by myself for $7. [Theater rating: ***: good seats, picture and sound]
[Critic's note: This film is about as independent as they come. It's so small 
that it hasn't been picked up by a distributor (yet) and it's not even listed 
on the Internet Movie Database. The director grew up and went to school in 
Guilderland, N.Y. which is only a few miles from Schenectady where I live. 
        According to information I've read on some film festival web pages, 
Aliwalas went to film school at Rochester Institute of Technology and shot 
this film in Albany and Guilderland sometime in 1996 or 1997 (although 
there's no specific references to the date and location of the story). 
However, I'm using the release date of 1999 just to maintain some kind of 
continuity.
        In April, Aliwalas lent the film to The Spectrum Theatre (the only 
arthouse theater in the Capital District) to be shown as a regular movie. The 
first few showings he held question and answer sessions about the film, which 
I'm ashamed to admit I missed. The film played there for about a month and I 
didn't have time to see it until its very last showing!
        Anyway, I'm hoping that by reviewing the film and posting my review 
on the Internet it will get more attention and possibly a listing on the 
IMDb. The only problem is I haven't been able to get a copy of the complete 
cast and crew (my apologies to all those I missed).]
        If we're to believe what the movies tell us, drama only comes in a 
few shapes and forms, with those being on really big scales and of events and 
emotions so major and powerful they're the kind that can only happen in 
movies. But then there's `Disoriented,' a film that's pretty small in just 
about every way, but has a quaint charm to it, showing that powerful drama 
(or sometimes melodrama) can be found at the local level.
        Drama is probably the easiest genre to work with as a first-time 
filmmaker on a tight budget because it doesn't require special effects or a 
lot of props or fantastic scenery (and yes, that old cliche is true - it's 
harder to do comedy than drama). Rookie filmmaker Francisco Aliwalas probably 
realized this and put together a story that could be told and filmed entirely 
in the Capital District of Albany, N.Y. 
        Aliwalas himself stars as West Cordova, a 20-something-year-old 
Filipino-American who's a struggling pre-med student living at home with his 
overbearing, conservative, traditional Catholic mother (Manis) who obviously 
hasn't so much guided him in life as she has pushed him. The two live in a 
section of their city that's not where the people well-off would live, but 
isn't the crack slums either. West works part time as a deliverer of Chinese 
take-out while his mother is a maid at a sleazy motel. 
        Aliwalas is quick to establish the setting of the story, giving us 
that feeling that things haven't been and probably won't be easy for this 
family. We also learn that Mr. Cordova left the family 10 years ago for a 
younger woman and the other son, Eduardo `Danger' Cordova (Quintero), who was 
a sports prodigy in high school, hasn't been seen in a while either.
        The film's first act does a fine job in establishing all the problems 
and conflicts in West's life, and most of them will pale in comparison to 
what will happen to him later on in the story. The first thing the film is 
able to convey well, and what is one of the most important aspects of the 
theme and atmosphere, is just how overbearing West's mother is. Some might 
say she's in a state of denial about the family and the problems she faces on 
a daily basis, but it's not so much that factor as it is her upbringing. She 
comes from a different culture and can't really comprehend modern American 
society, so she sticks to the traditions and values she knows.
        Mrs. Cordova's character is surprisingly easy to relate to because 
she doesn't just represent culture clash but generational clash, which is 
something everyone can relate to. 
        And with clash comes conflict and in the case of this film it comes 
in the form of the return of Danger who is still as seemingly jocular as 
ever, but with one major change - he's gay.
        Instead of launching right into emotional battles between Danger, 
West and Mrs. Cordova, the film decides to take it slow as West convinces his 
brother to remain closeted while he stays at home for a week or so. There are 
a few occasional outbursts between Danger and his mother, but they serve 
mostly as transitions from scene to scene and remind us there's a heavy 
dramatic tone to the mostly-lighthearted film.        
        And yes, the film is rather lighthearted in the midst of the drama. 
Although the tensions between the Cordova family are the biggest thematic 
element, a few other sub-plots crop up which are at least interesting. The 
best of these is a friendship which develops between West and another 
Filipino man named Speedy Sparkles, who owns and runs a car wash. The two 
seem to have a natural bond immediately and when Speedy begins offering West 
pieces of sage advice it doesn't seem out of the ordinary. However, their 
mentor/protege relationship seems to move a bit too fast. It's hard to 
believe that two strangers would be so nice to each other, especially in the 
way it's filmed here which seems like something out of `Sesame Street.'
        Another interest sidebar is West's meeting and fascination with a 
Japanese girl named Minniko, who also meets and gets to know just by being 
very nice. Minniko doesn't have much direction in life either other than she 
wants to be a model and more American. She even puts up with an obnoxious, 
almost racist boyfriend named Manny which doesn't seem to make sense. Later, 
when West tries to win her over, the two never really seem attracted to each 
other. Their friendship or allegedly romantic relationship has a very forced 
feeling to it. Perhaps they come together out of loneliness, yet there's 
still an absence of chemistry.
        For a film that has such a good mix of characters, conflicts and 
overall situations, the execution of the story is surprisingly weak. Perhaps 
Aliwalas gets in over his head by having so many dramatic sub-plots and other 
sidebars that the only way to resolve every conflict is through melodrama 
(specific examples of this would serve as spoilers to those who haven't seen 
the film, but let's just say they're things that have been done before and 
seem out of place here).        
        Every character is so perfectly poised to knock down at least one 
other character it's just a bit too much to swallow. And when things do 
finally come to their individual climaxes the drama, which had been tight, 
believable and realistic all along, takes a turn for the melodramatic in what 
seems to be efforts just to please the audience. The [happy] ending is pretty 
much proof of this.
        Although `Disoriented' has some problems, they are forgivable for the 
most part. Even during the times of sheer and pure drama for the sake of 
drama, the film consistently remains interesting to watch and does through in 
a few surprises here and there.
