Title
Review for "Nico (marca registrada)" (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
When first Steven Seagal movies appeared in former
Yugoslavia, local video distributors didn't look very
inventive in marketing them. HARD TO KILL, MARKED FOR DEATH
and OUT FOR JUSTICE were distributed as NICO 2, NICO 3 and
NICO 4 - presumably as sequels to the first Seagal movie,
NICO (ABOVE THE LAW). Fact that Seagal had played different
characters in each of the films, and that the plot and
characters actually hadn't had anything in common, didn't
seem to bother local (mostly pirate) distributors. For
die-hard Seagal anti-fans (and they seem to be more vocal
than Seagal fans) that could be the ultimate proof of
Seagal's limited acting skills and his inability to be
anything more than mediocre star of formulaic action films
indistinguishable from each other. On the other hand,
Seagal's fans might take this example as a proof that Seagal
in his debut as an actor and producer, directed in 1988 by
Andrew Davis, actually made very good and lasting
impression.
Protagonist of this film is Nico Toscani (played by Steven
Seagal), son of Sicilian immigrants who went to Japan to
study martial arts. His talents brought the attention of
CIA, which recruited him and sent him to take part in some
covert operations on Vietnamese-Cambodian border in 1973.
There he became disgusted with his superiors like Zagon
(played by Henry Silva), who used war as an opportunity to
engage into lucrative drug trade. Fifteen years after
leaving the Agency, Nico works as Chicago police detective
and one day finds out about major drug deal that involves
Salvadorian drug lord Salvano (played by Daniel Faraldo).
Nico and his partner, female detective Jax (played by Pam
Grier), manage to arrest Salvano, but the drug lord is
immediately released at the request of high Federal
officials. Not listening to the orders to back off, Nico
begins his own investigation that would link Salvano and his
old pals from CIA.
For many people, NICO is the best Seagal film. It might be
arguable whether it is the best Seagal film or not, but NICO
still has all important Seagal trademarks. Luckily, Seagal's
lack of skills in scriptwriting and acting is compensated.
We might disregard Seagal's wooden acting when in action
scenes that feature Seagal using his superb fighting skills
and doing most of his own stunts. Sometimes preposterous
elements of the plot (Nico just "bails out" after being
witness to the dirtiest possible CIA covert operation;
spectacular, but definitely unrealistic assassination
attempts etc.) are contrasted with the realistic atmosphere.
Chicago-born director and script co- writer Andrew Davis
uses his hometown locations and local acting talents with
great success. Some of the supporting actors are great, like
former blaxploitation star Pam Grier, while some, like
Sharon Stone in rather thankless role of Nico's wife, show
even less talent than Seagal himself. What distinguishes
this film from the multitude of formulaic 1980s action films
is the political message, more in line with the writings of
Noam Chomsky than with the speeches of Ronald Reagan. CIA
and, indirectly US government as a whole, is empowered with
huge powers, which, unchecked because of "national security"
considerations, might prove to be the ultimate threat to
American democracy and world peace, much greater than any
"evil empires" out there. This message is explicitly
delivered to the audience through Seagal's sermon, another
of his trademarks. This message might look somewhat dated
now, after the end of Cold War, when USA lost motivation to
be engaged into dirty little wars in Central America.
However, even those who don't care much about political
messages in the movies might really enjoy NICO as flawed,
yet still entertaining example of an action genre.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
