Title
Review for Angie (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by Martha Coolidge  
Written by Todd Graff, based on the novel "Angie, I Says" by Avra Wing
Starring Geena Davis
MPAA Rating "R" (presumably for adult-themed humor)
Running Time    Approx. 110 minutes
     ANGIE doesn't make a bit of sense.  Which is shame, considering how
likeable this Geena Davis vehicle really *is*.
     ANGIE is Angie Scacciapensieri (Davis), a Catholic/Italian/Brooklyn
gal with an okay boyfriend and a better job.  By day, she works for a
magazine.  By night, she dates a plumber.  (Named, what else?, Vinnie.)
The twist comes when the supposedly free-spirited Scacciapensieri gets
pregnant and doesn't want to get married.  Because, as she states,
"having a baby changes everything."  No duh.
     Which pits Angie against her family, her friends, and, ultimately,
herself.
     There's a *lot* to like about ANGIE.  There's good acting across
the board, from Mrs. Renny Harlin on down.  The
less-than-ethnic-looking Davis effortlessly carries the film.  She's a
striking actress *and*, as proven here, a dependable talent.  Some of
the better supporting players include James Gandolfini, Aida Tuturro,
and THE CRYING GAME's Stephen Rea as a love-interest.
     More importantly, the characters *feel* real.  As do (most of) the
situations.  The production values are good.  The timing is good.  All
in all, a very good effort.
     ANGIE never explains Angie.  Or, if you prefer, the film never
clearly explains who Angie *is.*  We know more of what *happens* to her
anything else.  In fact, Angie goes through enough dramatic situations
to fill *three* films.  Her monologue to an incubator, alone, should
send collective estrogen levels soaring.
     The story skimps in a couple other places.  Angie's reason for
leaving Vinnie is never made clear.  And her truck-stop transformation
late in the film, where she cuts all her hair herself, is barely
believable.
     Over-playing and unintentional omissions aside, there's enough
honest humor in ANGIE to amuse anyone.  Better bits include Angie
registering into the hospital as "Angie Scotchandsoda" and a
delivery-room scene complete with A CHORUS LINE.
     Ultimately, ANGIE feels like a "greatest hits" compilation from a
longer, stronger movie.  The early scenes work well, but the film goes
downhill, a bit, as the drama is played increasingly hard.  Like any
compilation, it's a pleasant experience even if none of the scenes,
good or not-so-good, ever tell us who Angie really is.  Which may leave
some viewers feeling hollow.
NOTE:   I don't know what is a funnier example of "intended audience."
        The "stay in school" PSA shown before SUGAR HILL?  Or the weepy
        Miramax trailers shown before ANGIE? :)

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Geena Davis, Aida Turturro, James Gandolfini, 
           Philip Bosco, Stephen Rea, Jenny O'Hara 
Director:  Martha Coolidge 
Producers:  Larry Brezner and Patrick McCormick 
Screenplay:  Todd Graff 
Music:  Jerry Goldsmith 
Released by Hollywood Pictures 
     Martha Coolidge's ANGIE begins as a delightful, if somewhat
familiar, romp through romantic comedy territory.  Then, somewhere in
the middle, it becomes something completely different.  Depending on
the individual, this shift may be seen as a welcome surprise or an
unpleasant diversion.  There are those who will find it to be both.
One thing ANGIE is not, however, is typical.
     Born in Bensonhurst in 1961, Angie (Geena Davis) grew up without
her mother, who ran away when she was three.  She spent her formative
years living with her father (Philip Bosco) and stepmother (Jenny
O'Hara), a woman whom she never liked.  Now in her early thirties,
Angie finds herself pregnant by her boyfriend Vinnie (James Gandolfini)
who, upon learning of the happy event, promptly decides that they
should get married.  Angie reluctantly agrees, but it isn't until she
meets a blarney-spewing Irishman named Noel (Stephen Rea) that she has
the courage to face Vinnie with her doubts.
     No one is going to find themselves in unfamiliar territory at the
outset of ANGIE.  For the first half, the storyline is pure romantic
comedy, complete with the two boyfriends--each representing a
different lifestyle--and the various subplots and complications.
Then, following a hilarious birth scene that features profane
renditions of Marvin Hamlisch songs, the tone and intent of ANGIE
shifts to melodrama, and there aren't many more laughs to be had.  This
frothy motion picture turns serious in a hurry.
     Some might find the abrupt shift in mood disconcerting or annoying
and, to a degree, it is both.  But it also represents a welcome change
that the film is willing to break away from the expected norms and
spring a series of surprises on the audience.  There's nothing so bland
as a movie whose next events can be predicted scenes in advance.  ANGIE
may be flawed in a number of ways, but this isn't one of them.
     One of the reasons the movie survives the second-half melodrama is
because the acting keeps things at a high level, even on those
occasions when the dialogue turns stilted.  Geena Davis is consistently
strong, and Stephen Rea is a whirlwind of energy and charm.  Together,
the two work perfectly.  The rest of the cast is adequate at worst,
including Aida Turturro in a part that could have been written for
Rosie O'Donnell.
     Much has been made of ANGIE's appeal to the female audience, but I
found the movie to be universally enjoyable.  The character of Angie
has enough depth and richness to attract the sympathy and undestanding
of any viewer, whether that person is a man or a woman.
     The key to enjoying ANGIE is to not anticipate the expected.  What
the film starts as is not what it becomes by the time that the final
credits roll.  Those that go in with an open mind--and a willingness
to overlook a number of minor faults--are more likely to enjoy the
picture than those who approach it with certain preconceived notions.
The transformation may not be elegant or seamless, but it gives this
movie a distinction of originality, a trait which has become
increasingly scant in Hollywood productions.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Tak
One-Line-Summary
----------------
     A woman comes to grips with her life, challenging her lifestyle,
family, friends and child in the process.
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Angie's (Geena Davis) dreams and ambitions are different than
those of her friend Tina (Aida Turturro), or her family (James
Gandolfini, Jenny O'Hara).  So it's no surprise that things become
difficult: she breaks with longtime boyfriend Vinnie (Philip Bosco)
after becoming pregnant, and has an affair with Noel (Stephen Rea), a
Manhattan lawyer.  In trying to define herself, she faces her family's
dark secrets, and learns responsibility for herself and her baby.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     I think you have to be a woman to *truly* appreciate ANGIE.
Directed by Martha Coolidge (RAMBLING ROSE), ANGIE touches on many
issues, including pregnancy, childbirth, and searching for her identity
and place within her family structure.  This movie focuses on a woman,
is directed by a woman, and is target at women.  And that's fine--it's
about time.  But, being male, I wasn't as moved.
     There's one scene where Angie reflects on childbirth as having
finally made her feel like a part of something bigger than herself.  A
chain from mother to daughter, stretching back through time and on into
the future.  Yeah.  Okay.  If you say so.  I'd imagine this has a
greater impact if you're female.  The same with the childbirth scenes,
where Angie goes through about five different emotions within the span
of four minutes, and runs down the traditional retorts made so familiar
by female comedians. The material seemed tired to me, but I suppose
it's a never-ending source of material for women, just like being
knee'd in the groin is for men. I imagine women are a bit tired of
that, but it never fails to get at least a little bit of a reaction
from me.  So I guess I'll have to deal with the childbirth shtick.
     Geena Davis has been called "a feminist spirit trapped in the body
of a goddess" (which suggests an inaccurate contradiction) in Feb
Premiere magazine.  As such, her roles are always interesting.  Her
characters are complicated people, and in the case of Angie, are not
above making mistakes.  Which makes for good viewing.  Plus, the accent
she picked up for the role of Angie is outrageously accurate.
     I felt empathy with Vinnie, Angie's longtime boyfriend.  He just
doesn't quite understand why Angie has to be so difficult, or her
strong spark of irreverence and energy.  He's "... got a good heart ...",
but that's not enough for her.  At first I thought James Gandolfini's
Vinnie was going to degenerate into the stereotypical Italian, but it
didn't happen, for which I was profoundly glad.
     I like to listen for comments as people are walking away.  I get
some gems that way--some people would make great critics (actually
some of them are) if they'd expand their one-liners.  The best one from
ANGIE was from two guys as they walked out of the theatre:  "Well ...
there was some good stuff there, but it's certainly not for me." To
which the other guy added his assent.  And I'll add mine, too.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     I didn't get a lot out of ANGIE. I enjoyed watching it, and it
engaged my interest and even my emotions to some extent.  But I can't
see myself watching it at the theatre again.  I would have been happy
to watch ANGIE on cable, and I recommend you do the same.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     There is a sub-genre of film drama, only recently identified,
which has come to be known as the "chick movie."  The term has at times
been used to define any film which women tend to like more than men
(SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE comes to mind), but in its strictest sense I
define a "chick film" as one which deals with relationships men could
only attempt to comprehend:  mother-daughter, female friendships, and
birth mother-child.  ANGIE definitely falls within this framework.
It's got mothers, daughters, friends, childbirth and a dose of
heartbreak to guarantee maximum lacrimal viscosity, and all these
things may affect the target audience.  I found myself impressed by
Geena Davis' performance, but bothered by the obvious and excessive
manipulation which never really pays off, and by some unfortunate mixed
messages.
     Davis plays the title character, Bensonhurst, Brooklyn resident
Angie Scacciapensieri.  Approaching thirty, Angie has spent her whole
life in the same neighborhood with the same best friend, Tina (Aida
Turturro), and the same boyfriend, Vinnie (James Gandolfini).  Then one
day, something does change in Angie's life: she's pregnant.  As
everyone assumes she and Vinnie will be getting married, Angie begins
to think about all the experiences she's been missing.  She begins a
relationship with flighty attorney Noel (Stephen Rea), and tries to
expand her horizons.  But as the baby arrives, Angie realizes that
ultimately she must confront the memory of the mother who deserted her
at the age of three to get her life straight.
     Geena Davis' performance as Angie is easily the best thing about
ANGIE, which is fine because it's also the most important thing.  Most
of Davis' roles to date have emphasized her comic talents, but ANGIE
confirms what THELMA & LOUISE suggested:  that Davis is a very gifted
all around actor.  She gets to work with the whole range of emotions,
big and small, bright and dark, and she handles all of them with grace
and sparkle.  Stephen Rea is also extremely slick and charming as Noel,
and the scenes between Davis and Rea provide many of ANGIE's
highlights.  Through its first hour, ANGIE is an interesting and
appealing character drama with real promise.
     The second half of Todd Graff's script suffers from two major
problems.  The first is that it seriously overloads on emotional high
points.  There were at least four separate points at which I thought
that ANGIE had reached its climax, and what made that decision the most
frustrating is that none of them quite provided the catharsis that
ANGIE needed but always just missed.  I got the feeling that Hollywood
Pictures had tested several endings, found that the audiences responded
to each one, and then decided to keep them all.  Consequently, ANGIE
loses its narrative momentum two thirds of the way through and coasts
to the finish on its tear-jerking.
     The second, and perhaps more distracting, problem is a rather
personal distaste for what I perceived as a sell-out in the change in
Angie's perspective which occurs at the end of the film.  ANGIE begins
as a story about a woman who feels trapped by her life trying to change
it for the better through new experiences.  When some of these new
experiences don't turn out well, and Angie's life takes some
disappointing turns, she seems to take all the wrong lessons away from
those experiences.  A speech Angie makes to her baby surprised me by
suggesting that Angie believed her problem was thinking too much about
herself, when I felt she was thinking about herself for the first time
in her life.  The fits and starts in the film's many climaxes left me
wondering what it was that I was supposed to have learned from Angie's
story.
     It is a given that a film like ANGIE pulls emotional strings, and
that in itself is not a failing.  Manipulating our emotions is what
films are supposed to do; the best ones just manage to do it so
skillfully that we don't notice or don't care.  ANGIE doesn't achieve
that deft middle ground.  It crosses its signals, piles on the pathos,
and leaves its star to carry most of its emotional baggage.
