Title
Review for Only When I Laugh (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Stage actress Marsha Mason is checking out of an alcohol
rehab center, where she has spent the last three months.
She is given a ride back to her New York City home by
Toby (Joan Hackett), her best friend.  Toby is a fading beauty who
is obsessed with her appearance in an attempt to
retain her looks and marriage.  Jimmy (James Coco), her other 
best friend, is stocking the fridge and preparing the
homecoming.  Jimmy is a gay middle-aged actor.
This being a Neil Simon play, there is lots of dialogue,
which is supposed to be funny and heart-warming but
mostly fails to be either.
Later, Mason meets her teenage daughter Kristy McNichol, 
who wants to move in and re-establish their relationship.
Mason also meets her most recent ex-husband, who has
written a play based upon their failed marriage,
and wants her to play the lead. After first saying no 
to both McNichol and her ex, McNichol moves in, and
Mason does the play.  No one asks the question,
who would want to see a play based upon a couple painfully 
arguing for two hours.  I'd rather visit my dentist.
Mason develops an interest in her ex, buying him a present.
But he brings his special other to "meet" her.  She learns
that Toby's husband has left her and filed a divorce.
And Jimmy has been fired from his play.  Mason uses all
this bad news as an excuse to drink again, getting plastered,
causing a scene.  There is much dialogue and hand-wringing.
Mason goes to bar late at night, hits on a guy there, who
then follows her after she leaves, confronts her on the
streets, and assaults her when she is less than friendly,
giving her bruises and a black eye.
The next day, Mason must apologize and explain to her
daughter, who decides to move out.  We are supposed to cry.
Mason wants to cop out of a lunch date, with McNichol and
her father, who is another ex of Mason's.  She says no,
but shows up anyway, wearing sunglasses to cover her
bruised eyes.  We are supposed to stand up and applaud
her courage.
Coco, Hackett, Mason, and McNichol were all nominated
for Academy or Golden Globe awards.  I am surprised that
such an average film received so much attention.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
