Title
Review for Tillsammans (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Laura Clifford
When Elisabeth's (Lisa Lindgren) husband Rolf (Michael Nyqvist) hits
her for the second time, she bundles up her kids Stefan (Sam Kessel)
and Eva (Emma Samuelsson) and moves into her brother Goran's (Gustaf
Hammarsten, "The Best Intentions") commune.  The wildly divergent commune
members and the people Rolf meets now that he's alone will take each
member of this family on a unique journey that ultimately brings them
all back "Together."
Writer/director Lukas Moodysson ("Show Me Love") creates a warm
comedy about a group of people forced to reconsider preconceived
notions and how only those willing to take a chance on change are able
to make the connections that count in life.  While Moodysson doesn't give
equal weight to all his characters, making his film's structure unbalanced,
his fine cast and true human observations are ultimately what count.
Goran tries to be all things to all people, including his sex-mad girlfriend
Lena (Anja Lundqvist), whose proclamation of and action upon their 'open 
relationship' is slowly driving him mad.  Medical student Lasse (Ola Norell) 
humorously speaks his mind, summing up situations in a no nonsense manner that,
while it may sting, is always on target.  His ex-wife Anna (Jessica Liedberg)
embraces meditation, hairy armpits and lesbianism, while homosexual 
Klas (Shanti Roney) yearns for nothing more than to be a housewife for Lasse.
Erik, (Olle Sarri) a strident member of the Communist, Marxist, Leninist, 
Revolutionary League, argues that his welding job keeps him from 'rotting
at university.'  Signe (Cecilia Frode) and Sigvard (Lars Frode) are hippies
who reject meat and materialism.
When Elisabeth and her kids arrive from the bourgeois world (just as Lasse's
dropped his pants in protest of Anna's bottomless kitchen attire!), everything
shifts.  Anna immediately sets her sights on Elisabeth, loosening her up
and strengthening her resolve to stay away from Rolf.  The kids suffer
until Stefan connects with Tet (Axel Zuber), Lasse and Anna's Vietnam War
named son, over forbidden Legos, war games and 'playing Pinochet' and Eva 
begins a tentative romance with Fredrik (Henrik Lundstrom), the equally 
four-eyed outcast son of next door's disapproving neighbors Margit (Therese 
Brunnander) and Ragnar (Claes Hartelius).  Meanwhile, after a disastrous 
evening with his kids which ends with him drunk in prison, Rolf quits the booze
and strikes up a friendship with lonely widower Birger (Sten Ljunggren), who 
urges him to woo back his wife.
Moodysson's nostalgic look back at 1975 Stockholm of 'ugly clothes and
bad music' proves that styles may change, but people pretty much stay
the same.  His gradual reconfiguration of the Tillsammans household is
canny and uplifting and his cast are uniformly excellent.  Except for
its small imbalances (the action shifts away from the household for too
long a stretch, Signe and Sigvard exist only to leave in protest), the
film's lone drawback is the amateurish cinematography by Ulf Brantas
("Show Me Love").  Brantas zooms and pans like someone with their first
videocamera, although editors Michal Leszczylowski and Fredrik Abrahamsen
make the most with the footage they have.
"Together" is a life-affirming comedy.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
    If only "Together" came out on the big screen in 1975, during
the year that is actually represented by Lukas Moodysson's often
hilarious comedy about life in a Stockholm commune!  Better still,
wouldn't it have been grand if the movie existed in, oh, about
1948.  Invite Mao and Fidel, Nikita and Leonid, even the
incorruptible Pol Pot to the screening instead of a group of critics
who are hardly about to change the world.  Then, maybe--not
likely but maybe--they'd see the silliness that Communism
represents.  We wouldn't have had to go through a Cold War after
1945, there would have been no Berlin Wall to knock down, no
Cambodians would be driven out of the cities by Kampuchean
nut-cases.  We'd even get to see whether these Reds were as
humorless as Reds are made up to be, because if they couldn't
get a laugh out of "Together," they're probably hopeless.
   OK, granted that the type of Communism that these politicians
preached was not the pure kind envisioned by the inhabitants of
Tillsammans.  Their lives were more like those of utopian
communities like Oneida in upstate New York or, on a larger
scale, similar to the Israeli kibbutzim--the only example of real
Communism in the world today.  Through Moodysson's tale, we
get quite a bit of insight into why these perfect communities have
all failed, why only two percent of Israelis choose to live in
communal conditions, why Communism has not brought
prosperity to a single state in which it ever existed.
   But enough serious philosophisizing because there's nothing
deadly serious about this comedy of proletarian manners. 
Moodysson introduces an array of characters from his country
who, during the time that the hippie movement was on its last legs
in the U.S. are still true believers in equality and, yes, even the
type of free love practiced by the Woodstock generation in the
U.S.   They're more interested in discussing politics and
philosophy than in sex, it seems (except for one horny female),
spending their time making up lists of chores to be done and
dividing the responsibilities equally--until, that is, one woman
challenges the concept of washing the dishes because she
considers such cleanliness and neatness "bourgeois."  The work
detail is just one of the points of disagreement that would
eventually cause the commune to crack at the seams.  The
principal catalyst is the introduction of two bourgeois kids into the
home,  one being the 14-year-old daughter of Elisabeth (Lisa
Lindgren), a newcomer to the collective who has fled from an
abusive husband to be with her communard brother; the other,
the son of the folks across the way who tut-tut about their
neighbors' way of life but look kind of envious as they train their
binoculars on the people whom they assume are conducting
round-the-clock orgies.
   "Together," however, is not a pro-capitalist movie any more than
it is in favor of the strict kind of communal living that these people
are striving to maintain.  While there is not a single really
obnoxious person in the company (at least when you get to know
all of them and dismiss such things as wife-slapping), they seem
to be clueless about things that other people take for granted--
people  who do not live in their heads and do not even know the
meaning of the term "ideology."  TV.  Vegetarianism.  Equal
sexual access to men and women.  These are not the issues that
face the rest of us--the bourgeois people who are damn proud of
their conventional, middle-class lives, but they are the things that
erode the well-being of the experimental community.  No sooner
do the two 14-year-olds--who have a crush on each other once
they discover that their eyeglasses are interchangeable--introduce
a small, black-and-white TV and a handful of hot dogs into the
community, things begin to change.  We'd say that they move
politically to the center without embracing the bold new world
envisioned by George W. Bush.
   "Tillsammans" shows those of us who witnessed the Woodstock
generation that the hippie movement was in no way restricted to
the U.S. and that the seventies were nothing more than a phase
that seems to have lasted just a bit longer than hula hoops and
D.A. haircuts.  These endearing young people look goofy to us,
but at least they had more on their minds than piercing their
tongues and abusing the word "like."  A fun picture all the way. 
Skol!
Not Rated.  Running time: 102 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Pete Croatto
My memory might be a bit hazy, but Together dealt with the following
subjects among a dozen different characters:  growing up, divorce,
lesbianism/homosexuality, loneliness, Communism, spousal abuse, shoddy
parenting, infidelity, and marital discontent.  I might have forgotten
about the release of Abba's third album in there, but again my memory
flickers.
What I do remember is that the movie takes place in 1975 Stockholm at a
large house full of free-loving Communists -- kind of like The Real
World, if Karl Marx and Hugh Hefner shared a flat with an MTV feed.  The
leader of the group is Göran (Gustav Hammertoe), a gentle fellow with a
great beard, whose sister, Elisabeth (Lisa Lindgren), escapes her
abusive lout of a husband, Rolf (Michael Nyqvist) by moving with her two
kids into Göran's clan.  This, of course, sets in motion a series of
changes for everyone in the house.
The moviegoer is also in for a challenge.  There are so many changes,
along with so many characters, that it's hard to keep up.  I entirely
forgot about two characters before they were reintroduced midway through
the film.  Dramas with large ensemble casts are difficult to maintain,
and Together is a great example of why that happens.
To me the model of a great ensemble drama is Paul Thomas Anderson's
Boogie Nights, because it took the time and the effort to let us know a
bit about each and every character.  It also had technical flair and a
plot that dug into the characters' hubris and fragile egos. 
Writer/director Lukas Moodysson doesn't let us know the characters
because it's in such a damned hurry.  We get no sense of a group
dynamic, no sense of character structure.  It's the cinematic equivalent
of a long flipbook.
Very rarely in Together do we get an idea of the emotions behind the
characters.  At one point, Göran suddenly and violently throws out his
promiscuous girlfriend, Lena (played with misguided, slutty conviction
by Anja Lundkvist).  It's easily the movie's most passionate moment. 
We've seen Lena's cavalier treatment of Göran and we understand his
action, though he says their relationship is open.  However, Moodysson
never offers this kind of absorbing history for everyone else, so we're
essentially stuck with empty gestures.  When he tries to offer some
sense of togetherness (no pun intended) like a soccer game or a crowded
dinner table, there's little to hold on to because we feel like we don't
know these people.
I would have been content just watching Rolf try to win back the
confidence of his wife and kids; Rolf's struggle to gain redemption is
fully believable and the sturdiest branch on the plot tree.  So much
goes on that it's not nearly as effective as it should be.  The director
is too busy looking at the repressed family next door, homosexual
encounters, and the household's introduction to meat and television.
There are definitely some highlights sprinkled throughout, apart from
the copious amount of nudity (both male and female).  The relationship
that Elisabeth's pubescent daughter (Emma Samuelsson) has with the boy
next door (Henrik Lundström) hits all the awkward notes, as does
Enqvist's painful attempts to get back in his family's good graces.  The
movie needs twenty more minutes, five fewer subplots, and a compass.
Director: Lukas Moodysson
Producer: Lars Jönsson
Writer: Lukas Moodysson
Starring: Lisa Lindgren, Michael Nyqvist, Emma Samuelsson, Sam Kessel,
Gustav Hammarsten, Anja Lundkvist, Jessica Liedberg
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Robin Clifford
When the Vietnam War ended in 1975, it also spelled the end of the hippie
movement in America forever. But, in Sweden, freethinking, free-loving
idealism still lives and communes still flourish. At one such cooperative,
the delicate balance needed for a large number of people, all very
different, to live together in harmony is strained by the arrival of a
family of outsiders in the Swedish comedy "Together."
When the leader of the Tillsammans (Together) commune, Goran (Gustaf
Hammarsten), gets a plaintive phone call from his sister Elisabeth (Lisa
Lindgren) he can't help but to take her and her kids into the house. Her
husband, Rolf (Michael Nyqvist), has a drinking problem and, drunk again,
he struck his wife in the face. Hard. Goran picks up Elisabeth and her two
kids and drives them, in a VW microbus of course, back to Together for
safety. Once there, the stable dynamics of the group home go completely a
kilter as the family's arrival disrupts the delicate social balance - not
that things weren't about to go awry anyway - in the house.
Goran is coupled with a sex-crazed, free love advocate, Lena (Anja
Lundqvist), who decides to test her significant other's idealism and beds
down, with vocal verve, the commune's irritable, radical, resident
Communist, Erik (Olle Sarri). The cynical med-school member of the house,
Lasse (Ola Norell), has to contend with his ex-wife Anna (Jessica
Liedberg), who divorced him to become a lesbian. They also have their
8-year-old son, Tet (Axel Zuber), to raise amidst the varied group of
freethinkers. Lasse has to cope, too, with Klas (Shanti Roney), a
homosexual member of the household who has a crush on the
doctor-in-training.
When Elisabeth and her children, Eva (Emma Samuelsson) and Stephan (Sam
Kessel), invade the collective with their own set of middle-class problems
and lifestyle, they introduce bourgeois elements into the communal. Two of
Together's most idealistic and fanatical members, Signe (Cecilia Frode) and
her stubborn husband Sigvard (Lars Frode), are appalled by the intrusion
and the disruption the outsiders cause. When their idealism is questioned -
Is Pippi Longstocking really a capitalist? Is a little meat with a meal so
bad? Or, is TV really so evil? - the couple decides to leave for another
commune where their values will be kept intact. Together begins its
metamorphosis from the group concepts of the 60's to the self-centered
cynicism of the 70's.
"Together," at its core, makes interesting social statements about the
state of mind of the world in the 70's. The controversy of the Vietnam War
is over, but the impact of that conflict and its effect on the world has
made impossible the continuation of the altruism spawned in the previous
decade. World society, now free of the political mess in Indochina, is
taking on a self-awareness that spawned the "me" generation and the good of
mankind takes a back seat to individual self-indulgence. Sophomore
helmet/writer Lukas Moodysson, from a narrative viewpoint, does a fine job
of recreating the philosophical transformation as seen in the tiny
microcosm of Swedish communal society.
Technically, though, the film is second rate and diminishes the subject
matter. Most annoying is the hand held, jerky camera work by Ulf Bantams.
The lender was shooting for a documentary look with his rapidly moving,
erratic camera but that is no excuse for bad photographic composition and
look. At times the filming takes on the feel of an amateur given his first
video camera and told to go shoot a feature film. Other techs are routine,
except, possibly, for the costuming by Matte Muller that belies the obvious
small budget of the film. One amusing distraction is the wig that character
Klas is saddled with. It looks like he raided his mother's wig supply -
blindfolded.
The ensemble cast is large with all of the actors (about 18 in all) each
given some level of shrift throughout the film. Notable are Gusted
Hammarsten as the kindly doormat Goran and his sister Elisabeth (Lindgren)
who is attracted to the freedom of Together but still yearns to have a
stable home life. Everyone in he cast delivers the good.
The combination of thoughtful period slice-of-life and the amateur-feeling
production make me have mixed feelings about "Together." I like the idea
but, regretfully, have major problems with the execution and give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
TOGETHER (TILLSAMMANS), by writer and director Lukas Moodysson (SHOW ME LOVE),
is set in a Swedish commune in 1975.  The pseudo-radicals who live there are
such unwavering Marxist Leninists that they refuse to drink Coca-Cola and eat
meat.  Although they profess noble socialist sentiments -- Göran (Gustav
Hammarsten) lectures the disbelieving commune kids about how their life together
is like warm porridge -- they spend most of their lives in petty squabbles, with
an argument about who washed up last being a typical one.  Another disagreement
comes over whether it is acceptable to walk around the kitchen with absolutely
nothing on below the waist.
If TOGETHER is supposed to be a comedy, then it is a completely laughless one
even though some of the situations do have promise.  As a drama about the
shallow and lonely existence of the commune members, it is slightly more
effective, but the director's flat presentation never involves us much in the
lives of these remarkably uninteresting characters.  The handheld camerawork,
full of gratuitous zooms, gives it a home movie feel.
Life outside the commune is even more depressing than life within.  One guy
breaks his own plumbing just so he can send for the plumber in order to have
someone to talk to.  The best of the small stories concerns an attractive but
bitterly unhappy girl of about eleven and her pudgy, would-be boyfriend.  The
characters have some fleeting moments of bliss.  The sullen young girl, who
spends most of her life in retreat, experiences a moment of contentment when she
sleeps with her boyfriend.  Just sleeps.  And, as the movie drones on, sleeping
is something that you may find yourself contemplating.
TOGETHER runs a long 1:46.  The film is in Swedish with English subtitles.  It
is rated R for "nudity/sexuality and language," would be acceptable for older
teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, September 14, 2001. 
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
