Title
Review for Fresh (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Writer-Director Boaz Yakin, in his first full-length film, has
come up with a searing, terrifying movie about life in the ghetto for
both blacks and Hispanics.  It's the story of twelve-year-old Fresh
(Sean Nelson), without a mother, who lives with his aunt in a crowded
apartment with his sister (a junkie) (N'Bushe Wright) and almost a
dozen cousins.  His father, (Samuel L. Jackson), sits in the park and
takes on all comers playing chess to earn himself a few dollars, so
essentially, Fresh is also fatherless.
     To earn some money, hoping one day to be "The Man" (the head of a
dope ring), he sells cocaine and delivers smack for a couple of
dealers, one black, the other Hispanic.  In this ghetto of Hispanics
and blacks, young Fresh keeps socking away his money for when he is
older and can be his own drug boss.
     Almost every other word spoken in the film is a cuss word except
when one really wants to use a pejorative on someone (black or white),
the vilest name they can think of is "Nigger."
     Fate steps in when his school girl friend is fatally shot on a
playground by a drug dealer who has gone momentarily berserk over a
basketball game in the school yard.  At this point he realizes that the
drug dealers are a curse and must be destroyed.  How he goes about
doing that makes for a very exciting film.
     Young Sean Nelson is perfect in his role as the sullen kid with
his missions; at first, to grow up and takeover, later to seek
revenge.
     What is missing in the film is any mention of what brought the
blacks and Hispanics to their plight.  What about good schools, jobs
and decent affordable housing?   It would have been a better film if
that had been included.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Sean Nelson, Giancarlo Esposito, Samuel L. Jackson,
N'Bushe Wright, Luis Lantigua.
Screenplay/Director:  Boaz Yakin.
     The recent commercial and critical success of such urban-themed
films as BOYS N THE HOOD and MENACE II SOCIETY is proving to be a
strange double-edged sword.  While they have inspired more films
focused on inner city life, there seems to be a developing perception
among mainstream moviegoers that they are more or less interchangeable,
that if you've seen one film with urban kids shooting at each other,
you've seen them all.  Not only does this perception perpetuate the
idea that there is only one story to tell about the inner cities, but
it can force some fantastic films to the margins before they even have
a chance.  Witness FRESH, a powerful urban drama that ranks among the
year's best and most devastating works.
     FRESH is the street tag of Michael (Sean Nelson), a
twelve-year-old New York youth with a dream of making it out of the
projects.  He slowly builds an impressive roll of cash by making
deliveries for heroin dealer Esteban (Giancarlo Esposito), as well as
selling crack on the streets.  However, he soon finds himself in
trouble from every direction.  He is a witness to a murder committed by
a short-fused neighborhood tough (Jean LaMarre), and is in danger of
going back to a group home when his aunt disapproves of his
activities.  Fearing for his very life, Fresh begins applying the chess
lessons of his absentee father (Samuel L. Jackson) to a plan to make
his dream a reality.
     FRESH easily could have been just another drama about drugs n the
hood, but what makes it truly harrowing is its focus on pre-teenagers.
Fresh is smart enough to realize that the trash talk of the streets
means nothing, but for his classmates, particularly the loud-mouthed
Chuckie (Luis Lantigua), it is a rite of passage.  By mimicking the
language that surrounds them, even as they discuss baseball cards and
comic books, they become part of the cycle before they even realize
it.  The words themselves at a certain point become meaningless,
particularly when Chuckie tries to convince Esteban that he too should
make deliveries because he's "got all the dope moves." Writer-director
Boaz Yakin creates a portrait of doomed youth that is gripping and
gut-churning.
     The centerpiece of this study is a stunning performance by young
Sean Nelson as Fresh.  There is not a moment when he rings false, his
eyes betraying a sadness beyond his years and a burning intelligence.
His reaction to one of the film's pivotal scenes, involving a shootout
in a schoolyard, is jaw-dropping, and it's only one of many wrenching
moments he has to carry.  The film's third act only works because we
believe that Fresh is so sharp and observant, and the final scene only
works because we understand how much he wishes it hadn't been
necessary.  As FRESH ends, Michael's street tag takes on a bitter irony
as his "freshness" disappears.
     Nelson gets more than enough assistance from a superb supporting
cast.  Samuel L. Jackson plays Fresh's father with a shaky dignity, one
that doesn't require an explicit explanation as to why he is not
Fresh's guardian.  Though similar to Laurence Fishburne's character in
SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER, it's more layered, and more imbued with
history.  Giancarlo Esposito is a subtle and complex figure as Esteban,
and delivers a skin-crawling scene as he describes his lust for Fresh's
sister while cradling his infant daughter.  From top to bottom the
performers do just a little more than you might expect, turning the
stereotype into a flesh and blood character.
     In many ways, FRESH is an extremely pessimistic film, and as such
will be difficult to watch.  It is about innocence corrupted, described
in shocking detail with no punches pulled.  I left FRESH with my mouth
literally hanging open, affected to the bone by a spectacular piece of
storytelling.

Author
Steve Kong
Fresh is one of those films that overwhelms a person not with spectacular
gunfights, special effects, or fanciful car chases, but with strong
characters and a story that will draw you in.  The brilliance of this film
lies in the character portrayed by Sean Nelson.
Fresh (Sean Nelson) is a young drug runner for a local drug distributor,
Esteban (Giancarlo Esposito).  He lives in a poverty struck ghetto where
nothing is right.  Fresh is not your stereotypical street hood.  He is an
exceptionally intelligent young man who knows what's right and what's
wrong.  He only runs drugs for the Esteban to earn money  he looks down
upon the drug users, which include his sister.  Fresh's father (Samuel L.
Jackson) is a drunk who lives in an old mobile home and plays games of
speed chess at a local park to earn money for his booze.  Fresh doesn't
live with his father though; he lives with the saintly Aunt Frances.  He
often visits the park to play chess with his father  a sort of bonding
experience for the two, and an excellent way to draw the analogy of chess
and real life.
Although chess seems like just something that the father and son do
together, in Fresh it is more than that.  The strategies that Fresh learn
from his father are used by Fresh in real life.  When two of Fresh's
friends are gunned down, Fresh plans revenge (and rescue of his sister) in
a sort of way that will leave you breathless.
The star of this film is Sean Nelson who plays Fresh as a quiet withheld
young man who, unlike his best friend Chuckie, keeps everything to himself.
 And although Fresh doesn't say much, we can see that there is something
going on inside of his head.  Nelson's performance is brilliant.
I've been a fan of Samuel L. Jackson for a while now.  He is one of the
best actors in Hollywood, no questions asked.  And in Fresh he doesn't
break from this.  His portrayal as the hard-nosed father who teaches his
son life's lessons via chess is one of his best.  Though his screen time is
limited, he has enough screen presence to be one of the most memorable
characters in the film.
Fresh was written and directed by Boaz Yakin whose credits include The
Rookie and The Punisher.  Fresh is quite an impressive film from Yakin.
His instinct about the characters is right on and his script is smart and
doesn't take insult the viewer's intelligence.
When looking at the film description on paper, one would probably instantly
say that the film look and score is going to be dark, gritty, and angry.
Someone who thought that would be all wrong.  The film's look is bright and
clear.  Instead of going with a docu-drama grainy look, cinematographer
Adam Holender uses a higher-grade stock of film, which results in a picture
that looks optimistic.  The score by Stewart Copeland fits the movie
perfectly and is not dark at all.  Although not upbeat, the score is well
done.  There is no hardcore rap nor heavy beats, just Copeland's score,
which is brilliant.
Don't Miss Fresh.  You can find this film on video.  This is a film that is
a prime example of a great film driven by characters not by superficial
things such a special effects or action.  This film is so intricate that it
cries out to be watched once or twice before truly understanding  the
complex relationships that are setup by the script.
 a guy with a helluva attitude who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This movie ain't stale for a second, it's completely... oh, 
what's the word... fresh. That also happens to be the nickname of the 
main character, a 12-year-old drug dealer who is the most intelligent 
and resourceful juvenile delinquent I've ever seen. He manages to keep 
his occupation a secret from his family, which consists of at least ten 
brothers and sisters, the aunt who looks after them all, the drunk 
father who uses chess as a metaphor for life and the older sister who is 
hooked on the very item Fresh sells and is also hooked up with Fresh's 
boss, Esteban.
        Tragedy strikes early on in the film, as a school girl Fresh has 
a crush on is caught in the line of fire (wasn't that a Clint Eastwood 
movie?) from a fellow drug runner's gun. Everyone else flees the 
scene, but Fresh stays until the police arrive, insisting of course that he 
saw nothing. The same thing happens later on in the film as Fresh's 
loudmouth friend-turned-drug runner is mowed down. The police 
realize it may not be a coincidence that this kid was found at the scene 
of two murders in two days. You or I may never make that connection, 
but then we never took months of courses in advanced detective 
techniques taught at the police academy (and watching those movies 
doesn't count either).
        FRESH isn't a fast-moving action film or a murder mystery. 
It's more of a case study into the life of an incredible young man who 
rises above the scum he associates with and the work he does. He also 
has the enviable ability to convincingly lie through his teeth to get 
what he wants. Enviable to me, of course, because lying has never 
been something I could even begin to try without bursting into 
maniacal laughter, even the most minor lies. That's why I was never 
called upon as a character witness for the Clarence Thomas 
confirmation hearings. I could never say "Even a fool knows pubic 
hair is part of the delicious Classic Coke formula" with a straight face. 
But this kid could. He lies to the cops twice, convincing them he's just 
a stupid kid. And those scenes don't even compare to the movie's end, 
in which Fresh commits several convincing doublecrosses on his boss 
and associates.
        As far as inner-city drug dramas go, this one ranks with the 
best of them, taking the high road to make its characters human, 
giving them a reason to commit the human atrocities they do (unlike, 
say, Clarence Thomas). It's also not as violent as the usual crop of 
drug dramas. The seemingly gratuitous violence toward the end is 
essential to the story. And FRESH contains some stunning 
performances from people you've never heard of, the only recognizable 
actor being Samuel L. Jackson (PULP FICTION), in the part of Fresh's 
chess-playing father, the man who gets medieval with the bishops, 
queens and pawns.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America for over 1/50th of a century!

Author
James Berardinelli
     Never has chess been a more apt metaphor for life than in Boaz
Yakin's feature debut, FRESH.  Like Lawrence Fishburne in SEARCHING FOR
BOBBY FISCHER, Samuel L. Jackson sits in New York's Washington Square
playing speed chess and dispensing valuable lessons about life.  (As a
trivia note, the chess advisor for this film was Bruce Pandolfini,
whose real-life character was portrayed by Ben Kingsley in SEARCHING
FOR BOBBY FISCHER.) His son Michael (played with astonishing ability by
Sean Nelson) eats up those lessons and promptly applies them to a far
more dangerous game than the one in the park.
     Michael, nicknamed Fresh by the drug lords who use him as a
runner, has had the grisly misfortune of watching two children gunned
down in cold blood.  He knows the killer, and decides that if he
orchestrates his revenge cleverly, he may be able to get both himself
and his sister Nichole (N'Bushe Wright, from ZEBRAHEAD) out of the
cycle of poverty and drugs they're trapped in.  To succeed, however, he
must play the perfect match.  A false move means death at the hands of
his mentor Esteban (Giancarlo Esposito), the local smack distributor.
     FRESH takes the setting and tone of BOYZ 'N THE HOOD and MENACE II
SOCIETY and applies it to a thriller.  Gone is the documentary-like
quality of filmmaking as well as the gritty sense of immediacy.  FRESH
uses higher-quality film stock and a more traditional cinematographic
style to distance the audience ever-so-slightly from the characters.
This way, it's easier to appreciate the complexity of Michael's plan
and the manner in which he arranges his masterful scheme of
manipulation.
     With a script as smart as the title character, FRESH keeps its
viewers guessing.  Having a sixth grader as the protagonist is a stroke
of genius that adds a further layer of tension to an already taut
storyline.  Thirteen year old Sean Nelson's performance would make many
older actors envious.  Without a hint of awkwardness, he conveys the
sharp intelligence behind Michael's wide-eyed, seemingly-innocent
looks.
     Samuel L. Jackson, who is becoming a familiar face these days (his
other current film is Quentin Tarantino's PULP FICTION), is a
scene-stealer as Michael's near-vagrant speed-chess-playing father.
The role isn't large, but this is an example of an actor at his most
focused.
     Michael's father advises him that any piece on the chess board can
be sacrificed to get the king.  It is a lesson he takes to heart.
Everyone becomes an expendable pawn in the high-stakes game, and there
are casualties.  The price of winning at all costs is depicted in the
film's final shot.  That's just one of the images that marks FRESH as
an atypical thriller--a film that succeeds because it defies many
conventions of its genre.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
