Title
Review for Went to Coney Island on a Mission From God... Be Back by Five (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Christopher Null
     Who would have thought that the life of Jon Cryer -- actor in such
memorable films as Hiding Out and Morgan Stewart's Coming Home -- would
be such fertile ground for based-on-a-true-story filmmaking?
     Based on a script co-written by Cryer himself, Went to Coney
Island... is a movie about exactly that.  Daniel (Cryer) and Stan (Rick
Stear) head to the New York landmark in the dead of winter, based on a
rumor they've heard about their childhood friend Richie.  The
long-missing Richie, it seems, has taken up residence under the
boardwalk, joining ranks with the insane and otherwise homeless Coney
Island-dwellers.  It's Daniel and Stan to the rescue.
     Why has Richie gone nuts?  Will Stan come to terms with his
alcoholism and gambling issues?  Will Daniel loosen up a little?  All
these questions will be answered in the 90 minutes that Coney Island
runs -- and these are some of the bleakest moments on film.
     Washed out to the point of near monochrome, Coney Island is a hard
film to watch because the anguish onscreen is unrelenting.  Cryer and
his compatriot Richard Schenkman have obviously poured a lot of soul
into this picture, so much so that the film feels insular to the cast
and crew -- and off-putting to the audience.  Fortunately, a number of
lighter moments (and a memorable by Frank Whaley as a Skee-Ball
attendant) make the film quite watchable, not to mention keeping you, as
a viewer, from slitting your wrists thanks to all the melancholy.
     Ultimately, Coney Island tries to be a mini-Magnolia with its tales
of intersecting pasts and presents, and in some aspects it is
successful.  But Coney Island could steal a thing or two from Magnolia
about how a depressing story can resonate with an audience by tricking
the viewer into caring deeply about its subjects.  The Wonder Wheel may
not spin fast enough for that.
Director: Richard Schenkman
Producer: Jon Cryer, Richard Schenkman
Writer: Jon Cryer, Richard Schenkman
Starring: Jon Cryer, Rick Stear, Rafael Báez, Ione Skye, Frank Whaley,
Peter Gerety
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 WENT TO CONEY ISLAND ON A MISSION FROM GOD...BE BACK BY FIVE
 (director/writer: Richard Schenkman; screenwriter: Jon Cryer;
 cinematographer: Adam Beckman; editor: Richard LaBrie; cast: Jon Cryer
 (Daniel), Rick Stear (Stan), Rafael Baez (Richie), Ione Skye (Gabby),
 Frank Whaley (Skee-Ball Weasel), Peter Gerety (Maurice), Akili  Prince
 (Julie), Patricia Mauceri (Mrs. Munoz), Christina Hernandez (Allegra),
 Dominic Chianese(Photographer), William Wise (The Store Owner);
 Runtime: 94; Phaedra Cinema; 2000)
A sometimes engaging indie film about three best friends growing up in
NYC, that is a heartfelt story but is hampered by its awkward dialogue
and unfulfilling plot. It begins with the voiceover from a mature Danny
(Cryer), telling how he met at an early age his two best childhood
friends -- Stan (Stear) and Richie (Baez).
The crux of the film has them already graduated from high school and
functioning as young adults, living a life that is less rosy than their
childhood expectations. Stan, their outspoken leader, who was born with
a bum foot, is living with his childhood sweetheart Gabby (Skye), and is
unhappy in his current job as a pizza parlor worker, resulting in a
drinking problem. Danny is the timid one who works as an appraiser for a
jewelry store, a respectable job but the store operates much like a
pawnbroker's, and he feels unsatisfied with his position but thinks he's
lucky to have it. Richie, who fooled the boys early on by lying about
his sexual prowess with women, has had a mental breakdown and
disappeared somewhere in Coney Island, where his friends believe he is
living as a homeless person.
When the two friends go in search of Richie, in the deserted winter
landscape of Coney Island, we see in flashbacks all the disappointments
in their lives that led to their current despair and what bonded them
together and why this search becomes a spiritual odyssey for them.
They come across a few of the odd characters who inhabit the bleak
offseason playland, such as a photographer in his seventies who has the
boardwalk in his blood and can't leave the area, even though it has
deteriorated from his youth and he has led a lonesome life there. A
couple of men lovers who recreate a staged melodramatic lover's argument
in front of the boys and talk in an unnatural stagelike voice. And an
unethusiastic waitress, with a scowl, who serves them hotdogs without
any relish. A young Skee-Ball operator who talks like a college lecturer
about the rules in his place. All these characters seemed contrived and
left the film feeling flat, though comedy burst forth from time to time.
The best conversations are between Danny and Stan, and give the pic its
intellectual stimulus and reason for being.
The story of Richie, takes the film down a different avenue, as it is
wracked with pain. Richie has a chemical imbalance and chooses to be a
homeless person, with sparks of memory coming back to him, but because
of his sexual problems and guilt-trip over his sister's car accident,
and because he refuses to take his medicine to treat his condition, he
can't function as a normal person any longer. He is too depressed to
make any sense of his life and the film doesn't know what to make of
him, except as a tragic figure who was once considered to be like the
other boys.
"Went to Coney Island" never got untracked, though it had some bright
dramatic moments and some perceptive comic offerings, but it could never
come together as a complete picture. It was also done in by a needless
subplot of Stan getting into gambling debts and being beaten, which just
seemed like padding to a thin story. Too much of the film seemed to have
no place to go, just like misinformed tourists who go to Coney in the
winter to see the idle Cyclone ride.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
