Title
Review for Excalibur (1981)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: John Boorman
Writer
Starring: Nigel Terry, Nicol Williamson, Helen Mirren, Cheri Lungi,
Patrick Stewart, Liam Neeson, Gabriel Byrne
In most films, the Knights of the Round Table are mainly seen as always
getting along, always trying to do right, and then having tragedy strike
in an almost obvious sense.  It's almost corny.  But with John Boorman's
("Deliverance") adaptation, the tales take a kind of multi-layered,
almost deep, if not sometimes too surreal, stance on the classic, which
was made around the time when making graphic movies was still considered
"inovative."
We all know about King Arthur (Nigel Terry) and the Knights.  We know
all about Merlin (Nicol Williamson) and his bizarre wizardry.  We also
know about how the best knight, Sir Lancelot, fell in love with the
Queen, Guinevere (Cheri Lungi), bringing down the whole establishment
known as Camelot.  And, mostly thanks to Monty Python, we all know about
the quest for the Holy Grail.  This film also covers the early days of
Arhur, including his father, Uther Pendragon (Gabriel Byrne), but it
covers it with a kind of original atmosphere, which isn't as fun as the
other films, but in many ways, more rewarding.
The film goes in chronological order, starting with his father's lust
for his enemy's wife, who thinks is sexy (questionable).  With the help
of Merlin, in a twisted Rumpelstilskin type pact, the result of their
one night is their child, who turns out to be Arthur.  Of course, then
there's the eponomysly named sword, which Merlin gets from the Lady of
the Lake in the beginning, and which, before Uther's brutal death, he
drives into the stone (much like that Disney flick).
The film then zips up to Arthur's adolescence, where, at a jousting
competition where he's his brother's squire (or so he thinks...), he
accidentally removes the sword from the stone, meets Merlin, and
eventually gains not only an army of Knights (soon to be of the Round
Table), but the love of Guinevere, daughter of one of his Knights
(played by a very pre-Picard Patrick Stewart).
But something something rots in the state of Camelot once Arthur
befriends Sir Lancelot, a french knight (with no accent), who just rocks
at everything, and soon takes quite a liking to Guinivere, who soon
begins to return the favor.  Meanwhile, Arthur's half-sister, the
magician Morganna (Helen Mirren, with blond hair), comes out of nowhere,
and begins touching Merlin's other side which he turns from the rest of
the world.
Soon, everything's topsy-turvy, Guinivere is sleeping with Lancelot,
Merlin has disappeared, and Morganna tricks Arthur into this disgusting
incestual sex scene where she conceives their child (yuck), who turns
out to be this little blond bastard named Mordred (who is born in the
second most disgusting birth scene, behind that one commercial in
"Boomerang") who has a sadistic additude.  As Arthur sits in his castle,
mourning his life, he sends them out on the quest for the Holy Grail to
restore the kingdom, which in turn brings about the final confrontation
between Mordred and his father.
The film is kind of simple in its plotting, but what's cool is the
design.  The film is never bright, even if in another film we'd be
seeing it as happy since everything's supposed to Camelot-brand
wonderful.  Merlin says at one point that evil is always present because
otherwise there'd be no good.  John Boorman knows that there's darkness
lying within, that even while all the knights are happy, there's
something horrible lurking within that could tear down the whole system.
We also get several original ideas with the story.  One, which I still
don't understand, is the concept of the "Dragon," which is a magical
thing Merlin conjures up sporadically.  Also, in respect to this and the
style, Merlin is given an original look.  Instead of the long-bearded,
slightly incompetent old man from Disney's "Sword in the Stone," we get
a kind of ominous and respectable man in a long black cape and with an
interesting silver plate on his head.  The film also spews out
intellectual lines like it was some daily calendar with an intellectual
phrase each and every day.
Merlin is the most interesting of all the characters, as he is almost
the center-point of the film, even if he's taken out halfway through. 
He's a symbol of the last instance of purity in the world, as he says,
in a world where men have overcome their gods.  When he disappears,
everything goes to hell, and the men try desperately to find some piece
of purity (i.e. the Holy Grail).  Arthur is also interesting, as a man
who's in love with Guinivere (or at least thinks he is), and is
shattered when she strays, since she only loves him as a king, not as a
man.  And Morganna's an almost dual-identity, or just a really cool
femme fatale.  She sneaks into the court, seduces the only last god
(Merlin), and then ditches him in a stream of vengeance.
The film is deep in its respect to that of Camelot, the mystery of
Merlin and Morganna, the lust/love of Uther and Arthur, the adultery of
Guinevere with Lancelot, and, of course, that of Excalibur, which is a
symbol of purity.
That and all, this film is still kind of hokey.  The dialogue is almost
mechanical most of the time, and a lot of the actors are not
exactly...good.  Granted, the performances by Nicol Williamson as the
bizarre Merlin, who gives him a bit of humanity towards his waning; and
that of Helen Mirren, as the equally bizarre Morganna, are great.  And
you get to see some cool performances from future stars Liam Neeson,
Gabriel Byrne, and Patrick Stewart.
But Nigel Terry as Arthur is simply not very good.  He talks very fast,
and sometimes seems to be a star in an Ed Wood film.  He's just not up
to the task of performing one of the most enigmatic characters in all of
folklore, although he's very good after he discovers Guinivere and
Lancelot.  But perhaps it was just the gray hairs.  And a lot of the
supporting characters are just kind of...crap.
The film is also very graphically violent (this isn't a negative
thing).  We get to see a lot of carnage, blood, nudity, and a bunch of
other stuff you wouldn't expect in an Arthurian tale.  I mean, apart
from the child birth scene (and the incest scene), there's a scene where
a bird pulls an eyeball from a corpses's socket.
Still, the film is a very excellently made film, with a great
surrealistic style that is not usually akin to this legend.  The choice
of music is also pretty fab, with "O Fortuna" from Orff's "Carmina
Burana" used a couple times to wonderful effects, and a great tune by
Wagner used in the titles and some other places.
"Excalibur" is a pretty underrated film.  I mean, yes, it's pretty hokey
in a lot of places, but with its cool style, great scenes, gorgeous
cinematography, and the overall deepness it applies to the classic, this
a very, very good film.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Nigel Terry, Helen Mirren, Nicholas Clay, Cherie Lunghi, Paul
Geoffrey, Nicol Williamson, Gabriel Byrne, Katrine Boorman, Liam
Neeson, Colin Redgrave, Patrick Stewart, Charlie Boorman
Written by: Rospo Pallenberg and John Boorman
Based on the book "Le Morte d'Arthur" by: Thomas Malory
Directed by: John Boorman
Running Time: 141 minutes
I've never been a big fan of the whole "sword and sorcery" genre.  Not
for any particular reason mind you, it's just never help much appeal
to me.  As a result, I'd never even considered watching a second of
John Boorman's Excalibur.  Now, eighteen years after it's release
comes a DVD of the film... so I decided I'd give it a shot.  I'm
thrilled that I did, as Excalibur is one of the best told stories I've
seen in a long time.
Surely everyone is familiar in some way with the legend of King
Arthur, but I doubt there's a better representation of it on film than
this one.  Excalibur begins as the wizard Merlin (Nicol Williamson)
strikes a deal with Uther (Gabriel Byrne) to help Uther bed the woman
he desires, even though it has caused war amongst the people of the
land.  As a result of this encounter, Arthur is born.  Due to the
bargain previously struck, Merlin takes young Arthur away with him.
Arthur (Nigel Terry) grows to be a man and one day, by complete random
chance, pulls the mighty Excalibur from the stone in which it was
thrust into by Uther years earlier.  This signifies that Arthur is now
king of the land.  Much follows, including the rise and fall of
Camelot, the introduction of the knights of the round table, meeting
Lancelot (Nicholas Clay) and his subsequent affair with Arthur's wife
Guenevere (Cherie Lunghi), and the battles between Merlin and Arthur's
half-sister Morgana (a gorgeously young Helen Mirren).
Excalibur holds up incredibly well considering it's age... more than
likely due to the incredibly compelling story.  Great production
values and use of music (both original score by Trevor Jones and
familiar stock music from Richard Wagner and Carl Orff) compliment
this experience.
Excalibur is available on DVD from Warner Home Video.  It contains the
film in it's original theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1, a commentary
track with director John Boorman, a biography and filmography for
Boorman, and the film's original theatrical trailer.
I'm not sure why, but I wasn't expecting much from the commentary by
John Boorman.  To my surprise though it was very informative.  Boorman
does take his time, and sometimes leaves gaps of silence between bits
of information, but he's still knowledgeable about seemingly every
aspect of this film.  Most directors I hear do commentary about a film
that they made years earlier tend to forget many of the tiny
details... like actor's names for example.  In those cases, directors
usually bring along a director of photography or co-producer to ask
questions to in order to help refresh their memory.  But Boorman's
there all by himself, able to identify things as detailed as every
different filming location, even when they change two or three times
in a single scene (unfortunately, if you've never been in Ireland you
won't know where he's talking about).  Boorman's commentary is also
highly complimentary.  He's very giving with kind words to both cast
and crew.
Some interesting tidbits of info he shares: Helen Mirren and Nicol
Williamson couldn't stand one another based on an event from their
past, and both threatened not to do the film if they had to work with
one another.  Boorman was able to convince them both to do the film,
and since their characters are enemies he was able to use their
natural animosity towards one another for their performances.  Also,
Liam Neeson and Mirren had a relationship for a year or two after they
met on the set.  And Boorman still has the sword Excalibur, Helen
Mirren's breastplate, and the Holy Grail in his home (that's got to be
a surreal experience to walk into your living room and see the Holy
Grail sitting on your mantle).
Excalibur is a great film, and this is a great DVD to own.  The
transfer is great... making it hard to believe that the film is over
18 years old.  If it weren't for the familiar faces in the cast you'd
think this was a recent effort.  If you're a fan of sword and sorcery,
a Boorman fan, or just love great storytelling, get yourself a copy of
this one.  [R]
The Jacksonville Film Journal
URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email:chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1999 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be reprinted
without permission.
