Title
Review for Utomlyonnye solntsem (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Regina M. DuBord
     No, no, no, no, no, I am afraid that Steve Rhodes did *not* get it
*at all*.  While this movie may have its moments of comic relief, it is
ultimately a tragic protrayal of one family's post-Russian revolution
experiences.  In no way does it even attempt to resemble a Monty Python
picture.
     The problem I had with this film, however, is that it is just too
depressing (and unfortunately, it is a true story).  Basically,
Marussa's true love, Dmitri, was forced to go to war, during which time
Marussa attempted to kill herself due to her misery without him.  A few
years later, however, along came Kotov, an important military
commander, who convinced her to marry him.  After the war, Kotov pulls
rank and arranges to have Dmitri sent away so that he will never come
back to claim Marussa.  The plot *does* make sense if you actually
watch the movie.  In the meantime, Dmitri becomes an intelligence agent
for his country.  When he discovers that Kotov was involved in selling
information to the Germans, he returns to Kotov's and Marussa's
household to exercise revenge.
     It is apparent that Dmitri and Marussa still love each other, but
Dmitri still carries out his plan and has Kotov executed.  When he
sees, however, the havoc that this situation creates for Marussa and
her daughter, he ultimately commits suicide himself, apparently in
complete confusion over whether he did the right thing.
     This movie is difficult to rate, in that who is the "good guy" and
who is the "bad guy" is hard to decide.  Many of the scenes revolve
around Kotov's wonderful relationship with his little daughter and
Marussa's general flakiness, making it difficult to assign singular
blame for the story's tragic conclusion.  However, depending on the
sensitivities of the viewer, these elements may be what makes the film
interesting.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This is the film that won the Oscar for Best Foreign Film of
1994 ... and deservedly so.  Not only does it tell of the horrors of the
Stalin era but it does so by following the life of one family living in
the placid countryside outside of Moscow with everyone apparently happy
until the ending when things close in on them; a history of a country.
     Sergei Petrovich Kotov is a retired colonel, (Nikita Mikhalkov)
who loves his fatherland, is faithful to its leader, Stalin.  Everyone
loves the colonel for his fairness and his ability to right any wrongs
in the village.  With him are his wife, Maroussia (Ingeborga
Dapkounaite) and his adorable and adoring six-year-old daughter, Nadia
(Nadia Mikhalkov) the real life daughter of Director Nikita Mikhalkov
who also wrote the screenplay and plays the colonel in the film.
     A visitor, Dmitri, nicknamed Mitya, (Oleg Menchikov) is on a short
visit to their home.  He was once in love with Maroussia but that was a
long time ago, before he left for France, mysteriously.  Before the
film ends we learn why he went to France, who he has become and the
consequences to the family as events suddenly turn viciously bad.
     The acting is excellent but little Nadia, in particular, will
steal your heart.  Just seeing her is enough to make this fine film
even better.

Author
Felix Kreisel
     This 1995 feature film took a number of prizes at the Cannes Film
Festival, and deservedly so.  Nikota Mikhalkov both directed and
starred in it in the role of Sergei Kotov, a Red Army officer, hero of
the Civil War and a pillar of the Soviet regime.
     What starts as a languorous and idyllic story describes one day in
the life of a privileged family in the new Soviet Russia on a lazy
Sunday in the summer of 1936, just weeks before the first of the
infamous Moscow Trials broke on a stunned world.  The sense of imminent
danger is palpable throughout this gripping film.
     Realism of this film is developed on various levels.  Firstly,
Mikhalkov uses vivid summer colors and a typical rural location to
bring the viewer into the midst of a July countryside somewhere near
Moscow.  Secondly, the skilled use of choice actors: tender and
talented portrayal of Kotov's six-year-old girl by Mikhalkov's own
daughter, the sensuous elegance of the beautiful Ingeborga Dapkunaite
as Kotov's wife, the nervous energy of Oleg Menshikov as the intruding
antagonist, and so on.  Thirdly, there is the masterful counterposition
of quick action and peaceful periods of weekend rest.
     Finally, there is the shocking reality of the Purges themselves,
totally unprecedented in world history.  From mid-1936 until 1939
Stalin wiped out the vast majority of the top echelons of the Soviet
regime: most of the top commanders of the Red Army, the majority of
the leaders of the Bolshevik Party during its heroic period of struggle
for power, the leading engineers, designers and scientists, outstanding
writers, artists, film and theatre directors, and so on.
     Stalin's assistants in this counterrevolutionary terror directed
against the organizers of Bolshevik victory and the builders of the
Soviet state were in many cases individuals who resisted the October
Revolution in 1917 or who stayed on the sidelines.  Stalin's chief
prosecutor at the Trials was Andrei Vyshinsky, a former Menshevik
leader.  Among the chief torturers of the NKVD was Lavrentii Beria,
known to all the Caucasian revolutionaries as a tzarist agent
provocateur; two of the chief stage managers of the show trials were
Henrik Yagoda and Nikolai Yezhov, unknown during the Revolution and the
Civil War, but promoted by Stalin in the fight against Trotsky and the
Left Opposition.
     Mikhalkov reaches towards an understanding of the reactionary aims
of Stalinist purges.  His protagonist Kotov begins to see the class
basis for this genocide of the true revolutionaries at the hands of the
power hungry bureaucrats and the former White Guards.  However, the
director's power of penetration is limited by the confusion and
disorientation still prevailing in Russia.  We hope that this film
marks a new step in the search for the truth about the history of the
Revolution led by Lenin and Trotsky, and the Stalinist
counterrevolution which followed.


Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release beginning 4/95 
Running Length: 2:14 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, sex, mature themes) 
Cast: Nikita Mikhalkov, Ingeborga Dapkounaite, Oleg Menchikov, 
      Nadia Mikhalkov 
Director: Nikita Mikhalkov 
Producers: Nikita Mikhalkov and Michel Seydoux 
Screenplay: Nikita Mikhalkov and Roustam Ibraguimbekov 
Cinematography: Vilen Kaluta 
Music: Edouard Artemiev 
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics 
In Russian with subtitles 
     BURNT BY THE SUN, the winner of 1995's Best Foreign Film Oscar, 
attempts, with only limited success, to combine two segments of 
radically different pacing and temperament.  The movie's resolution 
represents forty-five minutes of taut, arresting drama.  The setup, 
which weighs in at an overlong ninety minutes, has a tendency to 
meander.  The overall effect is to limit the impact of the picture, 
primarily because half the audience may be asleep by the time the climax 
arrives.  
     The film takes place in 1936 Russia, nineteen years after the 
Communist Revolution and well into Stalin's reign of terror.  We are 
introduced to Colonel Serguei Kotov (Nikita Mikhalkov), hero of the 
Revolution, and his family:  young wife Maroussia (Ingeborga 
Dapkounaite) and six-year old daughter Nadia (Nadia Mikhalkov).  They 
are spending a happy, peaceful summer at a rural retreat.  Into this 
idyllic setting comes Dimitri (Oleg Menchikov), an old lover of 
Moroussia's who was once in exile and whose current occupation is 
unknown.  His appearance irrevocably alters the loving relationship 
between Kotov and his wife as secrets, both new and old, come to light, 
and buried jealousy bubbles to the surface. 
     Director Nikita Mikhalkov is up front about the ultimate meaning of 
his film, dedicating it to "everyone who was burnt by the sun of the 
Revolution."  This movie is very much an attack on the policies and 
paranoia of Stalin.  The chilling final scenes emphasize the theme as we 
come to realize just how far-reaching the dictator's grasp was, and how 
insecure even the most loyal patriots were. 
     BURNT BY THE SUN's most apparent flaw is the stagnancy of its first 
two-thirds, which are scripted like Checkov in slow-motion, but without 
depth.  Other than establishing relationships and hinting at past 
misdeeds, this portion of the film serves little purpose beyond 
presenting impressive views of Russian country vistas and highlighting 
several fine performances.  Directors like the legendary Ingmar Bergman 
embraced this sort of deliberate, unhurried pace, but Bergman's films 
always had multiple levels of meaning.  Mikhalkov's pastoral sequences 
are distressingly shallow -- they give us the characters and their 
relationships, but little more.  Only in the final third does the plot 
begin to explore issues of substance and power.   
     Symbolism plays a key part in BURNT BY THE SUN.  Some of it, like a 
huge, billowing portrait of Stalin, is obvious, but much is obscure.  
It's left up to the individual viewer to determine how literally to take 
several instances of magic realism -- not that a particular 
interpretation will more than subtly change anyone's appreciation of the 
film.  Mikhalkov makes sure that his principal thesis is conveyed in 
such a manner that it's impossible to overlook or misunderstand. 
     BURNT BY THE SUN is characterized by solid acting (including a 
performance by director Mikhalkov as Kotov), but the real standout is 
the film maker's daughter Nadia, who displays a wonderfully wide-eyed 
energy and unexpected aptitude for dialogue.  At the tender age of six, 
the young actress gives an amazingly unforced portrayal.  
     This is the first anti-Stalin film to come out of post-Communist 
Russia, and the new freedom shows in the full scope of what Mikhalkov is 
able to criticize.  This story is the latest to illustrate the age-old 
injustices inherent in absolute power and how easily past loyalties are 
betrayed.  After the protracted and sluggish setup, the meat of BURNT BY 
THE SUN is as gripping as that of any "serious" motion picture -- it's 
getting to that point that's the main difficulty. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
al@167-290-33.hexacom.com (al)
     SOLEIL TROMPEUR was shown in Cannes and at the Montreal Film Fest;
I think it did won some prizes, not sure though.  By the quality of the
film it wouldn't be surprising.  SOLEIL TROMPEUR (Deceiving Sun) comes
right after "Urga" in Mikhalkov's realisations.  And like "Urga," this
film got its share of beauty although this time around its emanating
from the people inside a rural Russian family in 1936.  Mikhalkov
(colonel Sergei Kotof) and his daughter are the main characters.  The
film relates the calm life of a family whose main character is a
well-known army colonel, admired by all, the kind of guy that has
strong roots in his country while having plentiful of simple and warm
human values.  Mikhalkov is a strong figure and the rural simplicity
emanates from him as easy as it could ever be.
     But this very nice way of life will slowly give way to a terrible
drama as the smiles becomes forced instead of spontaneous, as the
arrival of a young and aggressive, former boyfriend of colonel Kotov's
young wife stirs up feelings.
     SOLEIL TROMPEUR is a film of great human force.  While it lasts
two and a half hours, it is never boring and does not have to rely on
action, special F/X and the like to maintain interest.  We share the
warmth displayed, the intrigue and the fatal conclusion.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BURNT BY THE SUN is a Russian film and was the winner of the 1995
Academy Award for best foreign film.  It is a comedy set in the 1930s
during the Stalin era in Russia.
     Colonel Serguei Petrovitch Kotov (Nikita Mikhalkov) is an old hero
of the revolution now retired to a small village.  He is married to a
lovely young wife, Maroussia Kotov (Ingeborga Dapkunaite), and together
they have a beautiful young daughter, Nadia Kotov (Nadia Mikhalkov).
Into their life comes Maroussia's old boyfriend, Dimitri/Mitya (Oleg
Menchikov).  The plot from there made little sense so I will not
attempt to outline the story more.
     If you like Russian style humor or if you Monty Python style
British humor, you will probably go gaga over this show.  I was at a
fairly full movie house where most of the audience set in stone silence
as if they didn't get it.  A few people however were in non-stop
laughter mode.  For this show you either love or you hate it.  There is
no in-between.  As you can guess by the rating, I am in the
I-don't-get-it category.
     Let me note the two highlights of the show.  First, the
cinematographer (Vilen Kaluta) manages to make an oppressive
dictatorship have a radiant feel that makes you think old Joe Stalin's
country would have been a pretty peaceful place to live.  Watch the
Daddy and the young girl drift down the lake on their boat.  Picture
perfect.  Notice how the camera hugs them in the close ups and how the
shots are carefully done with a twilight glow.
     The second highlight of the movie was in the attractive and
visually interesting actors cast to play the lead father, mother, and
young girl.  The girl was especially charming.
     Now for the rest of the review.  I found the script by Roustam
Ibraguimbekov and Nikita Mikhalkov to be a mess.  Certainly there were
the odd, good one liners.  My favorites was the one about a woman who
was so into medicine that when the doctor prescribed iron, she boiled
nails and drank the water.
     Mainly though the scriptwriters and the director (Nikita
Mikhalkov) relied on broad humor and sight gags of the Monty Python
style.  We had a redhead whose claim to humor was that she wore round,
large framed glasses always on the tip of her nose.  We also had many
fat people who were supposed to be funny solely because of their girth.
In one scene, a fat woman blocks Mitya's view and that in and of itself
is supposedly humorous.  We have a Summer Santa figure in a long ugly
beard, long hair, and bad clothes, that was supposed to make us laugh.
Many of the characters had exaggerated gestures in failed attempts at
humor.  I generally don't like slapstick comedy, and this movie was no
exception.
     I have now seen all of the 1995 Academy Award for best foreign
films.  They were:
     I enjoyed BURNT BY THE SUN least of all.  I would have given the
award hands down to EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN.  Although I liked parts of all
of the others, EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN was the only consistently excellent
one of the bunch.  See my reviews of all of them for more details.
     BURNT BY THE SUN runs on and on and finally ends after an
exhausting 2:14.  It is in Russian with English subtitles.  It is
unrated, but would be PG or perhaps PG-13 for very brief nudity and a
little violence.  It is a harmless show.  I do not recommend it unless
you are into sight gags, exaggerated characters, or a fan of Russian
humor.  For the beauty of the filming and for no other reason, I award
it *.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
