Title
Review for Oxygen (1999) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

OXYGEN (TV) (director/writer: Richard Shepard; cinematographer: Sarah
Cawley; editor: Adam Lichtenstein; cast: Maura Tierney (Madeline
Foster), Adrien Brody (Harry Houdini), James Naughton (Clarke Hannon),
Terry Kinney (Capt. Tim Kirkman), Laila Robins (Frances Hannon), Paul
Calderon (Jessie), Dylan Baker (Jackson); Runtime: 92; 1999)
A psychological thriller about a sociopath who buries a missing woman
alive in an undisclosed location and gives the police 24 hours to find
her. The killer's motive at first seems to be ransom, but as the story
develops it turns out that he wants to see her suffer and for him to get
away with the dual murder of her and a policewoman, thereby he will be
recognized like his hero Harry Houdini, as the greatest escape artist of
all.
Harry (Adrien Brody) kidnaps Frances Hannon (Laila) and her pooch in
front of her Manhattan building and takes the hysterical woman to a
wooded area around the NYC area (Poughkeepsie cemetery), where he
videotapes her and buries her alive in her underclothes. He then has his
partner deliver the ransom demand of a million dollars and the videotape
of her screaming for help to her wealthy art dealer husband (James
Naughton). The location of the ransom drop is at the Queens cemetery
where Houdini was buried in 1926.
Assigned to the case are a team of NYPD detectives, which includes a
working together husband and wife team, police captain Tim (Terry
Kinney) and detective Madeline (Maura Tierney), and an ace detective
Jessie (Paul Calderon). The married couple are going through a rough
period in their marriage, where Madeline is not faithful to him and is
lost in her own troubled world, realizing that she has a very dark side
to her that she can't stop from surfacing.
Written and directed with style by Richard Shepard (The Linguini
Incident), "Oxygen" is a compelling psychodrama, whose story is
sickening but is superbly played by an excellent cast. Adrien Brody got
the most he could get out of the character and gives a riveting
performance of someone who has gone over the edge. Maura Tierney also
turns in a spectacular performance, portraying a very troubled but
courageous woman. It was clearer to find out what was troubling Harry
than it was to get to the bottom of her problem, but her
characterization of a pained woman was almost as interesting as his.
When the victim's husband goes to the cops even though he is not
supposed to, the cops nab Harry after the ransom drop-off at the
cemetery and a high-speed car chase into Manhattan. It then becomes a
cat-and-mouse game between Harry and the police, with him refusing to
talk to anyone but Madeline, as he spots cigarette burns on Madeline's
arm and senses they have the same perversions and need for pain. The
victim's impatient husband pulls strings and gets thev F.B.I. involved
in the case, muttering under his breath that these cops are amateurs.
There are many problems with the story's credibility, starting from all
the power the woman detective is given in handling the case, and the
fact that NYC has a department code that states a married couple can't
have one of them be the supervisor of the other. There are many other
contrivances in the story that I'm afraid don't add up, such as Madeline
being left alone in a room with Harry and without a two-way mirror or
microphones, whereby he slips out of his handcuffs and escapes taking
her with him to be buried with Frances. No police procedure would ever
take that chance, and the film hinges all its marbles on that being
accepted for its tricky ending to work. But for sheer excitement, the
fast-paced film moves rapidly along to see if the police can get to the
buried Frances in time, and in the meantime, Brody gives the performance
of his career so far. "Oxygen" had some fresh air in its tank which it
leaked out at times to refreshen some of its derivative scenes,
especially the opening subway scene, where the lead police couple come
across a wanted felon and give chase, in a scene that looked like it
came right out of "The French Connection."
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Few people could deny that the best way to die is in your
sleep, painlessly, at a healthy old age.  But alas, we're built
to experience pain, and death inevitably comes to some at a
slow pace and with great anguish.  Think of the plight of the
217 folks on that Egyptair that swooped down like a stone
near Nantucket, then took off for a few moments, finally to
break apart in midair.  Think as well as that executive who
was kidnapped a year or so ago, buried alive, and ransomed. 
His rescuers were too late to save him.  The very fear of
being mistakenly put under ground while we still have a pulse
must drive many a person to choose cremation.
   "Oxygen," a gripping thriller about burial alive, is written
and directed by Richard Shepard, whose 1992 caper comedy
"The Linguini Incident" reflected the fascination he still has
with Harry Houdini.  Though the movie involves an adrenalin-
rushing car chase and a scene that looks like something out
of "The French Connection," this is anything but the usual
cops and robbers melodrama but is rather an effective and
taut psychological thriller.  Its premise, that cops and bad
guys sometimes share the same evil inclinations, is given
believable cinematic dimensions because of a especially
good performances by Maura Tierney as a cop with a history
of emotionally sick behavior and Adrien Brody as the sharp-
witted 25-year-old psychopath who has her number--and not
just the one on her badge.
    Shepard develops the dauntless character of Madeline
(Maura Tierney) and her relationship with her cop husband
Tim (Terry Kinney) early on as the two sit on a New York City
subway train.  When Madeline spots a face across her that
belongs to a wanted criminal, she takes off after the man
despite the plea of her husband that she's off duty.  A far
more challenging nemesis is to greet her shortly thereafter
after Harry (Adrien Brody) kidnaps Frances Hannon (Laila
Robins) and buries her live body with about 24 hours of air in
a Poughkeepsie cemetery, ostensibly to demand ransom from
Frances's wealthy husband Clarke (James Naughton).  We
soon learn that money--not even one million dollars' worth of
it--is the psycho's real goal.  Harry is in it for the game.
   Recalling David Fincher's classic police drama "Seven," an
unsettling psychological drama about a serial killer out to
punish perps of the seven deadly sins, and that director's The
Game," which lacks his previous film's violence but makes up
for it in mean-spiritedness--Shepard's drama does not wallow
in human depravity.  Shepard chooses instead to exhibit
much of the perversion through the verbal interchange
between cop and killer.  The two prove to be in a way one of
a kind though not nearly in the same degree.  Part of the
story could well have been put on the stage as a deadly
dialogue while the remainder lends itself to the full cinematic
treatment--a car chase, a couple of burial scenes, a race with
a petty gunman.  The only scene that does not work involves
a stagy monologue by an FBI agent (Dylan Baker) about
what happens to a convicted murderer who is given a lethal
injection.  (That New York State, in which the crime has
taken place, has not performed an execution in decades and
is likely to sentence this psycho to a life term at best is
overlooked.)
   New York City looks good, from the moneyed streets that
finds Frances on an afternoon stroll with her dog to the
tunnels and byways around Grand Central Station, and
photographer Sarah Cawley's work is given a splendidly
spooky score by Rolfe Kent.  Adrien Brody, recently on the
cover of umpteen magazines, continues to be a rising star,
nicely playing a guy who is both charmer and monster, while
Maura Tierney is his match as a woman determined to rid
society of his evil without necessarily exorcising her own
inner demons.
