Title
Review for Limey, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Allan Jenoff
Wilson (Stamp) is a career criminal who learns his
daughter Jenny has died while he was in prison.  He goes to
Los Angeles to learn the details of her death.  He contacts
the man who wrote to him (Guzman in a great supporting role),
a woman who befriended her (Warren) and finds her lover
Terry Valentine (Fonda).  He suspects Valentine was involved
in the car accident that killed Jenny.  Valentine is a music
producer with a bodyguard (Newman) who seems to know a lot
of lowlifes.  Valentine does not want to meet Wilson.  Wilson
is not the kind of man who takes rejection well.
What follows is a revenge drama with Wilson working his way
through a series of obstacles until he can have his highnoon
style showdown with Valentine.  There is lots of violence and
a little humour.  Stamp gives a restrained performance that some
might see as too laid back.  Fonda has a surprisingly small
role that he performs well in.  The supporting cast is strong.
The directorial technique of constant flashbacks and flashforwards
and fantasy scenes gets boring quickly.
Soderbergh made Sex, Lies and Videotape, Kafka, and Out of Sight.
That list should make it clear he is not a director trapped
in a formula.  I made the mistake of expecting this film
to be similar to Out of Sight.  It's not.  The emotional
intensity of that film is completely lacking here.  No one
steams up the screen in The Limey the way Clooney and Lopez
did.  But that's not what Soderbergh is going for here.  I
won't call this film an unqualified success - you never
make an emotional connection to any of the characters - but it
does work and is worth seeing.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Seeing a half-dozen guys lined up like statues outside the rich
American's front door, Wilson (Terence Stamp) figures that they must be
bodyguards.  Having just arrived in this country after a 9-year holiday
in her Majesty's prison, he's not used to LA ways.  The men, of course,
are not bodyguards, but valets, a prerequisite for parties of the rich
and famous in Southern California.
THE LIMEY is a stylish thriller by director Steven Soderbergh.  From his
original, groundbreaking SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE to last year's
acclaimed OUT OF SIGHT, Soderbergh has proved that he's a director who
has a knack for creating fascinating movies just slightly out of the
mainstream.
THE LIMEY continues in Soderbergh's avant-garde tradition.  Featuring
frequent jump cuts and fast action interlaced with moments of solitude,
the movie has a dazzlingly impressive style.  Layering as many as a
half-dozen time sequences on top of each other, the film is a tribute to
the director's talent since the movie remains lucid and easy to follow
no matter how often the time changes.
Wilson has come to America to investigate the death of his daughter,
Jennifer (Melissa George), who supposedly died in a car accident.  He
suspects foul play after learning of her death from a letter an American
ex-con, Ed (Luis Guzmán), sent him.  It seems Ed and Jennifer met in an
acting class -- remember it's LA, where everyone aspires to hit it big
in show biz.  Lesley Ann Warren plays Jennifer's voice coach.
When we first meet Wilson, a crook way past his prime, he acts like he
might not have it in him anymore.  He soon disabuses us of that notion
as he starts whacking guys left and right on the way to discovering the
truth about his daughter's death.
With a pensive and introspective demeanor and sporadically explosive
actions, Stamp gives his character an intellectual intensity.  Wilson's
a force to be reckoned with, even if he has trouble understanding the
mores and habits of the natives.
Although his accent is intelligible, his sentences are so full of
cockney slang that he sometimes seems to be speaking gibberish.  One
black cop listens to one of Wilson's particularly long and hyperactive
speeches and just stares at him.  "There is one thing I don't
understand," he tells Wilson.  "The one thing.  One #@$% you've said."
Lem Dobbs's script is full of wry, biting humor.
Soon, the paths all lead to Valentine (Peter Fonda, who was so wonderful
in ULEE'S GOLD), his daughter's last boyfriend.  Valentine, a music
producer with criminal connections, owns the big home in the hills with
the aforementioned valets.
Famous back in the 60s, Valentine explains that era to his current
conquest, a woman less than half his age.  "The 60s was just 66 and
early 67, that's all it was," he says in an explanation that goes right
over her head.
Ed, who accompanies Wilson as they crash Valentine's party, looks out
from the view high atop the smoggy LA mountains.  "You could see the sea
out there, if you could see it," Ed remarks, not used to such lavish
perks.
You can say one thing about those wealthy Angelenos.  They certainly
have class.  When Wilson kills a guy during the party in order to
frighten Valentine, the police and the firemen end up swarming all over
the place.  During the investigations, uniformed waiters offer everyone
drinks in elegant, long-stemmed crystal goblets.
THE LIMEY runs a fast 1:28.  It is rated R for violence and language and
would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Artisan Entertainment
 Director: Steven Soderbergh
 Writer:   Lem Dobbs
 Cast: Terence Stamp, Peter Fonda, Lesley Ann Warren, Luis
Guzman, Barry Newman, Joe Dallesandro, Nicky Katt, Amelia
Heinle, Melissa George, Jim Jenkins, Johny Sanchez, Ann-
Margret, Brooke Marie Bridges, Matthew Kimbrough, David
War
   Terence Stamp, an unusually fine character actor, is the
titled character of a film called "The Limey" (a slang term
generally meaning citizen of Britain) because Stamp's
character, Wilson, is so quintessentially lower-class English
that his colloquialisms and even his heavy accent are
scarcely understood by the Americans with whom he comes
into contact. "The Limey" is a crime story with a simple
trajectory: man's daughter is murdered, dad comes looking
for the killer to avenge the offense.  What gives the film an
unusual stamp, so to speak, is the method by which its
director, Steven Soderbergh, unfolds the plot.   Soderbergh is
anything but a conventional 36-year-old director.  His quirky
"sex, lies and videotape" which surfaced ten years ago, is
based on a script he wrote in one eight-day burst and put
across with a budget of just over one million dollars--a
morality tale that was the hit of the 1989 Cannes Film
Festival (Palme d'Or--best film).  Exceptionally well acted by
James Spader, Andie MacDowell and Peter Gallagher, his
first film was about a selfish lawyer with a frigid wife, who
takes on his sister-in-law as a lover--an exceptionally talky
drama coming from a young hand.  
   "The Limey," however, is anything but dialogue-driven.  Full
of action--though not gratuitous violence--the picture is
Soderbergh's way of proving that you can tell a story with a
succession of images, some repeated at various points in the
story, others thrown in almost helter-skelter with the aim of
showing us Wilson's character from different points of view. 
We see Wilson as an outsider in Los Angeles, a visitor who
flies into town the way the hero gunmen used to do to clean
up the old West.  He has not come to admire the gorgeous
scenery of the Big Sur area, but simply to eliminate up the
scourge he finds and delete not only his daughter's killer but
apparently all who work for this fabulously wealthy man.  He's
no marshall Gary Cooper putting on his guns to help purify
the West, but rather a flawed visitor from out East who has
just completed a nine-year sentence for armed robbery in his
native England.
   As Wilson (a man of few but charmingly idiomatic words)
mounts his design for vengeance, he allies himself with two
friends of his deceased daughter, Ed (Luis Guzman) and
Elaine (Lesley Ann Warren), who fill him in on their area of
the cliff-bound countryside and act as his guardian angels
while this powerful 60-ish man knocks off some of the
toughest characters who are into the state's opulent drug
culture.  His opponent is a weak man, too easy to pick off
once his bodyguards are eliminated.  As the villainous Terry
Valentine, Peter Fonda is a handsome but aging and
somewhat effeminate party-giver with two lavish cliffside
homes and a gorgeous girl friend, Adhara (Amelia Heinle)--a
man whose income allegedly comes from his success as a
producer of rock-and-roll records during the mid-sixties but
whose major income actually comes from criminals who use
him to launder their drug money.
   "The Limey" makes no major innovations in the crime
genre save for its repeated use of imagery thrown in for no
apparent purpose save to look inventive.  A recurrent
impression is of Wilson sitting poker-faced in his airline seat
presumably contemplating revenge as he heads from London
to L.A.  He frequently speaks to his daughter's friend, Ed, in
Ed's unassuming house, the camera suddenly changing
locations to Ed's car, where the conversation is actually
taking place.  At times the rapid scene changes come across
so arbitrarily that viewers cannot be blamed for thinking that
they are watching a rough, unedited cut of the story.  The
most striking recollection is the movie's chief comic touch. 
>From time to time Soderbergh flashes back to a more
youthful Terence Stamp of thirty years ago as he serenades
the gals with his guitar--the footage actually taken from Ken
Loach's "Poor Cow", about working-class loners, in which
Stamp plays the best friend of a promiscuous woman's
husband.  This is a clever touch indeed.
   Though a minor entry into the crowded world of movies
about iniquity, "The Limey" is well-acted particularly by
Stamp--known to teens as the evil General Zod in "Superman
II" and to me mainly for a role as a sex therapist in a
fabulous film not even mentioned in his press bio, "Bliss."

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
Riddle me this:  when does a crime drama become an art film?  Answer:  when 
it's directed by Steven Soderbergh.
Soderbergh's direction of "The Limey" is both quiet and stunning.  It's the 
story of a career criminal named Wilson, portrayed by Terence Stamp.  Wilson 
leaves England for Los Angeles with the intent to investigate and possibly 
to avenge his daughter Jennifer's death.  So what we have is a revenge 
story, and when we see Wilson's method of operation, we know it's going to 
be a violent one.  In scene after scene, Soderbergh has this aging bloke 
step right into the rhythm of a seedy Southern California atmosphere;  
Wilson contacts a former friend of Jennifer's, an ex-con named Ed, who is 
now trying to stay clean.  Wilson is shown purchasing a pistol and several 
rounds from a couple of bike-riding bangers.  Next he follows a lead to a 
warehouse where he asks about a man named Valentine.  When Wilson mashes a 
man's face and steals Valentine's address from a Rolodex, things heat up on 
both sides.  The director shows admirable taste when he keeps the key 
violence off-scene.
Another dimension of the script kicks in when Wilson contacts another of his 
daughter's friends, an acting coach named Elaine (Leslie Ann Warren).  She 
does not seem to think the circumstances of Jennifer's death are suspicious, 
but she seems to understand Wilson's need to discover the truth.  Although 
the scenes leading to friendship between Wilson and Elaine are too few, we 
totally believe the connection between them.  Warren is nicely cast for the 
role, and she plays a sophisticated foil to Wilson's Cockney-accented 
plainness.  Guzman's Ed is also pals with Wilson.  His role is to leaven the 
Brit's hot-headedness, or at least to help his friend to avoid prison.
What's so original about Soderbergh's method is camera work.  Director of 
Photography Ed Lachman assists Soderbergh's vision with a series of 
flash-forwards:  we frequently view shots from scenes that take place 
several minutes later.  In a type of forecasting montage, the frame often 
slows down, cross-cuts or repeats key images.  Soderbergh has always shown a 
fascination with multiple facets, and his narrative technique here is a 
successful experiment.  Occasionally he resorts to holding his subject in 
the corner of the frame instead of in the center - a trend popular in 80's 
commercials.  But the storytelling intelligence outweighs this cliché.
In depicting the different sides of Wilson's life - husband and father and 
sociopath - Soderbergh also employs various flashbacks.  We see Jennifer as 
a child, galloping across a beach or peering through a doorway at her 
parents.  When we watch her-a cute little girl threatening to turn her dad 
into the police should he go astray again -- we become closer to her and 
perhaps feel more acutely her father's loss.  In a bizarre and original 
effort on the part of the filmmakers, clips from the 1967 film "Poor Cow" 
show a dark-haired Terence Stamp playing a thief named "Wilson."  He 
interacts with a bubble-haired woman, and even plays a song on a guitar, and 
we can tell it's Stamp.  What an effect!  Stamp is a long-shot for 
nominations for major awards, but if "The Limey" gets the attention it 
deserves, this almost 40-year veteran of the screen will have even more 
roles in which to show his superior talents.
The action in "The Limey" is sudden and striking.  First in the warehouse, 
and several times as Wilson closes in on Valentine, we see almost unexpected 
escalation into violence.  As Valentine, Peter Fonda seems to reprise many 
of the roles he played in the 60's.  He does seem rather Eastwood-like with 
his hoarse whisper;  but Fonda has perfected an understated acting style 
that works well here, in his role of hunted man.  It's fascinating to watch 
the touches of characterization that tell us of Valentine's underworld 
connections, which he tries to rationalize away.  Because Valentine is not 
himself a violent man, he has hired the smooth and ruthless Avery (played by 
another veteran of many television and film outings, Barry Newman).  Avery 
in turn hires a couple of street toughs to rub out Wilson, but is not afraid 
himself to pump a shotgun if necessary.  Newman is a reliable actor who 
sketches here a sophisticated killer, completely efficient and amoral.
As much as the action of this film is well-done, it is the characterization 
that strengthens the story.  We end up knowing so many sides of Wilson, and 
end up liking him, even after we see him killing one of Valentine's henchman 
in cold blood.  The henchman is also not guiltless.  So all of these 
characters have taints of badness, and the result is a modern naturalism, an 
updated revenge film with style, slickly directed and watchable more than 
once.


Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Ever since he stormed on to the indie scene in 1989 with `Sex, Lies
and Videotape', director Steven Soderbergh has made films that
stray from the mainstream (`King Of The Hill' and `Gray's
Anatomy' being two of his better efforts). Last year, `Out Of
Sight', his critically acclaimed dark romantic comedy, tanked
during a busy summer at the box office. It was his first studio film.
Probably because of his disappointment, he has returned to his roots
with `The Limey', a strikingly stylish and elegant film noir
fueled by a tour de force performance by Terence Stamp. `The
Limey', shot at times on a handheld camera, is an excellent,
expertly paced movie which entertains and enlightens.
Terence Stamp and Peter Fonda, two 60's icons from separate
continents, play enemies caught in the midst of a deadly
predicament. Wilson (Stamp) has just finished a nine-year jail term in
England, and flies out to Los Angeles to avenge the death of his
daughter, Jenny. She reportedly died in a car crash, but Wilson senses
that his headstrong daughter would be too smart to fall asleep at the
wheel.
He is helped by Jenny's two former friends (played by Luis Guzman
and Lesley Ann Warren), and his search leads him to Terry Valentine
(Fonda), a wealthy record exec (and former boyfriend of Jenny's)
whose heart is still in the 60's.
As Wilson continues his odyssey, he dives more deeply into a life of
crime and learns about the daughter he was never there for. Stamp's
fiery performance conveys a yearning to start over, and to have
another chance to bring up his neglected daughter. He will never get
that chance, but he seeks vengeance for her sake.
Steven Soderbergh directs `The Limey' with the maturity of an
Orson Welles.  Refreshingly, `The Limey' doesn't waste time
with inconsequential conversation or subplots. The story-telling is
direct, from first frame to last.
Quick cuts and flashbacks are not used pretentiously, but rather to
further the story. Two conversations may be going on at once, but each
one is clear. The juxtapositions save several minutes of screen
time. A predictable trick would have been to have a romantic subplot
involving Stamp and Lesley Ann Warren, but conventionality is not part
of Soderbergh's picture. This is the way films should be made.
Another reason `The Limey' works so well is the way it works the
60's motif into the action. The soundtrack, with songs like
`Magic Carpet Ride' and The Who's `The Seeker', sounds
cool and adds to the mood. Terence Stamp and Peter Fonda may have
seemed past their time, but they end up making tenacious older men.
`The Limey' is not Elmore Leonard `Out Of Sight' material,
because there are no pulp characters and because Lem Dobbs (`Dark
City') gives the actors mature un-Tarantino dialogue. Stamp's
Wilson is driven and mad, recalling many classic noir characters.
The film has more depth than the average thriller, yet the surface
material itself is better than most.  Like in Alexandre Dumas'
`The Count of Monte Cristo', revenge is presented as a noble
deed, despite the crimes involved.
In a bold move, Soderbergh has decided to use real scenes of a younger
Stamp for the flashbacks.  They are taken from `Poor Cow', a
1967 film best known for being the debut of acclaimed British
filmmaker Ken Loach (`My Name Is Joe').
`The Limey' will not be patronized by a large audience (although
Terence Stamp's performance may stir up some buzz), but it is a
satisfying return to form for Steven Soderbergh. It is the kind of
film that can be made only by a veteran, and it may be this
director's finest accomplishment yet.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Steven Soderbergh is probably best-known for his SEX, LIES, AND
VIDEOTAPE of a just a decade ago.  That was an unconventional film.
His KING OF THE HILL was certainly a fine effort though of late he has
been doing more conventional work, albeit well.  OUT OF SIGHT, in spite
of some violence, was an amiable film.  With the exception of a little
strange editing, his latest could almost be a good 1960s TV movie.  It
is a plain, straightforward crime film whose only surprise is that
there are no real surprises.  It has a bad guy and an avenger who
implacably draws ever closer to his prey.  We watch fascinated like we
would a fly caught in a spider's web as the spider moves in for the
kill.
     Valentine (played by Peter Fonda) is a successful Hollywood music
producer with a nice-looking house and a string of better-looking young
women living with him.  One of the young women was Jenny Wilson
(Melissa George).  She got drunk one night and was killed in a car
accident never completely explained.  Jenny was a women who always had
self control and her father (Terrence Stamp), an English career
criminal, knows there is something very wrong with the official story
about the accident.  Just having been released from a 9-year sentence
in prison he finds his daughter is dead and he comes to the US to find
out the truth.  The Americans who stand in his way continually
underestimate Wilson and his determination to get revenge.  Wilson had
been alerted to the questionable circumstances of his daughter's death
by a letter from a man named Ed (Luis Guzman).  Now he recruits Ed to
help him track down some answers.  His entourage is completed by a
friend of his daughter Elaine (Lesley Ann Warren).  Wilson might almost
be some sort of alien killing machine, which indeed he is.
     Subtle humor is generated by Wilson's use of impenetrable English
rhyming slang that Ed cannot understand.  In one of the films two most
memorable scenes makes a long speech to a DEA official who listens
patiently without understanding a single word.  The other memorable
scene is Wilson's assault on some uncooperative characters involved in
Jenny's death.  Set in a warehouse the sequence establishes Wilson as
an implacable enemy.  Wilson is in this country so alien to him because
he has a job to do.  And he does it in a straightforward and
businesslike manner.  Adding to the 1960s feel of this film is the fact
that it has given us three 1960s stars, Stamp, Warren, and Fonda.
Stamp and Warren act very well together generating some chemistry in
spite of the very different backgrounds.
     Soderbergh tries a number of stylistic touches, most of which
work.  The primary exception is the intentionally confusing visual
editing.  The sound will be what one expects but visually he will be
rapidly cutting scenes showing the Wilson's memories, his thoughts, and
the present.  Occasionally the conversation seems to be going on
between the two characters at two different locations at once.
Probably the effect is to show the rapid flitting of Wilson's mind, but
it leaves the viewer bewildered.
     Another of the stylistic touches that is getting positive comment
is that footage for flashback sequences is taken from Ken Loach's 1967
film POOR COW which featured Stamp 32 years younger.  Certainly this is
more effective than trying to make up Stamp to look a lot younger or
casting another actor.  It is a clever touch, but it is not as new as
people seem to think.  1962's WHAT EVER HAPPENED TO BABY JANE? used
clips of early 1930s films of Bette Davis and Joan Crawford as films
that the characters played by Davis and Crawford had made early in
their lives.
     This is a fairly violent film, but its use of gore is fairly
reserved, certainly by 1990s film standards.  This is an enjoyable
tribute to the 1960s crime film, more entertaining than one might
expect.  I rate it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
James Sanford
         As directed by Steven Soderbergh, "The Limey" is a thriller
almost as jarring as the rhyming Cockney slang used by its central
character, the stoic Wilson, played with frozen fire in his eyes by the
great Terence Stamp. What sounds in synopsis like a fairly mundane story
of vengeance comes across on the screen as a collage of images, music
and crackling dialogue. Frequently, Soderbergh will take a simple
conversation and stage it in different locations, then skip blithely
between the various versions, using the soundtrack as the ribbon to hold
the pieces together. Although the effect initially seems like a gimmick
or perhaps a throwback to the "mod" caper films of the late 1960s, it
turns out to be a clever way to handle Lem Dobbs' no-frills screenplay.
 To balance Stamp's anti-hero, Soderbergh has cast another icon
of 30 years ago. As Terry Ballantine, a slick, devious record producer
who represents the worst L.A. has to offer, Peter Fonda oozes cool charm
and smarm. The director introduces both men with theme songs from the
Flower Power era: Wilson gets the Who's "The Seeker" ("They call me the
seeker, I been searching low and high/I won't get to get what I'm after
'til the day I die"), while Ballantine is saddled with the Hollies'
bitter "King Midas in Reverse." "You're not specific enough to be a
person," Terry's most recent bedmate tells him. "You're more like a
vibe."
 In contrast, Wilson is pure grit, an ex-con who's flown in to
Terry's world to seek retribution for the death of his daughter Jenny
(Melissa George) who perished in a suspicious car crash, apparently
after getting too close to the truth about her boyfriend Ballantine.
"The Limey" quickly builds to a clash between these two wildly different
titans, both of whom are haunted by their pasts.
  "What's England anyway?" one of Terry's cohorts cracks. "Some
rinkydink country half the size of Wyoming where the cops don't even
carry guns." Ah, but British criminals certainly do pack heat and, in
Wilson's case, know how to use it.
 There's plenty of violence in "The Limey," but what Soderbergh
truly seems concerned with is creating an impressionistic mood piece. As
he did in his last movie, the dynamic 1998 suspenser "Out of Sight," the
filmmaker has great fun trying to catch his audience off-guard, tossing
in a burst of humor when you least expect it (one of the guests at
Terry's party confesses "the first Christopher Cross album -- wow, man,
that changed my life"), or taking a few minutes of extra time to let
Wilson talk about his alienation from Jenny with the young woman's best
friend, an understanding speech coach (Lesley Ann Warren). Since Wilson
spent most of Jenny's childhood in one prison or another, she began
calling him "Daddy the Friendly Ghost."
 The 1960s motif is further reinforced by Soderbergh's marvelous
insertion of clips of the young Stamp playing a hood (named Wilson,
coincidentally) in director Ken Loach's 1967 drama "Poor Cow." It's a
smart alternative to the usual phoney-looking flashbacks we're used to
seeing in Hollywood films, in which makeup artists struggle to erase 20
or 30 years from the faces and hair of middle-aged stars. James Sanford

Author
John Beachem
I've always disliked the saying: "A triumph of style over substance". This
might be because it is so overused when applied to movies with both style
and substance (like last year's "Fight Club"). However, I can think of no
more accurate description for Steven Soderbergh's ("Out of Sight") "The
Limey". Soderbergh's film is so steeped in style that you may not even
notice what a hollow movie it really is. You'll most likely be too busy
marveling at the way Soderbergh shifts time periods in a split second while
continuing one narrative; or the way he manages to make footage from old
Terence Stamp movies fit seamlessly into this current story to notice what a
frightfully boring and often incoherent film "The Limey" really is.
Wilson (Terence Stamp) is a man just released from prison after serving time
for armed robbery. He receives a letter from a man in America, named Ed
(Luis Guzman), telling him that his daughter, Jenny (Melissa George), has
just died in a car accident. Wilson travels from England to meet with Ed, in
order to determine who "snuffed" his daughter. His search soon leads him to
Jenny's ex-boyfriend, Valentine (Peter Fonda). Valentine is a rich music
producer who also dabbles in drug running. Wilson also meets up with Elaine
(Lesley Ann Warren), Jenny's voice coach in acting school. Wilson, Elaine,
and Ed decide to take Valentine down, with a little unwelcome help from the
police, who are looking for the money from Valentine's last run.
If you sit back and just look at the plot of this film, without any of the
style or interesting camera work, you'll see what a simple film it really
is. When you get right down to it, "The Limey" is nothing more than a
simplistic revenge story. While Soderbergh's direction may be innovative,
it's also rather confusing at times. Images we sometimes see in the middle
of the movie have already happend long ago, or will happen at the end of the
film. While we're being shown these scenes which may not have happened yet,
the characters in the present keep chattering on even though we can no
longer see them. It seems interesting at first, but eventually it's just
annoying. It also hinders the story because half the scenes shown during
these moments are never explained.
The acting in "The Limey" is certainly the film's strongest element. Terence
Stamp (who most of today's audiences will only know from his brief
appearance in "Star Wars: Episode One") is simply brilliant as a vengeful
man who was going to start his life over. Peter Fonda, who gave a great
performance in "Ulee's Gold", is sadly miscast yet still manages to do an
adequate job. Luis Guzman ("Magnolia") is one of those actors who shows up
in almost everything, and all you can think is "I know that guy from
somewhere". He does quite a good turn here as Wilson's rather reluctant
sidekick. Last, we have Lesley Ann Warren ("Twin Falls Idaho") giving a
great, understated performance as the mother Jenny never had. Unfortunately,
Warren and Guzman are given very little screen time considering what
interesting characters they play.
"The Limey" will certainly go down in history as one of the most fashionable
movies of the '90s, but I do hope people in the future are able to see it
for what it really is: candy coated outside, empty inside. The movie may
only run 86 minutes, but a lot of that time is filler because there is so
little plot. As a result, the subplot about Valentine's drug running and
troubles with the law are hardly touched upon. Instead, we get scenes like
Terence Stamp walking in front of a wall while he talks about his mates back
in England. I recommend "The Limey" to arthouse film students, but I can't
recommend it to anyone else because I guarantee the rest of you will be
quite bored. I give it three out of five stars for acting and technical
merit.
Any past movies you want me to review? Send to:
johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - One of the worst movies ever made. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE LIMEY (1999) ***  Directed by Steven Soderbergh. Written by Lem 
Dobbs. Photography, Ed Lachman. Editing, Sarah Flack. Production 
design, Gary Frutkoff. Music,  Cliff Martinez. Produced by John Hardy 
and Scott Kramer. Cast: Terence Stamp (Wilson), Lesley Ann Warren 
(Elaine), Luis Guzman (Ed), Barry Newman (Avery), Joe Dallesandro 
(Uncle John), Nicky Katt (Stacy), Peter Fonda (Terry Valentine), 
Amelia Heinle (Adhara), Melissa George (Jennifer), et al. An Artisan 
Entertainment release. 89 minutes. R ( violence, language)
Last May I saw "The Limey" at its world premiere in Cannes. I watched 
it again locally seven months later. Now, I have always believed that 
the better understanding and the value or non-value of many a film, 
require a second screening, if possible much later. A major problem 
with most critics is that deadlines allow them to give only their 
first, quick  impressions. With some movies, even more than two 
screenings are called for. Lacking this, my evaluation of "The Limey" 
is still somewhat guarded.
Terence Stamp is Wilson (no first name), a Limey (slang for British) 
petty career criminal just released from his latest, 9-year prison 
stay for armed robbery. He flies from England to Los Angeles to 
investigate the suspicious death (nominally in a car accident) of his 
estranged daughter Jenny.--and to avenge her.
This leads to sleuthing and extreme violence, and to record 
producer/drug dealer tycoon Valentine (Peter Fonda) and his henchmen. 
Jenny was Valentine's girl.
On the face of it, "The Limey" falls in the most familiar sub-genre 
of revenge/retaliation movies which can be found among crime films, 
westerns, war movies and tutti quanti. However, behind this deja vu 
are the novel approach and stylistics of the movie.
>From the very beginning and through the finale, Wilson is a special 
character. Taciturn, unconfiding in others, he speaks economically 
with a Cockney accent and pronunciation (e.g. "I was finking about 
this") yet on at least one occasion he showers his listener (a 
puzzled DEA agent) with a long, vivacious speech in Cockney rhymes.
All along too, the movie bathes in an ocean of flasbacks in every 
possible direction and of every possible type. These include the 
leitmotif of Wilson playing in his head home-movies of Jenny as a 
child, visions of Wilson as a young man, visions of what was, what 
could have been, might have been, may not have been, and so on. It is 
a large puzzle plus non-puzzle of genre deconstruction which may or 
may not confuse the viewer (hence one reason for a third screening of 
the movie).
Throughout, and among all characters, the dialogue is terse,. The 
exceptions involve Valentine rather than Wilson.
Flashes as a stylistic device are the most obvious aspect of the 
film's techniques, yet other procedures are used so that what we 
learn of Wilson (and others) is based on the iceberg principle -- you 
really see or perceive only the tip.
The procedures have been compared to those of the French New Wave and 
to the non-French films they influenced in the 1960s. Indeed, the 
1960s and their ethos, updated  to the late 1990s, are another 
constant here. In clear terms, the two major roles of this movie are 
held by movie icons of the hippie years, with clever twists. Peter 
Fonda (Valentine) was once Wyatt (aka   Captain America), the biker 
(with his pal Dennis Hopper) in the landmark  "Easy Rider" (1969) 
where doing drugs was within a state of strange innocence. Decades 
later, Valentine's drugs then are a savage by-product of capitalism 
at all costs, including human.
A good touch Terence Stamp, in "Billy Budd" (1962)  was a revelation 
as the sweet-faced innocent victim in the eponymous movie. Four films 
later, he had a smallish role as a thief called Wilson in the first 
feature by Ken Loach, "Poor Cow" (1967).
In what may be a first in film history, the flashbacks of "The Limey" 
repeatedly go to the young Stamp-Wilson without any need of faking, 
special effects or a digitally created Stamp.
Both actors, born in 1939, are sexagenerians now. Stamp looks younger 
than his age. Fonda could pass for a young 40-something. He is 
fashionably garbed, is face is unlined, he is seriously preoccupied 
with his looks, checks them (and his gums) with near-obsessive 
frequency. He is also a near-Lolita fancier, but without prurience. 
Jenny has been replaced by Adhara, a young, live-in beauty. We know 
nothing about her beyond her bare minimum, in a bathtub.
We know very little about anyone else, including the interesting 
Avery. He is Valentine's lieutenant, middle-aged, chic and "soigné," 
has authority, delegates the dirty work and looks more like  a 
"consigliere" than a killer. It is characteristic of the movie that 
while, in principle, treading familiar ground, it avoids stereotypes. 
Clichés too but not all.
There is more subtlety around than meets the eye initially. In 
devious, insouciant-seeming ways, Valentine tries to hold on to the 
decorative Adhara by courting and admiring her openly. Beneath his 
sophistication there are crypto-pathetic efforts to impress a lover 
who is a fraction of his age. The girl is impressed --in  fashion 
corresponding to that of young cinephiles today discovering great 
older films-- by the mythical 60s. Yet in a debunking, anti-cliché 
Valentine tells her that the whole 60s thing happened only in 1966 
and the early 1967.
Where the movie does not resist clichés is in its action scenes. 
Wilson is tinged by Superman-ness a la Charles Bronson or Dirty 
Harry. He survives a horrible beating by lowlifes nearly unscathed. 
He then gets his improbably hidden revolver and kills them dead. 
Wilson disposes of a Valentine guard with ease and no witnesses 
during a reception. A car chase gets his pursuer vanquished. A major 
fusillade has the few good guys eliminate the many bad 'uns. The 
finale employs the far too familiar mano a mano between hero and 
arch-villain.

Author
Christopher Null
     Part of me feels like I didn't really get THE LIMEY.  Though it's a
spare 85 minutes, director Steven Soderbergh always has a trick or two
up his sleeve, and I was sure some twists were in store for me.
     Witness OUT OF SIGHT, with criminal and cop falling into an
unlikely romance.  Witness SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE, which broke the
indie film scene wide open.  Witness SCHIZOPOLIS  you know, all of it.
     But no matter how many ways I slice it, despite the critical smash
that THE LIMEY has become, the film failed to impress me much.  The
story is trite:  British ex-con (Stamp) flies to L.A. to avenge his
daughter's death, which he assumes is the result of foul play due to a
music magnate (Fonda).  Expecting a clever plot twist, I waited and
waited, and then the movie was over.
     This isn't to say that THE LIMEY isn't a well-made film.  As usual,
Soderbergh is innovative behind the camera, with flashbacks,
flash-forwards, flashes sideways, alternate realities, and optical
trickery.  While this is distracting, it does server to make the film
more visceral and fun.  Stamp and Fonda make for interesting rivals, but
neither really owns the film.  The most intriguing part of THE LIMEY is
Stamp's limey slang: words like `snaffle' and `doolally' that spice up
the lingo a la A CLOCKWORK ORANGE (though never with the same power).
     Unfortunately, THE LIMEY falls into that class of films that is
perfectly watchable but ultimately forgettable.  Soderbergh fans will
rejoice.  The rest of the world will scratch its collective head.
Director: Steven Soderbergh
Producer: John Hardy, Scott Kramer
Writer: Lem Dobbs
Starring: Terence Stamp, Peter Fonda, Lesley Ann Warren, Luis Guzmán,
Barry Newman, Joe Dallesandro, Nicky Katt, Amelia Heinle, Melissa George
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Check out G-Rex.com Personal Shopper at http://www.g-rex.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE LIMEY" (Artisan Entertainment)
With "sex, lies & videotape,""Out of Sight" and now "The
Limey," film-maker Steven Soderberg has become the master of the
lighter, gentler film noir. Charismatic Terence Stamp (who should have
received an Oscar for "Priscilla, Queen of the Desert") stars as a
tough Englishman named Wilson who flies from London to Los Angeles to
find out who was really responsible for the death of his daughter
Jenny. With the help of Luiz Guzman, who had sent him a clipping about
the car crash "accident" which took her life, he tracks down a sleek,
sleazy pop music producer, played by Peter Fonda, who had been Jenny's
lover. He learns even more about what happened from Lesley Ann Warren,
Jenny's acting teacher, and finds himself emeshed in Fonda's
drug-running operation. Determined to savor his revenge, the
Cockney-speaking ex-con fantasizes about drawing a gun and shooting
Fonda on the spot but decides to torture the cowardly culprit a bit
before killing him. Besides, first he has to eliminate Fonda's
smirking chief of security, Barry Newman, and his hired goons. Steven
Soderberg's stylish use of recurring flashbacks and memories is
compelling. It's as if you're seeing the story unfold through Stamp's
clear blue eyes. Curiously, both Stamp and Fonda seem to be doing
parodies of their '60s screen personas, and the amazingly "youthful"
shots of Stamp were adroitly lifted from Ken Loach's "Poor Cow" (1967)
in which Stamp also played a character named Wilson. The weakness lies
with Lem Dobbs' laconic script that has loopholes you could drive a
truck through, particularly in a segment involving federal agents. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Limey" is a mysterious,
dynamic 9. It's a cool, restrained revenge thriller for the art house
crowd.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Just thinking about the opening sequence of Steven Soderbergh's latest
film gives me major chills.  The screen is pitch-black and you can only
hear a man with a very raspy and very frightening voice demand `Tell
metell metell me about Jenny,' before it launches into the opening
credits, where The Who play `The Seeker.'  Start a movie like this and
you'll have me in the palm of your hand every time.
The voice belongs to a hard-edged Brit named Wilson (Terence Stamp,
Episode One), who has just served a nine-year prison sentence for
`wealth redistribution.'  Wilson is headed to Los Angeles in an attempt
to learn more about the death of his daughter Jennifer (Melissa George,
ROAR), who was killed in a car crash on the famed Mulholland
thoroughfare.  The cops believed the crash to be accidental, but Wilson
suspects foul play after receiving a letter in the clink that his
daughter really died under mysterious circumstances.  He has little to
go on  just the name and address of the man that sent the letter.
The opening credits show a very effective, choppy montage of Wilson on
the plane, in the airport, in a cab and in his hotel.  He seems to
become more enraged the closer he gets to LA, pacing the floor of his
hotel like a crazed tiger and smoking like it's going out of style.  He
begins his investigation with Ed (Luis Guzmán, OZ), a Latino who took
acting classes with Jenny and the author of the letter.  Ed can only
give Wilson the name of Jenny's last boyfriend, adding that he may be
able to find more information at a truck warehouse in a deserted section
of the city.
Before heading to the warehouse, Wilson stops off at a grammar school to
stock up on firearms.  He finds the warehouse and charges in like a bull
in a china shop, only to end up badly beaten and bloodied on the curb of
the shady business.  But Wilson doesn't give up easily and manages to
track down Jenny's acting/voice coach Elaine (Lesley Ann Warren,
Teaching Mrs. Tingle).  He eventually finds his daughter's ex, a wealthy
record producer named Terry Valentine (Peter Fonda, The Tempest).
While Wilson is shown blazing a trail through the seedy crime world of
Los Angeles, Soderbergh (Out of Sight) deftly edits clips of a nearly
unrecognizable Stamp in a 1967 Ken Loach film called Poor Cow, showing
the arc of Wilson's character as he moves from peace-loving hippie to
vengeful criminal.  Adding to The Limey's nostalgia is Valentine, who
made a name for himself during the 60s music scene and openly longs for
a return to those simpler times.  The casting of Stamp and Fonda is even
a bit nostalgic, as is the closing display, where a much mellower Stamp
covers Donovan's `Colours' in a scene taken from Poor Cow.
Soderbergh's direction is top-notch, showing cleverly edited scenes
repeatedly flashed forward and back (a la Homicide) and refusing to shy
away from the film's violence.  Credit cinematographer Edward Lachman
and editor Sarah Flack for creating a believable look to the picture.
Written by Dark City scribe Lem Dobbs, The Limey is also chock full of
fantastic acting, especially Stamp and Barry Newman (Bowfinger), who has
a wonderful supporting role as Valentine's bad-ass right-hand man.  The
music is fantastic and the film even shows Soderbergh's Out of Sight
alumni George Clooney in an `Access Hollywood' spoof.
In short, The Limey is a fantastic crime thriller.  My only complaint is
that it wasn't longer.
1:30 - R for mega-violence, adult situations and language

Author
Bill Chambers
THE LIMEY *** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (limey@filmfreakcentral.net)
starring Terrence Stamp, Peter Fonda, Lesley Ann Warren, Luis Guzman
screenplay by Lem Dobbs
directed by Steven Soderbergh
If your story's villain isn't particularly heinous, give him/her a tic
or habit; at the very least, annoy us. The Limey's bad guy, a record
producer who goes by the lone title Valentine (Fonda), is always
inspecting his teeth and checking his gums with a Sulca brush.
(Irritatingly so.) He likes to show off his pearly whites. 
Wilson (Stamp), a "limey", wants to wipe that smile off his face. Upon
release from an English prison, Wilson ventures to California in
pursuit of Valentine, his daughter Jenny's killer. He's a Cockney
shark out for vengeance, matter-of-fact tough and unafraid. The movie
began for me when the sixty-something Wilson took out a factory full
of thugs with his pistol-after they beat him up. The Limey is about an
absentee father's ("I watched her grow up...in increments," he tells a
friend) search for redemption through violence. He will deny his own
physical pain until his task is finished.
When he first arrives in L.A., Wilson hooks up with Ed (Luis Guzmán),
the man who informed him, through letters to his cellblock, of Jenny's
demise. (Ed, an ex-con himself, met her in an acting class.) In a
refreshing change of pace, Valentine's henchmen leave Ed alone-no
surprise visits in the middle of the night, no car bombs, no
kidnapping Ed's loved ones... That wimpy Valentine is a bundle of
nerves when he finds out about Wilson also impressed me. "Oh man, I'm
screwed," he wails to Avery, his head of security (Barry Newman).
Avery and Wilson are about the same age; it'll be an interesting
fight.
The plot avoids Death Wish parallels at every turn. The filmmakers
even manage some wry commentary on moviemaking that doesn't feel
imposed upon the material. (Can a California-set tale avoid mention of
Hollywood?) The obvious culture clash between Wilson and the
L.A.-types (Bill Duke's policeman responds to one of Wilson's frantic
monologues, "The one thing I don't understand is every motherfucking
thing you just said") is handled coolly-without overplaying it,
Soderbergh lets us know that we've never seen a character like Wilson
in a film like this before.
Soderbergh got carried away in the editing room, however. Imagine an
entire motion picture structured the way his brilliant, dual-timeline
love scene montage was in Out of Sight. I was distracted to the point
of contention at several points in The Limey by cinematic technique.
(Sometimes, four or five scenes are happening at once, though the
narrative magically remains coherent.) I must write that Stamp's
mesmerizing performance eventually drew me back in, every time. I
guess I prefer so-called invisible cutting.  
I was rooting for the cold yet sympathetic Wilson, perhaps because he
speaks just like my grandfather. (Though I pitied poor, just plain
pathetic Valentine.) Stamp wraps his lips around every syllable, drops
letters from the beginnings or the ends of words, and has a whole
dictionary of unfamiliar slang. (For a sampling, visit the film's
official website by clicking here.) 
With ingenuity, Soderbergh integrates footage of Stamp for flashback
purposes from an early Ken Loach effort called Poor Cow. Stamp seems
so genuine as Wilson that we feel as if we've never seen him act
before, that these snippets of a 1967 drama are photographed memories
of the character in his youth.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        People from England don't sound like Americans.  They have
different accents and use a somewhat different vocabulary.  There's a new
film in town which has decided that these differences are worth remarking
on frequently and, in fact, that they provide a cinematic raison d'ętre.
That film is "The Limey."
        As directed by Steven Soderbergh ("sex, lies and videotape," "Out
of Sight"), "The Limey" stars Terence Stamp as a career criminal recently
sprung from an English prison after a nine-year stint for armed robbery.
Learning that his daughter Jenny has died suspiciously in an automobile
accident in the States, Wilson (Stamp) heads out to L.A. to shakedown the
truth.
        The film starts out remarkably strong, and it's everything you'd
expect from a director of Soderbergh's caliber.  He uses an extremely
interesting expository technique in the first third of the film, almost as
if he has shot the story fifteen different ways, and then edited the pieces
together so that the dialogue and situations fit together linearly, but
visually the characters are in different hemispheres, different worlds.
It's a technique so rich and complex that the question is can he keep this
up for the entire movie?  He cannot.  Or perhaps worse, he does not.
        Anyway, for the film's first thirty minutes or so, we're absolutely
caught up in the comings, goings, and motivations of this relentless,
silver-haired mystery man who moves silently across the screen like
Murnau's ghost, speaks very economically (and, I'll admit it, with a bit of
an London accent), and doesn't seem too deterred by a bunch of crooks who
kick the crap out of him when he starts asking questions about Terry
Valentine (the successful music producer with whom Jenny was last seen).
        "The Limey" is at its absolute best when it's in reflective mode
though, with close-ups of Wilson sitting on a plane, thinking,  Or standing
outside a wrought-iron gate, his head cocked to one side with a cigarette
dangling out one corner of his mouth, thinking.  Or driving a green car up
Route 1 with the sun beating down through the windshield, a page torn from
a magazine rather than a frame in a movie, thinking.
        But as the film goes on, Wilson's accent gets thicker and
Soderbergh almost completely jettisons the revolutionary visual stylistics
that made the earlier part of the film so engrossing.  Wilson meets up with
a close friend of Jenny's, played by the always stellar Lesley Anne Warren,
and the two of them share some interesting scenes but not much chemistry,
since Wilson is as difficult to approach as a three-bar fire.
        Peter Fonda, playing Valentine, is nicely centered in the unlikable
role of the affluent, weak, and shady L.A. businessman, but perhaps as
strong is the performance of Luis Guzmán (you probably don't know the name
but you'll recognize the face), who appears as another friend of Jenny's
who serves as Wilson's tourguide.
        By the time we're two-thirds into "The Limey," the plot has
deteriorated into a standard shoot-em-up (Valentine and his pre-pubescent
floozy have bolted for his beach house in Big Sur where his dubious
bodyguards, headed up by Barry Newman, start shooting each other; I was
reminded of "Another Stakeout").  Stamp, on the other hand, has taken to
doing pitiable stand-up routines emphasizing his grasp of Cockney rhyming
slang, such as his scene in the presence of a dumb-struck narc.  What was
Soderbergh thinking here?
        Perhaps he was thinking that Stamp deserves the kind of "second
coming" that John Travolta effected with "Pulp Fiction."  This longtime
British actor has slowly been working his way towards household name-dom in
the last few years with roles--not exactly starring ones--in films such as
"The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert," "Bliss," "Bowfinger"
... oh, and perhaps you saw him in "Star Wars: Episode 1 - The Phantom
Menace" as Chancellor Valorum?  No super-significant roles--until now, that
is.
        With "The Limey," Stamp proves he's more than adequate in filling
those shoes.  It's just disappointing that everything around him--a rather
routine thriller at the best of times--is allowed to disintegrate into
humdrum in the process.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Dennis Schwartz

LIMEY, THE (director:Steven Soderbergh; screenwriter: Lem Dobbs;
cinematographer: Ed Lachman;cast: Terence Stamp (Wilson), Lesley Ann
Warren (Elaine), Luis Guzman (Ed), Barry Newman (Avery), Joe Dallesandro
(Uncle John), Nicky Katt (Stacy), Peter Fonda (Valentine), Amelia Heinle
(Adhara), Melissa George (Jennifer), 1999)
I only know for sure that this is a revenge type of film and that it
plays much like many a classical Western, but is shot in the '60s style
of "Point Blank," and is scripted by Lem Dobbs, most probably, for the
entertainment value it provides. I also know that a limey is a slang
term for a Brit and that he is played with a bravura performance by
Terence Stamp. Stamp is so good here, with his fiery blue eyes,
intimidating tone, and hollowed cheekbones jutting out from his intense
face, playing an ex-con who we only know as Wilson and who is 60-
years-old and just got out of the can in England after doing 9-years for
armed robbery. We see him on a plane from London to Los Angeles to find
out how his daughter Jenny (Melissa) died while he was away, not
believing for one moment her death was a result of a car accident.
The story frequently goes from what he is thinking to some flashback to
some future thing he wants to do, therefore the time sequence is often
confusing. But what remains riveting is the single-minded purpose he
has, as he tries to understand what happened to his daughter through his
conversations with two of her friends, the middle-aged acting coach for
his daughter, Elaine (Warren), who tells him, his daughter says she
considered her father to be a ghost in her life, and the burly, heavily
tattooed Mexican-American, Eddie (Guzman), who felt sorry for her, and
as an ex-con himself, identified with Wilson, therefore he writes Wilson
in prison about her death. Wilson also tries to find out what happened
to his daughter through a trucking business that is gangster operated,
and the conversation with the surly men there takes a more violent turn,
resulting in the typical crime film rub out scene. The only thing of
interest, is that you have this elderly guy going after these younger
hoods, and you can't help feeling that when he kills them, that they got
what they deserved.
If there is supposed to be a deeper meaning than revenge in this very
titillating feature, it is hard to say what that deeper meaning is,
unless from all the garbled Cockney sayings by Wilson, this is a film
about what the meaning of one's life is, as a senior citizen who had
plenty of time by himself to give the question adequate thought, as we
see that he from time-to-time reflects on that subject.
In any case, this film seems to be all style and that style is wonderful
to behold. It is also a film about nostalgia, as it brings back haunting
memories of a time that was intermixed with hope and confusion. The '60s
are dismissed here, as only being what happened in 1966- and early '67,
and that golden "hippie" age is further reduced to a few golden moments
of feeling free through the promising new music arriving on the scene.
At least, this is the view of Peter Fonda, who plays Terry Valentine, a
wealthy rock music promoter, the supposed reason for Wilson coming to
America, as he was Jenny's boyfriend when she died and is his prime
suspect as her killer. Fonda is the slick manipulator of the times, who
now has a few palatial homes and enough money to be thought of as a
big-time operator, though there seems to be some trouble in his
paradise, as he is laundering dirty money for drug dealers and is
constantly looking over his shoulder at what trouble lies ahead. He is
very convincing as a slime-ball, and I liked peeking into his closet,
which is bigger than most people's apartments, with all those shoes and
sweaters, and I shouldn't forget that splendid pool and that panoramic
view his ultra-modern house has from the top of the Los Angeles hills,
indicating that he is someone who is doing very well.
Steven Sodergergh (Sex, Lies, and Videotape/Kafka/Schizopolis/Out of
Sight) has a way of making quirky films that border on the mundane but
offer promises of much more. In this film he engages several intriguing
possibilities and plays them out to the hilt: he has his two major
stars, Fonda and Stamp, who were both born in 1939 and both played
innocent anti-hero types in the '60s, Fonda, as the biker drug dealer in
"Easy Rider" and Stamp, in "Billy Budd," be pitted against each other.
In addition, Stamp had a role in 1967 as a thief called Wilson in the
first feature by Ken Loach, "Poor Cow". These byplays to the film add
some questions to what went wrong with the '60s, as it seems to ask in
the film, how does Wilson end up doing hard time in prison robbing the
ticket office of a rock concert while Valentine remains stuck in a time
warp making big money by still packaging that same music, still going
after beautiful young girls, this time replacing Jenny with another
live-in beauty, Adhara (Amelia), and crossing the line of innocence in
drugs by becoming a party to the big-time criminal aspect of the drug
business, as money is his lure and no other pretences of becoming a
better person is given. The director makes frequent flashback cuts to
the Stamp of younger film days, using the 1967 film he was in, as it
becomes more and more evident that this film has many purposes to it,
not excluding the former real-life film roles of its present iconic
stars and how they are now portrayed onscreen.
As Wilson and Valentine square off with each other, through Wilson's
bitter way of looking at him, we get to view his take on Valentine's
Hollywood lifestyle, as he visits him in his Los Angeles canyon home and
meets his entourage full blast. The first one he meets, is his shady
lawyer adviser who is paid to protect him from the unseemly side to his
business, Barry Newman as the 60ish Avery, who plays his role as a
villain with an intractable mind-set. His first attempt to get Wilson
removed from the party results in his security man being fatally thrown
down the canyon by the limey. There is also a colorful hitman that Avery
hires to get Wilson, Stacy (Katt), someone in love with his image of
being a hitman, who has the funniest joke in the film, that is tasteless
and irresistible: "What is the smartest thing to come out of a woman's
mouth?" Answer. "Einstein's cock."
The filmgoer gets a lot for his price of admission here: a great
performance by the actors, a pleasing revenge film with all the usual
action sequences and a twist in the plot to keep the viewer further
enthralled, it's a film that has all the techniques of the French New
Wave filming style, with jump cuts and a fast-moving camera to keep the
viewer guessing what's coming next as he is kept adequately confused so
that he thinks he is missing something and should see the film again,
and the viewer also gets the promise that this baby has something wise
to say, which it appears to be on the verge of saying at times; but, I
would say, it is safer to believe that this film is style over
substance, and in this case, that is not all that bad. Perhaps, the '60s
itself was mostly an innocent call for a better world that was
manipulated by those who knew better, like the Terry Valentine's of the
world. Therefore style over substance isn't all that bad a message for
this intensely shot nouveau-noir work, that seemed to be saying
something like that or maybe it's just that the king's English, even
when spoken by a common criminal in a rich Cockney accent, sounds so
worthwhile, that I have been so duly conditioned to believe that about
the English language, that I would listen keenly to anyone who spoke
like that and believe I was listening to something philosophical.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jerry Saravia
I don't know about any of you but I can live without seeing another crime
picture, especially in this post-Tarantino age. A story about a criminal
avenging the death of his daughter from other criminals should not inspire much
thought or excitement. But in the hands of the extraordinary director Steven
Soderbergh ("Out of Sight," "Sex, Lies and Videotape"), "The Limey" transforms
its paper-thin premise into pure excitement and examines it up close with an
extraordinary actor at its center, Terence Stamp.
Stamp stars as the "limey" (slang for a British person, particularly a sailor)
otherwise referred to as Wilson, a former criminal released from prison who
comes to L.A. in search of his daughter, Jenny (introduced in Wilson's
voice-over at the beginning). She is presumed to be dead, possibly killed by a
former record producer named Valentine (Peter Fonda, thriving on his "Ulee's
Gold" streak). Stamp is relentless in his pursuit, actively waging a war to
find the truth. He is lean, mean and vicious...and apparently ignorant of
modern society. There's a wonderfully sly scene where he discovers that the men
outside of Valentine's grand palace are not bodyguards but valets. 
"The Limey" could be a late-night movie of the week or an HBO drama at best if
it were not for Soderbergh's flashy direction or Stamp's vulpine charms. He is
the heart and soul of the film, supplying both subtle humor and crafty,
suggestive mannerisms. Stamp has one great scene after another: whether he is
smoothly speaking to an old flame, bashing heads at a factory, throwing people
over balconies, or having flashbacks of his daughter, or trying to explain in a
thick Cockney accent the turmoil of his life to a police investigator. There is
nothing this man can't do - he makes the film eminently watchable. 
As in "Out of Sight," Soderbergh cleverly and astutely flashes back and forth
between one scene to the next, utilizing freeze-frames and different backdrops
while whole conversations take place. This is not a new feat of cinematic
interpretation - think back to Godard's wildly jump-cutting scene-shifting in
the groundbreaking "Breathless." It is also an added plus to insert footage
from  Stamp's 1967 film "Poor Cow" throughout, not to mention allusions to
Peter Fonda's "Easy Rider" by playing "Magic Carpet Ride." "The Limey" is all
about allusions to the past, as we follow Wilson on his path to discover the
truth of his daughter's possible demise.
"The Limey" also benefits from a great supporting cast, always a necessity in a
L.A. noir story. There is the Lesley Ann Warren as the old flame, the
terrifically funny Luis Guzman, and, aging like fine wine, Barry Newman as a
corrupt aide to Valentine. With a stirring conclusion, wonderful compositions,
and a full fledged character study at its center, "The Limey" stands along side
"Jackie Brown" as an exemplary look at the seedy, laid-back lifestyles of Los
Angeles.   
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at
Faust667@aol.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Steven Soderbergh's THE LIMEY is sort of an action crime-drama --
only there's not all that much action, and relatively little crime. It's
sort of a character study -- only there's not a whole lot of the main
character to study. It's sort of an avant garde experiment by Soderbergh
-- only Soderbergh has been plenty more avant garde in the past. THE
LIMEY keeps nudging you for artistic respect, and you keep thinking you
might give it more if only it would stop nudging. Intriguing films don't
often feel as minimally satisfying as THE LIMEY.
     On the surface, it seems like it has plenty going for it (though
surface is one of the main things it does have going for it). The
minimalist plot is something straight out of pulp crime fiction:  tough
British ex-con Wilson (Terence Stamp) learns that his daughter Jenny 
recently died in a car accident, and travels to Los Angeles to find out
the whole story. In the process he hooks up with a couple of Jenny's 
friends, Eduardo (Luis Guzman) and Elaine (Lesley Ann Warren), and learns
of Jenny's relationship with one-time 60s record-industry guru Terry
Valentine (Peter Fonda). Eventually he also discovers that Valentine may
have been involved in some criminal activities, and that Jenny's death may
have been connected to finding out more than she was supposed to know.
     Before you can say "They killed his daughter, now he's going to make
them pay," Wilson is making his determined, laconic way through L. A.,
shooting, head-butting or rear-ending anyone who stands between him and
the truth. I suspect THE LIMEY would have felt like a 25-year-too-late
episode of "Mannix" if Soderbergh hadn't jolted the film's visual 
style. In effect, he turns most of the film into an extension on his
Clooney/Lopez seduction sequence in OUT OF SIGHT -- flashing forward,
flashing back, laying dialogue from one scene over images from another. 
It might have come off as simple gimmickry, if it weren't such an
effective method of getting inside Wilson's head. An ex-con in unfamiliar
territory and coping with unresolved grief, he's living the jagged,
stream-of-consciousness life Soderbergh shows us on the screen.
     That's a wonderful start for an exploration of how a criminal comes
to terms with the choices he has made and the effect of those choices on
those in his life. And that's about as far as it goes. For all its
moodiness and somber tones, THE LIMEY really isn't terribly interested in
the complexities of its characters. Terence Stamp does a nice job as
Wilson, mixing a bit of introspection into the standard issue tough guy,
but the introspection isn't as deep as all the mournful close-ups of Stamp
would suggest -- he's just, as they say in the self-help biz, looking for
closure. Guzman and Warren are flat-out wasted as supporting players who
barely have a chance to register, while Fonda gets one or two decent
moments as the fading tycoon. When Nicky Katt appears mid-way through the
film as a hired killer, igniting the screen with his seething disdain for
absolutely everything, it's startling. And you have to credit Katt,
because screenwriter Lem Dobbs doesn't seem otherwise keen on vivid
personalities.
     It's not that THE LIMEY isn't an enjoyable piece of work. Soderbergh
is one of those directors who can give a mundane scene an electrifying
twist, as in the unconventional way he films Wilson's rampage at a
downtown warehouse. The reason THE LIMEY never feels like a gritty
vengeance caper, despite its car chases and shootouts, is that Soderbergh
is always yanking things 90 degrees from the expected direction. It would
have made for an even better film, however, if it never felt like a gritty
vengeance caper because it actually _wasn't_ a gritty vengeance caper. 
Give Soderbergh credity for the convincing illusion that this genre film
is something else. Stylistic flourishes aside, THE LIMEY is just a pretty
darned good straight-ahead action crime-drama -- provided you like them
with relatively little action, and not all that much crime.

Author
Jeremiah McVay
         As a follow-up to what many viewed as Soderbergh's mainstream
breakthrough (although nine years after the film that put him on the
map-- sex, lies, and videotape), Out of Sight, he has chosen as a
sequel. Of course it isn't a sequel to one of his films, but to a 32
year old British film many had never heard of. This seems to be the way
Soderbergh works, doing just what he pleases-- if it happens to fall
into what the public is, at the time, considering "mainstream," so be
it, perhaps. I somehow doubt Mr. Soderbergh cares very much. He is quite
willing to make cinema for himself, and this film is a sure example of
that.
        I think it is, indeed, very important to identify this film as a
follow-up to Out of Sight. If you'll remember, that film contained a
love scene in which not one extraneous body part was shown. All the
chemistry of the scene came from the cinema used to build it. In fact,
the scene took place in two different places and times, but these
spatial and temporal boundaries meant nothing to Soderbergh. He freely
mixed the audio of one time and space with the visual of another. In
this way, the scene took places in both settings at once-- I am doing a
poor job of explaining it, no doubt, so suffice it to say that it was
probably my favorite single cinematic moment of 1998.
        Well, why is that scene so important to The Limey? Simply put,
that scene is this entire film. It's as if Soderbergh became so
fascinated with that one stylistic decision, that he decided to expound
upon it throughout an entire film. The result is an experiment that,
while uneven due to its inherent nature as an experiment, is rather
interesting to watch just to see the final results.
        So, the film is constantly shifting it's spatial and temporal
viewpoint through both its audio and visual elements. How does this
effect the other parts of the film? The story, for one, I believe,
suffers quite a bit. There's just not really all that much to it,
although what is there is strengthened to a considerable extent by the
"experiment." It's a tale of revenge and redemption with a rather strong
conclusion, but the journey to that end is not always entirely engaging.
        Perhaps the performances did not help all too much, either. Of
course, the presence of Terrence Stamp is necessary, as he was the main
character of the first film, but his performance is quite stiff and
doesn't really help one to align with his character (that is left to the
direction, I believe, and perhaps that was the intent, but it jut didn't
work for me, I'm afraid). Peter Fonda plays the equivalent of an
antagonist and his performance is a far cry from his magnificent turn in
Ulee's Gold. Where Stamp is stiff, Fonda simply falters. He never once
really seems like any sort of character, but instead seems like an actor
trying to find a character. The other performances were all throw-aways,
in my opinion. I barely remember anything about them other than the
performance were either bad or pretty much ineffective.
        Still, Soderbergh was somehow to carry this film through with
his direction and make it interesting to watch. While, I think he could
have spent more time on characters and story, his experiment was worth
witnessing and, therefore, the film is far from a loss or failure.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Terrence Stamp, Peter Fonda. Directed by Steven Soderbergh.
Rated R.
Out of Sight director Steven Sorderbergh baffles the hell out of us all
in The Limey, a cold, uninvolving, confusing new thriller. Though the
plot description may at first seem like it came from the pen of Elmore
Leonard (author of Out of Sight, as well as Jackie Brown, Get Shorty
and Pulp Fiction), after you watch it, you realize that it's not nearly
good enough.
In an aggressively non-linear fashion, The Limey (li*mey, noun: an
English gentleman) tells the story of Wilson (Terrence Stamp), a
British ex-con just released from a 9 year stint in prison for armed
robbery. He has come to the US to seek vengeance for the death of his
daughter Jenny. He doesn't know much about the circumstances of her
demise, all he has is a name: Terry Valentine. Valentine was Jenny's
former boyfriend, a wealthy and corrupt record executive. He's played
by Peter Fonda, in his first major role since the terrific Ulee's Gold
in 1997.
Seeking Valentine's reclusive place of residence turns out to be no
easy task for Wilson. He finally finds the impressive abode high in the
mountains and sneaks in just as Valentine is having a big party. He
winds up breaking his cover eventually, setting off Valentine's head of
security and Valentine himself, who decides to run for it.
What a mess. I have no problem when films refuse to be constricted by
the linearity of time -- Pulp Fiction, which twisted time every which
way, was a masterpiece -- but I do take exception to movies that decide
to play around with it for no reason other than to confuse the viewer.
The Limey does exactly that. The plot is permeated with flashbacks,
flash-forwards and what can only be described as random time-travel,
without any evident purpose. There is no method to this movie's
madness. It uses a fancy way to tell a story that would be better off
told more conventionally and more comprehendably.
The plot isn't particularly interesting in the first place:
traditional, mildly hackneyed and not very involving. This is a sort of
brooding film -- our protagonist doesn't speak much and the action
sequences are done with an annoyingly perfunctory attitude. I felt like
the director wasn't very interested in the proceedings himself, almost
like he made this film for a paycheck. Ditto for the editing, which
seems to be deliberately sloppy and unpleasant.
Sixties icon Terrence Stamp manages to at least be menacing as the
aging criminal. He's not much in the way of stature but he has a
surprisingly imposing physical presence that works to his advantage
here. Peter Fonda is an unbelievably underrated actor: he's shy, quiet
but always effective. He's adept at conveying emotions through speech
rather than expression: his feelings don't always show on his face by
you can always tell what they are.
This is basically a conventional thriller told in a pretentiously
bizarre fashion. Why Soderbergh couldn't just parrot down and tell a
story, I don't know, but what he does do certainly doesn't work. The
result is a wild cornucopia of images that amount to precisely nil --
even the action scenes don't work. 1999 may have signified the death of
the traditional act one - act two - act three storyline, but obviously
some movies have not yet transcended it. Shall we go back to basics?
