Title
Review for Run of the Country, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Albert Finney, Matthew Keeslar, Victoria Smurfit, Anthony Brophy
Director: Peter Yates
Producers: Peter Yates and Ruth Boswell
Screenplay: Shane Connaughton
Cinematography: Mike Southon
Music: Cynthia Millar
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     Albert Finney is one of today's best character actors, and lately
he's been spending a lot of time in the skin of a lonely, aging
Irishman.  In addition to his role as the father in THE RUN OF THE
COUNTRY, he has appeared as a similar character in THE PLAYBOYS and A
MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE.  Similar, yet not the same.  Accomplished thespian
that he is, Finney does something subtly different with each of the
parts, and though many of the particulars are the same, no one would
confuse any of the three men.
     Yet Finney's character is not the focus of THE RUN OF THE COUNTRY.
His is a supporting role, presenting an opportunity for conflict with
his teenage son, Danny (Matthew Keeslar).  This is Danny's story--how,
coping with the recent death of his beloved mother, he struggles to find
independence from an overbearing father.  Part of this process is moving
out of his childhood home and in with his friend, Prunty (Anthony
Brophy), a cattle herder with a love of booze and a penchant for crude
talk.  Another part is falling in love.  The object of his affection is
Annagh (Victoria Smurfit), a girl from just north of the border
separating Catholic South Ireland from the Protestant North.
     Though it takes place in contemporary Ireland, the way in which
people live--many in ramshackle huts with little evidence of modern
"conveniences"--gives the story a timeless quality.  Likewise, the
characters would probably be equally at home in the nineteenth century
as in the twentieth.  Danny and Annagh are both virgins well into their
teens and Danny's father is opposed to any sort of contraceptive.
Religion is a powerful force, and the penalties for premarital sex are
terrible to contemplate.
     The best-crafted element of the film is the love story.  Director
Peter Yates brings real feeling and tenderness to the interactions
between Danny and Annagh, from their first furtive glances at each
other to Danny's faltering attempts to address her in conversation.
Annagh is somewhat more world-wise than Danny, which makes it amusing
to watch her nonplussed reactions to some of his unintentional double
entendres--phrases he innocently thinks have only one meaning.
     The relationship between Danny and his father, although of equal
importance to the romance, is less developed.  Drawn with broad strokes,
this conflict always seems more peripheral than central, which robs a
cathartic scene of emotional power.  Finney does all he can with the
material, creating a mild character always on the brink of an emotional
eruption, but Matthew Keeslar can't keep up with him.  In fact, Keeslar,
who is at times flat, isn't the equal of any of his co-stars.  Both
Victoria Smurfit and Anthony Brophy have impressive debuts.
     The script, adapted by Shane Connaughton (the writer of MY LEFT
FOOT) from his own book, has a fair number of affecting sequences, and
manages to deftly mix humor and serious issues.  While the political
situation and the possible involvement of the IRA are kept in the
background, they are not ignored.  Part of growing up in Ireland, after
all, is coming to grips with this volatile element of life.  At one
point, Prunty advises:  "Have a dream ya can live for, lad, not one
that'll put you in the grave."  More crucial to the story, however, are
the boundaries created by religion, education, and class.  Every
conflict in this film has its roots in one of these three causes.  So,
although THE RUN OF THE COUNTRY has its weak spots, it nevertheless
gives us a more original coming-of-age story than that which typically
graces American screens.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     A RUN OF THE COUNTRY starts off as a little, light, slice of life
movie, but by the end develops into full blown tragedy.  It opens with
Danny's (Matt Keeslar) mom being put in the grave.  It then switches to
a series of scenes of conflict between Danny and his father (Albert
Finney).  Whenever things get bad for Danny, he wistfully flashes back
to happy times, laughing with his mother.
     Danny's father is a police sergeant in a small town in Ireland
near the border with the North and hence near "The Troubles."  His
father wants to get a juicy murder that only he can solve, but the best
he can do is find people killed by the IRA.  He disgustedly remarks on
one killing that "This is a political murder, not an ordinary, decent
crime at all."  Finney is equally disappointed with his son, reflecting
that "He's a dreamer, but dreamers don't pay the rent."
     Danny soon gets feed up with his Dad who stays angry at him and
wants him to make something of his life and "go off to University" so
Danny leaves to stay with his friend Prunty known as Coco (Anthony
Brophy).  The Coco character is broadly drawn and soon becomes a
caricature of a flaky friend.  His costumes and make up are reminiscent
of a beggar in a Dickens play.  This character is badly written (Shane
Connaughton) and poorly acted.  Without him the movie would have been
much stronger.  A typical scene with him is the bar room brawl one
where he picks a fight just for fun and people crawl under other
people's legs to escape.  Its been done a thousand times before and
Connaughton's writing provides nothing fresh.
     The director (Peter Yates) appears to encourage Finney to overact
at first as the movie starts quite unevenly.  Eventually, Yates starts
to provide focus and the movie comes into its own after meandering for
about 20 minutes with a fairly boring, semi-slapstick tone.  I was
surprised how quickly my opinion began to change from boredom to being
drawn into the story.  The catalyst was the blossoming of the romance
between Danny and his new girlfriend, Annagh Lee (Victoria Smurfit) who
lives in Northern Ireland, but just a few miles from Danny's house.
Smurfit is a first time movie actress that has a smile and a sense of
inner confidence that mesmerizes her audience.  Suddenly you care,
because you want to be Danny.
     At this point, I thought the movie was going to be a romance.
Wrong.  Although the romance was wonderful and lasted for quite some
time, the film is ultimately a tragedy that may make tears come to your
eyes.  From the first, where Annagh declares that "You know our bodies
are just bags of fluid and bones.  I don't think we have a long term
future on this planet", you begin to sense an impending doom.  There is
also a little mystery along the way, but the writer telegraphs his
punches so well that most of the audience knows who it is.
     For me the war part is an unnecessary complication, but I liked
almost all of the show.  My main criticism, other than the Coco
character, is that I wish Yates had gone for either romance or tragedy,
but not both.  It was almost like a two part Opera where the first act
is all sweetness and light and the second all dark and foreboding.
Nevertheless, I liked both parts.
     The movie has fairly uninvolving cinematography which is a shame
given the material they have to work with.  They filmed it on location
in County Cavan.  Only the ending vistas while the credits are rolling
shows off Ireland at all.  The sound effects editing was especially
good.  The way they work the natural animal sounds into it, you want to
go live in a small village in the Irish countryside because it sounds
so peaceful.
     A RUN OF THE COUNTRY runs just about right at 1:50.  It is rated R
for a little violence, some tasteful and beautifully done sex, and some
male and female nudity.  It is a soft R, and I think it would be fine
for teenagers.  I recommend the movie to you, and I award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
