Title
Review for Rebro Adama (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     ADAM'S RIB is a Russian film directed by Vyacheslav Krishtolovich.
It stars Inna Churikova, Svetlana Ryabova, Masha Golubkina, and Elena
Bogdanova.  With English subtitles.  Unrated.
     ADAM'S RIB follows a few days in the lives of four women in a small
Moscow apartment: the paralyzed grandmother, the mother who works
part-time as a docent in a museum of the Revolution and who worries
full-time, and two daughters, sired by two very different husbands.  The
men are peripheral to their lives, even as much as they affect them in
various ways.  Everybody comes together at babushka's birthday party,
where various crises appear to come to the surface, some not for the
first time.  When the movie ends, nothing is resolved except that the
three youngest agree that they cannot rely on anyone or anything (the
unspoken exception being each other).  The film ends with a kind of
miracle the meaning of which no one is sure.
     Characterizations are the entire raison d'etre for this film.  The
four principals are sharply drawn, three-dimensional characters with
whom we feel both comfortable and familiar.  I was especially impressed
by Inna Churikova, the grandmother, who invests her paralysis with great
emotion and strength.  The scene between her and Svetlana Ryabova, her
daughter, in which Ryabova first reads her mother the riot act and then
begs forgiveness, is one of great power, a tour-de-force for both women.
     The men include an office womanizer, an ineffectual, weak law
student who aspires to become a thug, the two ex-husbands -- one a Jew,
one an anti-Semite -- and a new beau for the mother, sweet, shy, with
unexpected strengths and compassion.  Yet none of them is there when
babushka's bed pan needs changing.  The women bicker amongst themselves
in their crowded flat, but they are ones who are there to do the dirty
work for each other, to figure how to make their menage survive.
     This is a small film, but sharply focused, incisively written and
performed.  With no budget, no resources, no filmstock in all
likelihood, the film maker and his crew and cast concentrate on giving
us a small gem of insight, wisdom, and passion.
     If you have a chance to see this Russian ADAM'S RIB, do yourself a
great favor and do so, regardless of the cost.
