Title
Review for Talking to Strangers (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Rob Tregenza.
Cast: Ken Gruz, Dennis Jordan, Caron Tate, Marvin Hunter, Henry 
Strozier, Lois Evans, Sharrie Valero, Joanne Bauer, Linda Chambers, 
Richard Foster, Romey Curtis, Sarah Rush.
1988 - 93 minutes.
Not Rated (contains profanity).
Reviewed November 2, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
I was not prepared for the impact that the overlooked independent film, 
"Talking to Strangers," by director Rob Tregenza, would have. In fact, I 
had never heard of it until I picked it up at the video store and saw 
that a lot of critics had praised it. So I rented it.
"Talking to Strangers" is 90 minutes long, and consists of 9 separate 
sequences, and only 9 shots. It was filmed in Baltimore on an extremely 
low budget, and each scene only had one take, so the actors obviously 
had a lot of pressure on them to not make any mistakes. Through the nine 
scenes, we follow one person, Jesse (Ken Gruz), an artist who is alone 
in the first and last segment, and in the middle seven, a sort of story 
involving usually one other character, is set up that is seemingly 
completely obscure from the others. They sort of play like short films 
strung together in no particular order, involving the same actor. But as 
a whole, the film paints a powerful tapestry of conflicting stories that 
do, strangely enough, feel like they create a whole.
"Talking to Strangers," is one of the most audacious, startlingly 
original film debuts I have ever seen, and director Tregenza is a great 
talent. Each segment is totally fascinating, even those in which very 
little happen, such as the opening ten minutes, which starts off looking 
like an establishing shot of a city, but then follows the character of 
Jesse through the streets, down several blocks, as he almost gets on 
three different buses. And, similar to this, in the last scene, we 
simply watch him paint a room with a paint sprayer.
The middle sequences are all gorgeously shot and effective in their own 
way. The best story involves Jesse at a bank, as he tries to talk to an 
upset black secretary (Caron Tate), who keeps receiving disturbing, 
mysterious phone calls from her husband. Another thought-provoking 
segment starts off with Jesse talking to a kind middle-aged woman (Romey 
Curtis) on a bus whose car has broken down, only for the bus to be taken 
over by a group of punks, which leads to a brutal rape. All of the other 
scenes take place in varying settings, such as a ferry, a soup kitchen, 
a confessional in a church, and under a bridge.
What ultimately makes, "Talking to Strangers," such a brilliant motion 
picture is the unorthodox, strikingly unpredictable style that the film 
is made in, as well as the fact that it is always spellbinding to watch. 
There is never a dull moments, and all of the stories and individual 
characters are wholly memorable and often truly sympathetic and 
poignant. Thinking back on the film, the character of the secretary at 
the bank, played flawlessly and naturally by Caron Tate, is especially 
tragic and unforgettable, as is the enigmatic central character of 
Jesse.
The so-called "point" of the film is left wide open for the viewer to 
draw their own conclusions, and although I still am not sure exactly 
what it is all about, the overall boldness and power of the film cannot, 
in no way, be denied.
Director Rob Tregenza has a true gift as an intriguing filmmaker, and 
his debut film, "Talking to Strangers," is, in many ways, a masterpiece. 
It contains far more creativity, intelligence, extraordinary images, and 
provocative ideas than twenty big-budget Hollywood films put together, 
and it deserves to be seen.
