Title
Review for Relentless (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
     The newspaper add for RELENTLESS read: "Killers aren't born.
They're made."  Likewise, lousy movies aren't born; they're made--and
director William Lustig has made one.
     In a sense, RELENTLESS is only half bad--the half with Judd Nelson
portraying Buck Taylor, a homicidal maniac who's murdering people selected
at random from the phone book..  Screenwriter Jack Robinson seems to think
he can throw in some flashbacks of Buck's childhood and call it character
psychology; I call it superficial B.S.  We're supposed to sympathize with
Buck because his authoritarian father made him fire guns at age five.  But
as soon as he starts committing the gruesome murders, any sympathy we had
for him immediately flies right out the window.  Buck is despondent because
the police academy has rejected him on the grounds that he's
"psychologically unfit."  Call me an optimist, but there must be a
healthier way to cope with rejection than by killing people.
     According to the production notes, Nelson prepared for the role by
reading books about serial killings.  I would have guessed he prepared by
watching NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD 500 times because all he does in the role
is walk around like a zombie, complete with bags under his eyes and greasy,
disheveled hair.  As a psychological character study, RELENTLESS is about
as fresh and satisfying as moldy bread.
     As a buddy-buddy comedy, on the other hand, RELENTLESS has more to
offer.  The movie is nearly saved by the humorous repartee between Robert
Loggia and Leo Rossi who play the investigating homicide detectives.  Rossi
is an earnest ex-New York patrolman who has been promoted to detective in
L.A.  His new partner, Loggia, is a seasoned veteran preparing to retire.
RELENTLESS has fun with the clash between Rossi's anxious, New York
personality and Loggia's laid back California life-style.  Loggia seems
indifferent to the murder victims, showing more interest in the real estate
value of their condos.  Rossi, on the other hand, is almost too eager to
collect clues; he thinks he's Sherlock Holmes.  To a certain extent, the
movie makes up for its cliched story line with its satirical depiction of
the L.A.P.D.  The clever one-liners sprinkled throughout the film keep the
mood from becoming too somber.
     Ultimately, RELENTLESS is done in by its utter predictability.  At
the climax, for example, Buck Taylor threatens to kill Rossi's family; now
where have you seen that before?  RELENTLESS shows few, if any, signs of
imagination or creativity, but that shouldn't stop you from catching it on
cable some night while you're eating last week's leftovers.
