Title
Review for Tampopo (1986)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Miriam Nadel
     Imagine what would happen if Bill Forsyth and Julia Child had a son who
lived in Japan.  The result might be something like TAMPOPO.
     The basic story of this movie involves a truck driver who is determined
to make the title heroine into a first-rate noodle cook.  Interwoven with
the plot are a series of sketches that involve food, in various ways.  Most
are funny--like a very proper lady trying to teach a bunch of young
women how to eat spaghetti without making noise, while a man in the restaurant
loudly slurps his pasta.  Some are erotic--as the one in which a man and
woman pass an egg yolk back and forth between their mouths.  Some are just
weird, at least to a Westerner, but none fall flat.  
     The main plot is also quirky with lots of laughs.  In the pursuit of the
perfect bowl of noodles, Tampopo encounters a band of vagabond gourmets,
helps a choking victim by using a vacuum cleaner, and cons a rival chef into
revealing how long to leave the dough sitting.  The unexpected is constantly
happening, which is an all too neglected element in many recent comedies.
     At a more serious level, I also learned a lot about Japanese cultural
values--only in part associated with food.  The attention to detail associated
with the preparation and eating of noodles is also a reflection of the
attention to societal roles and this is lightly touched on in a few of the
sketches.
     Overall I can think of few better ways to spend an evening than going out 
for a sushi dinner followed by seeing this movie.  Four stars.
Miriam Nadel
mhnadel@gryphon.CTS.COM       {philabs, trwrb}!cadovax!gryphon!mhnadel
      {hplabs!hp-sdd, sdcsvax, ihnp4, nosc}!crash!gryphon!mhnadel

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  High-calorie comedy about one
     restaurant's quest for the perfect noodle soup.  Enjoyable
     comedy from Japan includes several comedy sketches unrelated
     to the main story, but which help to buoy it up.
     Are you into food?  I mean, are you REALLY into food?  And when you get
the food, is it important that everything about the food be just perfect?
And, just by the way, are you really into Japanese food?  If so, you will
probably enjoy TAMPOPO, a new film from Toho Studios.  Toho is known best in
this country for having invented Godzilla and many of his tall friends.
They also made the best of the samurai films.  They now bring the plot of a
samurai film and the subtlety of a Godzilla film to a comedy about the
adoration of food.
     Two truck drivers stop at a noodle shop somewhere in the outskirts of
Tokyo.  Even though the ramen is mediocre, one of the truck drivers finds
himself in a fight defending Tampopo, the chef.  He is knocked unconscious
by five ruffians and when he awakes the next morning, Tampopo has an odd
request: she wants our truck driver to become her master and teach her to
make perfect ramen noodle soup.  Thus Tampopo begins the arduous and
occasionally dangerous journey toward perfection in even so apparently minor
a task as noodle-making.  In this task details that seem minor to gaijin--
foreigners like you and me--become very important.  The plot from that point
forward advances much like a samurai film.  If thick noodles seem to make
for a thin plot, they do.  About half the movie is filled with tangential
comedy routines that have little or nothing to do with the plot.  Some are
funny; some seem a little pointless to us impatient gaijin; almost all are
on the subject of food.
     One may question if the world really needed a comedy dedicated to
gourmet cooking--particularly one that shows in detail the proper way to
kill and drain the blood from a turtle.  But TAMPOPO is a diverting hour or
so.  It is a pleasant (mostly) and forgettable film guaranteed to increase
the business of local Japanese restaurants.  Rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.  Don't see it on an empty stomach.

Author
Brian Takeshita
After watching the first ten minutes of this Japanese film, you will
never eat a bowl of ramen the same way again.  There is a scene where
an old man is teaching a young one how to eat the soupy bowl of
noodles, as a master would teach an eager apprentice.  "You caress the
noodles with the chopsticks," he says, "then put the roast pork on the
side of the bowl and apologize to it by saying, 'see you soon.'"  Of
course, it's meant to be a parody, but there is an earnestness
underneath the silliness that makes you take it with a certain degree
of sobriety.  You begin to appreciate the food as not merely something
you eat, not something you like, not something you enjoy, but rather
something you experience.  Experiencing it is a process which engages
all of the senses, fulfilling each one on its own terms and weaving
them so that the total is a pleasure that is more than the sum of its
parts.  Trust me, you really want to go find a noodle shop at this
point.
Juzo Itami's TAMPOPO brings the same sense of the serious parody of
food to the forefront by making the story follow the pattern of an
American western, set in modern day Japan.  A stranger, Goro (Tsutomu
Yamazaki), comes into town and finds Tampopo (Nobuko Miyamoto), the
proprietor of a small, hole-in-the-wall noodle shop, trying to fend
off the insults of the local strongman, Pisken (Rikiya Yasuoka).
Goro, to defend the honor of this woman and her noodles, gets into a
fight with the ringleader and his henchmen, emerging bloodied, but
victorious.  Goro finds that Tampopo's ambition is to have a shop that
people would flock to from far away, just to eat a bowl of her ramen.
The problem is, her fare is something less than popular, and less than
appetizing.  However, Goro agrees to help Tampopo in her quest, and in
the process they seek the wisdom of an elderly noodle expert, enlist
the aid of a wealthy patron, and make friends with the former enemy.
This film is filled with many little scenes which are absolute gems.
Take, for example, when Tampopo tries to buy the recipe for a
delicious soup from another shop owner.  The price is too high, but
the owner of the store next door will secretly sell it to her for a
more affordable sum.  Tampopo meets him at his store late at night,
and he leads her to a back room.  She protests, thinking that perhaps
this man has ulterior motives, but he insists.  Just when she is about
to bolt for the exit, he shows her a small gap in the wall adjoining
his store with the noodle shop next door.  She peers through and takes
notes as she watches the cook make the soup for the next day, her face
filled with a joy that can be felt by the audience.  This scene, while
comical, is very effective at filling the viewer with a sense of
trepidation, then of relief and discovery.
There's also an interesting scene where Goro introduces Tampopo and
her son to a bunch of street people who, despite their economic
trappings, are all gourmets and master sommeliers.  We even watch as
one of them sneaks into the kitchen of a restaurant and expertly
prepares a French omelet.  The scene is meant to bring a laugh, but it
also says that no matter whether people are rich or poor, food is
something which everyone has in common, and the enjoyment of food is
an experience shared by all.
There are also a number of unrelated vignettes appearing throughout
the film, which help to illustrate and accentuate the role of food in
people's lives.  A particularly effective one involves a wife and
mother being tended to in her home by a doctor.  Surrounded by her
children, she is obviously in her last hours of life.  Her husband
comes home, and seeing her worsened condition, demands that she get up
and make dinner.  The viewer knows the husband's intention is not to
be mean; he is desperate for the normalcy of which he and his family
has obviously been deprived, and the wife making dinner is an
essential part of this.  In a near miracle, the wife drags herself to
the kitchen and prepares a quick meal, then brings it to her awaiting
family.  As the family eats, she looks on them and smiles.  Preparing
food for her family is a joy and a comfort to her, and for a brief
moment, she too enjoys the normalcy.  Then she falls over, dead.  For
a moment, the family is stunned, but then the father yells at the
children, "Keep eating!  This is the last meal your mother ever made!"
Crying as they do so, the family finishes the meal.  The scene is
comical, awkward, moving, and beautiful.
By including the vignettes, Itami ran the risk of creating a
disjointed film, but surprisingly, they do not interrupt the pacing of
the main storyline.  Instead, they even help contribute to the idea
that Tampopo's goal of being able to serve exceptional food is worthy
and even noble.  Because the film parodies a western, the construction
of the plot is fairly predictable, but is still enjoyable as we watch
the familiar way in which the "good guys" come together for the final
showdown.  In this case, the showdown is against the ramen.  If they
eat Tampopo's ramen, soup and all, Tampopo knows she has succeeded.
It's pretty obvious what the outcome will be, but when a film changes
your whole perspective on something you consume every day of your
life, you can afford to cut it a little slack.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     I have to give credit to the Japanese filmmakers over the last two years;
they are producing some of the funniest films to grace the Film Festival.
Latest in the rostrum (and heavily recommended via word of mouth from NPR,
Pauline Kael) is TAMPOPO, a story of a widowed noodle cook, a truck driver who
seems to be John Wayne on the side, a vagrant food connoisseur, a churlish
contractor with a heart of gold, and a gangster who seems to be combining his
passion for food and his passion for his sexy moll.  And gourmets.  Gad,
EVERYONE in this film is a gourmand, from top executive assistants down to
bowery bums.  Anyone and everyone will suddenly stop whatever they're doing and
begin to talk in terms straight out of your local "Best Places" restaurant
guide, how the broth lacks sincerity but the noodles have guts.
     Actually, this film has a rather interesting construction, not seen since
some of the later Monty Python movies.  It has a main plot, that of Tampopo, a
widow who runs a not-very-good noodle shop.  Two truckers, one being the
archetype of most Western heroes of the 50s, help her give the bum's rush to a
bunch of toughs, and she is inspired to rise above her cooking inadequacies,
and become "the best noodle cook in Japan."  The plot follows her through her
training by her trucker friend, her investigations into the secrets behind
really good noodles, and her various trials to get secret ingredients to bring
her to noodle nirvana.  Meanwhile, the film will suddenly wander from the main
plot to various skits occurring nearby, always involving food and usually
involving the gangster with the erotic dinner ideas.  I have heard a lot of
comparisons between some of these scenes and the famous sequences in TOM JONES;
while I don't think they're as entertaining as the sequences in JONES, they're
funny--erotic humor seems to pass through the language barrier with flying
colors.  Some of the other sketches are much funnier, including a board-room
dinner at a fancy French restaurant.  The sketches don't interrupt the main
plot of Tampopo (the name of the aspiring noodle chef) for too long, and some
(but certainly not all) are worth the side trip.
     But the most interesting storyline is that of Tampopo, and Juzo Itami has
the wisdom to keep the center of the movie firmly tied to her apron-strings.  A
B- movie ($4.50 value), with heavy recommendations to get to the theater on
time--this has the funniest opening sequence of any film I've seen this year,
as the gangster decides to have a meal in another movie theater.
