Title
Review for Velocity of Gary, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
THE VELOCITY OF GARY (NOT HIS REAL NAME)
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Next Millennium Entertainment
 Director:  Dan Ireland
 Writer:  James Still
 Cast: Vincent D'Onofrio, Salma Hayek, Thomas Jane, Chad
Lindberg, Olivia d'Abo, Shawn Michael Howard, Khalil Kain,
Danny Arroyo, Ethan Hawke, Tzi Ma.
   There's more than one way to photograph the lower
depths of an urban nightmare.  Joel Schumacher chooses
the most lurid path by portraying the area of male hustlers,
porno merchants, and general sleazeballs of Los Angeles in
"8mm." There is no redemption for any of his characters
save, perhaps, the obsessed hero, Tom Welles, who
ultimately gets over the sordid grip of that sphere of squalor. 
Snuff merchant Eddie Poole goes up in flames while Dino
Velvet and Machine get their comeuppance in the end.  In his
new film "The Velocity of Gary (Not His Real Name)," Dan
Ireland finds a poignant humanity residing in the shadier
areas of New York, quarters for groups of transsexuals,
porno movie houses, male hustlers and homeless people--the
sorts that most middle-class and suburban humanity would
look right through and never dream of getting involved with. 
If director Ireland's view appears Panglossian to us, his
movie is filled with creative touches, merging past and
present in a roundelay of sequences to familiarize us with
some of these colorful personalities.  James Still, who bases
his screenplay on a true story, is nothing if not pro-family. 
For Still, redemption comes when isolated individuals break
through their detachment from genuine human feelings and
extend their reach.  They find contentment and purpose and
hope for the future in the embrace of home and hearth.
   "The Velocity of Gary" centers on a triangular romance with
all the joys and jealousies that such an arrangement can
provide.  At one point, the female third of the group, Mary
Carmen (Salma Hayek), reveals some advice she once
received from her mother: "Be dumb enough to fall in love
and smart enough to know better."  "At least I got the first
part right," she murmurs, and the picture takes off from there. 
Valentino (Vincent D'Onofrio), the love of her life, is a
bisexual currently starring in a pornographic movie in New
York's Times Square district (actually filmed in downtown
L.A.).  Valentino is involved as well with a handsome male
hustler, Gary (Thomas Jane), who has presumably been
thrown out of his house by a disapproving family and has
found an instant and powerful chemistry in Valentino's arms. 
While the male bonding understandably leads to friction
between Gary and Mary Carmen, the two rivals for the porn
star's affection must patch up their differences when
Valentino becomes mortally ill with AIDS.  Pooling their funds,
they set up housekeeping and become for one another the
only real family each has known.  
   While such a theme could easily copy the template for yet
other soap, Ireland does not flirt for a minute with the
conventional.  Opening his film with a striking portrayal of
Gary, who is washing up at a fire hydrant at about the time
that a deaf transsexual, Kid Joey (Chad Lindberg) is beaten
by punks, he explores both the humanity and the degradation
of this largely invisible sub-caste of New York.  Salma Hayek
looks younger than ever as the volatile waitress who cannot
hold even an undemanding job in a donut shop.  She spends
most of the film in perpetual motion, whether razzing a New
Jersey visitor who wants only a glazed doughnut and coffee
but gets more than he bargained for, or expressing her joie
de vivre in a series of ebullient dances in a local bar or on
the spur of the moment wherever she pleases.  Vincent
D'Onofrio, best known to moviegoers for his role in "Full
Metal Jacket" (for which he gained 70 pounds), was even
more impressive in the smaller "The Whole Wide World,"
about author Robert E. Howard---also directed by Dan
Ireland.  As with "The Whole Wide World," Ireland makes
good use of dream-vs.-reality sequences, highlighting the
talented D'Onofrio as yet another marginal character--one
who convinces us that bisexuality really does exist as
D'Onofrio exudes a magnetic relationship with both Hayek
and the more passive and well-cast Thomas Jane.
   Dan Ireland does not romanticize the lives he finds in New
York's lower depths, and in fact the off-the-wall transsexuals
played by Khalil Kain and Shawn Michael Howard are both
hackneyed and repellent.  We pretty much know what Ireland
and scripter James Still stand for when Valentino's dog
Roland (Bingo) strays from his happy home, becomes lost,
bewildered, and frightened as he paces the city streets
foraging for food, and recovers his animal joy when reunited
with his loving owner.  Though the film is not sentimental in
the Hollywood manipulation of the term, that scene alone can
evoke tears from a responsive audience.
