Title
Review for Wong Fei-hung chi saiwik hung si (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Sunga
ONCE UPON A TIME IN CHINA AND AMERICA (1997)
Chinese, with English subtitles. 
Also called Once Upon a Time in China VI (1997) 
Also called Wong Fei Hung Chi Sai Wik Hung Sze (Cantonese)
Also called Huang Feihong Zhi Xiyu Xiongshi (Mandarin)
Written by: Hui Qui Long, Shut Mei Yee, Shut Tiu Cheuk Hon, and Siu Man
Sing
Starring: Jet Li, Rosamund Kwan, Jean Wong, Chrysta Bell, Kwok-Pong
Chan, Xiong Xin Xin, Hung Yan-yan
Synopsis: 
ONCE UPON A TIME IN CHINA AND AMERICA (1997) is a screwball action
comedy on the order of BLAZING SADDLES or PAINT YOUR WAGON. It's
actually the sixth ONCE UPON A TIME IN CHINA movie. Movies one through
five of the series follow the adventures of hero Wong Fei-hong in China,
but ONCE UPON A TIME IN CHINA AND AMERICA takes places in the 1800s
American West. The film portrays the Western adventures of ONCE UPON A
TIME IN CHINA series hero Wong Fei-hong (Jet Li), who is simultaneously
a Chinese sage, a kung fu teacher, and a doctor.
The story begins with Fei-hong and his fiancee Yee (Rosamund Kwan), and
their faithful attendant Seven riding a stagecoach, intending to visit
Sol, a student of Fei-hung's who - - after immigrating to America - -
has invited Fei-hong to celebrate the one-year anniversary of his
medicinal clinic in a small town in the wild and woolly West. When the
stagecoach goes out of control, Fei-hong suffers a nasty bump on the
head, and soon ends up lost down the river with amnesia, where he is
adopted by a friendly Indian. Fei-hong is finally found by Yee and
recovers, but now there is a racist sheriff and some nasty gunslinging
bandits to contend with in town. Can Fei-hung, Seven, and their cowboy
friend Billy use kung fu to clean up all the injustice?
Opinion:
When you take a handful of good dramatic actors and actresses and
surround them with college kids from the local frat house, you end up
with an embarrassing Wild West, populated by straight-faced surfer dudes
dressed as both cowboys and Indians. But at least the fight scenes are
good.
ONCE UPON A TIME IN CHINA AND AMERICA is hilarious, but the
unintentional parts are funnier than the intentional. Everyone plays
their part with a straight face. For example, cowboy Billy has a perm
with platinum bleached blond surfer hair and brown roots, but he takes
his part seriously. As do all the Indian villagers who are poorly
disguised white actors wearing yellow and blue paint. Towards the end of
the film, the cowboy bandits start doing kung fu kicks and fifteen-foot
twirling leaps. Meanwhile, here's an example of an intentional joke:
"You're name is Seven, and I was the eleventh child in my family, so why
don't we team up and open up a store called 7-Eleven?"
The movie turns serious when Fei-hong makes two speeches exhorting the
Chinese Americans to be proud to be Chinese, and soon the Sheriff
threatens to hang every Chinese American in the town. Then the final
battle becomes humorous again when the cowboys start doing Shaolin
moves.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com
