Title
Review for Metro (1997)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Tim Voon
It's not about planes, trains or automobiles. The closest thing that
this movie gets to metropolitan is several bank robberies. Why confuse
the issues with a name that plays no relevance to the movie at all? Why
not simply call the movie "Hostage", or the "The Rescue Techniques of a
Personnel Endangerment Officer"? Wait, we are forgetting a vital element
in this small picture - Eddie Murphy.
Yes. This once simple movie has just taken a U-turn into the
schizophrenic wards. However, I am happy to report that Mr Murphy has
not forgotten to take his medication, and carries himself throughout
this movie with dignified self-control. I haven't seen him this well
behaved, since his role as Sherman Klump. Then again he was overweight
in that role, and that can have a sobering effect.
The plot is none too complicated. A gunman holds a person hostage. The
idea is to rescue everybody without being shot. Eddie Murphy goes about
doing this his personal way. Which in no uncertain terms mean confusing
the hell out of the kidnapper, then shooting him in the shoulder. Now
tell me, where can I find an enlightening chapter on this technique in
the "Police Rescue Operator's Manual"? Let's not be overly sceptical, I
can see some logic in all of this. After all if Eddie can perplex an
entire audience, he should have no problems bewildering the likes of a
low IQ, psychopathic bank robber with an antisocial personality.
The mass confusion rescue technique only works with the dumb criminals.
The smart ones who graduated with honours in English, Geometry and
Personal Grudges, are more likely send a relative to kill your
girlfriend. If this fails, they'll come after you personally. This movie
has its moments in holding the audience in mild suspense, but these
scenes come too far and few in between. Ed is digging a shallow grave
with this movie, if he's looking for a more abundant resting hole, he
may need to look further abroad than the already corpse littered grounds
of Metropolitan.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     One of the stars of METRO was at the press screening.  If you stay
till the end of this review, I'll tell you a unique experience I shared
with her.
     First, I need your help.  As I was counting up the cars being
killed in METRO, I began to wonder: Exactly how many wrecks does it
take to impress today's jaded audiences?  Certainly half a dozen are
not enough, but will a full dozen suffice?  More to the point, at what
count does the number become so ridiculous that the whole exercise
becomes little more than a bad parody of a demolition derby?  Whatever
the number is, METRO exceeded it.  Did you enjoy your holiday turkey?
Would you have liked it more if you had eaten the whole turkey at once?
     Let me confess that I found parts of METRO entertaining in spite
of all of its failings, but TV director Thomas Carter should return to
the medium he knows best.  Here, he subjugates his movie's best parts
to unoriginal, albeit well executed, stunt work.  There is a good story
attempting to get out when it is not buried under the debris left by a
killer cable car.
     The movie opens promisingly.  Hostage negotiator Scott Roper,
played with considerable style by Eddie Murphy, has his hands full.
A crazed man has seventeen hostages held at gun point in a bank.  The
man's wild eyes testify to his edginess.  In walks Scott to negotiate
with him face-to-face.  Through a combination of bravado and
intelligence, Scott gets all of the hostages out alive.
     At this point in the film I was optimistic about its quality.
My faith, however, was misguided since the script by Randy Feldman
(NOWHERE TO RUN and TANGO & CASH) spends little time in hostage
negotiations.  Feldman's forte is choreographing car crashes.
     Feldman does throw in three subplots.  The first has Murphy in
love with Ronnie Tate (Carmen Ejogo).  Ejogo is an incredibly beautiful
woman with a melodious British accent.  Her part is reduced to being
sexy and vulnerable, but she does both with class.  Unfortunately,
every time their romance begins to get interesting and believable, the
director yells "cut," and orders the stuntmen back on the set.  Murphy
plays his character with more compassion that I thought possible for
him so the constantly truncated romance is frustrating to watch.  I
hate it when shows use subplots merely to titillate.
     The second subplot is totally unnecessary and involves Scott's
compulsive gambling.  Scott's habit keeps sidelining the main part of
the movie so he can go watch the ponies.
     The third and most important subplot has Scott breaking in a new
partner named Kevin McCall and played by the numbers by Michael
Rapaport (BEAUTIFUL GIRLS).  This "old pro trains the new hot shot"
idea has been done a hundred times before, and METRO does nothing new
with it.
     In addition to the excessive reliance on action to carry the
movie, there is a problem with the villain.  Michael Wincott (BASQUIAT)
plays jewelry thief and ruthless killer Michael Korda.  The story would
have us believe that he is one of the kill-everyone-in-his-path style
criminals, but Wincott's lack of passion in the role makes him rarely
convincing.
     For reasons that escape me, the movie had more low bass than
JURASSIC PARK.  I guess that the director has been beside too many
teenager's cars and he, like they, equate bass overload with power
and sex appeal.
     In a movie that could have benefited from more humor, Scott does
get one good one-liner.  When he and Ronnie come home from a foreign
film, he complains, "my eyes still hurt from reading that movie."
Well, my ears hurt when I left his.
     Now for the promised story on why this screening was so unusual.
One of the stars of the show was there live and even stayed afterwards
in the lobby so we could meet her.  Now, the piece de resistance.  I
confess to the world that when no one else was looking, I patted her
rear.
     Okay, so she was the dog in the movie, but she was cute and this
was my first such interaction with a star.  The people from "Bow Wow
Productions" were there too and showed what a talented dog they had.
In the movie the dog is owned by Ronnie and appears in quite a number
of scenes.
     METRO runs too long at 1:57.  The movie drags in the slow parts,
and the action sequences go on too long.  The film is rated R.  There
is violence, profanity, brief nudity, but no sex.  The show would be
fine for teenagers.  METRO is too frustrating and tiring to recommend,
but it does have its moments.  I give METRO my rating of average,
which is **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jason Bacon
        METRO
  I've seen San Francisco in movies many times. There was 1994's
Interview With The Vampire and most recently The Rock. Now, yet again,
San Francisco is the setting for this movie.
  Eddie Murphy stars as Inspector Scott Roper of the SFPD. he is their
top hostage negotiator, and the very best at what he does.
  When his best friend on the force is killed by Joe (Michael Wincott,
in a terrific performance), a psychotic, demented jewel thief, Roger
makes it his mission to capture the guy before he strikes again.
  Meanwhile, Roper tries to rekindle a relationship with his British
ex-girlfriend Veronica, while helping to rear a new up and comer from
SWAT who's an expert sniper and marksman (Michael Rappaport).
  Despite the obligatory cop movie scenes (does EVERY cop/new partner
movie have to start the same way?) where the Sgt. assigns Roper a
partner, Roper confronts the sarge, etc., this film is still one heck of
an explosive ride.
  A scene involving a cable car has to be seen to be believed, and
boasts some amazing car stunts. Eddie Murphy shines in this tailor-made
role, and for once, his character shows depth and concern. When
confronting Joe in prison, you can feel the anger drip from every word.
  Michael Rappaport is basically throwaway. He serves no purpose, except
to be buddy to Murphy and get disabled in the final reel so that Eddie
can save the day. Typical action escapist fare.
  Michael Wincott offers the best performance as the crazed killer and
jewel thief Joe. Never before have I seen such a villian written like
this where I could actually believe that he was serious and take him
seriously. Maybe I just thought that this role was different due to
Wincott's perfectly raspy voice. I don't know.
  What I do know, though, is that although Metro is basically a typical
action retread, it manages to cover new ground and shed new light on
tired old cliches'. The film is a triumph, and an entertaining one at
that. it doesn't meander or trail off from its main character.
  An enjoyable two hours, Metro is enjoyable, witty, action-packed, and
fun, and makes for a great action movie that's perfect for all of us
that need an escape from reality.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Metro (1997) NO STARS out of ***** - C:Eddie Murphy, Michael Rapaport.
There are some people who think that Eddie Murphy is having a comeback.  Then
there are people like me, who believe Eddie Murphy hasn't made a good movie
since 1988's "Coming To America".  For those of you who believe he's having a
comeback, the comeback is over.
Even though 1997 has barely begun, I seriously doubt there will be a movie
as atrociously bad this year as "Metro".  In all my years of movie-going,
this was the very first time I had ever decided "enough is enough" and
promptly walked out of the theater after one hour.  And I'm surprised that I
even lasted that long.
In "Metro", Eddie Murphy plays a hostage negotiator for the San Francisco
police department.  The plot (which really must have developed during the
second hour because there's nothing going on in the first) involves
something about an overacting villain who is involved in stolen jewelry.
Oooo, a jewel thief, call the hostage negotiator!  Early on, Murphy's buddy
on the force is killed by the overacting villain (ooo, I've never seen that
plot twist before) and Murphy gets to train a new partner (Rapaport plays
the partner, in a plot twist I've never seen before).  Also, Murphy keeps
trying (pathetically) to woo back his ex-girlfriend.  Will he catch the bad
guy?  Will he get his girl back?  I could care less, but I guarantee you that
he does.
There's also a car chase through the mountainous streets of San Francisco
(say, I've never seen that before) which seems to contradict the whole
movie.  Well the first hour anyway.  Murphy's character, who's such a dreary
loser, somehow manages to convince us early on that his primary concern in a
hostage situation is to save innocent lives.  However, when he gives chase to
the overacting villain, at least 100 people must get killed, maimed, or
severely injured.
That calls attention to the tone of this movie.  Do not attend this film if
you are looking for a good time time at the movies.  "Metro" is loud,
unpleasant, dreary, and most of all, completely humorless.  Funnyman Eddie
Murphy decided not to be funny this time.  There is one joke in the first
hour, and its the Redd Foxx joke that's in every preview.  His character is
so drab and unlikable, I just can't figure why he would want to follow-up
the success he had with "The Nutty Professor" with such an unoriginal,
lifeless, brainless, disaster of a movie.  It's not like the man is
untalented, he just keeps picking one bad project after another.  I will
sincerely be shocked if "Metro" becomes a hit.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Paul Miller
If you are anything like me, you have not read one good review for Eddie
Murphy's new movie METRO.  At least now this is no longer true.
Metro starts off in an interesting fashion.  Roper (Murphy) is a hostage
negotiator and has a case on his hands.  He asks for a dozen donuts (I
still don't know why) and proceeds to go to the crime scence.  
The plot stops here.  All I will say is that Roper has one heck of a
case on his hands.  He also must take on a new partner (the always great
Michael Rappaport) and train him the right and the wrong ways to
negotiate.
I can say, however, that this is an imaginative movie.  It incoporated
many different views into a whole, this movie.  This movie was good
because of the exact reason I did not like Murphy's BOOMERANG, that
reason being that it didn't stress the comedy.  In here it stressed
supsence and action.  The BEST thing about this movie is that it ALWAYS
leaves you guessing.  Do not think you know what will happen next,
because you don't.  Don't try either, you'll just end up being more
confused than you already are.
If you are an Eddie Murphy fan (such as I am) this may not be the best
movie for you to see.  This isn't the usual Eddie role because the
comedy isn't stressed.  One thing I can say is that Eddie does a good
job with the role.  I think someone else possibly could have played both
parts (Murphy's and Rappaport's) role slightly better, but I think that
would be a very difficult thing to do.
If you want a suspence filled two hours, go see Metro. If you want
classic Eddie Murphy, try renting the Distinquished Gentleman.

Author
Michael Redman
Eddie Murphy=92s latest comedy action film owes much of its commercial
appeal to his previous "48 Hours". Unfortunately director Thomas Carter
and writer Randy Feldman seem to have forgotten that the earlier movie
not only had a plot, but had at least a few scenes that were not
time-worn cliches.
Murphy is police hostage negotiator Roper who forms an arch-enemy
relationship with a sadistic psycho played by Michael Wincott. Although
the two turn in more than adequate performances, as does girlfriend
Carmen Ejogo and partner Michael Rapaport, the story goes where _every_
cop buddy movie has gone before.
The story was so predictable that I found myself in a time warp,
watching the film ten minutes beyond what was on the screen. When
Roper=92s older police mentor goes into an apartment building to "just
talk" to a suspect and tells Murphy to wait in the car because it=92s no
big deal, you know what=92s about to happen. After the inevitable, Murphy=
wants to track down the killer and is ordered off the case by his boss.
What do you think he does?
Early in the film, streetwise tough guy Roper is assigned a white
partner with no experience but lots of book learning. Ever seen this
before? Wincott escapes from jail eager for vengeance and Roper and
girlfriend are about to leave for a vacation when she goes back to her
apartment alone. You can guess the next plot development.
There are so many plot lines that are not followed up that I suspect
there are five films on the cutting room floor where these scenes made
sense. The cop pals spend an afternoon at a race track for some reason.
Ejogo=92s boyfriend makes a brief appearance and then vanishes.
Murphy=92s performance makes the movie watchable. Miraculously he is able=
to wring some freshness out of most tired scenes by his over-the-top
persona. Looking leaner and meaner than in past films, he does a
commendable job in the dramatic role. Rapaport turns in a decent job,
but his character is underused and goes nowhere.
Like all good cop films, there are car chases and explosions aplenty.
After the popular chase sequences in "Bullet", every action movie filmed
in San Francisco has an obligatory high-speed-flying-through-the-air
spectacle through the city of hills. Here we are treated to that sight
so many times that it bores rather than thrills.
There is an out of control cable car chase that is more interesting and
features a unique method of applying the brakes to the picturesque means
of transportation. The scene would have been even more exciting if it
had an hour or two trimmed from it.
[This appeared in the 1/23/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Paul Haynes
Metro   *  *  *   (Out of Four)
R, 1997, 122m.  Filmed in Panavision.  Distributed by Beuna Vista.
Like a good action film should, "Metro" has action that keeps you
involved.  Some action films have action sequences that are so
conventional, our attention is detracted and diverted by other thoughts. 
"The Ghost in the Darkness," which opened a few months ago, is a film that
s action was so bland and uninvolving, it not only invited my thoughts to
divert me, it nearly put me asleep.  But "Metro" is one of the best action
films in a while.  It is hip, sharp, nifty, and has nice little pieces of
suspense and comedy.
Eddie Murphy was in bad shape for a while.  And this invites me to mention
last year s "The Nutty Professor," which was his blessed revival back to
the position at which he used to be.  "Metro" happens to be a lot better
than any film in the "Beverly Hills Cop" series.  That is because "Metro"
takes itself seriously, but doesn t prevent itself from having a little
fun.  Eddie Murphy is at his best in the roles of responsible, and
controlled people.  The "Beverly Hills Cop" movies all featured Eddie as a
reckless, wild cop, always crossing the line by just an inch.  In "Metro"
he plays a hostage negotiator, so negotiation is his job, not his hobby or
his preferred way out of trouble.  His character in "Metro" takes himself
seriously.  Eddie Murphy s mischievous trademark grin is hardly anywhere
to be found in "Metro," and perhaps it is quite better off that way.
Murphy plays Scott Roper, and as I previously mentioned, he is a San
Francisco hostage negotiator.  In the first tense situation in the film,
we are introduced to Roper s kind of work, as he tries to calm down a
confused, unkempt young criminal who has taken captive the entire capacity
of the San Francisco bank he is holding up.  Murphy handles the scene
seriously, without his usual happy-go-lucky, misfit humor.
The film develops when its villain is established, and the villain here is
the beguiling Michael Korda, a jewel thief, and murderer who likes to let
cops know of his hostage fatalities by giving them the ear of the victim.
"Metro" takes different twists and slight turns, and there is one great,
virtuoso chase scene, involving the a cable car.  Cars flip.  Cars crash. 
Cars turn over.  And it is done so good in this film, I was reminded of
"Speed," and the speeding bus that couldn t go under fifty mile per hour
for very significant reasons.  There are also some other good scenes in
"Metro" that a lot of films would rather choose not to have.  Scenes like
the one with Roper and his new partner are at the horse track Roper is a
gambler who knows all the tricks and Roper teaches his partner a few
little methods of betting and winning.  Of course, the writers tried to
disguise the scene as being insignificant by having Roper draw parallels
between Hostage Negotiation and gambling.  The scenes between Roper and
his girlfriend are nice, too.  Those are the scenes that make up "Metro,"
which is mainly about Eddie Murphy s maturing as a personality.
The actor that I most enjoyed seeing in "Metro" was Michael Rapaport, who
plays Roper s new partner, a lip-reading, book-skimming genius, and a
master of observation.  It was not the actor s presence that pleased me as
much as the role he was cast in the role of a proclaimed genius.  Rapaport
is an actor who I usually see in the role of the dimwit the really, really
dopey dimwit.  I hardly recognized him in "Metro," and it was quite a joy
to be able to see him in a role like this I feel that I respect him more.
There are two main types of villains in movies like this: the ones that
are part of the story, and the ones that are devices.  The villain in
"Metro" is no more than a device, but he is a darn good villain
nonetheless.  He is played by Michael Wincott, whose voice is pushed out
in a abraded rasp, as if he smokes a cigarette between every take. 
Wincott makes his villain, Korda, as mean as could be, the classic type of
villain who would push an old lady down a flight of stairs just for kicks,
like Richard Widmark in "Kiss of Death."  And, in addition, Wincott s
physical appearance and mannerisms, in the film, actually reminded my of
an arrogant friend I use to have, who is no longer on my good list.
I liked "Metro," and I do not think would have worked with any other actor
but Eddie Murphy.  His past roles were the great ones but they were also a
precursor to the maturing that would later take place, possibly from
Murphy s growing as a person, now having a family.  "Metro" is a
no-nonsense movie.  It works as a buddy movie, which it does not overplay.
 It works as a dry comedy, which it does not overplay.  It works as a
suspense film, which it does not overplay.  And it works as an action
film, where it does have a tendency to occasionally go all-out.  But who
cares?  It still remains serious, and it does not overdo itself.  Oh, and
there were plenty of explosions in "Metro," as well.  How nice it was of
the filmmakers to give us those.  
If there is one major objection I had to "Metro", it was the length, an
area where a lot of action films seem to wear out their welcomes.  "Metro"
is a film that lasted a little too long, but it was still entertaining,
and it gave me something to do while I waited for it to end.
Paul Haynes


Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Better-than-average actioner with Eddie Murphy *not* doing a
reprise of Axel Foley. Still doesn't quite leave the ground, though.
Eddie Murphy isn't exactly breaking new ground with METRO, an action picture
in which he plays a fast-moving police negotiator, but he does make the
movie an enjoyable experience. He is several megawatts less cranky than the
shrill and unpleasant Axel Foley, for starters.
Murphy's character lives and works in San Francisco. He knows his job well,
and doesn't believe that everyone he negotiates with deserves a SWAT bullet
through the head. But if it comes to that... well, that may be part of the
reason he goes to the racetrack and bets like crazy. He's a weird cross
between Can-Do Man and a walking deathwish. He does have a ladyfriend, and
the time they have on screen is engaging and funny (and judging from the
repartee, mostly unscripted).
Murphy runs afoul of a very nasty and cold-blooded diamond thief (played
with torrents of venom and grease by Michael Wincott), and quickly earns
himself an enemy. In a remarkable scene, Wincott takes over a posh
jewelers', and Murphy goes to talk him down. The two of them engage in a
fencing match of wits that's almost worth seeing the movie for -- and then
erupts into an incredibly violent and drawn-out chase that tears across most
of San Francisco. Both characters taunt each other savagely in scenes that
feel like they come from another movie, they're so ugly and angry.
The movie's schizophrenia is subtle, but it's there. On the one hand, there
are the *really* smart touches, like the way the whole hostage scene is
built, or the aforementioned mental cruelty between the two leads. On the
other hand, there are a gutload of criminally manipulative moments, like the
one where Murphy's ladyfriend is being stalked by bad theme music. Taken as
a whole, METRO's relatively entertaining, but anyone who picks too hard at
the movie is going to be disappointed. It's another disposable stop on the
trolley car of Murphy's career.

Author
James Berardinelli
     METRO is about as generic as action pictures come.  All the staples 
are in place:  the maverick cop out for revenge, the psycho villain with 
more than one life, the girlfriend-in-danger, and the mismatched 
partner.  There are also numerous, assorted shoot outs, car chases, and 
explosions.  Yet, despite the familiar nature of all this material, it 
somehow manages to rise above its cliche-riddled origins and ascend to a 
watchable -- and, at times, even enjoyable -- level.  This is due in no 
small part to the charisma of star Eddie Murphy and the sure-handed 
direction of Thomas Carter. 
     For Eddie Murphy, THE NUTTY PROFESSOR was a good career move.  It 
revived his reputation as a top-money funny man, and proved that, under 
the right circumstances, he can still generate a healthy box office 
return.  It remains to be seen whether METRO will continue the revival 
or plunge the actor back into the murky pit from which he so recently 
emerged.  While METRO isn't nearly as bad as either BEVERLY HILLS COP 3 
or ANOTHER 48 HOURS, one wonders if movie-goers, who stayed away from 
those features in droves, will avoid this one too.   
     Murphy plays Detective Scott Roper, a hostage negotiations expert 
with a gambling addiction.  When a strung-out druggie takes prisoners 
following a botched bank robbery, Roper uses his charm and unorthodox 
methods to diffuse the situation.  Afterwards, his captain (Denis Arndt) 
cheerfully informs him that he has a new partner, McCall (Michael 
Rapaport), a sharpshooter who scored well on all his police aptitude 
tests.  Soon, Roper and McCall are involved in a deadly cat-and-mouse 
game with a sociopath named Korda (Michael Wincott), who raises the 
stakes to include the life of Roper's girlfriend, Ronnie (Carmen Ejogo). 
     Somehow, almost against the odds, Murphy manages to make Roper 
interesting.  He's cut from the mold of dozens of motion picture cops, 
but, through sheer force of personality, Murphy makes him unique and 
likable.  The same cannot be said of Michael Rapaport, who sleepwalks 
his way through another wooden performance.  It continues to baffle me 
what film makers see in him.  Michael Wincott, who seemingly never plays 
a good guy, does a perfectly adequate job as the piece's villain.  And, 
even though I thought METRO's love story was lame, I enjoyed the work of 
British newcomer Carmen Ejogo, despite her lack of chemistry with 
Murphy. 
     Carter evidences a great deal of aptitude in directing the action 
sequences.  They are well-paced and tightly-edited (although there are 
times when it's obvious that Murphy is using the services of a stunt 
double), and keep the viewer from thinking too much about the flawed, 
episodic plotline.  Even the film's most obvious steal -- the chase 
through San Francisco's streets immortalized in BULLITT -- adds enough 
new twists, including a thrilling runaway cable car skid -- to make it 
entertaining in its own right. 
     Ultimately, however, owing to too many derivative elements and an 
erratic story that runs out of steam about halfway through, METRO is 
only partially-satisfying.  I suppose any viewer's reaction will depend 
on whether they choose to see this particular glass as half-full or 
half-empty.  Murphy fans and action junkies will probably find enough 
here to keep them involved and upbeat.  Everyone else will likely see 
this material as disappointingly over-familiar.  In the wasteland of 
early-1997 releases, you could do worse than METRO, but, by year's end, 
few people are likely to remember the title, let alone the premise. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Walter Frith
After coming off the tremendous success of 1996's 'The Nutty Professor',
Eddie Murphy has settled in with a slam bang action picture which is the most
vibrant and alive picture of his career.  A lot of Murphy's film endeavors
have been off beat successes starting with his film debut '48 hrs.' (1982)
and continuing into the nineties with his unconventional political statement
'The Distinguished Gentleman' (1992).  San Francisco is the setting for
'Metro' and Murphy plays a hostage negotiator who takes a young recruit under
his wing and trains him to take his place in the future.  That is only one in
a series of sub plots that lace this richly inventive and colourful
adventure.  There's the tracking of a psychotic jewel thief and Murphy's
relationship with that special lady in his life and the investigation into
the murder of his beloved superior officer.  One scene involving a runaway
streetcar in downtown San Francisco is worth the price of admission alone.
 There's a keen sense of maturity to Murphy's character in this picture as he
plays a complete opposite to his character of Axel Foley from 'Beverly Hills
Cop' (1984) and 'Beverly Hills Cop' (1987).  'Metro' finds itself almost
humourless and it works superbly as Murphy knows just the right place to ad
lib a few light moments.  The first half is more entertaining and thriving
with gusto than the second half but there is an explosive conclusion and a
continuing perception of crime which continues to plague American society as
we come closer to entering the third millennium.  Other members of the cast
include Michael Rapaport and Michael Wincott and writer Randy Feldman has
invented some clever and tense confrontations enhanced by the equally tense
direction of Thomas Carter.  Murphy continues to grow in the nineties after
some disappointments and downright bombs in the late eighties and early
nineties and he has the potential of finishing off this decade with critical
successes rather than box office hits which exploited him early in his
career.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Eddie Murphy, Michael Wincott, Michael Rappaport, Carmen Ejogo.
Screenplay:  Randy Feldman.
Producer:  Roger Birnbaum.
Director:  Thomas Carter.
MPAA Rating:  R (strong profanity, violence, brief nudity)
Running Time:  115 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     A cop with a troubled personal life.  A ruthless villain.  A friend
of the cop.  A _dead_ friend of the cop.  A quest for vengeance.  A new
partner.  A romantic interest.  A chase scene.  A chase scene _in San
Francisco_.  A woman in peril.  A confrontation.  An explosion.  The end.
Yawn.  Yawn.  Yawn.  The preceding has been the plot of approximately
twelve thousand and six action films; this one just happens to be called
METRO.  I have learned to expect little from films like METRO, and
consequently I am bored by them more often than I am genuinely
disappointed.  With Eddie Murphy on board, however, you hope for something
extra, some kind of spark.  When a film makes watching Eddie Murphy a
tedious experience, you know it is doing something terribly wrong.
     Murphy stars as Scott Roper, a hostage negotiator for the San
Francisco police department who is exceedingly good at his job.  With his
personal life, he is considerably less successful, facing an unhappy
ex-girlfriend named Veronica (Carmen Ejogo), a gambling problem and a
mountain of debt.  Then his professional life gets a jolt as well when a
friend and colleague (Art Evans) is murdered while investigating suspected
jewel thief Michael Korda (Michael Wincott).  Finding Korda becomes very
personal to Scott, and he joins with new partner Kevin McCall (Michael
Rappaport) to foil Korda during an attempted heist.  But all is not well
even with Korda in jail, as Scott, Veronica and Kevin all continue to face
life-threatening danger.
     METRO (the title, in case you are wondering, means absolutely
nothing) is so badly put together that even the most casual viewer may
notice the miserable pacing and stray plot threads.  In the first place,
Korda's rage over being discovered before he can make his big score is
rendered completely pointless when he proceeds to hit the target anyway
(and, incidentally, to screw it up).  A reference to payoffs in the police
department, followed by a conspicuous decision to keep Scott off the Korda
case and a couple of pointed glances, is dropped abruptly with no 
resolution after about forty-five minutes; even the relationship between
Scott and new partner Kevin is so perfunctory, with Kevin disappearing
entirely after taking a bullet for Scott, that you may yearn for bickering
buddies.  Worst of all is a plot structure which places the main villain
(the always menacing Michael Wincott) behind bars for far too long,
leaving a lot of time to kill with the tedious reconciliation of Scott and
Veronica.
     You can't blame Murphy for being unable to muster any enthusiasm for
the scenes with his bland leading lady, but he should have known better
than to take this role at all.  Scott Roper exists in an uncomfortable
middle ground between the kind of street-wise fast-talker Murphy has built
a career on and an actual three-dimensional character, and Murphy is never
able to reconcile the two.  The script seems to have been doctored for
him, with a gambling problem turned into a bit of character color and his
supposed inability to form relationships turned into a cause for gags
rather than actual conflict, yet there is still too little comedy for
Murphy to work with.  For much of the film, he walks around with an
intense frown, and it is over 90 minutes into METRO before you hear that
trademark laugh for the first time.  Murphy is stranded with too few solid
punch lines, and nearly all of the ones he does have bounce of Ejogo and
fall to the ground limply.
     I suppose I should give director Thomas Carter credit for taking the
obligatory San Francisco car chase (how much do you want to bet on the
likelihood of seeing a car soar over a hill?) and doing a few interesting
things with it.  As vehicles are sent flying and passengers sent sprawling
by a runaway cable car, it is possible at least for a moment to take some
pleasure in a goofy spin on a familiar situation.  Carter does an even
better job by taking that old suspense stand-by -- the medicine cabinet
mirror which will close to reveal a killer standing behind someone -- and
using it to defuse tension not once, but _twice_.  The fact that Carter
was able to demonstrate even that much recognition of cliches, and a
willingness to subvert them, makes his involvement in the rest of the
disaster that is METRO all the more puzzling.  An action film like this
plods so relentlessly and obviously from point A to point B to point C
that you might find yourself shouting out "point C!" while they're still
getting to point B, or getting up with the rest of the audience after the
big explosion which signals that nothing else of any consequence is going
to happen.
