Title
Review for Gloria (1999)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Columbia Pictures/Mandalay Entertainment
 Director:  Sidney Lumet
 Writer:  Steven Antin
 Cast: Sharon Stone, Jeremy Northam, Cathy Moriarty, Jean-
Luke Figueroa, Mike Starr, George C. Scott
   "Gloria" is a lot like "Guys and Dolls," one of the great
musicals ever produced on Broadway, a hit that captures the
characters andthe vernacular of its thoroughly urban Damon
Runyon characters.  While the songs are terrific, it's not the
sort of musical you'd expect to find in theater revivals simply
because treating gangsters as Runyonesque eccentricities
and displaying the likes of Adelaide, its frequently jilted moll,
is pass.   So why update "Gloria," the moderately amusing
Cassavetes film of some two decades ago, when that story is
based as well on the Runyonesque personalities?  From the
looks of the picture, it's Sidney Lumet's showcase for Sharon
Stone, who turned in a terrific performance against type as
the cuddly mom of a terminally ill child in the otherwise
mundane "The Mighty."  The plot is by now so hoary that we
go to the show to see another aspect of Stone, whose New
York kind of nervousness can remind you of Jane Fonda's
performance in Neil Simon's "California Suite" but who simply
does not come across like any modern New Yorker you may
know.  In "Gloria" the tough-talking, impertinent urban woman
learns something about herself.  She may have always
thought, "What's the point" about kids--just as Kevin Kline
figured about dogs in "Fierce Creature"--but after she
undergoes an oreal with an orphaned tot, her mushy heart
says otherwise.
   Sharon Stone inhabits the role of Gloria, just out of a three-
year term in a Miami prison for taking the rap for her
gangster boy friend, Kevin (Jeremy Northam).  When one of
the mobsters in the gang wipes out most of a Hispanic family
to recover a diskette loaded with names of the crime family's
beneficiaries, Gloria winds up the unwilling caretaker of the
surviving son, six-year-old Nicky (Jean-Luke Figueroa). 
Realizing that the Irish-American criminals will kill the boy to
get the tape, she becomes perplexed for the first time in her
life.  Never mind her overblown, Hell's-Kitchen-inspired
appearance--long curly blond hair which makes her almost
unrecognizable, skin-tight dress, spike-heeled shoes and
utterly unmaternal attitude.  She's vulnerable: stuck with the
kid, responsible for keeping him alive.  To do so she must
negotiate with her ex-boy friend Kevin and especially with the
mob's leader, Ruby (George C. Scott), who still carries a
torch for the much younger beauty.
  To go to the source of this tale, return to 1934,
to the first version of Damon Runyon's tale "Little Marker," as
a bookie played by Adolphe Menjou is reformed together with
his whole New York City gambling colony by the adorable
little Shirley Temple.  Little Jean-Luke Figueroa as Nicky is in
no way as appealing as Ms. Temple, however.  He simply
does not exude the charm, the personality, the "it" but rather
comes across as bland and all-too-accepting of the radical
changes taking place in his life.  Sharon Stone is a proper
mixture of goofiness, durability and disorientation.  She
retains a Noo Yawk accent more successfully than Jeremy
Northam hides his elegant British enunciation, and fleshes
out the role of the title figure well enough.  But the rest of the
cast is simply not up to her achievement.  Not even the great
George C. Scott as an aging gunman with a soft spot in his
heart can win our sympathy, and the plot is too stale to churn
up much interest.  "Gloria" is a surprisingly uneventful movie,
not the sort of drama you'd expect from Lumet who has
riveted us in the past with intense, resonant productions like
"The Pawnbroker," "Dog Day Afternoon," and "Serpico.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Sidney Lumet.
Cast: Sharon Stone, Jean-Luke Figueroa, Jeremy Northam, Mike Starr, 
George C. Scott, Bonnie Bedelia, Cathy Moriarty, Sarita Choudhury.
1999 - 105 minutes.
Rated R (for violence and profanity).
Reviewed January 23, 1999.
One of the most blatantly obvious signs that often-acclaimed director 
Sidney Lumet's "Gloria," a remake of the 1980 John Cassavetes film, had 
absolutely no effect on me occurred when I was driving home from the 
theatre. Suddenly, I realized that since I had stood up from my theatre 
seat five minutes before, I had not thought once about the film I had 
just invested nearly two hours of my life in. When a movie is over, 
aren't we supposed to think about it for a while, and have a 
conversation about it with the acquaintances we have just watched it 
with? I thought so, but, for one, I saw this particular picture by 
myself, and #2, even if I had been with someone there wouldn't have been 
anything to talk about in the first place.
To be sure, "Gloria" begins with a stirring, rather poignant prologue in 
which a seven-year-old boy's family is brutally gunned down by mobsters, 
in search of a disc his father had with incriminating evidence on it. 
Right before the men broke in, of course, his father gave him the disc 
to escape with. Eventually, the boy, named Nicky Nunez (Jean-Luke 
Figueroa), is caught by the mobsters, and taken back to their apartment.
Meanwhile, Gloria (Sharon Stone) has just gotten out of prison for a 
crime she didn't commit and returns to her ex-boyfriend (Jeremy Northam) 
to recieve the money he promised her for covering up his crime. When he 
refuses to give it to her, and then hears the group of men talking about 
killing Nicky, she leaves with him in order to save his life, but not 
before holding the men at gunpoint, stealing all of their money, and 
forcing them to strip nude. Gloria is the type of fast-talking, 
smart-mouthed New Yorker who always seems to get involved with the wrong 
people, and she never expected to be stuck with a kid, but she has a 
heart of gold (don't they always in this type of movie) and is only 
trying to protect the boy, whom she quickly begins to form a close bond 
with.
The previous incarnation of "Gloria" by Cassavetes and starring the 
luminous Gena Rowlands, remains unseen by me, but was no doubt superior, 
even though I can't really imagine how this considerably dull story 
could be transformed into an entertaining one, regardless of the 
director or stars. There is no doubt in my mind that director Lumet has 
stuck closely to the original, but the film itself is simply lifeless, 
with only an occasional laugh popping up here and there so that it isn't 
completely unbearable to watch. I liked, for example, a very funny 
climactic sequence where Gloria is deciding whether to leave the school 
she has left the boy at, and keeps turning the car around, then driving 
a little ways, then slamming on the brakes and turning around again. 
These bright moments, however, appear long and far between, and the 
majority of the film deals with the budding relationship between Nicky 
and Gloria, which is both painfully predictable and by-the-numbers. 
Throughout, my mind was repeatedly asking the question, "who really 
cares?"
As Gloria, Sharon Stone has adopted an over-the-top Brooklyn accent that 
honestly doesn't sound realistic at all. In the beginning, in fact, I 
was amazed at how amateurish Stone's performance was, but as the film 
progressed she got better. Although not one of her better turns, Stone 
does have a comic flare that refuses to be ignored. Jean-Luke Figeroa 
was fine as Nicky and a little more natural than the usual child actors 
who are so precocious they make you want to gag. All other actors who 
appeared were considerably wasted, none more than Cathy Moriarty, an 
entertaining actress in her own right, who is billed fourth and has all 
of one scene, as Gloria's friend whom she turns to for help. 
Sony, the studio that released "Gloria," obviously does not have any 
faith in the film, and I don't blame them. They declined to screen the 
picture for critics, which is never a good sign, particularly with the 
high-profile people involved. Although how much money a movie makes does 
not determine how good it is (just look at the spectacular "In Dreams," 
which failed to even make the Top 10 last week), I have a suspicion 
"Gloria" is going to vanish from theaters faster than "Ishtar," judging 
from the opening night 7:00 p.m. showing I saw it at, where there were 
about ten to fifteen people present, counting myself. Although Stone can 
be an impressive actress (just watch her in 1995's "Casino" or 1996's 
"Last Dance" if you don't believe me) and Sidney Lumet can be a 
respectable director, there is no reasoning for why they thought the 
cliched story of "Gloria" was worth remaking or, for that matter, why 
Columbia Pictures agreed to finance it when they could have been making 
a picture that actually looked like it might have an inkling of a chance 
to be successful.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Dustin Putman's
Film Haven >

Author
Matt Williams
Gloria is a remake of the 1980 John Cassavettes drama about a streetwise
woman who ends up protecting a child from the mob.  A good lead
performance keeps this otherwise sluggish film from becoming a disaster,
but it's a mild redemption at most.
Gloria (Sharon Stone) has spent the last three years in a Miami jail,
covering for her sleazy gangster boyfriend, Kevin (Jeremy Northam). Upon
being paroled, what is the first thing she does?  Breaks parole by
hopping a jet back to New York.  She seeks out Kevin, hoping  to find a
changed (and grateful) man.
Kevin, of course, could care less about his trashy girlfriend.  He's a
mid-level gangster in the Irish mob, and he has other things on his
mind. Most notably, an accountant in his employ has made a copy of all
the bribes and payoffs.  Kevin's lackey Sean (Mike Starr) goes
overboard, and kills the accountant, and his entire family...all except
the young Nicky (Jean-Luke Figueroa), who, as luck would have it, has
the disk with the incriminating data.
Wouldn't you know that Gloria and Nicky would get together.  The
tough-talking Gloria's long-dormant maternal instincts kick into high
gear as she does her best to protect the little kid from the wrath of
the mob.  But is this a challenge that even Gloria can't face?
This movie belongs to Sharon Stone.  Her plucky, streetwise Gloria is
the best thing about the film.  She tackles the role with plenty of
brass and personality.  Though her character begins to get a bit grating
as the film winds to a close, she's still head and shoulders above the
rest of the cast.
However, though Sharon does her part, the rest of the movie doesn't keep
pace. The bad guys are as generic as the "find the floppy disk" plot.
The film's few action scenes are sluggish and dull.  Even the developing
mother-son bond between the spunky kid and the spunkier Gloria is rather
trite and contrived.
A few good actors in some small roles here and there don't make a
lasting impression.  George C. Scott stumbles as mob boss Ruby.  Bonnie
Bedelia is downright irritating as Gloria's better-off sister, Brenda.
Only Cathy Moriarty is able to add some zest to the proceedings, as the
woman Gloria might have become.
Gloria is not quite good enough to recommend purely on the basis of
Sharon Stone's performance.  But that performance is good enough to
avoid an all-out pan.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Steve Rhodes
Some talented actresses are blessed with a demonstrated wide acting 
range while others, almost as gifted, have more limited types of parts 
for which they are suitable.  As was amply evident after BASIC INSTINCT, 
Sharon Stone can play sensual roles with great abandon.  Rejecting her 
natural abilities, she has spent the rest of her entire career trying 
with little success to play against type.  GLORIA is her latest 
disaster.  
Babe Ruth didn't quit baseball after one season to play football in a 
quixotic quest to prove his athletic dexterity, and neither should Stone 
reject what she does best.  Janeane Garofalo, for example, is no less 
wonderful an actress because she could have never pulled off Stone's 
part in BASIC INSTINCT; neither is Stone any less talented because she 
couldn't do Garofalo's comedic roles.
Gloria, directed by respected director Sidney Lumet and adapted by Steve 
Antin from the 1980 screenplay by John Cassavetes, was not screened in 
advance for critics, almost always a sign that the studio isn't behind 
the picture.  After seeing it in a nearly empty audience after it 
opened, it is clear why they held it from the press.  It is a film more 
to be endured than enjoyed.
As the story opens, an angry Gloria (Stone) is being released from 
prison after 3 years confinement.  She's got a bad attitude and a big 
mouth.  She also has a bad case of wavering and overblown New York 
accents, a disease suffered by much of the rest of the cast.  
An annoying child actor named Jean-Luke Figueroa plays a soon-to-be 
orphan named Nicky.  Just before his whole family is gunned down by 
hoods working for Gloria's ex-boyfriend Kevin (Jeremy Northam), Nicky's 
dad gives him a banana yellow floppy disk with secrets about Kevin's 
operation and offers him a piece of fatherly advice.  "Be a man," his 
father lectures him sternly.  "Don't trust nobody.  Not no broads.  
Nobody."
Most of the film's leaden dialog is delivered with the emotive power of 
the automated time and temperature announcements.  Add in the movie's 
almost non-existent background noise and the excruciatingly slow pacing, 
and you can hear the sounds of the lines falling to the ground like 
stones.
Lumet places his actors in the frames like fruit in a still life 
painting.  They stand awkwardly mouthing the stiff sentences that pass 
for discourse.  ("Say you're my baby," Kevin coos demandingly.  "I'm not 
gonna," Gloria pouts back.)
The movie has a plethora of logical flaws and implausibilites.  The kid 
rarely seems the least bit worried or scared, no matter how many people 
are after him with guns, trying to kill him.  And in one key scene, the 
yellow floppy he holds is assumed to be the right disk without checking 
it and is further assumed never to have been copied.
Gloria, who keeps saying how she hates kids, takes Nicky under her wing 
and protects him from Kevin and the bad guys.  Think her maternal 
instincts will show up before the movie finally and predictably ends?  
If you don't know the answer, you may be just the right viewer for this 
film.  
You have to say this for Stone: she can keep a straight face.  When 
explaining life to a 7-year-old kid, she says with utter seriousness, 
"You got a lot of love making to make; you got a lot of boozing to do."
GLORIA runs 1:48.  It is rated R for profanity, violence and brief male 
nudity and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
Since her breakthrough performance in 1992's _Basic_Instinct_, Sharon
Stone has been intent on proving that she is a "serious actress."  Yet
while she earned her critical and industry vindication with her Golden
Globe-winning and Academy Award-nominated turn in 1995's _Casino_, Stone
still feels she has something to prove.
Stone's latest bid for her already-won respectability (further cemented by
her generally well-received turn in 1996's _Last_Dance_ and her recent
Globe nod for last year's _The_Mighty_) is _Gloria_, director Sidney
Lumet's update of John Cassavetes's 1980 drama of the same name, which
earned star Gena Rowlands matching Oscar and Golden Globe nominations.  I
have not seen the original film, but on her own merits (despite a
distracting accent, which also marred her otherwise strong _Last Dance_
work), Stone delivers an appropriately steely but warmly comedic turn as
the title character, a gangster's (Jeremy Northam) ex-girlfriend who takes
under her wing a young boy (newcomer Jean-Luke Figueroa) whose family was
killed by the gangster's crew.
It is highly doubtful, though, that Stone will duplicate Rowland's double
nomination, for the film overall is much less effective than she is.
Although the film had been sitting on Sony's shelf for a year, and the
studio opted not to screen it for critics, _Gloria_ is not the disaster
those facts would suggest; the film is simply more dull than anything else.
 Lumet is no stranger to the streets of New York, having walked the
territory in films sush as _Dog_Day_Afternoon_ and _Serpico_, and the look
and atmosphere of _Gloria_ bears a gritty authenticity.  But there's little
Lumet can do to juice up Steven Antin's suspenseless update of Cassavetes's
original script--not even an extended car chase.  Not long after the setup,
where Gloria is released from a Florida prison; a mob thug murders the
family of the kid, Nicky; and the two meet, the film settles into a
predictable rhythm.  Scenes of Gloria being simultaneously annoyed and
charmed by Nicky alternate with those of her ex, Kevin, ordering his men to
find and kill the pair and retrieve the precious floppy disk in the Nicky's
possession.  The repetitive nature of the script could have been made
somewhat bearable if it built to an exciting climax and resolution, but
there is neither.  The conflict with Kevin is resolved in a most
anticlimactic fashion, and the outcome of the Gloria/Nicky relationship is
pretty much what one can predict from the get-go.
So, yes, Miss Stone, you can act, as we can see yet again in _Gloria_.  We
get it already.  Now it's time to start entertaining your audience,
something you haven't done in much too long.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
James Sanford
Roger Ebert has often brought up the idea that instead of rehashing
the classics, filmmakers should concentrate on revising movies that
weren't very good to begin with. Hollywood may have taken his comments
to heart.
Director Terrence Malick's "The Thin Red Line" is a loose remake of
the unsuccessful 1964 film of the same name, and now director Sidney
Lumet has tackled "Gloria," based on a 1980 melodrama that was nothing
to shout about, but did feature a memorably flinty, Oscar-nominated
performance by Gena Rowlands.
And what are the results of these experiments?  Malick's epic is
flawed but intermittently fascinating, rife with luscious
imagery. "Gloria," on the other hand, finds Sharon Stone doing her
darnedest to squeeze into Rowlands' high heels, and it doesn't take
long to see they don't become her.
Rowlands' Gloria was a bitter ex-gangster's moll whose heart had long
ago gone into a deep-freeze. Stone's Gloria, aside from the occasional
flip remark or crude comment, turns out to be a soft-shell crab. For a
woman who's supposedly so street-seasoned, she's weirdly skittish and
sentimental.
The reason for her transformation from bad mutha to mother figure is
Nicky Nunez (Jean-Luke Figueroa), a 7-year-old whose family was been
massacred by the henchmen of Gloria's ex-boyfriend Kevin (Jeremy
Northam), minutes after Nicky's dad sent the kid off with a valuable
computer disk and a teary "you da man." For reasons never made clear,
the supposedly steely Gloria steals Nicky from Kevin's clutches and
gives him a tour of New York, all the while dodging the bad guys who
want that precious disk.
Unable to commit to being a thriller or a character study, the movie
settles for being an excitement-free drag. Lumet, whose talent peaked
25 years ago with "Dog Day Afternoon" and "Network," throws in one
amazingly sloppy car chase, but otherwise does nothing to perk up the
picture's sluggish pace.
Stone's work here has two modes, shrill and mushy, and her Noo Yawk
accent quickly unravels; in one scene she's talking about having been
in jail for "twee" years, while in the next she sharply pronounces the
"h" in "therapy." Bad dialects also hobble Northam and even George
C. Scott, who turns up briefly as one of Gloria's former sugar
daddies.
If there's anything to be said in the movie's favor, it's that
"Gloria" offers a few glimmers of the natural wit Stone demonstrated
during her recent appearance on Bravo's "Inside the Actors' Studio."
After Nicky, who's shared her motel bed the night before, tells Gloria
he likes sleeping with her, Stone delivers her reply - "You're not the
first guy to tell me that" - with a smug sneer that would have made
Mae West proud. James Sanford

Author
Ross Anthony
A tough white "broad" (in Gloria's own words) and little Latino boy
adventure through a "B" movie. Gloria (Sharon Stone) is released from prison
after serving three years for her no-good boyfriend Kevin. She returns to
New York, only to find Kevin and his gangsters preparing to off little Nicky
(Jean-Luke Figueroa). Gloria's never been a good girl herself, so she finds
the urge to help the little boy awkward. However, after hearing how Kevin's
thugs took out little Nicky's entire family, she impulsively decides to
rescue the lad, thus adding danger to the adventure.
A word on how said thugs orphaned Nicky ... "MEAN". That's right, thug with
silencer caps gramma, mom, dad, and even little sister in one harsh scene.
It's definitely curdling, and deathly shocking in a movie that spends most
of it's time lightening up. As an example, Gloria returns to Kevin's thug
den to nab the kid and get away -- that's the extent of her plan. Despite
her cluelessness, she's able to gain the upper hand against a room full of
bad guys. Then in order to ensure her get away with the kid, she has the bad
boys go "full monty". It's quite funny, but equally ridiculous that these
heartless killers would allow a floozy in four inch heals and a little kid
to simply run away with a computer disc brimming with lethal information.
Though Gloria is clever enough to sneak out, she makes all the mistakes
cop-movie watchers would never make. 1) She immediately attempts to take
Nicky back to his house. 2) She then takes boy to nearest relative. 3) She
hobnobs with friends of Kevin drawing killers to her front door.
Miraculously, she manages to get away -- in the mob-mobile no less; which
leads to an interesting car chase where Gloria makes mistake number four. 4)
She hangs around the car after parking it in the open.
As for Nicky, most of of his lines and actions were only contrived vehicles
for which Gloria to respond. He was endearing in that wonderful "full monty"
scene, but after that, the scantily dressed Gloria drags him by one arm like
a rag doll through the rest of the film.
Starring Sharon Stone and Jean-Luke Figueroa.
Directed by Sidney Lumet.
Produced by Gary Foster and Lee Rich, Columbia/Mandalay Entertainment.
Rated R.
Grade..........................C-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
