Title
Review for Un flic (1971)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Among those who like to find the major influence on
Tarantino's work, John Woo and his ultra-stylish gangster
films from Hong Kong are the most obvious choice. However,
Woo himself was actually influenced by another film maker,
French director Jean-Pierre Melville, who used to create
cult following among some critics in 1960s and 1970s.
Melville, the biggest fan of American culture among
sometimes snobbish French filmmakers, built his reputation
by making ultra-stylish gangster movies about cops and
robbers as cold, detached professionals with highly personal
codes of ethics. Many of those films are considered to be
the classics. That includes UN FLIC, Melville's last film,
directed in 1971, two years before his death.
The movie's nominal protagonist is Edouard Coleman (played
by Alain Delon), police inspector whose character became
emotionally numb after witnessing too many deaths, tragedies
and human degradation in his everyday line of work. His
friend Simon (played by Richard Crenna) owns a small night
club in Paris, and the friendship is unchallenged even by
Coleman having affair with his wife Cathy (played by
Catherine Deneuve). Two of them, however, belong to the
opposite sides of the law, although Coleman doesn't know it
yet. Simon has led violent bank robbery in small coastal
town and the loot is going to finance another, even more
daring and ambitious stunt. In the meantime, Coleman gets
tipped off about huge shipment of drugs being smuggled on
the train.
In his last film, Melville showed his strength and some
weaknesses. The best thing about Melville is a sense of
style, mostly evident in the beginning scene - brilliantly
staged heist, with great atmosphere, pacing and superb
acting. Actually, this film could be viewed as pure style
accompanied with not so interesting content. Characters
aren't fleshed out enough, although they are played by
really superb actors. Alain Delon is excellent as extremely
cold, with almost pathological inability to show emotions.
On the other hand, Catherine Deneuve is used more like a
pretty face than real character. For Melville, casting was
opportunity to express his Americanophilia - Delon's
opposite is played by very good Richard Crenna, and Michael
Conrad (of later HILL STREET BLUES fame) is more than fine
as one of his crime partners. Melville was obviously more
interested into making elaborate and very effective heist
scenes, and they work splendidly (although the latter one,
including train, suffers from too obvious use of poor
special effects). Unfortunately, what connects those scenes
is not so interesting, and, even more important, not that
well-done. Script relies on too many coincidences, but it
also gives interesting insight into Melville's contrasting
view of those who break and enforce law. While gangsters in
this film conduct painstakingly planed heists that require a
lot of discipline and skill, policemen don't use much brain
- cases are solved through informants or simply by roughing
up suspects. On the other hand, flaws of the script and
characters are compensated with well-done atmosphere, thanks
to the grey overtones of Walter Wottiz's photography and
suggestive soundtrack by Michel Colombier. All in all, UN
FLIC, despite being imperfect and far away from cult
reputation of its creator, still represents very interesting
piece of genre cinema.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
