Title
Review for Ghost and Mrs. Muir, The (1947)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"The Ghost and Mrs. Muir" wasn't so much a
ghost story as it was a romantic fantasy.
Starring lovely Gene Tierney and imposing
Rex Harrison, the film's theme was platonic
love overcoming even the barriers of death.
This theme was so successful that the story
has been frequently reprised. It was remade
as "Stranger in the Night" in 1955, and it
became a 1960s sitcom, and even a short-running
Broadway musical.
What made "Muir" a winner wasn't just the story,
however.  The script was competent, the Bernard
Herrmann score was good, and the casting was
inspired.  Tierney is perfect as the prim,
headstrong Victorian heroine, and Harrison is
perfect as the salty but benevolent sea captain
ghost.  Always droll George Sanders has an
entertaining part, and Natalie Wood fans will
enjoy her role as Tierney's young daughter.
The film had a major production problem: Tierney
broke her ankle shortly before filming was to
begin.  After shooting around the problem, the
cast was taken off prematurely forcing Tierney
to walk about in pain.
The story has newly widowed Tierney leaving
her obnoxious in-laws to live in a sea-side
home haunted by Harrison.  Also with Tierney
is Wood and outspoken housekeeper Edna Best.
Harrison and Tierney soon develop a romantic
friendship.  Best and Wood are apparently
unconcerned that she spends hours talking to
herself alone in a room.
When money becomes short, Tierney publishes
Harrison's memoirs, leading to her acquaintance
with lecherous children's author Sanders.
Tierney must choose between Harrison and
Sanders, who proves to be a cad.  He eventually
gets his comeuppance, though, as according to
Tierney he became "bald and fat and drank too
much.  He was crying, and his wife had finally
left him".  Ah, sweet revenge.  Only in the
movies is it so perfect.
"The Ghost and Mrs. Muir" was nominated for an
Academy Award for Best Cinematography (Charles Lang).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
