Title
Review for Galaxis (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Former Danish fashion model Brigitte Nielsen could be viewed
as a true renaissance woman of late 20th century. Apart from
modelling, she explored her talents in many other areas -
poetry, pop music and television talk shows. She also tried
acting, but apart from appearing in few 1980s action films
she was and still is far from being a movie star.
Explanation for that could be found in TERMINAL FORCE, 1995
science fiction film directed by William Mesa.
The plot revolves around sacred crystal that can give power
over the entire universe. Evil Kyla (played by Richard Moll)
and his evil hordes would stop at nothing in order to get
that crystal, and peace-loving planet of Sintaria is one of
their victims. However, there is another such crystal
located on Earth, and this is the reason why Jed Sanders
(played by John H. Brennan), archaeologist from Los Angeles,
gets in the trouble both with evil aliens and gangsters to
whom he owes money. Thankfully, Ladera (played by Brigitte
Nielsen), brave woman-warrior from outer space, is coming to
Earth in order to protect him and wreck Kyla's plans.
After somewhat promising beginning, the plot of TERMINAL
FORCE becomes set in Los Angeles - town which is the most
popular alien landing site, at least if we are to believe
Hollywood filmmakers. This is just one of the many cliches
featured in TERMINAL FORCE, movie that uses its
science-fiction plot as an excuse for not particularly
attractive action scenes and few CGI explosions. However,
even with such cliches and laughably small budget this movie
could have been at least bearable. Unfortunately, the
producers made a fatal mistake by casting Brigitte Nielsen
in the role of alien lady superwarrior. Although the script
did everything in order to make her character similar to the
robotic protagonist of THE TERMINATOR, Nielsen's lack of
acting is nevertheless very apparent. The only remarkable
thing about this otherwise forgettable exploitation film is
a cameo role of cult director Sam Raimi who appears in the
opening scenes.
Review written on September 29th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
