Title
Review for Ladro di bambini, Il (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ben Hoffman
Sad but heartwarming, this story of real life for some unfortunates.
The film is of an 11-year-old girl and her brother, two years younger,
and a good hearted soldier in the Carabinieri.
Because the family in destitute, the mother puts out her young daughter
as a prostitute, the sole income for the mother and her two children.
When the mother and her boyfriend are arrested, he for having sex with
the young girl, the mother for having prostituted the child, the two
children are sent from Sicily to a Children's Home in the custody of a
young soldier in the Carabinieri.
While the young officer is taking them by train to the Home, he does
everything he can to befriend them.   They, he feels, are children and
thus not responsible for what they did or what befell them but both the
girl and boy remain sullen and unresponsive.
Arriving at the Home, they find that they will not be admitted.  The
person in charge says that without a medical certificate for the girl
he will not allow them to stay.  They then start a trip to another
Home, this one in Milan but on the way, the soldier decides they will
stop at a relative's house where he introduces the youngsters as the
children of another officer.   As the relatives own a restaurant and
there is a big party in progress, the girl and boy get a taste of
normal life until one woman recognizes the girl from a picture in a
magazine and blows their cover.  They move on.
The soldier meanwhile has gotten a car.  They stop at a beach where the
kids can enjoy themselves.  Both the girl, but especially the boy, have
now warmed up to the officer who has promised to visit them and
correspond and never to lose track of them.   A poignant moment in a
beautiful film.
Go see the film.   Not all of life is fun and games and this film tells
it as it is, not as we would like it to be.  But it is told so
lovingly. . . and it does have a "maybe it will be OK after all"
ending.
Stars Enrico Lo Verso, Valentina Scalici and Giuseppe Leracitano.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Enrico Lo Verso, Valentina Scalici, Giuseppe Ieracitano,
           Florence Darel, Marina Golovine
Director:  Gianni Amelio
Producer:  Angelo Rizzoli
Screenplay:  Gianni Amelio, Sandro Petraglia, and Stefano Rulli
Music:  Franco Piersanti
Released by Samuel Goldwyn Co.
Italian with English Subtitles
     Luciano (Giuseppe Ieracitano), a nine year old boy, and his eleven
year old sister Rosetta (Valentina Scalici) live in a single-parent
family with their mother.  To supplement her meager income, the mother
sells Rosetta into prostitution.  When the police find out about this,
they come and take the mother off to jail, leaving Luciano and Rosetta
without a home or a family.  Antonio (Enrico Lo Verso), a young
carabiniere officer, is charged with escorting the two children to a
children's home.  However, upon arrival, he discovers that the children
will not be admitted because of Rosetta's dubious past.
     In the simplest terms, it's possible to boil IL LADRO DI BAMBINI
to an unusual "buddy film."  The children and Antonio are initially
apathetic to each other, but, as the movie progresses, a bond gradually
forms.  Such a distillation, however, does this movie a great
injustice.  Writer/director Gianni Amelio has successfully taken the
skeleton of a common story and infused it with a unique freshness
rarely found in movies of this sort.
     While the plot is not filled with novel twists, it is remarkable
because of a genuine insight into the human condition.  Also, there is
no pat ending.  The film concludes when its story has been told, not
when all the loose ends are neatly wrapped up.
     Perhaps the only serious complaint I have about IL LADRO DI
BAMBINI is its pacing.  The first half of the movie is on the slow side
as it introduces the characters and establishes the relationships
between them.  While I recognize the necessity of doing these things,
less time could have been expended to achieve the same ends.  There is
no emotional tension in this portion of the movie since the
relationships are still in fledgling form.
     The second half of IL LADRO DI BAMBINI is powerful.  This movie is
without parallel when it comes to the "show, don't tell" rule.  There
are scenes that approach masterpiece level in the depth of emotion they
are able to convey without resorting to explanatory dialogue.  The
audience can feel the impact of what is happening, even though little
of significance appears to be transpiring on screen.
     The profound effect that the children and Antonio have on each
other is developed slowly.  There is no sudden shift in perspectives.
Instead, the relationships are allowed to develop naturally.  As a
result, simple things have greater impact, and small acts of friendship
and affection are heart- warming.
     This is the debut feature for Giuseppe Ieracitano and Valentina
Scalici.  While Ieracitano is certainly competent in his role, he - and
everyone else in the cast - is vastly overshadowed by Scalici.  Without
exaggerating, I can say that this is the best performance I have ever
seen by a child actor.  Scalici has a style that would make most adult
performers drool with envy.  She is a master of dialogue, body
language, and facial expressions.  It's a pity that her exposure
outside of Italy will be so limited.
     IL LADRO DI BAMBINI is proof that a relatively simple,
uncomplicated story can be the basis of a vital movie.  So much is
accomplished in this film that it's impossible for a review to do it
justice.  Most of what happens transpires through minor action, so
those who have trouble sitting through "character stories" may find
this film tedious.  That's too bad, because this is easily one of the
most provacative, emotionally-stirring films to come along in quite a
while.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
