Title
Review for Driven (2001)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Laura Clifford
When former racing star Joe Tanto (Sylvester Stallone) gets a call from
team owner Carl Henry (Burt Reynolds), he's not being asked to win races.
Henry needs an old pro to act as a blocker for his rising star, rookie
Jimmy Blye (Kip Pardue, "Remember the Titans"), who's giving CART world 
champion Beau Brandenburg (Til Schweiger, "Judas Kiss") some serious
competition in "Driven."
"Driven" reunites the writer/star (Stallone) and director (Renny Harlin)
of Stallone's last hit "Cliffhanger," but the pairing is less successful
this time around the track.
Stallone once again casts himself as a sensitive, damaged pro although we're
never really clued into the trauma of Tanto's past (something about almost
getting killed in a race).  He's brought in to mentor Blye, but has his
access to the young racer blocked by Blye's ambitious brother/manager Demille 
(a one-dimensional Robert Sean Leonard).
Branderburg, needing to refocus after losing one too many races to a rookie,
dumps his fiance Sophia (Estella Warren).  Still part of Beau's crew, Sophia
starts up a friendship with Jimmy which Jimmy hopes will turn to romance.
When Beau approaches and rewins Sophia at a racing event, Jimmy sets off in
a pique, taking a racing car into the streets of Chicago.  Tanto follows
and cools the hotheaded Blye off so everyone can get down to driving cars.
Stallone, who won an Oscar for writing "Rocky" back in 1976, serves up some
real dreck with "Driven."  This is the kind of flick that finds two racers
seriously endangering the city streets only to have a Yoda/Luke moment and
walk away without so much as a police warning.  There's too much stupid
speechifying ('Faith is like a good disease - it's contagious.'), too little
character development, and too many reality-defying moments.  Director Harlin 
appears to be trying to cop Oliver Stone's "Any Given Sunday" style, but 
instead achieves a empty flash.  CGI effects are so overused that you'll feel 
like you're inside a video game.
Even so, Stallone works in a couple of good bits, such as Tanto's
talent for picking up quarters on the racetrack and the hilariously witchy
exchange between Tanto's ex-wife (Gina Gershon, "Showgirls") and new love 
interest (Stacy Edwards, "The Next Best Thing").  Harlin also does put
his audience inside a race car travelling at speeds of 240 mph, hurtles
crashed car parts at us with glee and turns his sound levels up to 11.
Newcomer Cristian de la Fuente is a find as good-natured driver Memo Moreno,
Joe's old buddy who just happens to have married his ex-wife.  Also promising
is model/synchronized swimmer Warren.
Overall, "Driven's" a pretty silly movie, but it does offer some emtpy-headed
thrills.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Robin Clifford
At speeds in excess of 240 miles per hour and only inches apart from each 
other, CART (Championship Auto Racing Team) racecar drivers are members of 
the world's most deadly professional sport. When up-and-coming rookie Jimmy 
Bly (Kip Pardue) starts to have doubts about his driving ability, team 
owner Carl Henry (Burt Reynolds) brings back veteran driver Joe Tanto 
(Sylvester Stallone) to mentor the lad and win the champion's laurel in 
Renny Harlin's "Driven." 
As someone who faithfully followed international car racing many years ago, 
I have always had a fondness for racing movies. Unfortunately, for me, only 
two of the many such flicks made, Steve McQueen's "Le Mans" and the 1950 
Clark Gable starrer "To Please a Lady," impressed me. I've watched all the 
rest, from the painfully rendered "Bobby Deerfield" to the lavish melodrama 
"Grand Prix" to the overblown "Days of Thunder," and generally find them 
lacking. There is usually too much talking/romancing and not enough racing. 
"Driven" has ample quantities of moralizing, bickering, romancing and 
racing, but none of it gets below the surface level. There are multiple 
melodramatic stories in the Stallone-scripted flick. The latest leader on 
the racing circuit, Beau Brandenberg (Til Sweiger), is being challenged by 
young Turk, Jimmy Bly, and dumps his longtime girlfriend Sophia (Estella 
Warner) so he can concentrate on his job. Jimmy, pushed into professional 
racing by his ambitious brother DeMille (Robert Sean Leonard), is having 
doubts about his ability to take the pressures of his chosen career. And, 
he wants Sophia. Ambitious and ruthless race team owner Carl Henry dumps 
his second driver, Memo Moreno, and brings on Joe Tanto to whip Jimmy into 
shape. Memo is married to Joe's ex-wife, Cathy (Gina Gershon), who's none 
too happy about Joe's arrival. Joe is conflicted about his return to auto 
racing after a near fatal accident years before. Joe is also having a 
flirtatious professional relationship with beautiful journalist Luc Jones 
(Stacy Edwards). And there's racing, too, in this high tech, high-speed 
soap opera. 
The glue that holds these many stories together is the racing. There is a 
great deal of noise accompanying the fast-paced, music vid-style visuals of 
the racing as the story covers the Indy-style racing circuit. The races 
look good, but the focus rests solely on the principals as the two leaders 
battle for first place in one race after another. The rest of the field, 
which includes a bevy of pro drivers, are left to the background, as if 
there is no other race going on but for those in the lead. If you've ever 
followed car racing, you know that lots of the excitement in the sport 
takes place back in the pack. Not so in "Driven." Also, heavy use of 
computer generated F/X of the many crashes and close calls bring attention 
to what are obvious animated bits. The CGI effects are nowhere near as 
seamless as in, say, "Enemy at the Gates," but are integrated into the 
multi-camera POVs well enough. 
The large ensemble cast goes through the motions but, as seems to be 
typical in a Renny Harlin film, there is no genuine passion in the any of 
the characters. Virtually everyone is a two dimensional symbol ranging from 
ambitious and driven (no pun) to sorrowful and contemplative. Stallone, in 
particular, takes on a guilt-ridden persona as he looks, sadly with his 
puppy-dog eyes, on his past choices and present conflicts. Newcomer Pardue 
("The Replacements") doesn't deliver the chutzpah that a young buck new to 
pro racing should and would have. Gina Gershon is both sexy and venomous as 
Memo's ambitious wife, but because of limited time on-screen, is merely 
unlikable. Burt Reynolds is the only one to come across as a person, albeit 
a ruthless, forceful businessman who only cares about winning at whatever 
the cost in men and materials. 
"Driven" falls in the middle of the pack of racing flicks that have come 
out over the years. There is a lot of auto racing, though with a sameness 
to each race that conveys nothing original - except for some truly 
eye-wincing crashes. There is also lots of melodrama, but nothing delves 
into the psyche of the sport. If you really want to see a great racing 
flick, try to find a copy of "Le Mans." Now that's racing! 
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com 

Author
Steve Rhodes
In DRIVEN, directed with his usual pretentious showiness by Renny Harlin 
(CUTTHROAT ISLAND) and written with heavy-handed clichés by Sylvester 
Stallone, fashion models drive fast cars on the world's racing circuit.   
Jimmy Blye (Kip Pardue) is the rookie fighting the defending champ, Beau 
Brandenburg (Til Schweiger), for the crown and his girl, Sophia Simone 
(Estella Warren).  
"Blye seems to really be having a problem with consistency and focus 
today," the track announcer tells us -- something that could be said as 
well of the entire movie -- so car owner Carl Henry (Burt Reynolds) 
turns to grizzled veteran Joe Tanto (Sylvester Stallone) to guide his 
rising star.  "I wanted somebody who had been to the top of the mountain 
and slumped all the way to the bottom," Carl explains to Joe.
The only glimmer of any acting in evidence is by Robert Sean Leonard as 
Jimmy's heartless brother and Gina Gershon as Joe's bitchy ex-wife.  The 
rest of the cast appear to be either escapees from a fashion shoot or 
wax museum versions of once famous action stars.  
The film's real stars are the cars, which come apart in one flying crash 
after another.  Harlin burns through more money than a pork-loving 
Congressman feasting on surpluses as far as the eye can see.  These car 
crashes look like every racing video game that you've ever seen, with 
the most spectacular being by far the most ludicrous.
Harlin has the camera come in so close that you can see every pore on 
the actors' faces and every imperfection on the tires' rubber.  These 
close-ups are performed in nauseatingly fast, blurring pans and 
accompanied by rapid fire editing.  Kind of makes you want to puke.  A 
sensation that the hackneyed script also induces ("Everyone falls down.  
It's just how fast you get up that counts."  "You should talk less and 
drive more."  "Winning is an attitude.").  Sly's last film, GET CARTER, 
was pretty bad, but it was at least watchable.
DRIVEN runs a long 1:49.  It is rated PG-13 for language and some 
intense crash sequences and would be acceptable for kids around 9 and 
up.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
It's probably no coincidence that Driven is only one letter away from being
Drivel.  The film, made by long-time critical whipping boys Renny Harlin
(director) and Sylvester Stallone (star/screenwriter), features a 20-race
Formula One season that pits the defending champion (an unlikeable German)
against the rookie (a dreamy Calvin Klein model).  When it's showing a race,
Driven is merely adequate; when it's not, it's downright awful.
Admittedly, I know nothing about racing, other than the fact it's as
exciting as watching paint dry, and I furrow my brow at the fans who insist
it's a sport.  "You've got to be in great shape to race a car," they say.
Right.  I've seen plenty of fat people drive fast.  As far as I can tell
(and Driven didn't change my opinion at all), you need only a big bladder
and the ability to sit still for a really long time.  The only thing those
hillbillies in the stands (and the theatre audience, for that matter) want
to see is a crash, and then they're horrified when somebody zooms off to
that Big Oval in the Sky.  Here are a few things I did learn from the film:
- When there's an accident on the track, the Kyrgyzstan flag is triumphantly
waved to cheer up the spectators.
- Drivers pass their girls around like joints. (Have you seen Jeff Gordon's
wife?  Where do I sign up for this racing thing?)
- If you hum, you'll drive faster (try it at home, kids!).
- The cars are really controlled by laptop computers manned by nerdy men who
are neatly tucked away so nobody sees them.
Driven focuses on an F1 racing team managed by the wheelchair-bound Carl
Henry (Burt Reynolds, The Crew).  He has two drivers in his stable - Memo
Moreno (Cristián de la Fuente, Family Law) and rookie Jimmy Blye (Kip
Pardue, Remember the Titans).  When Blye begins to challenge the defending
F1 champion, Beau Brandenburg (Til Schweiger), he jettisons Memo and makes a
call to a washed-up ex-racer named Joe Tanto (Stallone, Get Carter) to help
steer his promising rookie in the right direction.
Thrown into the mix are three women who do incredibly little to add anything
to the weak story.  Gina Gershon (The Insider) is married to Memo but is
also Tanto's ex-wife.
Synchronized-swimmer-turned-Sports-Illustrated-swimsuit-model Estella Warren
(who is dating Pardue in real life) plays Brandenburg's squeeze, but she
leaves him for Blye.  In the Company of Men's Stacy Edwards clocks in a
throwaway role as a reporter assigned to cover the F1 season and all of the
chest-thumping attendant thereto - you know, kind of the Jane Goodall of
car-driving chimps.  Since you can practically see testosterone dripping off
the screen here, it's a big surprise that there isn't one sex scene.  Nobody
even kisses, which is just plain weird, especially since you know Stallone's
character will nail Edwards' five seconds before they even meet (it just HAS
to be on the cutting-room floor, abandoned for the PG-13 rating).
Isn't it about time we go ahead and subtitle Stallone?  I've heard more
intelligible things spewing out of the homeless guy at the bus stop who's
always going on about flying hams.  Sly's psychic mother makes more sense at
this point.  His script - the first he's penned on his own since the
celebrated Rocky V - goes out of its way to show that each character is
damaged in some way or another, but not in a way to make viewers care.
Driven includes several laughably bad motivational speeches and the lamest
foreshadowing in years.  Oh my God - I can't believe it's going to come down
to the last race of the season!
Harlin (Deep Blue Sea) does well with the racing scenes (especially the
crashes), but everything else is a poorly paced mess.  The music (from BT)
is annoying and the non-stop product placement is way too convenient to
ignore.  Driven can't even find anything to do with the beautiful but
clearly untalented Warren ("Well, what CAN you do, sweetie?"  "I used to be
a synchronized swimmer."  "Bingo, then that's what you'll do.").  When Gina
Gershon lends an air of credibility to your film, you're in big, big
trouble.
1:45 - PG-13 for language and some intense crash sequences
