Title
Review for Free Willy 3: The Rescue (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
     After three feature films, the FREE WILLY franchise appears ready at
last to take its natural place in the CBS Saturday night prime time
lineup.  The 1993 original was the de facto pilot, introducing Jesse
(Jason James Richter), the troubled teen who learns responsibility through
his love for a killer whale named Willy.  In two sequels, 1995's FREE
WILLY 2: THE ADVENTURE HOME and the new FREE WILLY 3: THE RESCUE, Jesse
and Willy worked to help other mixed-up kids while teaching important
lessons about environmental responsibility.  Now, with the guidance of
Jesse's wise Native American mentor Randolph (August Schellenberg), they
can continue that mission every week on "Free Willy: Touched by an Orca."
     Sure, it's easy to take cynical swipes at family entertainment,
especially formulaic family entertainment like FREE WILLY 3.  And perhaps
it deserves better.  After all, there is a modicum of intelligence to John
Mattson's script, which pits Jesse and company against the crew of a
whaling boat.  Sam Pillsbury's direction is pleasantly restrained,
particularly when dealing with his young actors.  There is an interesting
sub-plot involving the son (Vincent Berry) of the whaling boat captain
(Patrick Kilpatrick) which teaches a lesson about standing up for your
convictions.  All that, and not once does anyone get kicked in the groin
or break wind.
     But family audiences deserve better, too.  They shouldn't have to
settle for merely competent film-making like FREE WILLY 3 simply because
it's less noxious than the alternatives.  Every one of the things FREE
WILLY 3 has going for it is something the delightful SHILOH also managed
to do -- and do better -- without making the villain so predictable he
refers to whales as "fish," or padding the running time with several
minutes of second unit nature footage.  There is nothing actively
insulting, offensive or annoying about FREE WILLY 3.  There is nothing
actively entertaining or enriching about it, either, unless it is to learn
the sheer tonnage of blood which accompanies the birth of a baby orca.
     Certain self-appointed guardians of cinematic morality have
pronounced that American parents are clamoring for worthy films to show
their children.  I'm still waiting for the din to reach my ears.  I
certainly didn't hear anyone clamoring for yet another FREE WILLY film,
especially after the over-plotted and half-baked FREE WILLY 2.  It's too
easy for parents to settle, too easy for producers to give parents as much
as they will tolerate and nothing more.  It's easier still for parents to
rent videos for the kids, or to turn on America's Night of Television,
where they may be seeing Willy again before long.  Welcome home.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast:  Jason James Richter, August Schellenberg, Annie Corley, Vincent
Berry, Patrick Kilpatrick. Screenplay:  John Mattson. Producer:  Jennie
Lew Turgend. Director:  Sam Pillsbury.
Surprise yourself with this whale of a movie, where the ruthless killer
is man and the Killer Whale is more humane than mankind. Willy is not
the name of a hot dog, or your dangly 'uhum', but the name of Poseidon's
stallion who roams freely within the stables of the sea. In the first
instalment of "Free Willy", this Orca once in captivity, scales a
towering wall of stone in the most memorable footage we have of flying
whales. Now back with human chum Jesse (Jason James Richter), they
battle against the likes of whalers eager for the tasty hump of Willy,
worth a hefty sum on the Sushi market.
This is not a simple tale of good and evil. The Whaler (Patrick
Kilpatrick) is a descendant of generations of his kind, hand taught the
foul trade of whaling by his father, and by his father before him. It is
now the time of initiation and the handing down of skill from father to
son, but nature has the last laugh when Ahab's child (Vincent Berry)
becomes mesmerised by the song of the giant beast. With torn loyalties
and courageous fervour the child stands between his father's harpoon and
the vengeance of the sea. He cannot reclaim his father's soul for him,
until the hunter faces the beast.
I was impressed by the sensitivity by which this movie addressed such
thematic issues as loyalty, father/son relationships and the complex
characterisations of the hunter and hunted. By far one of the better
children's movies of the year, when compared to the likes of "Simple
Wish" and "Buddy". It came as a pleasant surprise when I was presented
with sushi instead of a sardine sandwich. Now all I need is a karaoke
machine, and I'll sing ya my made-up "Free Willy" song.
FREE WILLY SONG by TMT Voon - Can be sung to any tune.
Free Willy, shake it all about, Free Willy da dum da dum,
Yeah gotta Free Willy, so swing it all around,
He's not a Humpback, he's not a Blue Whale or a Sperm Bank,
(Whispered) He's your average Killer, your friendly Killer,
Your killing me with ya Free Willy da dum da dum.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Something just occurred to me," says the oceanic research
scientist hot in pursuit of the illegal whalers.  "When we find them,
what are we going to do?"  Just like the formula script of FREE WILLY
3: THE RESCUE, she does not think ahead.  John Mattson, the writer of
FREE WILLY 2: THE ADVENTURE HOME, again connects the dots to give us
basically the same movie plus one.
     A few minor things have changed.  Jesse, played placidly again by
Jason James Richter, has aged.  To emphasize his maturing, Jessie first
appears driving along, flirting with a carload of girls, and listening
to rock n' roll.  Having gotten that over with, he goes back to being a
17-year-old who plays a part better suited to a younger actor.  The
script attempts to compensate by giving him a job as a research
assistant and by providing him with a younger sidekick.
     The setup for this retelling of the FREE WILLY story has the
oceanic researcher, Drew, played without emotion by Annie Corley,
noting that the Orca population is down by 10 per cent and that it is
their mission to find out why.  Besides Jesse and the ship's captain
and mate, Randolph is on board.  Randolph, played by August
Schellenberg, is again the most animated of the characters.
     Among the best and worst parts of the plot are the villains.  The
head of the whalers is a third generation whaler named John Wesley.
Played by Patrick Kilpatrick, John is the only complex character in the
story.  In easily the most refreshing part of the picture, the film
explores briefly the other side of an environmental issue.  Hollywood
long ago decided that when it comes to the environment, there is only
one defensible position.  This script, on the other hand, explains
John's life as a whaler with some sympathy to his admittedly illegal
profession.  John tells his son Max, played wide-eyed by ten-year-old
Vincent Berry, that his grandfather proudly harvested the whale oil
that was used to light the lamps of America.  (Max ends up bonding with
Jesse and the whales and turning against his father's work albeit not
really against his father per se.)
     The problem with this approach is that it becomes hard to hate a
bad guy who seems trapped in his profession and who is such a good
father.  Without an adequate villain, the show lacks much credible
tension.
     TV director Sam Pillsbury's film feels like a direct-to-video
production, which is how the inevitable FREE WILLY 4 should be
marketed.  As a two dollar rental that only the kids watch, the movie
becomes a more palatable proposition.  Within the confines of a
theater, Pillsbury's lethargic pacing and the script's paucity of ideas
become all too apparent.
     The dialog is full of the platitudes one might find in a
substandard third grade reader.  Typical is John's lecture to his son.
"Whales aren't people," he argues.  "They don't feel.  They're just
fish."
     The only reason to see the show are the frolicking whale
sequences, framed nicely by the rugged mountains of the Pacific
Northwest coast.  As the big black and white beauties go splashing in
the deep blue waters, the sun glistens on the ocean's surface.  The
most remarkable scenes are those shot underwater, featuring close-ups
of the people and the whales looking eye-to-eye.  The whale is as
naturally at home there as the people are shocked to be paddling in
front of a whale's mouth.  Still, a half hour short film of just these
scenes would have been much preferable to a feature length movie padded
with the recycled material from the last two movies in the series.
     If your kids want to see this film, try to talk up the advantages
of waiting for it to come out on video.  Maybe by then they will have
forgotten, and you can suggest some much better show at the video
rental store instead.
     FREE WILLY 3: THE RESCUE runs 1:26.  It is rated PG for whale
hunting and one barroom fight.  The scene where WILLY gets shot with a
spear may be too much for kids under 6, but for older ones the show
would be fine.  My son Jeffrey, age 8, thought the film was great but
complained that all the FREE WILLY pictures have the same story.  Why
can't they do something different, he argued.  My sentiments exactly.
I give thumbs down to this lame rehash and award it * 1/2 for at least
having the courage to try to tell two sides of an environmental issue.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
