Title
Review for Homegrown (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
HOMEGROWN (director: Stephen Gyllenhaal; writers: Stephen
Gyllenhaal/Nicholas Kazan; cinematographer: Greg Gardiner; cast: Billy
Bob Thornton (Jack), Hank Azaria (Carter), Kelly Lynch (Lucy), Jon Bon
Jovi (Danny), Ryan Phillippe (Harlan), Judge Reinhold
(Policeman), Matt Ross (Ben Hickson), Matt Clark (Sheriff), Ted Danson
(Gianni), John Lithgow (Malcolm/Robert), Jamie Lee Curtis (Sierra
Kahan), Jon Tenney (Pilot), 1998)
Homegrown is a lovable off-the-wall film that, probably, very few people
have seen or even heard about. That might be because the film goes off
on so many different directions-- from murder to counter-culture
romance-- before it zeroes into the hippy drug dealing scene as it
evolved from the '60s to what it is today, which makes it a too
controversial topic for Sony to know how to advertise and release to
theaters. This is a film that you will probably only get a chance to see
on cable or video. Its highly animated story is both funny and
suspenseful, with a good deal of its plot made up of the kind of
material reserved for a sociologist who is writing a treatise on why
certain types of people must be outlaws; the director's aim was to make
a take-off on The Treasure of the Sierra Madre theme, but this time with
a stoned-out foursome lured by the possibility of making 3 million
dollars through growing and dealing marijuana.
A lot of the big-name stars in the film must have seen the merits of
this enterprise, because their cameo appearances and the small amount of
money they received for being in the film indicates that this was
strictly a labor of love for them.
Three growers of the weed, bumblers who are living in the woods of a
Northern California town, Jack (Thornton), Carter (Azaria), and Harlan
(Ryan Phillippe), witness their boss, Malcolm (Lithgow), as he gets off
a helicopter to see them during the harvest season and immediately get
shot by the pilot (Tenney). The three, in a state of confusion, run back
to the plantation and cut down enough marijuana plants to compensate
themselves for their lost wages, too afraid to stay around and take
more.They hide out at the house of Lucy (Lynch), who is Carter's
ex-girlfriend (she still sleeps with him; she will also sleep with the
much younger Harlan), without telling her what went down; she is
superbly cast as a jaded hippie, working as a drug distributor for
Malcolm.
To get some cash, the boys sell to a local dealer, Danny (Bon Jovi),
while pretending Malcolm is still alive; and, then decide to go back to
the plantation expecting the crop to have been taken. But when it isn't
touched, they decide to wheel and deal for themselves, their aim is to
sell to all of Malcolm's customers who have never seen him, with Jack
pretending to be Malcolm. The greed of making 3 million dollars for the
crop becomes their driving force, which is a somewhat similar theme to
what occurred in A Simple Plan.
Screw-ups follow the boys' business decisions, as their operation calls
for them to make one-on-one drug exchanges, while the ones not in on the
deal hide themselves in a spot where they cannot be spotted, watching
the deal take place while remaining undercover.
Jack pretends to be Malcolm on the phone without knowing who he is
talking to, which will get him a meeting with a mafia figure who thinks
he is at last to meet Malcolm. Jack mistakenly and comically calls this
maniacal figure Johnny when his name is Gianni (Danson), as they try to
get things straight about the business deal the real Malcolm made, which
is the source of all the problems Malcolm has with the local dealers.
The story clearly shows how love and peace are no longer the rallying
cry among the harvesters, as guns are a regular part of their dress
code; but most of all, the story understood how the close-knit community
of marijuana growers operate, and is able to show how they prospered and
psychologically feared outsiders coming into their well-run operation,
which included police bribes and annual get-togethers to celebrate their
business skills. At the annual harvest party, Sierra (Jamie Lee Curtis),
gives a speech to the other growers that could have been delivered to
any corporation in America, as she decries the need for the growers to
remember the integrity and spirit they had when they first started.
What this film failed to do was go into any depth about why these people
do what they do (for the money is not enough of a reason) and how
pervasive was their illegal business on the economy of small towns in
that region of California. It therefore left a very cloudy message about
what is a serious matter concerning the whole drug culture. It was a
much clearer film to evaluate, if viewed as an enjoyable dark comedy.
But don't be mislead by what I just said. This is a well-written and
acted and directed film, that is often disarmingly brilliant, getting
right in the face of an outlaw lifestyle that is both dangerous and
beautiful. It does this better than any other film I have seen in recent
times that attempted to tackle this sort of material. The implied
message is: the government's drug policy is just not working.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Billy Bob Thornton has shown his dexterity in roles as widely
diverse as the James Carville clone in PRIMARY COLORS and the deadly
simpleton in SLING BLADE.  In HOMEGROWN he gets a part that seems
tailor-made for him.  Playing a Northern California pot farmer named
Jack, he looks so convincing that you can almost smell the weed on his
well-worn jeans.
     Director Stephen Gyllenhaal, who co-authored the script with
Nickolas Kazan, says in the press kit that he did not envision the
story as "a head movie or a toker's paradise." He was inspired by
Westerns, and he sees HOMEGROWN as "sort of THE TREASURE OF THE SIERRA
MADRE on a marijuana plantation."
     Shot on a pittance but filled with name stars who worked for next
to nothing, the movie is a small treat at times but too often wanders
as aimlessly as Jack's two stoned helpers, Carter (Hank Azaria) and
Harlan (Ryan Phillippe).
     As the story begins, the three men are guarding their freshly
ripened cash crop while awaiting the arrival of their boss, Malcolm,
played in a cameo role by John Lithgow.  Malcolm is killed on arrival
by his helicopter pilot, who then quickly disappears.  The three
farmers and their mutual girlfriend Lucy -- pot farmers are a friendly
lot -- are left to harvest and sell Malcolm's multi-million-dollar
crop.  Lucy is played by Kelly Lynch, last seen in the disastrous MR.
MAGOO.
     Although the story has promise and some good acting, the first two
acts serve mainly to mark time until the picture comes alive with some
much needed twists and turns in the last act.  The director has trouble
keeping much momentum going until a group of "rippers," dressed as
cops, descend on Malcolm's field to steal the plants.  Soon guns are
blazing, and the picture takes off.
     In addition to Billy Bob's acting talents, the picture has other
little delights.  Jamie Lee Curtis, for example, plays a self-righteous
belle at a flag-draped pot growers' ball.  She lectures the marijuana
farmers on the virtues of the area's original pot growers, "who had a
sense of mission." Looking like a flower child from the 60s, she
prances around the dance while bragging that she is now carrying number
three in her tummy.
     "It's complicated," Lucy says of her affair with one of her many
gentlemen friends.  "Sometimes complications are interesting." With its
underdeveloped script, a few more complications would have helped
HOMEGROWN enormously.  But any movie with Billy Bob does have its
rewards.
     HOMEGROWN runs 1:35.  It is rated R for profanity, sex, violence,
nudity and, what else, lots of dope smoking.  It would be fine only for
quite mature and older teenagers.
