Title
Review for Senseless (1998)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Michael Dequina
Senseless (R) * 1/2 (out of ****)
        Marlon Wayans is a very talented physical comedian, and it is that gift
that brings Senseless moments of life.  Alas, moments are simply that,
moments, which are not enough to lift this fantasy/comedy above its
one-joke premise.
        Granted, that one joke is initially amusing.  When Wayans's Darryl
Witherspoon, an economics major at Stratford University, hits some dire
financial straits, he becomes a guinea pig for a experimental drug that
heightens all five senses.  After some initial side effects and problems
controlling his superhuman senses, Darryl learns to enjoy the benefits of
his abilities and uses them to land a position at a highly esteemed
corporate firm.
        At this point, the film sounds more like Senseful than Senseless, but
through some turns of the plot, Darryl finds himself only able to use four
of his five senses at once, essentially leaving him--yes--senseless.  This
sets up some showcase moments for Wayans's gift for physical comedy,
especially when Darryl loses his sense of feeling and his body goes
completely, hilariously limp.  But these gags, and the gag behind the
entire movie, quickly grows stale.  Once Darryl is shown without the use of
all of the senses, instead of exploring any new comic territory, director
Penelope Spheeris and screenwriters Greg Erb and Craig Mazin take the easy
way out and simply recycle each form of senselessness.  Wayans approaches
each go-round with gusto, but by this point he's simply treading water for
the rest of the film's unfunny duration.
        Senseless would not be as problematic as it is if it didn't strive to be
anything more than a comic trifle.  However, the raucous and often raunchy
comedy is wrapped in a blanket of bogus sincerity.  Darryl goes through the
experiment in order to help his cash-strapped family, and this "serious"
angle seems to come from an entirely different movie.  Unlike Wayans's last
starring vehicle, the surprisingly effective (and serious) The 6th Man, the
"emotional" content of Senseless is forced and unconvincing.  Any attempt
at anything more substantial than broad comedy fizzles--Darryl's romance
with Janice (Tamara Taylor), a young woman who yearns for a man who is true
to himself, does not generate sparks of any kind.
        Once his WB television sitcom The Wayans Bros. comes to an end, the
genuinely funny Marlon Wayans has a promising big-screen future ahead of
him.  But if he continues to associate himself with projects as flat as
Senseless, his film career could go the way of his once-promising older
brother, Damon, who is now set to make his comeback--on television.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
CinemaReview Magazine: http://www.CinemaReview.com
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court:
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Since at least one-third of American homes have dogs as
members of the family, you may wonder what makes this
animal so endearing.  The answer is simple: we are taken in
by the unmixed love that our dogs feel for us (assuming we
treat them half-decently) and we probably envy the many
ways they are superior to us homo sapiens.  They hear
better, run faster, have a more acute sense of smell, and
judging by the way they swiftly gobble up the blandest-looking
of commercial food, we've got to assume they have a more
robust sense of taste.  Without expressly saying this, or even
mentioning these canine concepts in her movie, Penelope
Spheeris's in the hilarious "Senseless," written by Greg Erb
and Craig Mazin, concocts a funny, funny man who injects
himself with a potion that gives him these superior attributes.  
   "Senseless" revolves around a brilliant, but penniless,
college senior, Darryl Witherspoon (Marlin Wayans), who
works his way through Stratford University doing just about
anything that will support his stay at the school.  He not only
waits tables, the typical chore of people in his category: he
sells his blood to the blood bank and semen to the sperm
bank, two tasks that provide munificent materials for comic
scriptwriters.  When a research doctor advertises for people
willing to take an experimental drug which will increase the
five senses of those who inject it into their backsides, a
number of students turn up, but because of the alleged side
effects, only the desperate Darryl is left in the room.
   Using a young cast, some of whom from backgrounds with
"Saturday Night Live," director Penelope Spheeris--whose
credentials include being at the helm of the high-spirited
"Wayne's World"--unfolds a fast-moving progression of side-
splitting events that mix physical comedy, romance,
sentimentality and even Wall Street jargon so effortlessly that
the performers look as though they're having at least as good
a time as their audience.  In the beginning, when Darryl
follows the protocol given him by the scientist, Dr. Wheedon
(Brad Dourif), he's amazed at what he can do.  He sees
women wiggling their bodies on the street with his binocular
vision, hears conversations of women behind bathroom doors,
and becomes so virile that he offers to fill up a water-cooler
sized jug at the sperm bank with a single donation.  He uses
his powers to get to first base with the lovely and
sophisticated Janice (Tamara Taylor) but can get no further
because he has no proved to her that he's a super guy in the
maturity department.  He works wonders on the hockey court
and becomes a contender for the high-paying job of junior
analyst conducted by one of its executives, Randall Tyson
(Rip Torn), a job which he wants desperately so that he can
move his mother and siblings out of Harlem.  Forgetting that
more is not always better, he ignores the doctor's advice and
doubles up on the drug, causing him alternately to lose his
vision, his hearing, his sense of touch, and his smell--a
temporary handicap which provides most of the ribald humor
of the story.
   Marlon Wayans may have entered the movie business on
the coattails of his better-known brother, Damon, and if his
role in "Senseless" is any indication he may become the next
Eddie Murphy.  Demonstration an uncanny ability to mimic the
fast talk of Jim Carrey, the rubber faces of Jerry Lewis, the
physical shtick of Chaplin, Wayans not only keeps the
audience laughing but makes us care about him. In fact at a
recent critics's screening, a few sophisticated folks watching
the film actually yelled at the screen, "Don't! Don't! as Wayans 
is about to plunge the double-dosed hypodermic into his rear.
    A good deal, perhaps most, of the humor is sophomoric,
the sort of waggery that would appeal to the "Animal House"
crowd, "Senseless" probably can cross over to a crowd older
than thirty and from various ethnic groups.  David Spade of
"Saturday Night Live" is a splendid foil in the role of Scott
Thorpe, who is Darryl's well-connected principal competitor for
the job of junior analyst and Matthew Lillard is well cast as
Darryl's well-pierced roommate.  Appropriate farcical elements
are contributed by Kenya Moore as Lorraine, who is Janice's
competition for the attention of the super-hero.
   Cinematographer Albert Beveridge captures the swift action
on the hockey court as Darryl blocks a hundred pucks in
succession and affords us some garish, fish-eye poses to
simulate the torment which the leading man is enduring.
Rated R.  Running time: 95 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Matt Williams
Senseless is a prime example of what can happen when you try to push a
one-joke concept a bit too far.  Director Penelope Spheeris is no
stranger to this, having subjected audiences before to such tortures as
The Beverly Hillbillies.
Marlon Wayans stars as Darryl Witherspoon, a college senior vying for a
lucrative job at a prominent brokerage.  However, he lacks the
advantages of his chief opposition, Scott Thorpe (David Spade, in the
smarmy sort of role he can deliver in his sleep): an athletic record,
sponsorship by a fraternity, and, most of all, a wealthy family to back
him up.  In fact, Darryl has to work at four jobs simply to make ends
meet.
But there may be a light at the end of that tunnel.  He signs up as a
human guinea pig in a neurological experiment run by the university's
Dr. Wheedon (Brad Dourif).  As a result, his senses are magnified
tenfold. Using his newfound abilities, he sets himself in complete
pursuit of the job (unaware that there may be some disadvantageous
side-effects to having super senses).
Naturally, Marlon Wayans plays this comedy at full throttle, giving Jim
Carrey-ish amounts of physical humor.  The problem is, aside from a few
genuinely inspired bits, there's not much that's funny here.  The film
has it's one central gag, and pads out the rest of its length with
rather obvious lowbrow humor.
There obviously wasn't much thought put into the plot.  The entire job
selection process is completely ridiculous. I mean, why the emphasis on
extra-curricular activities if the entire job is going to come down to a
single-elimination quiz anyhow? And is this the only job being offered
to economics majors this semester?
To give it credit, Senseless does try to create a secondary joke with
Darryl's roommate, Tim LaFlour (Matthew Lillard).  Apparently, he is
supposed to be faddish, but the film never does anything with him,
leaving him in a piercing phase throughout the movie.  His
"intervention" scenes with Darryl, however, do provide a rare, and
welcome, laugh.
And then there's the love interest which is always pathetically tacked
onto comedies like this one.  In this case, the object of Darryl's amor
is Janice (Tamara Taylor), a fellow student who won't have anything to
do with Darryl until he gains his super-senses.  Needless to say, the
romance is completely extraneous, and adds little to the film.
This is a film that desperately needed something else.  Be that a good
plot, more jokes (or simply funnier ones), or a strong character or two,
anything would have helped Senseless get off the ground.  As it is, all
the manic exuberant mugging in the world can't help Marlon Wayans get
this one off the ground.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Penelope Spheeris
Cast:  Marlon Wayans, David Spade, Rip Torn, Brad Dourif, Patrick Ewing,
Matthew Lillard, Tamara Taylor
Written by:  Greg Erb, Craig Mazin
Producers:  Eric L. Gold, David Hoberman
Runtime:  88 min.
Production Company:  Miramax/Dimension
Rated R:  language, sex
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Marlon Wayans (yet another Wayans brother?) is a pretty funny guy.  He
seems pretty nice, too.  Even though he doesn't have a lot of screen
presence, he made me laugh quite a bit as I watched Senseless.  And I
suppose that this is the point of the film--get us to like Marlon
Wayans.  Unfortunately, Wayans can't significantly overcome this dopey
script.  The movie has funny moments, yes, but most of them originate
with the profoundly dumb idea on which Senseless is based.  The comedy
is an excuse for the lame story, but everything would be so much funnier
and less painful if this statement were the other way around.
Wayans stars as Darryl Witherspoon, a poor (money-less) college student
trying to make money in order to pay for school, and to help out his
mother and his three siblings.  He tries giving blood four times a day,
but this proves tiresome.  He does various odd jobs about campus, but
none of them seem to pay well.  Finally, he agrees to be part of an
experiment led by Dr. Wheedon (Brad Dourif).  The experiment has Darryl
injecting glowing green slime into his buttocks (and we get to see this
process several times!).  The end result allows Darryl's senses to
become hyper-alert.
He can read microscopic typing from hundreds of feet away.  He can
smell non-existent body odor.  He can hear the ticking of a watch ten
feet away as if it were church bell in his ear.  Once he is able to
control his senses (and the rectal itching dies down), he finds that his
new heightened senses will be particularly useful to win a coveted
accounting job for a big company.  His primary competitor for the job is
the evil Scott Butler (David Spade, who is totally hilarious here), a
Rich Boy who gets everything handed to him by his rich father.  Along
the way, there is the obligatory love affair with a beautiful woman
(Tamara Taylor).
I suppose a pretty good word to describe this film is generic.  Aside
from Wayans, there's nothing much new here.  Not that this is
necessarily bad:  stock-comedies can be enjoyable, even if they aren't
very original.  As a story, however, Senseless is particularly bad.  The
screenplay doesn't even ask me to suspend my disbelief (uhhh, so what
are the side effects of this miracle drug?), so I didn't feel inclined
to take any of it seriously.  Was I supposed to?  Well, the film itself
takes all the moments with Darryl's family extremely seriously.  Most
dopey comedies like this require that there be serious moments, even if
the tone doesn't match the rest of the film.  
This is where director Penelope Spheeris comes in.  I remember her work
on Wayne's World to be pretty good, and here it's certainly not awful. 
But scenes within the film clash magnificently with the rest of the
film, such as all the subplots revolving around Darryl's pierced-up
roommate, Tim (Matthew Lillard from Scream).  And in one moment, a
strange revelation is made about Janice's heritage, and I was very
curious as to why.  It provides an interesting sequence in which Wayans
fondles Rip Torn...and I suspect that this is the sole reason that this
plot detail was included.
And that's what Senseless comes down to.  This is not the kind of film
one can hate--it's just kind of there.  There's no objectionable
material (well, I suppose there's some toilet humor).  Wayans is funny,
Spade is funny, and all of the actors are competent, but the story is
here for no other reason than to provide a few funny sequences for
Wayans to run through.  When the film is over--should you decide to see
it--take a step away and just think about how phenomenally absurd the
entire thing is.  Then ask yourself if you cared as you watched the
film.  When I ask myself that question, I realize that I didn't care too
much.  I guess it deserves points for that.

Author
James Berardinelli
     SENSELESS is a completely generic comedy that is only occasionally 
enlivened by the on-screen antics of Marlon Wayans.  Yet, while Wayans 
has the energy and malleable features to match those of Jim Carrey (whom 
he appears to be impersonating), he isn't endowed with quite as forceful 
a screen presence.  Of course, it doesn't help that he isn't given much 
to work with.  The screenplay is dumb, and director Penelope Spheeris, 
who has ridden her WAYNE'S WORLD success through a series of mediocre 
movies, can't seem to find a stable tone.  She seems to be striving for 
something more sophisticated than mere physical comedy, but her attempts 
never reach fruition.  In fact, there are isolated instances when 
SENSELESS almost seems grim.
     The screenplay does nothing with a potentially-interesting premise.  
Darryl Witherspoon (Wayans) is one of the hardest working men on the 
Stratford University campus.  Because he sends money home to support his 
mother and siblings, he has to work about three different jobs to make 
ends meet.  So, when the medical department advertises for human guinea 
pigs to test out their latest serum -- a wonder drug that magnifies the 
effectiveness of all five senses -- Darryl is first in line to collect 
the $3000 offered for being a subject.  But, although Darryl's first 
reactions to "Protocol 563" are negative (extreme itching, being 
bothered by seemingly-unobtrusive sounds, etc.), he soon begins to reap 
the benefits of having enhanced senses.  He turns into a leading 
candidate for a position at the Smythe Bates corporation, becomes the 
protégé of one of Smythe Bates' top men, Randall Tyson (Rip Torn), is 
transformed into a hockey star, and starts a romantic relationship with 
a fellow student, Janice (Tamara Taylor).  All of this doesn't sit well 
with Darryl's chief detractor, Scott Butler (David Spade), who is 
determined to do anything to undermine his rival's success.
     For the most part, SENSELESS falls into the category of "underdog 
makes good."  The autopilot script follows a well-known trajectory:  
someone gains confidence in himself because of an outside agent, then, 
once that agent has been removed, finds that his true strength comes 
from within.  In a case like this, when there's not much to be found in 
how the plot is structured, the movie's success depends on whether it 
offers enough laughs to camouflage its deficiencies.  Unfortunately, 
while SENSELESS can boast a few funny sequences, they're too few and far 
apart to allow me to describe this film as anything better than mundane.  
     Marlon Wayans' performance is uneven.  On some occasions, such as 
when he's running around buck naked on a city street, he is hilarious, 
but there are times when he's more bland than funny.  And the sporadic 
attempts to copy Jim Carrey didn't do anything for me.  Surprisingly, 
Wayans is perhaps most effective when working through the romantic 
subplot.  He and Tamara Taylor develop a nice rapport that isn't 
completely reliant upon sexual tension.  David Spade, despite being 
given second billing, is pretty much a nonentity.  Aside from an 
occasional low key put-down, Spade doesn't have much to do -- as a 
villain, he's decidedly unimpressive.  Supporting performers include 
SCREAM's Matthew Lillard as Darryl's excessively-pierced roommate and 
Brad Dourif as the doctor in charge of the Protocol 563 experiment.  
     There's really not a lot more to say about this film.  While the 
amusement level isn't high, the familiarity level is, but at least the 
movie is short enough that boredom never sets in.  Those who prefer not 
to be challenged by motion pictures, and who are willing to endure the 
same regurgitated material time-after-time, may enjoy SENSELESS.  For 
everyone else, the handful of good jokes aren't enough to justify ninety 
minutes in a theater.  
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Marlon Wayans, Matthew Lillard, David Spade, Tamara Taylor,
Brad Dourif
Ingredients: College nerd, secret formula, girlfriend, upper crust  frat
boy rival
Synopsis: 
Darryl (Marlon Wayans) plays a down-and-out University economics student
who will do anything to win a contest in which the winning student is
awarded a junior analyst position at Smith-Bytes, a prestigious Wall
Street firm. The problem is, the only people who ever win are rich kids
with upper class connections and prestigious positions in fraternities
and school sports. Meanwhile, poor Darryl is in debt and working himself
broke trying to send money back home to support his destitute,
fatherless family. He has no chance of becoming a contest finalist.
As yet another way to make money Darryl volunteers himself as a human
guinea pig to take an experimental drug, and suddenly finds that his
five senses are ten times as powerful as before. Thus empowered he joins
a fraternity, romances the girl of his dreams Janice (Tamara Taylor),
conquers the hockey team, works his way into the good graces of some
Smith-Bytes execs, and becomes a contest finalist. But tragedy strikes
when Darryl gets power hungry and double doses himself; his five sense
start disappearing.
Can the newly humbled Darryl win the contest, save his family, and win
back the favor of his girlfriend using his own power without the help of
the wonder drug?
Opinion:
In 1984 comedian Steve Martin did a comedy film called ALL OF ME (1984),
in which the spirit of a woman  took possession of one half of Martin's
body. ALL OF ME was a great excuse to highlight Martin's physical comedy
in the form of pratfalls and exaggerated clumsiness. Martin was
different from Robin Williams - - another premier comedian of the 1980s
- -  in that Martin was mostly 'goofy physical' while Williams excelled
in manic, mile-a-minute monologues.
In the 1990s we see a similar comedic dichotomy. On the one hand we have
the fast talking Jim Carrey or Chris Rock while on the other hand there
is Marlon Wayans, an expert trip and fall guy. Wayans' SENSELESS is
similar to Martin's ALL OF ME in that SENSELESS is a very funny comedy
about a guy losing control of his body - - and the film gives physical
comedian Marlon Wayans a great vehicle for comedic falls, slobbery
facial expressions, and general goofiness. If you can imagine Steve
Martin or Jerry Lewis' ability to trip and fall, combined with zany
facial expressions and Eddie Murphy-like enthusiasm, then you have a
good idea of Wayans' comedic charm. 
My only complaint is that one scene in SENSELESS - - the scene where
Darryl tries to have sex with Janice's sorority sister - - doesn't match
Darryl's ethical character or fit in with the rest of the movie. But
there are also very good scenes. One of my favorites is where Darryl
tests out his super senses playing ice hockey for the college team and
becomes a 'kung fu' goalie.
SENSELESS is funny. Director Penelope Spheeris (who also directed
WAYNE'S WORLD) hits the funny bone yet again with this one.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
This time of year is always painful for me.  It's always mid-February
when people start to bitch that there are no black Academy Award
nominees.  Hey, dumb-ass, I've got a secret for youSenseless is the
reason why.  So are Booty Call, Def Jam's How To Be A Player and Most
Wanted, just to bring up the few that I have the misfortune of
remembering.  Ring any bells, Einstein?
Senseless is the latest comedy vehicle for Marlon Wayans, arguably the
least talented of the Wayans brothers.  But, at least he's not making
action films.  And what's the deal with the Wayans brothers?  Are there
enough of them to populate Rhode Island?  And does the WB network really
stand for `Wayans Brothers'?  While you ponder, I'll continue.
Wayans plays Darryl Witherspoon, an economic student at fictitious
Stratford University.  While trying to concentrate on his studies,
Witherspoon also works a series of odd jobs to pay for his tuition and
to support his mother and younger siblings.  These jobs include, but are
not limited in any way to: campus tour guide, dishwasher, salad bar
attendant, mail courier, water boy, blood and, of course, sperm donor.
The main plot line centers on Witherspoon vying for the prestigious
junior analyst job with Smythe-Barney, a powerful brokerage firm that
offers one position annually to a deserving Stratford graduate.  Enter
Scott Thorpe (David Spade), snotty-white-rich-son of a banker who
presents the main competition.
The funny is supposed to come from Witherspoon enlisting in an
experimental drug test for some quick cash.  According to the crazy
campus scientist, the drug is supposed to increase the senses
five-fold.  And you can pretty much write the rest of the film yourself.
There is one great recurring gag in which Witherspoon's apparently
Canadian roommate (Matthew Lillard) thinks that his pal is really a
smack freak and continuously consults a pamphlet entitled `Is My Friend
A Junky?' for information.  The script, from the writers of the funnier
Rocket Man, is also peppered with plenty of dick and shit jokes and even
includes a reference to `tossed salad' that only I seemed to get.
Helmer Penelope Spheeris (Black Sheep, The Little Rascals) continues to
stumble along the mediocre comedy-directing talent heap.  One might
think that she would choose a different career path after the success of
her documentary series, The Decline of Western Civilization, which
earned her kudos (and the `Freedom of Expression' award) at this year's
Sundance Film Festival.  Maybe those are harder to make, but they sure
are easier to watch.
