Title
Review for Six-String Samurai (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Is the world ready for a parody of a film like THE POSTMAN, which 
some already regard as a parody?  SIX-STRING SAMURAI seems to think so, 
but if we have to have another parody of a post-apocalyptic America, 
does it have to be this unwatchably bad?
     The plot for SIX-STRING SAMURAI has the Russians dropping the bomb 
on the United States in 1957 and then occupying the entire country, 
except for Las Vegas.  In Vegas, the only free spot left on the earth, 
Elvis is crowned the king.  The movie takes place 40 years later when 
the king has died, and Elvis wannabes are heading for "Lost" Vegas, 
which is shown recast into an image of Oz.
     The hero of the tale is one such Elvis would-be replacement.  Named 
Buddy, he is played by Jeffrey Falcon, whose background is solely in 
Chinese martial arts films.  With a blank slate for a face and with a 
little tinny voice, he relies on his ability to perform martial arts 
spins to tell his story.  The picture emphasizes his fighting skills by 
playing a third of his scenes in slow motion.
     The handsome, saturated colors in the cinematography and the film's 
dramatic visual style are the only things to recommend it.  Most of the 
supporting cast seem to think they are mental patient escapees from ONE 
FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST.  The villains are Darth Vader wannabes, 
dressed in dark rags.
     The "best" part of the movie is the paucity of dialog.  The script 
by the lead, Jeffrey Falcon, and the director, Lance Mungia, has 
one-liners like "Cool" and "Gee."  When the actors attempt a complete 
English sentence, "Slice me off a thigh, Honey Bunch" is typical.  
     "The Kid" in the movie, played by Justin McGuire, is the one whose 
thigh almost becomes dinner.  McGuire is the only actor who demonstrates 
any talent potential.  Whether he has any or not is hard to ascertain, 
since it is hidden in this mess of a movie, but he has a couple of good 
facial expressions.
     The Nevada desert, where the picture is set, serves as a perfect 
metaphor.  The film is as dry and barren as the arid terrain.  The 
formless story drifts aimlessly like a tumbleweed blowing nowhere in 
particular.  If I hadn't been at a press screening to review the film, I 
would have walked out, which is what I'd recommend you do if you find 
yourself accidentally watching it.  Then again, who knows.  Perhaps, 
someday it will be thought of as so outrageously atrocious that it will 
be considered a cult classic.
     SIX-STRING SAMURAI runs 1:31.  It is rated PG-13 for martial arts 
and sword fight violence and would be fine for kids around 10 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: In a post-holocaust world, a guy who dresses like Buddy
Holly and fights like Sanjuro struggles his way to "Lost Vegas" where
he will be "the King."  No new ideas, no plot, just a string of fights
and music.  Rating: 1 (0 to 10), -2 (-4 to +4)
   - Directed by Lance Mungia.  Starring Jeffery Falcon.  Written (if
     that is the right word) by Mungia and Falcon.
   - The director claims to be a fan of Akira Kurosawa, and imitates
     the fight scenes in some of his films fairly well.  But he has
     missed a very important aspect of Kurasowa'a work.  If you walk
     out of a Kurasowa film for ten minutes the plot will have advanced
     and you will need to do something to catch up.  The plot of this
     film does not advance.  If you walk out of SIX-STRING SAMURAI for
     ten minutes, you will have missed no plot complications beyond
     whom the title character is fighting and you will enriched your
     life by ten minutes.  I recommend at least eight such absences
     during the course of the film.
   - Alternate history in which the USSR defeated the US in a 1957
     atomic war.
   - Music is supplied by The Red Elvises who rely on doing rock
     versions of classical Slavic music.
   - Yet another film in which the props all seem to come from a
     particularly impoverished junkyard.  Costumes seem to be from Good
     Will.
   - Words don't fit characters' lips, as if incompetently redubbed in
     the studio.
   - If there was a nuclear war in 1957, where do the Eisenhower
     dollars come from that one set of baddies are flipping?

Author
Ron Strong
Palm Pictures & Overseas FilmGroup, Inc. Presents an HSX Films
production of a Lance Mungia Film.
Jeff Falcon   "SIX STRING SAMURAI"  Justin McGuire, Stephane Gauger,
John Sarkisian, Gabrille Pimenter
Edited by James Frisa    Music by Brian Tyler    Cinematography by
Kristian Bernier     Visual Effects by: Pixel Envy
Executive Producer: Michael Burns    Co-Producers: Jeffrey Falcon &
Lance Mungia
Screenplay by Jeffrey Falcon & Lance Mungia   Produced by Leanna
Creel    Directed by  Lance Mungia
Every so often in this industry, there is a project or talent that
creates a buzz. The title of that project takes on a mystique that
drives it through the rounds of dinner -talk, industry screenings and so
forth and so on. Occasionally these little films live up to their hype,
but most time they do not. For every good film screened at film
festivals around the country, hundreds may never see release outside of
a direct to video release. With the upcoming release of Lance Mungia's
"Six String Samurai", filmgoers are in for a rare and delectable treat.
The plot is a complete fabrication, creating its our history for it's
bizarre plot. In 1957, World War 3 has broken out. The last surviving
outpost of civilization is LOST VEGAS (!). The leader of the free world
is Elvis (the KING!). Our story picks up forty years later. The King is
dead and the quest is on for a new King. Every Rock and Roller with a
guitar from across the country makes their way to Lost Vegas to claim
the throne. One of these guitar-carrying warriors is a Rastafarian
looking heavy metal guitarist known as Death. He is systematically
killing off rivals to the throne. The other is Buddy (Jeff Falcon), who
carries his samurai sword, duck taped to the back of electric guitar.
Buddy is a man of few words. But, his actions speak volumes. But his
journey takes a decided turn when an 8-year-old boy joins him.
 "Six String Samurai" is without a doubt one of the most original and
thoroughly surprising films of the past decade. While the plot is rather
episodic and slow at points the film more than makes up for it with its
goofy charm. This is film that not everyone will enjoy, but neither was
it meant to. 'Six String Samurai' comes from the same subversive
attitude that gave us such marvelous independent epics as 'Death Race
2000', 'Repo Man', 'Vanishing Point', and even 'Faster Pussycat, Kill,
Kill'.
The film belies its low budget origins by using some of the most
dazzling cinematography since 'The English Patient'. Kristian Bernier's
camera work is inspired. Death Valley has not looked this mystical and
majestic since John Ford. Almost every scene shines like a frame from a
David Lean epic. This is no faint praise. Considering what resources Mr.
Bemier had to work with, we are witnesses to a vital and wondrous new
talent. His work here rivals Dean Cundey's (Jurassic Park, Escape from
New York) best in terms of pure cinematic magic.
Director Lance Mungia carries the film with a flair that brings to mind
such diverse talent as Russ Meyer, Paul Bartell, and even John
Carpenter. Being his first feature film, it does have a raw edge, but
that edge gives this film a comedic drive that is sourly lacking from
the majority of films today. It would be a shame to see this talented
individual dropped into the direct to video market. The script for "Six
String Samurai' while being episodic, plays like a peyote inspired road
picture. There are moments of pure comedic joy in this film, with laugh
out loud hilarity. The action set pieces are staged and executed with a
style that is exhilarating. At a time when Hollywood is aping everything
from Hong Kong filmmakers, its refreshing to find a film that tries to
create it's own style. Yes, there are moments of Wu Shu style martial
arts, but they are used sparingly. The weapon of choice here is the
sword (as one character points out late in the film "We havent had
bullets since 1959"). So many techniques and styles are used in filming
the fight scenes that some of the references may be lost on most film
historians. You can be certain; you will see loving tributes to both
Akira Kurosawa, and Kenji Misumi (Lone Wolf & Cub).
Jeff Falcon, who plays Buddy (Holly?), has made a career in Hong Kong
working on over 15 films. Including "Inspector Wore Skirts." where he
had the fortune of getting whacked on the head with a Chinese pole by
Wei Yin Hung (My Young Auntie /1980). His performance in 'Six String
Samurai' is a caricature of the Sergio Leone "Man Without A Name"
anti-hero. Now playing the part of a man carrying a Gibson 335 guitar,
wearing Bifocals taped in the centerpiece, trudging across the desert
wastes is as daunting a performance as one can possibly imagine. While
the character of Buddy is written as an enigma, Mr. Falcon brings a
comic sensibility to the performance that is charmingly refreshing. But,
what we really what to see are the fight scene. Any film that has its
hero carrying a Samurai Sword had better have some fight scene. And
fight scenes it has. Copious fights scenes. Each one more inventive than
the one preceding it. Mr. Falcon may be the best screen fighter in the
U.S. since Charles Bronson in 'Hard Times' (1975).
The only week part of the film is the performance by Justin McGuire as
THE KID. While the performance is not necessarily bad, it is
indifferent. Since this is Mr. McGuire's first film, this can be excused
as just inexperience. However, Justin McGuire does exude a charm in some
scenes that contradicts his inexperience. Not having much dialogue in
this film, Mr. McGuire has to communicate with his eyes and body
language, which he does well.
To end up, "Six String Samurai" is a joyous celebration of movie making
by a team of filmmakers that were hell-bent on creating something unique
and special. It would be lest than flattering to say that they have
succeeded.
On a scale of ***** "Six String Samurai" rates ***=.  A charming example
of guerrilla filmmaking, And a loving tribute to a form of cinema that
has been missing for far too long.
Copyright ) 1998 R.L. Strong
Nothing in this review may be quoted or reprinted with the expressed
written permission of the author.

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1998. Director - Lance Mungia, Screenplay - Mungia & Jeffrey 
Falcon, Producers - Michael Burns & Leanna Creel, Photography - Kristian 
Bernier, Music - Brian Tyler, Songs -The Red Elvises, Visual Effects - 
Jason Dunn, Production Design - Falcon. Production Company - HSX Films.
Jeffrey Falcon (Buddy), Justin McGuire (The Kid), Stephane Gauger 
(Death), Lex Lang (Voice of Death), John Sakisian (Russian General)
Plot: In 1957 the USA was devastated by a Russian nuclear strike. In 
Lost Vegas, Elvis was proclaimed the king. But now with the death of 
Elvis, the guitar and samurai-sword wielding Buddy seeks to become the 
new king. Reluctantly allowing himself to be accompanied by an orphan 
child that he saves, Buddy makes his way across the post-apocalyptic 
Nevada Desert, fighting off crazies, while pursued by Death who wants to 
usurp rock'n'roll with heavy metal.
It is not long into 'Six-String Samurai' when you wonder what on Earth 
it is you have sat down to watch. The opening moments feature a samurai 
sword-waving Buddy Holly lookalike (in the midst of what the opening 
credits tell us is a post-holocaust alternate world) despatching 
Neanderthal mutants and trio of bowlers who hide blades inside their 
bowling pins, while a group of mariachi Elvis-impersonators play on from 
the sideline. Subsequent encounters include brushes with a strange 
cannibal family and a Spinach Monster which, in what appears to be an 
attempt to parody bad sf movies, is represented by an eye on a 
corrugated pipe, with the rock'n'roll samurai hero all the while being 
pursued by a heavy metal-playing Death.
It rapidly becomes apparent that 'Six-String Samurai' is an offbeat 
indie experiment in cinematic textural meldings. It reads as a 
conflation of rock'n'roll mythology crossbred with Japanese samurai 
films, a parody of the whole 'Mad Max' post-holocaust genre and an 
attempt to be a bad sf movie. And it all gets pretty silly - the scenes 
with the moronic mutants conducting a 'Mad Max' style chase at about 
five miles per hour is quite inane.
But oddly enough all the silliness eventually develops a certain panache 
of sorts. Director Mungia manages all the action poses with a reasonable 
degree of style - the film and its low-budget chutzpah ends up reminding 
one to a lesser extent of Robert Rodriguez and what he set out to do in 
his 1993 debut 'El Mariachi'. Mungia's stroke of luck is his lead actor 
(also his co-writer and production designer) Jeffrey Falcon. Besides 
bearing an uncanny resemblance to Buddy Holly, Falcon pulls off the 
potentially absurd image of a bespectacled, bedraggled sword-wielding 
Buddy Holly with thorough conviction. Falcon also delivers the cod 
rock'n'roll dialogue with a wonderfully thin-lipped mealy pout and 
proves surprisingly lithe when it comes to all the fight poses. 
Ultimately the film proves an oddity that leaves one scratching their 
head in puzzlement, but not an unenjoyable one.

