Title
Review for Angel Eyes (2001)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Laura Clifford
Chicago PD officer Sharon Pogue (Jennifer Lopez, "The Wedding Planner") fights 
to keep an accident victim conscious with earnest care emanating from her every
pore in one scene, then throws a hulking hood against a squad car in the next.
JLo means business as an all purpose supercop, but when she finds herself
at the mercy of a gun-wielding thug, it's the bravery of a passing stranger -
or is he? - that saves her life in "Angel Eyes."
Director Luis Mandoki and screenwriter Gerald DiPego tone down the saccharine 
syrup they applied liberally to their last effort, "Message in the Bottle," 
but can't resist overdoing the melodrama in the home stretch of their new one.
"Angel Eyes" is being marketted as some kind of supernatural outing, but it's
really a love story about two troubled people who find each other.  Sharon is
agonizing over a family that has a history of abuse, from her father's (Victor
Argo, "Coyote Ugly") former treatment of her mother (Sonia Braga, "Kiss of the 
Spider Woman") to her brother's current spousal abuse.  Her concerned partner
Robby (Terrence Howard, "The Best Man"), whom she hasn't confided in, even 
suggests she may be battling her own violent impulses after witnessing her 
rough treatment of apprehended suspects.  Her mother and sister-in-law's 
pleas for her to attend a ceremony celebrating the renewal of her parents' 
wedding vows are bringing the familial conflict to a head.
Sharon finds herself intrigued by the quiet young man (Jim Caviezel, "Pay It
Forward") who tackled her assailant.  Giving his name only as Catch, the
man with the intense blue eyes proves to have an even higher wall around him
that she does.  As the couple can't seem to resist the urge to be together,
Sharon begins to delve into Catch's past, finally discovering a shattering
confluence.
It's here that "Angel Eyes" plunges earthward.  Mandoki and editor Jerry
Greenberg crosscut Catch's coming to terms with his tragedy as Sharon 
attends her parent's party and attempts to make peace with her father.
The ludicrousness of such emotional trauma hitting a couple at the 
exact same time is cause for eye-rolling - surely not the intended audience 
response.  (I also have a pet peeve with filmmakers who prominently feature
a pet - in this case Catch's dog Bob - only to inexplicably forget the
animal's existence.)
A second problem with "Angel Eyes" is the imbalance of the leads' performances.
Jennifer Lopez has enough street cred to be entirely believable as a Chicago
cop and the femininity to appear soft and vulnerable.  Even while Mandoki
overmanipulates the climax of his film, Lopez pulls off a highly emotional
moment, recalling a good childhood scene with her dad for a camcorder when her 
real father can't bring himself to bridge the gap that's grown between them.
Caveziel, however, needs to stop playing Christlike characters.  He became
known with his sacrificial Private Witt in "The Thin Red Line" and
turned the heroin addict of "Pay It Forward" into a fallen saint.  Maybe
Mandoki directed him to play Catch in an otherworldly manner to keep audiences
guessing, but the routine is wearing thin for this actor, who coasts here
with his penetrating eyes and cautiously dazzling smile.  Making a stronger
impression is NAACP Image Award winner Terrence Howard as Sharon's hopeful
partner.  Oscar nominated actress Shirley Knight ("As Good as it Gets") appears
in a small role as a wheelchair bound woman whom Catch shops for.
The film alternates between a skewed, dreamy look and lushly colored reality
provided by Academy Award nominated cinematographer Piotr Sobocinski ("Red")
(who passed away earlier this year while working on Mandoki's next feature).
The musicical focal point comes when Catch surprises Sharon by picking up a 
trumpet to perform a blues piece in a nightclub.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
In ANGEL EYES, Sharon Pogue is a tough-as-nails Chicago police officer.  
She's the type who hangs out at the bar after work, belting beers with 
the boys from the precinct.  Although she can trade insults with the 
best of them, she's really a sad loner who is never more uncomfortable 
than when she attempts dating.  
Combining a bit of her charm from THE WEDDING PLANNER and her intrigue 
from THE CELL, Jennifer Lopez, as Officer Pogue, is one of the two 
reasons to see ANGEL EYES.  The other is her costar, James Caviezel 
(FREQUENCY and PAY IT FORWARD), who plays an illusive character known as 
Catch -- no last name.  Catch is a Good Samaritan who turns off people's 
car lights and knocks on neighbors' doors when they leave the keys in 
them.  More comfortable in the shadows than in the light, he is a 
nervous type who wanders aimlessly through dangerous streets at night.  
(His happiness can be seen in strange ways.  The happier he is, the more 
often he shaves.)
The biggest argument against seeing ANGEL EYES comes from its MESSAGE IN 
A BOTTLE team of director Luis Mandoki and writer Gerald Di Pego.  An 
uneven story that moves in fits and spurts, it has trouble ever quite 
deciding what it wants to be.  Not a romance, per se, although there is 
an obligatory sex scene, which is both brief and bland, the film is more 
of an exploration of two characters' lives.
Catch, for example, may or may not be alive.  Is he a ghost, an angel, a 
trauma victim or what?  Sharon, who grew up in an abusive family, 
appears to be hiding some secrets of her own.  Catch and Sharon, who 
share an easily guessed bond, form a mutual help group.  Their 
relationship is awkward since they both suffer from various forms of 
denial.
One thing is certain, the movie is in no rush to get wherever it is 
going.  One character, a mysterious shut-in, Elanora (Shirley Knight), 
asks, "Why does everybody have to rush everything these days?"  The line 
feels rather like a lecture to the audience to stop being impatient.
At its best, the movie can drive home some excellent points with the 
best of these showing how a single moment in one's life can be so 
incredibly precious or tragic.  But the proof of the story's 
effectiveness comes in the end.  Catch and Sharon each have what are 
obviously designed to be three-hankie scenes, but both leave you 
completely dry-eyed.  One thing is certain, you can't fault the acting 
since it is splendid throughout.
ANGEL EYES runs a long 1:44.  It is rated R for language, violence and a 
scene of sexuality and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Robin Clifford
A mysterious man (Jim Caviezel) appears, like a guardian angel, and saves
police officer Sharon Pogue (Jennifer Lopez), from a deadly ambush. Is it
coincidence or fate? The two shall learn the truth about themselves and
each other as they fall in love in "Angel Eyes."
"Angel Eyes" is, first and foremost, a date flick. It has the trappings of
an action-drama, initially, with Lopez saving a car crash victim, then,
later, getting in a shootout with a fleeing felon. But, once the setup is
made - troubled cop, Sharon, meets mysterious drifter, Catch (Caviezel) -
the cop drama falls away and real story, the love story about two troubled
people adrift and alone who find each other, kicks in.
When Catch (Caviezel) comes on the scene, we find a tortured and confused
man who is, at his core, a good Samaritan. When he first sees Sharon, he
recognizes her, but it's left vague as to how and when. (But, if you paid
attention to the action under the credits at the beginning, you'll guess
who Catch is.) All we really know about the stranger is that he is drawn to
drawn to Sharon like a magnet to iron.
Sharon has her own set of hang-ups to deal with, too. She is overly
aggressive at her job - so much so that her partner, Robbie (Terrence
Howard), repeatedly admonishes her to lighten up. Her sudden rescue by
Catch, just when she is about to be capped by a hoodlum with her own gun,
begins a slow-burning romance that increases in heat as each of the two
discard their outer shells - hers of tough anger, his of benign confusion.
As they fall for each other, they both unlock hidden, painful pasts. The
release each experiences, because of their love for each other, allows both
to resolve past problems and learn to love each other unconditionally.
The routine story about two troubled people finding and nurturing each
other is helped by decent, though not great perfs by Lopez and Caviezel. I
have never been a big fan of Jennifer Lopez (though I really liked her
opposite George Clooney in Stephen Soderberg's "Out of Sight"), but found
her angry cop character to have dimension. Caviezel, with those piercing,
expressive eyes and handsome looks, fits the bill as the mysterious Catch.
The actor has to get some roles that give him more to do than look tortured
and pensive. I'd like to see the guy get a chance to thesp once in a while,
instead of just expressing for the camera.
There is little going on below the performances of the two stars. Acclaimed
Brazilian actress Sonia Braga ("The Kiss of the Spider Woman") appears as
Sharon's mother, whose abuse by her husband (Victor Argo) years before led
to the father/daughter estrangement that has lasted for years. Vet actress
Shirley Knight has a small, sensitive role as Catch's caring, former
mother-in-law.
Scripter Gerald DiPego joins, again, with helmer Mandoki (they last
collaborated on the saccharine "Message in a Bottle") in bringing another
romance to the screen. Fortunately, their second time together is better
than their first. Lenser Piotr Sobocinski shifts between dark and brooding
lighting, when things are serious, to warm and soft as the romance
traverses the film story.
"Angel Eyes" will find its audience in the post-teen dating scene. The
angst of the characters and their release from despair won't get the action
fans, but it will get the romantics. I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit reelingreviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 ANGEL EYES (director: Luis Mandoki; screenwriter: Gerald DiPego;
 cinematographer: Piotr Sobocinski; editor: Jerry Greenberg; cast:
 Jennifer Lopez (Sharon Pogue), Jim Caviezel (Catch), Victor Argo (Carl
 Pogue), Sonia Braga (Josephine Pogue), Terrence Howard (Robby),
 Shirley Knight (Elanora Davis), Jeremy Sisto (Larry), Daniel Magder
 (Larry Jr.); Runtime: 110; Warner Brothers; 2001)
It's a gritty cop movie when the two protagonists are inarticulate and
are trying to form a relationship to ease their inner pain. They have
both lost their families in one way or another. Their romance is quirky
and seems to be stumbling around to get someplace. Unfortunately, when
they do become articulate and mesh together, the film moves into the
predictable formulaic mold and ends in a cornball way. They were both
more endearing when they had nothing to say, where one would constantly
be asking the other: "Who are you?"
Sharon Pogue (Jennifer Lopez) is a tough Chicago policewoman, who in the
opening scene comforts a critically injured man who has been in a
terrible car accident. She is soon shown in action making an arrest on a
nasty thug by using a body-slam to make sure she gets the pinch. Her
physical prowess in that incident would make make even the most macho
policeman feel proud. Relaxing in a bar she trades sexual innuendoes
with her compatriots on the police force, and smoothly handles her
married partner Robby's (Terrence Howard) sexually playful attempts to
come onto her. She shows her vulnerable side at night, after being wound
up too tight fighting crime in the street all day, suffering from her
loneliness and from her insomnia. She's also poisoned by the fact that
she had to arrest ten years ago her abusive father (Argo), who used her
mother (Braga) as a punching bag. The arrest stopped the abuse, but she
took all the heat for embarrassing the family. Her father has refused to
talk to her since then, and mom only wishes she wouldn't have arrested
her father. She now finds out from her construction worker brother that
her mother and father plan to renew their wedding vows.
The recovered accident victim goes by the handle Catch (Jim Caviezel).
He is a timid, quivering man, who does nothing but walk the city streets
in his overcoat and tries to do angelic things for the strangers he
encounters. He shuts off a guy's headlights on his parked car, returns
his next door neighbor's keys she left in the door, and takes in a stray
dog. For his mother-in-law (Knight), who is disabled in a wheelchair, he
does the weekly grocery shopping and uses her as his surrogate mother.
He has a ghostlike appearance and seems to be disengaged from the world.
When Sharon is faced with a thug standing with a gun over her slumped
body after a police chase, Catch jumps him and saves her life. The two
get together in the bar where her cop friends hangout and neither one
recognizes the other from the car accident a year ago, though Catch
feels a strange connection to her. He thinks they were destined to meet.
Even though Catch seems like a freak show, Sharon feels something about
him that she doesn't from the other guys she goes out with. They develop
a relationship filled with the secret pains they have, but are unable to
communicate with each other because their hurt is so deep. His pain is
that he can't live with himself because his wife and kid were killed in
the accident. Her pain is that she is not appreciated by her family;
they have made her an outsider. When she goes to her brother's house
after he punches his wife around, they react poorly to her intervention.
Spousal abuse seems to have a history of being passed onto different
generations of the same family, as is evidenced here.
JLo is a convincing cop and one tough broad, but who has a soft side to
her behind her bullet proof vest. Jim Caviezel looks as if he arrived
from another world; he's disheveled and lives in his sparsely decorated
apartment featuring only a bed, a telephone with an answering machine,
and a drawer filled with children's toys. He seemed believable as
someone who has been traumatized, and begins to recover when it is
revealed that he's a former jazz trumpeter. As for their hot moments
together JLo is a natural for sex, but Caviezel seemed too distant to
really be getting into it. But the film can almost be forgiven for its
sore points in storytelling, because these two star performers bring
something to the screen that is curiously arresting. The problem with
the film is that the filmmaker couldn't let their romance play out in a
natural way. Filmmaker Luis Mandoki ("Message in a Bottle") could think
of no other way to bring them together than by having Caviezel go
through a corny soliloquy at his wife's graveside; while, JLo saved her
corny soliloquy for a videocam message to her father at the family
reception. To make matters seem more artificial there is some loud,
syrupy music before the film ends and the credits roll by, as JLo and
Caviezel drive off together seemingly having survived their personal
tragedies with some big fake smiles on their faces. I wonder how many
market research reports it took for them to come up with that happy
ending!
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David N. Butterworth
Jennifer Lopez is riding a wave of popularity right now so it should come
as no surprise to anyone to see the actress turned Queen of Q102 with
another movie in theaters (following close on the heels of her lukewarm
"The Wedding Planner").  Given Lopez's current appeal, it would probably be
unwise for her to attempt anything controversial or challenging at this
point, and "Angel Eyes," therefore, is exactly the right vehicle for her:
she looks good, she turns in a decent performance, but she doesn't do
anything risky, doesn't do anything to stretch herself as an actress.
Luis Mandoki's film (he made the Kevin Costner/Robin Wright sudser
"Message in a Bottle") is another drama/mystery/thriller/romance, but those
looking for anything more than a romance (replete with delectable JLo
close-ups) will be disappointed--there's not a whole heck of a lot of drama
here, even less mystery, and virtually zero thrills.
What starts out looking like a traditional police drama (Lopez plays a
Chicago cop with relationship problems) quickly shifts gears with the
arrival of a mysterious stranger.  Catch (played by James Caviezel) is
first seen observing (or, perhaps, spying on) Lopez's Sharon Pogue as she
hangs out in bars and coffee shops, shooting the breeze with her peers,
Chicago's finest.  When Sharon is called into action, Catch is there to
save her, but not after Sharon takes a few rounds to the chest (don't
worry: we've already seen her strapping on her bullet proof vest).  That
scene is one of the film's better ones, especially if you watch Lopez's
reactions as she rips open her protective garment to verify that it did its
job.
So Catch and Sharon are introduced, and the more strange and mysterious
Catch seems (that name, for instance), the more strangely and mysteriously
attracted to him Sharon becomes.  Judging from his rather
sparsely-appointed apartment though, it's clear the guy has never heard of
IKEA.
Unfortunately, "Angel Eyes" is almost always too obvious for its own good.
 It opens with a scene of Lopez's character rescuing someone from a car
crash, and it's pretty apparent to anyone with half a brain that Catch is
that someone, yet the filmmakers go out of their way to make that
revelation, when it eventually comes, surprising.  There's a
falling-in-love montage--we've all seen those a thousand times before--and
as the film slowly segues from tough police drama (Jen looks especially
good in uniform) to touchy-feely cop romance (Jim seems to be doing
*exactly* the same facial expressions he used in "Frequency" and "Pay It
Forward"), Mandoki and writer Gerald Di Pego ("Message in a Bottle" also)
turn up the manipulation factor one hundred fold.  Caviezel's monologue in
the cemetery is effective and convincing; Lopez's monologue at her parent's
house is redundant and poorly timed.
That's Sonia Braga ("Kiss of the Spider Woman," "The Milagro Beanfield
War"), by the way, looking a lot older than her years, as Sharon's mother
and Shirley Knight ("Dutchman," "Petulia," and other cult '60s movies),
looking just about right, as Catch's mother-in-law Elanora Davis.
"Angel Eyes" won't hurt Jennifer Lopez's career any but it's only a so-so
addition to her sometimes impressive résumé.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Luis Mandoki.
Cast: Jennifer Lopez, Jim Caviezel, Terrence Howard, Jeremy Sisto, Sonia 
Braga, Victor Argo, Monet Mazur, Shirley Knight.
2001 - 102 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, and sex).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, May 19, 2001.
While watching the theatrical trailer and television ads for "Angel Eyes" 
would lead you to believe the film is a supernatural romance, along the lines 
of 1990's "Ghost" or 1998's "City of Angels," it really isn't at all. "Angel 
Eyes" is a romance, to be sure, but it goes so much deeper than the soapy 
genre usually permits, and turns out to not have any connection with 
otherworldly entities. Infinitely more mature and delicately plotted than 
most big, studio-distributed love stories, it enraptures you in its humane 
characters and their plight from the very beginning, and doesn't let go until 
the emotionally honest conclusion.
Chicago P.D. officer Sharon Pogue (Jennifer Lopez) has had a rough year. 
Although she loves her job, she is mostly estranged from her entire family, 
and is living a lonely, single life. During a near-tragic fight with a 
drive-by shooter, her life is spared with the help of Chase (Jim Caviezel), 
an alluringly mysterious man with no last name who stops the suspect just 
before he is about to shoot Sharon in the head. Chase doesn't ever seem to 
want to talk much about himself, but he is helplessly attracted to Sharon, 
and she can't help but be drawn to his obscure mystique--and his willingness 
to go out of his way to be "good" to people, and do the right thing. Chase is 
hiding something, though, and Sharon knows it. After all, people just don't 
show up in the middle of nowhere and risk their life for a complete stranger.
In what has, thus far, been a lackluster year with virtually no truly great 
movies, "Angel Eyes" is one of the better films of 2001. Directed by Luis 
Mandoki (1994's "When a Man Loves a Woman"), it is a rare motion picture that 
refreshingly doesn't feel the need to create big plot twists and 
mechanically-created problems. The movie falsely sets the viewer up for 
surprises and unforeseen turns, only to uncover a stirring multiple character 
study of two people who may or may not have met by chance, and are struggling 
to make sense of everything--the good, as well as the bad--that has happened 
in their lives.
In what is her most powerful performance, to date, Jennifer Lopez (2001's 
"The Wedding Planner") is really shaping up to be one of the great actresses 
of her generation. So much more than just a pretty face, Lopez is 
strong-willed and profoundly touching as officer Sharon Pogue, not to mention 
completely plausible as a professional, trained cop. The journey that Lopez 
takes through the duration of the story is one of great catharsis and 
understanding, and the pain she feels from being shut off by her father for 
doing something she firmly believed was right is palpably  sustained.
Fulfilling his part of the bargain, and more, Jim Caviezel (2000's 
"Frequency") is appropriately subtle, and all the more effective because of 
his on-target portrayal of the inscrutable Chase. Chase's backstory, which is 
intentionally hidden until the third act, is fairly predictable, but the 
realism that he brings to these grievous circumstances could not have worked 
so well with a lesser actor in the role.
The rest of the actors taking up space along the edges have small, but 
pivotal parts, all of which are fully realized. Sonia Braga (1995's "Two 
Deaths") and Victor Argo (2000's "The Yards") are poignant as Sharon's 
parents, and Jeremy Sisto (1995's "Clueless") strongly plays Sharon's 
brother, of whom she's seen her relationship with also falter. Veteran 
actress Shirley Knight (2001's "The Center of the World") also turns up as an 
equally mysterious acquaintance of Chase's.
The romance that blossoms between Sharon and Chase is one that is sharply 
written by screenwriter Gerald Di Pego, capturing all of the nuances of the 
growing love that occurs between two people. There is an obligatory love 
scene between the two characters, but it also happens to be one of the most 
simplistic and steamy that has ended up onscreen in some time. For once, the 
entrance of sex into the story is not gratuitous, but powerful, as it is 
about characters coming together and connecting in the closest way they know 
how, rather than to just merely titillate the audience.
"Angel Eyes," grittily photographed by Piotr Sobocinski and lushly scored by 
Marco Beltrami, is of a growingly scarce breed. It is an intelligent, 
impassioned adult romance that has a lot to say, and doesn't feel the need to 
let a rock soundtrack full of love ballads explain it. Director Mandoki lets 
his characters actually talk, and lets the viewer get to know and care about 
what happens to them. And at the center of everything, Jennifer Lopez, once 
and for all, exposes herself to be exactly what she has been hinting at for 
several years: a genuine movie star.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/DustinPutman.htm
http://us.imdb.com/reviewsby?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Homer Yen
Somewhere in the twilight zone of movies, huddled
around films like "Frequency" and "The Sixth Sense,"
you'll find ones very much like "Angel Eyes."   You
know the story.  A person is given a chance to make
things right courtesy of some unexplainable,
supernatural intervention.  
There's nothing wrong with a tale that revolves around
cosmic connections.  But we've charted this territory
before, especially in the case of co-star Jim
Caviezel.  His recent roles included a forlorn son
("Frequency"), a haunted homeless man ("Pay It
Forward"), and even a bewildered soldier ("The Thin
Red Line").  This guy has mastered the art of silent
torment.  And here, he has created a reticent wanderer
named Catch whose soul has been traumatized for
reasons that are not made immediately clear.  
His destiny lies with officer Sharon Pogue (Jennifer
Lopez), a feisty cop whose desire to fight crime seems
as if its some measure of her self-worth.  During one
of her frenetic chases, she is ambushed.  Out of
nowhere, Catch appears to save her.  Destiny has
allowed these two to meet, but it will take much more
for these two to truly connect.
Catch is unwilling to discuss his past.  But from
various clues, it's clear that he is either hiding or
trying to forget something.  Why is his kitchen drawer
stashed full of children's toys?  And, at a jazz club,
why does he deny knowing people that claim to
recognize him?  The mystery to Sharon and the audience
is maddening.  
Yet, we also learn that she is almost as secretive and
tormented when she reveals an episode that created a
rift with her father.  As a result, her defensive
mechanism forces her to assume the role of an
invulnerable, graveyard shift-loving supercop.  The
fortress that she has built around her heart is almost
as impenetrable as Catch's is.
For much of "Angel Eyes," the story delicately focuses
on the advances and retreats made by our couple.  They
first develop a cautious, arms-length relationship. 
But to get closer, they would need to break free from
their psychological bonds.   Neither one, though,
seems capable of taking that first important step.
The dramatic aspects worked better than the romantic
ones.  Despite being dubbed the World's Sexiest Woman
(by FHM magazine), Jennifer Lopez had a surprisingly
earthly quality and easily allowed us to sympathize
with her.  She effectively conveyed her sense of loss
underneath her on-the-job bravura.  Caviezal, again,
is reliably good as a member of the walking wounded.
Less convincing, however, was the romantic aspect. 
These two came across more like two lost children
holding hands while walking through a dark forest. 
They were better off as mutual supporters.  Lacking
sizzle, the love scenes then seemed something of
distraction.  
"Angel Eyes" has material that grabs our attention. 
But while it's interesting, it's never quite
compelling.  Some walls are just too tall to break
down, whether it's Catch's inner torment, Sharon's
sense of regret, or the film's desire to be more moody
than it really was.  But we can be grateful that they
tried.  As such, the film does just enough of the
right things to keep us engaged as we watch these two
navigate through their emotional mazes.

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     It may be a sign of a beginning thaw, or perhaps just of audience 
desperation, but this year's bad movies are beginning to seem a little 
less bad.  Angel Eyes, the Jennifer Lopez action-romance with a 
supernatural tease, is bearable and sometimes even engaging.  It should 
never be confused with a good movie, but it will do to pass the time.
     It comes from director Luis Mandoki, whose When a Man Loves a Woman 
and Message in a Bottle  will give you some idea of what to expect - 
soapy sentiment yoked to professional competence.  This idea was 
probably born following a screening of The Sixth Sense, or rather after 
the box office returns began to show the sleeper potential of that 
movie's supernatural appeal. 
     Angel Eyes picks up where the Shyamalan movie left off.  There, we 
weren't supposed to even think about the fact that Bruce Willis might be 
dead until the surprise ending.  Here, we're supposed to think about 
little else.  Is he dead or isn't he?  Catch (James Caviezel) strides 
the seedy neighborhoods of Chicago in his long flapping overcoat 
(wings?) doing good deeds which go largely unappreciated.  But we've 
seen him before - in the movie's prologue, when Officer Sharon Pogue 
(Jennifer Lopez) tries to save his life at the scene of a terrible auto 
accident.  Does she or doesn't she?  Only the filmmakers know for sure..
     When they meet again, neither of them seem to recall the incident.  
He feels a bond with her, but doesn't appear to know why.  His face 
rings no bells with her.
     Here's what we know about Sharon: she comes from a family where the 
men sometimes beat up their wives.  She once called the cops on her 
father (Victor Argo) when he was beating up her mother (Sonia Braga), 
and he hasn't spoken to her since.  Now she's a cop herself, and as 
tough as they come.  She drinks and swaps friendly macho barbs with the 
guys.  But she has intimacy issues.
     Here's what we know about Catch:  damn little.  He's a bit on the 
weird, silent side, but Caviezel is too good an actor to leave himself 
completely mired in that tedious movie clichE9, and he leavens his =
performance with unexpected smiles and flashes of humor.  He has a 
kitchen drawer full of action figures, and it's hard to miss the 
correlation with Sharon, a feisty little action figure herself if there 
ever was one.  He leaves doors open.  And he has intimacy issues.      
     To a large extent your enjoyment level will depend on how well you 
connect with its two stars, and how well you feel they connect to each 
other.  There are bits of cinematic carelessness: Sharon takes a bullet 
smack in the bulletproof vest, which leaves a deep and angry bruise 
above her breast; but the next time she exposes that area of flesh, and 
it doesn't take long, it's creamy enough to reveal at the Oscars.  There 
are also bits of pure pleasure: Catch picks up a trumpet on the 
bandstand at a blues club and plays a nicely haunting rendition of 
"Nature Boy".  And of course there are many bits of nonsense: long 
silences as people stare uncomfortably at each other, a disease that 
seems to be caused by cameras and lights.
     This isn't a gotta-see-it movie, it's more of a 
what's-at-the-movies movie.  As the old blues line has it, it can be 
your little dog till your big dog comes.
