Title
Review for Chain Reaction (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Director Andrew Davis reworks his FUGITIVE formula and the results
are about as exciting as his last film-- the dreadful comedy STEAL BIG,
STEAL LITTLE-- was funny.  Keanu "I'd rather play music than play
another action hero" Reeves is the grad student on the run, who, along
with his superfluous sidekick (Rachel Weisz), has been framed for a
sabotaged science experiment that vaporized eight Chicago city blocks.
(The mushroom-cloud explosion is a knock-out and easily the best part of
the movie.  Or, as one audience member succinctly summed it up: "whoa.")
False information implicates their involvement and boy and girl are soon
on the run, fleeing over open drawbridges, across icy lakes, and through
the corridors of power at a top-secret, underground energy facility.
Aiding and abetting is the team's shady mentor, played in an
excellent-but-so- what performance by Morgan Freeman.  (Brit Brian Cox
is also about, as the behind-the-scenes bad guy.  He has some fun
fiddling with a Southern accent.) Unfunny, overscored, and without a
single shred of suspense, CHAIN REACTION is *the* summer movie to walk
out on.  If you make it to the end, a mess of cross-cutting involving
another imminent explosion, you'll hear somebody say "I guess it's time
to go." Heed that warning.  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Steve Kong
Have you ever had that sinking feeling that something is going to be bad? Then 
have the sinking feeling be confirmed. As I started watching Chain Reaction, 
directed by Andrew Davis (The Fugitive, Under Siege) starring Keanu Reeves, I 
got that sinking feeling. And as I continued to watch the film, the feeling 
got worse and worse. 
In a world that is reliant on petroleum, wouldn't it be wonderful to find a 
cleaner more abundant source of energy? Something like water? That is the 
basis for Chain Reaction, and early in the film this is achieved by the luck 
of Eddie Kasalivich (Keanu Reeves). Eddie is a machinist for a hydrogen 
project that is working to, I'm confused with their explanation, split 
hydrogen from water and use that to create a cleaner energy source. 
But this discovery is all for not. Later that night, after a party celebrating 
the discovery, Eddie takes a coworker home and then heads back to the lab. As 
he arrives, alarms are sounding, and as he gets inside, he discovers that the 
head scientist on the project has been murdered, and another scientist is 
missing. He also sees that the hydrogen tank is completely unstable, and is 
about to blow. Eddie makes a run for it and barely escapes an explosion that 
levels eight square blocks. 
After this point, the movie goes into a chase mode. But that is not low point 
of the movie. The movie takes place in Chicago, the FBI is on the hunt for the 
innocent Eddie and his coworker and is directed by Andrew Davis. Strangely 
enough the one armed man is missing from this film. Chain Reaction is a cheezy 
remake of The Fugitive. But there are a few other things missing next to that 
one armed man. 
For one the strong performers are missing. Keanu is no Harrison Ford, and Fred 
Ward is not even close to being Tommy Lee Jones. Also missing is the 
intelligence of The Fugitive. Eddie is a dope, the conspiracy behind all the 
mayhem has no intelligence, and ideas behind most of the chases are 
preposterous. Keanu's character Eddie is a complete idiot in the movie. I 
wonder what Eddie is thinking when he does some of the things he does in the 
movie, and in most cases, I don't think his character is thinking anything. 
Fred Ward doesn't come close to Tommy Lee Jones, often squinting his eyes in 
some sort of effort to look tough, but coming off as some rookie actor. He 
also delivers lines that were not as convincing as Jones did in The Fugitive. 
He also has a group of rag-tag agents helping him out, and if I'm not 
mistaken, some of those agents were actually on the US Marshall's team in The 
Fugitive. The conspiracy behind all of this mayhem is headed up be the Central 
Intelligence Agency but shows no intelligence at all. I often wondered why 
they would be trying to frame, kill, and or get killed the only guy who knows 
how to make the hydrogen project work.
If I said that the chases were awful I would be lying. Though the story and 
characters are weak, most all of the chase sequences are well done. Though 
there feels to be one too many chase sequences.
Chain Reaction is a cheap cheezy try at trying to recreate The Fugitive. But 
its efforts are all but lost in its weak script and bad acting. Forget seeing 
this film and go and rent Andrew Davis' better film, The Fugitive.


Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Keanu Reeves, Morgan Freeman, Rachel Weisz, Fred Ward, Kevin
Dunn, Brian Cox.
Screenplay:  J. F. Lawton, Michael Bortman.
Director:  Andrew Davis.
     Most of the time, it is fairly easy for me to put my finger on why a
film didn't work for me:  sloppy performances, inane writing, lackluster
production, leaden direction, what have you.  Then there are cases like
CHAIN REACTION.  There is nothing aggressively unwatchable about this new
action thriller, no glaring stupidity; even Keanu Reeves didn't make me
want to run screaming for the parking lot.  Yet I left the theater not
just unimpressed, but unsatisfied, as though I had just left a restaurant
without getting a bite to eat.  CHAIN REACTION may be one of the most
generic film experiences I have ever had, a chain of events without a
single speck of personality.
     Reeves plays Eddie Kasalivich, a machinist at the University of
Chicago working on a project to create a clean, limitless fuel source from
water, funded by a foundation headed by Paul Shannon (Morgan Freeman).
One night, Eddie stumbles onto the final piece of the puzzle, and a new
era seems right around the corner.  That is before one scientist on the
project is killed, another disappears, and an explosion at the research
facility levels several city blocks.  Suddenly, Eddie finds himself
suspected of espionage along with physicist Lily Sinclair (Rachel Weisz),
and the two take off on the run from the FBI.  Of course, the Feds prove
to be the least of their worries, as other parties seem eager to get their
hands on Eddie and Lily first, and Paul appears to be the only person they
can trust.
     It would be easy enough to pick on CHAIN REACTION for its obviousness
-- if you aren't aware that the government and oil companies would
conspire to bury alternative fuel sources, you clearly haven't been doing
your street-corner-leaflet reading -- but obviousness tends not to be
terribly troublesome to most genre film viewers.  No, the real problem is
that CHAIN REACTION traffics in a kind of monotonous obviousness.  We know
our hero is going to be in for a series of chases until he ultimately
proves his innocence, and that everyone is suspect except the spunky love
interest.  Those chases are fairly flat, however, and even paranoia
becomes mundane in CHAIN REACTION.  Director Andrew Davis appears content
to do a remake of his own THE FUGITIVE, with a wrongly-accused man,
traitorous colleagues and a hard-nosed but ultimately sympathetic law
enforcement agent (Fred Ward as the lead FBI investigator).  I suppose you
can't blame Davis for returning to familiar territory after the dismal
STEAL BIG, STEAL LITTLE, but the familiar in this case has left him wholly
uninspired.
     I think there is also a rather important lesson which Davis failed to
take away from THE FUGITIVE, namely that for a plot of that kind to work,
it is fairly important for the hero to be someone you want to root for.
Harrison Ford's Richard Kimble may not have had a complex history, but at
least you knew he had a history.  Eddie and Lily aren't even stock
characters in the service of this plot...they're non-characters.  The
script by J. F. Lawton and Michael Bortman gives us exactly one piece of
information about Eddie (he once blew up a lab by accident) and exactly
one piece of information about Lily (she's British), and neither one make
an ounce of difference.  One of the reasons CHAIN REACTION feels so dead
is that every person in the film might as well _be_ dead, even the
ordinarily ultra-sinister Brian Cox as a nasty CIA operative.  I was so
desperate for a character with some life that when Eddie announced that he
and Lily were going to hide out with an old friend named Maggie, I said a
silent prayer that she would turn out to be a lovably eccentric scientist.
And she turned out to be Joanna Cassidy playing a bland astronomer.
     I will give CHAIN REACTION credit for casting Keanu Reeves in a role
where he can do little damage.  Eddie probably has two dozen lines in the
whole film, and a quiet Keanu is a tolerable Keanu.  I will also give
credit for casting Morgan Freeman, period.  Even in a torpid piece of
film-making like this, he commands attention, and his speech about the
consequences of this new fuel takes on weight just because it is Freeman
who delivers it.  And I will give credit for a welcome refusal to explain
the pseudo-science which allows the water-fuel to work.  I just wish it
could have generated some energy for this film.  To borrow the over-worked
comparison of action film to amusement park ride, CHAIN REACTION is more
like the kiddie train at a petting zoo.  It just goes around and around
and around...and then stops.

Author
Michael Redman
For some reason director Andrew Davis decided to remake his own movie
"The Fugitive" and had the brainstorm to cast Keanu Reeves in the
Harrison Ford role. This must be why he's making the big bucks out in
Hollywood while the rest of us are slaving away for peanuts.
Eddie Kasalivich, a nice Chicago boy genius, is a grad student techie
working on the mysterious Hydrogen Energy Project (mysterious partially
because the science doesn't make much sense) when things start to go a
little wrong. Immediately after they finally get the thing to work, the
chief scientist is murdered and the project blows up, leveling eight
blocks of the Windy City. Of course Eddie is on the run from the FBI
because they think he is selling secrets to whoever our enemy is
nowadays, but it's really the one-armed man...no, wait, that's the other
film.
Blazing through this non-start adventure film, Reeves looks as
uninvolved as possible, which appears to be the extent of his acting
ability. There are a few good scenes -- the explosion in Chicago is well
done, although you've seen that on the previews already -- but most of
the so-called action scenes will leave you begging for less. The ice
boat on the frozen lake sequence is a masterpiece of bad logic,
implausibility and poor cinematography.
As various organizations join the chase, the main theme of the film
becomes which governmental agency is the most evil: the Chicago Cops,
the FBI, the CIA or the CIA Front. Morgan Freeman is the best bad
guy/good guy  (Fred Ward is definitely not Tommy Lee Jones) owing at
least partially to his god-like voice. Although Freeman takes his
character as far as possible, we're just talking a short drive in the
country.
Davis says that the film was made up as they went along. I believe it.
Of all the "Destroy The Cities" films out this summer, this is one that
should have been saved for the late show along with the Godzilla movies.
[This appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana, 8/8/96.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Philip Lam
Directed by: Andrew Davis
Written by: Michael Bortman, Josh Friedman (story), J.F. Lawton, Arne Schmidt 
(story), Rick Seaman (story)
Cast: Keanu Reeves (Eddie Kasalivich), Morgan Freeman (Paul Shannon), Rachel Weisz 
(Dr. Lily Sinclair), Fred Ward (Ford). 
Produced by: 20th Century Fox/ Chicago Pacific Entertainment/
Digital Domain/ Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. (distributor)/ Zanuck
Co.
Running Time: 106 minutes.
Rating : *1/2 out of *****
Theatres : Shaw
Boy, what a great movie!! Keanu Reeves and Morgan
Freeman acting together, the director of THE FUGITIVE (Andrew Davis)
back again to give us another thriller, and the beautiful Rachel
STEALING BEAUTY Weisz thrown in to boot. How could this not be a
blockbuster? All die-hard Keanu Reeves fans, read on. 
Ol "Much Ado About Nothing" plays Eddie Kasalivich, a machinist studying
at the University of Chicago. To help pay for the rent, he takes on this
job making the machinery for a hydrogen project being conducted by the
university. By happy coincidence, he also happens to stumble on the
solution to the final problem and thus is the only one who knows the key
to performing this feat of miracle physics. This project holds great
promise: taking hydrogen from water and giving out more energy than is
put in. A potential solution to the Earth's energy problems without the
pollution cost. Surely nobody could have any problems with that?
Morgan Freeman is Paul Shannon, the project's sponsor. He works for a
very powerful organization that disagrees with the paternal project
leader as to how quickly technology should be released to the public. He
figures the world will disintegrate into anarchy if the results of the
project are released too quickly. So he murders the project leader,
blows up the project (great but short scene here, sort of like a mini
ID4 city-devastation thing) and tries to simulate the experiment at some
other hi-tech hush-hush location. Unfortunately, our intrepid machinist
and an English physicist (Weisz) manage to get away and now follows a
Fugitive-like chase using a  not too dissimilar rehash of that movie
script.
This movie is just dying for a comparison with "The Fugitive". Both
movies use Chicago as the main city and since the place doesn't change
much, I guess we can't really blame the setting for the paucity of
atmosphere. The trouble here is that where THE FUGITIVE had Harrison
Ford and Tommy Lee Jones, CHAIN REACTION only has Keanu Reeves and Fred
Ward. Credit to them, but we aren't really given much of a chance to
empathise with the characters. Where Ford was able to work within the
confines of the movie to evoke sympathy, Eddie Kasalivich just doesn9t
seem very believeable and Reeves' character is never given the time to
develop. It might have been a better investment in film to give the
characters more depth and spend less time on the chase sequences, which
frankly, get quite boring after a while.
Harrison Ford was "the man against the world." He was alone in a world
where he didn't know who to trust and it came across real well. In CHAIN
REACTION, Keanu Reeves isn't alone. Now that would be fine if the
fleeing couple had some chemistry and could really portray some
paranoia, vulnerability and confusion. We don't get this. We get him
thinking he's still in SPEED, only now our Sandra Bullock has an English
accent, probably doesn't drive a bus, and hardly contributes anything to
the movie.
The producers here probably thought, "Hey, what if Keanu
and Rachel don't hit it off too well? Let's rope in that Morgan to help
us out." Well, Keanu and Rachel didn't hit it off well on the screen,
and most unfortunately, Morgan Freeman doesn't help much either. The
only thing we come to really know of Paul Shannon is that he always has
a full load of cigars in his cigar holder.  It's not really his fault.
Once again, Andrew Davis just doesn't take the time to build his
characters. Someone must have convinced him that this time round, cinema
dollars are best earned by making the movie run like a headless chicken.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
* Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.
____________________________________________________________ 
This movie review was written for THE FLYING INKPOT, the 
Singaporean zine that dares to say "Bok." For a spanking 
good time, visit THE FLYING INKPOT at 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     For those of you who truly believe that Elvis is still alive, I
have a picture that you will find plausible, CHAIN REACTION.  For the
rest of us, we will have to enjoy the film for the action alone.
     Just so you can get a feel for how much you will have to suspend
disbelief, try a few of these on for size.  Eddie Kasalivich (Keanu
Reeves) is just a student machinist, but at home by himself he comes up
with the key breakthrough on the most important scientific invention of
at least the Twentieth Century.  With a single glass of water the
scientists are able to unleash enough energy literally to power the
entire city of Chicago for a whole month.  Not only is the energy of
colossal power, it is also free.
     In the silliest notion of all, if this free energy technology is
given to the world we learn that all of the stock markets and all of
the world's economies will immediately collapse because companies
depend on making money off of energy.  Think about this one for a
minute.  With the exception of the energy companies, all of the other
companies would have fantastically profitable years since a key part of
their cost structure would vanish.  The stock markets would have the
biggest bull market they have ever seen.
     At any rate, we learn all of this crazy pop science in the first
few minutes, and then is on to the heart of the show.  The lab where
Eddie, Dr. Lily Sinclair (Rachel Weisz), and others work is blown up.
The special effects are terrific.  Although it is not a nuclear
explosion, it looks like one.
     The only people not killed in the blast are Eddie and Lily.
Someone sets them up to look like they are who set up the explosion.
The show is about who actually did the bombing and who is trying to
steal the free energy.  I would like to reveal the groups involved in
the bombing so I could rant and rave about how ridiculous it is, but I
will resist.  The movie's conclusion is not only tedious - it is stupid
as well.
     The best part of the movie is that it has Morgan Freeman in it as
super-rich and highly mysterious Paul Shannon.  Shannon has been
getting billions of dollars over the years from the congress, the CIA,
most major industries, etc., but no one seems to know anything about it
since it is all top secret.  Yes, that old credibility problem again.
The good news is Freeman gets to speak some.  The bad news is that the
writers (Michael Bortman and J. F. Lawton based on a story by Josh
Friedman, Arne Schmidt, and Rick Seaman) have Freeman spend most of the
time just twirling a cigar in his mouth and saying nothing.
     Beside the impressive special effects (Nick Davis), the
cinematography (Frank Tidy) is awesome.  Watch how the editors (Donald
Brochu, Dov Hoenig, and Arthur Schmidt) cut between shots of cold, gray
snow at night to pictures of the power of the energy in the lab.  The
music (Jerry Goldsmith) is far from subtle.  Most scenes have the horns
blaring just to remind you of how much danger our heroes are in.
     One key piece of special effects is absurd.  The machine they use
to produce the energy looks like it came from a 1930s science fiction
movie.  Imagine a large washing machine with glass sides that shakes
like crazy, and that has a few dryer hoses coming out of it that appear
to be about to come unconnected and spill water everywhere.  Behind it
put a large oven with big open flames.  Make it all constantly just
about to blow like an overheated boiler on a sternwheeler.  Trust me;
it is actually even less believable than my description.
     The director for CHAIN REACTION is Andrew Davis.  His specialty is
movies with lots of violence and heavy special effects components.
These include: ABOVE THE LAW, UNDER SIEGE, and THE FUGITIVE.  This
movie is not near as good as any of these successful past efforts.  He
also made other films that I have not seen which were perhaps as bad as
this one.  He sets way too serious a tone for such a ridiculous show as
CHAIN REACTION.  A little humor would have helped immensely.
     Although Reeves delivers an acceptable performance, the same can
not be said of his sidekick.  Relative newcomer Weisz, who has a small
part in STEALING BEAUTY, plays the woman in danger role with little
intelligence and not much emotion.  It is hard to believe that she is
either super smart or super scared as she should be based on the plot.
Weisz seems mainly oblivious to the world.  If she has any talent, it
is not in evidence in this movie nor is it in STEALING BEAUTY.  A nice
small good performance is given by ever reliable Fred Ward as FBI Agent
Leon Ford.  In another small role Brian Cox overacts as unbelievable
bad guy Lyman Earl Collier.
     CHAIN REACTION runs 1:46.  It is rated PG-13 for gobs of
non-graphic violence.  There is no sex or nudity, and I did not catch
any bad language.  The film would be fine for any kid over say 10.  I
do no recommend the show, but if you go, you'll probably enjoy the
stunts and the action.  I give the film * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Keanu Reeves, Morgan Freeman, Rachel Weisz, Fred Ward, Kevin Dunn, 
      Brian Cox, Joanna Cassidy
Director: Andrew Davis
Producers: Arne Schmidt and Andrew Davis 
Screenplay: Michael Bortman and J. F. Lawton
Cinematography: Frank Tidy
Music: Jerry Goldsmith
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     In the words of that eminently quotable maestro of malapropisms, 
Yogi Berra, "It's deja vu all over again."
     After a brief hiccup that saw the releases of COURAGE UNDER FIRE, 
MULTIPLICITY, and A TIME TO KILL, we're right back into the thick of the 
action again.  And, as has been the style all season, it's adrenaline 
without brains.  Looking back to the summer's beginning with TWISTER, 
you can probably name about a dozen movies that belong in this group -- 
some of which were reasonably entertaining, some of which weren't.  
CHAIN REACTION is just the latest link.
     Director Andrew Davis has lifted whole segments of CHAIN REACTION 
from another, better chase movie -- but at least he's had the good taste 
to steal from himself.  Aspects of this film are likely to remind even 
the most oblivious movie-goer of THE FUGITIVE, which Davis also 
directed.  There's the man on the run, the supposed friend who's not as 
helpful as he first seems, and the lawman who, despite pursuing the 
protagonist, is actually on his side.   
     Unfortunately, the hero, Eddie Kasalivich, is played by Keanu 
Reeves, not Harrison Ford, and it's fair to say that the two are not in 
the same class as actors.  Eddie, a machinist, works at the University 
of Chicago on the "Hydrogen Energy Project".  The man in charge of the 
project, Paul Shannon (Morgan Freeman), seems like a nice, helpful 
person -- which probably means he's anything but that.  One night, while 
working late, Eddie arrives at the solution to a problem that has been 
plaguing the project since its inception.  Following this breakthrough, 
the scientists have at their fingertips a method of producing stable 
hydrogen from ordinary water -- "cheap, clean, abundant energy" which 
has the potential of making fossil fuels obsolete.  Someone, however, 
doesn't want the formula to get out, and they're willing to murder, not 
to mention destroy an eight-block area of Chicago's south side, to bury 
the secret.  Eddie soon finds himself, along with an attractive female 
physicist, Lily Sinclair (Rachel Weisz), framed for murder, and on the 
run from an FBI team led by the no-nonsense Inspector Ford (Fred Ward).
     Yes, the plot contains some interesting elements, but, when all is 
said and done, they're only window dressing for the elaborate chase 
sequences.  This isn't a thought-provoking motion picture interested in 
exploring fertile territory; it's a reasonably straightforward action 
feature.  If you don't believe me, just count the number of explosions, 
gun shots, and fights.  
     In its defense, CHAIN REACTION has an excellent first half hour.  
There's a satisfying explosion that levels a significant portion of 
south Chicago (although, based on the low number of casualties, this 
part of the city appears to be largely uninhabited) and a well-paced 
foot chase along Michigan Avenue that ends with a race up an opening 
draw bridge.  Unfortunately, after that, CHAIN REACTION settles into a 
comfortable, routine rhythm that lasts until the rousing conclusion.
     As in SPEED, Reeves' acting limitations aren't a severe liability, 
since the part of Eddie doesn't require great range.  On the other hand, 
Rachel Weisz (one of the best things about STEALING BEAUTY) is 
reasonably  impressive.  While Reeves' Eddie faces adversity with a 
blase attitude, Weisz' Lily appears frightened, bewildered, and 
vulnerable.  The actress takes her token female sidekick role and 
develops a character of some substance out of it.  In fact, given the 
obvious constraints, it's hard to imagine anyone doing anything more 
with Lily.  Meanwhile, Morgan Freeman basically re-creates his OUTBREAK 
personae.  Freeman always has an arresting screen presence, but this 
isn't one of his more challenging parts.  Fred Ward, while no Tommy Lee 
Jones, is adequate as the sympathetic FBI agent.
     Aside from the lip service paid to the pros and cons of releasing 
free hydrogen onto the world market, CHAIN REACTION doesn't contain 
anything that we haven't already seen this summer.  The explosive 
destruction that wipes out a portion of Chicago looks like it could have 
been excised from INDEPENDENCE DAY.  The action sequences recall MISSION 
IMPOSSIBLE, ERASER, and THE ROCK, albeit with less energy.  The concept 
of government agents being bad guys has been used so often that it has 
long since turned into a tired cliche.  CHAIN REACTION isn't dull -- the 
film is paced to keep audiences attentive -- but the lack of originality 
dampens its enjoyability.  As a result, box office reaction will almost 
certainly be more like a spark than an explosion.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Keanu Reeves, Morgan Freeman, Rachel Weisz, Fred Ward, Kevin Dunn,
Brian Cox, Joanna Cassidy Director: Andrew Davis Screenplay: Michael
Bortman and J. F. Lawton
Make Keanu Reeves look like a hooligan and pretend he's intelligent;
throw in a implausible plot; add special effects which look dull and
mediocre; use up fifty million in production costs, and you have created
for yourself a recipe for disaster.
When Mr Reeves spoke his first word, I felt the impending doom of this
movie.
The story centers about a group of scientists who have discovered cold
fusion. They succeed, but their research and lab are completely
destroyed by a seemingly evil group of industrialists, who do not want
to lose their monopoly on natural fuel resources. Reeves is at the wrong
place at the wrong time, and he and another scientist are framed for the
accident.
This story goes from nowhere to nowhere. Lot's of running about in which
the good guys are the bad guy, and the CIA is somehow involved. Don't
ask me for details cause I kinda dozed ..
Comment: Put it in the nuclear waste disposal basket please.

Author
Mike Joyce
Chain Reaction attempts to combine the action, suspense, thriller and
political intrigue genres. It tries too hard to combine all these aspects
leading to a complex plot with too many twists to be believable. The story
revolves around a Hydrogen Energy Project aimed at producing mass, clean,
free energy by causing a chain reaction in Hydrogen. Eddie Kasalivich
(Keanu Reeves), a machinist and physics student with the Project, discovers
the right frequency in order to cause a stable chain reaction to take
place. Following this success, the head physicist of the Project is
assassinated, and the workshop blown-up. Eddie Kasalivich and Lily Sinclair
(Rachel Weisz) the head physicist's assistant are framed for the
assassination and explosion. This leads to a huge chase, in which the FBI
attempt to track down and capture Eddie and Lily (who predictably become
closer as they flee together). In this respect the film is reminiscent of
The Fugitive, and this is little wonder given that the director (Andrew
Davis) also directed The Fugitive.
Shannon (Morgan Freeman) is the head of the "Foundation", an underground
operation which attempts to replicate the Hydrogen Energy Project. However,
they need Eddie Kasalivich, as he is the only person who knows the correct
frequency. It is here that the plot becomes twisted, and it is hard to
follow. Shannon was involved in the original Hydrogen Energy Project, but
we now find him involved in this underground operation which at first we
are lead to believe is privately funded for power and money. Next we
discover that the C.I.A. is somehow linked to the project, and that free
energy cannot be released upon the world because it will cause a crash of
world economies and lead to recessions, or something. The plot is too hard
to believe, that is, if you can follow it. Performances are reasonably
solid, and the actors do their best with the script. At times the action is
thrilling, however, it has all been done and seen before.
Review by Adam Joyce.
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm
