Title
Review for Gods and Monsters (1998)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Bill Condon
Writer: Bill Condon (based on the novel "Father of Frankenstein" by
Christopher Bram)
Starring: Ian McKellen, Brendan Fraser, Lynn Redgrave, Lolita
Davidovich, David Dukes, Kevin J. O'Connor, Mark Kiely, Jack Plotnick,
Rosalind Ayres, Jack Betts
Like "Deep Impact" and "Armageddon," "Antz" and "A Bug's Life," and
"Deep Rising" and "Virus," "Love and Death on Long Island" and "Gods and
Monsters" feel eerily like the exact same movie, released (or supposed
to be released) within months of eachother for extra effect.  The
former's a wonderfully droll piece of cinema, and a witty rethinking of
"Death in Venice"; the latter's a much-similar, much more serious
rethinking of the final days in the life of famous Hollywood director
James Whale (of the first two Frankenstein pics fame) that only borrows
from some of the elements of the former's source material (i.e. the
protagonist dies).  Both deal with an older man's love for a younger
man, but the former only dealt with it in terms of non-sexual love and
came off with clever bits of irony and whatnot (whatever it was, it was
damned entertaining), the latter has the protagonist being notoriously
gay, and his love for the younger man being that of the physical kind
only blossoming into the emotional kind.  Both films are still rather
similar, with the only other major difference being that it's the older
man as the celebrity this time, and, of course, that this one's far less
interesting nor successful as the other one.
I can only attribute this not to the film's lack of ambiguity in its
subject (though, for the record, the older man's love is still rather
ambiguous), but to other elements that seem to distract and hurt the
otherwise very good film that is "Gods and Monsters."  Most of the film
is a series of chats between Whale (played magnificently by Ian
McKellen) and his gardner/object of obsession, Clay Boone (Brendan
Fraser), where they exchange stories and respective thoughts, and all
this is incredibly interesting for being not much than long talky
scenes.  McKellen, white-haired and polished, and Boone, blockheaded but
surprisingly intelligent and understanding, share a very complex
relationship that is the heart and major strength of the film.  Starting
off as a mere obsession with Whale's perception of physical beauty (in a
way, Boone resembles the monster in his movies), we see their
relationship turn from physical love on the part of Boone to joint
respect from eachother and then to self-centered mooching, and it's all
done with a gentle screenwriting touch by the director himself, Bill
Condon.
It's most of everything else in the film that doesn't work as well as
the main section, ranging from partially sucessful to downright sloppy.
For example, much is made of Whale's bitterness over his failing health,
and the fact that his mind is slowly going, so every now and then, we
get flashbacks to memories, most of them traumatic, so we see that we
see that he cherishes what he will soon no longer have.  But these only
pop up sporadically, albeit nicely when they do, while we are also
subjected to melodramatic scenes where Whale is physically crippled by
his past or driven to unbridled anger at who he's talking to.  In a
silly scene towards the beginning, Whale is giving an interview to an
effeminate collegiate reporter wherein every question Whale answers
results in the removal of one article of the reporter's clothing when he
suddenly suffers a minor stroke.  Later on, he screams at Boone for
allowing him to uncover the wounds of the past.  Both scenes would
otherwise be fine, but they're handled in such an overly-dramatic tone
that they're downright silly and distracting from the overall quaintness
of the film.  Nothing's as silly, though, as the sloppy depth the film
tries for in terms of the Frankenstein-esque relationship between the
main characters, Whale being the doctor, Boone being the monster, and
Whale's german housemaid (Lynn Redgrave) being, oh, Igor.  And
gotinheimel, did it actually have to recreate a scene straight from
"Sunset Boulevard" and then culminate it with a maudlin final reel that
only makes the film's finale (Whale's suicide, also eerily from "Sunset
Boulevard") seem contrived when, of course, it damn well shouldn't.
When it's dealing with the Whale/Boone relationship, it's wonderfully
subtle and refreshingly interesting.  When it ventures away from it,
it's either too silly (the interview scene, for one) or too
over-the-top, particuarly when it comes to Boone's outside life, which
is so sloppily-conceived that it either had to be longer or cut out
completely (the final scene, in particular, reduces it to merely being
about how an everyday schmuck knew a famous member of Hollywood once
upon a time).  I wanted to see more about Whale, though, and maybe even
more about Boone, though the Whale bits interested so much more that
anytime it cut to Boone's outside life, I was merely waiting for them to
cut to Whale.  It'd be nice to see more of his past life, more
flashbacks, some more detail (his flashback to making "Bride of
Frankenstein" is wonderful, to say the least), though at least it gave
some more insight into watching his films (I'll probably never be able
to watch "Bride of..." again without thinking of it as a film about a
bunch of queens, or so they say).  But as such, none of it is as
well-documented as the scenes between the two of them - they don't seem
fake and contrived like other parts of the film, and if it had been more
about the two of them as a unit, and how they were able to find
something more to life by knowing eachother, I'd say it was one of the
best films of the year hands-down.
This is mostly due to great performances, though, by McKellen and
Fraser.  I, at least, have no doubt in the pure competence of McKellen -
he's one of the best actors working today (for more mainstream
audiences, he was the only truly good thing about "Apt Pupil," and
otherwise shoddy affair), and what's great about this performance is
that it's not merely a typical posh homosexual role, but that it's a
nuanced, sad, and deft performance - he makes Whale effortlessly
complex, so that we don't immediately notice what he's brought to his
role (in fact, along with Nolte and Hanks, I'd say that if the Academy
knows anything, they'll pick one of these three as the winner - all
three gave such subtle performances that you hardly knew they were
acting).  Fraser, shockingly enough, is excellent as well.  He makes
Boone a surprise - a pretty much intelligent working man who doesn't
succumb to cliches, and only seems minorly disturbed when he discovers,
halfway through the film, that the man he's been hanging around with is
gay.  I also liked how he killed off any suspicion about a potential
tryst between the two men - any such idea would be distracting to their
overall relationship (though, towards the end, the homoeroticism does
nearly reach the surface, and mistakingly so).
Let's say, for the sake of argument, that they had been given a better
script, one that was longer and dealt more with their outside
relationships, making their moments together even more poignant and even
more interesting.  As such, it feels just like the kind of film that is
overpraised while another one is dramatically underpraised.  This one
did have a better performance from the lead actor (though, for the
record, John Hurt is pretty damned close in his dramatic power to
McKellen), but the other one was far more subtler, and deepened the
relationship in an almost effortless fashion, all while retaining a
droll tone that was one of the film's biggest successes (best of all, it
never for a second felt smug and/or cheap).  The tone Condon has adapted
for this film is far more maudlin and even occasionally schizophrenic -
over-the-top funny, then subtly droll, then over-the-top dramatic - he
even tosses in a line from Whale about how the monsters are, *gasp*,
inside him - gimme a break (and what of Mr. Condon's direction?  Well,
it's mostly competent, but nothing too remarkable: a series of
alternating shots, occasionally laced with a distracting DePalma-esque
wide shot of a close-up/things in the distance, showing off the coveted
depth-of-field technique).  And throughout, I just kept on waiting for
the two actors to get together again and share a conversation once
again.  Pity some actors are forced to give great performances in films
that are only half-way wonderful.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
John Sylva
GODS AND MONSTERS by DeWyNGaLe (John Sylva)    Rating: A+
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Director Bill Condon delivers this brilliant look into one of the world's most
famous motion picture directors, the director of Frankenstein and The Bride of
Frankenstein, James Whale.  Gods and Monsters is about this interesting man in
the last years of his life.  Ian McKellen, who deserved to win the Oscar for
this role, plays Whale with such enthusiasm and talent, developing his
character to the fullest.  James Whale, who has been out of the motion picture
business for around twenty years, has been living in a relatively small home,
with his maid Hannah, played by Lynn Redgrave, who also deserved the Oscar for
Best Supporting Actress, an elderly woman with a strange accent, who loves her
boss.  One secret that is not known among the public is that Whale is gay.  One
man that definitely doesn't know so is his gardener, Clay Boone, played by
Brendan Fraser, who becomes friends with Whale as they discuss Whale's hard
life, through directing his movies, through Whale's hard times at war, and
losing his friends.
The relationship between the James and Clay becomes greater throughout the
film, and is developed much like a father/son relationship, in which Clay
starts to admire Whale, but at the same time doesn't realize that his friend is
gay.
The screenplay, which was written by Bill Condon, is marvelous, using
flashbacks and hallucinations that really let you into the mind of Whale while
his mentally stable status plummets.  Gods and Monsters isn't just a look
inside the director's mind, but it shows what war can do to a man, years after
the events occurred, in ways that will in turn, haunt the viewer.  Looking back
on the film, I still remember those disturbing sequences, and I get a chill.
The entire premise of this film is brilliant, for it's not too often we get to
see what the people behind the films and plays are like.  Much like Shakespeare
in Love, which let us see William Shakespeare, Gods and Monsters has one of the
best screenplays of 1998.  James Whale is shown not only dramatically, but
comically as well, as he asks men to remove an article of clothing for every
question he answers in an interview.  James Whale is much like another recent
Ian McKellen character, in the film Apt Pupil, in which McKellen played a
former Nazi who still held the memories, and changed the life of a young boy,
played by Brad Renfro, forever.  Unlike Apt Pupil though, Gods and Monsters
isn't as intense, as it concentrates more on quality rather than the intensity
Apt Pupil had.
Lynn Redgrave is almost completely unrecognizable as Hannah, using a hysterical
accent, and walking around with a hunchback.  Hannah added a lot to the overall
effect of the film, showing how one can put up with the strange man.
Brendan Fraser gives his best performance of his career, making Gods and
Monsters his breakthrough film that will make him mainstream.  Clayton,
Fraser's character, is one that seems like your average person, and as his life
is completely changed by that of James Whale's, Fraser is able to go places
with his character that he hasn't been able to in past roles, giving a dramatic
and moving performance.
Gods and Monsters overwhelmed me, as I viewed this man's life come to a slow,
moving halt, when I expected only a light and interesting drama, based on clips
from the film.  What moved me the most was the flashbacks, and this combined
with the great performances by McKellen, Fraser, and Redgrave make for a
memorable film which will be in my mind for days to come. 
The Bottom Line- One of the most moving, compelling, and best films of 1998.

Author
Scott Renshaw
GODS AND MONSTERS
(Lions Gate)
Starring:  Ian McKellen, Brendan Fraser, Lynn Redgrave.
Screenplay:  Bill Condon, based on the book "Father of Frankenstein" by
Christopher Pram.
Producers:  Paul Colichman, Gregg Fienberg and Mark R. Harris.
Director:  Bill Condon.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, nudity, adult themes, sexual situations)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Ian McKellen -- who has already won two year-end critics' awards as
of this writing -- has a sinfully great time in GODS AND MONSTERS.  He
stars as James Whale, the director of 1930s horror classics like
FRANKENSTEIN and THE INVISIBLE MAN.  When we meet him in the film,
however, it is the late 1950s, a tough time to be an openly gay man even
in Hollywood.  Twenty years removed from his film-making peak and
suffering the after-effects of a stroke, Whale has been left to putter 
in his Los Angeles home, accompanied by his memories and housekeeper
Hannah (Lynn Redgrave).  That doesn't mean he won't try to seduce the
occasional film student who comes to interview him, or even new gardener
Clay Boone (Brendan Fraser).  Growling innuendo and wrapping his lips
around a cigar that's not just a cigar, McKellen fashions Whale early on
as a dirty old man with little left to embrace but his own lasciviousness.
     There's no question that McKellen's work is a great time...great
acting, not necessarily.  It is McKellen's misfortune that GODS AND
MONSTERS is the second film of 1998 in which an older gay man tries to woo
a young heterosexual.  The first was called LOVE AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND,
and starred John Hurt as the older man.  In every other way the characters
are completely dissimilar -- Hurt played a timid professor who had lived
his entire life as a straight husband, while McKellen takes on a
flamboyant artist utterly at ease with his lifestyle.  Hurt's was the more
difficult role, one in which a small man confronted upheaval and potential
humiliation; McKellen got a part full of punch lines and haunted 
recollections, the stuff actors turn into audition monologues.  James 
Whale isn't a role that requires a great performance.  It's a role that
requires an _entertaining_ performance.
     And entertaining it is, particularly in service of Whale's intriguing
biography.  That biography comes both in spoken recollections and
scattered flashbacks, revealing Whale's rise from impoverished youth to
soldier to stage designer to film director.  Writer/director Bill Condon
makes it evident that Whale's affinity for creating screen monsters was
born of sympathy, one outcast giving voice and soul to other outcasts.  He
even makes the sly suggestion that Whale was also the father of camp,
creating intentionally humorous films from horror stories as a sop to his
own amused sensibilities.  McKellen makes Whale far too inventive to be
pathetic, yet also shows him fighting with the shadow of his former self. 
As Whale's mind deteriorates, he becomes an ever-sadder figure, a living
relic who has begun thinking of himself in the same past tense others
think of him.
     But there's another character gobbling up chunks of screen time, and
that's Brendan Fraser as the wrong-side-of-the-tracks gardener.  Clay is
set up as a kindred spirit to Whale, another outcast from a disapproving
family who turns to sex when he needs to define himself.  It's a solid
enough performance by Fraser, but there's something trite about the entire
structure of Clay's friendship with Whale, nearly as trite as Lynn
Redgrave's fussy German housekeeper.  It reaches the point where the story 
actually appears to be about Clay, which is a big mistake.  McKellen's
performance may not be perfect, but it's still the best thing about GODS
AND MONSTERS.  It's not incredibly touching, and it's not incredibly
profound.  It is, however, quite a lot of fun for a while.  There are
worse places to cast your lot than with the year's second best performance
as an older gay man trying to woo a young heterosexual.

Author
Walter Frith
What's extraordinary about 'Gods and Monsters' is not just the fact that
it's about a director responsible in many ways for setting the stage in
the way horror films would be made for decades to come but the dark side
of them that filtered into his personal life.  One man's loneliness, a
sense of dreams never quite fulfilled and wrestling with his own
sexuality make for a truly interesting film with no pretensions and
plenty of rich characterizations.
Director James Whale (1889-1957) was a grand director of horror, having
made 'Frankenstein' (1931), which is #87 on the AFI's list of all time
greatest films.  He made 21 films as a director, and some of his other
achievements include 'The Invisible Man' (1933), 'Bride of Frankenstein'
(1935), and his last film in 1949 was entitled 'Hello Out There'.  Whale
went into seclusion somewhat until his death eight years later.  The
film tells us many things about Whale, where he came from, his family
history and the fact that he was gay.
James Whale is portrayed in 'Gods and Monsters' by Ian McKellen, and he
had better polish up his Oscar speech because he may need it.  His work
in this film is brilliant because of the way he UNDER plays the role.
He brings dimensions of the character to the screen but others remain an
enigma.  By the end of the picture, you feel sympathy for Whale but you
want to know more about him.  The film is simply shot, almost like a
play by director Bill Condon and the screenplay, based on the novel
'Father of Frankenstein' by Christopher Bram is adapted for the screen
by Bill Condon as well.
The film opens in the final days of Whale's life as he lives in his
modest upper-class home in Southern California.  He is cared for by his
housekeeper who has worked for him for 15 years (Lynn Redgrave who is
also Oscar worthy).  There is a quote in the film that strikes a
memorable chord that says something about the fact that servants who
have worked for you long enough begin to feel as if they're related to
you.  Whale spends his time drawing as an artist, sketching on pads
mounted on giant easels and granting the occasional interview to an
eager journalist or fan, relishing in the thought of meeting such a
talented but under rated man.
The story starts to unfold interestingly enough when Whale begins to
fancy a gardener for hire, Brendan Fraser (who holds his own in many
scenes with McKellen).  He fancies him for not only for what he feels
are his incredibly good looks but for companionship, someone to talk to
and sketch.  He makes a notation that Fraser has the most extraordinary
head and features and that he wants him to sit and have his image
sketched.  Fraser, a heterosexual, later learns that Whale is gay and
things take a somewhat unpleasant turn in their relationship towards the
end of the film.
There is one scene in 'Gods and Monsters' that is priceless.  A garden
party hosted by the great movie director George Cukor portrayed in the
film by Martin Ferrero.  There are actors playing Boris Karloff, Elsa
Lanchester, Elizabeth Taylor and Princess Margaret.  Seeing all of these
actors portrayed by others is convincing and it is one of the best
scenes where McKellen portrays Whale's emotions as a man longing for the
past at times and wanting to put it behind him at other times.
One thing that haunted Whale ferociously throughout the course of his
life was his experience in World War I.  He has constant memories of it
and memories of it along with other scenes from his life seem real to
him in his everyday existence as he sees images from those experiences
right before his own eyes in the present day that aren't real, just
ghostly as an ingredient in Whale's mind as we learn he suffered a
stroke and takes medication and the stroke continues to make certain
functions of his brain deteriorate.
Hopefully, 'Gods and Monsters' will encourage people to take a look at
the work of James Whale with enthusiasm not just for the films he
directed but for the skill he had that has influenced the film industry
to capture his story on film 41 years after his death.  Bringing the
story of the final days of this man's life to the screen to audiences
who were perhaps not familiar with him serves as a way for people to be
educated not only about what they're watching but with what they learn
about the past which affects the present.  A tired cliché, but it works.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Ken Pierce
This review is supplied by the DVD Future website!  www.dvdfuture.com
`To a New World of gods and monsters!'  from James Whale's classic film,
Bride of Frankenstein.
Some films are just so amazing that they have to be seen more than once.  Gods
and Monsters is one of those films.
This film is about the last few weeks of director James Whale's life
(Frankenstein, Bride of Frankenstein, Showboat).  It delves very deeply into
his personal life and his past, showing his day to day routine after a stroke
has destroyed a portion of his brain and is causing him to hallucinate.  Of
course, it's the revelations that occur during this process which make the
movie so good.
The story is fictional, but based on real-life accounts of Whale's life.  As
far as anyone knows, Brendan Fraser's character is fictional, though Lynn
Redgrave's character, Hanna, is based on Whale's real-life maid and caretaker,
and of course several supporting characters are based in reality.
The film starts out by showing Whale as a dirty old man, interested only in
getting young guests out of their clothes and into his pool in a state of
nakedness.  It immediately becomes apparent that this is not going to be an
ordinary Point A to B to Z story as most Hollywood movies are.  In this case,
this is a very good thing.
The story weaves its web around you, slowly introducing those characters who
are important, and through a series of flashbacks, hallucinations and
monologues explains Whale's childhood and young adult years.  This all helps
to bring McKellan's character even more to life, and to bring sympathy to an
otherwise misogynistic man.  All the meanwhile, subplots are evolving and
coming to a head in a brilliant climax which will remain unrevealed here.
Ian McKellan, Lynn Redgrave and Brendan Fraser all give great performances
here.  McKellan and Redgrave both have received Oscar nods for their work in
this film (we'll see if they win on Sunday), and both deserve to take home
the Golden Boy.  Fraser's performance seems to have been underrated because
he plays `the dumb guy'.  I don't see it this way at all, since Fraser's
character is completely believable.  No, he's not an Oxford-educated snob,
he's a regular joe, and he plays it that way.  He also shows with a few
simple gestures that there's a lot more going on under the surface.  As the
movie progresses, Fraser's character literally `bubbles' with interesting
revelations, and this helps to keep the movie flowing.        An absolutely
stunning performance, and proof that there's more to this guy than Encino Man
or George of the Jungle (though both are films which I enjoyed immensely,
they hardly stretch his acting muscles).  Unfortunately, Fraser still spends
a lot of time in this movie with his clothes offmaybe in the Mummy he'll get
to wear a shirt.
Needless to say, Bill Condon has impressed me with this film.  I'm even more
impressed when I consider that Condon's previous work is the little-seen
horror flick sequel Candyman: Farewell to the Flesh.  It's obvious that
Condon sees a little bit of himself in James Whale, and allows that to
reflect into his vision.  The difference is, that whereas Whale is best
remembered for his films which he didn't really care for, Condon will easily
be remembered for brilliant works of art if this is to be his quality of film
from now on.  Of course, with him being such a close friend of Clive Barker,
there is a very real possibility that he could end up back in the horror
genre before long.  With the right script, though, this could be a great
thing for horror.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Being pulled from his north of England boarding school and forced
to work in a factory to support his family; watching his best friend die
before his eyes, hung like a side of mutton on a barbed wire fence during a
Great War skirmish; interred in a prisoner of war camp; and, throughout all
this, having to shoulder what was then the burdensome stigma of
homosexuality.
        It was certainly enough to turn this particular man towards
Hollywood, where he attempted to unleash his demons, his "electrical storms
in the brain," through the creative and cathartic process of film making.
        By the time he took his own life in 1957, James Whale, the
legendary director of "Frankenstein," "The Bride of Frankenstein" and other
classic movies from Hollywood's Golden Age (including, believe it or not,
"Show Boat"), was seriously ill.  He had also fallen from grace from the
studio system that had created him, living out his years as a painter of
portraits and still lives.
        "Gods and Monsters" is a speculative account of the last days of
this iconographic filmmaker.  It entertains the notion that Whale, who was
slowly losing his mind, might not have acted alone and that his final act
may have included more than a walk-on for his gardener, Clayton Boone
(Brendan Fraser).  While this idea is certainly an imaginative one, the
journey to that point as envisioned by writer/director Bill Condon, is less
intriguing, unfolding like a Playgirl magazine-styled hybrid of "Ed Wood"
and "Love and Death on Long Island."
        The ailing, disillusioned Whale is brought to life by that great
English thespian, Sir Ian McKellen.  McKellen conveys more with a raised
eyebrow than Fraser does with his entire body.  It's an authoritative
performance, much like Ian Hurt's was in "Love and Death...," but the film
suffers the same fate of spending entirely too much time focusing on the
not terribly fascinating theme of a lustful, aging queen salivating over an
unsophisticated, impressionable boy-toy.
        With the more interesting background material left underdeveloped,
we're given to assume that any gay war veteran with a rough childhood would
opt for a career making horror movies.
        For all of the interesting possibilities inherent in Condon's
source material, the single most important thing one learns about James
Whale, according to the film, was that he was a dirty old man.  His
Germanic, longtime domestic help Hanna (Lynn Redgrave, who steals every
scene she's in) stands by dutifully yet disapprovingly as Whale talks the
sweaty, muscular Boone into posing for him.  "Just your head," he tells him.
        And it certainly is a great head.  During one fantasy sequence,
Whale and Boone, silhouetted as they stagger across a barren, war-torn
landscape, are uncanny in their resemblance to Colin Clive and Boris
Karloff as Frankenstein's monster and it's at times like these, when Condon
takes the time to parallel scenes from Whales' movies, that "Gods and
Monsters" comes alive.  More of this, and less of the idle sexual entendres
(take that dueling cigar sequence for example), would have made for more
engrossing cinema.
        Neither the temptations of the flesh nor the final seduction of
death paint a compelling portrait of the multi-talented James Whale.  "Gods
and Monsters" makes that abundantly clear, but it misses an opportunity to
tell us more about the true father of Frankenstein.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Bill Condon.
Cast: Ian McKellen, Brendan Fraser, Lynn Redgrave, Lolita Davidovich.
1998 - 106 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity, brief nudity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed January 8, 1999.
Bill Condon's "Gods and Monsters" is a fascinating look into the last 
days in the life of gay director James Whale (Ian McKellan), who made 
the horror classics "Frankenstein" and "Bride of Frankenstein." Since I 
was unfamiliar of Whale prior to viewing the film, there is no way to 
know how accurate the film is, but I suspect that much of it only came 
from Whale's inner fantasies and hallucinations. 
Whale, who fought in WWI and then went on to become known for his work 
on horror pictures, decided fifteen years before his death at age 67 to 
quit filmmaking once a homosexual scandal broke out involving him. As 
the film tells it, during the end of his life, Whale, at his large home 
in L.A., became infatuated with the tall, handsome, and much younger 
man, Clayton Boone (Brendan Fraser), who was working as the gardener at 
his home. James Whale, we learn quickly was, what many people refer to 
him as in the film, "a dirty old man." In one of the opening scenes, a 
young film enthusiast visits Whale's home to interview him and Whale 
agrees, on one condition: for every question he answers, the young man 
must take off an article of clothing. Because of this episode, we know 
exactly what it is Whale wants when he asks Clayton to pose for him for 
a painting, later making the excuse that his bright, white shirt is 
disracting only so he will take it off. Clayon agrees, and doesn't 
really think much of this, much to the warnings of his friends, becoming 
more and more intrigued in the stories Whale tells him about his past. 
Certainly, the relationship between Whale and Boone is headed for a 
downfall, since Whale starts to grow a deep love for this young man, 
even though Boone is not gay, and Whale himself realizes he is nearing 
the conclusion to his life, as he begins to seldom suffer mild strokes 
and moments of true catharsis.
"Gods and Monsters" is an intimate and seemingly respectful portrait of 
a director who was forced to become somewhat of an outcast, due to his 
sexual preference, and never got the recognition he would have liked, 
since he longed to be referred to as a "motion picture director," rather 
than a "horror director." And in one heartbreaking scene, he attends a 
party with Boone being his guest, held by director George Cuckor, and 
finds that many of the other attendees do not recognize him anymore. It 
is evident that Whale's first love in his life was making movies, and 
when his career ultimately fell apart, so did his passion in life. 
As played brilliantly by Ian McKellen, James Whale comes off as a sad, 
but dignified man, and a person who was not afraid to stand out from 
others, just as long as he knew he was being true to himself. He never 
hid the fact that he was gay, however, even if it meant threatening his 
filmmaking profession, and it was this unblinking honesty that made him 
a great person. Through the complicated relationship that develops 
between Whale and Boone, Boone, of course, only things of Whale as a 
possible friend or someone he can talk to, while it means so much more 
to Whale, who sees Boone as sort of his salvation in life. Although 
Boone is only in a dead-end job as a gardener of people's homes, Whale 
views him as the ideal man, not only one that is good-looking, even 
though it is this attraction that first begins his feelings, but one 
that will actually listen to him. Since Whale lives with only his loyal, 
but disapproving maid (touchingly portrayed by Lynn Redgrave), it is 
Boone that Whale can talk to in his ultimate reclusion from the world, 
and the only reason Whale finally decides to attend the gathering of 
George Cuckor.
Although an extremely fine and mature picture, a few small elements hold 
the film back from ultimate greatness. It is appreciated that the film 
does not pull for any obvious or overly dramatic story developments, but 
it is a little thin, and the structuring of the "on-again-off-again" 
friendship at the film's center is fairly predictable. We know early on 
where these two characters are headed, and we can guess that there will 
be a final confrontation between the two as the tension slowly builds. 
In lesser hands, this set-up might have felt too calculated, but it is 
not in the surprisingly deft treatment and writing that helps the film 
to be much more than this. Also, a subplot is briefly brought up between 
Clayton and a waitress working at a bar (effectively played by Lolita 
Davidovich), but abruptly dropped and never brought up again. If the 
film was not going to follow up on this side story, then it, perhaps, 
should have been taken out altogether.
"Gods and Monsters" is a heartfelt and intelligent motion picture, 
impressively directed by Bill Condon, who, I sense, relates to or fully 
understands the meaning behind the curious relationship between Whale 
and Boone. The film also plays as a tribute to a fine man who met an 
untimely end. Walking away from "Gods and Monsters," it was Ian 
McKellen's marvelous and astounding performance that left the most 
impression on me, and I doubt there could have been anyone who could 
have stepped into the role more fully and believably. It is a sad 
testament when a person's true talent and love is unfairly taken away 
from them, based on the scrutinization and judgement of their personal 
life, which, ironically enough, is no one else's business in the first 
place. 
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
        Dustin
Putman's Film Haven >

Author
Bob Bloom
 Gods and Monsters (1998) 4 stars out of 4. Starring Ian McKellan, Brendan
Fraser and Lynn Redgrave. Written and directed by Bill Condon.
 "Gods and Monsters" is the story of two men who separated by age and
class, eventually form a strange alliance in which they found commonality
and forge an unease bond.
 What makes this film, written and directed by Bill Condon, so fascinating
is that it is based on the life of a real person - movie director James
Whale, who died in 1957 under mysterious circumstances.
 Whale's death was ruled a suicide. He was found floating in his pool,
fully clothed.
 Whale's glory days were well past him at the time of his death. He had not
been behind the camera in more than 15 years and had been virtually
forgotten by Hollywood.
 If you're not a fan of horror films than James Whale's name may mean
nothing to you. But, he directed four groundbreaking films in the genre in
the early and mid-1930s: "Frankenstein," "The Old Dark House," "The
Invisible Man" and "The Bride of Frankenstein."
 Ironically, this soft-spoken British gentleman also directed the
definitive version of one of the great Broadway musicals of all time,
"Showboat."
 Condon has adapted Christopher Bram's novel, "Father of Frankenstein,"
which takes a fictional look at the circumstances surrounding Whale's
death.
 "Gods and Monsters" is the story of Whale's relationship with Clayton
Boone, his young gardener. Boone is an ex-Marine, trying to eke out a
living while searching for fulfillment in his life.
 Whale slowly draws the young man into his orbit as Boone becomes
fascinated with the older man's stories of his early days in Hollywood as
well as his harrowing experiences in the trenches during World War I.
 Whale, who was openly homosexual at a time when most in Hollywood kept
their sexual preferences in the closet, subtly tries to seduce the young
man, but not for the reasons one would expect.
 For Whale is a sick man. He is recovering from a stroke. His past
continually intrudes into his thought processes. He continually sees people
and events from his childhood, his military days and his time on the set of
"Bride of Frankenstein."
 Whale has trouble sleeping, he cannot concentrate on his paintings or
sketches. He is weary, lonesome and afraid.
 With Boone as his unwitting subject, Whale transforms the inexperienced
and somewhat naive gardener into his "second monster."
 But, just as in his horror films, this real-life monster cannot be totally
controlled to do its master's bidding.
 As Whale, Ian McKellen gives an Academy Award-worthy performance. His
Whale is sophisticated, sly, subtle, urbane, charming and witty. He is also
frightened, bedeviled and lonely, at odds with a world in which he feels
out of step.
 McKellen shows the dissatisfaction of a forgotten old man surviving on
little more than memories as well as the artist who, despite his
infirmities still can construct a real-life script that can manipulate his
actors.
 Brendan Fraser gives a touching performance as Clay, the young man out of
his depth and confused by this artist who introduces him into a world in
which he is not equipped, either mentally or emotionally, to cope.
 Fraser displays the volatile nature that seethes in the underbelly of this
dissatisfied young man who resents being manipulated by Whale. "I am not
your monster," he shouts at Whale.
 He refuses to commit the ultimate act for his new patron, showing that
spark of humanity that parallels the monster's mercy that saves Henry
Frankenstein in the finale of "Bride of Frankenstein."
 Lynn Redgrave is fierce as Hanna, Whale's protective and domineering
housekeeper. She dotes on her employer without indulging his every whim.
She is disapproving of his lifestyle and suspicious of Clay, yet comes to
accept their odd relationship.
 Condon creates some wonderful imagery as he brings his camera into Whale's
mind, showing us flashes of the director's unhappy childhood, his brutal
war experiences and his creative endeavors in filmmaking.
 "Gods and Monsters" is more than historical fiction. It is a paean to a
talented, yet almost forgotten moviemaker whose contributions to the early
sound days of Hollywood need to be re-examined.
 Perhaps "Gods and Monsters" greatest achievement will be to resurrect
Whale's body of works for a new generation of filmgoers to appreciate.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 8 November 1998 with Tony at the Quad for $8.
"You must please excuse me. You see, I'm blind," says the old man to the
monster--the noble, misunderstood, and murderous creature cobbled together
by Dr. Frankenstein. And so a pure but brief friendship ensues in The
Bride of Frankenstein.
Contrast this to the first meeting of Frankenstein's director James Whale
(Sir Ian McKellen) and yardsman Clayton Boone (Brendan Fraser), where
first appearances prove deceptive. That friendship takes longer to blossom
but finds a real depth.
The movie opens during the final year in the life of gay film director
James Whale, best known as the director of Frankenstein and its first
sequel, and less known for The Invisible Man and Showboat. He suffers a
stroke, and while he remains as wily as ever in his 1950s-style
queer-dirty-old-man way, the past he spent his life escaping now "floods
all over" him. Not just moviemaking, but also the ghosts of a lost time
and lost possibilities. The memories of a boy brought up by people who
were "like a family of farmers given a giraffe and not knowing what to do
with it."
Clayton Boone proves to be an exception for Whale. He's not the typical
fawning acolyte, impressed by status and fame. In his own environment, the
trailer-dwelling gardener is surrounded by more simplistic people, who say
things like "Funny is funny. Scary is scary. You don't mix 'em." While
Whale slowly reveals himself to Boone, making himself visible a bit at a
time, his devoted yet somewhat disgusted housekeeper Hanna (Lynn Redgrave)
spills all the beans eventually ("He's a buggerer!") to Boone. Despite
having the gaps filled for him, he keeps coming back, posing for a
painting and befriending the ill, older man, finding a real affection and
respect for him. Remember, this is the mid-1950s. Such understanding
between two men so clearly different is not expected.
The friendship has two culminations--a hilarious one at a party thrown by
George Cukor (another gay director) for Princess Margaret, and a more
pathos-filled one later that evening during a thunderstorm. While
comparisons to Love and Death on Long Island have been made, Gods and
Monsters succeeds in two ways the earlier film did not: There is a certain
degree of fulfillment, and a greater sense of depth of the two
protagonists.
McKellen's performance is outstanding, as he vascilates from witty
(laughing off his "touch of stroke") to heartrending (as he remembers his
personal losses during World War I) to salacious and lubricious (cajoling
a reporter into stripping). (It almost makes up for the homophobic Apt
Pupil). Fraser holds his own as typical working man with an atypical
capacity for understanding. 
Redgrave, as Hanna, brings a real Calvinism to her role as the
near-spousal devotee of her boss in a Hollywood where the invisible are
allowed to live out dissipated lifestyles as long as they keep it quiet.
Her almost puritanical outlook brings a real hilarity to the "den of
iniquity" she thinks she is tending.
Director Bill Condon brings a fullness to James Whale by mixing movies and
memories, alternating black and white with color, and humor with sadness.  
This has brought Gods and Monsters to a higher level that has garnered him
several awards already, was the toast of the New York Film Festival, and
has a lot of people calling for Oscar nominations. Based on Christopher
Bram's novel Father of Frankenstein (which received lukewarm reviews),
Condon's adaptation is one of those instances of the movie bettering a
book.
Also starring Lolita Davidovich, David Dukes, Jack Plotnick, and Rosalind
Ayres as a dead ringer for actress Elsa Lanchester (who played "The
Bride"). Original music by Carter Burwell. Cinematography by Stephen M.
Katz.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Christopher Null
     It will probably be honored as a triumph of filmmaking (and indeed
has already one the National Board of Review's Best Picture award), but
while GODS AND MONSTERS is a good film, it's really more of a curiosity
than a legitimate masterpiece.
     The adaptation of a fictionalized account of the final days of
director Frank Whale (best known for directing the first two
FRANKENSTEIN movies), director Condon's story is really a simple one,
about Whale's infatuation with his gardner Clay (Fraser).  That Whale is
a not-so-in-the-closet homosexual is pretty clear up front, but for some
reason, Clay can't figure that out.
     What follows is a series of encounters between the two, the
degeneration of Whale's mind thanks to a stroke, and, most curiously,
one dream/fantasy sequence after another, wherein Whale relives his
childhood, World War I, and his years in Hollywood.
     The dream sequence, long known as the biggest crutch a screenwriter
can use, works.  At least part-way.  Because Whale's mind is going
south, we are asked to indulge his fantasies as near-reality for him. 
Like I say, this works, but only up to a point.  After two hours, the
device has grown stale and predictable.
     Still, GODS is a truly good film with a great cast (McKellan and
especially Redgrave, playing Whale's maid, both deserve serious praise),
and what must have been a tricky adaptation of the novel on which it was
based is also a feat unto itself.
Director: Bill Condon
Producer: Paul Colichman, Gregg Fienberg, Mark R. Harris
Writer: Bill Condon
Starring: Ian McKellan, Brendan Fraser, Lynn Redgrave
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Luke Buckmaster
GODS AND MONSTERS
Cast: Ian McKellen, Brendan Fraser, Lynn Redgrave, Lolita Davidovich
Director: Bill Condon
Screenplay: Bill Condon based on the novel Father of Frankenstein by
Christopher Bram
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
4 and a half stars
Gods and Monsters is a vividly sketched character portrait of a man
whose inner demons were as real to him as the monsters that he graced
the world with.  Director James Whale, whose emotional battles
encompassed memories of trench warfare and an unsatisfying homosexual
lifestyle, directed such film noir as Frankenstein, The Invisible Man
and The Bride of Frankenstein.  Whale, however, never became one of
Hollywood's celebrated success stories, as he chose to leave the
movie-making business after studio tampering made his expected
masterpiece, Hello Out There, a laugh stock of the industry.  He tried
to isolate both his memories and his contacts, but was always remembered
as the horror God who brought his memorable monsters to life.
In capturing Whale's deteriorating mind but vigorous spirit, director
and writer Bill Condon (who adapted the screenplay from the novel Father
of Frankenstein) succeeds magnificently, not without the essential
central performance from Sir Ian McKellen, who was last seen in an
equally impressive but slightly less captivating performance in Apt
Pupil.  Gods and Monsters wholly succeeds in being a character study and
an examination of different levels in society.  As Whale searches for a
reason to either live or die, Condon doesn't fall into the trap of
sensationalizing or simplifying.  Like in life, all of his problems
won't resolve themselves when he dies, and a life will not always end
with redemption and courage.  This is a very humane tale told with
compassion and elegance, cynicism and poignancy, and the result is a
film that has been created for those who want to take something with
them when they leave the cinema.
Whale (Ian McKellen) is an elderly homosexual nearing the end of his
life.  He lives a solitary existence with housekeeper Hannah (Lynn
Redgrave), heeding the pain of the after affects of a stroke.  His
memories are equipped with visions of happier times, as well as
nightmares of the past that have not completely vanished.  Whale
befriends his new gardener Clay Boone (Brendan Fraser), and their
relationship becomes a complicated comparison between the homosexual and
the heterosexual, the rich and the poor.  Boone is fascinated by Whale's
experiences but at times repelled by his manipulative personality,
admiring him but approaching their friendship hesitantly.  Whale's
motivations behind his relationship with Boone gradually become evident,
whilst recollections of the movie-making business seem more and more
distant.
It is easy to underestimate the depth of Whale and Boone's relationship.
Social status and sexuality are two of the primary issues that are
effortlessly studied, but Bill Condon had more in mind than that.  The
very reason behind Whale's existence is challenged again and again, not
only by his disturbing recollections of terrible times, but mainly an
emotional-by-play that allows McKellen and Fraser to play off each other
beautifully.  McKellen's powerhouse performance is definitely an
entertaining one, and he also handles his darker, more provocative
material with the care and skill that only experience can generate.
Fraser gives an exceptional performance in his first dramatic role,
working as a counterpart to Whale's complicated personality, and
delivers charisma as though it were something second nature.  Although
his very masculine appearance was no doubt a prerequisite for his
casting, there is also a non-sexual seductiveness in his performance
that makes his character entirely likable but never typecast or
stereotypical.
The screenplay seamlessly integrates stories of power, reliance,
individual growth, and so much more.   Perhaps most impressive is the
way that Gods and Monsters develops its protagonist.  The film carefully
shapes Boone as a person that we are not entirely at ease with, yet his
social mannerisms and eccentric personality are developed with startling
realism.  It is hard to criticize a film that works on as many levels as
this one, and delivers the goods on so many different occasions, ranging
from its bizarrely comic opening to its unsettling and thought-provoking
climax.
One dream sequence near the film's conclusion, in which Fraser and
McKellen play Frankenstein and his evil master, is amongst one of the
most effectively staged scenes I've seen this year.  Like this powerful
metaphorical moment, Gods and Monsters not only gives its material the
wit and intelligence it deserves, but rises above expectations by
generating a curious fascination from its characters.  Although James
Whale's reputation has never been completely intact, Gods and Monsters
goes to the heart of one of Hollywood's greatest misfits with
unflinching detail.


Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Ian McKellen, Brendan Fraser, Lynn Redgrave. Rated R.
Not too many people know who James Whale is, but it's a safe bet that a
good chunk of them have seen his movies. If we are to believe the semi-
biographical Gods and Monsters, Whale would have wanted it to be that
way. This is an insightful, haunting exploration of the last days of the
Frankenstein and Bride of Frankenstein director, and it is notable for
introducing one of the first complicated gay characters in a Hollywood
movie.
Gods and Monsters has no interest in being a biopic of Whale's life
because it tracks only the final few days of his life, and it's probably
a better movie for it. It's focus is on Whale's (Ian McKellen)
untraditional and deceptive lust for heterosexual gardener Clayton Boone
(Brendan Fraser). It begins with Whale (a fairly talented artist, aside
from being a director) asking Boone to "sit for him," (pose for a
portrait). At first, Boone doesn't realize that Whale is gay and grows
fascinated with the old man. When he does discover Whale's sexual
orientation from his dedicated and protective maid (Lynn Redgrave), he
is frightened, refusing to sit for the guy. But he comes back, only to
storm out again, disgusted with Whale's "locker room talk." Boone
returns yet another time, after Whale promises to tone down the
aforementioned "locker room talk," and finds their platonic relationship
to be strengthening.
Meanwhile, Jimmy himself is suffering from hallucinations and mental
attacks as a result of his stroke not long ago. His ailment leads to
desperation and depression, which build to the point where he is forced
to ask Boone for an incredulously big favor.
What is perhaps most sensational about Gods and Monsters is Brendan
Fraser's bravura performance; up until seeing this film I intensely
disliked the young actor because of his tendency to ruin the movies he
is in (Blast From the Past, for example). I was surprised how expressive
an actor he proved himself to be here. This is impressive because his
character's dialogue is minimal, with McKellan doing most of the
talking. That requires Fraser to act through body language; a difficult
skill to master, but something he proves capable of doing well.
This is not to ignore McKellan's Oscar nominated turn. He earned that
nomination with his touching performance here (although, at the risk of
sounding like a philistine, I would have chosen his performance as the
Nazi in Apt Pupil for the nomination); an understated, compelling gem.
Whale dreaded being remembered solely for his work in the Hollywood
horror genre, and he thought Hollywood to be the equivalent of a
battlefield. He rejoiced in being free from it, only reluctantly going
to receptions with fellow movie people. In the end, perhaps, it is what
killed him: the memories of Hollywood and war blending together to form
a living nightmare.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Lion's Gate Films
 Director:  Bill Condon
 Writer: Bill Condon, novel Father of Frankenstein by
Christopher Bram
 Cast: Ian McKellen, Brendan Fraser, Lynn Redgrave, Lolita
Davidovich, Kevin J. O'Connor, David Dukes, Brandon Kleyla,
Jack Plotnick
   Irving Berlin knew that there's no business like show
business and Bill Condon does his bit to prove it.  In one
scene of "Gods and Monsters," Condon's fanciful and
splendidly realized adaptation about the last days of
"Frankenstein" director James Whale, the impresario of horror
insists that there's no joy in the world that compares to that of
directing films.  Condon creates an inventive tale of this
important figure's views, work and memories. And why not? 
In 1957 his subject was found dead in his pool like "Sunset
Boulevard"'s Norma Desmond.  His departure was listed as
"under mysterious circumstances."  Since Whale was a
practicing gay in a Hollywood that looked askance at such
behavior, the old man is indeed a subject worthy of
biographical inquiry.  Christopher Bram covered his life story
in his book "Father of Frankenstein," which forms the basis of
Condon's screenplay.
   Unlike the conventional biopic "Without Limits" about track
athlete Steve Prefontaine, "Gods and Monsters" does not play
to the grandstands.  It unfolds instead as a mostly serene
probing of the director's mind in his final days, a period
highlighted by his recollections of a better time and by an
unusual friendship between him and the young man he hires
to mow his lawn.  The victim of a stroke which left his motor
ability untouched but which caused neurological electrical
storms in his brain, Whale was confronted daily with the
choice of taking a prescribed drug which zonked him out or of
avoiding the medicine, which caused his mind to go off in a
hundred directions.  Like the stroke-afflicted character Emily
Stilson in Arthur Kopit's play "Wings," Whale endures an
ailment which causes  memories, both pleasurable and
distressing, to flood his faculties.  Through a brief, unusual
friendship with a working-class stiff, he recalls his direction of
Elsa Lanchester as the "Bride of Frankenstein" while Condon
frequently breaks away from the narrative to offer up snippets
of scenes from that accomplishment.  
   The film is superbly acted by Ian McKellen, one of the
world's foremost thesps, who is encased in a large home on
California's Pacific Palisades but has lost his capacity to
enjoy.  He looks in the mirror at his old but distinguished
features, runs a comb slowly and lovingly through his silky
white hair, and for the most part appears to us as a
mellowed-out venerable chap.  His calm makes his bursts of
rage all the more alarming, as in Condon's imaginative view
he taunts a robust young man, begging to be killed.  Such
moments of privacy are rare as he is under the watchful eye
of his servant of fifteen years, the Hungarian-born Hanna--
who is portrayed as woman with unconsciously comic
repartee by  Lynn Redgrave, made over to look about seventy
years of age and wearing a perpetual scowl.
   In an unusual and marginally dangerous bit of casting,
Brendan Fraser, known to a large audience as a sweet, comic
personality in "George of the Jungle" and "Encino Man,"
provides the catalyst for the older man's reveries.  Handsome
and muscular, Clayton Boone (Fraser), a drifter who accepts
odd jobs in tony California neighborhoods, could not help
reviving Whale's dormant sexuality, belying a popular view
that senior citizens do not think of sex.  Rather, as one
knowing person suggests, they think of nothing BUT sex. 
Boone poses for Whale's sketches, at first seeming to tolerate
his new employer's homosexual background ("live and let
live") but soon becomes enraged when the man makes ribald
suggestions about the armies of folks who'd cavort naked
under his roof and at his swimming pool.
   Director Bill Condon seamlessly weaves visions of the old
man's fancy into his drama of his subject's deterioration,
following clips from "Bride of Frankenstein" with a
reenactment of Whale's direction of the movie.  He creates a
mood that lets us imagine what it might be like to be going
through a neurological crisis, blending 1950s reality with the
moviemaking of the 1930s.  It does not take long to realize
that the muscular Brendan Fraser is pictured by Whale as the
Frankenstein monster, a creature who is treated
sympathetically and with a great dry wit in Whale's movies. 
The monster is the lonely outsider in a world he can scarcely
understand.  In Condon's most comical scene, Whale
embarrasses gay director George Cukor and Princess
Margaret at a house party by introducing his gardener--like
the monster, an outsider to this milieu--which we see as one
of Whale's futile attempts to break through his own
vulnerability.  
   Money isn't everything.  Like "Sunset Boulevard"'s Norman
Desmond, Whale is shown to lack nothing in material
comforts.  But he no longer uses the pool, which was the
locus of so much of his enjoyment in his earlier days.  His
career junked two decades back with the failure of his movie
"The Road Back," Whale might as well be living in the
England of his childhood, a youth of poverty whose diet
consisted of drippings.  Ian McKellen, who cannot turn in a
bad performance, is quietly riveting throughout, no longer the
misanthrope of Christopher Bram's novel but a sympathetic
soul who justifiably captivates our compassion.  Not Rated. 
Running time: 105 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Steve Rhodes
James "Jimmy" Whale, once appropriately given the sobriquet of "the father
of horror," launched the monster movie craze in the early 1930s with
FRANKENSTEIN, THE BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN, and THE INVISIBLE MAN.  GOD AND
MONSTERS, set in the 1950s, tells the story of the last period of his life.
Alternatively witty, poignant, insightful and surprising, the film relates
the story of a man's life by focusing on its ending, while keeping the
flashbacks to a minimum.  Whale, played with an Oscar caliber performance by
Ian McKellen, was an eccentric and a loner.  An avowed homosexual, at a time
when few admitted it publicly, Whale dropped out of the active Hollywood
scene.  Living in an uncommonly modest house by Hollywood standards, he kept
himself busy painting amazingly accurate copies of great masterpieces.
Cast opposite McKellen, who was last seen in APT PUPIL as a retired Nazi, is
Brendan Fraser, last seen crashing into trees in GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE.
Although the choice of Fraser to go opposite Sir Ian may seem a bit odd, it
works.  Comedic actor Fraser, who has played serious parts before, as in
SCHOOL TIES, makes us expect much less than we get.  He gives his character
charisma and a subtle complexity.
Fraser plays Clayton Boone, Jimmy's big oaf of a gardener.  Clayton, who has
the rippling muscles of a Greek god, lives in an old trailer and drives a
beat-up truck.  He's an ex-marine who has a big, patriotic tattoo to remind
himself of his time in the service.
An avowed heterosexual, Clayton feels uneasy but yet drawn to Jimmy, who
tells him fascinating inside stories about the making of movies.  He says,
for example, that Boris Karloff was a proper English actor but was
dreadfully dull.  And he tells much more controversial stories too, like the
inside scoop on George Cukor and his sex-with-young-boys scandal.
Even with his reservations, Clayton becomes both Jimmy's friend and artist
model.  The natural chemistry between them doesn't follow conventional
patterns.  Besides the obvious physical attraction, Jimmy is also drawn to
Clayton because of their similar childhood economic status.
Jimmy grew up in a large family where they lived four to a bed and with a
privy out back.  They used "drippings," i.e., congealed beef juices that
they kept in a jar, to put on toast instead of butter.  His father, whom he
loathed, made him work in the factories at hard labor from an early age.
"Hatred was the only thing that kept my soul alive," Jimmy says of his
father, who treated him badly.
Jimmy served in the foxholes in World War I, and he was as scarred
emotionally by this as much as his childhood.  Both of these parts of his
life keep flashing into in his mind.
The movie contains old film footage of Jimmy's classic movies as well as
reconstructions of their shootings.  Although these form the heart of GOD
AND MONSTERS, there are many wonderfully little odd ball incidents as well.
Typical of these is the obviously gay reporter who doesn't have much respect
for Jimmy's talents but has come for a pro forma interview of him.  Jimmy,
who finds his trivial questions boring, decides to make a game of the
interview.  Jimmy tells him that he will answer any questions whatsoever
that the reporter poses so long as the reporter takes off a piece of
clothing for every question.
As a character out of left field, Lynn Redgrave, with a thick Eastern
European accent, plays Jimmy's disapproving maid.  Although she loves Jimmy,
she is full of "tsk, tsk, tsk" for his behavior.  She's sure he's going to
rot in hell for his proclivities.
Based on Christopher Bram's novel, written and lovingly directed by Bill
Condon, the film touches us with its honest and poignant portrayal of a
fascinating individual.
"Alone, bad; friend, good" Frankenstein says at the end of his movie.
Jimmy, a loner, didn't have many friends, but he certainly cherished the few
he did have.  And Clayton was glad to be counted among them.
GODS AND MONSTERS runs 1:45.  It is not rated but would be an R for sex,
profanity and mature subject matter and would be fine for older and mature
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
GODS AND MONSTERS (director:Bill Condon; cast: (James Whale) Ian
McKellen, (Clayton Boone) Brendan Fraser, (Whale's housekeeper, Hanna) Lynn
Redgrave, (Boone's girlfriend, Betty) Lolita Davidovich, (David Lewis)
David Dukes, (Mr. Kay) Jack Plotinick, (Elsa Lanchester) Rosalind Ayres,
(Boris Karloff) Jack Betts, 1998)
James Whale (Ian) is the son of working class parents in north England,
who escaped his early poverty to become a successful director, noted for
his famous monster films. James Whale  directed the original
FRANKENSTEIN (31), THE BRIDE OF  FRANKENSTEIN (35), THE OLD DARK HOUSE
(32), and THE INVISIBLE MAN (33)--- which was his personal favorite.
Whale, always the aesthete and snob, comments to an interviewer that he
just directed the first two Frankensteins, the others were done by
hacks. He also did some non-horror films, most notable is the classy
musical SHOWBOAT (36), and his most inauspicious one is, THE ROAD BACK
(37).
He died of mysterious circumstances in his Hollywood pool in 1957, this
film clears up that mystery (at least, hypothetically) and probes into
his homosexual life, as Jimmy, as he liked to be called, is seen in his
last few weeks alive, living infirmed with the ill effects of a stroke
that makes him either forgetful when medicated or when unmedicated
seeing a lot of images at once, as if it were thunderstorms in the sky,
in the form of violent hallucinations from the past.
What highlights this film and makes it propelled on a high octane level,
is the bravura physical performance of Ian McKellen, whose presence on
screen is gigantic as a swish personality, much like a few other great
performances accomplished recently about gifted artistic and
intellectual English queers, such as Derek Jacobi as Francis Bacon in
LOVE IS THE DEVIL and John Hurt's performance of a fictionalized stuffy
professor in LOVE AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND.
To gain access to what this fictionalized but mostly real-life film is
about, one has to look at Jimmy as a homosexual, whose every movement is
influenced by the lust he craves for men and how cunning he is in trying
to entice them, as we see him at his playful best in the splendor of his
tasteful home, being taken care of by the heavily foreign accented
housekeeper (Redgrave), who wears her cross over her apron in earnest,
fearing Jimmy's sins of the flesh will take him to hell, yet finding in
herself the strength to disapprove of his behavior but still be his most
trustworthy caretaker for the last 15 years. She is wonderfully dour in
her supporting role.
If it is fear or disgust of homosexuals that repels you, this film will
displease you, even though its overt physical sex is minimalized, yet
every nuance of the film and all its projections are about what a queer
is like. For openers, we have a pesty and patronizing film college
student (Plotinick) who comes over to interview him, not interested in
his homosexuality but in those horror films he made famous. Jimmy
handles him with bemusement, life is but a strip poker game, he
gleefully says, and since the student's questions are leaving Jimmy
feeling cold, he suggests that they make things interesting, at least
for Whale, by having the student strip off a piece of clothes for any
question asked and in response, Whale promises to answer any question
honestly. This scene turns out to be a classically hilarious comedy
routine, probably capturing Whale's devilish personality as well or
better than the more dramatic scenes did.
The serious focus of the film will become the strange relationship that
will develop between the new gardener for the Whale house, Clayton Boone
(Brendan), who looks like Adonis, and has caught the director's roving
eye, focusing in on his muscular arms and his tattoo from his marine
days, of "Death Over Dishonor," as he charms and beguiles him, knowing
full-well that this stud is all heterosexual. Yet he feels very
comfortable talking to the brutish Clayton and loves the chase of
someone he is attracted to, who seems like a very nice and naive young
man, but will come across later on as a young man with a lot of pent-up
feelings and in need of a fatherly figure to talk to. Clayton is
anything but literary, never even having heard of Whale before, just as
Whale is hardly your prototypical fatherly figure. But Whale opens up
with Clayton and becomes nostalgic about his life and his films, more so
than with the film student who really knew his films, but was just
perceived by Whale as a user of people. It seems that there was probably
some deeply repressed psychological need in Whale to be accepted by
certain types of people, which is why he devotes so much time to the
uninspiring Clayton, it was as if he needed to have his approval to be
gay.
And Clayton gets to like the old man, despite what he can't stand about
him sexually, glad that he met someone who is famous or at least was at
one time.
What is most impressive and understated about the film, is the comic
tone and lightness of Whale, much like the tone Whale used in his horror
films, which he used to hide the real fear of death people have and
their antagonism for monsters, whom Whale simply adored and would never
make fun of. He comes across as debonair at all times, even when in the
middle of a mild stroke, and terribly witty in the ways of Hollywood's
gays.
The only animated sexual delight that we see from him, comes by way of
his ex-lover, the Hollywood producer, David Lewis (David), who after a
particularly dry conversation welcoming Whale back home after his
stroke, kisses Whale intimately on the lips as he departs the house.
During his somewhat voluntarily retirement from Hollywood, not induced
by any scandal, Whale reminds his interviewer, but from his antagonism
with the studio for ruining his career by blaming him for the failure of
THE ROAD BACK, which the studio interfered with unmercifully, ruining
any chance of success that film may have had. He thusly retreated to his
amateur passion for drawing, which he uses to lure Clayton into his
studio, getting him to pose for a drawing of just his head.
There is Whale as the charmer, which is what this film personifies best,
as we see him telling Hollywood stories and talking of his WW1
experiences, which are enhanced by the hallucinations he is having of
those events, and as we see him nested at home with his florid flower
garden and the olympic-sized pool in the background, which the director
never uses for himself, but welcomes men to swim there in their natural
comfort.
Reactions to Whale, as to whether you care for him or not, come about
from how the participants in his life view his films, which we see them
watch on TV. Clayton must somehow see something in them that affects him
greatly, since he alone of the housekeeper and his ex-girlfriend, see's
something endearing in those films, yet he is turned off by Whale's
homosexuality, but he still poses for him, and that only seems to be
because he wants something more than the money he is being paid to pose,
he wants something from him that he is not quite sure that he can
articulate. What both these men need is to get things off their chest,
to talk to someone who can listen to them with some empathy, as they
both suffer from an interminable loneliness and an emotional poverty of
childhood: one with too many stories to tell, living a life of an upper
class gentleman, pretending to be something he was not born into, but
not caring about these pretenses anymore with Clayton, who is far
removed from the circle of people he moves in, so he easily lets his
hair down; and the other, with not enough stories he wants to tell, can
only be a listener and be reluctantly drawn into talking about himself.
Perhaps, both are drawn to each other because they don't travel in the
same circles and can relax with each other since no false
representations of themselves are really needed.
Real Hollywood figures are portrayed in the way Whale probably saw them,
with his so-called monsters (Boris Karloff and Elsa Lanchester) there is
a frank and polite distance, their friendliness seems genuine enough, as
there is a keen recognition that their fame and illustriousness is
linked together, while for the closet homosexual director, George Cukor,
there is no love lost, as Whale expresses his displeasure at him at
being a pushy upstart, while flashing back to the nude boy parties the
hypercritical Cukor was secretly known for giving, and then we see how
distant they seemed at meeting again in Cukor's mansion, at a rather
dull party to honor Princess Margaret (which never happened in
real-life), where Whale takes Cukor's cold reaction to him without any
visible anger but shows a great deal of resentment at Cukor for getting
to direct a lot of the better films that he wanted for himself.
For all its wonderful performances and charm and probative look into the
gay Hollywood world, this is not a very important film, in the sense
that it has little to say about the creative experience but a lot to say
about how a queer man can manuever his way around the Hollywood of the
past, as long as he didn't make a big show out of his sexual
predilections. Condon has very ably directed a likable and witty film on
a very low budget, that makes its subject seem much greater than it is,
it is as if Jimmy Whale invited us over for some iced tea and cucumber
sandwiches and he told us a few things about himself and the filming of
his Frankenstein movie before he got tired-and-all, so all we had left
to ponder was the materialism and memories he was surrounded by, and how
tired and painful life has become for him, as he wishes for a mercy
killing at the hands of Clayton, but since he couldn't bring that about,
he instead jumps into his pool of seduction and drowns himself.
And what we learned from this biop, is that Jimmy Whale was a gentleman,
a lecherious and cunning one, but still, a gentleman of the old school,
and for most of us, we got to know him better than we ever did before,
via this splendidly done and excellently researched film.
It is apparent that Whale has this tremendous identification with
outcasts (monsters), therefore it seems logical to deduce, that for
those who liked this film, it really came down to what they saw in it
how well they responded to it, just as when Clayton saw the
FRANKENSTEIN  movie on TV for the first time with Betty, and gravitated
toward the film, while Betty saw it as passe, something that wasn't cool
enough for her to enjoy.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews "
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
Ah yes, the little movie that could.  No doubt that more than a few heads
were shaking the night of the Academy Awards when the Best Adapted
Screenplay trophy had "Gods and Monsters" written on it.  What the heck is
this film, and why is Brendan Fraser in hootin' and hollerin' with
artsy-types Ian McKellen and Lynn Redgrave?
Turns out that Bill Condon is fascinated with James Whale, a director I had
never heard of, but what a resume-- _Show Boat_, _The Invisible Man_, _The
Man in the Iron Mask_, and the first two Frankenstein movies.  Condon made a
love poem to one of Hollywood's great neglected directors, one whose
eccentric behavior had him all but blacklisted in Hollywood, at a time when
very few directors were acknowledged.
So far, so good.  James Whale is near the end of his life, and he's living
in a respectable little suburban house, far from the glitz that Hollywood is
accustomed to.  One day, he witnesses the young man mowing the lawn, and
pursues a friendship with him (Brendan Fraser)...
And much, much, more.  Gods and Monsters, from the very start, veers into
territory that is popular amongst art-houses--the homosexual angst film.
"Oh, woe is me.  If only I were understood.  If only I were acknowledged for
the real me."  These words were not spoken, but they might as well have
been.
I can appreciate films which explore hidden characters of great,
unacknowledged individuals.  But tell me, in Hollywood, is not the
definition of one's sexual preference quickly taking the defining role as to
who that person truly is?  How superficial.  
Ian McKellen does an extraordinary job as to hiding completely within some
of the eccentricities of James Whale.  But take away the homosexual fetishes
of this dirty old man (which he had truly become), and who do you have?
According to this movie, nothing at all.
The other performances are wonderful, including Brendan Fraser.  But
trumping the entire cast is none other than Lynn Redgrave, as Hanna, Whale's
overly ethnic housekeeper.  What a performance.  Redgrave is fully
convincing, very funny, and quite emotional.  I've seen this, and I've seen
Judi Dench, and to be quite frank, Redgrave was robbed.
And the screenplay has moments of genuine old-fashioned emotionalism, as it
looks at Hollywood at a simpler time, still learning how to deal with fame,
only as shallow as characters the actors played.  The scene I really liked
was a mini-reunion between Whale, Boris Karloff and Ella Fitzgerald, of the
Frankenstein movies.  What was a genuine reunion of old friends turns into a
mundane photo shoot.  Such is the price of fame.
The tragedy is that Condon falls into the same trap that the film's
fictitious reporters have fallen into.  The reporters could care less about
who Whale truly is: just talk about them Frankenstein movies.  Condon
couldn't care less either: he wants only to talk about Whale's homoerotic
impulses late in life.  I appreciate the sentiment, but I still don't know
who the heck he is.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Bill Condon
Cast: Ian McKellen, Brendan Fraser, Lynn Redgrave, Lolita Davidovich,
Kevin J. O'Connor
Screenplay: Bill Condon
Producers: Paul Colichman, Gregg Fienberg, Mark R. Harris
Runtime: 105 min.
US Distribution: Lions Gate Films
Rated R: homosexual themes, nudity, profanity
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
When Gods and Monsters ended, I was confused.  I wasn't confused by the
film, but by the fact that I was unmoved by a story that should be
moving, and by a performance that rates among the best of the year.  The
performance to which I refer comes courtesy of Ian McKellen, who plays
James Whale, the director famous for such films as Frankenstein, Bride
of Frankenstein, and Show Boat.  Apparently, he's also famous for being
a homosexual.  Written and directed by Bill Condon, Gods and Monsters is
a film with immense potential.
Unfortunately, it's also a conglomerate of missed opportunities.  Much
of the film is played for laughs, but not enough of it is taken
seriously to the point where we can identify with any of the
characters.  The moments that are serious are so straight-faced that
they seem to stick out, colliding with the playful tone that wants to
overtake the film.  McKellen's performance is a revelation -- it makes
the entire movie worth watching.  But it's one of those movies that
makes you wonder what it would have been without the masterful central
performance.  
Condon doesn't provide a very strong narrative; this seems to be his
intention, but the result is going to be a plot synopsis that doesn't
sound like much:  the film centers around the very-homosexual Whale in
his later years, living in a nice home with his housekeeper (Lynn
Redgrave), spying on young, muscular men who come to work on his house.  
The man who catches his eye is the very-heterosexual Clay Boone
(Brendan Fraser), a young go-nowhere type who finds Whale interesting
but not sexually desirable.  Whale wants to paint Clay's portrait, and,
because he's curious, Clay agrees.  From that point, the two men begin
an interesting platonic relationship.  Along the way, we see numerous
flashbacks to Whale's memories of World War I and to his days making
movies in Hollywood.  
The first thing I found disarming about Gods and Monsters is Condon's
use of flashbacks.  I find flashbacks distracting in general, although
they are sometimes appropriate when used in a non-intrusive manner.  The
problem with the flashbacks here is that they come at the worst time --
in one scene, Whale is telling Clay about the war as he paints his
portrait; McKellen's acting here is wonderful and intense.  But, just
when I was getting drawn into the moment, a flashback jostled me out of
it.  Most of the memories that are explained by flashbacks would have
been more effective as dialogue.  I did, however, like the scenes that
show Whale's passion as a director -- I think that side of him is
necessary.
What makes the entire film worth everyone's effort is McKellen's
performance.  There's something about watching a seasoned, experienced
actor play in a role that has so many levels as this one.  Whale is an
interesting character -- one of the more interesting layers is the
contrast between his service in the military and his active
homosexuality during that time.  McKellen nails the role without being
too flamboyant; you can see how much fun he's having in just about every
scene.  Of course, there are a few heavy moments -- the conclusion has
little space for laughs, but McKellen never lets us down.  I was also
impressed with Brendan Fraser, who is vastly suitable for this role; he
has that dumbfounded look to accompany the crew cut and perfectly square
body.
The real problem with the film is that it just isn't very engaging. 
The flashbacks are one problem, but it also doesn't give us a whole lot
to latch on to.  The performances are more enlightening than Condon's
script, which is based on the novel Father of Frankenstein by
Christopher Bram.  The ending, too, is anticlimactic;  I can not say why
without giving it away, but I can say that I wasn't sure what the
characters were supposed to have learned from their experiences.  What
Gods and Monsters comes down to is this:  there may be potential in the
story of the homosexual director James Whale, but Bill Condon's version
of it doesn't seem to find much of it.  But thanks to Ian McKellen, it's
still worth seeing.  Funny how that works.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
GODS AND MONSTERS (1998) *** 1/2   Directed, written by Bill Condon, based
on the novel "Father of Frankenstein" by Christopher Bram. Photography,
Stephen M. Katz. Editing, Virginia Katz. Production design,  Richard
Sherman. Music, Carter Burwell.  Produced by Paul Colichman, Gregg
Fienberg, Mark Harris. Executive producers, Clive Barker, Stephen Jarchow.
Cast : Ian McKellen (James Whale); Brendan Fraser (Clayton Boone); Lynn
Redgrave (Hanna, the housekeeper); Lolita Davidovich (Betty, the barmaid);
Kevin J. O'Connor (Harry); David Dukes (David Lewis); Brandon Kleyla (young
James Whale); Jack Plotnick (Edmond Kay, the student interviewer); et al. A
Lions Gate release.  105 minutes. Unrated. (Nothing really shocking in
words or deeds)
Hungarian salami is one of the joys on life. U.K ham is another
--figuratively speaking. (So is Italian ham, literally, as found in Parma
and figuratively, as found in Cinecitta).  English ham is that
extraordinary, bigger-than-life quality one finds in a certain class of
English (Scots, Irish, Welsh, etc.) actors, often stage-trained, who can
mesmerize you with their voices,over and above their other talents. Whether
the voice is thunderous, insinuating, scratchy, snobbish, lyrical or
anything else, it is as characteristic of the player as a fingerprint.
Here's an extremely incomplete roster: Sir John Gielgud, Sir Laurence
Olivier, Sir Alec Guinness, Basil Rathbone, Robert Morley, Roger Livesey,
Claude Rains, Charles Laughton, James Mason, Robert Newton, Richard Burton,
Trevor Howard, Laurence Harvey, Noel Coward, Alastair Sim, Michael Caine,
Michael Gambon, Richard Harris, Alfred Hitchcock (yes), Stephen Fry --I'll
stop here before I drown  in nostalgia. Most of them are now dead.
Ian McKellen (b.1939) is alive and well. His voice falls on our ears like
heavenly manna. In Gods and Monsters, you almost expect him to address
Brendan Fraser as "dear boy", the way so many of the thespians above (and
others). I don't think he says it, but  it's there alright.
The movie is about the last days of James Whale. James who? Well, this is
what separates the men from the boys, the film fanatics from the fans, the
connoisseurs from the kibitzers.
Whale (1889-1957) the son of very poor, working-class Britons, started out
as newspaper  cartoonist  then served in the British army during World War
I. He discovered theater in a German P.O.W.camp. After the war he began a
stage career, was eventually successful as a set designer and director.
Hollywood's Universal Studios brought him to America. He hit paydirt  with
his fourth film, Frankenstein (1931), folllowed by the successful The Old
Dark House (with Boris Karloff, Melvyn Douglas,Charles Laughton), and six
more movies, notably The Invisible Man (with Claude Rains, his voice and
extraordinary special effects). The apex of his career was Bride of
Frankenstein (1935).
In 1936, financial difficulties at Universal added complications. Whale
also complained that he, the studio's star director, was ill-treated and
that the studio had butchered his The Road Back (1937).This was a sort of
sequel  to Universal's own classic All Quiet On the Western Front (directed
by Lewis Milestone). It wa about German ex-soldiers'  problems when they
return to civilian life.
In spite of interesting movies that included Show Boat, The Great Garrick
and the Man in the Iron Mask, by 1941 Whale had had it. He retired totally,
to paint and to enjoy his openly gay lifestyle.
Gods and Monsters, based on a novel about Whale is an invention rather than
a biopic, yet its essence, well-informed by the real  life and character of
the man, is true. Whale lives in Pacific Palisades, in a very nice house,
not a mansion. His health is rapidly deteriorating after a stroke. His
gayness is not. When his eyes land on a twenty-something garderner, the
hunk and ex-Marine Clayton Boone (Brendan Fraser), he makes friendly
advances and asks him to pose for drawings.
What Whale's inititial intentions were is left beautifully hazy and
ambiguous. The young man knows little about movies or about life beyond his
working-class milieu. He is properly --for the naive 1950s--shocked to find
out that Whale is a homosexual. But the undeniable fascination the older
man exerts makes Clay tolerate Whale's otherness, one that goes beyond sex.
The former director opens for him a new world of past and present. It's
done through a constantly serpentine succession of excellently staged,
graduated and never blatant touches.The two men keep their physicalities
apart yet bond in odd but believable ways.
For Clay, this is a kind of introduction to another culture, an immense
expansion of his horizons, a most original psychological and deviously
sentimental education, to paraphrase Flaubert. His relationship to Whale
moves along the lines of one step back and two steps forward.
For Whale, Clay fills the need for an audience and a sounding-board,
although he is not immune to thoughts of carnality. Through Clay's physical
appeal, Whale recaptures not the fact, but the idea of a past where
handsome young men would gather au naturel in the director's swimming pool
as a prelude to weekend follies.
The film has a complex structure,with real or surreal flashbacks to Whale's
destitute youth (that's after he stops posing as a patrician); to scenes of
World War I and Whale's love for a comrade. The connections between wartime
carnage and horror films are unavoidable.
Excerpts from The Bride of Frankenstein dot the movie. As poignant as any
is the meeting of the two pariahs, the Monster and the Blind Man, in a
celebration of friendship that  prefigures the Whale-Clay rapport.
There is also a reconstruction of filming The Bride. For me, it's the only
fly in the ointment, since so many of us have vivid remembrances of the
movie. No matter how cleverly and skillfully depicted, the substitute
actors remain just that.
The title comes from the Bride,where Dr. Frankenstein's teacher, then
collaborator  Dr. Praetorious (the unforgettable Ernest Thesiger) exclaims
"We have created a new world of gods and monsters!" (There is another Dr.
Praetorious in film history. He is the mysterious, generous professor Cary
Grant in 1951's People Will Talk).
Subtleties come at a quick pace.Whale sees in Clay a kind of continuity of
his Monster. The young man's head shape and flat-top haircut help . Whale
sees ( deftly and discreetly) his own self as both "creator" of Clay and as
a monster, a wronged artist  outside the main stream of Hollywood, doubly
so since his unabashed gayness in times of strictly closeted homosexuality
had its price.Clay gets no flashbacks. Yet he too has a secret from his
days in the Marines. Not a world-shaking secret, but enough to have given
him a trauma that Clay will help cure.
McKellen-Whale's sense of irony, humor, wit and the outrageous is
succulent. It's one of the picture's pillars, along with remembrance of
things past, the growing rapport between the two men, and the sick old
fellow's intimations of mortality. There's a "piece de resistance" in which
he takes Clay along to a garden party given by crypto-gay director George
Cukor in honor of Britain's Princess Margaret, shown as a pre-airhead.
Cukor (more than once) is the butt of Whale's acerbic jokes. Other barbs
and one-liners fly. "My driver Clay" he tells Margaret "is impressed.He's
never met a Princess before - only queens."
That McKellen is superb comes as no surprise.That Brendan Fraser is so
good, does. His impressive debut was in School Ties (1992), as a  boy who
in the 1950s goes to an exclusive prep school, hides the fact that he is
Jewish and comes out of this particular closet as a reaction to bigotry.
Perhaps the connection of "being different" between the two movies inspired
Fraser who's been in mostly lesser films. Here he does himself proud in all
in details in speech, tone, gestures, body English, expressions-- from the
way he eats new foods, handles drinks other than beer from a bottle, to how
he smokes an unfamiliar cigar, sucking it his gauchely. Whale sucks his
Freudianly.
 A nice supporting role goes to Lynn Redgrave, practically unrecognizable
as Whale's stern but sweet, familiar,outspoken but polite (it's Mister
Jimmy this, Mister Jimmy that), clear -sighted housekeeper. Her strong
accent is a puzzle-- a blend of Transylvanian, German, Irish and more. She
gets the spotlight near film's end when, on May 29, 1957 she and Clay find
Whale, fully clothed, floating in his pool a la Sunset Boulevard. (It was
suicide, since the man knew his days were counted). Unexpectedly, this is
the moment when a splendid bit of black humor comes in.
G & M was nominated for 3 Oscars: Actor, Supporting Actress, Screenplay
from previously produced or published material. It won the latter.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Jerry Saravia
I know very little about the late James Whale, except that he was a fine
director and he was very open about his homosexuality. His films also reflected
his way of life, and his need for companionship. These ideas about Whale come
through in the well-acted, if disjointed "Gods and Monsters," a fictional story
of Whale's last days before mysteriously dying in a swimming pool in 1967. 
The exceptional Ian McKellen plays the silver-haired, colorfully attired James
Whale, living in luxury at his house with his harsh housekeeper (played by an
unrecognizable Lynn Redgrave). He's a forgotten movie director who revels in
the glorious Hollywood days of the past, and is immersed in painting and in the
painful memories of serving in the war. 
One day, a new gardener named Clayton (Brendan Fraser) begins working on
Whale's lawn, and Whale immediately becomes transfixed by his physique. He
offers his pool as a welcome respite from work and asks Clayton to pose for his
drawings. Clayton is a dim-witted but kind man who is a little slow to
understand Whale's advances and intentions, even when asked to remove his
shirt. 
"Gods and Monsters" is a smooth piece of entertainment, yet it is
unimaginatively directed by writer-director Bill Condon. Whale's nightmares are
filmed in Gothic blue tones that undermine any sense of real drama or tension
in his own life. There are the silhouetted figures against a night sky (shades
of Whale's own Frankenstein pictures) that say little if anything about the
man. 
The rest of the picture is too stilted and dry; moments that require some sense
of movement are too inert. I admire restraint, but Condon could have framed
certain scenes in more interesting ways. The dinner party is especially
awkward, where Whale reunites with his old-time friends, Boris Karloff and Elsa
Lanchester. The actors who portray these horror legends are convincing, yet we
barely see enough of them. 
Though the filmmaking lacks pizzaz, the performances do not. Ian McKellen is a
remarkable actor and brings such an uncommon blend of sensitivity, wryness,
wit, and nobility to James Whale - thereby evoking the man's own personal
demons. He also brings a delicacy to the man (his looks, gestures, etc.) that
makes us want to watch his every move. At the very least, Condon had the good
sense to feature this titanic actor in nearly every scene. 
Brendan Fraser can't compete with McKellen, but he does bring something to
Clayton that makes us sympathize with him. Still, it is difficult to believe
Fraser as a dumb, hulking man who doesn't catch on to Whale's charms and
subtleties. And Clayton's brief relationship with a waitress (thanklessly
played by Lolita Davidovich) drags the narrative and becomes unnecessary in
context. 
Lynn Redgrave is nutty and uproarious as the housekeeper - a servant to Whale
for almost twenty years. She sees through Whale and resents his routine
advances towards young males. Her reactions to a nearly nude male reporter in
one scene is hilarious to watch, and I liked her comments about "Bride of
Frankenstein": "Your film is not my cup of tea". 
"Gods and Monsters" wants to be a celebration of life and art. This theme,
however, doesn't resonate with the richness or importance of the similar "Love
and Death on Long Island" or "Ed Wood." What one does take away from this movie
is McKellen's delicately sublime, incredibly understated portrayal of the
emotionally ailing James Whale. He shows us that his own monsters were not his
creations. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com
