Title
Review for Urban Legend (1998)
Number of Reviews
27

Author
Steve Rhodes
New England's Pendleton College, which according to "U.S. News and World
Reports" is the safest college in America, has trouble brewing.  It
seems there's a serial killer on the loose, who is making all of those
urban legends come to life -- or more precisely to death.  From the
small dog that dies being dried in the microwave to the babysitter who's
getting threatening calls from someone upstairs, the killer has turned
the campus into a lab for enacting the urban legends taught in Professor
Wexler's (Robert Englund) course.
Quite similar to I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER, from which it borrows
many key plot elements, URBAN LEGEND is a full-fledged member of the
teen-horror-flick genre.  Somewhere there must be a rulebook for these
movies since they all adhere to the same principles.  There will be a
host of attractive college aged kids, most of whom will wear invisible
bulls eyes on their backs.  As the show advances - surprise! -- they
will start dropping like flies.  The killer's face will remain hidden by
a heavy coat, but just about everyone will own a coat exactly like the
killer's.  And most of what makes audiences jump will be good guys who
appear without warning into the scene.
(Now, here is the big secret of ALL of these movies.  I will reveal it
now if you promise never to tell another living soul.  If you tell
anyone else, a person in a heavy coat will pay you a visit. Ready?  The
character with the purest background and the one who appears least
likely to be the killer is always the murderer.  Now, remember that
mum's the word.)
URBAN LEGEND is more concerned with amusing the audience than
frightening it, which is good since it is rarely frightening but it is
sometimes genuinely humorous.
The over-the-top opening is set during a torrential downpour.  As the
thunder crackles, a lone female driver pulls into a gas station run by a
creepy guy (Brad Dourif) with a bad stutter, who's having a bad-hair
day.  He lures her into the office and locks the door behind him.  The
scene then gets so ridiculous that it is hilarious.  Most of the rest of
the movie isn't this funny however.
As the attractive lead, Natalie, Alicia Witt gives the same completely
superficial performance as the rest of the cast.  Jared Leto, last seen
as the lead in PREFONTAINE, plays her boyfriend, Paul, the campus
newspaper's investigative reporter.  Rebecca Gayheart is Natalie's
girlfriend, Brenda.  There are other people in the cast, but they are so
interchangeable that it hardly seems worth mentioning any more names.
To be fair to the actors, the script doesn't call for them to do much.
All of the characters suffer from high degrees of stupidity and bad
luck.
Although director Jamie Blanks just connects the dots, screenwriter
Silvio Horta shows some good comedic flair.  "I dropped journalism
ethics early in the semester," budding reporter Paul tells Natalie as he
burglarizes Professor Wexler's office.  "It wasn't helping my GPA."
Now, there's an honest student.
URBAN LEGEND at its best revels in its ridiculousness.  The campus has
only one cop, Reese (Loretta Devine), and she never calls for help, no
matter how bad the situation gets.  Her gun handling lessons come from
her favorite videotape of Pam Grier in her heyday.  The pudgy Reese is
in no danger of becoming the next Pam Grier, but she doesn't realize it.
Too bad URBAN LEGEND didn't have bigger aspirations than being yet
another horror movie starring teenagers.
URBAN LEGEND runs 1:41.  It is rated R for violence, sex, and profanity
and would be fine for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
What hath Kevin Williamson wrought?  While the horror movie revival
spurred on by his _Scream_ has yielded a few decent entries in the
genre--_I_Know_What_You_Did_Last_Summer_, _Halloween:_H20_, and _Scream_2_
--it must be noted that Williamson himself had a hand in the writing of
those films.  Those Williamson-less post-_Scream_ efforts, among them
_Wishmaster_ and the recent _Disturbing_Behavior_, have been frightening
all right--frighteningly, insultingly _bad_.  Add to that list
_Urban_Legend_, which takes a promising premise and runs it through a
predictable meat grinder of idiocy.
The influence of Williamson on screenwriter Silvio Horta is clear in two
key areas.  First, the opening sequence, like that of _Scream_, is an
extended set piece detailing the singular murder that gets the proverbial
ball rolling.  This sequence, in which Pendleton College coed Michelle
Mancini (Natasha Gregson Wagner) is decapitated while driving, also reveals
the other obviously Williamson-esque touch: the killer's look.  Dressed in
a large hooded parka, wielding an axe, the killer bears more than a passing
resemblance to the _I_Know..._fisherman, sans the hook.
One thing Horta does not borrow from Williamson, however, is the
intriguing premise.  Students at Pendleton are being killed by way of urban
legends--those contemporary bits of "mythology" passed from person to
person, group to group, year to year that become so embedded in the social
consciousness.  It hardly matters if they are true or not, such as the tall
tale that Mikey from the Life cereal commercials died from a fatal
combination of Pop Rocks and Pepsi (he didn't).  Michelle, slain by the
"killer lurking in the backseat" of lore, is but the first to fall prey to
an urban legend come true; as the body count rises, fellow Pendleton
student Natalie (Alicia Witt) suspects not only a link between the murders,
but a personal link to her past as well.
The setup shows promise, but the story never takes off, due in large part
to Horta and the director, the aptly named Jamie Blanks, who fires round
afer round of his namesake in terms of suspense and scares.  Too many of
the would-be shocks are fakeouts reliant on bombastic music cues, and the
film's chase scenes are riddled with the cliches that _Scream_ tried to
subvert, like screaming damsels knowingly running themselves into dead ends
when they should--and could--run out the front door.  But that is just the
tip of the iceberg when it comes to cliches; there's also the climactic
villain confession, in which a contrived and way-too-convenient motive is
revealed, not to mention the credit card opening up the locked door trick,
which is a cliche in any film genre.  Banks and Horta's (intentional)
attempts at humor are also lame; the fact that the best gags are lazy,
in-jokey references to the other credits of co-stars Joshua Jackson and
Rebecca Gayheart says a lot about the imagination of their humor.  Some
laughs are also had when the rather predictable identity of the killer is
revealed, but I'm not so sure if some of the more hilarious things about it
were meant to be so.
The filmmakers don't get much help from their onscreen talent.  I was far
from a fan of bland _I_Know..._ starlet Jennifer Love Hewitt, but I'd talke
her any day ove the dreadfully stiff and uncharismatic Witt, whose inept
attempts at emoting were often met with laughter; Witt has a pefect foil in
her equally pesence-challenged leading man, Jared Leto.  _Dawson's_Creek_
star Jackson mugs his way thorugh a glorified cameo; Gayheart displays all
the depth and range of, well, a Noxzema spokeswoman; and Robert Englund
lends the film little more than his Freddy Krueger pedigree as a folklore
professor.  Granted, the cast
is hampered by their material.  Loretta Devine, who has done some fine work
in films such as _Waiting_to_Exhale_, is saddled with the ridiculous role
of a Pam Grier-worshiping campus security guard.
The recently resuscitated horror genre cannot rely on the efforts one
man--namely, Kevin Williamson--to stay alive.  If other filmmakers continue
to make such shoddy product as _Urban_Legend_, the genre looks to once
again go the way of screen slashers' many victims.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Someone is murdering people on campus in various ways depicting true urban
legends. At first, people don't buy it. Then, people start believing. Then,
people get really scared.
CRITIQUE:
Good little premise with decent mood and a great opening scene, turns into a
muddled "teen horror flick of the day", with plot holes the size of my ass,
and a resolution that just blew away any suspension of disbelief that I had
left over. It's hard for me to describe my distaste for this film's tactics,
without giving too much away, but just let me say that I am personally not a
fan of horror films that leave too many questions unanswered, and this one
had me wondering all kinds of stuff. The fact that the killer wore a parka
in the dead of summer was weird enough, but to show various other members of
the cast with that same parka just for the sake of spreading out our web of
suspension, just didn't brew my beer (Yes, there is actually a girl who
wears a parka jacket inside a pool area. Hello!?!?!?). And you know a horror
flick's lost all sense of hope, when its killer NOT only confesses to the
whole thing whilst torturing a victim, but has a SLIDE SHOW to back things
up. That's right....a SLIDE SHOW!! You'll shit your pants, I'm telling you!
It's too bad because the film had a nice opening, some tense moments and an
interesting premise. And can we please do away with horror flicks in which
nobody in the case believes the main accuser, despite obvious evidence,
signs of foul play and good ol' fashioned proof?? I mean, c'mon people! That
kind of stuff doesn't scare us...it just pisses us right off!! Having said
all that, I suppose this film could be tolerated under certain
circumstances, like a dark, dreary summer night alone in your parka with a
beer in one hand, and a gigantic suspension of disbelief in the other. A
slide show........I still can't get over it !!! hahaha
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Originally titled, MIXED CULTURE and URBAN LEGENDS.
If you look behind Natalie and Parker in the auditorium, you will see the
writer Silvio Horta acting as a college student. Hopefully, he's taking
notes on the implausibilities lined within his own script.
When Paul and Natalie walk into the hidden room in Wexler's office, a puppet
of Freddy Krueger can be seen just before they see the axe. Robert Englund,
who plays Wexler in this film, played Freddy Krueger in the NIGHTMARE ON ELM
STREET movie series.
The book sitting on the desk in Professor Wexler's desk in his class is "The
Vanishing Hitchhiker," which is one of the premiere texts on urban legends.
When Joshua Jackson (Damon Brooks) starts his car before he takes Natalie to
"the spot" in the woods, the radio is playing Paula Cole's "I Don't Want to
Wait" from the TV show "Dawson's Creek" also starring Jackson.
There is another reference regarding a "girl in those Noxema commercials"
which is another subtle ribbing at actress Rebecca Gayheart, who appears in
those commercials. She is currently engaged to her boyfriend of nine years
director Brett Ratner (RUSH HOUR (7.5/10)).

Author
Luke Buckmaster
This is a multi-part message in MIME format.
URBAN LEGEND
(Columbia Tristar)
Cast: Jared Leto, Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Michael Rosenbaum, Loretta
Devine, Joshua Jackson, Tara Reid, John Neville, Robert Englund, Danielle
Harris, Natasha Gregson Wagner
Director: Jamie Blanks
Screenplay: Silvio Horta
Australian theatrical release: January 28, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
2 stars
Melbourne born newcomer Jamie Blanks delights in telling spooky modern
fables; the kind which are told by children in tree houses on Halloween.
These are urban legends, stories that evoke fear from people because a
friend of a friend of someone you know has experienced one.  There's a
killer in your back seat, or a maniacal driver chasing you down a deserted
road - whatever the story may be, Blanks has a visual illustration.  Urban
Legend milks that gimmick for all it's worth, which is the best and worst
reason to see this film.  Those interested in this ever so slight twist of
the standard shock-horror formula should by all means take a look, but
ultimately, this is yet another horror film that misses its mark
considerably.
The way Jamie Blanks directs is interesting in comparison to someone like
Wes Craven.  Craven has been around long enough to know exactly what works
and what doesn't, and although many of his pieces are far from perfect, they
provide calculated shrieks and squeals.  Blanks doesn't have that same
knowledge, so the most he can do is give it a gutsy effort.  Consequently,
some moments of Urban Legend are dumb and boring, whilst others are exciting
and strangely compelling.  Like its final few scenes, which are remarkably
more satisfying than the endings of both Scream and Scream 2.  But this is
escaping the fact that Urban Legend fails to complete even the most basic
requirements for a scary movie: it just isn't scary.
At New England's Pendleton College, somebody is bringing urban legends to
life.  As students begin die off, the assertive Natalie (Alicia Witt)
attempts to make sense of the frightening scenario.  Helping her is Paul
(Jared Leto), a selfish and conniving journalist for the school paper.
Natalie's best friend Brenda (Rebecca Gayheart) is dis-interested; she is
more concerned in flirting with Paul.  Natalie and Paul primarily suspect
their American folklore teacher Professor Wexler (Robert Englund), but there
are lots of other suspects - Natalie's sex crazed room mate, the eerie
school janitor, a Pam Grier look a like security guard, a dim-witted
practical joker, and many more.
Blanks keeps us guessing who-done-it is by creatively cheating - the same
jacket that the killer wears appears in almost everybody's wardrobe.  On one
occasion he uses an entire scene to bluff the audience, and on others he
uses the shock-horror formula which Scream 2 did so well (music builds up,
then a character bumps into somebody else who is - much to our
disappointment - not trying to kill him/her).  It works to reasonable
success, although the line up of suspects are an uninteresting bunch and for
that matter, so are all the characters.  The identity of the killer should
have evoked a fun guess-then-guess-again game with the audience, but after
not long I just wanted to get the revealing process over with.
Alicia Witt's performance is a change in character for most horror heroines.
She offers something that Neve Campell and Jenniffer Love Hewitt haven't:
Witt seems to have a reasonable idea of what's going on.  Though appearing
as moderately aggressive, Witt doesn't have the sexual flamboyancy and zest
that is an assumed trait of these type of roles.  Portraying intelligence is
not enough; she lacks excitement. Rebecca Gayheart gives flamboyancy and
confidence to her part, but she suits a more eccentric thriller like Scream
(although she did have a small part in Scream 2 as an annoyingly cheerful
student). Veteran John Neville - famous for his role as "The Well-Manicured
Man" in The X Files movie and television series - can be seen in a small and
unrewarding part as the Dean.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any inquiries or
feedback
Read more of my reviews at Alphalink Movies:
http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Jamie Blanks
Cast:  Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Jared Leto, Joshua Jackson, Tara
Reid, Michael Rosenbaum, John Neville, Robert Englund, Natasha Gregson
Wagner
Screenplay:  Silvio Horta
Producers:  Gina Matthews, Michael McDonnell
Runtime:  100 min.
US Distribution:  TriStar
Rated R:  horror violence/gore, language, sex
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Imagine this:  you're walking down a really dark hallway.  It's so dark
that you can't see anything -- not even the walls, not even your hands! 
(The only thing illuminated is your face.)  You're looking around
slowly, plodding through the darkness, scared of something that may or
may not be there.  Suddenly, a half-second crack of extremely loud
guitar music radiates from a six-foot stack of speakers right next to
you.  Would you be scared?  I sure would be.  I'd fall to the floor,
convulsing, perhaps even weeping, and I doubt that I'd ever recover from
the incident.
In real life, this would be frightening.  But in a horror movie, the
formula doesn't work quite the same way.  For instance, the scene
described above is a common one in Urban Legend, with each segment
ending in that ultra-loud burst of music.  When we see people walking
through dark hallways, we know that they're probably just going to have
the stuffing scared out of them.  On occasion, he or she might get
gutted by some maniac, but, typically, scenes like this are false
alarms. 
Urban Legend is wholesale false alarms, none of which are particularly
alarming.  Ever since Scream came out in 1996, the studios have been
rushing to bring out their own teen horror flicks.  They range from the
watchable (I Know What you Did Last Summer) to the silly (Disturbing
Behavior), but I have yet to see one that does everything right.  Urban
Legend is perhaps sillier than all of them, sporting a kinda-cool
gimmick/plot.  It's watchable badness, with some decent moments of
suspense and good acting.  But I wonder if the director, Jamie Blanks,
had any idea that the film is inherently and completely ridiculous.  
Like most of these new-wave Teen Horror Flicks, Urban Legend has a
gimmick in place of a story.  The gimmick is that the killer murders
people based on urban legends.  Urban legends are those stories that
everyone knows and thinks are true, but really hold no truth
whatsoever.  I sat in quiet astonishment as the fable of Mikey, the Life
Cereal kid, is discussed on screen.  I heard that story probably twelve
years ago (when I was just a tyke), and in all this time I've never
heard anything that proved the tale true or false.  It's slightly
amusing the way Urban Legend uses this group of famous stories to create
a sequence of interesting set-pieces.  Strictly as a formality, the film
has a main character:  her name is Natalie (Alicia Witt).  She's a
college student, and -- just as our young heroines in all of the other
Teen Horror Flicks -- she's the girl the killer wants to abuse
emotionally.
This film is profoundly silly, but there's stuff I liked about it. 
First, there's Alicia Witt.  She's a great actress (very Witty), and,
when given the right material, extremely funny (remember her on
"Cybil?").  The script for this film, which was written by Silvio Horta,
doesn't give her much of a character to work with, but she's fun to
watch anyway.  Also fun is Rebecca Gayheart (Noxema girl!); she overacts
on a nuclear-meltdown level, but I think she's aware of it.  In
addition, the film features John Neville (as the evil Dean) and Robert
Englund (for a guy so well-known, you'd think he'd make a good movie
every once in a while).  There are lots of actors in this film, but no
characters -- that tends to be a problem when we're trying to manifest
sympathy for the figures on screen getting all hacked up.
Blanks has a good visual style, and the film is competent in its
execution.  There are a few really nicely-done scenes, including a
gore-fest that has something to do with a dog in a microwave; the
opening scene (which features an uncredited Brad Dourif in a role not
unlike his first in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest) is spectacular and
beautifully ironic.  There are some good camera angles, and Blanks
injects enough atmosphere to keep the film from being dry and
uninspired.  It's just too bad that the film is overflowing with cliches
and scenes that end with loud bursts of music.  
Even for a horror film, there are necessary elements missing.  It isn't
very scary -- it relies a little too heavily on gore and gratuitous
violence (some of it is simply unpleasant).  What makes films like this
really scary is a believable explanation for everything.  That's where
Urban Legend really loses it -- the final fifteen minutes of the film
are laughably absurd (I'm not exaggerating -- I was laughing).  Did
Blanks know how silly all of this stuff is?  Perhaps.  It would have
been nice if the urban legend gimmick had been put to better use, but
I'm more concerned with the numerous scenes that rely on that crack of
loud music to scare the audience.  It's so hard to scare us when we know
it's coming anyway.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Jamie Blanks.
Cast: Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Jared Leto, Tara Reid, Michael 
Rosenbaum, Loretta Devine, Joshua Jackson, Natasha Gregson Wagner, 
Danielle Harris, Robert Englund, John Neville, Julian Richings, Brad 
Dourif.
1998 - 100 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, profanity, brief sex, and mild gore).
Suggested Retail Price: $24.99
Widescreen Format in the original 2.35:1 theatrical aspect ratio on Side 
A/Pan-and-Scan format on Side B
Languages: English and French 
Back in the early 1980's, there was a slasher movie craze, and it 
eventually burned out because the films simply weren't any good, 
reaching for the lowest-common-denominator in filmmaking. But then 
1996's "Scream," a genre-shattering horror flick, suddenly revived the 
genre, and since then we have been bombarded with new horror movies, and 
the strange thing is, ever since then, they could be divided easily into 
two categories: the great ("Scream," "Scream 2," "I Know What You Did 
Last Summer") and the awful ("An American Werewolf in Paris," 
"Wishmaster," "I Still Know What You Did Last Summer"). Usually you can 
tell before you see one of these little fright items whether they are 
going to be worthwhile or not. And luckily, the new slasher film, "Urban 
Legend," directed by newcomer Jamie Blanks, fits in the former category: 
the great. 
"Urban Legend" stars Alicia Witt (TV's "Cybill") as Natalie, a student 
of the fictional northeastern college Pendleton University, who becomes 
convinced after several dead bodies show up that a psychopathic killer 
is on the loose, murdering people in ways that are based on urban 
legends (i.e. an axe-wielding killer hiding in the backseat of your car, 
a babysitter receiving threatening phone calls that are coming from 
inside the house, etc.). Complicating the story even more is the myth 
that at the college 25 years ago, a muder spree took place, and the sole 
survivor was Mr. Wexler (Robert Englund), who, surprise!, is currently 
teaching the American Folklore class at Pendleton U.
As in the "Scream" movies, "Urban Legend" has a lot of fun toying with 
its audience on who the killer is: could it be Mr. Wexler; Paul (Jared 
Leto), a journalism major and potential boyfriend of Natalie; the 
school's janitor; or any number of the other students and staff. 
Regardless of this minor similarity to "Scream," "Urban Legend" is an 
original because of the extremely clever, ingenious storyline. 
Practically no popular legend is left unturned, and all of them are used 
to spooky effect. 
There are many things that separate this from those 80's stalk-and-slash 
movies: the characters aren't all one-dimensional airheads, and the 
performances are from mostly talented up-and-coming actors; the writing 
is sharp and often funny, with many in-jokes and tributes to other 
movies, most noticably "Halloween"; the killer's identity is, for most 
of the running time, unpredictable; and most importantly, it is actually 
scary, with many effective, suspenseful set-pieces. Two particular 
moments that are especially nerve-wracking is the opening scene, set at 
a gas station, and the other is set at a radio station. The picture runs 
at a brisk pace, and is consistently entertaining. The technical credits 
are superb, particularly the moody cinematography which casts the 
college as an ominous character of its own, and the down-beat music 
score by Chrstopher Young. Another plus is that there are very few songs 
in the movie, compared to other recent "hip" films aimed at young 
adults, and like some of the great genre works, like "Halloween" and 
"The Exorcist," it relies more on an instrumental scores. 
If there is a negative thing about the resurgence of the horror genre, 
it is usually the climax, which reveals the killer's identity and then 
becomes an example of overacting, and loses its frightening grip. Not 
here. In "Urban Legend," the villain, whom will remain nameless, 
obviously has a lot of fun, and it becomes both menacing and strangely 
humorous. Oh, and one last thing that is worth mentioning: Loretta 
Devine, who plays the school's black security guard who is obsessed with 
Pam Grier and blaxploitation movies, is a standout, stealing every scene 
she's in. The same thing goes for Tara Reid (last seen in the Coen 
Brothers' "The Big Lebowski), as Sasha, Natalie's friend, and DJ at the 
college's radio station. "Urban Legend" is one of the very best of the 
recent slasher offerings, because it mixes its laughs and chills with 
more smoothness and grace than usual, and it proves that just because 
it's a horror movie that includes people being murdered doesn't mean it 
still can't be intelligent and impressive filmmaking. 
The DVD edition of "Urban Legend" comes to you in a wonderful package 
filled to the brim with interesting and insightful special features. The 
film is certainly the best horror film to be released since "Scream," 
but the extra supplement material buoys it over to being an absolute 
must-buy on DVD.
First, the DVD transfer and sound is top-notch, like all of Sony's 
releases, and includes clear, precise colors, with an appropriate 
emphasis on shades of blue. Aside from maybe one or two instances, there 
are no noticable hints of bleeding or grain, and the sound perfectly 
compliments the the picture quality, with an especially powerful 
transfer of the memorable music score. The orchestral accompaniments 
were actually noticed more on DVD than when I saw this film in theaters 
last September. Like usual, I ignored the Full Screen version of the 
film and did not even take a look at it since any well-knowledged film 
buff will know that Widescreen is incomparably superior, capturing the 
theatrical aspect ratio that the movie was meant to be seen in.
As for the Special Features, Sony deserves a round of applause for going 
out of their way to bring us many enjoyable bonus'. The "Making-Of" 
featurette, which runs about ten to fifteen minutes, was fascinating 
because Director Jamie Blanks narrated the footage, which shows us 
filming of some of the major sequences, including the opening scene at 
the gas station; the parking garage death scene with John Neville; and 
the set-piece in the forest with Alicia Witt and Joshua Jackson (as 
Natalie's wise-cracking friend, Damon). Also among the featurette is an 
intriguing deleted sex scene between Michael Rosenbaum and Tara Reid in 
which they are attempting to mimic the positions of the Kama Sutra. 
Although fun to watch, the scene was wisely cut since it was rather 
pointless to the story and concluded with an odd occurrence happening 
that didn't really make much sense in the context of what follows. The 
Filmmaker's Commentary was done in my favorite commentary format, in 
which Director Jamie Blanks, writer Silvio Horta, and actor Michael 
Rosenbaum discuss the making of each scene as the film moves along, 
adding surprising and often funny anecdotes about the making of the 
picture, as well as stories of the cast and how they actually managed to 
get the film made in the first place. A particularly amusing on-going 
discussion that they bring up throughout is how they found the late Gene 
Siskel's negative review rubbish, since he claimed the film was far too 
bloody and gruesome. The filmmakers repeatedly point out, however, that 
they purposefully tried to stray away from excess blood and gore in the 
film, making it appear with tight edits that the viewer has seen more 
than they actually have. Other intriguing anecdotes during the 
commentary were that several lines were improvised; Loretta Devine's 
part grew more and more as they discovered how very good she was in it; 
and that the self-referential scene in which Jackson turns on the radio 
to hear Paula Cole's "I Don't Want To Wait" (the theme song to TV's 
"Dawson's Creek," which Jackson stars in) was actually thought of on the 
spot and was filmed during the last take. Finally, other Special 
Features include actor biographies and filmographies, which come in 
handy if you are interested in learning about each star and what else 
they have previously been in, and the film's atmospheric theatrical 
trailer.
With such a splendid compilation of Special Features on a film such as 
"Urban Legend," which was one of the more entertaining films of 1998 
(and on my runner's-up list of the year's best), this DVD is one of the 
better presentations that I have come across since buying my DVD player 
in September of 1998, and judging from the fine commentary, Director 
Blanks is a talented new filmmaker whom I expect a bright future from.
     - DVD Review written by Dustin Putman, March 2, 1999 
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
David Nusair
Starring Jared Leto, Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Joshua Jackson, Robert
Englund
"Urban Legend" is the latest film in the newly created genre, the "teen
horror/suspense movie", following "Scream", "Disturbing Behaviour", and
"I Know What You Did Last Summer".  I don't think the word "horror" should
even be used to describe these films, though.  To call them horror movies
would imply that they are scary.  They most decidedly are not.  The
contain elements that make the viewer "jump", yes, but they do not contain
any images that linger with the viewer for days afterwards, as a truly
scary movie will do.
The setup for "Urban Legend" is a rather intriguing one.  Some lunatic is
offing students at an American university in the style of famous urban
legends.  These are stories we've all heard, but have likely never
actually happened to a real person.  A premise like that would appear to
be foolproof, but the director, Jamie Blanks, has disproven that theory. 
He creates absolutely no sense of atmosphere, and nothing in this movie
gave me chills.  Sure it's competently directed, but imagine what a
director like David Fincher could have done with a script like this.  
As for the performances, there's nothing too special here.  Jared Leto has
the presence of a dead chicken.  Joshua Jackson steals all the scenes he is
in, but he vacates the picture after the first 20 minutes.  Alicia Witt
never convinced me she was actually scared, even when she was being chased
by a psycho with an axe.  And finally, Robert Englund, "Freddy" himself,
has a small part as a professor that teaches a class on (what a surprise!)
urban legends.  He's good, but is not given much to do.
I will say this for the movie, though.  When the killer was finally
revealed, it was someone I had not even considered as a suspect.  That's
not entirely true, however.  During the 100 minute running time of the
film, anyone who is more than an extra is made to be a suspect.  I guess I
did like that aspect of the movie; the fact that I was constantly
guessing. 
"Urban Legend" isn't all bad, really.  It's just not scary, and that
offends me since it's being marketed as a horror film.  But it is
entertaining all the way through, and it kept me guessing, so I'll
recommend it if a better movie is sold out.
-- 
David Nusair                                      dnusair@chat.carleton.ca
Come visit my "Reel Film Reviews" site! "http://chat.carleton.ca/~dnusair" 

Author
Fox Davidson
  Bing, bang boom!  Scream, whimper, cry!  Sudden noise, impending doom, turn
around, it's only your friend, the practical joker.  This could be the premises
for the new-to-video Urban Legend, a random Scream impersonator that is
strikingly nice to look at, but not very stimulating to talk about.
  The film, director by new comer Jamie Blanks, stars Alicia Witt (my pick for
the best leading female in a horror film since Neve Campbell) as the ominous
Scream Queen, ready to scream her lungs out, as she does quite often.  When a
young women is murdered not far from the college where she attends, she, along
with the snotty school paper reporter Jared Letto and her dumb-as-doornails
friends (one a predictable victim for the masked slasher, she is the host of a
college radio talk show dedicated to sex - what a surprise!), form the idea
that the killer is killing in the forms of urban legends.
  Urban Legend is so clearly a bluntant rip-off of Wes Craven, that I couldn't
help but think about Scream (and its superior sequel) while watching this film.
 Various shots in the new film almost copy the ones in Scream, that Legend's
major drawing point is, also, its draw back, lacking any sense of originality,
so even when the killer is identified, it is SO original, it was just silly.
  I did, however, like the way Blanks filmed the chase scenes.  One of these
sequences features a breathtaking fall and several close-calls with a swinging
ax.  We haven't seen an ax as the main weapon in a horror film since the Friday
the 13th movies.  There are also other choices of maiming, such as hanging with
a rope, and car smashing.
  Urban Legend is much better than Disturbing Behavior (the lackluster
anti-Stepford Wives with Dawson's Creek It Girl Katie Holmes), but, lacks the
recent Halloween: H2O's depth and frightning stalk-and-dice theme.  
  The DVD of Legend is very good.  It contains the original theatrical trailer,
cast bios, and an interesting Behind-the-Scenes featurette, which was more fun
than the actual movie.

Author
Steve Kong
Have you ever heard the story about the group of teens being chased by a
masked man? You know the story, where there's a hip theme and some
good-looking actors. Thinking of Scream? Wrong. Maybe it's Scream 2? Wrong.
OK, it's gotta be I Know What You Did Last Summer! Wrong! It's Urban
Legend. Urban Legend is the next hip-slasher film to come down the pipe
after the revival of the slasher-film genre by Scream.
In my review of I Know What You Did Last Summer I listed the common
elements of the '90s hip-slasher films. Here's a quick rundown 1) The
killer has to wear some sort of a mask -- this time around the killer is
dressed as an Eskimo. 2) There needs to be ditsy female leads with ample
cleavage. 3) There needs to be a cast of one-dimensional characters that
serve as slasher fodder. I'm adding one more to this list: 4) There needs
to be a point in the film where the undead dead killer returns for a final
round. I'm happy to say that Urban Legend dutifully fills all these
requirements.
On the campus of a quiet Maine university, a student, Natalie (Alicia
Witt), is being harassed by a killer who is dressed like an Eskimo and
likes to kill people by methods based on urban legends. Urban legends are
modern folktales that may be true or may just be a hoax. We all know one or
two urban legends, and a few are covered in the movie. During the movie we
get The Ax Murderer in the Backseat, Pop Rocks & Pepsi, The Hung Lover,
Woman Who Dried Her Dog in the Microwave, and a few more.
Sounds like a good premise. It reminds me of another movie, CopyCat, that
used a similar premise. In CopyCat, the killer modeled his killings on
previous serial killers. The difference between CopyCat and Urban Legend is
that CopyCat is a good movie with good scares. Urban Legend is not.
The thrills in Urban Legend come in the form known as Cheap Scares. Cheap
Scares are the type of scares in which a person's head fills the screen,
they are walking forward, and then WHAM! someone touches their shoulder.
The WHAM! is punctuated with a burst from the musical score. It's not a
scare that's built up, it's just something that startles us. Urban Legend
does this repeatedly -- four or five times in the first half-hour. If I
wanted this kind of scare, I'd have a monkey follow me around with a gong.
Some moments in the film are horrific though. I loved the opening (The Ax
Murderer in the Backseat), which is slowly built up. Tension is never too
high in Urban Legend.
Two actors in Urban Legend are serviceable Alicia Witt ("Cybill") and Jared
Leto (Switchback, Prefontaine). Witt does a good job onscreen, though she
doesn't have the scream of a "scream queen." Leto doesn't get too much
screen time, but he does OK.
One actress sticks out like a sore thumb. I'm not sure what Rebecca
Gayheart was aiming for, but she overshoots it by a mile. Gayheart just
plainly overacts in Urban Legend.
Writer Silvio Horta actually gets the movie off to a good start. The first
half of the movie -- Cheap Scares and all -- works well. However, as we
slide into the halfway mark of the film, things go downhill. Red herrings
and cliches are thrown at us like doggie-treats. And as the body count
rises in the film, the thrill of this thriller proportionally drops. After
awhile I just wanted the Eskimo to wipe out the whole school and be over
with it.
Would I recommend Urban Legend? No. Rent Scream or Scream 2 for some good
thrills. Urban Legend is just a bad knock-off of Scream.
Hey monkey, hit that gong!  Scared?

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Alicia Witt, Jared Leto, Rebecca Gayheart, Robert Englund
Ingredients: College kids, mysterious murders, urban legends
Synopsis: 
The plot of URBAN LEGEND revolves around Natalie (Alicia Witt), a
Pendleton College girl who discovers that everyone associated with her
is being killed off. The catch is that they're dying in accordance with
the plots of popular urban folk tales such as the story of the ax
murderer hiding in the back seat. Just like in SCREAM, Natalie's young
peers are familiar with these folk tales, so they know how death might
possibly occur.
Police never show up, and attractive college kids wander around and run
off to be alone in dark places where a villain who wears a hooded winter
parka in warm weather stalks them. People always run the wrong way
straight into danger. Evidence and bodies disappear, and in the end, as
tradition dictates, the villain is revealed to be someone who can't
possibly do all that lifting, clean up all that evidence, and survive so
many bullet wounds. 
Opinion: 
Urban legends are fictional modern folk tales passed off as true. A
couple examples are: the cat in the microwave; alligators hiding in the
sewers; a famous actor (you know his name) going to the hospital with a
gerbil in his intestine; feeding alka seltzer tablets to seagulls to
make them explode; seeing a girl walking down the street and finding out
later she died years ago; the kid who gets his pecker chopped off in the
bathroom; the choking Doberman;  et cetera, et cetera.
URBAN LEGEND features some of these, but I haven't heard of some of the
others. It's a somewhat campy movie that's not really suspenseful. But
at least we get to see who lives, who dies, and who the villain in the
winter parka turns out to be.

Author
Dustin Putman
Urban Legend * * * 1/2 (out of * * * * )
Directed by Jamie Blanks.
Cast: Alicia Witt, Jared Leto, Rebecca Gayheart, Tara Reid, Michael 
Rosenbaum, Loretta Devine, Joshua Jackson, John Neville, Natasha Gregson 
Wagner, Danielle Harris, Robert Englund.
Running Time: 100 minutes.
Rated R (for horror violence, gore, profanity, and a brief sex scene).
Back in the early 1980's, there was a slasher movie craze, and it 
eventually burned out because the films simply weren't any good, 
reaching for the lowest-common-denominator in filmmaking. But then 
1996's "Scream," a genre-shattering horror flick suddenly revived the 
genre, and since then we have been bombarded with new horror movies, and 
the strange thing is, ever since then, they could be divided easily into 
two categories: the great ("Scream," "Scream 2," "I Know What You Did 
Last Summer") and the awful ("An American Werewolf in Paris," 
"Wishmaster"). Usually you can tell before you see one of these little 
fright items whether they are going to be worthwhile or not. And 
luckily, the new slasher film, "Urban Legend," directed by newcomer 
Jamie Blanks, fits in the former category: the great.
"Urban Legend" stars Alicia Witt (TV's "Cybill") as Natalie, a student 
of the fictional northeastern college Pendleton University, who becomes 
convinced after several dead bodies show up that a psychopathic killer 
is on the loose, murdering people in ways that are based on urban 
legends (i.e. an axe-wielding killer hiding in the backseat of your car, 
a babysitter receiving threatening phone calls that are coming from 
inside the house, etc.). Complicating the story even more is the myth 
that at the college 25 year ago, a muder spree took place, and the sole 
survivor was Mr. Wexler (Robert Englund), who, surprise!, is currently 
teaching the American Folklore class at Pendleton U.
As in the "Scream" movies, "Urban Legend" has a lot of fun toying with 
its audience on who the killer is: could it be Mr. Wexler; Paul (Jared 
Leto), a journalism major and potential boyfriend of Natalie; the 
school's janitor; or any number of the other students and staff. 
Regardless of this minor similarity to "Scream," "Urban Legend" is an 
original because of the extremely clever, ingenious storyline. 
Practically no popular legend is left unturned, and all of them are used 
to spooky effect.
There are many things that separate this from those 80's stalk-and-slash 
movies: the characters aren't all one-dimensional airheads, and the 
performances are from mostly talented up-and-coming actors; the writing 
is sharp and often funny, with many in-jokes and tributes to other 
movies, most noticably "Halloween"; the killer's identity is, for most 
of the running time, unpredictable; and most importantly, it is actually 
scary, with many effective, suspenseful set-pieces.
Two particular moments that are especially nerve-wracking is the opening 
scene, set at a gas station, and another set at a radio station. The 
picture runs at a brisk pace, and is consistently entertaining.
The technical credits are superb, particularly the moody cinematography 
which casts the college as an ominous character of its own, and the 
down-beat music score. Another plus is that there are very few songs in 
the movie, and like some of the great genre works, like "Halloween" and 
"The Exorcist," it relies more on instrumental scores.
If there is a negative thing about the resurgence of the horror genre, 
it is usually the climax, which reveals the killer's identity and then 
becomes an example of overacting, and loses its frightening grip. Not 
here. In "Urban Legend," the villain, whom will remain nameless, 
obviously has a lot of fun, and it becomes both menacing and strangely 
humorous. 
Oh, and one last thing that is worth mentioning: Loretta Devine, who 
plays the school's black security guard who is obsessed with Pam Grier 
and blaxploitation movies, is a standout, stealing every scene she's in.
"Urban Legend" is one of the very best of the recent slasher offerings, 
because it mixes its laughs and chills with more smoothness and grace 
than usual, and it proves that just because it's a horror movie where 
people are brutally murdered doesn't mean it still can't be intelligent 
and impressive filmmaking. 

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: September 25, 1998
Starring: Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Jared Leto, Loretta Devine,
Joshua Jackson, Tara Reid, Michale Rosenbaum, John Neville, Robert
Englund
Directed by: Jamie Blanks
Distributed by: Sony Pictures Entertainment / TriStar Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (horror violence/gore, language, sexual content) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/urban.htm
As the slasher/horror-genre revival takes the film world by storm,
filmmakers are gravitating toward the quantity-over-quality maxim. Along
with earlier-this-year's DISTURBING BEHAVIOR, the latest entry into the
neo-category is a quickly-crafted mix of script, character, and
atmosphere. In directing her debut feature, Jamie Blanks attempts to
take URBAN LEGEND down a path that hasn't been done before. The title
shows it - she's going to make use of those pop campfire scare stories -
but in the process of trying to fit everything in she falls back on
cliché and gimmick to the point where it reflects badly on other films
of the type. 
Granted, the urban legends make things interesting intially, but for the
most part this is simply novelty. Everyone knows most of these stories
by one version or another, and the popularity is undeniable, but by the
end they're just a tired gimmick. Even that might work, but in order to
substantiate this, the script calls upon recent trademarks. How many
people in the same small town have the same fur-lined parka (a la the
raincoat in I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER)? Or who brought the gun
into the final scene so that the killer could get offed at least three
times a la SCREAM? And that escape route by foot through the woods -
why, that wouldn't be from DISTURBING BEHAVIOR, would it? The bottom
line is that everything included here is definitely not of orginal make
or model. 
The center of the cast is a group of four or five teens we've all seen
before. Alicia Witt (TV's CYBILL) is no different from the Jennifer Love
Hewitts and Neve Campbells of Gen-X fame, and she does all right - minus
a bit of inspiration. Her college student world is rocked one night when
news of the gruesome death of a friend reaches campus. Suddenly other
friends start turning up dead (Joshua Jackson, Danielle Harris), and all
suffer death in the same fashion as one of the urban legends. The cast
is narrowed down to only the smart and the quick, and, of course, they
have their fallings-out and childish moments of paranoia. Nothing we
haven't seen, but not to worry - it won't be long before the killer
strikes again. Thus the plot. 
The only reason we don't confuse this with parody is because Jamie
Blanks makes to spice up her movie with murders grotesque and graphic to
the extreme. URBAN LEGEND is perhaps the first movie to enter the
no-holds-barred arena of slasher movies, and the only purpose it serves
is to turn the audience against the killer. After a string of nine or
ten gruesome deaths, the audience cares more about how the killer will
die rather than who he actually is. And in this case, when the
impossible identity is revealed, no one bats an eye - which could lead
one to believe that Blanks was counting on the ignorance of her
audience. Most of URBAN LEGEND follows in suit: a typical 90's horror
movie. And though the crowds will flock to the theaters on opening
weekend, you don't have to be among them.

Author
Sean Siska
        I'm not sure if Silvio Horta wrote URBAN LEGEND before or after
the success of SCREAM, but I'm guessing after just because it seems he
may not have had time to write a second draft. Seriously, this idea--a
psycho bumping off people in the style of urban legends--is a great one
and I wish it could have been pulled off. The first sign of trouble comes
with the painfully insipid dialogue. An example: "That [car crash] must've
been awful...for everyone involved." You can tell that the writer intended
that something a little more airy was supposed to have been said,  just no
one figured out what.
I know in slasher movies there isn't supposed to be a lot of great
characterization and I myself don't mind cardboard cutouts, but please
don't let the cutouts be so damn bland. One reason movies like SCREAM,
STAR WARS and DIVA have become so treasured is because they feature
charismatic actors playing interesting characters. Aside from Jared Leto
and Joshua Jackson (who aren't on the screen long enough) no one in URBAN
LEGEND makes the grade. Alicia Witt shows none of the acerbity or wit she
displayed on CYBILL, Rebecca Gayheart actually looks unattractive (not to
mention as dumb as a post through 3/4 of the film) and Robert Englund just
cruises on auto pilot.
Good thing Brad Dourif is here, but wait...he's only in the movie
for five minutes _and_ he's just redoing his good-natured
stuttering character from ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST. Which brings me
to another aspect of URBAN LEGEND: it's unoriginality. The film most
blatantly ripped off is SCREAM (another reason that makes me think Silvio
Horta wrote this after Craven's and Williamson's great success). URBAN
LEGEND tries to deconstruct modern-day folklore much the same way SCREAM
deconstructed slasher films, but it doesn't quite succeed. It's best
stab at self-reflexivity is poking fun at "that girl in the Noxzeema ad"
(ie, Rebecca Gayheart) We also have another
killer-taunting-his-victim-on-the-phone routine in URBAN LEGEND and quick,
what movie is this exchange of dialogue from:
Villain: Why? WHY?!?
Congratulations to those of you who answered SCREAM and/or URBAN LEGEND.
Like I said, this movie could've been great. If only Silvio had
worked or been allowed to work a little longer on the script. Still,at
least URBAN LEGEND had some pretty cool death scenes and a somewhat
realized whodunit angle which makes this slasher is waaaayyyyyy better than 
I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
I had this stupid little smile on my face during the opening scenes of URBAN
LEGEND.  I thought back, fondly, to CANDYMAN, an intensely disturbing little
movie that took the idea of urban legends and invested it with a grand and
primordial dread.  The only dread I felt during URBAN LEGEND was the fear
that my watch had stopped.
Okay, maybe I'm being too cruel.  URBAN LEGEND was obviously put together,
post-haste, to cash in on the success of movies like SCREAM and I KNOW WHAT
YOU DID LAST SUMMER -- a movie where teenagers and proto-twenty-somethings
get sucked into various horrible happenings, but maintain the ability to
spit out ironic one-liners and wisecracks.  LEGEND is competent and amusing,
and gory without being excessive, but barely worth more than a glance when
it comes on cable TV.  We've seen it all before, better.
This time around, the premise is that various students on a college campus
are being stalked by a nutcase whose methods of dispatching his victims are
patterned after various urban legends.  There's the Man With The Axe In The
Backseat, the Microwave Death, and so on.  About all that's missing is the
Death By Broiling In A Tanning Salon and the Choking Doberman -- and if you
don't know about those, go ask the guy who writes "The Straight Dope".
Once the movie gets rolling, though, there's not much to look forward to
beyond the unmasking of the killer.  But along the way there are some cute
stops.  Robert Englund (the voice and face of "Freddy Krueger" from the
NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET movies) plays a professor on campus who runs a class
on urban legends, and one of his hallmarks is that the camera never just
seems to SHOW him.  We'll see a bunch of students in a hallway or something,
and then the camera will slam-pan to the side with a ZOINK! of horror-movie
synth music, and there he is.  I guess it goes without saying that he's one
of the suspects.
Movies like this inspire a great deal of free-association in me.  For
instance, why is it in films like this that the killer always chooses to
dress so homogenously?  In ...SUMMER, it was a yellow rain slicker; in this
movie, it's a parka with a fur-trimmed hood, which in the middle of a
non-snowbound campus, would be sure to grab anyone's attention.  And do the
people who compose the scores for these movies all use the same orchestra
hit synthesizer patch?  It sure sounds like it.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 TriStar Pictures /Phoenix Pictures
 Director: Jamie Blanks
 Writer: Silvio Harta
 Cast: Jared Leto, Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Michael
Rosenbaum, Joshua Jackson, Tara Reid
   "Urban Legend" follows the conventions of the collegiate
horror movie but it is so well-written, tightly paced and
realistically acted that it rates as the scariest film of its kind
since "Scream."  If "Halloween H20" has turned you off on the
species, have your faith restored with director Jamie Blanks's
work, based on a script by the 24-year-old Silvio Harta.
   The high concept that propels the movie is similar to that of
Jon Amiel's 1995 hit, "Copycat," a similarly tense and visceral
story of a man determined to trod down the same paths as
other serial killers.  In this case, the murderer acts out the
details of urban legends, modern-day folk tales which, like the
Greek tales of past millenia (thinks "Oedipus," "Antigone" and
"Medea,") deal with the untimely end that comes to people to
flout societal (or religious) conventions.  
   While no alligators appear in the sewers of the New
England college (only in New York, remember?), other myths
are cleverly and horrifyingly re-enacted with special touches
for originality.  The fairly banal fable of the woman who put
her wet cat in the microwave oven to dry gets a canine slant
thanks to an adorable West Highland White, while other folk
tales--such as one playing on the severe damage that your
car may suffer if driven over parking-lot spikes and another
about kidneys which are extracted from unwilling victims and
sold on the black market--are given new life with a
vengeance.  What's particularly praiseworthy this time around
is that most of the time an guiltless guy or gal gets tapped
suddenly and without warning on the back, it's not usually an
innocent encounter but a prelude to something gory. 
   The story begins in the typical fashion as a car, running out
of gas, traverses a lonely road.  The driver, Pendleton college
student Michele Mancini, reluctanty accepts a tankful of gas
from the frightening attendant (Brad Dourif) whose stuttering
banter petrifies the wits of the coed but turns out--like much of
the rest of the movie--to be other than you think it is.  Michelle
becomes the first victim of the killer's axe, soon to be joined
by a number of others who all have a special connection to
one particular student: we in the audience are challenged to
figure this out thereby exposing the motive and the
perpetrator--all revealed in the penultimate scene.
   "Urban Legend" features Alicia Witt as girl-next-door
Natalie, yet another figure who is not all who she appears to
be.  In fact her criminal background becomes a major clue in
this whodunit horror film.  Ms. Witt is ably supported by an
ensemble of stereotypical college students who spend their
days pursuing more interesting pleasures than their studies. 
The erotic scenes and sexual banter are pumped for their
humor, particularly underscoring college radio broadcaster
Sasha (Tara Reid) whose programming of carnal counsel may
have been modeled from Howard Stern's show.  Practicing
what she preaches, this blond libertine's favorite book is the
Kama Sutra and her motto might well be "willing to try any
and all positions."  But handsome, blue-eyed Jaret Leto is the
Leo Di Caprio guy who, in the role of college journalist Paul,
is likely to bring in the audience of high-school and college
women.  Joshua Jackson as practical joker Damon turns in
the best situation gag of the movie, Robert Englund plays the
kind of professor we all wish we had, and the veddy British
John Neville bring an exceptionally sharp touch to his role as
college dean--the man who hushed up a multiple murder in
the school's Stanley Hall 25 years earlier.
   "Urban Legend" is a young person's motion picture but one
with a mythic resonance likely to appeal to moviegoers of all
ages.  Following its dictates could save your life. For example,
we already know that we should wear weat belts and drive
within the speed limit.  But did you know you could get
yourself killed some night for warning an oncoming car that its
headlights are out?

Author
Jason Wallis
Urban Legend (1998) * * * 1/2 (out of four)
Starring Jared Leto, Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Natasha Wagner, Michael
Rosenbaum, Loretta Devine, Joshua Jackson, Tara Reid, John Neville, Robert
Englund and Brad Dourif 
Directed by Jamie Blanks 
Rated R for graphic violence and gore, profanity and suggested sex 
Theatrical aspect ratio of 2.35:1 
Released in 1998 
Running 99 minutes 
Urban Legend surprised me. Based on the last few films the genre has
produced (including but not exclusive to the likes of I Know What You Did
Last Summer, Disturbing Behavior and the disappointing Halloween: H20), I
was positive that I was in store for another mildly entertaining but silly
and ultimately boring rehash of the Scream phenomena. Thankfully, Legend
rose above it's soggy premise to become not only a hip, scary and stylish
entertainment, but also what will probably become one of the best films of
the year. 
You're all familiar with the plot; a bunch of overly horny teenagers get
systematically slaughtered by a masked maniac who's identity is not
revealed until the closing moments of the film when it turns out to be, you
guessed it; everybody's favorite veteran of the whodunit flicks...the only
person you didn't suspect! 
However, just because Legend doesn't really break any new ground as far as
literary or even technical achievements go does not mean that it can't
qualify as first-class entertainment. It was, believe it or not, one of the
funnest times I've had at the movies all year. 
The thing is, I'm not really sure what made this particular stab (pardon
the pun) at the genre seem so fresh and alive. Maybe it was the above-par
performances by the movie's two leads (Jared Leto and "Cybil" actress
Alicia Witt). Or, it could have been the on- target direction by Jamie
Blanks. More likely, though, it was because of the inspired premise. I
don't think I need to tell you that a killer hacking people up ala urban
folklore is much more frightening than a killer fisherman. 
Urban Legend begins with a sequence that reminded me of the classic Scream
opener, not so much in plotting as in attention to detail that makes for an
absolutely chilling teaser for the rest of the film. A pretty young coed is
driving down a deserted road when (gasp!) a gas problem (hee-hee) forces
her to stop at an equally deserted gas station for a refill. One problem,
though. Would you want to stop at a station run by Brad Dourif? I thought
not. Predictably, the attendant ends up coaxing her into the main building
to sort out a problem with the credit card company. It's odd, though, when
you pick up a phone to realize that nobody's on the other line. Naturally,
the potential victim escapes into her car and drives off. And the when we
least expect it...WHACK!!! A decapitation. It turns out that the creepy
looking attendant was just trying to warn her about the maniac in the back
seat of the car. 
So who is it this time? The obvious candidate is the slightly off-kilter
professor at the college the girl went to (none other than Freddy Kruger
himself, Robert Englund), who teaches a class on urban legends. A-ha. Or
could it be the fame-hungry local journalist (Leto) looking for a meaty
story to put on his resume? Like all movies of this nature, one of the
chief pleasures is trying to guess whodunit. And it turns out to be, of
course, the one you didn't suspect. 
I'm not going to pretend Urban Legend is anything more than it is, but I
must give credit where credit is due. And this flick definitely deserves
credit for being what not many other recent horror films have been...fun. 
*Complimentary movie ticket courtesy of Valley Cinemas in Lodi, CA
Get all of Jason Wallis' movie reviews at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
James Brundage
Movies are like murder laws. It's a question of intent. If you meant to kill
them, it's murder 2. You planned it, it's murder 1. If it was an accident,
you get manslaughter. If you got a dark comedy and you came for a horror
movie, you're disappointed. You got a drama and you came for a comedy,
you're disappointed. Sometimes.
Myself, I like it when it's different from my expectations. It's because I
like change in general. When it's different, I'll take it. I took Urban
Legend (like a pill with some water), and liked it enough to see it once and
at a Halloween party if my girlfriend drags me, but don't really care to see
it again.
The movie, which has the same plot as every single psychokiller movie except
this time they're knocking 'em off with urban legends, would have never been
good if it weren't for the saving grace of a comic element. It has to be
intentional, in my mind, because the places it was put in are so ridiculous
that they have to be plotted. You can't be that good by accident.
It has things in it like the person from Dawson's Creek yelling "Oh, God"
when "I Don't Want to Wait" by Paula Cole blasts on the radio by accident,
the song "Turn Around" on in the background as the girl is about to get her
head chopped off, and a killer that will keep you smiling for days. It has
more freaks than a circus show, but they're fun to watch.
And, like everything else on the face of the Earth, I have a philosophy
about fun, too. Let it happen. Forget plot holes when its fun. Forgive
murder when its fun. And, most important, have fun when its fun.

Author
Steve Rhodes
New England's Pendleton College, which according to "U.S. News and World
Reports" is the safest college in America, has trouble brewing.  It
seems there's a serial killer on the loose, who is making all of those
urban legends come to life -- or more precisely to death.  From the
small dog that dies being dried in the microwave to the babysitter who's
getting threatening calls from someone upstairs, the killer has turned
the campus into a lab for enacting the urban legends taught in Professor
Wexler's (Robert Englund) course.
Quite similar to I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER, from which it borrows
many key plot elements, URBAN LEGEND is a full-fledged member of the
teen-horror-flick genre.  Somewhere there must be a rulebook for these
movies since they all adhere to the same principles.  There will be a
host of attractive college aged kids, most of whom will wear invisible
bulls eyes on their backs.  As the show advances - surprise! -- they
will start dropping like flies.  The killer's face will remain hidden by
a heavy coat, but just about everyone will own a coat exactly like the
killer's.  And most of what makes audiences jump will be good guys who
appear without warning into the scene.
(Now, here is the big secret of ALL of these movies.  I will reveal it
now if you promise never to tell another living soul.  If you tell
anyone else, a person in a heavy coat will pay you a visit. Ready?  The
character with the purest background and the one who appears least
likely to be the killer is always the murderer.  Now, remember that
mum's the word.)
URBAN LEGEND is more concerned with amusing the audience than
frightening it, which is good since it is rarely frightening but it is
sometimes genuinely humorous.
The over-the-top opening is set during a torrential downpour.  As the
thunder crackles, a lone female driver pulls into a gas station run by a
creepy guy (Brad Dourif) with a bad stutter, who's having a bad-hair
day.  He lures her into the office and locks the door behind him.  The
scene then gets so ridiculous that it is hilarious.  Most of the rest of
the movie isn't this funny however.
As the attractive lead, Natalie, Alicia Witt gives the same completely
superficial performance as the rest of the cast.  Jared Leto, last seen
as the lead in PREFONTAINE, plays her boyfriend, Paul, the campus
newspaper's investigative reporter.  Rebecca Gayheart is Natalie's
girlfriend, Brenda.  There are other people in the cast, but they are so
interchangeable that it hardly seems worth mentioning any more names.
To be fair to the actors, the script doesn't call for them to do much.
All of the characters suffer from high degrees of stupidity and bad
luck.
Although director Jamie Blanks just connects the dots, screenwriter
Silvio Horta shows some good comedic flair.  "I dropped journalism
ethics early in the semester," budding reporter Paul tells Natalie as he
burglarizes Professor Wexler's office.  "It wasn't helping my GPA."
Now, there's an honest student.
URBAN LEGEND at its best revels in its ridiculousness.  The campus has
only one cop, Reese (Loretta Devine), and she never calls for help, no
matter how bad the situation gets.  Her gun handling lessons come from
her favorite videotape of Pam Grier in her heyday.  The pudgy Reese is
in no danger of becoming the next Pam Grier, but she doesn't realize it.
Too bad URBAN LEGEND didn't have bigger aspirations than being yet
another horror movie starring teenagers.
URBAN LEGEND runs 1:41.  It is rated R for violence, sex, and profanity
and would be fine for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Jared Leto; Alicia Witt; Rebecca Gayheart & Michael Rosenbaum
I didn't go into Urban Legend expecting a whole lot. I figured that I was
about to see your standard slasher film that would be watchable but
certainly not something that was going to be very memorable. Well, I was
very happily proven wrong. Apparently, films such as Scream; I Know What You
Did Last Summer and Halloween: H20 have raised the bar when it comes to the
quality of the once low budget, poorly acted slasher film. Don't get me
wrong, Urban Legend still has its share of blood and guts which it relies of
quite heavily in places for shock value, but the writing and acting are
surprisingly pretty good. Continuing the trend of the afore mentioned
Scream, Urban Legend doesn't take itself too seriously and pays homage to
some of the horror films that have come before it. Much like Scream, it also
pays tribute to pop culture with a number of inside jokes.
So enough analytical stuff, what's the movie about? Like all good slasher
films, Urban Legend has a killer who takes pride in his work. This
particular homicidal maniac has decided to pattern his killing spree after
popular urban legends. He recreates them in a particularly ghoulish and
bloody way, much to the dismay of the students at a small New England
university. Now I certainly wouldn't be doing my job if I didn't mention
that Urban Legends doesn't have too many real scary moments. In most cases
you can figure out what is going to happen before it actually does.
Although, surprisingly that fact doesn't really take too much away from the
movie.
The young cast is first rate. Alicia Witt plays a college student around
whom most of this killing seems to be centered. Rebecca Gayheart, is her
best friend. Both actresses do a good job in their first major starring
roles. They are joined by none other than Robert "Freddy Kruger" Englund as
a professor who teaches a course on urban legends. Rounding out the cast is
Joshua Jackson from TV's Dawson's Creek. Much of what makes the cast look so
good is the first rate writing. While it is not up to the quality of Scream,
it is certainly a far cry from the Halloween and Friday The 13Th movies of
days gone by. Urban Legend also is a very nice looking film, it doesn't have
the claustrophobic feel of some older horror films.
Urban Legend is far from the scariest film that you will ever see, but it
does have its moments. If you are in the mood for edge-of-your-seat terror,
this isn't the film that is going to give it to you. If, on the other hand
you are interested in watching something a little lighter, with a few scary
scenes mixed in, Urban Legend should fit the bill nicely.

Author
Rob Strong
Starring:  Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Jared Leto, Joshua
Jackson, Tara Reid, John Neville, Robert Englund, Julian 
Richings, Natasha Wagner
The only thing worse than watching a bad movie is realizing that
the film had a lot of potential and could've been effective.
Such is the case with _Urban Legend_, the new horror film from
first time director Jamie Blanks.  The idea behind the movie is
that the mad slasher of the film muders people according to various
urban legends.  Examples include the killer in the backseat of the
car and person getting calls from inside her house.  The killer wears 
one of those L.L. Bean parkas with the hood drawn completely up, so
you can't see the face.  I guess Halloween masks are out of style
for psychos these days.  Anyhow, the premise is certainly a nifty
one and the opening scene is spooky and atmospheric.  It's a very
good setup that promises more chills to come.  Unfortunately, the
film never takes off from there.
The movie takes place on a peaceful New England college campus.
Like most slasher flicks, this one also centers around a young
female main character whose friends are slowly killed off by a 
knife wielding maniac (or in this case an axe wielding maniac).
I've always wondered why these killers don't save themselves a lot
of time and trouble and just go after the person they ultimately
aim to kill.
After the fine first scene, the movie degenerates into a monotonous
series of those annoying you-thought-it-was-the-killer-but-was-just-
someone-else scares.  These are always accompanied by loud bursts of
music.  I guess sudden, sharp music chords are what passes for terror
these days.  The actual killer will attack at about every third 
music blast.  The slasher appears, attacks, the victim is eviscerated,
and the tedious cycle appears anew.  False scares should always be used
in moderation.  Someone needs to tell director Blanks that things like
this just aren't as scary as they used to be.  This movie commits the
biggest sin a horror film can commit--it's not frightening.
Remember the horror movie cliches that were so mercilessly mocked in 
_Scream_ and _Scream 2_?  This movie still adheres to them.  Tons
of illogical moments about; more than I really have the inclination
to list.  And I don't mean illogical in the summer popcorn movie
sense.  That type of illogical can be fun.  This film insults your
intelligence more times than I care to remember.  The last 20 minutes
especially degenerates into such lunacy that you'll be laughing more
than you'll be screaming.  Actually, you won't be screaming at all.
At its best, the acting can barely be called "adequate" and the script
could've definitely used a rewrite or two.
The film still manages to have some strong points.  The killings are
certainly inventive and plentiful enough to satistfy most gore fans.
There are some intentionally funny moments.  (These were exceeded by
the unintentional ones.)  The film is well made from a technical
standpoint.  Besides the first part, there is also another good scene,
a prolonged cat and mouse chase inside a radio station.  If there had
only been more sequences like this, that relied on tautness and 
suspense rather than loud bursts of music, _Urban Legend_ might've
been worth your money.

Author
Christopher Null
     Sadly, URBAN LEGEND will be another forgotten entry into the teen
horror revival fad of the late 1990's, and with good reason.
     Despite putting together one of the better ensembles of young actors
(basically, it's all the leftovers from hip TV shows that haven't yet been
slaughtered on camera, including "My So-Called Life"'s Jared Leto), a really
dumb script and lifeless direction causes URBAN LEGEND to fail the singular,
critical test of horror films:  It's not scary.
     Even the "hip jokes" are not hip, and they're not funny....  In fact,
it's only the self-referential humor (a rumor about "that girl in that
Noxzema commercial," referring to Gayheart; a blip of Paula Cole's signature
tune when Jackson(of TV's "Dawson's Creek") flips on the radio) that keeps
URBAN LEGEND above a total disaster.
     The plot is something about a serial killer reenacting a bunch of urban
legends (guy with axe in back seat, killer calling on a phone inside the
house, et al.), but it's barely memorable.  It isn't scary in any case.
     Of course, the *only* reason I even bothered to see this film is
because it stars the radiant Alicia Witt, who I could watch for two hours
doing the laundry.  In fact, I think I would have *preferred* the movie be
completely about Witt doing her laundry....  I'll have to pitch that to a
studio someday.  But I digress.
Director: Jamie Blanks
Producer: Gina Matthews, Michael McDonnell, Neil H. Moritz
Writer: Sylvio Horta, Don Roos
Starring: Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Jared Leto, Joshua Jackson
http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/jump/urbanlegend.html
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Ron Small
Starring: Jared Leto, Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Joshua Jackson, Robert
Englund, Tara Reid, Michael Rosenbaum, Brad Dourif, Natasha Gregson Wagner
The great actor James Woods once said (and I'm paraphrasing), "If sex isn't
messy, then you're not doing it right". A truly profound statement, and one
that could be made for the entire mad slasher genre (just replace "sex" with
"your mad slasher film"). For those uninformed souls, the mad slasher genre (or
sub-genre) is a melding of horror and exploitation elements put to the service
of a plot that follows an identical outline: a usually masked but always crazed
killer stalks and kills attractive teens a la HALLOWEEN.
URBAN LEGEND is a mad slasher flick, but one that is so sanitary, bloodless,
and nudity free, that with its irony laden dialogue and beautiful (though not
overly talented) cast, it more closely resembles an overlong WB television
special. For film makers, gore is one of the two weapons they have at their
disposal in a stale, fright-free horror movie, as Stephen King once said (again
paraphrasing) "If you can't scare your audience, gross em' out, if you can't do
that, make em' laugh". Alas, URBAN LEGEND succeeds only at the latter, though
not by intention. I actually find the fact that this film became a minor
success ($40 million domestic box office gross) more frightening than anything
in it. It seems that audiences' tastes have been whittled down to such a degree
that any movie even claiming to be scary is given the benefit of the doubt. The
promotion for URBAN LEGEND sure promised thrills, but how can anyone with a
three digit IQ argue that it provides them. Unfortunately, these kinds of
flicks will continue to be produced because people no longer have expectations;
one idiotic super-hyped blockbuster flick after another has desensitized
audiences to the point where films don't need to do anything more than promise
a good time without the added pressure of delivering. If anyone disagrees I
would love for them to explain the box office successes of shit like BATMAN AND
ROBIN, WILD WILD WEST, and GODZILLA.
But forget all that, it goes without saying that Mad Slasher films (or any
other exploitation off-shoot) will be made without an ounce of craft
(especially considering the sheer volume that are produced). Allow me to
present you with the real fault of the mad slasher film: the lack of
enthusiastic exploitation. These flicks aren't harnessed with any lofty
aspirations, so why not break free and give your audience a bloody good time?
Sadly out of the literally hundreds made, I would estimate that maybe three are
at all worth while. And URBAN LEGEND would certainly not be included amongst
those three. Despite its considerable production value and the absence of any
boom mics slipping into frame, it is just as awful as any no budget entry in
the slasher sweepstakes.
As far as the possibility of some good natured exploitation URBAN LEGEND's
setting alone offers a myriad of promising possibilities: It takes place on a
college campus, which is always an appropriate playground for the crazed
killer. You see, the campus is a community made up almost entirely of young
people all in the midst of strange hormonal surges percolating beneath the
surface. All those young people are growing up together, going through all
kinds of inexplicable emotional highs and lows, so naturally some weirdness is
expected. All the better for that elusive crazed killer. Coupled with the
copious amounts of scantily clad coeds running around, and the introduction of
a little exploitation into the proceedings should be a relatively easy task.
But alas, URBAN LEGEND is not only idiotic and clichĂŠ full; it's way too
clean, a slasher flick for the whole family with no nudity, little gore, and
much stupidity. This is the kind of movie where the killer drags dead victims
from the scene of the crime for no reason other than, I dunno, exercise. It's
the kind of movie where the villain calmly purses a running-like-the-wind-prey,
yet still manages to catch that prey through some really awful editing
techniques. It's the kind of movie where characters run into each other just as
a loud clash reverberates on the soundtrack. I really wish filmmakers would
just retire that whole loud-noise-jump-scare thing. Yes the audience jumps,
momentarily frightened, but wouldn't anyone if a loud sonic boom suddenly
infiltrated a quiet room.
I lost all hope for the possibility of any genuine scares in URBAN LEGEND about
ten minutes in when I caught a glimpse of the killer. Apparently filmmakers are
running out of creative ways to disguise their mad slashers. In SCREAM it was a
ghost mask (scary enough), in I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER it was a fisher
man's rain slicker (in the middle of summer no less), and in URBAN LEGEND the
disguise sinks to the level of Mel Brooks parody: the villain wears an
oversized parka with a fury hood (oohâŚscary) intended to conceal his/her
identity. For URBAN LEGEND 2 I humbly suggest a Donald Duck costume.
Though I must admit, URBAN LEGEND does have a winning premise for what could
have been a somewhat entertaining exploitation film. The film's killer slices
and dices comely college students to the tune of famous urban legends (you
know, like the babysitter gets threatening phone calls only to find that
they're coming from inside the house). I won't spoil the surprise as to what
urban legends are used, after all the film does offer fine 2:00 am cable
viewing if you happen to be intoxicated enough. Sad to say, it doesn't include
my favorite urban legend: A fairly graphic antidote concerning Richard Gere and
a very unhappy gerbil. Now that would be scary.
Before I leave you, I would like to bring to your attention the third most
irritating thing about the film (the first being the lack of craft, the second
the lack of exploitation)-- its characters, all of whom are just about the most
annoying group of people I've ever spent an evening with. Only Jared Leto
(looking like a carbon copy of Rob Lowe from back in the day) and Alicia Witt,
as the resilient heroine, avoid vexatiousness. The most annoying of the bunch
is a tie between Noxima girl Rebecca Gayheart and sitcom star Michael
Rosenbaum, as a supremely irritating lout (so irritating I actually cheered his
painful death, and I am not a cruel person). Ironically those aggravating sacks
of human waste provide the only entertainment in the film; if viewed as a
vicarious fantasy URBAN LEGEND can be mildly entertaining. After all this is a
movie that features the kind of faux hipsters I can't stand getting
slaughtered, which is at least better than watching an entire film about people
I can't stand not getting slaughtered.
 http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
James Sanford
The most frustrating movies to sit through aren't the ones that are bad
through and through; those you can usually spot early on and leave before
wasting too much time on them. The real killers are the films that have just
enough clever ideas or funny lines to keep you in your seat, hoping against
hope that some kind of knockout ending is going to make your investment of
time and money worthwhile.
 So it goes with "Urban Legend," which tosses in a few exciting moments, a
handful of snappy jokes and a potentially solid set-up only to self-destruct
in its excruiating last half-hour. Desperate to devise a finale sure to
stun, writer Silvio Horta concocts several and runs them back to back. The
result drove a sneak preview audience to scream alright, first in gales of
disbelieving laughter and then for their money back.
 "Urban Legend" is constructed around those deathless stories that somehow
circulate through every community. Everybody knows about the babysitter who
realized too late that the threatening phone calls she was getting were
coming from inside the house, or about how washing down Pop Rocks with soda
will make your stomach explode, and similar pop mythology.
 In Horta's script, a serial killer has decided to recreate these tales of
terror in and around Pendleton College, recently named "the safest campus in
America" by no less than U.S. News and World Report. So, for example, when a
young woman fails to check the backseat of her truck before cruising down
the road, singing along to Bonnie Tyler's "Total Eclipse of the Heart," the
line "every now and then I fall apart" takes on a whole new meaning.
 This recent burst of coed carnage coincides with the 25th anniversary of
Pendleton's fabled "Stanley Hall massacre," in which a knife-wielding maniac
went from room to room slaying dorm residents. The only survivor was
Professor Wexler (Robert Englund, re-establishing his credentials as an
actor with a capital "h") who now teaches a popular class on urban legends.
Could he secretly be doing some unauthorized first-hand research into his
subject matter?
 Maybe and maybe not. Red herrings abound in "Urban Legend." They're almost
as plentiful as director Jamie Blanks' use of the old
turn-around-and-bump-into-something-and-scream cliche, which loses its shock
value in this film somewhere around the middle of the second reel.
 The real horror lies in the performances of such generally reliable types
as Jared Leto and Alicia Witt, both of whom spend most of the movie
slack-jawed and trying hard to look frightened. They definitely have their
work cut out for them by the time Horta drops his final bomb, revealing the
maniac behind the murders. It's one thing to ask viewers to suspend their
disbelief, Mr. Horta, and quite another to heave all logic out the nearest
open window.
 A few intentional laughs are provided by Joshua Jackson (that makes James
van der Beek the only "Dawson's Creek" lead not to have starred in a horror
movie this year) and particularly by Loretta Devine as a security officer
who spends her spare time worshipping blaxploitation queen Pam Grier.
There's also a Noxema commercial joke to hint at the past (and future)
career of the utterly talentless ex-model Rebecca Gayheart, whose feeble
thesping as Witt's best friend makes one long for the days of talents like
Shelley Hack and Maud Adams.
James Sanford

Author
Simon Calloway
Cast: Alicia Witt; Jared Leto; Rebecca Gayheart; John Nevill; Robert England.
DVD Widescreen 2.35:1/Standard/Making-Of Featurette/Cast Bios/Dolby 5.1
 In the upteenth slasher flick Hollywood has rushed out to the multiplexes
since Scream smashed its way to the top of the box office in 1996, Urban Legend
stands as either malarkey or a camp classic.  I view it as both.
 It opens in the tradition of "the girl gets it" with a women driving alone on
a desolate road in the middle of nowhere, during a thunder storm.  She goes to
a run-down gas station, but is forced to go inside for the creepy attendant
(Brad Dourif) says that her credit card won't work.  When she does what he
says, he attacks her, she escapes, and, bingo, she gets her head chopped off.
 The film then takes us to a small university in Maine, where the local school
newspaper reporter (Leto) claims that the girl was killed based on an urban
legend.  Everyone thinks he is crazy, except for smart Natalie (Witt, who, if
she keeps her cards right, could become a Jamie Lee Curtis of the `90s) who
believes him and is attacked by a stranger wearing a big, bulky coat, hood and
all, carrying an axe!
 After several more attacks and bloody murders, Natalie and reporter Paul try
to find who the killer is and which urban legend he will use next.
 Urban Legend reminded me of Scream many times, but not in the sense that
Legend is a blunt rip-off, but in small details:  The big frat house party that
takes place at the end of the movie; the leading lady being the prime target of
the psycho;  the scene where a girl is being chased inside a radio station,
which feature enormous sound-proof windows (Scream 2) for the killer to
surprise her.
 Legend isn't fresh in the brains department, but, lo, it is a lot of fun. 
It's stylishly directed by newcomer Jamie Blanks and is probably the best
horror film featuring a masked maniac since the Scream movies and Halloween:
H20.  We can safely pass on Disturbing Behavior and Bride of Chucky.
 The killer's identity is very hard to figure out, and when you think you know,
you really don't.  I was disappointed with the revealing of the murderer and
the cause for the campus slaughter, yet, the actor/actress makes such fun of
the role the thin plotline sort of creeps away from you.
 Urban Legend isn't great, but the amount of sustained scares and the way the
film is shot, it isn't the worst way to spend two hours.  But, for a real treat
in college carnage, rent Scream 2.

Author
Scott Renshaw
URBAN LEGEND
(Tri-Star)
Starring:  Jared Leto, Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Joshua Jackson,
Robert Englund, John Neville, Loretta Devine.
Screenplay:  Silvio Horta.
Producers:  Neal H. Moritz, Gina Matthews and Michael McDonnell.
Director:  Jamie Blanks.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, sexual situations, profanity)
Running Time:  100 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Hey, did you ever hear the one about the really good post-SCREAM teen
horror film?  It seems that some film-makers, realizing there was a new
market to be tapped after the success of SCREAM and its sequel, decided to
make an even better variation on the theme.  The script was intelligent,
the obligatory pop culture asides felt more than obligatory, and the
suspense was genuinely scary.  It was both fresh _and_ frightening.  No,
really, it actually happened.  A friend of my cousin's sister-in-law
actually saw it.
     Sorry, friends, but the preceding is a myth -- an URBAN LEGEND if you
will, exactly the kind which forms the basis of the film of the same name.
You see, the story on the Northeastern U.S. campus of Pendleton College
goes that a psycho professor murdered a dorm full of students 25 years
ago, but the administration hushed it up.  Now, as the silver anniversary
approaches, more nastiness is going on.  A young woman is decapitated by a
figure in the back seat of her car; another is killed in a darkened room
while her rommate lies blissfully sleeping.  All of it is somehow
connected to Natalie Simon (Alicia Witt), a student with a dark secret in
her past, but who is murdering students based on urban legends?  Hot shot
school reporter Paul (Jared Leto)?  Frat boy prankster Damon (Joshua
Jackson)?  Folklore professor Wexler (erstwhile Freddy Krueger Robert
Englund)?  Or some other disgruntled soul?
     If you actually care about the answer to that question by the end of
URBAN LEGEND, it will only be to see how convoluted the explanation could
be.  Like too many recent horror films, this one obliges you to play Name
That Killer, without giving you enough information to permit anything but
a random guess.  And if you think abut the revelation for long enough
afterwards, you'll realize it just doesn't matter.  Memo to horror
film-makers:  we don't need to be guessing who's behind Michael Myers'
mask in order for him to be threatening.  Stop wasting our time; this is a
slasher film, not Agatha Christie.
     Frankly, it's about time slasher films started acting like slasher
films in plenty of ways.  Ever since SCREAM (or even Wes Craven's earlier
NEW NIGHTMARE, if you wanna be picky), horror films have gone all
post-modern on us, eschewing grind-it-out gore in favor of winking
recognition of genre conventions.  URBAN LEGEND's pop culture nuggets
range from the acceptably smirky (a snippet of the "Dawson's Creek" theme
played when "Dawson's Creek" cast member Jackson turns on his car radio)
to the who-cares ridiculous (naming one character after one of the film's
producers), and those are only a couple of examples of the strained
reaches for gags in Silvio Horta's script.  There's just not enough humor
or creativity to compensate for the raw terror lost in forced attempts to
be cute.  Aside from the effective prologue sequence, URBAN LEGEND misses
the boat on providing gut-level scares.
     Ironically enough, it also misses the point that most of the late
70s/early 80s slasher films these arched-eyebrow cousins goof on were
actually moralizing cautionary tales, just like the ones described by
Englund's folklore professor.  When he asks his class if they know the one
about the babysitter who gets a call from inside the house, many movie
fans will say yes...it was called WHEN A STRANGER CALLS.  URBAN LEGEND
nicks from the cine-literate horror of SCREAM without even realizing it,
because movies _are_ our urban legends.  The film might have been on to
something with a killer copycatting other movie murders, rather than
trying to pass off the ever-popular "impaled on the parking lot tire
spikes" tale as part of the collective unconscious, or giving us the
Nanook of the North terror of a killer hidden behind a zipped-up parka.
Pity the talented Alicia Witt (late of TV's "Cybill") for getting caught
up in a horror film that's not clever enough or scary enough to succeed as
anything but a clutch-your-date Friday night special.  URBAN LEGEND is a
tale too often told.  And as one character in the film says, "If you're
going to tell the story, at least get it right."

Author
Jamie Peck
URBAN LEGEND
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
The movie takes place on the creepy campus of New England's Pendleton 
College, where some freaked-out student or faculty member has begun a 
murder spree (check), offing victims according to those titular tales - 
most of them campfire and sleepover favorites - that doubly function as 
social parables (check). Our heroine is beautiful, brainy upperclassman 
Natalie (Alicia Witt, check), who may hold the key to cracking the 
mystery in a dark secret buried deep in her past (check). Our hero is 
handsome journalism major Paul (Jared Leto, check), a studious reporter 
for the school paper who's determined to get this scoop no matter what 
the price (check). Carnage ensues (check, check, check). 
Director Jamie Blanks and screenwriter Silvio Horta start better than 
they finish, with an extended "Scream"-esque prologue that depicts the 
film's first casualty, as a nervous little missy (Natasha Gregson 
Wagner) on a late-night commute loses her head in a vivid variation on 
the killer-in-the-backseat urban legend. Yikes. Most of the time, 
however, the filmmakers' scare tactics include silly false jumps and 
absurd red herrings; just about everyone around Pendleton, for example, 
owns and wears our psycho's hooded Nanook of the North-type costume. 
True, every movie in this genre relies on faux frights to generate 
suspense, but "Urban Legend" plays with them far too often to be very 
effective. 
Yet another disappointing facet of "Urban Legend" is exactly how it 
employs the villain's violent gimmick. Only a handful of the urban 
legends he brings to life seem genuinely inspired, and all the leftovers 
don't seem to fully realize their grisly potential. Horta leaves a lot 
of possibilities unexamined, and ends up having the killer simply 
splatter coed guts across dorm walls with a large axe when he runs out 
of ideas. The campy ending also doesn't satisfy; "Urban Legend"'s 
unmasked villain not only seems physically incapable of pulling off an 
early murder involving a a tree, a noose and a moving car, but they also 
explain their master plan to the incompasitated good guy with ... 
_a_slide_show_? 
At least the motive makes too-pat sense and there are some good in-jokes 
stretched throughout the movie's 98-minute running time; co-star Joshua 
Jackson, of "Dawson's Creek" fame, exits "Urban Legend" earlier than 
expected, but not before turning on a radio to the opening notes of 
Paula Cole's "I Don't Want to Wait." These postmodern references, along 
with the solid acting (particulary Witt and Michael Rosenbaum as a 
party-hardy frat boy), sleek production design and clever concept, add 
up to a so-so slasher film that falls a little short of delivering the 
goods. But delivering isolated scares is another matter entirely. Let's 
just say that, thanks to "Urban Legend," this critic will henceforth be 
keeping a close eye on the backseat of his car.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Urban Legend (1998)
Jared Leto, Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Michael Rosenbaum, Loretta 
Devine, Joshua Jackson, Tara Reid, John Neville, Julian Richings, Robert 
Englund, Danielle Harris, Natasha Gregson Wagner, Brad Dourif. Produced 
by Neal H. Moritz, Gina Matthews and Michael McDonnell. Written by Silvio 
Horta. Directed by Jamie Blanks. 97 minutes.
Rated R, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Did you ever hear the one about a young woman driving along an isolated 
stretch of road late one rainy night, unaware that a killer is hiding in 
the back seat of her car? "Urban Legend" begins with that old folk tale, 
adding a wry audio joke to the mix. As Natasha Gregson Wagner cruises 
along, oblivious to the ax-wielding loon right behind her, she pops a 
tape into the car's cassette player, and Bonnie Tyler's "Total Eclipse of 
the Heart" begins to play. The song's instrumental introduction comes to 
a close and the male back-up singer beings to croon "Turn around..." 
I'm giving "Urban Legend," the latest entry in the post-"Scream" slasher 
movie renaissance, a qualified recommendation based on a few self-mocking 
gags like that, and a nice starring turn by Alicia Witt, but mostly for 
the filmmaker's audacious choices concerning the identity and motif of 
their serial killer.  
Before exploring the juicy details about the murderer (have no fear, 
there will be no spoilers here), it's important to cover the basics of 
the story. Like virtually every slasher flick, "Urban Legend" involves a 
lunatic chasing attractive, mostly white, young people. The story is set 
at a picturesque New England college staffed by only three adults; a 
crusty disbelieving administrator (John Neville), a wise, but ominous 
professor (Robert "Freddy Krueger" Englund) and a plucky security guard 
(Loretta Devine from "Waiting to Exhale"). In a recent interview, I asked 
Devine about the film's paucity of adults and she laughed and said "Shit, 
honey, kids don't want to look at grown-ups!"
There's a killer on campus, murdering students by recreating famous urban 
legends; those alligators-in-the-sewer, exploding-cats-in-the-microwave 
contemporary myths passed on by folks who invariably claim the stories 
really happened to a cousin of a friend of theirs.
Alicia Witt (the daughter from "Cybil") is the first to figure out the 
horrible pattern, but of course, no one will believe her. As the body 
count grows, the leaders of tomorrow cope with the carnage in the only 
logical fashion - - they throw a kegger party. Naturally, the killer 
attends and the corpses stack up, leading to the inevitable face-off 
between our heroine and the maniac.
Oh, and what a maniac! In a burst of idiotic inspiration, the filmmakers 
conceal the killer's identity by dressing the psychopath in (get ready 
for this) a parka with a fuzzy, face-obscuring hood that looks like it 
came straight out of "South Park." Instead of being frightening, I found 
myself fighting the urge to shout "Oh my God, Kenny's killing sophomores! 
You bastard!"
That's not all. When the killer is finally revealed, we're treated with 
an overacting exhibition of operatic proportions. Obviously, I can't 
mention the actor's name, so I'll simply offer my congratulations on a 
wild-eyed, teeth-gnashing, in-your-face performance that would make even 
William Shatner blush.
In the starring role, Alicia Witt deserves credit for centering the film 
by projecting an air of reason that makes all this nonsense seem almost 
credible. Even when her own behavior is illogical, there's a look of 
intelligence in her eyes that helps to sell the story. Look for Witt to 
go on to much better things.
"Urban Legend" ends with a patently unbelievable scene that sets thing up 
for a sequel. I hope they do one because, even with its many leaden spots,
 this lurid trifle is actually fun on a trashy level. Besides, there's so 
many urban legends left to cover. For instance, did you hear the one 
about a writer who turned out a screenplay for a teen movie that didn't 
insult the viewer's intelligence? It's true. It was written by the cousin 
of a friend of mine.
