Title
Review for Odishon (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Director: Takashi Miike
 Writer:  Daisuke Tengan, story by Ryu Murakami
 Cast: Ryo Ishibashi, Eihi Shiina, Tetsu Sawaki, Jun Kunimura
 Screened at New York's Film Forum, 209 W. Houston Street
   Could it be that the women we all so love, the human beings
whom Dr. T (Richard Gere) declares are all saints, bear desires
for revenge against us men?  Well, yeah, after all Clytemnestra
killed her hero husband Aegisthus for cheating on her as Jason
slaughtered her two children to get back at Jason.  Ridley Scott's
Thelma and Louise turned into flaming anti-male feminists, in
Virginie Despentes and Coralie Trinh Thi's "Baise-Moi" two
hookers, Manu and Nadine, take violent revenge against men
after being brutalized.  The fantasy dominates Giacomo Puccini's
opera "Turandot," which premiered at La Scala in Milan on April
25, 1926, the story of a empress, Turandot, who gives men a
chance to win her hand by guessing riddles and which, failing
that, sends them to the executioner. As we see, then, reprisals by
women against men are at least as ancient as Aeschylus.  
   Now comes a Japanese version of the same theme, this one by
Takashi Miike, who is not a household word in the U.S. but who
knocks out four films annually in his native country.  "Audition,"
which took two critics' prizes at the Rotterdam Film Festival in
2000, horrifies not only because of a gruesome ending that could
impact on dating agencies and will have us sharing homolies like
"Don't judge a book by its cover," but because for most of its
absorbing 115 minutes we are watching what looks like a
cinematic version of a potential new TV series, The Japanese
Dating Game.
   Not that any of this aesthetically elegant and challenging stuff
would appear on mere TV.  The story centers on an overweight,
lonely 40-year-old, Shigeharu Aoyama (Ryo Ishibashi) whose wife
died seven years ago, leaving him and his young son Ryoko 
(played as a teen by Miyuki Matsuda).  While most guys would
start dating the normal way--bars, computer dating services,
women at the workplace--Aoyama does something more
dramatic.  He gets together with an associate and sets up a
phony audition for an abandoned movie project, but Aoyama's
mind is made up before the audition starts: he wants the twenty-
four-year-old  #28, Asami Yamazaki (played by fashion model Eihi
Shiina).  Is he the only one who doesn't see something spooky
about her--despite her beauty and her comformity to a Japanese
ideal of timidity and deference?  Yep.  He ignores his partner, sets
up a couple of dates, and he's in heaven.  Is Asami different from
the type of person she appears to be?  Yep again.  But wait!  She
may not be.  All depends on what you make of the ending, a
dazzling, surreal ride into images and sounds that Japan's David
Cronenberg, Takashi Miiki thrust at us--boom boom boom, almost
out of the blue.
   Audition, or Odishon as the title transliterates from the
Japanese, has some of the most harrowing, graphic closeups of
torture yet seen on the screen, scenes that make recent American
films of the genre such as Brad Anderson's "Session 9"--a bloody 
display of the disintegration of the mind of an average person--
look like "Bambi."   Do horror films need to be so explicit?  No, as
the immensely popular but highly overrated "Blair Witch Project"
indicates.  But as the director states in an interview, the final
scenes are, in his view, organic to the events and not used just to
shock, and yet, he adds, "the directors whose films scare me the
most are the ones who carefully hide the aggression in the
background."  In this case, I'd say that Ms. Shiina's character is
so "ideally Japanese feminine" that we have to be convinced that
appearance is only skin deep. And we are, we certainly are.  A
well-done scary movie that might make us married men sleep with
one eye open.
Not Rated.  Running time: 115 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Pointless and painful, very painful.
Takashi Miike's AUDITION (ODISHON) is divided into two distinct halves.  The
first is such an easy going and tentative romance that it would be hard to stay
awake were it not for the hint of intrigue.  Specifically, who or what is in
that body-sized bag in Asami Yamazaki's (Eihi Shiina) sparse bedroom?
Then there is the second half, which has the dubious distinction of being the
movie that kept my eyes off of the screen for the longest amount of time ever. 
And since this was a subtitled film it meant that I was forced to miss much of
the dialog.  If this part has any redeeming merit, it may make you appreciate
your feet more.  You'll be happy that they're still attached and that no ghoul
has slowly and painfully severed them from your legs.  Other directors might
spare us some of AUDITION's needless gore, but not Takashi Miike.  He pulls his
camera in close in order to make us look away or barf.  Watching this painful
movie is like having to endure an especially sadistic fraternity hazing.
The plot concerns a middle-age director, Shigeharu Aoyama (Ryo Ishibashi), who
auditions young women, looking primarily for a wife but ostensibly for an
actress to be in a film, which may or may not ever get off the ground.  The
first time he sees Asami's picture, he falls in love with her.  The 24-year-old
Asami has perfect creamy skin, long flowing black hair and the slenderness of a
professional model.  In the audition he learns that she was a ballerina who had
to give up her passion after injuring her hip.  This loss of her life's vocation
is like death to her.  Later he describes why he is so infatuated with her.  It
is because she is so "beautiful, classy and obedient."  One of these attributes
will be seriously called into question in the second half of the story.
With shades of FATAL ATTRACTION, Asami's one demand of Aoyama is, "Please love
me.  Only me.  Okay?"  From there the story rapidly moves from one disgusting
scene to another.  You'll feel like begging for mercy and be praying for the
ending credits to put you and poor Aoyama out of your collective misery.
AUDITION runs oh-so-painfully long at 1:55.  The film is in Japanese with
English subtitles.  It is not rated but would be NC-17 for pervasive, graphic
violence.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, September 14, 2001. 
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
