Title
Review for Seńor muy viejo con unas alas enormes, Un (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A mute winged man (an angel, perhaps?)  is discovered by a poor couple in the
Caribbean.  They put him in their chicken coop.  Word spreads and soon their
house is a major tourist stop, visited by crowds of pilgrims and curiosity
seekers, and surrounded by a constant carnival.  An interesting film, but 
nothing special.
Cuba/Italy/Spain (English subtitles), color, 1988, 90 minutes.
Director: Fernando Birri
     One night, during a heavy rainstorm, an old man washes ashore in front of
the home of Pelayo and Elisena, a very poor couple living in the Caribbean
(possibly Cuba).  The man is very old, weak, mute, and has very large wings!
Could he be an angel?
     They put him in their fenced-in chicken coop.  Word quickly spreads that
he is an angel, and crowds of curiosity seekers and religious pilgrims appear.
The local priest comes by to denounce him as a fraud, but nobody pays 
attention.  Pelayo and Elisena realize that there's money in this for them, and
begin to charge admission.
     Shortly thereafter they learn that the "angel" might be a mere mortal.
However, they cover it up, as they don't want to lose their new business.  An
amusement park/carnival develops in their neighborhood, serving the crowds that
come to see the angel.  This attracts hucksters and other shady types.  Pelayo
and Elisena must deal with the changes this brings in their life, and the story
continues from there.
     This film provides some interesting insights into human nature, though the
insights are often cruel.  The angel is alternately adored and abused by the
crowds.  A blind woman enters the chicken coop, singing in a high pitched
voice, and demanding a miracle (not asking, demanding).  She doesn't specify
the miracle she wants.  When a miracle is not immediately delivered, she starts
to beat the angel with her cane!  This angers the angel (who has some powers),
and he gives her a miracle: he changes her voice to a deep, man's voice!  Well,
she gets her miracle after all!  Additional insights are provided by the
priest's bumbling efforts to discredit the angel, and by the hucksters that
appear to make money off the crowds visiting the angel.
     Although the film is relatively interesting, and is well made with high
production values, I should warn you that the story develops at a slow pace.
Additionally, the film seems to be edited for television (it was originally
made for Spanish television).
     Although the film is interesting, its slow pace and unusual subject
prevent me from recommending it to a general audience.  Those with an interest
in human relations films should give it consideration.
Distribution.  Currently being screened at some art houses and repertory
theaters in the U.S., it is part of a set of films being marketed under the
title "Dangerous Loves."  These films, originally made for Spanish television,
are based (sometimes loosely) on stories by Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
