Title
Review for For Love or Money (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jon Ridge
CAST:  Michael J. Fox, Gabrielle Anwar, Anthony Higgins, Michael Tucker,
       Dan Hedaya, Bob Balaban (who never appeared...)
DIRECTOR:  Barry Sonnenfield
SCREENPLAY:  Mark Rosenthal, Lawrence Konner
SCORE:  Bruce Broughton
RELEASE:  October 1, 1993
     I don't like movies that start off bad and end up that way, too.
I don't like movies that present an audience with absolutely no
redeeming values (nothing to laugh at, or cry about, or feel excited
about).  I don't like movies that front as something that they're not.
I don't like movies like this one.
     Michael J. Fox stars as Douglas Ireland, concierge at a ritzy
hotel in New York.  He doesn't take his work lightly--the man makes
people feel useful, saves marriages, takes dogs for a walk, gives you
tickets to any Broadway show you want.  And Doug has a dream of
creating his very own hotel, called THE DOUG, or THE RIVER HOUSE.  He
just needs to make a big-time money man very happy in the mean time, so
that he can close a deal.  To do this, he must take good care of the
man's younger mistress (played by Gabrielle Anwar).  The woman is
beautiful, and Doug has been after her for some time now, so he gladly
accepts the job and does whatever it takes to make his dream a
reality.
     Well, Doug falls in love with her (big surprise, huh?).  The only
problem is, he can't act on his feelings for risk of crushing his
dream.  Ah, what's a man to do...?  I knew what would happen.  In fact,
I knew everything about this movie within the first ten minutes it
played.  FOR LOVE OR MONEY is an exercise in just how predictable and
utterly worthless a comedy--or *movie*, in general--can be.  It isn't
funny, or romantic, or engaging, or surprising, or original in any
way.  Fox acts with some sort of smirk on his mug the whole time, and
basically looks rather bored throughout the movie.  The usually strong
supporting "love interest" that should have backed him up--or, in this
case, sufficed for him--is played by an enigmatic young actress named
Gabrielle Anwar.  We saw her briefly in SCENT OF A WOMAN, doing the
tango with Al Pacino, but got nothing, no sort of impression, from her
little screen time in the film.  I guess FOR LOVE OR MONEY came to her
in the wake of the success of that movie, she read over the screen
play, and said, "Yeah, i should probably do this so I can work some
more and survive in this business."  It's just too bad for her that the
script, by two different people, has *no* luster about it whatsoever.
     And what about Michael J. Fox?  What's his problem?  I know he can
be funny, I saw it in BACK TO THE FUTURE 1, 2, and 3.  I know he can be
dramatic, I saw that in CASUALTIES OF WAR.  But lately, things just
don't seem to be working out for him (first LIFE WITH MIKEY, and now
this?).  His character of concierge here is pretty much a nice guy--
but that's it.  He's extremely shallow in the movie, and isn't able to
give his character the gravity it so desperately needs.
     I didn't want to give this movie a bad review--I hate doing that
for *any* film.  But the disappointing fact is:  Bad movies often are
written, and cast, and filmed.  FOR LOVE OR MONEY should've stopped
on the first level, been trashed, and then rewritten until it could
make us care about it.
     What we have here is an excruciatingly unnecessary film.
CRITICAL RATING:  (1/2)*
Rated PG-13, for very mild Profanity -- Running Time:  1:33m

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Michael J. Fox, Gabrielle Anwar, Anthony Higgins.
Screenplay:  Mark Rosenthal and Lawrence Konner.
Director:  Barry Sonnenfeld.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Michael J. Fox is in a *deep* rut.  While he's made the occasional
stab at drama (LIGHT OF DAY, CASUALTIES OF WAR), Fox has basically
seemed content to play the character he perfected on "Family Ties:" The
Cocky Young Go-Getter Who Learns a Lesson about What Really Matters.
It's a type that has worked for him, thanks to his charm and comic
timing, but it puts him in danger of carrying questionable projects
which seem comfortable.  As a perfect example, witness FOR LOVE OR
MONEY, a cliche-filled would-be romantic comedy that's neither
particularly romantic nor particularly funny.
     This time around, Fox's Cocky Young Go-Getter is named Doug
Ireland, concierge at the posh Manhattan hotel The Bradbury.  His
specialty is doing that little something extra for the guests--walking
their dogs, acquiring hard-to-get theater tickets--and raking in huge
tips for his efforts.  These tips have gone into a deposit on Doug's
dream, his own luxury hotel, but making that dream a reality will
require another $5 million.  Enter financier Christian Hanover (Anthony
Higgins), who's willing to exchange helping Doug with his hotel with
Doug helping him carry on an affair.  The catch:  Hanover's mistress is
Andy (Gabrielle Anwar), an aspiring singer who works at the Bradbury's
perfume counter and for whom Doug is carrying a torch.  As the two
spend more time together, a mutual attraction develops, forcing Doug to
decide whether he's willing to sacrifice Hanover's money for Andy's
love.
     If you have to guess which choice Doug will make, you haven't seen
very many romantic comedies.  The point is never whether they'll end up
together, but simply how entertaining getting there will be.
Unfortunately, the answer in FOR LOVE OR MONEY is, not very.  It starts
promisingly enough, with a focus on Doug's wheeling and dealing, but
once the romantic plot kicks in there's just no energy.  There's a
lengthy sequence at a party involving mistaken identities and Doug
trying to hold everything together which was frantic but never really
clicked; after that, the film doesn't even seem to try.  The situations
are simply tedious.  I can't begin to describe how tired I am of that
stock "we both care about each other but neither one of us will admit
it so instead we'll yell at each other" scene in romantic comedies.
There are plenty of ways to establish conflict that actually occur in
human life (or perhaps I and everyone I know have just been lucky so
far).  FOR LOVE OR MONEY uses up most of its best jokes and all of its
originality in about ten minutes.
     I also had many problems with the performances.  Fox has spent so
much time as the Cocky Young Go-Getter that he doesn't seem to know how
to vary it.  He's too likable too soon; FOR LOVE OR MONEY would have
worked much better if a man who had seen more than his share of kept
women had initially been more cynical and antagonistic towards Andy.
He also never conveys when the mild flirtation established early in
their interaction becomes real romantic interest, but perhaps a better
question than "when" is "why." Gabrielle Anwar wanders through the film
gorgeous but thoroughly uninteresting, emoting and pouting in ways that
would make a high school drama teacher cringe.  Of the supporting
players, only Michael Tucker as a nebbishy hotel guest is not a
complete stereotype.  Particularly embarrassing are fascistic German
hotel manager and a swishy fashion designer, but they are just the most
glaring examples of a script that makes all the easy choices, and all
the wrong ones.
     Director Barry Sonnenfeld was a marvelous cinematographer
(MILLER'S CROSSING), but so far only a barely serviceable director.
Like THE ADDAMS FAMILY, FOR LOVE OR MONEY is too ham-fisted, and
Sonnenfeld's few stylistic flourishes are lost in slow pacing and
mishandled actors.  FOR LOVE OR MONEY turns out to be ALEX KEATON - THE
CONCIERGE YEARS, an overlong mid-grade sitcom.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Michael J. Fox, Gabrielle Anwar, Anthony Higgins, 
           Michael Tucker, Bob Balaban
Director:  Barry Sonnenfeld
Producer:  Brian Grazer
Screenplay: Mark Rosenthal and Lawrence Konner
Music:  Bruce Broughton
Released by Universal Pictures
     Doug Ireland (Michael J. Fox) is the concierge at an upscale New
York hotel, where his attention to the guests sometimes goes beyond the
call of mere duty as he plays the role of a "genie is a suit", helping
them realize their less grand dreams.  But Doug has a dream of his
own--building the "ultimate" hotel--and all he needs is a $3 million
investment from super-rich tycoon Christian Hanover (Anthony Higgins).
Hanover seems interested, but first he wants Doug to babysit his
mistress, Andy Hart (Gabrielle Anwar).  At first, Doug has no trouble
with the task, but as he begins to fall for Andy, he realizes that he
may have to make the choice between the girl and the dream.
     "Cute" is the operative word to describe FOR LOVE OR MONEY, and
there are numerous times when this picture takes cuteness to an
extreme.  It's nice when a movie gives you a warm, fuzzy feeling deep
inside, but too much sweetness can turn sickening.  FOR LOVE OR MONEY
has its moments, but it's debatable whether there are enough of them to
justify the movie's existence.
     Michael J. Fox and Gabrielle Anwar make a good pair, and there's a
decent rapport between them, but the script fails to take full
advantage of the chemistry.  Despite the amount of screen time that
they share, the development of their romance is fitful and incomplete.
For a romantic comedy, this is a serious flaw, and it makes the
inevitable conclusion less satisfying than it should be.  For those who
enjoy this sort of lighthearted, frothy boy-meets-girl sparring, last
year's THE CUTTING EDGE is a far better choice.
     There are a number of seemingly unnecessary subplots going on, the
inclusion of which damages the early pace of the movie.  When the
audience wants to see more Michael J. Fox/Gabrielle Anwar interaction,
they are instead treated to Doug trying to duck the earstwhile,
seemingly-incorruptible IRS agent Drinkwater (Bob Balaban).
Admittedly, things get tied together in the end, but the conclusion is
so feeble that it doesn't warrant all of the excess garbage that leads
up to it.
     There are a number of charming scenes sprinkled throughout FOR
LOVE OR MONEY, most of which feature the delicately growing
relationship between Doug and Andy.  There's also a very funny mistaken
identity incident that shows the promise of a more enjoyable film than
the one we're presented with.
     The ending, in addition to being unaccountably rushed (the movie
weighs in at a light 95 minutes, so there's no obvious reason for
things to be truncated so suddenly), is disappointing in its
unoriginality.  Since this is basically a modern-day fairy tale, we
know everything is going to turn out right--in fact, we'd be
disappointed if it didn't--but the manner in which things are smoothly
resolved is far from satisfying.
     This is one of Michael J. Fox's better film performances (put it
alongside his BACK TO THE FUTURE and DOC HOLLYWOOD roles).  The movie
itself isn't that great, but Fox is affable, and seems the perfect
choice for Doug.  Gabrielle Anwar, who had a quick scene in SCENT OF A
WOMAN and a much larger role in WILD HEARTS CAN'T BE BROKEN, is a
refreshing as Andy, perfecting a breezy attitude.  Unfortunately for
Ms. Anwar, she is forced to wear a number of too-tight outfits whose
presence indicates that sex appeal is one of her main functions of her
part.
     Romantic comedies have become something of a scarce breed of late,
and this is a prime example of why (there's an old saying that if you
can't do something right, don't do it at all).  Although FOR LOVE OR
MONEY is a marginal film by any standards, it isn't unwatchable, and it
does fit nicely into the "date movie" niche.  I can't honestly
recommend the movie, but it isn't completely without redeeming
qualities.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
