Title
Review for Rat Race (2001)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Robin Clifford
Six ordinary people, one eccentric gambling entrepreneur, $2 million
stashed in a train station locker in Silver City, New Mexico. This is the
formula for a cross-country chase (the only rule is there are no rules)
that pits the contestants against each other as they all gallop for the
gold in Jerry Zucker's "Rat Race."
In 1963, Stanley Kramer created a comic throwback to the old Keystone Kop
Kapers with his "It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World," putting together a cast
of classic comedians in a wild and wacky race to find ill-gotten booty. Sid
Caesar, Milton Berle, Jimmy Durante, Phil Silvers, Buddy Hackett, Mickey
Rooney, Dick Shawn, Terry-Thomas, Jonathan Winters, Buster Keaton, The
Three Stooges and other comic icons joined the ailing Spencer Tracy in the
3+ hour comic chase caper that took a look a the greed that drives men's
souls.
Comedy maven Zucker ("Airplane," "Naked Gun"), using Andy Breckman's
original script, assembles a group of comedians and actors and revisits the
silent-era slapstick style mined so well by Kramer decades ago. With "Rat
Race" we have Rowan Atkinson, John Cleese, Whoopi Goldberg and Cuba
Gooding, Jr. leading the cast as a disparate group who, for one reason or
another, arrive at the casino owned by wealthy Donald Sinclair (Cleese).
All play the slot machines and each receives a special gold token that
gains them entrance to the casino penthouse. Once there, Sinclair informs
the crew that he has gathered them together to make them an offer they
can't refuse.
Here's the deal: in a locker at the train station in Silver City sits a
duffel bag containing millions. Each contestant is given a key to the
locker and they must use whatever means they can find to get to the station
and, first come, win the loot. Along the way, the various pairings beg,
borrow and steal any means of transport to get to the final destination. A
gambit by two of the players, brothers Duane and Blaine Cody (Seth Green
and Vince Vieluf), shuts down the Las Vegas airport, forcing everyone to
search for ground transport, evening the odds.
Gambling addict Randy Pear (Jon Lovitz) dupes his wife (Kathy Najimy) and
kids that he's on his way to get a job, not yet another get-rich-quick
scheme. The kids spot, along the highway, a sign for the Barbie Museum and
insist that, against their dad's protests, they stop for the exhibit. Much
to their chagrin, the museum turns out to be a skinhead hangout honoring
the notorious Nazi war criminal Klaus Barbie. The Jewish family beat feet
and steal Hitler's Mercedes, an exhibit at the museum, to make their
getaway and head to Silver City.
The Cody brothers lose their key to an unscrupulous guy at a hardware store
and have to get it back before they can continue on their way, resulting in
a chase involving a hot air balloon and an extremely unhappy cow.
Mother/daughter team of Vera and Merrill (Whoopi Goldberg and Lanai
Chapman) run into a nutty squirrel lady (Kathy Bates) and their car gets
wrecked, forcing them to steal a rocket car. Narcoleptic Enrico Pollini
(Rowan Atkinson) shags a ride with inept Zack (Wayne Knight), an ambulance
driver tasked with delivering a human heart to El Paso for a transplant.
Owen Templeton (Cuba Gooding, Jr.), a pro football referee who screwed up a
big game, hijacks a busload of "I Love Lucy" look-alikes in his quest for
the money. Breckin Meyer and Amy Smart pair up as the most normal in this
abnormal lot, but they, too, are drawn in to the crazy race. Unbeknownst to
this unlikely crew of treasure hunters, Donald Sinclair is using the race
to amuse his high stakes gamblers as they watch and bet on the contestants.
"Rat Race," while not as complex as "Mad, Mad World," is goofy fun that may
not always work well, but has enough laughs and silly stunts to keep amused
a summer audience trying to beat the heat. All of the actors, most of who
are on screen alone or in pairs most of the time, give a yeoman's effort in
providing the appropriate dose of low-brow comedy to their characters.
Rowan Atkinson, as Senor Pollini, puts on the oddest Italian accent I have
ever heard but delivers his typical brand of offbeat physical comedy. Jon
Lovitz is manically obsessed as the loser father who just wants a big piece
of the pie. Cuba Gooding, Jr. puts the right spin on his out of favor
referee who just wants to forget his gaff that caused many to lose their
bets on the big game. Seth Green and Vince Vieluf have some of the funniest
moments as the Cody brother when they destroy an airport radar tower or
invade a monster truck rally. Everyone in this film pays their dues and
each has fun in the process
The visual comedy, much of it very absurdist, works on the lowest common
denominator to tickle the funny bone, something that Jerry Zucker has done
since his "Kentucky Fried Movie." The gags don't come as fast and furious
as they did in "Airplane!" but the set up for the more elaborate jokes is
done with style and a solid sense of comedy.
"Rat Race" is "It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World"-lite. It doesn't have the
plethora of comic stars as the earlier film, but the cast and crew are
every bit as dedicated in providing a light-hearted, politically correct
comedy that won't earn high praise, but won't be derided either. The
audience laughed at all the right places and even I laughed aloud a few
times. I give it a B-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Take seven ordinary people, dangle $2 million in front of them and watch the
ensuing fun.  That's basic premise of Rat Race, a new film that seems a
whole lot like It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World.  Thankfully, it's a lot
funnier and about an hour shorter, too.
John Cleese (The World is Not Enough) plays Donald Sinclair, an eccentric
Las Vegas hotel owner with a mouthful of the biggest, whitest teeth you'll
see this side of Baba Booey (I swear they're the same choppers Matt Dillon
wore in There's Something About Mary).  In order to keep his hotel filled
with high rollers from various foreign countries, Sinclair must offer
betting on unique competitions.  His latest involves a 500-plus-mile race
from Vegas to Silver City, New Mexico, with contestants randomly chosen via
the distribution of special gold coins in his hotel's slot machines.
Here's a quick rundown of the participants:
- Nick Shaffer (Breckin Meyer, Josie and the Pussycats), a Chicago attorney
in town for a friend's bachelor party.  He thinks the contest is a goof but
then meets a charming helicopter pilot named Tracy (Amy Smart, Road Trip),
who provides the quickest way to get from Point A to Point B.
- Vera Baker (Whoopi Goldberg, Monkeybone) and the daughter she gave up for
adoption (Lanei Chapman).  The two meet for the first time just prior to the
competition and quickly bond over an incident with Kathy Bates and several
homeless squirrels.
- Duane (Seth Green, America's Sweethearts) and Blaine (Vince Vieluf, Clay
Pigeons) Cody, two wannabe grifters.  One of 'em has a self-pierced tongue
and is unintelligible (one scene has him swearing up a storm, but it's about
as clear as Brad Pitt's dialogue in Snatch).  Their adventure involves a
vertical drive, an udder fight and a crooked hardware store employee.  'Nuff
said.
- Owen Templeton (Cuba Gooding Jr., Pearl Harbor), an NFL referee who, one
week prior, blew a big call in a big game and is despised by everyone who
lost money because of him (it's Vegas, remember).  Owen somehow ends up
driving a tour bus full of nuts dressed as Lucy.
- Enrico Pollini (Rowan Atkinson, Bean), a narcoleptic Italian who teams up
with an organ deliveryman (Wayne Knight, Seinfeld) rushing a donated heart
to El Paso.  One can only assume that Roberto Benigni passed on this part.
- Randy Pear (Jon Lovitz, 3000 Miles to Graceland), a husband (to Kathy
Najimy, The Wedding Planner) and father of two who refuses to tell his
family why their Vegas vacation to see David Copperfield is taking a detour
through Silver City.  Hilarity ensues in the form of kids requesting
bathroom breaks (the best description of having to poop since Fat Bastard in
The Spy Who Shagged Me) and stops at tourist traps, like the Barbie Museum
(a damn funny scene).
The competitors use various modes of transportation, ranging from the
typical (planes, trains and automobiles) to the unique (helicopter, hot-air
balloon and rocket car).  With a script written by former Saturday Night
Liver Andy Breckman and direction from Jerry Zucker (Airplane, Police
Squad), no comedic stone is left unturned.  Of course, this may offend
anyone hung up on animal rights, speech impediments and the mentally
challenged (maybe it's got something to do with those damn Matt Dillon
teeth).
I hate Gooding, and downright despise Goldberg, but they were both as
likable as they've been in years.  Don't get me wrong - I ain't no racist.
Meyer, Knight and Smart aren't exactly high on my list of the Tinseltown
elite, but everybody here is thoroughly enjoyable.  Lovitz and Atkinson
steal the show, however.
Although it's this summer's funniest film, Race's ending flat-out sucks.  I
know I've already campaigned for a moratorium on the number of
Holocaust/WWII films, but isn't there something we can do to keep that
goddamn "All Star" song out of every film possible?  I'm picturing a wizened
Sick-Boy trying to explain the cinematic significance of Smash Mouth to his
grandchildren in 2053:
Little Suzie:  "Grampy, why is that song in every old movie?"
Decrepit Sick-Boy:  "It's Carson Daly's fault.  Spiders!  I'm covered in
spiders!"
Little Suzie:  "Mom, he's doing it again."
Seriously, that "All Star" bullshit nearly ruined this summer's other funny
film (Shrek), but Race ups the stakes by having the stupid band in the
movie...performing the song live.  And, brother, does Smash Mouth singer
Steve Harwell have a face made for radio.
1:53 - PG-13 for sexual references, crude humor, partial nudity and language

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie forums, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
An eccentric billionaire places $2 million inside a locker in New Mexico,
assembles a bunch of losers in Las Vegas and tells them that whoever reaches the
locker first, can keep all of the money. And they're off to the races! 
CRITIQUE:
A very cool premise, some half-decent gags here and there, a few major stunt
pieces and a fun score just aren't enough to recommend this movie all the way.
Why? Well, I just didn't think that most of this film was funny, that's why. The
basic idea is a good one, gather a bunch of people and ask them to reach the
same point in order to win $2 million. Check. But once everyone hits the road,
it's basically just a bunch of sketches, each involving one of the characters or
another, getting into outrageous situations (most of which are extremely
farfetched if you really start thinking about them-a Nazi museum in the middle
of the desert?) in order to stir up laughs. Unfortunately for me, I just didn't
think that most of it was all that funny (but being as humor is very subjective,
who knows...maybe you will enjoy the laughs). In fact, I spent the first half of
this movie looking at my watch, other than the scenes with Cuba Gooding Jr.
(who's very funny here), and only started "getting into" it during the film's
second half.
It's basically a matter of the characters being humorous or not, and most just
weren't for me. Rowan Atkinson for example, was abysmally unfunny to me as the
"Italian" tourist, but many in the audience were cracking up at every facial
gesture that he made. Not me! (and don't get me started on that inane bit with
Wayne Knight and the human heart...yeesh!). Whoopie Goldberg and her daughter in
the film were also not funny, and the whole ongoing joke about Seth Green's
brother not being able to speak, was also not a part of my humor list. Cuba
Gooding Jr., on the other hand, did make me laugh, as did some of the Hitler
jokes from Lovitz's camp (although some will be offended, no doubt), and I
really liked how all of the rich guys were betting on pretty much anything under
the sun (the "maid bets" were the absolute tops). I also liked the whole bus
full of Lucy Balls...brrrr, creepy and funny at the same time. But then you had
a bunch of time-filling stunt pieces that just weren't amusing in the least.
Like the whole helicopter thang and the scene featuring Seth Green's car being
pulled upwards by a radar.
And the reason that I'm talking about the characters and the scenes specifically
in my review is because that's basically all that this movie is about. You
either like the characters and think that most of what they're doing is funny,
or you don't. It's not a plot-driven film and it certainly doesn't ask that you
invest anything into the characters (i.e leave your brain at the door). It's
mindless (but it doesn't pretend to be anything otherwise) with some laughs and
a horrible ending. I mean, what the hell is going on with the band Smashmouth
and movies this summer?!? This feels like the umpteenth film to which they've
sold their "hit" single "All-Star". Enough already! Anyway, you just gotta see
the goofy ending to believe it, easily one of the most contrived things that
I've seen in some time. Check it out on video, only because of the cool premise
and some of the gags clicking, but otherwise, stick to the "Whoopie Goldberg"
rule of movies, and stay away from this one in the theaters (for those
uninitiated to the guideline: "If Whoopie's in a film, stay away!"). I think it
would also have been much greater if they had used A to B list actors and made
the chase cross-country, as opposed to the B to C list actors assembled here,
and the state-to-state race. Oh well...it's August, folks, and studios aren't
exactly known to reserve this month for the greatest pictures in their annual
portfolio, so lower your expectations and you might just laugh along.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Airplane (10/10) - A Simple Plan (8/10) - Dirty Work (5/10) - Drowning Mona
(5/10) - Honeymoon in Vegas (10/10) - O Brother, Where Art Thou (7/10) - Raising
Arizona (10/10)

Author
Bob Bloom
 RAT RACE (2001) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Rowan Atkinson, Lanai Chapman, John
Cleese, Whoopi Goldberg, Cuba Gooding Jr., Seth Green, Jon Lovitz, Breckin
Meyer, Kathy Najimy, Amy Smart, Dave Thomas and Vince Vieluf. Screenplay by Andy
Breckman. Directed by Jerry Zucker. Rated PG-13. 
 If you want some hearty laughs, then Rat Race is the movie for you. 
 This unpretentious little comedy, which sneaks into theaters today with very
little hype, will have you bouncing in your theater seat. 
 And while the film fits neatly into the low-brow, slapstick school of comedy,
one refreshing aspect is its lack of mean-spiritedness. 
 The plot follows a group of people chosen at random by an eccentric Las Vegas
casino owner (John Cleese) who must race from Vegas to a bus station locker 700
miles away in Silver City, N.M. Inside the locker is a duffel bag containing $2
million. The first one to open the locker, gets the bag and the money. 
 What the group of participants doesn't know is that Cleese's Donald Sinclair
("I can do anything I want - I'm eccentric!") is staging the race as a betting
game for a group of high rollers at the hotel. 
 The participants include Vera (Whoopi Goldberg) and Merrill (Lanai Chapman), a
newly reunited mother and daughter; disgraced pro football referee Owen
Templeton (Cuba Gooding Jr.); Italian tourist Mr. Pollini (Rowan Atkinson);
Randy Pear (Jon Lovitz) and his family; the bumbling con men Duane and Blaine
Cody (Seth Green and Vince Vieluf); and cynical young lawyer Nick Shaffer
(Breckin Meyer). 
 Various amusing encounters and mishaps befall the participants en route to
Silver City. Screenwriter Andy Breckman adds a nice touch by not having the
racers try to sabotage one another. 
 The most side-splitting situations involve Vera and Merrill's encounter with
the squirrel lady, a nice nutsy cameo by Kathy Bates; Owen's commandeering a
charter bus full of Lucille Ball look-alikes on their way to a Lucy convention;
the Cody brothers misadventures with a hot-air balloon, a flying cow and a
monster truck; and the Pear family's stopover at a Barbie museum, which turns
out not to be what they think it is. 
 The Pear family situation is a fine example of the way Breckman's script builds
the laughs. Without going into detail, this bit segues from the museum to
Hitler's touring car, to Eva Braun's dark lipstick, to Lovitz burning his
tongue, culminating at a ceremony honoring World War II veterans. 
 Rat Race's cast is first rate. Cleese is wonderfully devilish and madcap;
Lovitz is, at first, a bit whiny, but his character grows on you; Gooding is
having a fine romp; and Dave Thomas almost steals the show as Cleese's deadpan
assistant, a man "born without a personality." 
 The film is directed by Jerry Zucker, who knows something about comedy. Along
with his brother, David, and friend Jim Abrahams, he was responsible for such
hits as Airplane! and Ruthless People. 
 A throwaway subplot, which is good for some laughs, features Cleese and his
buddies, betting on a series of outlandish situations, including one dealing
with a hooker and Pepto-Bismol. 
 This is a fun little feature. The only letdown comes at the finale, which is
too touchy-feely and sweet, almost negating what came before it. 
 Rat Race is a summer sleeper, but it will keep you awake, as will the laughter
of those watching around you. 
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He
can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Other reviews by Bloom can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on
golafayette. 
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom 

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "RAT RACE" (Paramount Pictures)
   Like Stanley Kramer's "It's a Mad Mad Mad Mad World" (1963), this
silly screwball comedy has a simple premise. Six unsuspecting people, along with
their partners, are entered a bizarre "human rat race" devised by an eccentric
Las Vegas casino owner (John Cleese) as a new kind of gambling game for his
Venetian Hotel high-stakes rollers who can make bets on the outcome. Each
contestant, chosen at random, is given a key to a locker in a train station in
Silver City, New Mexico, containing a duffel bag filled with two million
dollars. Whoever gets there first keeps the loot - and there are no rules. The
competitors include Whoopi Goldberg and Lanai Chapman, a reunited birth-mother
and ambitious daughter, who are sent over a cliff by frustrated Kathy Bates;
con-artist brothers Seth Green and Vince Vieluf, who plot to sabotage the
airport's radar system, thus forcing others to find slower transportation;
Breckin Meyer and Amy Smart, who use a helicopter since it doesn't need the
airport radar; Jon Lovitz and Kathy Najimy, who planned to see David Copperfield
but wind up stealing Hitler's Mercedes limo; Rowan Atkinson, a narcoleptic
Italian, who grabs a ride with ambulance driver Wayne Knight, who is
transporting a heart to Texas; and Cuba Gooding Jr., a disgraced NFL ref who,
stranded in the desert, hijacks a chartered bus filled with Lucille Ball
impersonators. Writer Andy Breckman ("Sgt. Bilko") and director Jerry Zucker
("Airplane!") show no restraint, throwing in every gag imaginable to get a
laugh. Unfortunately, several of them miss the mark due to bad timing, the
schtick wears thin, and the conclusion is corny and contrived. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Rat Race" is an absurd, madcap 5  but it's not, as
claimed, "the gambling experience of a lifetime.

Author
Steve Rhodes
The opening credits for RAT RACE perfectly serve their purpose of putting the
audience into a suitably silly mood.  Each of the movie's long list of stars
appears with his or her real head attached to a cartoon figure body that waddles
by the titles like a drunk duck.
Working from a wonderfully wacky script by Andy Breckman (SGT. BILKO), director
Jerry Zucker (AIRPLANE!) throws in everything but the kitchen sink -- or maybe
the sink was there -- in order to make us laugh, and the miracle is that most of
it works.  Frequently the film falls back on old slapstick gags, but, more often
than not, the jokes manage to be funny even you've seen similar moments before. 
The movie is a delightful throwback to old screwball comedies.  There's some
funny bathroom humor in the movie, but the majority of the jokes are so clean
that they could be in G-rated comedy.  (The movie is PG-13.)
The setup is that billionaire hotel owner Donald Sinclair offers six randomly
chosen guests in his Las Vegas hotel something with great odds -- one in six to
be precise.  Each is given a key to a locker in New Mexico in which he has
placed two million dollars.  The game is incredibly simple.  The first one there
gets the cash.  Sinclair has a bunch of super wealthy gamblers on hand who have
placed bets on who will get to the money first.  It is "the gambling experience
of a lifetime," Sinclair explains.  The inspired script has the participants
initially not participating.  They can't believe it, so nobody moves.  It seems
as if the race will be a bust without even getting started.
John Cleese, in a small but essential part, hams it up as Sinclair.  The film's
best subplot has the bored gamblers wagering on a series of crazy things in
order to kill the time as they wait for the big race to finish.
ROAD TRIP's Breckin Meyer and Amy Smart play Nick Shaffer and Tracy Faucet. 
Nick is a lawyer who has never gambled on anything in his life, and Tracy is a
daredevil helicopter pilot with whom he hitches a ride.
In the most underutilized pairing, Whoopi Goldberg and Lanei Chapman play a
mother and daughter who are going for the gold.  The mother is kind of cautious,
and the daughter is just the opposite.  
Seth Green plays Duane Cody, a guy who is ready to utilize the game's one rule
-- "There are no rules."  -- to its maximum advantage.  His goofy brother,
Blaine (Vince Vieluf), has a speech impediment and an infected tongue caused by
the piece of jewelry he used in a "do-it-yourself" tongue piercing.
Cuba Gooding Jr. plays a widely loathed football referee who recently became
infamous for a bad call on the coin toss.  The ref probably needs the money
since he may never be able to show his face again on the gridiron.
Jon Lovitz plays a plump man with any equally pudgy family, whom he is willing
to put through any amount of grief on the way to capturing the loot.  Kathy
Najimy, Brody Smith and Jillian Marie play the other family members.   
Only Rowan Atkinson, who acts like Mr. Bean channeling Roberto Benigni, is
uniformly disappointing.  His annoying character, who suffers from narcolepsy,
is a klutz.  One scene involving a heart could have been eliminated entirely.
Among several nice small parts, the best has Kathy Bates playing a crazy woman
known only as "Squirrel Lady."
The fast paced film has lots of hilarious incidents, large and small, but to
mention even their setup would diminish their impact.  To be fair the film does
run out of gas every now and then, but it just keeps plugging away, happy to run
on fumes.  "Who Let The Dogs Out" and many other well known songs are used to
maximum effect in the film.
As our contestants approach the finish line, every member of the audience will
probably have their mental money on one of the teams and their hopes riding on
another.  The ending is something of a disappointment, but at least it is a
surprise.
RAT RACE runs 1:50.  It is rated PG-13 for "sexual references, crude humor,
partial nudity and language" and would be acceptable for kids around 10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, thought the film was hilarious and gave it *** 1/2.  He
thought the acting was good, the story was imaginative and the ending was
surprising.  
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 17, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Rat Race (2001)
Whoopi Goldberg, John Cleese, Cuba Gooding Jr., Rowan Atkinson, Jon
Lovitz, Kathy Najimy, Seth Green, Breckin Meyer, Amy Smart, Wayne
Knight, Paul Rodriguez, Vince Vieluf, Lanai Chapman, Dean Cain, Dave
Thomas, Kathy Bates (uncredited). Written by Andy Breckman. Directed by
Jerry Zucker. 112 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
After watching "Rat Race" last week, I noticed my cheeks were sore and
realized that, when not laughing aloud, I had held a grin for virtually
all of the film's 112 minutes. Saturday night, I attended another sneak
preview for the movie and damned if I didn't enjoy it as much the second
time as the first. "Rat Race" is a great goofy delight, a dandy mix of
energetic performances, inspired sight gags and flat-out silliness.
Hands down, this is the most fun film of the summer.
The movie begins with zippy retro-style opening credits that look like
they were torn straight out of a '60s slapstick comedy, featuring
animated photos of the cast attached to herky-jerky bodies bounding
around the screen. Then comes the setup.
Donald Sinclair (John Cleese), the extremely rich owner of the Venetian
Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, enjoys concocting unusual bets for his
high rolling clients. To that end, he places a half dozen very special
tokens in his slot machines. Gathering together the lucky token holders,
he explains, "Today you have a chance to play a game where the odds of
winning are one in six." The competition is simple: Each contestant gets
a key that opens a locker in Silver City, N.M., containing $2 million in
cash. There is a transmitter in every key, so that Sinclair and his
cronies can keep track of who is ahead. The race has no rules 
whichever contestant reaches the locker first gets the money.
Since it would be wrong to spoil any of the jokes, let's use the next
few paragraphs to profile the racers.
Decked out in flashy, trashy clothing and sporting big hair, Vera Baker
(Whoopi Goldberg) is in town to reunite with the daughter she gave up
for adoption as a baby. She finds that grown-up Merrill (Lanai Chapman)
is erudite, conservative and more than a little bit wary of this
stranger trying to jump into her life. Thrown together, it becomes clear
that both women share a fierce competitive nature.
Owen Templeton (Cuba Gooding Jr.) is currently the most hated man in
America. An NFL referee, he cost gamblers all over the country enormous
amounts of money by blowing a call in a high-profile game. After
escaping from a vengeful cab driver, Owen gets to New Mexico by
masquerading as the driver for a busload of Lucy Ricardo impersonators
heading to a convention.
Mr. Pollini (Rowan Atkinson) is a cheerful, odd little Italian man on
holiday in America. He also is narcoleptic and falls asleep at the most
inopportune times. Pollini hitches a ride with Zack (Wayne Knight), a
hyper-tense ambulance driver carrying a human heart across country for a
transplant operation.
Randy Pear (Jon Lovitz) promised his wife Beverly (Kathy Najimy) and two
kids a fun-filled vacation in Las Vegas. Fearful that Beverly will be
angry over his involvement in the race, he claims that he must travel to
Silver City for a job interview. Beverly insists the family stay
together, so they hop in the mini-van and tear off into the desert.
Brothers Duane (Seth Green) and Blaine (Vince Vieluf) Cody are young,
crooked and stupid. Blaine has a speech impediment due to his poorly
self-done tongue piercing, and Duane is the only person who can come
close to understanding him. The boys will stop at nothing to reach their
goal.
Finally, Nick Shaffer (Breckin Meyer) is a no-nonsense
lawyer-in-training who recruits helicopter pilot Tracy Faucet (Amy
Smart) for the journey. At first glance, they seem blandly wholesome,
but all that changes when Tracy buzzes the home of her boyfriend Shawn
(Dean Cain) and spies him swimming with another woman.
Director Jerry Zucker ("Airplane," "Ghost") leaps from racer to racer,
periodically returning to Las Vegas where Sinclair and Mr. Grisham (Dave
Thomas), his personality-impaired right hand man, continue cooking up
bizarre bets for the gamblers. As with any Zucker production, a few
jokes fall flat, but the momentum of the comedy zooms past those
missteps. High points for me include a bit involving Kathy Bates as a
roadside squirrel salesperson and an intricately set up gag that carries
Jon Lovitz and family from a bizarre museum to an outdoor rally, with an
utterly tasteless and screamingly funny pay-off.
Had I been part of the filmmaking team, I would have ditched a joke
where a key is dropped into a baby's clothes and instead had the key get
lost in the cleavage of a dozing society matron. It would have drawn the
same laugh without the squirm-inducing hint of child molestation. I also
would have selected a different band for a concert sequence. My God, do
we really need yet another movie with Smash Mouth performing "All Star?"
But enough carping. "Rat Race" is a riot, with terrific no-holds-barred
performances from the diverse cast. See it, see it again and when the
DVD comes out, buy it, because a movie this hilarious will surely have
outtakes to die for.

Author
Homer Yen
Over the past decade or so, Director Jerry Zucker's
name has become synonymous with over-the-top comedies.
 He brought us "Airplane" in the 80s and "The Naked
Gun" in the 90s.  Thoroughly silly yet frequently
funny, these screwball comedies provided audiences
with a bellyful of giggles through snappy dialogue and
a flood of sight gags.  In his latest effort, "Rat
Race," we see that he still knows how to, more or
less, appeal to our childish sense of humor.  White it
isn't as hilarious or as inspired as his previous
work, you'll still find something that will make you
grin. 
You might smile at its crude sense of humor, such as
when a courier who is transporting a human heart
becomes overly curious about his cargo.  You might
giggle at the women who pose as models in order to
steal a land-racer.  And, it's hard not to laugh at
the inane sequence involving an out-of-control car, a
runaway hot-air balloon, and a cow.  I'll just leave
that up to your own imagination.  One can only imagine
what THAT storyboard must have looked like.
These poor souls (and several others) wind up in such
absurd situations because of a bizarre race in which
they are competing.  Sponsored by an unctuous tycoon
(John Cleese with teeth like a piano keyboard), he
furnishes competitors with locker keys.  Starting in
Las Vegas, everyone is told to make their way to a
tiny train station in Silver City, NM where it will
open up a locker.  There, they shall find a duffel bag
containing $2 million, and the first to reach it will
win it all.  Why does he do this?  As he explains, "I
can do anything.  I'm eccentric!" 
"Rat Race" features an ensemble of fairly well-known
actors who all get a chance to flex their comedic
muscles.  Most spirited and particularly funny was
Rowan Atkinson who is bug-eyed, walks around flailing
his gangly arms, and seems like he's desperately
emulating Roberto Benigni.  He's obviously the most
gung ho of the bunch.  Sadly, he's narcoleptic and
falls asleep at the most inopportune moments.  Also
likeable was Cuba Gooding Jr., who is forced to steal
a chartered bus filled with Lucille Ball look-alikes. 
When the bus trip begins to experience a few hiccups
and the scores of impersonators wail out the Lucy cry
of "Waaaaahhhhh," not only is it hilarious (for those
who are familiar with "I Love Lucy") but you'll
develop a newfound respect for chartered bus drivers. 
In another memorable segment, thanks to great comic
timing by Jon Lovitz, you would have never known that
Adolph Hitler could be so funny.  The silliness of
this film actually grows on you, and it's a nice
diversion from the recent spate of gross-out comedies.
"Rat Race" works best when the sight gags are in
progress.  Unfortunately, there is a lot of down time.
 For example, the first 30 minutes is just a drawn out
introduction of the eventual racers.  Who cares about
that when the film is all about the wild situations? 
Meanwhile, the ending takes an absurd detour away from
its beloved sense of madcapped buffonery and veers
towards an ill-advised attempt at a schmaltzy,
feel-good ending.  If you want to participate in "Rat
Race," come late, leave early, and enjoy the ride.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
RAT RACE (2001)
Rated PG-13; running time 125 minutes
Genre: comedy
Seen at: Jack Lokes' Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.ratracemovie.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0250687
Written by: Andy Breckman
Directed by: Jerry Zucker
Cast: Rowan Atkinson, Kathy Bates, Dean Cain, Lanai Chapman,
John Cleese, Whoopi Goldberg, Cuba Gooding, Jr., Seth Green,
Wayne Knight, Jon Lovitz, Breckin Meyer , Kathy Najimy,
Paul Rodriguez, Amy Smart, Dave Thomas, Vince Vieluf
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsratrace.html
Though it was a childhood favorite of mine, I'm scared to watch It's A
Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World ever again.  Scared because in watching it, I
just might realize that it's just as dumb as RAT RACE was.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**)
The rats in RAT RACE are all too human.  In a bizarre play on Willie
Wonka and the Chocolate Factory, Vegas casino owner Donald Sinclaire
(John Cleese) offers his version of a Golden Ticket to eight "lucky"
stiffs, with the promise of a $2mil payoff for the winner of a race from
Las Vegas to Silver City, New Mexico.  These are the players, in what
should have been a madcap comedy:
  -Enrico Pollini (Rowan Atkinson), a goofball Italian citizen
   who has a medical problem that might prevent him from getting
   anywhere too quickly;
  -Vera Baker (Whoopi Goldberg) and Merrill Jennings (Lanai Chapman),
   a mother-daughter team who just met--27 years after Merrill was born;
  -Owen Templeton (Cuba Gooding, Jr.), a pro football referee who
   half the men in America are mad at for messing up a coin toss
   [Yeah, you heard me, a coin toss.  Not a vital, mis-called play.
   Not a blatant foul.   A coin toss.  Can you tell my eyes damn near
   rolled out of their sockets?];
  -Duane Cody (Seth Green) and his bejeweled brother Blaine
   (Vince Vieluf), con men who can't quite pull off a proper con;
  -Randy Pear (Jon Lovitz), a soccer dad trying to keep wife Bev
   (Kathy Najimy) from discovering he wants to have a wee bit o' fun
   on their vacation;
  -Straight-laced lawyer Nick Shaffer (Breckin Meyer), who never did
   anything illegal in his life until he hooked up with goofy pilot
   Tracy Faucet (Amy Smart).
Here's where I'm supposed to say "...and Hilarity Ensued".  Uh huh.
The Upshot:
Based on the trailers I saw, I admittedly went into RAT RACE with low
expectations - and they were met.  It wasn't as bad as I thought it
would be - the inclusion of Cuba Gooding, Jr. in comedy mode,
especially, initially scared me off - but "it could've been a lot worse"
just isn't my idea of a sparkling movie recommendation.  True, it could
have been; but I figure movies cost too daggone much to watch these
days, to be satisfied with only having your intelligence insulted "just
a little".
The biggest problem with RAT RACE for me was that it just plain wasn't
funny; not funny enough, anyway, to mask some huge logic holes (I'd say
"plot holes", normally, but there was no real plot.  "Character
development?  We don' need no stinkin' character development!").  Had I
laughed harder - or more often - I might not have had time to notice the
many implausible scenarios, starting with the biggest two: the Vera
Baker/Merrill Jennings (Whoopi Goldberg/Lanai Chapman) relationship, and
the completely implausible airport antenna situation upon which the rest
of the movie's hijinx [or should I say, "lowjinx"?] was built.
As with its brother in implausibility, Face/Off (which offended me so
much, I left the theater before it was over), once my disbelief was
suspended so high it developed altitude sickness, there was no saving
this flick.  Unlike Face/Off, however, RAT RACE had no other qualities
that held my interest.
Hmmm...that's not exactly true.  In discussing the movie with The Diva,
I had to admit that the whole Barbie subplot, especially the hilarious
conclusion, was indeed funny; and less funny, but still somewhat amusing
before it got tired, was the side betting going on by the big rollers.
But being that these were only a small part of the flick, and after
being asked to swallow this movie's lame, sellout conclusion, Jon
Lovitz's nod to Henry Godwin, and Dave Thomas' deadpan lawyer schtick,
only just barely pulled this film out of redlight territory.  I would
say that director Jerry Zucker ought to stick with Airplane! and Naked
Gun, but their time has passed, too.
The "Black Factor"  [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]
New readers of my reviews are often intimidated by my "Black Factor"
commentary.  Ignoring those who totally (and usually, blindly) miss the
point for a second, there are others who take issue with my questioning,
for instance, Black actors acting like buffoons in what is supposed to
be a comedy.
And up to a point, I agree: all other characterizations being equally
buffoonish, a Black actor in a comedy should not be held to a different
standard by being made unnaturally Noble.  Indeed, I'd rather see a
funny actor of whatever race being allowed to be funny, over them being
made the Hero just to avoid the tricky subjects of race, class, and
culture (which, really, doesn't avoid them at all.  Folks like me are
chompin' at the bit to razz a pedantic, paternalistic filmmaker; one who
has the nads to admit that, yes, racial situations do exist, earn at
least my admiration for their tenacity).
So this BF is purely a jab at Cuba Gooding Jr., and not at The Machine
which would make him act the fool.  He does that to himself without much
help.  The man is brilliant as a serious actor; I've enjoyed him
thoroughly, without pause, in films like Boyz N The Hood and Men Of
Honor.  But please, somebody, spank his  agent's ass if Gooding decides
to do another comedy.  Save me the effort of another "This Moment In
Black Buffoonery" created just for him.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I suppose I should mention John Cleese, and Kathy Bates, and Rowan
Atkinson, in here somewhere.  There.  They're mentioned.  And for the
stupidity that was RAT RACE, that's about all they deserve.
RAT RACE (rating: yellowlight.gif):
Not even a funny invocation of Godwin's Law, could save this drowning
mouse.

Author
Karina Montgomery
"What!  Full Price Feature?!"  Believe me, I am as shocked as you are.  I
fully expected to come out of that theatre with a couple of amusing
moments, smiling maybe, nut not much more.  I can't give away what was
funny about the movie without ruining it, so I will have to rely on
detailing our reaction to the film.  Not only did I laugh my freakin' butt
off (as did my three very diverse companions) pretty much the whole time
(after a mite slow beginning), but the four of us were still cracking up,
loudly, walking out of the theatre and into the car and most of the drive
home.  We recollected all our favorite moments, which were legion, and
laughed afresh.  It was the simple, unaffected laughter of delight in
simple, easy pleasure.  Guffawing, if you will.  Now that's funny!
Remember in the date montage in Naked Gun when Leslie Nielsen and Priscilla
Presley come out of Platoon clutching their guts and laughing?  That was
us, except instead of Platoon, it was Rat Race!  So, with my pricing schema
of dollar value for entertainment received, this is indeed a Full Price
Feature.  I want to see it again!
Now if course I have built it up too much, but I have peeked at ratings on
other sites and they seem to agree.  What looks like a disjointed,
multi-storyline wackofest is actually a beautifully shot, action-packed
comedy with a little something for everyone.  Some of the jokes telegraph
themselves a mile away, and a lot of people seem to crash vehicles through
fences, but for some reason, it all works!  My favorite shot, which I do
not want to give away, literally had me hopping up in down in my seat, even
though it was apparent what would happen and how it would be, it was the
execution that was so hilarious.  It was like a cartoon come to life, in a
good way.  If you need your humor to be dry and verbose, well, you weren't
honestly expecting that after looking at those creepy big-head-big-hand
posters, were you?  I hope you like those images because they also are the
main visual crux of the official movie site and the opening credits.
The characters are a diverse group of actors and comedians who have very
little character interaction outside of their teams in the race, yet the
sense of working together to a common comedic goal is still felt.  A good
story involves the dynamics between people, but this story can rely on the
over-reaching theme of greed to unite the people who are otherwise apart on
screen.  But the miniature teams of one or 2 or 4 all have their own magic
as well.  It's the details, however, that really make it work.  I wish I
could give away things but I fear the trailer has already done some of that
for me.  I never would have seen it if not for the previews, so I guess it
was a necessary evil.  I now wish to see the original film upon which this
one was based, It's A Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World, to see if it compares.
Bizarre situation exacerbated by wicked machination with reincorporation
and huge reaction equals comedy.  There's slapstick, situational humor,
subtle physicality, tumbling disaster, Darwin-award behavior, good natured
humor, mistaken identity, peril, insanity, over-the-top, observational
humor, corn-pone chuckles, surreal visual gags, and even an homage to a
classic Lucy episode - whatever you like, they got it!  It's a Zucker film.
So go get it!
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
These reviews (c) 2001 Karina Montgomery.  Please feel free to forward
but just credit the reviewer in the text.  Thanks.
cinerina@flash.net
Check out previous reviews at:
http://www.cinerina.com
http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com - the Online Film Critics Society
http://www.hsbr.net/reviews/karina/ - Hollywood Stock Exchange Brokerage
Resource
http://www.mediamotions.com
http://www.capitol-city.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Seth Green, Cuba Gooding Jr., Breckin Meyer,
Amy Smart, Jon Lovitz, Whoopi Goldberg, Rowan
Atkinson, Kathy Najimy, John Cleese, Vince Vieluf.
Directed by Jerry Zucker. Rated PG-13.
Watching Rat Race is like being invited to a big
party. There is so much glee in this infectious,
embarassingly fun farce that even the most cynical
will find themselves happily jumping on the bandwagon.
The film shames American Pie 2, which thought that
vulgarity was the end-all to comedy. In the
August-September movie doldrums, a notorious dumping
ground for studios with movies to get rid of, Rat Race
is a triumph of irreverence.
The movie has a great basic foundation: rich people
are really, really bored. The richest in the world are
willing to throw away money just for a quick day's
entertainment. Casino owner Donald Sinclair (John
Cleese) smartly latches on to this concept and comes
up with a game for the obscenely wealthy to play. He
will collect a group of people, divide them into teams
and give each team a key to a locker somewhere in New
Mexico, tell them that it contains two million dollars
and say the word "go." What better way to whittle away
time than bet on a human horse race where the
specimens actually want to reach the finish line?
The teams are Duane and Blaine Cody (Seth Green and
Vince Vieluf), brothers who have no conscience or
scruples; Vera and Merrill (Whoopi Goldberg and Lanei
Chapman), a recently reunited mother and daughter;
Nick and Tracy (Breckin Meyer and Amy Smart), an
aspiring politician and a helicopter pilot; Randy Pear
(Jon Lovitz) and his Perfectly Average in Every Way
Family; Owen Templeton (Cuba Gooding Jr.), a
nationally humiliated football referee; and Enrico
(Rowan Atkinson), a narcoleptic Italian.
There is no real plot or story behind the skeleton
that gets the movie from A to B, but it works even
better as a series of hilarious, old-fashioned comedy
vignettes. Director Jerry Zucker, who is responsible
for what may be the most consistently funny movie ever
(Airplane), really lets loose, which no self-aware,
pop-culture-minded director would permit himself to
do. Where most movies deteriorate into simple chaos,
this one evolves into precise, thought-out, organized
chaos that never runs out of steam.
By the time the climax rolls around, greed has
completely taken over these characters, who have
abandoned any other life ambitions and aspirations
they may have had to get to that damn locker. The
denoument, which is a complete reversal of this, is
somewhat disappointing, but the journey there is one
delight on top of another. Suffice it to say that
Duane and Blaine wind up hanging off of a hot-air
balloon with a live cow, Templeton is chased by a mob
of Lucille Ball impersonators, the Pears drive
Hitler's car to a World War II Veterans Club meeting
and Vera and Merrill get punished for not purchasing a
squirrel. These scenes aren't expected to be funny on
their own merits (though they are), which is a mistake
a lot of films make; instead, Zucker puts them all
into brilliant context. I may not have believed it,
but I did laugh.
People undervalue the sophistication of this movie and
ones like it. To make a comedy, no matter how "dumb,"
that's timed so perfectly and works so effortlessly is
a deceptively difficult endeavor. Zucker is back, and
it's about time. 


Author
Max Messier
Crazies, Lucille Ball impersonators, redneck garage mechanics,
neo-Nazis, dykes on bikes, cross-dressers, electrified dogs, flying
cows, vomit contests, vindictive girlfriends, and Rowan Atkinson's
horrible Italian accent are the elements of success for Rat Race, the
latest hilarious remake of It's A Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World.
I know how bad it sounds.  But thanks to the comedic talents of Jon
Lovitz, Atkinson, John Cleese, and Whoopi Goldberg, plus a sharp script
written by Andy Breckman (a writer for TV Funhouse and one of the best
Richard Pryor movies, Moving) Rat Race is much better than it should
be.  In the end, it's summer junk food for the soul.
Through the orchestration of casino owner Donald Sinclair (John Cleese
in one of best performances in recent years), six groups of people are
brought together in a Vegas casino to race against each other in an
attempt to reach a satchel of $2 million in locker 001 in the train
station at Silver Lake, New Mexico.
The Pear family (headed by Jon Lovitz) finds its family vacation in
Vegas interrupted, and the Cody brothers (Seth Green and Vince Vieluf)
are two con artists whose personal injury suit against the casino goes
awry.  Mr. Pollini (Rowan Atkinson), an extremely cheerful but
narcoleptic Italian man, represents the hare of this story.  After
falling asleep on the way out of the casino, he gets hit by a creepy
ambulance driver named Zack (Wayne Knight) who is on his way to New
Mexico with a live heart in a cooler.  Owen Templeton (Cuba Gooding Jr.)
is a disavowed NFL coach who blew a major call and is drowning himself
in alcohol at the casino's bar.  Vera (Whoopi Goldberg) and her
estranged daughter Merrill have reunited at the casino after Vera gave
up Merrill for adoption years ago.  Nick (Breckin Meyer) is an uptight
lawyer-in-training.  All of these clowns earn a shot at the money and
head out across the desert.
Rat Race starts off with a mildly humorous tone and then unexpectedly
ramps up to a full-blown gut buster.  Jerry Zucker, co-director of such
classics as Top Secret! and Airplane!, lends a veteran hand at handling
the pace of the comedy and keeps the laughs coming in waves. 
The main drawback of the film, though, is the lack of a solid third
act.  The humor completely dries up when all of the parties converge
onstage with the band Smash Mouth.  It ends up feeling like an old
Three's Company episode.  And about as funny.
Director: Jerry Zucker
Producer: Janet Zucker, Jerry Zucker, Sean Daniel
Writer: Andy Breckman
Starring: Whoopi Goldberg, John Cleese, Cuba Gooding Jr., Rowan
Atkinson, Jon Lovitz, Kathy Najimy, Seth Green, Breckin Meyer, Amy
Smart, Wayne Knight, Paul Rodriguez, Vince Vieluf, Dave Thomas
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
