Title
Review for Across the Pacific (1942)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
Thanks to the unwritten dogmas of "political correctness"
Hollywood moviemakers these days are supposed to avoid
ethnic or racial stereotypes in their films. We might argue
whether Hollywood puts considerable effort in this, or
whether overzealous implementation of those rules affects
the quality of recent films, but most of the people would
agree that Hollywood made significant progress, at least
compared with previous decades. Reputation of some older
Hollywood films is often tarnished (or controversial, at
best) because of the negative portrayals of certain ethnic
and racial groups. This is especially the case with films
made during WW2, notably those that deal with Japanese. One
of such examples is ACROSS THE PACIFIC, 1942 spy thriller
directed by great John Huston. Additional reason why this
film often gets overlooked is because Huston used cast and
crew of THE MALTESE FALCON, and many of the film scholars
see ACROSS THE PACIFIC as nothing more than much inferior
and rather insignificant follow-up to Huston's true
masterpiece.
The plot, based on the screenplay by Richard Macaulay,
starts on November 17th 1941, few weeks before American
entry in WW2. Rick Leland (played by Humphrey Bogart) is
U.S. army officer who had been dishonourably discharged from
service for embezzling regimental funds. Since soldiering
happens to be his life, he travels to Halifax in order to
offer his services to Canadians, but his bad reputation
precedes him. Out of desperation, he decides to join Chang
Kai-Shek's army and, in order to travel across the Pacific,
he boards Japanese freighter "Genoa Maru". Charming Canadian
girl Alberta Marlow (played by Mary Astor) boards same
vessel and Leland soon falls in love with her. Their
shipboard romance is shadowed by the presence of elegant,
but nevertheless sinister Doctor Lorenz (played by Sydney
Greenstreet), university professor who used to live in Far
East for 30 years and who doesn't hide his strong
pro-Japanese feelings. Lorenz is aware of Leland's
bitterness towards US government and wants to use it in
order to recruit ex-soldier for some covert activities in
Panama.
ACROSS THE PACIFIC represents craftsmanship of Hollywood
Golden Era at its best - plot is a rather interesting
combination of international spy intrigue, melodrama and
humour. Cast of MALTESE FALCON is giving another great
performance - Bogart is quite believable as disgraced
officer and has incredibly good chemistry with Mary Astor,
this time playing somewhat simpler, but definitely more
charming character than in previous film. Greenstreet is
very impressive as villain, albeit not very different from
characters he had played in many similar films. Dialogue has
a lot of great lines, including some not so subtle Freudian
references (especially when characters compare size of their
guns). However, the ending of the film is very weak -
interesting plot is drowned in cheap melodrama and not very
believable method of providing obligatory Happy End. Perhaps
Huston is not to be blamed for this, since he left the
shooting in order to go to war and left directing to Vincent
Sherman who was not up to the task.
Depiction of Japanese characters, although questionable for
our standards, may be useful for those who want to study
inter-racial relations in 1940s America. Japanese are
portrayed as evil, insidious and utterly alien to American
society. Attempts of integration or assimilation are bound
to fail, which is suggested with scene in Panamanian cinema
featuring Japanese immigrants preferring technically
inferior movies from their old country to more glamorous
Hollywood. Moviemaker's scepticism towards individuals
overcoming their cultural and racial background is also
underlined with the character of Lorenz's henchman Joe
Totsuiko (played by Victor Sen Young) who wants to look and
sound more American than Americans themselves only to become
a caricature; in the final scenes, Doctor Lorenz, who made a
great deal of superiority of Oriental culture, fails
miserably in his attempt to follow example of his Japanese
role models. This worldview might look unacceptable for most
of today's audience, but it is presented very skilfully,
which is another reason why ACROSS THE PACIFIC should be
seen as something more than simple WW2 propaganda.
Review written on September 21st 2000
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
David Dalgleish
Starring Humphrey Bogart, Mary Astor, Sydney Greenstreet
Directed by John Huston
Written by Richard Macaulay
Cinematography by Arthur Edeson
        The Genoa Maru is a ship bound for Japan, with a handful of 
passengers aboard.  They are Rick Leland, an artillery officer 
recently given a dishonourable discharge; Dr. Lorenz, an intellectual 
American ex-pat who has lived in Asia for 30 years; and Alberta 
Marlow, a woman from Medicine Hat, Alberta, who sells peanut brittle 
in a ten-cent shop.  Well, that's who they say they are.  We're pretty 
sure they're lying, and, indeed, they are.  Finding out who they 
really are--and why they're on board the vessel at the same time--is 
one of the many pleasures in John Huston's ACROSS THE PACIFIC.
        The passengers are also Humphrey Bogart, Mary Astor, and Sydney 
Greenstreet, reunited with Huston and cinematographer Arthur Edeson 
(CASABLANCA) for the follow-up to the director's stunning debut, THE 
MALTESE FALCON.  With a cast like that, under the guidance of a master 
like Huston, the film seems almost guaranteed to offer splendid 
entertainment--and that is precisely what it does.
        The events take place during World War II, and involve a sinister 
anti-American plot by the villain, Greenstreet, who is allied with the 
Japanese.  To reveal more would be to spoil the fun: Richard 
Macaulay's script is tight, tense, and compelling.  But, this being a 
Bogart movie of the 40s, it's also fairly predictable: we know he'll 
defeat the villain, and we suspect he'll win the lady's heart.  What 
makes it so entertaining are the little things.  The dialogue is 
wonderful: fast, funny, and perfectly suited to these actors.  
Greenstreet plays an expansive, sophisticated villain as only he can; 
Bogart is, well, Bogart, except here his persona is a little less 
cynical than usual, a little more playful.  And Astor's Alberta Marlow 
is particularly refreshing--a smart, independent woman who loves to 
engage Bogey in verbal fencing matches.  Their repartee is 
consistently witty and playful.  After their first kiss, which happens 
while Alberta is still finding her sea legs, she remarks, I feel sick; 
Bogart asks if that's normal, and she retorts, how do women usually 
respond when you kiss them?  They trade pointed rejoinders throughout, 
to our delight.  If only people talked like that in real life; if only 
they still talked like that in the movies.
        The interactions between other characters are equally sharp.  After a 
shooting incident, Bogart and Greenstreet discuss the preponderance of 
guns on the ship, and when each reveals his own weapon, Bogart 
playfully comments, "Mine's bigger than yours," relishing the silly 
Freudianism.  They are later joined by Joe Totsuiko (Victor Sen Yung), 
a second-generation American (with hidden motives, of course) who 
desperately wants to sound like an authentic Yankee, so he speaks with 
splendidly overblown American diction, calling Rick "Ricky" and saying 
things like "I wonder if those Panamanian mamas are all they're 
cracked up to be."
        If the characters did nothing else but talk, this would be great 
stuff, but there's no shortage of secret identities, double-dealings, 
and revelations.  The pace never flags, sweeping us along from Halifax 
to New York and on to Panama, where the film ends, despite the title.  
In Panama, the characters finally confront each other, all truths are 
finally unveiled, and then the finale devolves into a rather mundane 
action sequence.  The ending, indeed, is the weakest part of the 
movie, particularly in the wake of THE MALTESE FALCON, where the 
conclusion was absolutely perfect.
        ACROSS THE PACIFIC was filmed during World War II, and not 
surprisingly, it contains no small amount of pro-U.S. propaganda.  The 
final shot shows American planes flying west to (paraphrasing Bogart's 
character) help the Japs commit hara-kiri, and could have been lifted 
straight from a war-time documentary.  There is also a gallery of 
laughable Asian caricatures and some extremely racist dialogue.  At 
one point, Bogart complains that all Japanese look the same, and Astor 
says they don't--upon close examination; Greenstreet refers to the 
Japanese as "wonderful little people."  The actors seem to be aware of 
how ridiculous these lines are, and deliver them tongue-in-cheek, so 
that these moments are not as ugly as they might have been.  
Fortunately, while Huston himself left to help the war effort before 
filming was complete (Vincent Sherman took over), his movie plays 
mostly as entertainment, not propaganda, and it is a thoroughly 
enjoyable diversion.  Only a director whose first film was THE MALTESE 
FALCON could make a second film this good, and have it be a weaker 
effort.
