Title
Review for Casino Royale (1967)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: David Niven, Peter Sellers, Woody Allen, Ursula Andress, 
      Charles Boyer, William Holden, John Huston, Deborah Kerr, 
      Orson Welles, Joanna Pettet, Terence Cooper, Barbara Bouchet
Directors: Val Guest, Ken Hughes, John Huston, Joseph McGrath, 
      Robert Parrish
Producer: Charles K. Feldman
Screenplay: John Law, Wolf Mankowitz, and Michael Sayers, 
      suggested by the novel by Ian Fleming
Cinematography: Jack Hildyard and Nicolas Roeg
Music: Burt Bacharach
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     The only James Bond story for which Albert Broccoli never obtained 
the rights is CASINO ROYALE.  Those are held by Charles Feldman, who, 
following the success of DR. NO, FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE, and GOLDFINGER, 
decided that he wanted to make his own Bond film.  After commissioning a 
script, he began casting.  When attempts to "borrow" Sean Connery from 
Broccoli came to naught, Feldman decided on a radical change in tone.  
Instead of making CASINO ROYALE a "straight" movie, he chose to attempt 
a parody.
     The opening is promising.  We are introduced to the "real" Sir 
James Bond (David Niven), a retired "pure spy" who is horrified by the 
outrageous activities of the agent currently assigned his name and 
number.  M (John Huston) appeals for Bond's return to active duty.  
Spies all over the world are being killed, and the governments of the 
Soviet Union, France, the United States, and England have temporarily 
set aside their differences to combat SMERSH, the criminal organization 
suspected of the murders.  At first, Bond refuses, but, after M is 
killed, he changes his mind and agrees to come back.
     For twenty minutes, CASINO ROYALE is clever, witty, and exacting in 
its satire.  The conventions so popular in the official Bond movies -- 
the gadgets, the women, and the cars -- are skewered with relish.  Bond 
is a reserved twit with a stutter who looks and acts nothing like the 
dashing Connery version, and his contempt for the "tricks of the trade" 
is plain.
     Unfortunately, after the introductory sequences, CASINO ROYALE 
begins a downhill slide.  It gets progressively sillier and more 
incoherent until it's impossible to keep any of the plot elements 
straight.  Worse, with only occasional exceptions, the humor ceases to 
be funny, and the whole production degenerates into absurdity.  By the 
ending, just about every agent has been renamed James Bond, including 
Peter Sellers, Charles Cooper, Daliah Lavi, and a chimpanzee.  There are 
other Bonds as well:  the daughter of Sir James and Mata Hari, Mata Bond 
(Joanna Pettet), and Sir James' nephew, Jimmy Bond (Woody Allen).
     Five directors helmed this production, and it shows.  CASINO ROYALE 
is poorly-paced and the transitions are largely ineffectual.  Each 
segment has a different main character, so the overall effect is like 
cobbling together five short episodes, then devising a ludicrous ending 
to resolve them all.  It doesn't work, and the viewer is left scratching 
his or her head, wondering what's going on.
     Three "legitimate" Bond actors crossed between the official series 
and CASINO ROYALE.  The most notable is Ursula Andress, the femme fatale 
of this film, who played Honey Ryder in DR. NO.  Vladek Sheybal, who has 
a small role here, was SPECTRE agent Kronsteen in FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE.  
And Angela Scoular, CASINO ROYALE's Buttercup, appeared in ON HER 
MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE as one of Blofeld's allergy girls.
     By far the best element of CASINO ROYALE is Burt Bacharach's score.  
Light and upbeat, it's the perfect musical companion for a spy spoof.  
Neither John Barry nor the "James Bond Theme" is missed (although a 
Barry tune can be briefly heard -- Bacharach uses the title track from 
BORN FREE during a scene with some lions).
     Despite an impressive cast that includes such notables as Niven, 
Sellers, Allen, Orson Welles, Jean-Paul Belmondo, and Jacqueline Bisset, 
CASINO ROYALE is too ridiculous and muddled to be of more than passing 
interest to real Bond enthusiasts.  The few good aspects of this farce 
are vastly outweighed by the bad.  Besides, given how close some of the 
Bond movies have come to self-parody, it's questionable whether an 
outright satire is warranted.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This is a royale mess. Supposedly parodying the James Bond 
films of the 60's, this turns into a confusing, bland, rarely funny movie 
that's even more episodic and cliched than the movies it parodies. The 
only redeeming feature is the assemblage of talent. David Niven plays 
Bond, old and retired, who is drawn back as head of the British secret 
service after M's murder. Ursula Andress, who co-starred in the real 
Bond movie DR. NO, plays the traditional Bond girl, with PINK 
PANTHER star Peter Sellers as the traditional Bond. Also starring are 
villains Woody Allen (as the sex-obsessed, neurotic Dr. Noah) and 
card-shark Orson "Macbeth" Welles, who contribute the only truly 
memorable performances in the movie.
        CASINO ROYALE is for the most part indecipherable. 
Niven, at the beginning, is staying with M's widow and her eleven 
beautiful daughters, all between the ages of sixteen and nineteen 
(coincidentally, this has always been my idea of what heaven will be 
like). The ladies all put the moves on Bond, who has gained some 
morals since retiring, in an attempt to corrupt him. (Why this is 
relevant to the plot is beyond me.) Bond gets out of that jam after 
about thirty minutes and heads to headquarters, where he finds Miss 
Moneypenny's beautiful daughter has taken her place and seems to 
have the same intentions her mother did. Bond displaces her and gets 
down to business.
        The plan here is to confuse the enemy by making every agent 
007, James Bond, including the ladies. The main Bond is an author-
turned-spy who is recruited to play poker against Welles. There's also 
some harem girl who's the daughter of Bond and Mata Hari, and a few 
other identical beauties to confuse viewers. Sure, the James Bond 
series is ripe for parody, with the far-fetched action and sexist views, 
but CASINO ROYALE doesn't follow the formula at all. It goes in 
another direction without ever actually being a parody. It has some of 
the same Bond characters, but they're nothing like their actual 
counterparts. It's a slow-mover with a bland climax. You could say it 
has a license to suck.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
