Title
Review for Purple Rose of Cairo, The (1985)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Woody Allen
Starring: Mia Farrow, Jeff Daniels, Danny Aiello, Irving Metzman,
Stephanie Farrow, Edward Herrman, John Wood, Deborah Rush, Van Johnson,
Zoe Caldwell, Eugene J. Anthony, Ebb Miller, Karen Akers, Annie Joe
Edwards, Milo O'Shea, Peter McRobbie, Alexander H. Cohen, Michael
Tucker, Glenne Hedley, Diane Wiest
I was once engaed in a lunch-time argument back in high school over the
need for films.  My one friend deemed that they're not necessary at all,
and that taking them away would cause no real drift in the morale of the
nation.  I disagreed vehemently: films are, above all, entertainment,
and can enlighten people's lives, open their eyes, and cheer up the
morale of the nation.  And that's what Woody Allen's "Purple Rose of
Cairo" is all about: films are necessary not only as an art form, but as
a way to change lives.
The plot of the film, though, sounds gimmicky (and also very reminiscent
of "The Last Action Hero"): a character from the movies comes down from
the screen to be in real life with a woman whom he wants to meet.  But
that's what's cool about Woody Allen: he takes these kinds of ideas, and
goes off on philosophical rants with them, but never loses sight of the
plot or makes them too preachy.  This is exactly how the film is played
out, and is in retrospect a classic of cinema.
"The Purple Rose of Cairo" is the name of the movie in the film which
our protagonist, the weak Cecilia (Mia Farrow), goes to see to escape
from the unhappiness of her life.  It's the Great Depression, and she
has a horrible waitress job which she's no good at, a louse for a
husband (Danny Aiello - who else could have played this role?) who takes
her pay to gamble and drink, and is just generally miserable.  Every
week, the local Jersey theatre plays a new Hollywood film, and she goes
every week, sometimes numerous times.
In the week of the film, the eponomys film is playing, and Cecilia shows
up.  It's some really hokey yet escapist film dealing with aristocrats
who journey to Egypt and meet a happy-go-lucky explorer named Tom Baxter
(Jeff Daniels), and take them home with them for a "madcap Manhattan
weekend."  After numerous airings of it, and after some more life
complications, Tom begins stumbling over his lines, and looks out into
the audience and begins talking to Cecilia, who's the most startled in
the theatre.  He walks down off the screen, takes her out of the
theatre, and declares he'll never go back.
The rest of the film deals with her relationship with him, and how they
fall in love like in a Hollywood film, but with the major setbacks of
reality.  But while they're dancing and talking around town, the
characters in the movie are stuck on screen since they can't turn the
projector off or Tom will be stuck in the real world forever.  Soon,
Hollywood is notified, and the producers, and the actor who plays Tom in
the movie, Gil Shepard (also Jeff Daniels - duh!), fly out to Jersey to
stop him.
As the movie goes on, more and more complications emerge.  Cecilia's
husband learns of her new romance, and begins making brutal attempts to
reclaim his prize from the fictional Tom.  And Gil stumbles into Cecilia
by accident, and soon, he's falling in love with her, making her chose
between the fictitious Tom, and the real Gil, a rising star.  She
exclaims at one point: "Yesterday, no one loved me; now two people love
me!"
What's magical about "The Purple Rose of Cairo" is how balanced it is in
every way.  Woody deftly creates multilpe themes and thoughts on film
and its relation to reality without ever harming the story, but also
makes the two work hand-in-hand.  By having a reason for Tom to walk off
the screen, he creates a fantastically leveled fable on life, and how
film can truly affect it.
Woody's also very responsible about it.  If taken out of hand, film can
cause people to blur reality with the fictitious, which is made notable
through Cecilia's relationships with Tom and Gil.  Through this
conflict, Woody shows that people often want to be just like the people
in the movie, while at the same time, the characters in the movie want
to be people in reality.
People often rate Woody's films as how funny they are.  "The Purple Rose
of Cairo" is no exception, with lots of hysterical jokes here and there,
and brilliantly funny scenes.  There are plenty of fish-out-of-water
jokes, but they never feel forced, and in fact, seem quite inspired,
even by today's standards.  And any of the scenes involving the
characters stuck on the screen, bickering and trying to pass the days
away are funny as hell.  But all of this has a kind of deeper warmth to
it, allowing some drama to flow effortlessly through the narrative, but
never seem like melodrama.
The acting's also excellent, especially by Farrow, who gives what is
probably her best performance in a Woody Allen film.  She posesses true
likability, and plays her character as weak yet somehow optimistic when
watching a movie.  There's a shot where she's going to see the movie for
the first time where she looks so ecstatic that she looks like she's
going to burst.  Jeff Daniels has a lot of energy in his roles, giving
one of his best performances (special note: the split-screen effect
looks flawless).  Danny Aiello adds some human qualities to his role as
a no-good husband.  And we even get some cameos from Milo O'Shea
(remember Durand Durand from "Barbarella?") as a priest in the movie,
and Diane Wiest as (get this) a hooker (showing that Woody sure has a
knack for writing hooker roles).
The final shot is one of the great Woody Allen moments: a shot of Mia
gazing upon the movie screen where Fred Aistaire is singing "I'm in
Heaven," and gradually, a small smile grows on Cecilia's face.  For this
moment, no matter what the trouble is in the world, she's in heaven like
the characters in the movie.  This is the power of movies: to cause
people to relax and escape from the horrors of reality, if only for a
short time.  This film is a masterpiece.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Brian Koller
"The Purple Rose of Cairo" is an imaginative and clever
comedy, directed by Woody Allen and starring Mia Farrow
and Jeff Daniels, who both give strong performances.
The film is set in a small town during the depression
of the 1930s.  Farrow plays a klutzy waitress and abused
spouse whose only escape from dreadful reality is
the local movie theatre.  While watching a particular
film for the fifth time, one of the characters
(Daniels) steps out into the theatre from the movie
screen to romance her.
This is the first of many surprising, original,
and humorous plot twists, all of which work very well.
Daniels-the-character is a naive, good-natured
person with little knowledge of the real world,
and the resulting misunderstandings (he can't spend
his play money, he is clueless about prostitutes)
are very funny.
Soon, Daniels-the-actor comes to town from Hollywood
to confront Daniels-the-character, while Farrow
must choose between the two Daniels and her
good-for-nothing husband (Danny Aiello).  Allen
remains behind the camera.
Allen, while making us laugh, has a couple points
he is getting across.  He lampoons Hollywood hypocrisy,
which is present in the 1930s as in any era.  The
various actors come across as petty, manipulative
and self-involved.  The film also has a negative
depiction of men.  Of all the major and minor male
characters, only Daniels-the-character, who isn't real,
is a swell guy.  Other characters, including the
husband, Daniels-the-actor, and the restaurant owner,
do not come off well.
"The Purple Rose of Cairo" won the Golden Globe award
for Best Screenplay (by Allen), and was given an Oscar
nomination in that category.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
