Title
Review for Anaconda (1997)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
James Sanford
        It took six writers to concoct ``Anaconda,'' and the fact that
they each wanted to take credit for their contribution is the scariest
thing about this creature feature.
  Imagine being brave enough to claim you penned dialogue that
rarely rises above ``Let's get the hell out of here!,'' or ``What the
hell is going on?,'' as well as a plot that would have seemed hokey
back when Grandma was an ingenue.
  ``Anaconda'' may someday make a great ``Mystery Science
Theatre 3000'' episode, but it's not something most would want on
their resumes.
  The feeble story follows a documentary filmmaking crew down
the Amazon as they search for a lost tribe, ``the people of the
mist.'' You'd have to turn to a WWII combat movie to find a finer
collection of stereotypes: Terri the Latin fireball (Jennifer Lopez),
Danny the cynical homeboy (Ice Cube), Denise the airhead sex-kitten
who proclaims the jungle makes her ``horny'' (Kari Wuhrer), pothead
Gary (Owen Wilson), and Warren the world-weary sophisticate (Jonathan
Hyde) are all on board.
  There's also Steven (Eric Stoltz), a doctor of some sort,
who manages to somehow get a water wasp in his mouth while scuba
diving and spends most of the journey recuperating in bed.
  They're soon joined by Paul Sarone, the scarred mystery man
with a hidden agenda, played with a ridiculous, impenetrable
mock-Venezuelan accent by Jon Voight. It's a performance that should
torpedo any dreams he has of making a comeback.
  As the title signifies, large snakes are also part of the
goings-on.  After Sarone hijacks the boat, Terri and company find
they're heading into a part of the river so dangerous the natives have
built a wall, a la ``King Kong,'' to contain the danger.
  Of course, had Sarone simply turned the craft around,
``Anaconda'' would only be about 45 minutes long, so you can bet the
barrier is dynamited, the cruise continues, and the audience is soon
taking bets on who'll be the first meal.
  An opening title informs us that anacondas will sometimes
regurgitate their victims, just to have the pleasure of devouring them
again: Yes, friends, prepare for the awesome spectacle of a vomiting
giant serpent!
  ``Anaconda'' is the follow-up to director Luis Llosa's last
masterwork, ``The Specialist,'' a 1994 clunker that marked a new low
even for Sylvester Stallone and Sharon Stone. Rest assured that taking
a few years off has not sharpened Llosa's skills one iota. His knack
for clumsy action sequences remains intact, and his chronic ineptitude
makes most of ``Anaconda'' an unintended laugh riot.
  Even the special effects don't pass muster. The anacondas,
created through animatronics and computer animation, often look more
showy than scary, even though the sextet of scribes have gone to
admirable lengths to devise inventive deaths for most of the cast.
  It's a shame the performers didn't all follow Voight's lead
and head straight to camp. Hyde and a smirky Stoltz ham it up
admirably, but the ever-mumbly Cube is lifeless, and Lopez makes the
mistake of acting as if she's in a real movie. Check your script,
girl: It ain't ``Selena,'' it's ``Anaconda''!

Author
Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
2 and a half stars
For the Hollywood industry, a giant snake really isn't that big a deal.
We've already been treated to rampaging dinosaurs, vicious lions, hungry
sharks and even human devouring aliens - so a snake, or "anaconda",
doesn't seem that appealing amongst the crowd of successful thriller
vehicles.  But people love to be scared; the fear industry is profitable
as movie goers constantly flock to the cinema in the hope of being
scared witless.
Anaconda does in many ways complete all that it sets out to do; it has
an eerie and sinister approach and has the same sort of tension, and
corniness, that Jaws and many others have been infamous for.  However
this alone is not even close to adequate for the dismal plot to got
unnoticed, leaving a lot to be desired even in this type of film.
The Anaconda heroes and villains are all together trapped inside a
Jaws-like boat, which leaves no room for decent character development,
or more to point, it shows none.  The entire film is not protective of
its main characters nearly as much as it should be - many die but nobody
really cares because we all came to see the snakes anyway, which are
quite obviously the stars of the movie.
Aside from all of this, I must admit that I did enjoy watching most of
Anaconda.  Amongst all the disappointing acting and horrific animation
of the water bound beasts, this film is surprisingly appealing due to
the sheer innocence and almost kiddish style in which it's portrayed.
Anaconda follows in the footsteps of just about every scary film
created, bringing the true essence of fear and suspense to the silver
screen the traditional and effective way.  I guess the only difference
is after walking away from Jaws you feared the water and creatures
within it, but after seeing Anaconda I sneered at the thought of a 3
metre computer-generate piece of fluff ever existing.  But that just
makes it all the more fun.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jon Voight, Jennifer Lopez, Ice Cube, Eric Stoltz, Owen Wilson, 
      Jonathan Hyde, Kari Wuhrer, Vincent Castellanos
Director: Luis Llosa
Producers: Verna Harrah, Carole Little, Leonard Rabinowitz
Screenplay: Hans Bauer and Jim Cash & Jack Epps Jr. 
Cinematography: Bill Butler
Music: Randy Edelman
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     When I was a kid, I used to love monster movies of all kinds:  
FRANKENSTEIN, DRACULA, KING KONG...  The list went on and on.  Had I 
seen ANACONDA when I was 9 or 10, or even 13 or 14, I probably would 
have enjoyed it.  Since then, however, my standards have changed, and 
motion pictures like this one don't look nearly as good.  I still 
appreciate FRANKENSTEIN, DRACULA, and KING KONG (all of which have 
characters, solid plots, and style), but the bared fangs and crushed 
bodies of ANACONDA are no longer sufficient.
     The relatively thin plot centers around a documentary film crew 
venturing deep into the Amazon to make a movie about the discovery of a 
lost tribe.  Dr. Steven Cale (Eric Stoltz), a cultural anthropologist, 
is heading up the expedition.  First-time director Terri Florez 
(Jennifer Lopez), Cale's girlfriend, leads the film crew.  Also on the 
trip are Danny (Ice Cube), the cinematographer; Warren Westridge 
(Jonathan Hyde), the snooty British narrator; Gary (Owen Wilson), the 
sound man; and Denise (Kari Wuhrer), the production manager.  Along the 
way, they rescue the mysterious and sinister Paul Sarone (Jon Voight), a 
snake catcher who is after the most lucrative capture of his life.  
     Much of the first half of ANACONDA is devoted to building tension 
between the human characters as Sarone makes it apparent that he's less 
interested in helping the film crew than in pursuing his own ends.  By 
the time the serpent -- a forty foot monster capable of (and willing to) 
swallow a human whole -- makes its first significant appearance, it's 
anti-climactic.  The rest of the movie details the surviving humans' 
attempts to escape from the snake while avoiding Sarone's traps.
     ANACONDA is trying to be a JAWS for the '90s, but, like last year's 
THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS, it falls short in several key areas.  The 
biggest flaw can be summed up in a short phrase:  lack of excitement.  
Thrillers are supposed to be crammed with thrills (hence the name), but 
ANACONDA is relatively barren of them.  Movies like ALIEN, THE 
TERMINATOR, and JAWS get the blood pounding and adrenaline pumping; 
ANACONDA is unable to accomplish this.  
     Why?  The first reason has to do with character development.  The 
men and women populating ANACONDA are uninteresting types.  Despite all 
the time devoted to interpersonal interaction at the beginning of the 
film, we learn very little about these people beyond certain basic 
facts:  their names, their jobs, and who they're sleeping with.  Such 
obligatory, wooden personalities are incapable of exciting our 
imagination or our sympathy.  By the time the carnage starts, we're 
strangely detached from the would-be heroes.  
     Another serious problem is that the snake doesn't make an 
especially good monster.  It doesn't have much of a personality, doesn't 
appear particularly clever or calculating, and isn't really all that 
menacing (it can get killed by a shotgun).  On top of that, it looks 
like a special effect, and sometimes a rather cheesy one.  The 
animatronic anaconda is okay, but the digitally composed version looks 
exactly like what it is:  computer generated.  
     Many of the actors appear to be on hand mostly to collect a 
paycheck.  Jennifer Lopez, who was so impressive in SELENA, dutifully 
plods through her role here without exhibiting any real spark or energy.  
Eric Stoltz and Ice Tea quickly fade into the background, where they're 
all-but-forgotten by the script.  Jonathan Hyde (the big game hunter 
from JUMANJI) provides a little comic relief, but nothing on the order 
of Bill Paxton's contribution to ALIENS.  The only one guilty of sinking 
his teeth into his part is Jon Voight, who develops Sarone into a 
creepy, charismatic figure.  It's not a landmark performance, but it is 
one of ANACONDA's redeeming features.
     Director Louis Llosa (THE SPECIALIST) doesn't seem well suited to 
direct this sort of movie.  For too long, he's more interested in the 
DEAD CALM-like situation on the movie makers' boat than in what's 
lurking out in the jungle.  The snake is not effectively mythologized, 
and its first appearance occurs without much fanfare.  The picture has a 
solid enough premise for a monster movie; the film makers just didn't do 
a very good job converting it to the screen.  As a result, while 
ANACONDA offers a few momentary jolts and a rash of goosebumps for 
ophidiophobics, it never comes close to taking your breath away.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jennifer Lopez, Ice Cube, Eric Stoltz, Jon Voight, Owen Wilson,
Jonathan Hyde, Kari Wuhrer, Vincent Castellanos Director: Luis Llosa
Screenplay: Hans Bauer and Jim Cash & Jack Epps Jr.
Anaconda is undoubtedly the most entertaining documentary of the year:
ANACONDA: A SURVIVAL GUIDE FOR THE GIANT SNAKE LOVER:
1.  Stay still, very still, look into it's eyes and don't move. Don't
even blink.
2.  The guaranteed way of not being eaten is to remain comatose for most
of the movie; ala get a amazon wasp to bite you on the tongue.
3.  Another way of making sure that you survive the longest is to make
sure that your name is at the top of the movie credits.
4.  Giant statues of snakes swallowing men, are generally a good warning
sign that there are Anacondas in the area.
5.  Axes are good, but a couple of double barrelled shot guns will do
the trick.
6.  If you can't shoot the snake, burn it.
7.  Snake bait - anything from monkey blood to humans will do nicely.
8.  Don't try using a fishing pole or a net, or you'll end up being the
bait.
9.  The snake spits, so get used to half digested bodies flying at you.
10.  And remember the trip ain't worth it if you're only making a
documentary on Amazon pygmies.
At first there were eight, then there were three,
Just when you thought you were safe, here comes Anacondee,
It's not the name of a bra, your jocks or undeewear,
Hold on tight all the same, the snake has no preference for what you
wear.
Sorry for crapping on; but my original review was too short, and I just
need a couple more paragraphs here and there to make the break; and I'm
plain running out of things to say about this stupid snake. So...
Comment: Skin the snake and make yourself a nice set of jacket, belts
and boots.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When I reviewed RUMBLE IN THE BRONX and said that I did not
particularly like the movie, one person wrote me to say that not every
film has to be so serious and that Americans make very few "fun" films.
That came to me as something of a shocker since I had thought that the
majority of feature films made in this country in the 90s were "fun"
films, or at least intended that way.  I grew up when the 50s science
fiction films were hitting television and for me a fun film is
something not unlike Jack Arnold's THE CREATURE FROM THE BLACK LAGOON.
Arnold's Amazon opus is not a good film by any objective standard but
is a sort of a dark pleasure.  The new ANACONDA is not even enough
unlike THE CREATURE FROM THE BLACK LAGOON, borrowing a good deal of its
plot.  For me more pleasure than watching Jackie Chan kick somebody or
gliding over them in a hovercraft is seeing a snake the size of a small
traffic jam making mincemeat of an expedition to the Amazon.  Not that
ANACONDA is even a well-made rip-off of CREATURE and it would be more
enjoyable with a better script, but it passes as a decent film.  It is
the sort of film that I peg in the back of my mind as a "drive-in"
film, though in my part of the country the last drive-in died several
years ago.  The script of ANACONDA borrows much of its plot from THE
CREATURE FROM THE BLACK LAGOON, with a nod or two to MOBY DICK and
JAWS.  But let us face it, it is fun to see a recreation of a
primordial battle between humans and some giant force of nature.
     The film opens with some young filmmakers on the Amazon planning
to make a documentary about a legendary tribe of people, the People of
the Mist.  Immediately we know there is trouble brewing since these
people would not be safe on the Amazon even if there were no giant
snakes around.  We have Terri Flores (played by Jennifer Lopez of BLOOD
AND WINE and in the title role of SELENA).  She is leading the
expedition, believe it or not.  Her cameraman is Danny (played by Ice
Cube).  Why do I have the feeling that Ice Cube would last on the
Amazon just about as long as an ice cube would last in the Amazon?
What passes for adult supervision is Dr. Steven Cale (Eric Stoltz) who
seems to know a little of lore of the river, but mostly from books.
There are several others, just as hopeless.  And as someone who has
actually been stranded on the Amazon in an outboard canoe ... without
gasoline ... and with an Amazon storm blowing up, I could tell at the
beginning that snake or no snake these people are not all coming back.
In a nick of time they pick up somebody real who knows the Amazon.
Paul Sarone (Jon Voight) is a Paraguayan snake hunter who has some idea
about how to handle the river without getting killed.  Unfortunately he
has a plan of his own.  He wants to capture alive a forty-foot anaconda
he has reason to believe is living in a little traveled tributary.
(Actually for those interested, a forty-foot anaconda is not that much
of a stretch.  These aquatic boas have been reported to actually reach
to lengths of thirty feet and the largest may never have been seen and
reported.)
     Eric Stoltz is a good actor, but the script does not give him
nearly enough to do.  He is the logical descendent of the Whit Bissell
character in THE CREATURE FROM THE BLACK LAGOON.  Actually is
surprising that with three names credited to the screenplay and at
least two more people who worded on the script, there should have been
more to the story than a patchwork of other films.  But the characters
are flat and uninteresting, with one exception.  Jon Voight is a
terrific actor and his Sarone is what keeps the film watchable between
snake attacks.  The role is something of a departure for him and the
hardened Amazon Paraguayan with the down-turned mouth and the
understated manner of talking really is the best thing about ANACONDA.
The snake isn't too bad either.  The snake is done as a combination of
animatronics and digital animation.  Somehow the animatronics work
better.  The film was directed by Luis Llosa who must have been an
obvious choice for the producers as his last four films were two action
films (SNIPER and THE SPECIALIST) and two documentaries about the
Amazon.  But Voight was the most solid choice.
     I cannot give the film a high rating, but it was watchable and
between the snake and Voight's performance I did not feel cheated.  I
rate it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Luis Llosa
Writers: Hans Brauer, Jim Cash, and Jack Epps Jr.
Starring: Jennifer Lopez, Jon Voigt, Ice Cube, Eric Stoltz, Owen Wilson,
Kari Wuhler, Jonathan Hyde, Vincent Castallanos, Danny Trejo
Take a giant, computer-animated snake, toss it in the jungle with a fake
film crew, and toss in a campy Jon Voigt for good humor and you have
what is pretty much "Anaconda," an intelligently stupid creature flick,
not to mention one hell of an enjoyable one.  Like its great
predecessor, "Tremors," "Anaconda" is a tongue-in-cheek bit of fun
scariness that is pretty much guaranteed to entertain as long as you
don't think about it.
"Anaconda" follows a documentary film crew through the jungles of South
America as they make a film about a group of people who live in the
jungle.  The director (Jennifer Lopez, from "Selena") is a first-timer,
trying to get her first break.  Along with her are: her boyfriend and
scientist (Eric Stoltz); her old school chum and cinematographer (Ice
Cube); the sound man ("Bottle Rocket"'s Owen Wilson); the perky
production assistant (Kari Wuhler); the british narrator (Jonathan
Hyde); and the captain (Vincent Castallanos), the latter who pretty much
screams "expendable!"
Along the way, they encounter a broken down ship with a mysterious
pony-tailed Central American old man (Jon Voigt), who gets aboard their
ship and begins telling them how to survive the dangerous jungle they
are in, since he knows all about it.  "This jungle can kill you in a
thousand ways," he says.  And soon, it becomes apparent that he's
actually interested in the big attraction of the jungle: the anaconda.
Of course, we all know what's going to happen: the anaconda - which is
boasted to coil its victims, breaking their bones, them eat them, and
sometimes regurgitate them so they can devour them again - will attack
each of the members of the crew.  The film knows that, and plays along
with it to its fullest extents.  We get early shots of it attacking a
leopard (and squeezing it so hard that an eye pops out), and one of the
crew members (guess who?) is eaten early on.
The film plays with us, not letting us see the anaconda in full view to
well into the film.  And each of the characters, or characateurs, are
well-defined and we care about them...well, most of them.  This makes it
particularly scary when one or a couple of our favorite characters have
fallen into the water.  Director Luis Llosa (who also made the crap
"Specialist") plays with our nerves a bit, including some not-so-subtle
movie allusions to earlier creature-features, like "Jaws."  And he even
plays with the old Ebert cliche BADF (Brother Always Dies First), when
Ice Cube says he's going to go back into the water to check on a missing
crew member (cue: groaning by everyone in the theatre).
The cinematography and sets in the film are incredible.  It's a
beautiful bit of cinematography that lulls us into fake peace, only to
surround us with snakes and various other deadly Amazon creatures.  It's
one of the better traits of a creature film if the cinematographer can
fool us like that.
The anaconda when seen is a pretty cool special effect.  It doesn't look
realistic (though I've never seen one of them in real life), and it
sometimes defies gravity, but it's a cool piece of shockdom.  It moves
incredibly fast, sometimes at what seems to be the speed of light,
although it sometimes stalks creepily.  And when it breaks someone's
bones, it has this great sadistic look on its face.  It's one of the
more impressive uses of special effects, like the dinosaurs in the
"Jurassic Park" flicks.
But to me, the real treat of the film is none other than Jon Voigt. 
Playing a typical river rat, he makes him into a fascinatingly funny
piece of camp.  Voigt's an Oscar Winner, and one of the best actors of
his generation (see "Midnight Cowboy" and "Coming Home," as well as his
other river flick, "Deliverence"), and its hilarious to see him go full
ham on us.  With his cuban or latino accent, as well as his Brando-like
delivery, he makes the film more enjoyable than it is, and he never
overdoes it.  Just to see him smile at Jennifer Lopez cunningly is well
worth the price of admission.
"Andaconda" is a superior creature flick in that it is entertaining,
never boring, and always hilarious.  Besides, it has Jon Voigt.  And Jon
has enough brauvara to make even "Glen of Glenda?" interesting.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I don't know if you know, but this film was supposed to be my big
break," says Jennifer Lopez as documentarian Terri Flores.   "Now, it's
a turned into a disaster."  And so does the film ANACONDA -- right
after the opening credits.
     Luckily for Jennifer Lopez, she had a tremendous hit, SELENA,
before ANACONDA was released, because this grade B movie with grade A
special effects could do serious damage to the career of a newer actor.
     Okay, let's set the cast for our cruise down the Amazon.
Jennifer Lopez plays our bumfuzzled documentary director, who manages
to look alluring and keep on her make-up no matter how hot and humid
the climate.
     Giving the only respectable acting performance in the show, Hip
Hopper and actor Ice Cube plays the documentary cameraman.   As the one
credible character on the boat, the audience can use his part as a
standard to judge the degree of ridiculousness of the others.
     Owen Wilson (BOTTLE ROCKET) ostensibly plays Gary, the sound
mixer, but actually his is the classical role of the gullible blonde
who has good looks but little brains.   He gets some asinine lines,
including my favorite, "Is it just me or does the jungle make you
really, really horny?"  Yes, our titillating script makes you think
that sex, just like the monster, is just around the corner.   Kari
Salin plays Denise Kalber, whose main role in the film is that of
someone for Gary to ogle.
     Eric Stoltz briefly appears as the anthropologist Dr.  Steven
Cale.   Shakespearean actor Jonathan Hyde is cast as the documentary's
narrator Warren Westridge.   Warren, the quintessential twit, drinks
his white wine from his personal crystal goblet while floating down the
Amazon in a beat-up barge.   Danny Trejo plays Poacher, the captain of
the ill-fated boat.
     Jon Voight, who was so brilliant in ROSEWOOD, returns to his old
habit of picking miserable material.   In ANACONDA, he plays Paul
Sarone, the Captain Ahab of the snake hunting world.   Voight, sneering
through the entire movie, gives a pathetic and unbelievable
performance.
     (As the characters die in the movie, see if you notice an
interesting relationship with the order of their death and the actor's
probable salary.)
     Finally, there are the real stars of the show -- the snakes.
According to the press kit, there were two animatronic snakes which
were augmented with computer imaging.   The largest snake was 40 feet
long and weighed over a ton.   The kit goes on to claim that snakes
like these do exist.
     The special effects are the only reason to see the film.   The
fake snakes' movements are fascinating.   Director Luis Llosa uses
typical horror film techniques to shock and gross out the audience.
We get to hear people's bones snap, and we get an inside view from the
snake's stomach as someone is swallowed alive.   The snake even gets to
regurgitate one of its human kills.   And you will lose count of how
many times snakes and humans come back from the dead to fight one more
time.
     Perhaps because the filmmakers realized how hopeless ANACONDA was,
they pumped up the music and the background sounds so much that you
will leave the theater looking for a little peace and quiet.   One
thing that can be said for the film, it does have a high energy level
and lots of action, even if it is all preposterous.
     ANACONDA runs a mercifully short 1:30.   It is rated PG-13 for
gross and sometimes gory violence.   I'd be careful about letting kids
under 13 go unless they are used to schlock horror films.   I give the
movie thumbs down and * 1/2 for the special effects.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Columbia)
Starring:  Jennifer Lopez, Ice Cube, Jon Voight, Eric Stoltz, Jonathan
Hyde, Owen Wilson, Kari Wuhrer, Vincent Castellanos.
Screenplay:  Hans Bauer and Jim Cash & Jack Epps Jr.
Producers:  Verna Harrah, Leonard Rabinowitz and Carole Little.
Director:  Luis Llosa.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, profanity)
Running Time:  92 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     If you have never had the opportunity to read the press notes for a
Hollywood film, you are missing an art form with more inspired comedy than
most of what they put on the screen.  I'm not saying the humor is
intentional.  Take ANACONDA, for instance, about which co-star Kari Wuhrer
opines in the press notes:  "There is a subtle message in this
film...(about) messing around with what is the most awesome, incredible
power on the planet:  the Amazon Jungle."  You only wish you could see her
try to say that with a straight face, to see what _really_ good acting is.
There are plenty of words one could use to describe ANACONDA, but "subtle"
ain't one of them.  B-movies don't get much B-movie-er than this one,
which doesn't mean it's a bad film.  On its own level -- thanks to some
hilariously ghoulish special effects -- it's actually something of a
guilty pleasure.
     The story begins with a documentary film crew preparing for a trip
down the Amazon River.  Anthropologist Steven Cale (Eric Stoltz) is
searching for a legendary but never-documented native tribe, and brings
along a crew of five people -- director Terri Flores (Jennifer Lopez),
cameraman Danny Rich (Ice Cube), sound engineer Gary Dixon (Owen Wilson),
production manager Denise Kalberg (Kari Wuhrer) and narrator Warren
Westridge (Jonathan Hyde) -- to record that search.  But the journey takes
an unexpected turn when the crew finds a man named Paul Sarone (Jon
Voight) stranded on a grounded boat, and agree to take him along.  What
the crew doesn't know is that Sarone has his own agenda for the trip,
which involves tracking down a legendary 40-foot anaconda with a big
appetite and an even bigger attitude.
     I offer a warning here that some of the following information might
be considered spoilers, assuming you have been hermetically sealed away
from pop culture and have never seen a suspense film.  ANACONDA doesn't
work very hard to buck the conventions of the genre; in fact, it seems to
revel in them.  As one might expect, characters die.  As one might also
expect, they generally die in inverse order of their placement in the
credits.  ANACONDA even steals a page from 1980s slasher films by giving a
monster a taste for those with questionable moral fiber.  Smoke a joint?
Dead.  Have premarital sex (or even _think_ about having it)?  Dead.
Shoot a monkey? Dead.  The script serves up stock characters like the
pompous prima donna Westridge and the villainous poacher Sarone with a
giddy disregard for anything but plot, plot and more plot.
     Not that the plot makes much sense (beginning with why the narrator
is along on the shoot in the first place), or even moves very briskly for
a suspense thriller.  Director Luis Llosa (THE SPECIALIST) often can't
seem to decide whether ANACONDA is about the conflict with the snake or
the conflict with Sarone, and it proves to be a mistake to focus on the
shipboard clashes when it means the characters are going to have to talk
for any length of time.  Owen Wilson (BOTTLE ROCKET), a dead ringer for
Dennis Hopper, creates a sense of APOCALYPSE NOW deja vu when he starts
talking about Sarone like he was Col. Kurtz; vapid Kari Wuhrer pronounces
the word "satiated" like someone reading it off the page for the first
time without knowing what it means.  Voight, whose perpetual sneer and
absurd Paraguayan accent make Pacino's performance in SCARFACE look
positively subdued, goes madly over the top and looks like he's the only
person having any fun.  At least Eric Stoltz had the good sense to grab
his check and spend half the film in a coma.
     So why, then, is ANACONDA more fun than glorified B-movies like
TWISTER or INDEPENDENCE DAY?  Because it never pretends to be anything
more, and because it includes the kind of scenes a good monster movie
needs:  moments which leave you laughing even as you are going "eeewwwww."
Sometimes a film only needs one really memorable scene to leave you
feeling a goofy sense of satisfaction.  ANACONDA boasts at least three,
including a shot from inside the snake's digestive system (the
Ana-colon-cam?) and it doesn't even matter that the computer-generated
snake is nobody's idea of state-of-the-art visual effects work.  A B-movie
shouldn't be out to impress you.  ANACONDA is simplistic, and could have
used more of its monster, but it delivers.  I'll look for my "subtle
messages" in movies that aren't about 40-foot-long killer snakes.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        ANACONDA is a horrible movie but a hell of a lot of fun. I 
have a feeling director Luis Llosa made it to be that way and so, after 
laughing at an overacting Jon Voight, an underacting Ice Cube and a 
fake-looking 40-foot long snake (which looks like it was computer 
generated on a Mac Classic), I'm giving ANACONDA a thumbs-
almost-up.
        It's constructed like a disaster movie, with a big cast of 
caricatures who will be in constant danger, fatal for most of them. 
There are also a string score, endless p.o.v. shots from the snake and 
even a few fake scares. None of this is original, but there are a lot of 
cheesy moments to make it a self-aware bad movie -- Ice Cube 
listening to his own music, a character saying "The jungle is making 
me horny" and a memorable and almost frightening waterfall attack 
scene.
        The movie begins as a film crew boards an Amazon boat. The 
plan is to make a documentary on a lost tribe, with Jennifer "Selena" 
Lopez the director, Ice Cube (that perpetual scowl still on his face) the 
cameraman, Jonathan Hyde the snooty TV host, Eric Stoltz the expert 
on Amazon tribes, Owen Wilson the sound guy, Kari Wuhrer as 
Secretary of Cleavage, and Vincent Castellanos the ship captain. Two 
will live to see the end credits, and it's not much of a mystery who.
        Voight soon hops aboard, after the crew members spot him 
stranded on his broken-down boat. From the beginning, his Spanish 
accent betrays him as the Man To Watch Out For, and when he talks 
of his love of anaconda hunting, there might as well be a flashing 
subtitle reading "Foreshadowing!" Indeed, within a few scenes, Stoltz 
is put out of commission when he goes scuba diving and some giant 
wasp gets stuck in his throat (which should serve as a lesson -- when 
you're scuba diving, never use a wasp hive as your oxygen mask) and 
they have to rush him to medical help, which will take a few days. 
Voight purposefully points them down a river path that is infested with 
those damn 40-foot snakes.
        The disaster springs from there, and when you're up against 
anacondas that big, it pretty much has to. The crew members start to 
get picked off, the least important ones first. There are plenty of scenes 
with the giant snakes wrapping around their prey and devouring them, 
and the pre-credits notation that anacondas regurgitate their prey to 
hunt and kill them again turns out to be no lie. The last 30 minutes of 
ANACONDA are the best 30, although the movie's IQ never rises to 
the three-digit level. If you think you can enjoy a laughable, mindless 
movie about giant killer snakes, well, here you go.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Talking trash on the web since 1995...

Author
Cameron Shelley
Anaconda is a challenging film to review, since little of any
substance appears on the screen. It is an intensely silly
picture that could probably be adequately discussed during
screening, without missing anything vital. I say this with
some assurance, since several movie patrons appeared to be
doing just that while watching. In fact, Anaconda, I think,
invites exactly that reaction.
According to Variety (I think it was), the end of April is
basically dead-time for the movie box-office - what with
people feeling impoverished over their tax returns and
such. The cruelest month is also the most financially
depressing for the studios, and has, to all appearances,
leveled off films like Volcano and everything else wedged
into the gap before the advent of big summer blockbusters
like Jurassic Park II. Anaconda, however, squeezes
comfortably into the early spring time slot. This film is not
for the ambitious movie-goer out to treat his (or her) eyes to
a piece of cinematic brilliance. No, this film is for the
recently defrosted slacker with five bucks burning a hole in
his (or her) pocket!
Considered formally, the film only has two things to offer:
    1.The black guy (Danny) doesn't get killed first! In fact,
       he survives the whole picture relatively intact.
    2.The chick (Terri) doesn't twist her ankle at all!
Other than that, things are pretty much as you'd expect. A
pretty stereotypical documentary crew goes out on the
Amazon with a snooty, British presenter to film some
mysterious natives. In a setup arranged by their captain,
they pick up a Paraguayan ex-priest (Sarone) who's really in
it for the big snakes. He incapacitates the film crew's leader
(Steven) and leads the gang down the wrong tributary -
with horrendous results! That's pretty much it. Why the
setup? Who knows!
The centerpiece of this movie is not, in fact, the 40 foot
snake, but rather Jon Voight and his B movie acting. He
sneers, smirks, slimes, and slouches across the screen,
delivering his silly lines with real gusto, and all in that
stupid accent! No matter how bad, no scene or bit of
dialogue receives anything less than all the over-acting it
deserves. Opposite him, Jennifer Lopez does a creditable job
of maintaining an air of solemnity (without panic) and
keeping a straight face. To Llosa's credit, I suppose, the
movie focuses on the interaction between these two
characters, leaving the snake on the sidelines for most of
the time. (Except for one or two sequences, the anaconda
itself seems like little more than an "innertube with an
attitude." 

Insofar as there is one, I suppose the moral is that if you
have five bucks and a taste for the ridiculous, then
Anaconda may well be for you. If you are also one of those
people who is repulsed by snakes, so much the better - you
might actually get a kick out of the reptilian sideshow. But
remember, the real reptile is that Sarone guy! Frankly, I
don't think I'd trust him at all, even out for a little gopher
hunt. He probably knows where there are some "real" gophers....
-----
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-1211 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle>

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
Midway through "Anaconda", documentary filmmaker Terri Flores (Jennifer 
Lopez) turns to a co-worker and says "I thought this movie would be my 
first big break. Instead, it's turned into a disaster." Truer words have 
never been spoken.
"Anaconda" is a monster movie with a lousy monster. It's a suspense film 
that is utterly predictable. It's a mess The film does manage to drum up 
some scares, but only in the most elementary way, like a jack-in-the-box. 
As you turn the crank, you're totally aware that the damn clown is going 
to pop up, but somehow it's still mildly startling when it happens. The 
main difference between the giant snake in "Anaconda" and the clown in a 
jack-in-the-box is that the clown is more realistic. "Anaconda" boasts 
some of the worst special effects to appear onscreen in years. 
Animatronic shots of the snake look as phony as any of those cringe-
inducing robots you've endured at Disney World. But it's the computer 
animated scenes that truly expand the meaning of the word lame. In one 
shot, a character tries to flee from the monster by diving from a tree 
near a waterfall, but the giant snake springs out and loops around its 
hapless victim in mid air. The scene, if done well, would have been a jaw-
dropper. Here, the horribly bad digital effects look less convincing than 
a Saturday morning cartoon. What's really amazing is that the filmmaker's 
were so proud of this dreadful shot that they actually included it in the 
promotional trailers for the movie. 
But enough about the phony snakes. Now it's time to talk about the lousy 
story. Heroic and very pale anthropologist Eric Stoltz leads a 
documentary film crew down a Brazilian river in search of the Shirishama 
Indians, a legendary tribe that supposedly lives in the boondocks of the 
rain forest. Stoltz tells his crew "Pray that you didn't forget your bug 
spray." Apparently the female crew members bathed in the stuff, because 
they spend most of the film wearing skimpy tops and short shorts with no 
ill effect.  Along the way, the group rescues a whacked-out lapsed priest 
(Jon Voight) who claims to know how to find the Shirishama. Within 
minutes, they throw away all their plans and follow Voight down a 
tributary into the land of creepiness. From that point on, the film is a 
hodgepodge of scenes and shots ripped off from "Jaws" and "Dead Calm."
One of the oddest structural points of the film is the handling of Eric 
Stoltz. Early in the story, his character gets knocked into a coma by a 
river insect and spends virtually the rest of the movie unconscious. So 
why did they hire an actor of the caliber of Stoltz for what amounts to a 
cameo appearance? Also, why did Stoltz, who generally selects his roles 
with great care, agree to appear in this crap? Ah, the mysteries of 
Hollywood.
The remaining crew members are basically just snake food waiting to 
happen. Jonathan Hyde is mildly diverting as a pompous Englishman hired 
to narrate the documentary, but Lopez and Ice Cube manage to rise above 
their cardboard characters. Lopez, who starred in "Selena," is an 
enormously appealing performer, possessing a vibrancy that makes even the 
most trite lines seem credible. Ice Cube has a special charisma; an 
ability to look like a macho adult and a frightened boy simultaneously. 
There's also a special twinkle in his eyes, as if he's gently mocking his 
own tough-guy posturing. 
But the movie really centers around the outrageously hammy performance of 
Jon Voight. Obsessed with capturing one of the giant anacondas, Voight 
plays the villain in thick accent, with a series of leers and hisses, 
spouting the kind of dialogue usually heard only in episodes of "Jonny 
Quest." At one point, he looms over the crew and says "The anaconda is 
the perfect killing machine. It strikes, wraps around you, holds you 
tighter than your true love. And you get the privilege of hearing your 
bones break before the power of its embrace causes your veins to explode.
" That moment is so high-camp that it almost made the film tolerable. 
Almost.
Fans of the horror genre may be tempted to check out "Anaconda." Don't. 
There are a lots of horror films scheduled for release this summer, 
including another "Alien" sequel. Wait for them, rent "Jaws" in the 
meantime, and don't throw away your money and time on drivel like this.

Author
Marty Mapes
** (out of 4) I was looking forward to Anaconda. The previews looked
good. The subject matter was potentially scary. It had Ice Cube, who is
an interesting personality, if not a great actor. It even got a
favorable review from Roger Ebert.
After an introductory scene showing the strength, stealth, and terror of
(movie) anacondas, we meet the main characters: a film crew in search of
a reclusive tribe of South American aborigines. The crew is just
underway on their barge when they encounter Paul (John Voight), whose
boat has gotten stuck. They take him on board.
It turns out that Paul is a poacher specializing in snakes. He claims to
have met the reclusive tribe and offers to guide the film crew to their
location. Some of the crew don't trust the creepy man.
Eventually, the crew encounters a huge anaconda with an attitude who
starts picking them off, one by one.
As you can tell, the plot is not very original. Replace the snake with a
vampire or a swamp thing or a ghost and you have a movie that you have
probably seen many times before. So what's different about ANACONDA?
What does it have to offer? Not much, but here goes.
First, there are some good tilted camera shots that give an uneasy
feeling about what's going on on-screen. Second, I like Ice Cube. I
won't say he's a great actor, but he's fun to watch. Third, there is a
scene where I started to write that the character fell for the obvious
double-cross -- another stupid cliche -- when it turned out to be a
triple-cross. Nice touch. Fourth, there is a wonderfully disgusting
scene of one of the actors regurgitated from the snake.
Most everything else was boring or bad.
When the characters were introduced, each was an exaggerated caricature.
There's the producer (Eric Stoltz) and the director (Jennifer Lopez) who
just happen to identify each other's job title in their conversation.
Most of us could have figured this out without "I wanted only the BEST
DIRECTOR (hint, hint, wink) I could find." There's the production
manager (Kari Wuhrer) and the sound man (Owen Wilson) who just happen to
identify each other's job title in their conversation (as if the
clipboard and the microphone didn't give them away). Then there's the
"talent" (Johathan Hyde) who is an uptight prick. We could have learned
about this character flaw when he started driving golf balls, sipping
wine, and turning his nose up at rap music on the jungle river. But lest
we miss that point, the screenwriters (Hans Bauer, Jim Cash and Jack
Epps Jr.) have him ask the first woman he sees to carry his bags. Duh.
We got it already.
The movie makes a lot of other mistakes, and when it does, it errs on
the side of obtuseness. For example, two characters are alone in the
jungle in the dark. They comment on all the beautiful natural jungle
sounds. But on the soundtrack, there is music, too. When the jungle
noise stops and the characters remark on the shock of the utter silence,
the violins are still playing their tense chords. Here's a clue. Unless
your Luis Bunuel or Ed Wood, when someone on screen says "listen to the
silence" (or "my, what a red wall"), there should be silence (or the
wall should be red).
And of course, to round out the adolescent worldview of the movie, there
is cheesy dialog. Here are some examples in no particular order. "You
and whose army?" "Yo mama's." "This river can kill you in a thousand
ways." "I was up all night picking leeches off my scrotum."
I had high hopes for Anaconda. I suppose if I were a 13-year old boy, I
would have enjoyed this movie, but there's nothing in it for adults.
It's as if Llosa assumed none of us would be interested in seeing his
movie. That may have been a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes

Author
Walter Frith
Anacondas are snakes that are primarily found to be living in the
Amazon jungle.  They  allegedly grow to be forty feet long in some
cases and can eat people.  Your enjoyment of the move 'Anaconda' will
depend entirely on how you accept the film's visual effects.  It is
obvious to tell that at most times they are computer graphics but the
chills and terror set fourth by the film are genuine.
A group of documentary filmmakers led by their director (Jennifer
Lopez) venture into the Amazon jungle to film a piece detailing the
existence of a South American tribe of natives.  She is accompanied by
her camerman (rapper Ice Cube) and an anthropologist (Eric Stoltz).
Along with a few others they rescue a stranded and mysterious stranger
(Jon Voight) from his broken down barge and he seems to be a nice guy
at first.  It turns out that Voight is bounty hunter whose quarry is
snakes and he sabotages the boat's crew at gunpoint and any other means
necessary in his quest for an anaconda which will make him a rich man.
This is a clever and enjoyably campy film from director Luis Llosa
('Sniper', 'The Specialist') who never over estimates the value of his
subject matter and directs 'Anaconda' in a frightfully pleasant way
reminiscent of 1990's 'Arachnophobia' which was about a gigantic and
deadly amazon spider on the loose in small town California.  That film
had more humour than 'Anaconda' but there isn't much to laugh about
when we see nature in its most furious and fatal moments.
Jon Voight makes a cunning and precariously acceptable villain along
with the snake and his character reminded me a little bit of Quint
(Robert Shaw), the salty and crusty shark hunter of 'Jaws'.  Both are
men of determination and both end up losing their lives in a struggle
to big for them to handle.  'Anaconda' has a biting and firey climax
which will leave you as mesmerized as any jungle picture you're ever
likely to view.

Author
Monika Huebner
Director: Luis Llosa
Cast: Jennifer Lopez, Ice Cube, Owen Wilson, Eric Stoltz
Humanities quest for knowledge never ends. So a team of scientists and
film-makers travel to the Amazon to search for a legendary Indian
tribe. The party consists of anthropologist Steven Cale (Eric Stoltz)
and the camera team consisting of Terri Flores (Jennifer Lopez), Danny
Rich (Ice Cube), Gary Dixon (Owen Wilson), Denise Kahlberg (Kari
Wuhrer) and Warren Westridge (Jonathan Hyde). Early on their journey
they meet Paul Sarone (Jon Voight) whose boat is stuck on the shore.
They agree to give him a ride to the next village. He claims to know
the area well and can be useful locating the native tribe. Very soon
their friendliness backfires on the group because Sarone turns out to
be a snake hunter without scruples who only wants to catch a giant
anaconda and sell it to a zoo.
We don't have to wait too long for the giant snake. She just had a
panther hors d'oevre and now is looking for the main course. 
Our heroes paddle around in the Amazonas as if it were the pool in
their own backyard. No wonder giant animals mistake their splashing
for a dinner bell. Our anaconda is a polite one and swallows the first
victim in one big gulp. Enjoy!
So much for the first attempt to catch her. But who would want to
catch a giant snake with a fishing pole? Our villain Sarone shows his
soft side when he stops Terri from shooting the snake. Too bad that
anaconda is just about to strangle another member of the expedition.
One by one she goes after the others.
Eric Stoltz is stung by a giant wasp right in the beginning and is
mercifully unconcious for the rest of the adventure. The rest of the
crew keeps entertaining the viewer although not the way the makers of
the movie had planned. However the scenes without the anaconda are
rather boring. Whenever the leading lady shows up we're in for a
laugh. The snake reminds us of a favorite character of a famous
animated movie even if she should be an awe-inspiring monster. Her
attacks always follow the same plan: one last hypnotic look - she's
looking at you, kid - then she speedily wraps herself around her
victim and starts to gush it down. Mostly we don't see the act of
devouring. But she looks nice when she wiggles away with her bulging
middle part. Whoever did the special effects on this movie may have
wanted to go to a zoo first and study some real snakes. Maybe then the
anaconda model would have looked more real.
The animatronics are somewhat more believable. But that didn't work
for the strangling scenes. Don't go see the movie for the F/X. They
are everything but up-to-date.
The viewer who likes to watch the end credits will see to his/her
surprise that a snake expert was a consultant for the team. We may
doubt though that he has ever seen the final result of his work. A
well known American science magazine is also mentioned in the credits,
but I will refrain from naming it here to avoid further damage to its
reputation. The majority of viewer will have left the theater as soon
as the credits start rolling, anyway.
What kind of audience is the target group for this movie? Hard to say.
This can't be a serious horror movie, or can it? See for yourself.
Homepage: Book and movie reviews
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin/indexalt.html

Author
Rydain
Please don't mind this windbag letting off a bit of steam...I just want
to warn all of y'all not to waste your hard-earned $$$ on Anaconda.
It's not even worth a 99-cent video rental.  Don't listen to Ebert on
this one (he has no clue what he's talking about!) BTW I accompanied my
friend to this one because she was *required* to watch it on assignment
(she reviews movies for a local paper).  Now I'll actually back up my
huffing and puffing.  Here goes:
Movie: Anaconda
Rydain's Rating out of Four Stars: 1/2*
Bottom Line: Wait for it to come on USA Up All Night.  Even then, I
doubt it's worth the price of Jolt (to help you stay up that late!)
Why do I hate Anaconda?  Let me count the ways...
First of all, this movie gets way too many snake facts wrong.  As an
ophiophile (snake lover), I can tell you that a) anacondas would never
reach a length of 40 feet, b) they're scared of people, c) cases of
snakes eating adult humans are extremely rare because human shoulders
are too wide to fit in a snake's mouth, and constrictor snakes don't
kill what they can't eat, d) people can outrun snakes with no trouble,
especially heavy ones like anacondas, e) if an anaconda did eat a
human, it would need at least 6 months of sitting on its butt to digest
the huge meal, therefore it couldn't run around gobbling up everybody
else in the cast, and f) snakes have no vocal cords, so they can't make
funny squealing noises.  Whew.
I was prepared to suspend reality if the movie would have been worth
it.  Unfortunately, Anaconda was about as suspenseful and exciting as
watching paint peel.  My friend and I even successfully predicted who
would live at the end.  Anybody can tell the bad guy is going to die
eventually.  That was a pity because his character was one of the few
reasons my friend and I didn't give up and fall asleep.  He was the
most likable character in the movie.  Who wouldn't enjoy somebody who
looks like a deranged Walt Whitman?
Anaconda did have its cute moments: arguments between Ice Cube's
character and the British guy, for instance.  However, those small
flashes of wit were not worth the other hour and twenty-eight minutes
of boring schlock.  The writers had - and blew - a multitude of
opportunities to insert funny lines.  I was quite disappointed with a
scene where a young guy tells a young lady that the jungle makes him
horny.  Did she retort with a clever, ego-withering comeback?  Of
course not! "I'm trying to work!" Gee, that's even dumber than the crap
comebacks I come up with.  She could have told him to go find a
knothole or something... ;P But I will admit, there was just one scene
where I was surprised at the outcome (hint: it involves the evil guy
and Miss Crap Comebacks).
As for the plot, I'm still trying to find one.  This movie was
basically an excuse to get a boatload of people into dangerous
territory where they could get snarfed by ridiculous,
computer-generated anacondas with the eyes and fangs of vipers and the
faster-than-gravity downward acceleration of a Harrier jet. (Harrier
snake?) Not to mention instant digestion so they could go snarf
countless other victims.  The writers tried to throw in some sort of
plot twist (should I call it a plot knot because it made no sense?) in
which the sick guy's g-friend kisses the evil dude and suddenly
everybody hates said evil dude and starts trying to kill him.  That was
about as clear and understandable as Mission: Impossible. (If someone
could explain THAT movie to me, I'd be most grateful!  All the old-guy
double agents looked the same!!)
I wasn't inspired by the acting, save for the evil dude.  I can't blame
the actors, though.  It's not their fault they had a cruddy script to
work with.
This concludes Rydain's diatribe on a shameless exploitation (and
perpetuation!) of public fear of snakes.  Comments, flames, anyone?
-Rydain the Atomic Cheese, fresh from Chernobyl Dairies!

Author
Brian Takeshita
Well, what are you going to expect?  It's a movie about a big snake
that eats people.  That's what I should have been thinking when I
viewed this film, because maybe then I would have enjoyed myself more.
Instead, I ended up wishing a giant snake would come along and eat me,
too.
ANACONDA is about a documentary film crew sailing down a South
American river.  Led by anthropologists Dr. Steven Cale (Eric Stolz)
and Terri Flores (Jennifer Lopez), the crew is attempting to locate a
lost tribe of natives.  Along the way, they find poacher Paul Sarone
(Jon Voight), and become unwillingly embroiled in his quest to capture
the elusive anaconda.  To simply say that this is the world's largest
snake wouldn't be doing it justice, since the anaconda in this movie
is at least two feet wide.  If this isn't a good reason to avoid
picking up hitchhikers, I don't know what is.
At the beginning of ANACONDA, we find that Flores and Cale have had
some kind of relationship in the past, but that seems to be more or
less over now.  I expected that fact to play a key part somewhere down
the line, but it ended up being a set-up for nothing.  Cale chokes on
a deadly wasp (don't ask me how that happens - I don't know) and is
put out of action, relegated to being the person whom the rest of the
film crew must get back to civilization for medical help.  This
minimally helps to add a sense of urgency for the plot, since this
goal now comes in direct conflict with Sarone's plan to capture the
snake.  However, this is negated by the fact that Cale seems to get
better by himself about halfway through the film, and in any event
still results in zero payoff from the relationship angle.
Most bad characters are either annoying or stupid.  In this movie,
they're both.  Since this description applies to all the characters
except Sarone, it's hard to find someone to root for.  You're supposed
to back the good guys, but you really end up cheering for Sarone
because he's smarter than everyone else.  Or maybe he's just not as
dumb as everyone else.  At times, I almost found myself rooting for
the snake.
There are no standout performances here.  Everyone seems to be
reciting lines written for stock characters.  Even Voight appears to
be doing his best impression of Christopher Walken for some reason.
No matter, as in most monster movies, the snake is supposed to be the
real star anyway.  In most of the scenes, the snake is computer
generated, and the effects crew did a decent job of making it look
real.  However, the realism is thrown off by some pretty unrealistic
occurrences.  Sometimes, for example, the snake just moves too fast.
It catches a guy jumping off of a waterfall, for crying out loud.
Then there's another scene where the snake eats one of the characters,
and we see the snake's skin drawn so tightly over its prey that we can
see the victim's pained expression from within the snake's belly.
Absolutely ridiculous.
A testimony to the film's bad direction is the inclusion of a scene
early on the in the film, where we get to see just how dangerous the
mighty anaconda is.  In a scene totally unrelated to anything else, we
are witness to the big snake winning a showdown with a panther.  The
anaconda wraps itself around the powerful feline as if it were a
stuffed animal and squeezes it so hard, one of the panther's eyeballs
pops out.  Eeeewwwww.  Above and beyond the sick factor, however, this
scene surprised me because it actually showed the face of the snake
before a quarter of the movie had even passed.  In films like these, a
sense of mystery surrounding the monster must be maintained.  If the
characters are reacting to something they fear more than see, we as an
audience must experience that feeling along with them.  To show us the
monster early on is to let us in on something the characters don't
know about, and therefore allow us to get used to the danger before
the pivotal moment when man and beast have their climactic showdown.
In a case like that, the showdown just ends up being a letdown.  When
I saw the snake for the first time, I decided to give the film the
benefit of the doubt and assume that the snake I saw wasn't the REAL
danger.  This one was just a decoy, and there was actually a BIGGER
snake waiting to make its appearance just when everyone thought they
were safe.  No such luck.  Okay, maybe ANACONDA is actually a decoy,
and there's really a BETTER movie waiting to make its debut.

Author
Vallejo
  A human has just been gulped by a 40 foot serpent. The reptilian then
proceeds to chase someone else and when it's ready to consume it's latest
prey, it suddenly spits out the person it has just swallowed. Not only that
but the man, mangled and deformed as in a cocoon, winks and then falls flat
down on the floor. Laughter overflowed my astonishment, as if the filmmakers
were in on the joke from the get-go.
   That is the basic premise for ANACONDA, an unrestrained, sometimes raunchy,
hilarious suspenser replete with inconceivable situations, and even more
unthinkable, cheesy B-movie momentoes that work more effectively as mass
entertainment than, say, THE SAINT. Pinpointing the better instances would
ruin the experience of laughing out loud while simultaneously finding yourself
rooting for the nebulous characters.
   As every chiller nowadays, ANACONDA  begins with an irrelevant scene whose
purpose is to demonstrate the raw power of the lizard. A man is calling for
help to some sort of station, since `something` is lurking towards him ( we
can tell because the camera rotates left and right). As the poor sap gets
frantically paranoid, the snake destroys half the boat, and there is no other
solution but for the man to climb all the way to the top and take his life
with a revolver.
   Okay, so the prologue has been instituted, now the movie can officially
start. The soon hunter Dr. Steven Cale ( Eric Stoltz ), an aesthete in finding
lost tribes who leads an expedition into the sweltering, damp Amazon jungle
where USC student director Terri Flores ( Jennifer Lopez, in her third film of
the year ) is shooting a documentary about the tribal experience. Among the
ciphers included in the crew is the cool, hip cameraman Danny Rich (Ice Cube),
the misplaced Brit narrator Warren Westridge (Jonathan Hyde), who practices
golf strokes and listens to classical music, and production manager Denise and
sound mixer Gary (who are also a couple in which the Anaconda catches at the
worst possible time) respectively played by Kari Wuhrer and Owen Wilson.
    For the initial fifteen minutes or so, the movie is a bad case of terribly
unimaginative and slow paced execution with artificial dialogue and inane
altercations, but this all changes when the crew rescue Paul Sarone (a droll
Jon Voight), an idiosyncratic and quite creepy Paraguayan snake hunter who
uses the boat as his personal chase to recuperate the viper alive for big
bucks, but the crew doesn't realize this yet. He does give malignant stares
and assumes a certain amount of distrust in his over-the-top Paraguayan
accent. 
   Voight's performance is what gives ANACONDA the much-needed jolt to elevate
the material into truly satisfying escapism. His cryptic, enigmatic looks and
bad, bad intentions make him an outstanding figure in these formulaic
thrillers, not since Andrei Konchalovsky's RUNAWAY TRAIN has he had a juicier
role and displayed it with a substantial amount of energy and durability. 
 Aside from Voight, ANACONDA is a fatuous, prosaic exercise in delivering 
cheap thrills in a usually slow moviegoing period of a year. There are the
washed up 
circumstances, the recycled `plot` twists and desperately desperate one
liners. ( The notable one is Ice Cube's remark: ` Man, I'm gettin' the hell
back to L.A ` ). Yet, accusing  ANACONDA from its obvious problems would be
like snatching a five year-old's toy. In movies like ANACONDA logistics are
eschewed to assure incredulous flexibility.
   The real star is the 40ft snake, a swaying, hand made creature which loses
its visceral charge when it attacks its victims, then it becomes a case of
visibly unripe animatronics. In the history of Hollywood snakes, I don't
recall a more colossal one than this one, commanded by director Luis Llosa
with the common sense of a Roger Corman OUTER LIMITS episode. When the camera
starts moving slowly and Randy Edelman's inviting score kicks in, it is as
inviting as pie, the snake wants to snack again. No spontaneous attacks here. 
   Scriptwriters Hans Bauer, Jim Cash and Jack Epps, Jr. are actually
interested in rendering the rituals the anaconda practices right before
eating. ` You get the privilege of having your bones break before the power of
their embrace causes your veins to explode, ` Sarone says at one point. There
is even a gruesome shot in which we're inserted into the thing's esophagus, as
his latest victim is filling it up. 
   And of course, we are subjected to a lonely eyeball, plenty of dead bodies,
explosions, chases, and totally unfounded scenes. (Sarone spills a gallon or
so of monkey blood over two of the crew members ). 
  The adequate manner to classify ANACONDA is not classifying it at all. I'd
call it an ecologically violent, bone-crunching, heart pounding, nail biting,
half-witted , JAWS-in-the-jungle rip-off. It's musty, alright, but not
flavorless. (1:30)

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Jennifer Lopez; Ice Cube; Jon Voight; Eric Stoltz & Jonathan Hyde
OK, so Anaconda is not going to go down in history as the greatest film ever
made. For that matter, not even anywhere near the top of the list. But it's
a fun little movie none the less. You simply have to take it for what it
is -- the kind of movie that you watch for some light entertainment, nothing
more, nothing less. I can say that I was disappointed in one area though,
and that was special effects. Before seeing this film, I kept hearing about
the great snake effects. Well friends, they might have been great compared
to the special effects on an old episode of Star Trek, but they weren't
anything to write home about compared to what audiences are used to today.
As computer generated animal effects go -- if you compared the snake in
Anaconda to the dinosaurs in Jurassic Park -- these effects look downright
cheesy. But that's OK, because it goes along well with the cheesy acting of
most of the film's stars. Most notably, Jon Voight. Now my guess is that
this was the effect that the filmmakers were going for, because Jon Voight
is just too fine an actor to give an over the top performance like this
without it being intentional. Although I do think he should have put a
little extra effort into what turned out to be a really bad accent. As I
said, the producers seemed to want to inject an element of camp into just
about every aspect of this film, and they certainly accomplished that goal.
The basic premise goes something like this -- a documentary film crew is
sailing up the Amazon River to make a movie. The crew includes Ice Cube and
bodacious babe Jennifer Lopez. Along the way, they meet up with snake hunter
Jon Voight. When one of the crew gets injured, Voight's character convinces
them to take a shortcut so they can get the man back to civilization for
medical attention. What they don't know is that his shortcut also happens to
be the home turf of a very large, and very mean, anaconda. The anaconda, by
the way, isn't accepting visitors.
In Anaconda, acting and plot take a back seat to the computer-generated
snake. Let's not pussyfoot around it, Anaconda is just one big showcase for
the snake. It is never a good idea when little things like plot are pushed
aside for the special effects. It becomes even worse when the special
effects stink. In some scenes the stupid snake looks so bad that you would
think that they had a bunch of 5 year olds with a pack of crayons doing the
animation. OK, maybe it's not that bad, but you get the point. When they
base a movie around special effects it would be nice if they actually had
spent money on the special effects. Or better yet, hired people who knew how
to create them properly.
Anaconda is campy -- not a bad thing had the snake made up for the camp. The
only reason I can really recommend this film would be for the fact that
Jennifer Lopez is hot and sweaty throughout. For my money, worth the price
of admission any day of the week. But other than Ms. Lopez's perspiration,
there is really nothing else that warrants an exuberant recommendation for
this movie.

Author
Michael Dequina
Anaconda (PG-13) no stars (out of ****)
"When you can't breathe, you can't scream."  That may be true, but
when speaking in terms of the new thriller Anaconda, a more fitting tagline
would be "When you're laughing your ass off, you can't scream," for this
inane jungle adventure is nothing less than Congo '97.
This adventure, directed by Luis Llosa of The Specialist and Sniper
fame (or infamy, depending on how you look at it), follows a film crew
traveling down the Amazon to make a documentary on a mysterious tribe.  The
crew is a bunch of flat characters, each with only one discernible
personality trait: there's the earnest young director (Jennifer Lopez, the
only actor on board who emerges with her dignity intact); the cameraman from
the 'hood (Ice Cube); the horny sound guy (Owen Wilson); the bimbo
production manager (Kari Wuhrer); the stuffy British host (Jonathan Hyde);
the professor/love interest to the director (Eric Stoltz, wasted); and the
foreign-accented captain of the boat (Vincent Castellanos).  When they
stumble upon a mysterious stranger (Jon Voight) in a broken down boat, the
crew decides to take him on board.  Big mistake.  He's --no lie--a psychotic
former-priest-turned-snake-hunter from Paraguay, dangerously obsessed with
capturing the 40-foot anaconda snake alive--even if it means sacrificing the
film crew.
Now, if one is making a movie about snakes--giant, man-eating
snakes, no less--one would think that the first order of business would be
to come up with convincing snake effects.  Apparently, no one involved in
Anaconda thought hard enough.  The animatronic snakes look like giant rubber
hoses with tire treads.  Llosa also uses some "state-of-the-art" computer
animation for some shots of the snake striking and wrapping around its prey,
but the effects are obviously computer generated; the seams are quite visible.
The phony snakes are more than enough to ruin the film, but the true
awfulness of Anaconda doesn't stop there.  Two words--Jon Voight.  As the
nominal human villain of the piece, he is a complete embarrassment.  If his
unconvincing accent (alternately overdone and underdone) isn't bad enough,
there are his hilarious leering gazes at Lopez.  If that isn't enough, there
are his "villainous" looks, clenched teeth and eyes in full bulge, during
the physical scenes.  The rest of the cast isn't all that great, either, but
their work is downright Oscar-caliber compared to Voight's laughably
overwrought turn.
Anaconda can best be summed up by a line delivered midway by Lopez
without the slightest bit of irony: "This film was supposed to be my big
break, and now it's turned into a disaster."  You said it.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
