Title
Review for Mariachi, El (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Frank Maloney
     EL MARIACHI is written and directed by Robert Rodriguez. It stars
Carlos Gallardo, Consuelo Gomez, and Peter Marquardt.  In Spanish, with
English subtitles. Rated R, due to violence.
     EL MARIACHI is not a great film, but it is a remarkable one, and
it may be the harbinger of an important new filmmaker.  The filmmaker
is Robert Rodriguez, an Austin, Texas, writer-director. His plan was to
make EL MARIACHI on the cheap, sell it to the Mexican video market,
take the profits and make two more Spanish-language films which he
could parlay into a slightly larger English-language film, and then
break into Hollywood. To raise part of the $7,000 he budgeted for his
first film, he volunteered for a drug experiment at his school, the
University of Texas, Austin; four weeks later he had $3,000, a script,
and one of his actors, Peter Marquardt (who would play the gringo drug
lord). He and his co-producer and star, Carlos Gallardo, shot the film
in a week, using mostly local townsfolk in a border town, Cd. Acuna,
Coahuila. For dolly shots, Gallardo pushed Rodriguez in a borrowed
wheelchair as Rodriguez shot with a borrowed camera. He filmed in 16-mm
and edited in video. He inserted footage of a mostly inert pit bull
whenever the narrative was out of synch with the film.
     His film style appears to be modeled on the Coen brothers, or
perhaps satirizing it: violent subject matter, some black humor, fast
camera movements, fish-eye distortions, and speeded-up action
sequences. As for a moral center, the film is a more than a little
tentative. This is not Peckinpah, not yet at least, but the mariachi of
the title does have a sense of who he meant to be and who he became
instead. But mostly this is an action film that puts its energy into
being energetic. Still the characters, especially the mariachi and the
woman bar-owner he falls in with are interesting characters, credible
and likable. The plot, the characters, the editing, the use of music,
the direction, and the inventiveness in the face of a nearly cash-free
production are worthy of our attention.
     Rodriguez' plan, by the way, went somewhat awry when EL MARIACHI
unexpectedly attracted a studio bidding war. When the dust settled,
Columbia had agreed to distribute the film to twenty U.S. cities in
Spanish with English subtitles and signed Rodriguez to work on a $5
million or $6 million remake (or sequel -- I've read both).
     Admittedly, EL MARIACHI has a freak-show element to it -- not
unlike Dr. Johnson's crack about the woman preacher ("The wonder, sir,
is not that she preach well, but that she preach at all") -- but there
is something under the student razzle-dazzle and the gee-whiz appeal of
the story of the film's making that attracts me, entertains me, and
makes me hope for more miracles from Robert Rodriguez.
     If EL MARIACHI plays near you, I highly recommend you see it, even
at full ticket price.

Author
Keith Meng-Wei Loh
EL MARIACHI -- LOW BUDGET ACTION, 'BIG BUDGET' EFFECT? -- 
     For those of us who have been raised on a steady diet of Hollywood
films and culture, the pre)eminence of the budget and of dollar signs
have come to represent a benchmark--a signpost--that, in the hype
media, at least, indicates the value of a film.
     Those absorbed in the Hollywood culture have come to follow films
as an industry and, consequently, have come to regard the budget as a
star on the marquee, and at times on an equal footing as the true stars
themselves.  So, then, the budget of LAST ACTION HERO, which can only
be guessed as more than the health expenditures of many developing
countries, should have equal billing as the formidable name of Arnold
Schwarzenegger and John McTiernan.
     If so, the marquee for EL MARIACHI would be ridiculously out of
touch.  It would read: EL MARIACHI / written and directed by Robert
Rodriguez / budget: US $7,000.
     $7,000 is surely a fraction of the cost of a Hollywood marketing
campaign in mid-sized city.  For a Hollywood seven grand you may be
able to rent cameras for an hour but you would not be able to pay for
their insurance.  Seven grand worth of film can be shot and dumped in a
few minutes.  You could not afford Arnold Schwarzenegger for any length
of time.
     Likely, you also would not have John McTiernan or even John Woo
helming your production, but you would have twenty-four-year old Robert
Rodriguez.  And if you are Rodriguez, you can hire yourself for nothing
and work between university semesters, beg for cameras, probably
collect a cast of actors willing to work for nothing or a percentage,
and *then* somehow find studio time for editing.  Your $7,000 would go
a far longer way in Mexico than in Hollywood, but not a lot more.
     EL MARIACHI is not a great film, but it is a decent action/comedy
in the mold of many Hollywood styled guns and laughs films that have
come to pervade the film industries of many other countries.  The
bustling Hong Kong and Indian film industries each boast output far in
excess of the U.S. industry and with budgets likely a third of the
average U.S. film budget for their most expensive action blockbusters.
Many, like EL MARIACHI will have come through on shoestring budgets
with very decent, even big budget effects.
     It took nearly a decade for the fame of John Woo to come through
to the U.S., a director of action films with a distinctive American
flavour but who out-does most Americans in dazzle and stunts.  On the
American doorstep, does the Mexican industry offer a similar boomerang
effect?  EL MARIACHI is not HARDBOILED by any means, but it is a
good example of how, in many places, a low budget means very little if
off-set by energy and vision.  Gussied up and given a recognizably
Hollywood cast, EL MARIACHI becomes a Van Damme movie or even
RESERVOIR DOGS, another example of how a small budget (though not
$7,000!) can mean very little within the U.S.
     The vision in EL MARIACHI is a familiar one with a twist just as
its character is American put on a Mexican twist.  It's a case of
mistaken identity: a mariachi player arrives in a town looking for work
at the same time as a vengeful hitman returns looking for the yanqui
crime boss who put him in jail.  Both wear black and carry guitar
cases.  But in the hitman's case is an arsenal; the mariachi has his
guitar.
     You can figure out the rest but it must be said that EL MARIACHI
is witty and well plotted.  The action is not complex, but comparable
with many American films.  There is an obligatory body count but in its
heart EL MARIACHI is a comedy that is well worth the time.
     EL MARIACHI's billing as an "homage to the spaghetti western" is
an irony that can't be missed.  "Spaghetti westerns" were, in the 60s
and 70s, examples of Italian directors like Sergio Leone outworking an
American mythos better than Americans when the dominant American
cinemacultural product was the western.  In the 80s, the dominant
American product has had to be the action-adventure (sourced, of
course, from the westerns).
     At the height of the action)adventure dubbed copies of RAMBO:
FIRST BLOOD PART III played to packed houses in Beirut.  While no film
would likely bill themselves as homages "to the 80s Rambo pictures," it
seems clear that the boomerang for this American product is coming back
with a vengeance.  Later this year, John Woo will be releasing HARD
TARGET starring Jean Claude Van Damme.  Is this any different than
Sergio Leone bringing back Clint Eastwood in the "Man With No Name"
pictures?
     None of this is to say that what are coming back are photocopies.
To do that would be to enter into the dangerous America vs. Asia
stereotypical battles which have come to litter the political arena.
Here we are speaking of culture and cultural spin.  The films that come
back may have been sourced in American "flavour" but they return with
decidedly different and original spins.
     While in EL MARIACHI we have a scene with the Mariachi in black
clothes walking down the street with a MAC-10 slung over his shoulder
in a seeming carbon of the TERMINATOR, Arnold was never carrying a
guitar case in the other hand, nor did he ever sing love songs while
under threat of castration.  The enemies in EL MARIACHI are the
gringos, not the dark skinned enemies of Rambo and the code of conduct
is decidedly latin.
     Finally, the most important spin that has come back with this
boomerang is a perspective on the cost of films.  Returning to what I
was said at the beginning, if we are to regard film budgets as an
expression of their value, then to see quality films returning with
budgets a fraction of the cost of their American cousins is to realize
that American costs and benefits have polarized.  The budget has taken
on an immense portion of the marquee in the U.S., where elsewhere the
cost is still a means, not a justification.

Author
Craig Good
     I'm truly sorry I don't have time to compose a full-fledged review
of EL MARIACHI, but I want to at least spread some good buzz about
the movie.  By now everybody knows that it was shot for $7,000 and has
launched the first-time director's Hollywood career.
     EL MARIACHI is a simple action story, well-told and with well-
drawn characters. It has a fresh appeal which struck me as BLOOD SIMPLE
meets THE OUTLAW--JOSEY WALES meets THE GODS MUST BE CRAZY. It seems to
stand as a shining example of how a small budget can be a help, and not
a hindrance, to a film maker.
     Were I to offer a Hollywood job to this film maker, it would
probably be as an editor. It's not that his directing isn't natural and
assured, but I think it's the cutting that really makes EL MARIACHI.
The film also captures very faithfully the look and feel of a small
Mexican town. This is clearly an insider's view, and not some Art
Director's idea of what Mexico might look like. This is the real
thing.
     The English subtitles are plenty good enough for any semi-literate
American to be able to enjoy the film, but if you happen to understand
Spanish you'll enjoy another level of clever (but not overly-clever)
dialogue. If you think you'd enjoy a simple, fresh change of pace film
with no actors you can recognize, go out of your way to catch EL
MARIACHI.

Author
Pedro Sena
Some films are not great, but they display a desire to do well, and the
detail that could make them great.  El Mariachi, is nicely done, with no
budget to speak off ( hell, a Hollywood meal for a week for a star would
cost at least twice the amount this film cost... ), but its ability to
dedicate its style, and well designed continuity of the director, make this
film work from the very beginning.
It is a bit of a comedy, so it seems at first, but slowly works its way into
a serious film.  The new visitor in town gets mixed up by accident with a
drug dealer, and the accidental mis-match almost  costs him his life were it
not for his instincts and ability to
walk out of trouble.  In the process he befriends a young lady who has been
kept in business by a rival drug lord just so he can not only get to her,
but keep his eyes on his rival.  The young mariachi is trying to find a job
just playing his guitar and singing... and the gun toting drug dealer
carries a guitar case with a few guns to take care of his business.
While many films take a lot of money to get everything done, this is the
quintessential student film, if you will, in that the director is also the
writer, and the cinematographer.  Were he at UCLA, or at the USC film
school, he would get a heck of a passing grade just for getting his project
done ( who cares about the other grades when the  competition alone would
prevent it from getting done...!!! ) and delivered.  It is an excellent
first start, and shows a promising director in the works. He deserves a
budget and a studio to back him for a few films.
The film itself is not great.... it is just there, and consistent.  It isn't
slick.... just filmed.  It has no great looking actresses or dolls,  just
real women.... it doesn't have a slick soundtrack.... just a few songs  on
the guitar of the lead actor.  What else does one want from a film...???
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1994
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Carlos Gallardo, Consuelo Gomez, Peter Marquardt,
           Reinol Martinez
Director:  Robert Rodriguez
Producers:  Robert Rodriguez and Carlos Gallardo
Screenplay:  Robert Rodriguez
Released by Columbia Pictures
Spanish with English Subtitles
     The title character of EL MARIACHI is the mariachi (Carlos
Gallardo), an itinerant musician who goes from town to town in Mexico
looking for a new place to play his music.  Dressed in black and
carrying his guitar in a case, he inquires at various bars and
restaurants if they will hire him.  Unfortunately for the mariachi,
Azul (Reinol Martinez) has just broken out of prison and is on his way
to kill crime boss Roco (Peter Marquardt).  No one except Roco has seen
Azul, so the description of the escaped criminal is sparse: he dresses
in black and carries a guitar case (which, instead of containing a
musical instrument, has a selection of knives and guns).  An obvious
case of mistaken identity arises as Roco's thugs think the mariachi is
Azul.  Suddenly, the simple musician is on the run from men trying to
gun him down.  Fortunately for the mariachi, he finds a sympathetic ear
in the person of Domino (Consuelo Gomez), but her introduction into his
life only adds new and previously unforeseen complications.
     EL MARIACHI is the $7000 wonder.  For less money than many
television commercials are budgeted at, Robert Rodriguez took his crew
down to Mexico and filmed a tightly-gripping, eminently entertaining
thriller that outdoes most of what Hollywood is putting out today at
costs three orders of magnitude greater.  This is proof positive, if
any be needed, that film quality should not be measured by the amount
of money put into a production.
     EL MARIACHI is an old-fashioned thriller based on a case of
mistaken identity.  It's the kind of film that Humphrey Bogart might
have been at home in.  The only noticeable difference between this
movie and something produced in the 1940s is the level of graphic
violence.  Rodriguez doesn't pull any punches when it comes to showing
people getting shot.  There's enough blood and gore in this film to
earn it an R rating.
     The script is clever, and, although the plot occasionally relies
upon contrivances, these instances are no more frequent or glaring than
in most other modern action films.  They are perhaps more noticeable in
EL MARIACHI because of the consistently high quality of the writing.
     Thrillers are expected to deliver a lot of pulse-pounding action,
and EL MARIACHI complies without difficulty.  The elements of
exploitation in this film, while present, are kept to a minimum - on
Rodriguez' budget, anything else would have been impossible.  For the
most part, the characters are not three-dimensional, but they have
enough quirks to give them more personality than the average stock
action film creation.  Numerous moments of irony and humor keep the
movie from descending too deeply into grimness.
     On only a few occasions is it obvious that Rodriguez is a novice
director working on a limited budget.  For the most part, EL MARIACHI
appears like a professional film produced for a sizable amount of
money.  It doesn't look Hollywood - the subtitles and the cleverness of
the script make that much obvious - but neither does it look like the
$7000 creation of a film student.
     The actors, all of them complete unknowns (and friends of
Rodriguez), have some ability, especially Consuelo Gomez.  But whether
they make another film appearance or not, we can only look forward with
baited breath for the director's next project.  If he can do as much,
or more, with a bigger budget (Columbia has signed him to a contract),
we may be in for a real treat.  Until then, EL MARIACHI is an excellent
introduction to the talent of Robert Rodriguez, and a truly remarkable
film in its own right.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
