Title
Review for Bounce (2000)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Chad Polenz
Did you notice Hollywood doesn't really make romances anymore? Movies today 
are rarely centered around a man and woman who meet, fall in love, have their 
share of problems and either break up or stay together forever. That only 
tends to happen in "period pieces" or as sub-plots in movies about other 
subjects. "Bounce" is the first movie to come along in a while that's 
actually set in the present day, is about real people really falling for each 
other. The problem is there's a secret between them, it's the film's niche 
but it becomes so overbearing at times the romance becomes virtually 
unbelievable. 
Ben Affleck and Gwyneth Paltrow star here as Buddy Amaral and Abby Janello. 
They're good friends in real life and each has played romantic leads in other 
movies about modern-day star-crossed lovers. They come together here in a 
rather unusual way and once they get together they're immediately locked into 
a close-knit relationship. 
The film tells the story of how Buddy met Abby - through a traumatic situation
that some might pin on fate but others might attribute to luck but the 
most cynical will say randomness has nothing to do with it. 
Buddy is a Los Angeles-based advertising exec stuck at O'Hare airport in 
Chicago waiting for his flight to get clearance to take off in the snowy 
weather. While waiting in an airport bar he picks up a hot chick named Mimi 
(Natasha Henstridge) and befriends a man named Greg. The three converse as if 
they were old friends. Buddy is funny and charming and when he hears Greg 
talk about how he wishes he could get home to L.A. earlier Buddy gives him 
his plane ticket and manages to convince the airline's ticket checker to let 
him on no problem (which is a serious FAA violation in case you didn't know - 
I didn't). That plane crashes. Buddy feels a little relieved he wasn't on 
that flight and a little sorry Greg had to die but it bounces off his thick 
shell quite easily. Meanwhile we cut back to L.A.and meet Greg's wife Abby 
who is put through an emotional hell because she was certain Greg wasn't on 
that flight and shouldn't have been. 
I'd seen the preview for "Bounce" at least 20 times this summer and it 
portrayed the love affair between Buddy and Abby as being purely chance. 
However, the actual screenplay here is much different and I think I have to 
take the more cynical route in discussing how Buddy and Abby meet and fall in 
love. 
Buddy enters re-hab for three months and upon his release he tracks down 
Greg's family. He stalks Abby for a day and pretends to be an interested 
buyer in the property she's showing (Abby's a real estate agent), but is so 
smitten by her beauty he can't bring himself to tell the truth and pursues 
her as he would any other woman. Through a series of pretty quirky and 
somewhat humour events the two flirt, have a lot of awkward pauses, go on one 
date, almost decide to give up on each other, but then quickly realize they 
probably are perfect for each other and suddenly fall into a very serious 
relationship. 
There's really no sub-plots going on throughout this movie. The screenplay is 
focused mainly on Buddy and his battle with his inner demons over whether he 
should tell Abby he's responsible for her husband's death. He's also a 
recovering alcoholic and there's a few scenes of drama along those lines. Not 
surprisingly Buddy's assistant is a young gay man who's also a recovering 
drunk and gives him the kick in the pants and makes for the obligatory gay 
one-liners we've come to expect in such movies (but which are funnier on 
television). 
For the most part "Bounce" works as a fine dramedy. It's constantly on the 
edge between super-serious drama and all-out melodrama. Let's face it, under 
these circumstances can this story really be told in a believable, realistic 
manner? 
Writer/director Don Roos does his best to pull it off but he only partially 
succeeds. The film is very reminiscent of another Ben Affleck romantic 
dramedy, "Chasing Amy." The romance between Buddy and Abby is pretty much 
plugged-in and implied through a lot of musical montages and cute scenes of 
Buddy having to meet Abby's friends and relatives and relate to her two young 
boys. Paltrow's screen time is surprisingly short compared to Affleck's, and 
most of what she does on film is look pretty, try hard not to cry, and spout 
a lot of dramatic cliches. 
The last act of the film takes a turn for the worst in all ways, for both the 
characters and the movie itself. It becomes a rollercoaster of emotional 
battles and thus many tear-jerking scenes ensue. I have no problem with drama 
but "Bounce" dabbles with melodrama and tries to play it off as nothing and 
it doesn't work. The story is very predictable when things get so dramatic so 
you feel you're being pandered to than watching an authentic drama. 
"Bounce" might have worked a lot better if it had a different hook. That 
Buddy and Abby are able to get together despite the fact he's indirectly 
responsible for her husband's death is an acceptable premise. The way the 
story is told just doesn't convey that as plausible. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-760A-3D19FAA5-3A22AADD-prod6 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Michael Redman
Paltrow, Affleck bounce...but not very high
A majority of people probably begin affairs with little white lies. Their
personal history ("I've never done this before") and current status ("Of
course they're real") are exaggerated slightly to create a more positive
face. Praise ("You're the best I've ever been with") tends towards the hyperbolic.
Some falsehoods are more serious ("That was someone else with the same name
in the newspaper") and some downright dangerous ("No, I'm not psychotic").
If the relationship progresses there comes a time when the honesty must out
and intense back-peddling takes place ("Well, yes, I am sorta married, but
I'm getting divorced soon, I promise"). The more monumental the deception,
the higher the level of guilt and the greater the risk in both telling the
truth and keeping the secret. Explaining that "I'm the man who caused your
husband's death and I've been lying to you ever since we met" is probably a
potential deal-breaker.
Buddy (Ben Affleck) faces such a dilemma when he falls for the widow of the
man he unintentionally doomed.
In a snowed-in airport bar, the ad exec sits with two strangers awaiting
news of their delayed flights. Greg (Tony Goldwyn) wants to get home to his
family. Buddy wants to score a homer with Mimi (Natasha Henstridge), their
attractive companion. When Mimi hints heavily that she wouldn't be opposed
to sharing her hotel room, Buddy gives his rescheduled flight ticket to Greg.
Sex with a perfect stranger saves Buddy's life. The plane crashes with no survivors.
Understandably shaken by his close brush, Buddy hits the bottle for a year.
As part of the 12-step recovery program, he has to make amends to people he
has wronged and looks up Greg's widow Abby (Gwyneth Paltrow).
He is unable to admit who he is and lies to her, tossing a big real estate
deal her way trying to relieve some of his guilt for destroying her life.
She lies to him ("I'm divorced") so she doesn't appear pathetic.
Ignoring all the danger signs (guilt-ridden man wants to rescue wounded
woman so he can make himself feel better) and this being a movie, their lies
lead to -- you guessed it -- true love. The film follows the tried but true
formula. He falls for her and can't bring himself to confess because it
would destroy their relationship. Does she find out? Do they break up? Can
they get back together? You've seen this all before.
It takes forever for Abby learn the truth. Since you know it's going to
happen, every scene poses the question. Is he going to tell her now? How
about now? Maybe now? Better to get it done with and on with the story.
Just because the outcome of every plot element is known after the first five
minutes doesn't necessarily mean you won't enjoy the film. But it does mean
that characterization and chemistry have to work overtime. Here there is
good news and bad news.
Paltrow does a credible job portraying a real woman with real concerns:
single motherhood, guilt over dishonoring her dead husband's memory.
Affleck's journey from wise-cracking rogue to caring lover and father figure
by way of demon rum and AA is an interesting premise but not very
convincing. His character is too over-romanticized to be very believable.
The sparks between them are the linchpin of the film but there is no blazing
fire. The audience's investment in Abby's decision whether she can spend the
rest of her life with a man who reminds her of her dead husband every time
she looks at him requires that we understand her overwhelming desire to do
so. That passion is never on the screen. The two feel shielded from letting
us see any deep emotions.
A different relationship that gets very little screen time is much more
engaging. Buddy's caustic gay assistant  and fellow AA member (Johnny
Galecki) is the liveliest character in the film and has the best lines. A
more interesting story would have been about those two. Instead they go from
enemies to friends invisibly.
Director Don Roos scored a major hit with his quirky "The Opposite Of Sex"
but this mainstream attempt is just so-so. The final few minutes are
absolutely atrocious.
My biggest gripe with this film is product placement. A couple of IMacs in
the background are acceptable, but six-foot tall Coke cans (regular, diet,
caffeine-free -- take your choice) repeatedly shoved in our faces is an
insult. One also has to wonder how much Paltrow's breasts paid for their
prominent screen placement.
(Michael Redman has written this column for a very long time but he has
never lied to make himself look better at the beginning of a relationship.
To the best of his knowledge. Probably. Email entertaining falsehoods to redman@bluemarble.net.)
[This appeared in the 11/23/2000 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bluemarble.net.]

Author
Jonathan F Richards
One of the most enduring sub-genres of the romantic movie is the one 
where the relationship is entered into by one of the parties under false 
pretenses, and a secret hangs over the proceedings like a dark cloud 
which is going to have to flash some lightning and rumble some thunder 
and get everybody wet before the skies clear and the lovers kiss and 
make up. Often it's a bet the guy's made that he can woo and win (or 
these days, bed) the girl. Sometimes it's something darker and more 
personal, as in this year's "Return to Me", where Minnie Driver keeps 
putting off telling David Duchovny that she's wearing his late wife's 
heart.20
Writer/director Don Roos, the indie auteur of the quirky "The Opposite 
of Sex", has chosen to fly these friendly skies in his second outing, a 
formulaic weeper that waffles between clever charm and awkward writing 
and is largely rescued by its two stars, Gwyneth Paltrow and Ben 
Affleck. Their job is made more difficult by some contrived situations, 
a few tin-eared speeches, and an end game with the subtlety of a rubber 
boat full of explosives. But these two have the talent, appeal, and 
chemistry (reinforced by real-life tabloid gossip) to almost pull it 
off.
It is a rule of movies that if somebody gives you his seat on a plane, 
that plane will surely go down, a rule Tony Goldwyn would have done well 
to brush up on. He doesn't, the plane does, and the result is a grieving 
widow in L.A., and a guilt-ridden ad exec, the guy who gave up the seat, 
watching the news in the Chicago airport hotel with a shapely stranded 
fellow traveler.
The air disaster sends Buddy Amaral (Affleck) into a downward spiral of 
alcoholism. He's part owner of "the hottest little ad agency on the 
coast," for whom he's just closed a contract with Infinity Airlines 
before their plane crashes. (Roos shows a weakness for meaningful names 
- Amaral is amoral, and infinity is just where the passengers go.) Heavy 
drinking leads Buddy into some inappropriate behavior vis-vis the 
client, and his partner/boss (Joe Morton) steers him into a rehab 
clinic.
When he gets out, it's been a year since the crash, and in running over 
his 12-step AA manual he is struck by #9, which enjoins him to make 
amends wherever possible. So he looks up the widow Abby (Paltrow) to see 
if there isn't something he can do for her, and it turns out there is. 
They meet cute, if you can find cuteness in the jaws of an attack 
Rottweiler, and he manages to throw some real estate business her way. 
(The dog's name is also Buddy, which raises complications, but none as 
great as those inherent in the name itself: a line like "What is it you 
want, Buddy?" hits the ear differently than it would if his name were, 
say, Howard.)
The movie takes pains to show the pains he takes not to get involved 
with her after his 9th step intervention, but the centrifugal force of 
true love is too strong. And soon we're in a Situation. Roos handles it 
well, with a slick romanticism reminiscent of the golden days of 
Hollywood when romantic clichE9s had a good name, when stars like Grant =
and Stanwyck and Stewart and Davis stamped their indelible personae on 
contrived smiling-through-the-tears material. Affleck and Paltrow are up 
to that standard. He makes a credible transition from glib, shallow jerk 
to sensitive male, and she handles her role with remarkable subtlety, 
rejecting easy sympathy while managing to show an irresistible 
vulnerability. It's a beautiful performance that confirms her 
Oscar-winning talents.
Movies are easier to begin than to end, but there's no excuse for the 
depths to which this one sinks in its plot-resolving scene, which 
involves courtroom testimony and Court TV. There have been problem 
moments before in the story, but after this clunker, even the winning 
grace of the actors can't keep it aloft, and the worn places begin to 
show like threadbare patches of carpet when the furniture is moved. 
There is also a sense of things inserted as plot devices, and of parts 
of characters and situations that may have been jettisoned to keep the 
bounces a little more buoyant.20
Still, for most of its modest length "Bounce" lopes along with the 
smooth, easy ride of a polished genre picture. On the whole Roos is 
better at the high points - when he goes for the tear ducts he falls a 
little short. The movie benefits from a solid supporting cast. Caroline 
Aaron is all knowing sympathy as Abby's best friend, the usually 
villainous Tony Goldwyn has a chance here to show his nice side, and the 
always-welcome Joe Morton is gruff but caring. Johnny Galecki as Buddy's 
brash recovering alcoholic gay assistant almost steals the show, except 
that his alcoholism and gayness, inserted as if meaningful, are never 
revisited.20
When the shoe falls, as it must, just before Buddy summons the courage 
to confess his secret, it falls with the kind of timing God leaves to 
screenwriters. But after all, it is a movie; and for all its failings, 
it's one that almost rises above pleasant to achieve the level of good.20

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BOUNCE (director/writer: Don Roos; cinematographer: Robert Elswit;
editor: David Codron; cast: Gwyneth Paltrow (Abby Janello), Ben Affleck
(Buddy Amaral), Alex D. Linz (Scott Janello) David Dorfman (Joey
Janello), Natasha Henstridge (Mimi), Tony Goldwyn (Greg Janello),
Jennifer Grey (Mrs. Janice Guererro), Joe Morton (Jim), David Paymer
(Prosecution Lawyer), Caroline Aaron (Donna, Abby's Friend), Johnny
Galecki (Seth, Buddy's assistant); Runtime: 105; Miramax Films; 2000)
"Bounce" had some...well, bounce, to its moralistic romantic tale, as it
sets up a formulaic dilemma for a couple who fall in love and have to
face their own private demons. Don Roos ("The Opposite of Sex"), the
director-screenwriter, has come up with a smart script and lets his
adult stars act like real adults do and is not ashamed of the glossy
film becoming a tearjerker, and when the romance story tugs shamelessly
at my heart it feels good because there is a heartfelt rhythm in this
film that allowed me to clearly see what the troubled couple is feeling
without it seeming to be contrived, even though it is contrived. In
fact, the film is thoroughly engrossing and well-crafted until the
closing scenes, where some speeches are made to clear the air, which
seemed totally unnecessary. What helped carry the film through such
contrived spots, was the real-life romantic couple who star in the film,
Ben Affleck and Gwyneth Paltrow, playing two hurt souls who don't expect
to fall in love but do. Ben being a smug, womanizing ad executive and
Gwyneth, a young widow not knowing how to bounce back from the loss of
her husband in a plane crash. They had great chemistry onscreen, and
Paltrow in particular, seemed to make the story appealing and credible.
In the Hollywood tradition of such love stories, it seemed easy for the
audience to root for them to get together and make the romance work. The
only thing is, that the film is a little tougher than how most
mainstream films do romances but is not edgy enough to be an art film,
so it falls into the category of being not one or the other type of
film, which might cause it to be ignored by both audiences.
Waiting out a snowstorm at a bar at Chicago's O'Hare Airport, Buddy
Amaral (Affleck)
casually converses with writer Greg Janello (Tony Goldwyn) and a pretty
blonde businesswoman Mimi (Natasha Henstridge), and shoots a video of
the three of them horsing around. Greg voluntarily bumped himself from
an L.A.-bound flight in order to get two free round-trip tickets to
anywhere in the U.S. plus $200 and feels guilty about being so cheap and
letting down his family by not going home at once. Mimi has been given a
free hotel room because her flight was canceled, and when Buddy sees her
flashing the room coupon as a come on, he quickly decides to give his
Los Angeles ticket to Greg and spend the night with Mimi instead. Greg
takes the ticket because he is anxious to get back to his wife and two
young sons and do some pre-Christmas things with them, though feeling
nervous about taking the ticket, he is, at least, relieved of his guilty
feelings he was plagued by.
The plane crashes in Kansas, and the story goes into much detail of the
passenger mix-up, of the airline first saying he is not aboard and then
reversing themselves. Greg's wife Abby (Paltrow), not knowing if he was
on the flight, becomes devastated when she finds out that he was killed
in the crash.
The crash has a great affect on Buddy also, as he goes through a
personality transformation from being a slick playboy-type, to someone
who becomes overloaded with guilt and sensitivity, which makes his
alcohol problem more severe and he freaks out when drunk during an award
ceremony that his ad company wins for doing this bathetic commercial for
the airline to express bereavement to the families for the loved ones
they lost.
A year passes, as he goes through an alcohol rehab program and returns
to work, but gets transferred to a different Southern California
location, which happens to be where Greg's wife lives. He still feels
guilty for not dying and has a need to meet Abby to see if she's OK and
make amends to her as part of his A.A. 12 step program, but does not
have enough nerve to tell her that he was the one who switched tickets
with her hubby. She's going through her own guilt-trip and also lies to
him by telling him she's divorced. When he feels sorry for her, seeing
how she's a neophyte in the real estate business, he arranges to throw
her a big bone, as he connives his boss (Morton) into letting her sell
him the more spacious building his company needs to move its operations
to, thereby she unexpectedly gets a tremendous commission.
They both seem tentative about the attraction they have for each other,
afraid of entering a relationship, but he is willing to forget about
her, glad that he made amends by helping her out materially. But she
suddenly shows up at his workplace with two tickets to see a Dodgers
game, with the excuse that she wants to thank him for what he did. She
also comes clean and admits she lied about being divorced, but he still
needs more time to get his secret off his chest. They finally close
their romantic deal and sleep together, and he then shows he's a good
guy and a changed person by bonding with the kids. Sex is not presented
as the prize here, as much as a serious and meaningful relationship is.
It has probably been ages since that theme was tried as seriously as it
was in this mainstream film, and that just might be the most refreshing
thing about the film.
But he waits too long to tell her that he's the one who gave her husband
the ticket on the ill-fated flight, as she finds out in a surprising way
about it and can't forgive him. Her decision to break the relationship
causes anguish to both of them, as they try to find out what it is they
want and how they really feel. Since Paltrow is the better actor, she
mops up the screen in these scenes of anguish and is convincing as
someone who has been damaged and is afraid of getting hurt again.
Affleck is good as an actor conveying someone who is arrogant and
shallow and full of false bravado, but is not convincing as someone who
has been down for the count and is bouncing back as a changed man. His
sudden change to the sensitive-type seemed artificial, leaving questions
about what he was doing in the first place in meeting her, if he
couldn't tell her that he knew her husband. It left me wondering, how
sensitive of a person could he really have become, if he could only help
her materially and not understand that his drinking masked deeper
problems he had in his character, such as lying! What I never quite
understood, is why he has to make amends to her, since he had nothing to
do with the accident and was actually helping her husband out by giving
him the free ticket. He might have hurt others during his callow period,
but I can't see how he purposely hurt Abby and her husband.
But the film had enough of a realistic romance under its belt to not be
buried for dead with its contrivances. In additition it had some pretty
good players in supporting roles. Joe Morton always gives a fine
performance, and here as the sturdy, no-nonsense businessman he grounds
the film in some needed reality. Johnny Galecki is around for some
levity and as the gay assistant to Affleck who fires away at his boss,
not afraid to confront him with opposition in the midst of his moral
dilemma. Caroline Aaron has the cardboard role as Abby's supportive
friend, but she's not intrusive and is pleasant in that role. Alex D.
Linz and David Dorfman are perfect as Abby's kids, trying to get a
handle on Affleck and recover themselves from not having a father
around, while receiving loving care from their harried mother. Jennifer
Grey is the airline rep who covers up for him when he switches tickets
with Greg and is believable in her small part.
This modest production scored with me. And if it didn't have that phony
civil court scene at the end, with Affleck forced to act in such a
disingenuously apologetic manner, the film would have been much better.
But I was glad to be taken in by what I was seeing onscreen, that is an
adult romantic film, with the adults interested in having a real
relationship. I'm so conditioned by now, that I think only foreign films
or art house films operate that way.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Don Roos.
Cast: Ben Affleck, Gwyneth Paltrow, Johnny Galecki, Caroline Aaron, Joe 
Morton, Natasha Henstridge, Tony Goldwyn, Jennifer Grey, Alex D. Linz, David 
Paymer.
2000 - 106 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for sexual situations and profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, November 18, 2000.
Director Don Roos' 1998 debut "The Opposite of Sex" was such an acid-tongued, 
wittily-scripted black comedy that there was no doubt in my mind his 
sophomore effort, whatever it may be, would be anything less than smart and 
confidently made. "Bounce" fulfills both of these things and goes a step 
forward to, as in "The Opposite of Sex," find the poignancy and truth that is 
required in any intimate relationship. Aided by a memorable supporting cast, 
and two couldn't-be-better performances from the film's leads, Gwyneth 
Paltrow and Ben Affleck, "Bounce" is the sort of romance that doesn't come 
around too often--intelligent without being saccharine, heartfelt without 
being condescending.
With the snow heavily falling outside, almost all planes have been canceled 
at Chicago's O'Hare Airport. Passing the time in an airport bar, advertising 
executive Buddy Amaral (Ben Affleck), headed for his home in Los Angeles, has 
met up with the beautiful Mimi (Natasha Henstridge), going to Dallas, and 
kind businessman Greg (Tony Goldwyn) who desperately wants to get home to his 
wife and children. When Mimi makes it clear that she would like Buddy to 
spend the night with her, he gives his ticket to Greg (who is also headed for 
LA, but on a later flight), and slyly convinces the flight attendant at the 
door (Jennifer Grey), who has an on-again-off-again crush on buddy, to do so. 
When the plane crashes, killing everyone on board, Buddy (1) can't believe he 
was going to be on that flight, and (2) crushed that he more or less sent 
this family man off to die while he could have yet another one-night-stand.
Switch forward one year, Buddy is now a newly recovered alcoholic who has 
just checked out of the local Drug and Alcohol Recovery Center and is eager 
to get back to work. In an effort to come to terms with his insecurities and 
make amends, Buddy tracks down Greg's wife, real estate agent Abby Janello 
(Gwyneth Paltrow), and attempts to give her a big sale on a patch of property 
his ad company wants to buy. With Abby, at first, telling Buddy that she is 
merely divorced, and without Buddy having the guts to disclose his true 
identity with her, they unexpectedly click and begin to fall for one another.
In lesser hands, "Bounce" would be a romantic drama that is predictable and 
obvious every step of the way, offering nothing new in the way of plot 
developments or character motivation. But unlike so many movie romances, 
"Bounce," scripted by Roos, is based in the scary world of reality, where not 
everything always turns out as you'd expect, and where the characters seem to 
be real people, rather than pawns whose only purpose is to fall in love with 
a mawkish love ballad overscoring each scene. Its expertise in depicting 
everyday life while setting up an affecting romance is impressive and all too 
rare in movies nowadays.
Reminiscent in many ways with 1999's Harrison Ford-Kristin Scott Thomas drama 
"Random Hearts," which had virtually the same setup, "Bounce" is infinitely 
more successful because it isn't afraid to show its heart, while "Random 
Hearts," ironically, was cold and emotionally unfeeling. Buddy and Abby are 
both flawed, yet sympathetic people whom we care about and hope get together, 
despite the sticky situation they are in. 
Since his Oscar win for 1997's "Good Will Hunting," Ben Affleck has 
skyrocketed to the top of the Hollywood A-list, but in doing so, has chosen 
far too many duds and not enough financial successes. Either appearing in 
brainless thrillers like 2000's "Reindeer Games" or trashy blockbusters like 
1998's "Armageddon," Affleck has finally returned to the type of emotionally 
centered motion picture he exceeds in.  Affleck may have the build to be an 
action star, but his sweet-natured features and puppy dog eyes make him far 
more qualified for character roles that exploit his acting talent, rather 
than muscles.  Here, he has a tough assignment--someone that has made many 
mistakes in his past and a nasty bout with alcoholism, but is struggling 
every day to put his life back together and be the best that he can be. This 
is arguably Affleck's most powerful and distinguished work, to date.
His match in every way, Gwyneth Paltrow (1999's "The Talented Mr. Ripley") 
has proven herself time and time again that she is an extraordinary talent 
who has a string of successful films and a Best Actress Oscar statuette (for 
1998's "Shakespeare in Love") to show for it. Fearless in her portrayal of an 
average, working-class mother with two young children, Paltrow is fearless in 
the way she downplays her physical beauty here, and in doing so, is all the 
more radiant. Every performance choice that Affleck and Paltrow make--every 
facial expression and line-reading--rings with a resounding honesty that is 
inordinately refreshing to hear.
Roos' strongest asset, however, lies in the sharp dialogue he pens. Every 
word counts, and in making what the people say so memorable, has created 
quite a few good supporting roles, helped along by strong performances from 
the rest of its cast. With just a few scenes each, such top-flight actors as 
Natasha Henstridge (2000's "The Whole Nine Yards"), Tony Goldwyn (1990's 
"Ghost"), and Jennifer Grey (1987's "Dirty Dancing") make a lasting 
impression that stays with you throughout. Of special notice is Johnny 
Galecki (who appeared in Roos' "The Opposite of Sex"), as Buddy's confidante 
and gay assistant, who is so understated and effective that I would love to 
have seen a whole movie made about his immensely likable and naturalistic 
character.
Quietly emphatic, "Bounce" is never exactly earthshaking, but exactly the 
type of motion picture that will have its work cut out for it if it plans on 
making money. With so many expensive holiday movies being released now, a 
low-key drama about real people in real relationships is something that not 
many people will be attracted to, which is a shame. On its side are the 
wonderful turns by Ben Affleck and Gwyneth Paltrow, who have enough chemistry 
to light up the darkness in a giant movie theater. "Bounce" is a truly 
worthwhile and appealing entertainment that is certainly worth a look, and 
reestablishes what a fine filmmaker director Don Roos is becoming.
     - Copyright 2000 by Dustin Putman
       Http://www.atnzone.com
       Http://www.young-hollywood.com
       Reviews by Dustin 
Putman - Http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman

Author
Laura Clifford
Hot shot ad exec Buddy Amaral (Ben Affleck) gives up his seat on a plane to 
another man desperate to get home in order to take advantage of the weather
related layover with the pretty young woman he's just met in the airport bar.
He doesn't realize he's just saved his life and doomed that of another.  
One bad year later, encouraged by his assistant (Johnny Galecki, "I Know What
You Did Last Summer") to follow the teachings of AAA, Buddy arranges to meet 
the man's widow, Abby Janello (Gwyneth Paltrow), although he doesn't tell her 
about their connection.  They fall in love, but what will Abby do when she 
finds out that fate had a helping hand?  The complexities of lies and love are 
explored in writer/director Don Roos' ("The Opposite of Sex") "Bounce."
"Bounce" is a well-written, solidly acted love story with a great marketting
hook built in due to the curiosity factor about the casting of former(?) 
lovers Ben Affleck and Gwyneth Paltrow.  Reportedly, this was a project which
Gwyneth proposed to Ben as a vehicle for him to stretch his acting muscles.
Affleck has plenty of opportunity to do so, as his character, Buddy Amaral,
changes dramatically during the course of the film's one year time frame.
Initially a callous, arrogant, womanizing jerk, Buddy sinks into alcoholic
depression, guilt and self pity before being shaken back into becoming a
more mature, self-exploring member of society.  Affleck acquits himself
well in this adult role, but is helped immeasurably by his costar.
Paltrow really gets into the skin of Abby Janello, the widowed mom of
two small boys who tells Buddy her husband divorced her because it feels
more like a choice than the fateful truth.  She's blustering through a 
new job in real estate while dealing with her childrens' abandonment anger
and her own guilt and bereavement.  She makes us feel the strength of
character that enables Abby to carry the staggering weight she's had to
assume.
Roos' script (he was the screenwriter for such diverse films as "Love
Field," "Single White Female," and "Boys on the Side" before writing and
directing "The Opposite of Sex") is smart because his characters are
believable and he presents life in all its multi-layered complexities.
Not only does Buddy have to live with the knowledge that he unwittingly
sent another man to his death, but Infinity Airlines happens to be his
big account.  He must deal with the 'We Remember' ad campaign which
he wins an award for even as he cries hypocrisy.  (His drunken 'acceptance'
speech/breakdown recalls James Mason's Oscar embarrassment in "A Star
Is Born.")  Roos also explores the nature of relationship lies.  While 
Buddy's may be bigger, Abby is also guilty.
Roos' and his actors make small moments count too - you can
feel the moment Buddy falls in love with Abby (he's been resisting getting 
romantically involved) when she jumps up from their diner table to trod
upon the toilet paper trailing from a young prom girl's shoe.
This small selfless gesture speaks volumes about Abby's character and
Affleck's gaze upon her softens and deepens.  Things get dicier as
Buddy shores himself up to tell Abby the truth, which she finds out
before he's able.  His collusion with an Infinity stewardess (Jennifer
Grey) to turn a blind eye to security rules on the night of the crash 
is another character defining moment.
Support is good with Johnny Galecki giving a tart turn as the fearless
office assistant who makes Buddy face his real self.  I liked this young
actor in TV's 'Roseanne' and its encouraging to see him nail a role in
a non-teen-slasher film.  Tony Goldwyn (who also appears in "The 6th Day,"
opening the same day as "Bounce") establishes his character of Abby's husband 
so well with such short screen time that we feel his presence throughout
the film.  The film also costars Joe Morton as Buddy's boss/partner, Natasha
Henstridge as Mimi, Buddy's airport pickup and Caroline Aaron as Abby's
friend and neighbor.
Technically the film is first rate with intimate lensing by Robert Elswit 
(all three Paul Thomas Anderson films).  Smart editting (David Codron, "The
Opposite of Sex") choices are made in that the films two major crashes (the
second allegorical) are not shown, making the aftermaths more earth
shattering.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BOUNCE (2000) **  Directed and written by Don Roos. Photography, 
Robert Elswit. Editing, David Codron.Production design, David Wasco, 
Music, Mychael Danna. Produced by Steve Golin, Michael Besman. Cast: 
Ben Affleck, (Buddy Amaral), Gwyneth Paltrow (Abby Janello),  Joe 
Morton  (Jim Weller),  Natasha Henstridge (Mimi) ,Tony Goldwyn (Greg 
Janello), Alex D.Linz (Scott Janello), David Dorfman (Joey Janello), 
Jennifer Gray (Janice Guerrero), Caroline Aaron (Donna Heisen) et 
al. A Miramax release.106 minutes. PG-13
In "The Opposite of Sex" (1998) his first film as both director and 
scenarist, writer Don Roos had composed an offbeat, blackish comedy. 
Now, in his second feature, he gets closer to the melodrama-for-TV 
genre, which is acceptable but even without commercials tends to 
become a yawner.
Los Angeles hotshot advertising executive Buddy (Affleck), having 
closed a great contract in Chicago, is flying home. As bad weather 
makes for delays and cancellations at O'Hare, Buddy kills time at an 
airport bar, garrulously chatting with two strangers: Greg (Goldwyn) 
who is anxious to get back to his wife and kids in L.A., and sexy 
businesswoman Mimi (Henstridge) who is going to Dallas.
Even in the age of AIDS, brief encounters are tempting. When, with 
the briefest economy of means, Mimi signals Buddy that a night of 
sex would be welcome, he generously gives his ticket to grateful 
Ben. But the Infiniti Airlines plane crashes.
The film, moving from fast sex to the old twist of mistaken 
identity, switches to the confusion of who's who and to the agony of 
Ben's wife Abby (Paltrow). Those sequences are effective. So are 
those of Buddy who is suffering from massive survivor's guilt.
Matters become colorfully dramatic. The airline, which happens to be 
a client of Buddy's firm, has it produce outrageously and phonily 
sentimental TV commercials which mourn  the crash victims - for PR 
reasons of course. The commercials are revolting, both to us and to 
Buddy whose personal involvement make him  aware of their crass 
nature for the first time in his career no doubt. With its 
additional mix of business and ad-people's lingo, the script scores 
good points as an expose. 
Alas, artificiality sets in. Buddy now drinks heavily. He attends a 
major do of publicity firms. He gets top honors for "his" airline 
commercial. His drunken acceptance speech points the finger at his 
trade. It's too much, too phonily Hollywood.
Buddy undergoes a cure for drinking. Cut to some time later. 
Permanently sober, Alcoholics Anonymous member Buddy is back in 
business.
He feels compelled to do something for Abby, the widow he has never 
met. Guess what? Right. She turns out to be attractive, appealing in 
the awkward, rookie ways she tries to sell real estate. She says she 
is a divorcee. Why?  That's what gave me the most food for thought. 
Is it a sign of the times that a divorced person is more appealing 
to the opposite gender than a widowed one?  Is there a curse on 
people whose spouses have died? And to think that the 1934 
Astaire-Rogers musical "The Gay Divorcee" came from the play "The 
Gay Divorce" but the Hollywood Code  demanded the change!
Abby has no idea of what connects Buddy with her husband's death. He 
keeps mum on that subject. But guess what again? The two are 
mutually attracted. Buddy gets her a big deal with his firm. He 
likes her is good with them --the old cliché. Their relationship 
escalates to love. They kiss at 50 minutes into the movie.
I hate to say it, but up to now, save for some sequences, the film 
has been dull. The twosome's episodes have been played in the lowest 
key of anything I remember on the screens of the AD. 2000. This 
would have been a virtue, had  the script managed to combine it with 
discreet psychological excitement. But even when at 70 minutes the 
big crisis comes, the movie stays dull.
The performances are, grosso modo, competent, even good. But the 
basic situations and developments remain artificial and 
unconvincing. Not the least aspect of this is a courtroom twist in 
which the stewardess who had originally accepted Ben's gift boarding 
pass and ticket is being chastised.
Next time a nice flight attendant breaks a rule in your favor, think 
twice before asking her or him.

Author
James Brundage
Great.  Here I am, writing a review of yet another cheesy, clichéd, Ben
Affleck romantic comedy in which I will probably be flamed by Affleck
fans, Paltrow fans, romantics, teens, and widows.  Yeah widows.  Why? 
Because Bounce is the latest in a string of contrived romantic comedies
to feature a man falling for a widow whom he helped to make a widow.
Yeah it's our old friends Bob and Harvey Weinstein, and this time
they're capitalizing on plane crashes, public relations companies,
alcoholics, and stalkers all in the same wicked stroke.  Here we have
Buddy Amaral (Affleck), just a good-old sweet talking ad rep who happens
to give a free first class plane ticket to a guy named Greg (Tony
Goldwyn) in order to sleep with Mimi (Natasha Henstridge really, who
wouldn't go for that)?  Of course, the plane crashes, and, wouldn't you
know it, he happens to rep the airlines.  So he does what any person
would: He drinks.
Cut to a year later, and Buddy's out of rehab and decides to take Step 8
(Contact those you have wronged and make amends) a little too seriously,
and he begins following the widowed Abby (Gwyneth Paltrow), the former
wife of Greg.  Finding out that she's a realtor, he fixes it so he rips
his own business off to the tune of $100,000, making herself a double
commission to boot.  Grateful as she is, she buys a couple of Dodgers
tickets and the two head down the eventless path towards true bliss.
If this plot thrills you, or makes you coo, "Ah, how sweet," then please
go see Bounce.  Now.  I'm sure you'll enjoy the paint-by-numbers
romance.  But let's face it, this is not exactly a great flick.  In
fact, it's downright terrible.  In fact, the idea of being romanced by
an alcoholic stalker named Buddy is a little more Silence of the Lambs
than Sliding Doors.  Writer-director Don Roos's last project, The
Opposite of Sex, was one of the most honest films about homosexual
stereotypes in recent years.  And I'll give him the benefit of the doubt
that he was trying to address issues of honesty and grieving, but this
time he crashes and burns like the plush 747 O'Hare red-eye that makes a
fiery farewell.
The performances are weak, the script couldn't hold up a toddler, and
the emotional value is slightly above that of a couple of Valium. 
Sorry, Gwen and Ben, but even that oh-so-cute non-romance we read about
at checkout lines daily can't salvage this wreck.
Director: Don Roos
Producer: Michael Bessman, Steve Golin
Writer: Don Roos
Starring: Ben Affleck, Gwyneth Paltrow, Natasha Henstridge, Jennifer
Grey, Tony Goldwyn, Joe Morton, David Paymer
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Scott Renshaw
     This just in: The sincere romantic drama is not extinct. Make no
mistake, it's on the endangered species list; in this oh-so-ironic era,
sincerity sightings have been akin to those blurry shots of the Loch Ness
Monster and hubcap-like flying saucers. You don't expect mainstream movies
to deliver romantic stories that seem grounded in genuine feelings, and
you certainly don't expect it from Don Roos, who wrote and directed the
attitude-laden THE OPPOSITE OF SEX. Nevertheless, here comes BOUNCE
offering that rarest of Y2K big-screen commodities: an adult relationship
with some real emotion.
     It starts out, however, like a typical high-concept trifle. Buddy
Amaral (Ben Affleck), a cocky advertising executive, is on his way back to
L.A. from a business trip to Chicago when he meets Greg Janello (Tony
Goldwyn) in an O'Hare Airport bar. Greg is trying to get home to his
family on a snowy night with plenty of flight delays; Buddy is looking for
an excuse to stay the night with a woman he just met. Doing his version of
a good deed, Buddy hands Greg his boarding pass for his L.A.-bound flight.
Tragically, that flight crashes, leaving Buddy with a serious case of
survivor guilt. After a bout with the bottle, Buddy decides that the
closure he needs involves checking in on Greg's widow Abby (Gwyneth
Paltrow) a year after the crash to make sure she's doing all right.
     Naturally, a relationship grows between Buddy and Abby, complicated
by Buddy's unwillingness to admit to Abby that he was the person
responsible for Greg being on the ill-fated plane. The surprise is that
the relationship never feels like a wacky contrivance. Roos is a smart
writer with a nose for full characterizations, and the story development
as a whole rarely feels manipulated for the convenience of the plot (see
below for notable exception). He steps back as a director from some of the
most potentially exploitative moments, and injects his sharp wit in places
where it works organically (particularly in the person of Johnny Galecki
as Buddy's assistant). Though it's a romance with some humor, it never
ignores the basic sadness in both Buddy and Abby's lives that gives
resonance to their connection. Though it's a romance with tragic elements,
it never wallows in the tragedy so much that it turns into melodrama.
     BOUNCE could have been a true gem of a film if the leads had been
more evenly matched as actors. Gwyneth Paltrow is one of those performers
who appears doomed to be scorned and underappreciated for her talent as
long as she is still young and attractive, but let's get this straight:
She's a damned good actress. In BOUNCE, she's once again wonderful,
capturing Abby's strength and vulnerability. Affleck, on the other hand,
still has some growing to do as an actor. He's not a bad actor, but he
still carries himself on screen primarily with a swagger, even when he's
supposed to be emotionally wounded. Buddy the charming cad is a role
Affleck can make appealing in his sleep. Buddy the tormented alcoholic,
huddled in a shower with a drink in his hand, is too heavy a character for
Affleck to clean-and-jerk.
     Roos takes an unfortunately large mis-step during BOUNCE's third act,
when he introduces a sub-plot involving a court battle. Not only does it
once again place Affleck in the unfortunate position of getting all
mega-serious on us, it's also the only time BOUNCE starts to feel like
something that could only happen in a movie. There's nothing inherently
wrong with romantic dramas that take on that AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER-style
sense of heightened tragedy. It's just so unusual when a film gives you
the opportunity to explore romantic complications more simply. BOUNCE
makes it's share of mistakes, but it's always clear that its heart is in
the right place. How refreshing to spend time with a film willing to show
you its heart at all.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
First, Juliette Lewis was dating Brad Pitt. Bounce. Then Brad Pitt hooked up
with Gwyneth Paltrow and Juliette Lewis visited a rehab center. Bounce. Then
Gwyneth Paltrow moved on to the next best thing in Ben Affleck and Brad Pitt
got cozy with Jennifer Aniston. Bounce. The next thing you know, Brad Pitt
marries Jennifer Aniston, and Gwyneth Paltrow and Ben Affleck break up.
Bounce. Then word on the street is that Ben Affleck and Gwyneth Paltrow are
still dating. Bounce. Then, JoBlo realizes that he has to get a life and
stop coming up with cheap gimmicky ways to start his movie reviews. Bounce.
PLOT:
A cocky guy who wants to stay in town to nail a girl he just met in a bar
gives his plane ticket away to a nice guy who wants to get home to his
family in time for Christmas. The plane crashes and everyone aboard it dies.
The cocky guy suddenly feels very bad about his place in life and the wife
of the nice guy is heartbroken about the loss of her husband. One year
later, after getting out of rehab, the cocky guy turns into a nicer guy and
follows his guilty conscience to meet the widow of the deceased man. Without
her knowing who he is, they start to develop a nice relationship together.
CRITIQUE:
A solid relationship movie which cannot be brushed aside with the simple tag
of a "chick flick". This film delivers on many fronts including an
interesting story, drama, humor, engaging characters and surprisingly, a
decent helping of multi-leveled acting. I could generally tell if a "sad
movie" touches me just by the appearance of water in my eyes, and this
son-of-a-bitch had me tearing up left and right. Nice. I call this is a "sad
movie" because it is not an upbeat film by any stretch of the imagination.
It's serious, it deals with a very painful subject and it doesn't pretend to
phony up to many of the Hollywood standards. The ending is left ajar, the
complicated feelings associated with the characters in the film are massaged
from top to bottom and the relationship is not automatically cured with a
catch phrase. Basically, the film gives us a true to life tale of a bad
stretch in the lives of two people, during which they must come to terms
with their own feelings of guilt and unworthiness, before tackling a
relationship with another. The film is also moved along by this whole
connection between the two main characters, but that part of the film didn't
interest me as much as their own inner-struggles. In fact, I thought that
the revelation of the so-called "secret" to Gwyneth's character took a
little too long to be divulged.
I mean, as an audience member, we are in on the concealment from the get-go
and the waiting game just starts to weigh on you after a while. Acting-wise,
I was quite surprised by the performance put forth here by Ben Affleck, who
has proven to be a pro at banging out the charisma, looking great and
running and shooting at the same time, but here he takes it all onto another
level. He makes you like his character despite his many, many flaws. He also
made me cry, and for that, kudos go out to you, young man. Keep up the solid
work. Gwyneth was also very believable as the other half of this film,
especially since she had to play against type, a regular woman with regular
problems. In the end, the characters and the chemistry between the two leads
are what make this story work because you believe in their sorrow, their
hurt and their eventual resolution of issues. I can't say that I found too
many things wrong with this movie. The story was an interesting one. The
characters were believable and well played out. The touching moments were
touching and the lighter moments light. I guess I would've preferred less
time spent keeping the secret away from Gwynnie, but that's just a small
miscalculation, in my humble opinion. Overall, I doubt that this film will
win any awards or cha-chink its way through the box-office, but for me, it
was definitely one of the nicer surprise movies of the year. The kind that
you'll either really like or really think sucks.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
BOUNCE (2000)
Rated PG-13; running time 120 minutes
Genre: Romantic Drama
Seen at: Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.miramax.com/bounce/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0186894
Written by: Don Roos
Directed by: Don Roos
Cast: Ben Affleck, Gwyneth Paltrow, Tony Goldwyn, Joe Morton,
Caroline Aaron, Alex D. Linz, Johnny Galecki, Natasha Henstridge,
Jennifer Grey
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsbounce.html
Actually, I made a mistake in something I wrote above: this film's genre
shouldn't include the word "romantic" in it at all.  Of course, the
mistake was really not mine; blame it on reportedly real-life lovebirds,
Ben Affleck and Gwyneth Paltrow, who did everything they could to
convince the audience that they're Not Really Seeing Each Other.  Too
bad that convincing shows *onscreen*.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
The Moral Of The Story?  Lies Are Bad.  Ask Buddy (Ben Affleck) and Abby
(Gwyneth Paltrow), two needy people who need to work on keeping their
stories straight.
When his plane got delayed in Chicago, advertising agent Buddy Amaral
("amoral", get it?) hooked up with two strangers, Greg Genello (Tony
Goldwyn) and Mimi (Natasha Henstridge) to pass the time away.  Wanting
to Get To Know Mimi Better, Buddy gave Greg his ticket voucher - a clear
breach of federal regulations, as Flight Attendant Janice Guererro
(Jennifer Grey) finds out (she helped Buddy's scheme to get Greg home to
his wife and kids).  Fed regs would be the least of Buddy's concerns,
however: after the plane - which *he* was supposed to be on - crashes
with Greg aboard, Buddy has Deep Guilt about what happened.  And,
keeping with the Theme, Buddy becomes an ugly drunk, much to the dismay
of his boss/business partner Jim (Joe Morgan).  Still not feeling
guilt-free, Buddy seeks out Greg's wife Abby (Gwyneth Paltrow), to
somehow try to make up for what he did.  Meanwhile, The Widow Abby has
Issues of her own to deal with: namely, her unforgiving older son Scott
(Alex D. Linz), her still-trusting youngest son Joey, her Nosy But
Well-Meaning friend Donna (Caroline Aaron), and a job for which Abby
is not very qualified, but has to do to make ends meet.
Buddy lied to Abby about how he came to find her. Abby lied to Buddy
about how she lost her husband. I'd say "and, of course, Wackiness
Ensues", but that'd be going against the moral of the story, I reckon.
The Upshot:
I swear, at times, watching BOUNCE go through its by-the-numbers paces
was like watching paint dry.  I'm not exaggerating.  Seriously; it's in
my review notes: "Here comes the Sad Guitar Music...now is the time
Buddy feels Remorse..."; and after Buddy and Abby met: "Here comes the
Sad Guitar Music again...now is the time for the Kiss..."
And so forth.  BOUNCE was an exercise in tedium, like watching a
read-through for a play that you just *know* is gonna bomb.  The movie -
and its characters - took itself *way* too seriously, much to its
deficit.  Me, I couldn't stop snickering.
What's funniest about BOUNCE, is that it's not even "So Bad It's
Good"-worthy; this one was just...there.  I'd dearly love to pick fun at
the high-fallutin' "Academy Award Winner Ben Affleck...Academy Award
Winner Gwyneth Paltrow" pronouncements, but the blame only partially
lies with those two.  More shameful was the TV Movie Of The Week script,
which put words into its characters' mouths that I daresay did *not*
belong there.  C'mon, guys; do people *really* talk like that?  I mean,
honest-to-goodness conversations between men and women just don't sound
*anything* like the overly-sentimental speechifying from Affleck, or the
- whateverthell it was that Paltrow failed to put across.  Even more
than Affleck (who at least *tried* to show some emotion, genuine or no),
Paltrow's monotone droning made me reach for a non-existent volume
control button.
The shame of it all was that Tony Goldwyn - one of those great actors
that you recognize immediately, but never remember the name - was offed
so soon.  He's about the only one of the bunch that seemed to believe in
what he was doing.  And though Gay Friend Seth (Johnny Galecki) was 
animated enough, the whole feel of the movie was flat, as if the 
actors were all only doing what they were doing because some lame 
director was yelling out lame
instructions at them.  There was no sense of discovery, of natural
progression from here to there; blink, and suddenly Things Changed, for
reasons that seemed murky, character development-wise.  In the end, that
was just it: there *was* no real development; just actors, Acting.
Fourth wall?  Hell, I could see the fourth ceiling, fourth floor, fourth
table, fourth chair...
I guess I called it right, back when I first saw previews for
Bounce, when I predicted it would be "RANDOM HEARTS-lite,
with the mindlessness of FINAL DESTINATION thrown in for bad measure".
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
At this point in his career, Joe Morton seems to be the kind of "go-to"
guy that Hollywood loves to use in situations that call for a solid, but
"safe", Black actor.  This is no slight on his part - he plays the kinds
of Everyman roles that are the earmark of a good character actor - but
it makes me wonder whether he's tapping his full potential yet.  No, I
don't need to see Yet Another 'Banger (plus, Morton's long-in-the-tooth
for that), and no, I don't want to pigeonhole Morton, or *any* Black
actor, for that fact, into "Black Roles".  I just wish he would play
something more than "safe", y'know?
But please, Mr. Morton, not another BLUES BROTHERS 2000, okay?
Bammer's Bottom Line:
There's little doubt in my mind that "THE GRINCH" will bounce BOUNCE
right out of America's theaters.  That's too bad, too; with "Grinch" not
being strong enough to keep most adults' attention, we *need* an
intelligent, thought- or emotion-provoking, romantic tale to escape to
during this holiday season.  Sorry; BOUNCE just ain't it.
BOUNCE (rating: yellowlight):
Man, Affleck and Paltrow have *no* chemistry together on-screen.  Good
thing they're Not Really Seeing Each Other, eh?

Author
Jon Popick
Everybody is making such a big deal about Ben Affleck, Gwyneth Paltrow
and their highly publicized `are they or aren't they' relationship.  I
couldn't give a rat's ass what any Hollywood star does with their
personal life (unless it actually involves a rat's ass), but even I have
to take my hat off to Affleck and Paltrow for their performances in
Bounce, the new three-hankie chick-flick starring the
former/current/future real-life couple.  I don't know if their
off-screen relationship has anything to do with it, but their chemistry
in Bounce is terrific.  The Oscar-winning duo seem so comfortable in
their roles that it doesn't appear that either is acting.
Affleck (Reindeer Games) stars as Buddy Amaral, a smooth-talking
advertising salesman who appears to be an extension of Affleck's Jim
Young from Boiler Room.  As the film opens, he has just landed the Big
Account but finds himself stranded at Chicago's O'Hare Airport due to a
snowstorm.  He meets a married father of two from Los Angeles named Greg
Janello (Tony Goldwyn, Kiss the Girls).  Buddy has a boarding pass for
the next flight to L.A. but gives it to Greg so he can make it home for
his son's Cub Scouts Christmas tree sale the following day.
Greg's plane ends up crashing, killing all 216 people onboard.  His
wife, Abby (Paltrow, Duets), assumes Greg is okay, since he wasn't
supposed to be on that particular flight.  Eventually she gets
confirmation that her husband is dead, leaving her two sons fatherless.
Without seeing a dime from a class-action suit against the airline, Abby
makes ends meet as a struggling commercial real estate agent.
In the meantime, Buddy goes on a one-year bender.  It's hard to tell if
he's just freaked out from narrowly escaping death or if he's bothered
by indirectly killing a nice guy with two little kids (the character
doesn't even acknowledge the latter scenario).  As part of his alcohol
rehab, he's forced to take that dreaded eighth step, where you're
supposed to make amends with all the people you hurt as a drunk.  He
finds Abby, pretends to be a complete stranger, and hooks her up with a
peach of a real estate transaction.  Buddy only means his atonement to
be financial, but he ends up falling for Abby when she orders a grilled
cheese sandwich at a diner after the big closing.
The rest of the film shows the budding relationship between Buddy and
Abby, but as a viewer, you know it's only a matter of time before she
finds out about the boarding pass swap that left her a widow.  It's
obvious that Buddy really wants to be honest with Abby but knows the
truth will crush her.  The further he gets into the relationship, the
worse his secret becomes.  He's the first person who has been nice to
her without knowing she's a widow  except he really does, but has to
pretend he doesn't.
Bounce's ending is kind of a cop-out, compared to the quality of the
rest of the script.  I won't go into why here, as it could ruin the
ending, but it seems like it could have been mistakenly inserted from a
completely different film.  Admittedly, it's different than what you'd
expect from a typical chick-flick, but it still doesn't work.
As I mentioned earlier, the acting in Bounce is fabulous.  The smart
script and direction (from The Opposite of Sex's Don Roos) is also much
better than average.  Both of Roos' main characters are more flawed than
we're used to seeing on the screen, and the flaws aren't your typical
Hollywood defects.  Roos doesn't hit you over the head with emotional
stuff, either.  You don't see the plane crash, and the scene where Abby
learns that her husband was on the flight is surprisingly tasteful,
while most other films would have exploited both of these scenarios.
Credit Atom Egoyan regular Mychael Danna for keeping his score in check
throughout the film.
1:49 - PG-13 for adult language and sexual content

Author
Steve Rhodes
In the romantic comedy and tragedy BOUNCE, Ben Affleck and Gwyneth 
Paltrow play Buddy and Abby, two lovers who are living mutual lies.  
Abby is a widow who hides behind claims to be a divorcee, and Buddy is a 
man with strong but secret bonds to Abby.  He "accidentally" meets her 
while trying to buy commercial real estate.
Written and directed by Don Roos, BOUNCE has none of the sharply written 
edginess of his last film, THE OPPOSITE OF SEX.  With a plot and tone 
vaguely reminiscent of RANDOM HEARTS, starring Harrison Ford and Kristin 
Scott Thomas, BOUNCE concerns two people affected by the aftermath of an 
airline disaster.
At a Chicago airport bar on a snowy night, Buddy meets Abby's husband, 
Greg (Tony Goldwyn).  Buddy generously gives Greg his Infinity Airlines 
ticket so that Greg can make it home to be with his son.  This last 
flight out that night ends in a cataclysmic fireball that kills everyone 
onboard.  An unrecognizable Jennifer Grey (DIRTY DANCING) plays the 
airline clerk who lets Greg on with Buddy's ticket.
Ironically, Buddy is an ad executive working on the Infinity Airlines 
account.  Full of guilt for not dying, he resents the airline's 
schmaltzy ad series, "We Remember," that memorializes the victims and 
honors their families.  Turning to booze to drown his sorrows, he hits 
bottom in a drunken stupor when he accepts an advertising award for the 
ad series.  "We crashed; we're humble; and we're ready to sell some 
tickets," he tells the stunned crowd in his acceptance speech before 
passing out on stage.
After some time in a rehab clinic, he looks up Abby, hoping to do 
something nice for her financially in order to atone for his perceived 
sins.  She turns out to be a nervous and ditzy real estate agent.  
Smoking badly, she explains that she is only doing it to cure her 
addiction to the anti-smoking gum that she got hooked on while trying to 
support a friend.  An unhappy type, Abby says things like, "if you grade 
on a curve, I'm happy," talking as much to herself as to others.
Buddy and Abby's awkward friendship and eventual love affair are 
pleasant enough but never particularly engaging.  Their first date is to 
a baseball game in which the large scoreboard displays the slogan, "Make 
some noise."  The actors would have served the audience better if they 
had heeded that advice.
Even if it isn't quite worth recommending, the film does have its 
moments, especially its funnier ones.  "Guys screw up," Abby's friend 
explains to her when she is about to give up on Buddy after learning his 
secret.  "It's in his manual, right after love your grill and leave sox 
on the floor."  But, when the movie tries to be a tear-jerker, it leaves 
you dry-eyed and feeling manipulated.
BOUNCE runs 1:46.  It is rated PG-13 for some language and sensuality 
and would be acceptable for kids around 11 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
