Title
Review for Viagem ao Princípio do Mundo (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
    Maybe the Europeans should leave the road movies to the
Americans.  "Voyage to the Beginning of the World," which
takes place largely in a car travleing over the roads of
Northern Portugal, is the sort of film that has the viewers
wondering, "Are we there yet?"  When we get there, though,
there's no payoff, just the pretentious chatter of uninteresting
people who are fond of talking in metaphors.
   This latest film of a ninety-year old director has nothing in
common with his 1970s works which critics admire for
their modernist complexities, and seems world apart from his
more accessible 1995 film, "The Convent," which featured a
crackerjack role for John Malkovich.  Perhaps it will be
marketed as a tribute to great Marcello Mastroianni, who died
in 1996 at the age of 73 shortly after appearing in "Voyage,"
too soon even to see a screening of the movie.  
   The journey from France to Portugal is undertaken by a
Portuguese director, his small company, and a French actor
who is hired to do a TV shoot with them in the Iberian
country.  The Frenchman, Afonso (Jean Yves Gautier) was
brought up in France by a French mother and by a
Portuguese father who died young and did not teach the boy
any of his language.  Afonso uses the trip as an
excuse to visit his father's town where he hopes to meet his
dad's surviving sister, and since the Portuguese director,
Manoel (Marcello Mastroianni) and the two actors can
translate for him, they agree to go with him to the village. 
Reminiscing is apparently contagious: director Manoel, who
looks more old and tired than his 73 years and wallows in
self-pity, describes the past as a time that "it's good to
remember" since the days "will not come back."  He describes
the horniness of his earlier years, his strict education under
the Jesuits, and insists that he could never become a priest
as the mere sight of a woman would make him forget about
celibacy.  In a roundabout way he even suggests a liaison
with the attractive Portuguese actress in the car, Judite
(Leonor Silveira), who is not engrossed but who, despite her
name, has no interest in beheading the director.  Much is
made of a mustachioed statue they encounter on the road, a
statue which takes on great metaphoric weight as a man
whom "no one can set free."  When the troupe arrive at the
old aunt's house, the crone at first refuses to believe that
Afonso is her nephew, but is convinced of their relationship
when she touches his arm and somehow senses that they are
of the same blood.
   While Manoel's dad seems to be an interesting dude, one
who left ol' Portugal and its spartan ways to fight in Spain,
bought his way out of a Republican jail, and wound up in
France, Manoel, Afonso, Judite et famille are crashing bores. 
Manoel carries a walking stick and protests that he is but a
lame old man and Judite seems to have her stick stuck to her
spine.  
   Traveling from a hip, modern area of France to a
backwoods village in Northern Portugal is indeed a journey
back to the dawn of time. Though the picture is a mere 95
minutes, the viewers can't be blamed for feeling that they
themselves have had the experience.

Author
Pedro Bras Marques
(This is the translation of a previous review, posted in Portuguese.)
Manoel de Oliveira, the only living director in the world that comes way
back from the silent era of movies, presents to us his latest opus. This
time he goes for a semi-auto-biographic story, a journey to his childhood
and adolescence.
The action is entirely set in the extreme North of Portugal, in Alto Minho,
in villages like Caminha and Castro Laboreiro, visiting people and
landscapes that are in the beggining of the Portuguese World. Yes, right to
the beggining, because these lands belonged to the embryonic 'Condado
Portucalense', whose capital was Guimaraes, just a couple kilometers away.
Also, 'castro' is the word given to the first settled communities in
Portugal, even before the arrival of the Romans. Geographically speaking,
it is also the place where the portuguese territory begins, to those who
come from the north, and where the river Minho meets the vast ocean,
watched by Caminha and the spanish Mount of St. Tecla.
Rather curious is Oliveira's option to show us the city and the road by
putting the camera in the back of the car, facing the road behind (driven
by the real Manoel de Oliveira). The image is a obvious metaphor: the path
left behind is no other than every journey in life, all of the memories,
life itself.
Stoping near the mouth of the river (where it dies...), close to the ferry
pier, all the characters listen to Manoel/Mastroianni recalling his
childhood in a religious border school, on the other bank of the river, on
the other country. The fact is that the other country is much more than
just Spain. It's the memory of a past, that the river/time, restrains of
reaching. Someone gets a binocular. But the same way as looking at a
picture doesn't bring the past back, the binoculars just bring closer what
is far away. The river, like the road before, has a begginig and an end,
and in between those two points lays what is called journey. The characters
are real close to Spain, where the portuguese road ends and where the river
finds its grave in the sea. Two dead ends. But we can add a third one: the
own directors end, who has 86 glorious and adventurous years. Ironically,
Mastroianni, the actor who plays him, does his last perfomance here. The
title could well be "Close to the End of the World"...
In the movie, everybody knows that there is an end for everything. Is there
anything that survives? The answer seems to be negative. The 'Hotel do
Peso' lays in ruins and even memory has a lot of difficulty in rebuilding
it. The statue of Pedro Macau is still there, just like Atlas holding the
World on his back. And it also holds a part of the world of the director,
even if the statue had lost an arm...We can even wonder how many memories
isn't he still holding...And how many people still keep or have kept the
image of the statue as a reference? Who was Pedro Macau? Who put it there?
What is he doing there? Isn't this extension of life, what Kundera called
'Imortality'? In other words: can 'imortality' lay in the   perpetuity of
gestures, thoughts and images, passed from one to another, like a relay
race, this time called life.
The 'journey' reffered in the title, you guessed it, has several meanings.
If there is one journey to the beggining of the director's life, there is
also a journey of a french actor to the village that his portuguese father
had left when went to France.
The french actor had never been to Lusitanian lands, but his wish to know
the beggining of his world was stronger. He wants to meet his father's
hometown and the people he once knew. He wants to know how his father was,
how he behave and how he lived, because he died when the actor was still a
child. He is going to meet an old aunt, living in a recess place of a
village, that is lost both in time and space. It is an image of the old,
rustic and rural  Portugal, nowadays called 'real' by the politicians. A
way of calling 'typical', to what is just 'poor'... The little village is
made of grey stone, so harsh as the wrinkles in the faces of the old people
that still manage to survive. Has time stood still since his father's
departures? We almost say yes. But his aunt doesn't think that way. And she
is annoyed that being the actor her nephew, then "why doesn't he talks our
talk"? The fact is that what seemed cristalized, in fact, wasn't. 
The farewell is made at the graveyard. Everybody's last stop.
Life is a journey to be enjoyed and no matter our will to stop the time, we
never manage to do so. Our wish of eternity drives us mad and motivate us.
We're too important just to...disappear. But, just like the car on the
road, where what is back is gone, so it's life. Every little second that
has gone won't ever come back.  When that Journey comes to an end, it is
good to recall it. And if we don't have enough memories, we can always
appeal to those of other people, that even though they don't fulfill our
need,  they don't leave us empty.
