Title
Review for Office Space (1999)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
Scott Renshaw
OFFICE SPACE
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Ron Livingston, Jennifer Aniston, David Herman, Ajay Naidu,
Stephen Root, Gary Cole, Diedrich Bader.
Screenplay:  Mike Judge, based on his "Milton" animated shorts.
Producers:  Michael Rotenberg and Daniel Rappaport.
Director:  Mike Judge.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual content)
Running Time:  88 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In the small television-sized doses which are his forte, Mike Judge
is one of our savviest social satirists.  Freed of the "Beavis and
Butt-head"-inspired hand-wringing by many conservative critics, Judge has
been able to show in "King of the Hill" what his supporters have known all
along:  that Judge observes behavioral quirks as well as anyone, whether
his subjects are media-fried teenagers or middle-aged suburbanites.  In
OFFICE SPACE, his first live-action feature, Judge turns his attention to
corporate culture, a world of cubicles, coffee and numbing sameness ripe
for skewering.
     It's not a new target for Judge.  In fact, the animated shorts he
created about a put-upon office worker named Milton (played in the film by
"NewsRadio's" Stephen Root) even pre-date "Beavis & Butt-head."  Here he
expands the concept to focus on a computer programmer named Peter Gibbons
(Ron Livingston) at a software company called Initech.  Peter loathes
everything about his job -- the grinding commute, the chirping customer
service operator in the next cubicle, the mountains of pointless reports,
the passive-aggressive pestering by his boss Bill Lumbergh (Gary Cole).
That all changes after a visit to a hypnotherapist leaves Peter with a new
perspective, and a blissful disregard for preserving his position.  While
"consultants" preparing for layoffs have most Initech employees scrambling
to justify their existence, Peter's id-run-wild "straight-shooting" has
him in line for a promotion.
     The first 45 minutes of OFFICE SPACE exploit the concept to its
fullest, resulting in some wonderfully surreal, wonderfully funny moments.
The opening traffic jam sequence alone is a sly riot, including a futile
exercise in "fastest lane" selection and a geeky white programmer who
blasts gansta rap on his car stereo but locks his door when an actual
black person walks near him.  Gary Cole, who so brilliantly nailed the
Mike Brady cadence in the BRADY BUNCH films, is equally slick with the
self-help tones of an inept middle-manager ("If you could just remember to
do that from now on, that would be great").  For a while, it looks like
Judge is going to head into inspired territory, lining up the newly
revitalized Peter for a supervisory position which could turn Initech
upside-down.
     Then, in a depressing turn of events, Judge appears to run out of
ideas for the premise he spent the first half of the film setting up.
Instead of continuing his cannon shots at bureaucratic tyranny, he 
launches into a lame caper in which Peter and his about-to-be-downsized
co-workers Samir (Ajay Naidu) and Michael Bolton (David Herman) -- no
relation to the singer -- try to rip off Initech by introducting a
computer virus into the accounting program.  As even the characters in the
film note, the premise is a rip-off from SUPERMAN III, and Judge doesn't
do anything interesting with it to justify recycling it.  OFFICE SPACE
grows tiresome in its last half hour, flipping back and forth between the
conspirators' anxiety over getting caught and a limp romance between Peter
and a sweet waitress (Jennifer Aniston).  After a decent televison
episode's worth of keen-edged satire, Judge lets his script dribble into
bland conventionality.
    It wouldn't be fair to suggest that Judge is only comfortable with
characters as cartoons -- Hank Hill is more endearingly human than most
sit-com creations put together -- but that seems to be the case in OFFICE
SPACE.  The robotic Lumbergh and the muttering Milton create the strongest
impression in the film; not coincidentally, they're the most extremely
absurdist creations.  When Judge tries to turn OFFICE SPACE into Peter's
quest for professional meaning and personal fulfillment, it just doesn't
work. He's much more effective pointing out the surreal yet all-too-real
details of industrial park anthropology, but there's not quite enough
material here to make it a thoroughgoing delight.  Mike Judge has taken
his gift for creating hilarous short films and overstayed his welcome.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
OFFICE SPACE *** Directed and written by Mike Judge, based on his "Milton"
animated shorts. Photography, Tim Suhrstedt. Editing, David Rennie.
Production design, Edward McAvoy. Music, John Frizzell. Cast : Gary Cole
(Bill Lumbergh), Ron Livingston (Peter), Jennifer Aniston (Joanna), David
Herman (Michael Bolton), Ajay Naidu (Samir), Stephen Root (Milton).
Produced by Michael Rotenberg and Daniel Rappaport. A 20th Century Fox
release. About 92 minutes. R (language)
Would you believe that it's been almost twenty years since "9 to 5" (1980),
the famously funny revolt and revenge of three women secretaries? It's also
the first movie that comes to my mind in the office sufferers category. The
topic has been an element in some other films too ("The Apartment" of 1960,
etc.) but in wider contexts. In more recent years, it has been neglected. A
major exception is "Clockwatchers" (1998), a first feature by Jill
Sprecher, revolving around four temporary workers, all women.
"Office Space" concerns three male employees of Initech. What the
corporation does exactly is unclear, a word that in most cases would be a
criticism of a plot, but here is perfectly suited to the absurd atmosphere.
For that matter, the tasks are not even clear to the employees.
Work is a hateful daymare, the subalterns are purely and simply slaves in
tight cubicles that remind me of the cramped interiors of  U-boats. Or else
they're like chained rowers of Roman galleys, except that the modular
enclosures can and do get moved around, to the workers' distress.
The three young men work (so to speak) mostly with inimical computers and
printers. There is just one smiling face in the office, a jocular female
telephone operator, who, like a voice chip, ceaselessly answers with
exactly the same, short phrase.
The madness of Intertech is lorded over by an oily, falsely polite,
robot-like dictator Bill Lumbergh (Gary Cole). He keeps reminding Peter
(Ron Livingston)-- the main focus of this horror story-- that he didn't put
"the new cover sheets on the TPS reports." This becomes a leitmotiv as
other managers reiterate it.
In their cluster of cubicles, Peter's fellow-sufferers and pals are a
fellow called Michael Bolton (the questions about the "real" Michael Bolton
are another leitmotiv) who looks like Microsoft's Bill Gates, and the
exotic Samir whose computer whizness will play a major part in the plot.
All employees are miserable. To add injury to insult, Initech has called in
efficiency experts in order to eliminate some personnel. The diverse
interviews are a howl.
Peter, whose job has made of his life one big dysfunction, has been seeing
a hypnotherapist at the request of his girlfriend. During the last session
(also a howl of black humor), the healer also hypnotizes himself and keels
over dead. But somehow Peter is liberated by his own trance. He embarks on
civil disobedience vis-a-vis Intertech, starts living it up, breaks all the
rules,has an affair with restaurant waitress Joanna (Jennifer Aniston) who
herself rebels against the stupidity of her workplace (another howl).
When Peter reappears at the office in non-regulation casual garb and an "I
don't give a damn" attitude, and after he tells the experts that he hates
his job and gets no work done, all this is interpreted as signs of
leadership. So  Peter gets upgraded. But with his two buddies, he plans and
executes a revolt of the slaves. It's no "Spartacus" but it is pretty
funny, and leads to  a computer scam.
The movie is the first live feature by Mike Judge ("Beavis and
Butt-Head,""King of the Hill"). It is satirical from the deja vu but
cleverly shot opening sequence. Driving to work, bosses in Porsches,
underlings in ordinary cars, manual laborers, and all others are equalized
when caught in excruciatingly slow, stop and go traffic. At roadside, an
old man with a walker always stays ahead of them. (The film was shot in
Austin, Texas)
All is not perfect in the movie. The tempo of the first part is fine, but
the  relatively rookie director does not increase the rhythm gradually,
does not  follow the rule that in comedy (black slapstick in this case), if
you don't keep accelerating, you fall behind. Part 2, the scam, loses the
impetus, and there's also the problem of no specific suspense items to keep
the viewer going.
But Judge makes up for much of this by having a fourth employee, the older,
quirky, bumbling Milton who can hardly utter his phrases. His function is a
mystery --partly and hilariously explained later. His role, conceived with
comic cruelty (par for the course in farces), is the hardest in the movie,
along with Gary Cole's variations on a one-sided character. Milton is
played by Stephen Root who steals the show whenever he's around.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: February 19, 1999
Starring: Jennifer Aniston, Ron Livingston, Gary Cole, Stephen Root,
David Herman, Ajay Naidu, John C. McGinley, Paul Willson
Directed by: Mike Judge
Distributed by: 20th Century Fox Films Corp.
MPAA Rating: R (language, brief sexuality)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/office.htm 
Confucius once said, "Governing a nation is like cooking a small fish --
don't overdo it." His maxim might be easily applied to writing a comedy
script, for quantity over quality is one of the worst mistakes an
amateur scribe can make. Granted, Mike Judge, writer-director of the
workplace satire OFFICE SPACE isn't exactly an amateur (his most
infamous work, the MTV series "Beavis and Butt-head" was pure gold for
its network). But unfailingly, Judge manages to make some rather
inexcusable mistakes in OFFICE SPACE by spreading an iffy plot over too
much ground. 
The iffiness in Judge's plot -- a group of coworkers plan the downfall
of their despicable boss -- is not in its appeal. In fact, based on the
popularity of Scott Adams' cartoon "Dilbert," which will soon have its
own television series, a satirical view of the American workplace is a
hot item in Hollywood. Unfortunately the concept lends itself to
skit-length sequences which would be more at home on the set of
"Saturday Night Live" rather than a full-length feature. The most
convincing evidence of this are the trailers for OFFICE SPACE, which
feature almost all of the movie's top content; this leaves the actual
picture appearing very deflated. 
Other evidence of OFFICE SPACE's failure to work are its lack of good
jokes. The comedy is marginally funny at best, but not enough to get a
packed house of theater-goers to laugh out loud. The material in the
movie is on-key for an older demographic than Judge is used to
targeting, and this could partially explain his work here. However, the
movie is loaded with too many misfires -- including the token plot -- to
allow for any excuse. 
The plot centers around three or four cubicled engineers, headed up by
Peter Gibbons (Ron Livingston), at a company named Initech. After the
movie elaborately establishes the miserable working conditions at
Initech, the movie introduces us to two consultants (John C. McGinley
and Paul Willson) which are in charge of "downsizing" the company's
payroll. When Peter and his gang learns of this, as well as the reason
behind it -- so their smooth talking boss Bill Lumbergh (Gary Cole)'s
stock will go up -- they set about creating a plan to see his downfall. 
The circumstances that follow were obviously intended to be hilarious
but they come out as anything but. A sympathetic cast and a muddled
Jennifer Aniston-as-love-interest subplot are all that keep this one
together, but it's definitely missable in lieu of something more
intelligent. 

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = okay/average)
1999, R, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
starring: Ron Livingston (Peter Gibbons), David Herman (Michael Bolton), Gary
Cole (Bill Lumbergh), Jennifer Aniston (Joanne); produced by Daniel Rappaport,
Michael Rotenberg; written and directed by Mike Judge; based on the animated
`Office Space' and `Milton' serials created by Mike Judge.
Seen Feb. 26, 1999 at 7:40 p.m. at the Hoyts Crossgates Cinema 18
(Guilderland, NY), theater #18, with my brother John for free using my Hoyts
critic's pass. [Theater rating: ****: excellent seats, sound and picture]
        Making a biting satire of the real working world shouldn't be too difficult
of a task. Most people can relate to the subtle politics of the modern office
environment and how going to work is like stepping into a whole other world.
But trying to sum it all up is a job itself, which might explain why `Office
Space' only scratches the surface.
        You don't see too many movies or television shows where people actually work
regular jobs (most of us aren't cops, FBI agents or criminals). That's
probably because Hollywood figures 1) people don't want to be reminded of
their work in their leisure time and 2) what could be so interesting about an
office?
        The truth is the working world is probably the most complex and grittiest
reality possible. Not even the most gut-wrenching human drama, fictional or
non-fictional, could stack up to it. That's the biggest obstacle standing in
the way of this film's success and it could have overcome it by simply
sticking to its guns.
        The film shows a lot of promise throughout its first act, especially the
first few scenes alone. The setting seems to be L.A. in the present day where
we're introduced to a gang of working stiffs at some type of corporation whose
jobs involve working with computers, fax machines, memos, meetings, overtime,
staplers, cubicles, constantly-ringing telephones and of course intimidating
bosses. 
        Right from the get-go there's a tasty sense of satire here. Our hero, Peter
Gibbons (Livingston), finds trying to maneuver through traffic with the
thousands of other nine-to-fivers is a tedious, painful chore. He does
everything he can to move just that extra 1 mph faster but he never seems to
move any faster than an old man using a walker on the sidewalk. It's the fable
of `The Tortoise and the Hare' for the 1990s!
        Then there's the office itself where Peter's daily exercise in futility
begins. His co-workers aren't exactly his best friends since each has their
own personality problems. There's Michael Bolton (Herman), whose shared name
with the adult contemporary singer is played for laughs but soon becomes
annoying (maybe it's so we can emphasize with him?). There's also Samir (Ajay
), who probably emigrated to the U.S. from India thinking his smarts would
lead him to success, but he's just another schlob. 
        The other characters include an annoying fat secretary who worships the boss,
a paranoid veteran worker afraid of downsizing, and a mentally-challenged man
named Milton (an under-used Stephen Root playing the character who starred in
Judge's animated shorts upon which the film is based) whose life revolves
around his love for staplers and secret yearning to burn the building down if
he's pushed around by the boss one more time.
        Speaking of whom, the boss here, under-sub-assistant V.P. Bill Lumbergh
(Cole), does make for a good catalyst of the story and enemy of the
characters. He's very soft-spoken but in a menacing way (he seems to start out
every sentence with, `yeaaaah... we're going to need you to... greaaaat').
Everyone can relate to that.
        Considering all this, it's clear the film definitely has potential. The first
act is very funny as it utilizes a lot of character interaction to get the
ball rolling and establish the satirical, often cartoony setting. For example,
Peter forgets to put a cover sheet on a memo and he is constantly subtlety
scolded for not doing something so routine.
        But where the film begins to weaken is when an actual plot begins to form and
the focus shifts from the office space to Peter's personal life. There's a
lame joke involving Peter having an epiphany and having a constant good
feeling. Then the company brings in two specialists to interview the workers
to see who's really needed and who's not. By this time Peter has become so
disgruntled with everything he simply tells them the truth and in the process
is recommended for a promotion for his `potential.' This just didn't seem
realistic to me.
        There's also a sub-plot involving Peter's crush on a waitress named Joanne
(Aniston, who basically rips off her performance from the first few seasons of
`Friends') who loathes her job too and endures the same type of work B.S. as
Peter. She isn't cheery enough, her boss says, and she certainly can't compete
with the dorky waiter who seems to think waiting on customers is the best
thing that ever happened to him. Needless to say Peter and Joanne hit it off,
but their relationship is used mostly as reserve for hit-and-miss jokes and a
poor attempt at a cute romance.
        The film takes an even bigger turn for the worse by the time the third reel
rolls in which Peter, Michael and Samir seek vengeance on their company. It's
basically the same as `going postal,' but with computers. Their plan never
really makes sense to begin with and quickly blows up in their faces. 
        The ending proves that Judge just couldn't write his way out of the hole the
film dug for itself and is just another example of what happens when
television guys try to do movies.
        So much more could have been done with `Office Space' had it just lived up to
its title. Its spoof of office politicking really works, so why get so wrapped
up in a plot?
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ 
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - Over 200 new and old films reviewed in
depth, not just blind ratings and quick capsules.
Member of The Online Film Critics Society
(www.ofcs.org)

Author
Greg King
OFFICE SPACE (M).  
(Twentieth Century Fox)
Director: Mike Judge
Stars: Ron Livingston, Jennifer Aniston, Gary Cole, David Herman, Ajay 
Naidu, Stephen Root, Diedrich 
Bader, Richard Riehle, John C McGinley, Alexandra Wentworth, Paul Willson
Running time: 90 minutes.
Mike Judge, the creator of animated favourites Beavis And
Butthead and King Of the Hill, turns his hand to live action comedy
with Office Space, a sort of slacker's guide on how to succeed in
business without really trying.  This enjoyable enough comedy about
the plight of office workers everywhere centres around a disenchanted
computer programmer who finds himself unexpectedly promoted, despite
his best efforts to get himself fired from his mundane job.
Peter Gibbons (Ron Livingston, from Swingers, etc) is a
computer programmer at high tech computer firm Initech, but he has
grown more stressed out and disenchanted by his job and lack of
opportunity.  Following a hypnosis therapy session that ends with the
death of his analyst, Peter becomes far more relaxed and easy going,
turning up to work late and casually dressed.  A team of corporate
consultants somehow identify his attitude as perfect management
material and recommend him for promotion.  He and two colleagues also
put into motion a small scheme to help sabotage the company, which
backfires.
A less interesting subplot centres around the growing romance
between Peter and Joanna (Friends' star Jennifer Aniston), a waitress
in a tacky fast food restaurant.  Joanna is also growing tired of her
thankless job and her manager's insistence on the employees wearing
"lots of flair" and projecting a happy attitude.  Aniston is wasted in
an under developed role.
The film loses much of its comic energy and invention when it
moves outside the office and away from the office politics of Initech.
One of the more fascinating characters here is Milton (Stephen
Root), the mild, mumbling, much put upon employee who works in an
increasingly cluttered office.  Gary Cole (American Gothic, etc) is
wonderfully droll as Lumbergh, the firm's laconic and irritating boss.
The film's very obvious philosophy is that there is more to
life than working nine to five purely for the money to pay the bills.
Man wasn't meant to spend all day sitting inside a tiny cubicle
staring at a computer screen, or filling in meaningless forms in
triplicate.  Many within the audience will identify with the
frustrations of the put-upon white collar characters here and
sympathise with the movie's sentiments.  However, they may find little
consolation from some of the more extreme solutions that Judge
suggests.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
"What would you do if you had a million dollars?" asks a character in Mike
Judge's awkward satire OFFICE SPACE. "Two chicks at the same time," answers
the other. Right from the start, Judge makes sure you know that this movie
is from the creator of the controversial animated TV program BEAVIS AND
BUTT-HEAD(and co-creator of KING OF THE HILL). But despite being at times
very funny and very entertaining, OFFICE SPACE fails to live up to it's
creator's potential.
Based on Judge's animated shorts "Milton", OFFICE SPACE tells the story of
Peter Gibbons(Ron Livingston), a young computer programmer at a large
corporation called Initech. Peter's job is slowly eating away at him. His
boss, played by Gary Cole, is defnitely a creation of Judge; he is a boss
who is always hinting at something else. A nearby secretary answers every
phone call with "Just a moment". The computer won't print. A nearby
stuttering employee(Stephen Root) is calling Peter on the phone to complain
about his desk being moved constantly. And Peter stays at his desk all day
and plays Tetris. One Saturday, Peter disobeys his boss and doesn't come to
work. From that point on, Peter is a crazed man who just doesn't care about
anything anymore. He comes into work without a suit on the day in which many
employess are being laid off. But instead of being fired, Peter is given a
promotion because of his frankness and laid-back attitude, and his
hard-working friends Samir(Ajay Naidu) and Michael Bolton(David
Herman)...yes you heard me correctly...have been laid off. Wanting to get
back at the corporation, these 3 friends decide to hatch a scheme that could
ruin the whole business without them even knowing. It is then that Peter
meets a pretty young waitress(Jennifer Aniston) with whom he begins a very
underdeveloped relationship(arguably the worst part of the film). 
The whole "work is hell" message of OFFICE SPACE doesn't work nearly as well
as it did in last year's CLOCKWATCHERS. One of the reasons for this is that
Judge, like the Farrelly brothers, isn't above adding stupid subplots to
generate some laughs. The sign of a great comedic filmmaker is when they can
give you laughs without ruining a good plot. RUSHMORE is a fine example of
that kind of film. Judge, however, does show some signs of potential in his
first film. The script is occasionally smart, and he gets likable
performances from most of his actors(Aniston excluded), especially
Livingston, who had a small role in SWINGERS. OFFICE SPACE is also a bit too
short to make much of an impression, but for light comedic fare, this should
provide some harmless entertainment.
review by the Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
www.angelfire.com/mo/film 


Author
Alex Fung
OFFICE SPACE (Fox - 1999)
Cast: Ron Livingston, Jennifer Aniston, David Herman, Ajay Naidu,
      Diedrich Bader, Stephen Root, Gary Cole
Screenplay by Mike Judge
Produced by Michael Rotenberg and Daniel Rappaport
Directed by Mike Judge
Running time: 89 minutes 
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   In a marketplace where spectacle and thrills-per-minute appears to be
   the measure of audience appeal rather than coherent plotting, Mike
   Judge's live-action feature debut OFFICE SPACE makes for an unusual
   counterpoint: here's a picture which should've disposed with a story
   altogether and concentrated on stringing together bits of incidental
   humour.  Anyone who's had their spirit crushed by a day job should
   relish the film's comically-accurate depiction of the insanity that
   is office work, but after a promising opening, this occupational
   comedy begins to lose its appeal the moment its unwelcome storyline
   spins into motion.
   In not-quite-a-spoof of Fellini's 8 1/2, we're introduced to our
   heroes caught in the middle of a traffic jam.  Immediately
   establishing the aggravation of the typical workday, in rapid
   succession we meet Peter (Ron Livingston) and his anxious sidekicks
   Samir (Ajay Naidu) and Michael Bolton (David Herman), who are
   discontent drones toiling at the nondescript software company Initech
   under the command of the wonderfully insincere manager Bill Lumbergh
   (Gary Cole) and alongside such bizarre eccentrics as the blubbering
   Milton (Stephen Root), who whimpers incessantly and protectively
   guards his stapler with a vigor.  The trio hate their jobs but can't
   afford to lose them, especially with the threat of downsizing on
   their way, and a miserable Peter winds up pleading for solace from
   an "occupational hypnotherapist" -- "Every day since I started
   working, each day has been worse than the last, so when you see me,
   I'm having the worst day of my life ... is there some way you can
   just zonk me out?"  Lo and behold, Peter finds himself the recipient
   of a BULWORTHian transformation from trod-upon office peon to a
   cheerfully candid cubicle jockey who's blissfully unconcerned about
   job security and nonchalantly neglects his duties.
   The skewering of the workplace, while not particularly groundbreaking
   in the wake of the Dilbert phenomenon, is nonetheless effective and
   often very amusing in OFFICE SPACE, and the film's observational
   humour is its strength, keying in on the countless little
   frustrations and irritants regularly encountered at the office which
   amass over time into soul-deadening, sanity-threatening agony.
   Office drudges will undoubtedly feel both a sense of deja vu and
   kinship at the depiction of familiar workplace experiences gleefully
   sent-up (without being overexaggerated for comic effect, which is
   perhaps the frightening part), and what's special is that Mr. Judge
   is able to capture the latent anger festering alongside the
   exasperation and hopelessness without diminishing the humour.
   Whether it's Samir's pent-up rage exploding at regular intervals,
   Milton's meek mumbling "I could ... set the building on fire," or, in
   the piece's showcase sequence, the trashing of a piece of office
   equipment (amusingly shot as a gangsta rap video, complete with
   mock-posturing and swagger), which injects a disturbing note in its
   mirth through the destructive zeal of the participants, it's
   unmistakable that these cubicle prisoners are on the edge between
   frustration and fury, ready to either curl into a whimpering ball or
   lash out.
   The film gets so many of the little details right that at times it
   prompts disturbing flashbacks.  From the serpentine conviviality of
   manager Bill Lumbergh sidling up with a disinterested, drawn-out
   "Yeah ... so ... what's happening?" to the mind-bending chirpiness of
   the secretary inevitably within earshot to the
   where-did-they-find-this-guy of nebbish Milton, the picture adeptly
   captures the absurdity of office life.  (I was hoping that the film
   would fire a zinger at one of my pet peeves -- the manager-type who
   cracks stupendously unfunny jokes and the brown-nosers who dutifully
   guffaw at them as if new heights of hilarity had been reached -- but
   no such luck.)
   It's when the picture attempts to veer off into an actual story that
   interest begins to wane.  A misguided and tired caper plot involving
   our sympathetic trio is introduced, while Peter begins to romance a
   waitress, Joanne (Jennifer Aniston).  The film is all too happy to
   explore blue-collar and white-collar workplace dissatisfaction alike
   -- she's given her own workplace woes: a fast-food manager (played by
   Mr. Judge himself under a pseudonym) who chastises her for not
   wearing enough "flair" on her uniform (she ought've solved this
   dilemma by wearing a button reading "Perfunctory Love Interest") --
   but it's a poor substitute for the occupational inanity of Initech.
   These subplots aren't completely devoid of laughs -- I enjoyed the
   scowling faces and hardcore rap on the soundtrack incongruously
   characterizing the trio of software engineers as bad-asses as they
   executed their lame Machiavellian scheme, and the perfect prop
   placement of a mug in one of Peter's nightmares about Joanne was
   uproarious -- but they're far less engaging and effective than the
   wry observational humour of the film's first half, and ultimately
   steer the picture towards a pat, unsatisfying conclusion.
   It's only logical for filmmakers to cast their comic gaze away from
   the overmined subject matter of dysfunctional families and towards
   the eclectic, disparate personalities which make up a workplace,
   especially given that an unhealthy proportion of one's life is
   consumed on the job.  Among recent features to zing this subject
   matter, OFFICE SPACE is more broad and certainly less subtle than
   Jill Sprecher's CLOCKWATCHERS (perhaps uncoincidentally, another
   picture whose appeal plummeted upon the unfurling of a plot), but
   also far more caustically incisive and enjoyable.  It's far too
   disposable and uneven to be considered an outright success -- the
   Great Workplace Comedy has yet to be made -- but it's a reasonably
   amusing diversion.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"X-FILES fans come up to me in malls expecting me to be able to fill them
 in on the whole conspiracy.  Half the time I have no idea what they're
 talking about." - Martin Landau

Author
Jamie Peck
OFFICE SPACE
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
The hero of "Office Space" is Peter Gibbons (Ron Livingston), a 
stressed-out software engineer at a fairly ambiguous corporation called 
Initech. Aggravated by performing insipid tasks, omnipresent 
middle-management and the looming threat of downsizing, he seeks help 
from a hypnotherapist. But when the doctor keels over mid-session, 
leaving his patient in a calm, Zen-like trance, Peter suddenly finds 
himself trapped in an agreeable state of perpetual relaxation. 
Irritation and hatred are replaced by ease and indifference. When the 
boss ("The Brady Bunch Movie"'s Gary Cole) steps in his way to chat 
about his recent apathetic streak, Peter just zips around him and keeps 
on walking. You go, boy. 
Needless to say, much of this white-collar comedy is going to elicit 
smiles, chortles and even cheers from viewers who can say, "Been there, 
wish I'd done that." "Office Space" paints such an amusingly dead-on 
portrait of office life that many of the jokes and sight-gags - ranging 
from en-route rush hour to hungry fax machines to cramping cubicles - 
are irresistible in a unanticipatedly honest way. (Incidents of mass 
exaggeration number surprisingly few.) OK, so maybe poking laughs at the 
workplace isn't the most original idea, what with the comic strip 
Dilbert and the sitcoms "Working" and "The Drew Carey Show," but the 
numerous bullseyes here are innovative even if the target is not. 
Though Judge's clever writing and appropriately understated direction 
are key factors in making "Office Space" the success that it is, a 
terrific cast also contributes undeniable strength to the final product. 
Livingston, whose sole noteworthy credit was back in 1996's "Swingers," 
makes a perfectly unfazed leading man, his delightfully deadpan facade 
ranking as the movie's main attraction. Cole has a lot of fun as Peter's 
evil overseer, peppering his lines with hilariously absent-minded 
"yeeeeahs" and "mm-hms," while "Friends"' Jennifer Aniston is adorable 
as the object of Peter's affection, an oft-scolded waitress at a T.G.I. 
Friday's-like eatery. Their romance is largely superfluous, but "Office 
Space" does use the Aniston role to observe the parallel travails of 
those in the service industry. 
Also giving their all are David Herman, Ajay Naidu and Stephen Root as 
assorted colorful "Office" lackeys, and this last actor gets to steal 
scenes as the real-life version of Judge's Milton character, the 
frequently put-down black sheep of Initech. These subordinates, along 
with Livingston, attempt to strike back at their superiors in wildly 
different ways (steering towards a pitch-perfect, if slightly 
disappointing, ending), but it's Peter Gibbons who gets the ball 
rolling. Watching "Office Space" may cause a stirring in the hearts of 
many viewers experiencing job-related ruts similar to Peter's. If they 
follow suit, expect the unemployment rate to skyrocket, but darn - if it 
won't be empowering!

Author
Michael Dequina
_Beavis_and_Butt-Head_, _King_of_the_Hill_.  Two of the most successful
animated television series in recent years--and two of the most annoying
creations to ever hit the tube, if you ask me.  So I was surprised to find
myself laughing through much of the offbeat workplace comedy
_Office_Space_,  the live-action directorial debut of those series'
creator, Mike Judge.
When we first meet Peter Gibbons (Ron Livingston), he is stuck in the
circle of hell known as morning rush hour trafic.  But this is nothing
compared to the next circle that awaits Peter and his also-traffic-jammed
friends Samir (Ajay Naidu) and Michael Bolton (David Herman) every single
day as office dronces for the Initech Corporation.  As we see Peter being
harrassed by his numerous higher-ups about a memo regarding report cover
sheets and Michael doing battle with the temperamental office fax and
anyone who mentions a certain identically-named singer, Judge's point is
abundantly clear: work sucks, as goes the film's tagline.
Judge's recreation of soul-deadening busy work is so painfully dead-on
hilarious that it wouldn't really matter if there were much of a plot--and
there really isn't much of one.  Fed up with his unfulfilling,
underappreciated efforts and his smarmy, condescending boss Bill Lumbergh
(Gary Cole), Peter decides to rebel, and he and the about-to-be-laid-off
Samir and Michael join forces in an elaborate scheme to fleece the
corporation.  While their scheming does pave the way for some very
effective, very funny set pieces (one gangland-style "beating" is a
showstopper), it doesn't have much of a payoff.  In fact, perhaps
_Office_Space_'s weakest element is its rather flat conclusion, which
doesn't fulfill the buildup of what preceded it.
Nonetheless, Judge has come up with a wry, perceptive, always-amusing
comedy, highlighted by some memorable characters, chief among them the
gangsta-rap-loving Michael Bolton; the ever-unctuous Lumbergh; and Milton
(Stephen Root), a perpetually stepped-on (or, rather, completely ignored)
soft-spoken co-worker.  But it's Livingston who holds the film together.
Peter, while the main character, may not be the showiest role in the film,
but Livingston's low-key, self-effacing attitude works in creating a
likable character--and, in turn, an involving film.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
DeWyNGaLe
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe
Beavis and Butthead was one of the most popular shows on television for the
longest time.  Parents did not approve of the crude humor, but no one seemed to
care.  The show went on to turn out a hit movie, Beavis and Butthead Do
America. (A-) The phenomenon was quickly stopped when the MTV show was
canceled.  Mike Judge, the creator of the show went on to make another hit show
King of the Hill, but soon that lost popularity as well.  Well, Mike Judge is
back with Office Space, which he wrote and directed.
The style of comedy used in Office Space is one of my favorites- sarcastic
comedy.  Ron Livingston, played by Peter Gibbons, is an employee at Initech, a
computer company.  His boss Bill, played by Gary Cole, is very laid back and
kind of "clueless."  Ron is not the type that likes to work at all.  He pretty
much just sits around on the job, not doing anything he is told to.  Other
employees at Initech include the very funny Milton, played by Stephen Root, who
is always getting excluded from everyone else, Michael Bolton, played by David
Herman, and Samir, played by Ajay Naidu.  
Ron is not happy with the fact that he has to be in a cubicle all day long.  He
feels trapped.  After going to a therapist, he realizes that he needs to be
care free and not do what other people expect of him.  He takes this advice way
to seriously, and plots to take much money from Initech.  He gathers other
employees at the job to help him with his clever plan, which could land him in
jail.  From here, the film sort of goes into a theme that I didn't like.  It
takes about half of the film to get into this plot, and I wish it would have
stayed the way it was the first half.  The first half was a realistic look at
work today, and I found it hysterical.  
All of the performances in Office Space are very funny, especially Gary Cole's.
 Peter is also very funny as the rebelling office worker who will do whatever
he wants.  One of the best performances comes from Jennifer Aniston as Joanna,
a waitress who works nearby Initech.  She meets Ron, and the two start dating. 
The relationship between Ron and Joanna was underused, and really could have
added a lot to the overall film.  Jennifer Aniston is often underused in films.
 She should get a good role one of these days, because she has a lot of talent
as an actress.  
Sometimes Office Space can be very cheesy.  Sometimes dialogue doesn't work or
some scenes seem very out of place.  Office Space also has a problem that many,
many films have today.  It was quite a forgettable film, and certainly not one
that I will look back on at the end of the year and think of it as one of the
funniest films of the year.  It is just another nice, simple film with some
good laughs.  There are so many comedies that are the same way today.  I am
getting sick of all these mediocre comedies.  Fortunately, Office Space didn't
feel as empty as a lot of the other comedies coming out.  The characters got to
be very likable, and we actually got to know them pretty well.
The Bottom Line- Yet another so-so comedy to add to the long, ongoing list.  

Author
Matt Williams
It was only a matter of time before a Dilbert-esque office comedy hit
the screens.  However, rather than coming from Dilbert creator Scott
Adams, Office Space is instead based on the work of another animator,
Mike Judge, creator of Beavis and Butthead and King of the Hill.  In his
live-action directoral debut, Judge aptly spoofs corporate culture.  The
story is certainly not very involved, but there is plenty of truth and
humor to fill the gaps.
Peter (Ron Livingston) is a programmer working at the Initech
corporation. Every day in his mundane life is worse than the one
before...in other words, every day is the worst day in his entire life.
He's stuck in a boring job with eight different supervisors, all
obsessed with administrative trivialities.  He's smitten with Joanna
(Jennifer Aniston), a local waitress, but hasn't the guts to even
introduce himself.  Everything has simply made him a complete, nervous
wreck.
But all of that changes when, after an unintentionally over-effective
visit to a hypnotherapist, Peter loses all of his inhibitions.  He
realizes his lifelong dream:  to do absolutely nothing.  He begins to
blatantly disregard the nonsensical instructions of his boss, Bill
Lumbergh (Gary Cole), doing whatever he feels like.
Peter's friends and co-workers, Samir (Ajay Naidu) and Michael Bolton
(David Herman)...no, not that Michael Bolton, are perplexed by their
friend's sudden change in attitude.  But, they have larger things to
worry about:  rumors about that Initech is about to begin downsizing...
As bleak as much of this sounds, let me assure you that Office Space is
a comedy, and quite a funny one.  Although it shares the same absurdist
office humor of the Dilbert comic strip, Office Space is actually based
loosely on the series of Milton cartoons which aired on Saturday Night
Life.  Each mundane detail, taken by itself, seems completely,
regrettably, plausible.  Yet, when combined into a whole, the picture
which results is absolutely surreal.
Ron Livingston tackles his role straight-faced, and becomes much funnier
because of it.  His character isn't simply being a clown lampooning
around the office, but rather seems possessed by a zen-like clarity. He
is operating on a higher plane, where everything suddenly makes sense,
and from this vantage point, he allows the audience to smirk at the
absurdities of life.
Anyone who has had to deal with the inefficiencies of corporate
bureaucracy, or who has ever been frustrated with the technology of
modern life, will recognize many of the characters and situations in the
film. In fact, in addition to being wildly humorous, the film may
actually prove to be cathartic.
The animated roots of Office Space show in the film's lack of
complexity. Most of the characters in the film can be quickly summarized
by a particular personality quirk.  One employee, Milton (Stephen Root),
is practically a flesh-and-blood cartoon.  However, despite their simple
nature, the characters still manage to be surprisingly funny.
It's not required to have a corporate background to enjoy this film
(though the situations may seem exceedingly far-fetched if you are
unfamiliar with just how close to reality they really are). The film is
flimsy and absurd, but also very funny.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Ross Anthony
"It's not that I'm lazy -- I just don't care," Peter (Livingston) explains
to the two shocked efficiency experts hired to down-size the software
company at which he works.
Peter is the generic every-person. He's you and me (we'll not me -- I like
my job). Toiling with traffic, patronizing bosses, temperamental office
equipment and the Y2K problem. One day all that unspoken tension comes to a
boiling point, but instead of exploding ... it dissipates, leaving him in a
floating state of Nirvana. "Are you going to quit?" love interest Joanna
(Aniston) asks. "No, I'm just not gonna go," Peter responds with a
blissfully bent smile.
Soon enough, Peters learns that his two buddies at the company are being
phased out -- so the three develop a revenge/embezzlement plan that should
even the playing field (so they think). "It's a short life," Peter cries,
"We weren't meant to stare at computers in little cubicles all day,
listening to our eight bosses drone on about mission statements!" The three,
however, start to have second thoughts. In one of Peter's guilt-ridden
dreams, a judge puts it this way, "you've lived a trite little life" as if
that were his sentence, "and you're a bad person."
The plot line isn't the hook in this movie ... it's the satiric truths about
real life. With just a touch of exaggeration, reality can be darned funny.
It's the little things: The use of slow-mo to dramatize the stale office
environment is such an odd juxtaposition of events that we scream with
laughter. And then there's the gangstyle lynching of the office printer --
if you've ever used a copy machine in your life, you won't be able to watch
this baseball bat vs. technology scene with a straight face.
Starring Ron Livingston with Jennifer Aniston.
Writer/Director Mike Judge (of "Milton" animated shorts)
Producers Michael Rotenberg and Daniel Rappaport at 20th Century Fox
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Matt Prigge
Writer/Director: Mike Judge
Starring: Ron Livingston, Jennifer Aniston, Ajay Naidu, David Herman,
Gary Cole, Stephen Root, Richard Riehle, Diedrich Bader, John C.
McGinley, Paul Wilson, Todd Duffey
Of course I agree and like everything that 'Office Space' stands for.  I
have a job, and while it may not be a desk job like the one in this
movie, it's still a station for purgatory on earth.  And I fear the day
when I have to give up my dreams of whatever it is I dream of and settle
for a boring, spirit crushing desk job, like the one the characters in
this film have.  They work every day, sometimes even weekends, at a
computer plant and their job is to prepare for Y2K.  As written and
directed by Mike Judge ('Beevis and Butthead,' 'King of the Hill'), it's
a cartoonish hellhole of orwellian and kafkaesque proportions.  The lead
character (Ron Livingston, from 'Swingers') is basically a mutation of
the Job character from the bible, complaining to a hypnotherapist that,
'Since I started working, every single day has been worse than the day
before, so that every day you see me is the worst day of my life.'
On his way to work, he gets stuck in a mind-blowing traffic jam, and
every time he successfully gets into the moving lane, the lane stops
moving, and the lane he was just in starts moving miraculously.  He
glances out of his blind spot and notices the old man with a walker,
moving at a snail's pace, is making more locational progress than he
is.  When he gets to work, people notice he's gloomy and say he's 'come
down with a case of the "Mondays."'  Then his main boss (Gary Cole)
shows up at his cubicle and mentions that he didn't put the cover sheet
on his latest TPS report.  A couple seconds later, another boss comes up
to him and says the same thing.  Then again.  Then again.  Meanwhile, a
high-pitched receptionist's voice repeats the same annoying mantra to
caller after caller after caller.  Work is hell; a desk job is worse.
There are many hilarious things about 'Office Space,' and all of them
have to do with the hellishness of work and the way they make the
characters feel.  And it only helps that Judge, in his own right, is an
exceptional satirist, not only in terms of the lowest-of-the-low-ness he
brought to 'Beevis and Butthead,' but also to his 'Milton' shorts that
were shown on 'Saturday Night Live' way back when.  'Office Space' is
basically the live-action materialization of those shorts, complete with
the materialization of the Milton character (played brilliantly by
Stephen Root).  Milton, an overweight, perpetually sweating lisper works
in a tiny cubicle, with his radio and stapler as his only refuges, and
is always either being told to relocate his cubicle or to allow more and
more cardboard boxes to be stored there, crowding him in.  Just about
anything Milton does in this film is just about laugh-out-loud
hilarious, not the least being the scene where the boss has his birthday
party and is passing out cake while Milton is furiously worrying if
there's enough pieces or not.
In fact, there's so much potential comedy here that it's a damn shame
that it had to succumb to the silliest of Hollywood Movie Standards and
give itself an actual plot, and then succumb to the second silliest
Standard and give itself a go-nowhere romantic subplot involving the
main character and a 'Friends' cast member.  See, a movie these days,
especially one that's main strong point is its satire, doesn't feel like
it can get by on just it's on random comic insights, and the result is
that a film like this often becomes subject to a balancing beam of
judgment, concerning the ratio of great, funny moments to the thinness
and annoyance of the plot that it felt it had to add.  In fact, for a
lot of this film, I was in mild suspense, wondering how this film would
turn out in regard to that; it has a ton of funny,
tell-your-friends-and-family moments, but on the other hand, it has that
distracting plot that, self-depricative or not, still gets in the way of
potential jokes.  The actual storyline concerns our hero, Peter, and his
two office buds, Samir (Ajay Naidu, from 'SubUrbia') and Michael Bolton
(David Herman)...and no, not that Michael Bolton, as we're told (at
least it leads up to one really funny joke, involving John C. McGinley),
and their decision to try and rip off the company over the course of a
couple years by using a program designed by Bolton that was in fact
ripped off of a job pulled off unsuccessfully in the 70s (and, as they
note, in 'Superman III').
There's another plot going on at the same time, though, featuring how
Peter goes to a hypnotherapist who puts him in a positive trance and
then dies before he can bring him out of it.  Pretty soon, Peter is
sleeping in for days on end, ignoring his boss, knocking down part of
his cubicle so he can see outside the window, and even gutting fish at
his desk.  And he's also becoming acquainted with an attractive waitress
(Jennifer Aniston) at the local T.G.I. Fridays-esque establishment near
his office, who is stressed out by her own job, which requires her to
wear a minimum of 15 'flairs.'  She does, but her boss wants more
personality out of her, and points out that Brian, another waiter has 37
'flairs,' and a heck of a smile to boot.  Basically, this film has lots
of really superb moments, and a great philosophy about work that would
make for an otherwise recommendable film.  Alas, it's not to be.  The
main plot, about the virus, and the romance interfere too much with and
seem to detract from the overall orwellian/kafkaesque feel that this
film nails in its opening ten minutes.  Sure, Stephen Root is a
guaranteed riot, and Gary Cole (who with this and 'A Simple Plan' is
becoming a favorite supporting player of mine) is a hoot as the tiresome
boss, who opens every single sentence with a prolonged
'Yeeeaaaahhhh...." only to ignore anything anyone else says.
But the rest of it is hit-and-miss.  Livingston is likable in the lead,
but he never pushes the envelope far enough (he basically needs more
material to work with), and the same goes for Naidu and Herman, who both
do the best with what they're given.  As usual, it's the supporting guys
who have to work the hardest, to cover up for the amount of laughs the
plot and subplots take away from the overall effect of the film.  But
even they aren't given a whole lot to work with, and the entire feel I
had coming out of the film was of dire unsatisfaction.  I knew there
were lots and lots of great moments that I was still giggling about, but
there are too many missed opportunities and the main plot just ain't
funny enough.  What I did like, though, was the change in Peter from
'this blows' to 'who cares?' and what it gets him into.  Basically, the
office is being visited by efficiency experts (McGinley and Paul
Williams), a disguised word for those who give the bosses more money by
trimming the fat off the office.  Going through interviews, most people
kiss up, but nonchalant Peter tells them he actually does work for a
mere 15 minutes a week, and when questioned about the amount of work
he's missed, he gleefully states 'Well, I wouldn't say I've been missing
it.'  They like his attitude, and instead of firing him, as his boss
suggests, they state he should be promoted so he can have a challenge.
Okay, good idea.  This is stuff comedy, cartoonish as this is, is made
for.  But even when it gets to Peter's promotion, it still falls back on
the dreaded virus plot, which is more of an excuse-for-a-plot than an
actual plot.
Suggestions for the film: 1) drop the Aniston romance or at least modify
so it either goes somewhere or is the least bit interesting, because as
such, it isn't; 2) drop the virus stuff altogether - just not that
funny; 3) maybe, just maybe, go with the stuff about the promotion, and
make it more satirical and even funnier - expand expand expand; 4) up
the orwellian and kafkaesque tones a lot - apart from the
beginning stuff and a couple spots throughout, there's just not enough
of it; and 5) maybe just ditch any sense of a plot and make it an
episodic, plotless look into office life, exposing the horrors and thus
the humor in a more productive and satisfying manner.  Number 5 is the
most feared of all because not only does this mean the screenwriter(s)
has/have to come up with more jokes, it means snobbish critics will pan
it for not having a plot.  Let me state this loud and clear: you do not
need a plot to make a good film.  I just saw a Truffaut film called
'Small Change,' which is just a great flick, that dealt with the lives
of children in school and out.  It was plotless, save for a bit at the
end about a maltreated boy, but its lack of a plot allowed it to be more
open to insight, and to be able to concentrate more on mannerisms and
create individual sequences which together made up a complete portrait.
Now, I'm not suggesting in any way that a film like 'Office Space'
should be like a 70s French art house film; I'm merely implying that
this kind of structure would actually benefit a film like this.
Because, as such, it's just not at all satisfying, even if it does have
its head in the right place and comes with a powerhouse of great jokes.
Just not amusing enough.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 20th Century Fox
 Director:  Mike Judge
 Writer:  Mike Judge
 Cast: Jennifer Aniston, Ron Livingston, Gary Cole, Alexandra
Wentworth, Stephen Root, Todd Duffey, Jennifer Emerson,
David Herman, John C. McGinley, Ajay Naidu, Rupert Reyes
   The tagline of "Office Space" is "works sucks," a concept
that may indeed be true.  Ironically, what sucks in real life
(murder, mayhem, fatal illness) can be most entertaining on
the big screen, as the audience sit back safely in their
comfortable seats with their popcorn and burritos and
contemplate the fate of people less fortunate than they.   You
may have to look for a while for movies that concentrate on
people at work ("Wall Street" is a good example).  "Office
Space" is another reliable illustration.  This one takes a
Dilbert-like view of people sitting in their cubicles crunching
numbers and doing assorted jobs which are not in the least
as meaningful as the genuinely productive stuff that muscular
guys accomplish on the street with their drills, hammers, and
saws.
   "Office Space" is directed by Mike Judge, who is perhaps
best known for his direction of the animated feature "Beavis
and Butthead Do America," but some of you may be familiar
with his short cartoons going under the name of "Milton." 
The title character of this lampoon has been seen on
programs like "Saturday Night Live" and, in fact, the entire
movie comes across as an extended sketch of that unevenly
comic TV entertainment.  Judge's movie satirizes office work
with its impossible bosses, alienating labor, and meaningless
paper-pushing. Though it centers on three particular software
engineers who are mad as hell and are not going to take it
any more, "Office Work" does not even approach the depth of
Sidney Lumet's 1976 cry for help, "Network." Nor does it
possess the witty, sledgehammer impact of Michael Moore's
hilarious 1998 documentary, "The Big One."  Nonetheless, it's
a fun movie that will appeal particularly to those in the
audience who have the misfortune of spending their
weekdays in cubicles, one that works because of the
wonderful deadpan acting of its central character, Peter
Gibbons (Ron Livingston), who teams up with his two best
friends on the job to do something about their lives of quiet
desperation.
   Essentially a sophisticated sitcom, an extended joke that
manages to keep the giggles coming throughout its ninety
minutes, "Office Space" begins its thesis that work is  a
travesty by spotlighting a major traffic jam on a typical
morning.  Watch especially the nerdy-looking Michael Bolton
(David Herman) lip-synching gangsta rap from the safety of
his closed automobile.  When he, his Saudi-American co-
worker with an unpronounceable name (Ajay Naidu), and
Peter Gibbons learn that their company expects to downsize
workers, they conjure up a plan to introduce a virus into the
computer network which would not only damage the
corporation but would be slowly and imperceptibly put money
into their bank accounts over a period of years.  
   The running gag of the story, however, is that Peter,
hypnotized into a permanent don't-worry-be-happy attitude,
not only stops coming to work on time if at all, but convinces
a hatchet man hired as a consultant that he should be
promoted rather than fired.  
   The brief romance between him and Joanna (Jennifer
Aniston), serves as a subplot, as Joanna is as disgusted with
her job as a restaurant waitress as Peter is as a software
developer.  Despite Ms. Aniston's appeal, the entire romantic
interlude could be cut from the movie with no great loss,
giving Judge an opportunity to concentrate on what he does
best--to send up corporate America.  
   "Office Space" is for the most part sit-com formulaic but
when the jokes work--which they do most of the time--they
provide quite enough laughs and signs of rueful recognition
for the audience.  When Peter, who has taken a devil-may-
care attitude, is warned that he will be fired and will not be
able to pay his bills, he responds confidently and coolly, "I
never really liked paying bills."  This is the sort of quip that
infuses the entire movie.  If that appeals to you, this is your
kind of movie.  I know it's mine.

Author
Christian Pyle
Successful animator Mike Judge ("Beavis and Butthead," "King of the Hill") has
written and directed his first live-action feature, "Office Space."  It has
more in common with the satiric realism of "King of the Hill" than the
adolescent slacker humor of "Beavis."  Judge's target is the mind-numbing,
soul-killing cubicle culture of the 9-to-5 corporate world.
Peter Gibbons (Ron Livingston) hates his job and dreams of doing nothing at
all.  (Think of him as "Ferris Bueller, 10 years later.")  He achieves his
dream briefly when a hypnotherapist (Michael McShane) puts him in a state of
perpetual relaxation.  While he is slacking off, a couple of efficiency experts
(John C. McGinley, Paul Willson) are surveying the employees to decide who to
"downsize."  They like Peter and promote him while firing two of Peter's
hard-working friends (David Herman, Ajay Naidu).  Peter encourages his buddies
to rip off the company with a computer virus.
Meanwhile, Peter is dating Joanne (Jennifer Aniston), a waitress at
Chotchkie's, one of those trendy bar-n-grills where the cubicle class gather. 
Joanne is also having problems with her job.  She's required to wear at least
fifteen "pieces of flair" (inane buttons and the like), and her manager insists
that she should wear more than the minimum to show her "Chotchkie's spirit."
"Office Space" is effective in its details and has many wonderful moments of
biting satire.  However, it lacks a story that ties all those beautiful details
together convincingly; in the middle, the characters seem to wander around in
search of a plot.
The best performances in "Office Space" come from its supporting actors.  Gary
("The Brady Bunch Movie") Cole is hilarious as Bill Lumbergh, Peter's boss. 
Lumbergh is a doofus who attempts to be casual as he leans against the edge of
Peter's cubicle with a coffee mug as a prop, as if he just happened to drop by
to chat, and asks in a grating monotone for Peter to work all weekend.  Another
great character is Milton, played by Stephen ("News Radio") Root, a mumbling
nebbish who is constantly mistreated and shortchanged.
If you work in a cubicle, have eight bosses, or have ever had to justify your
job to an efficiency expert, you'll especially enjoy "Office Space."  And
you'll laugh harder than everyone else.

Author
Christopher Null
     Give BEAVIS AND BUTTHEAD creator Mike Judge enough rope, and he may
just hang himself.  In his first live-action outing, Judge does a fair
job at making sick jokes about corporate America, he just doesn't seem
to make enough of them, ultimately leaving OFFICE SPACE a bit flat.
     Straight from SWINGERS, Ron Livingston makes a surprisingly good
Everyman as Peter, so sick of his job ("In a week, I'd say I do 15
minutes of real work.") that he goes to a hypnotherapist for relaxation
treatment.  Of course (and the trailer doesn't tell you this), the
therapist dies while Peter is under, leaving him in an ultra-relaxed
state without a care in the world.  (What's particularly funny is that
OFFICE SPACE was shot in high-tech ghetto north of my old hometown of
Austin, Texas, where the "go-getter" attitude is severely frowned-upon.)
     Anyway, after the therapy, Peter has a whole new outlook on work. 
But oddly, Peter soon goes from apathetic to outright seditious, all
while imminent downsizing is about to take place.  This culminates in a
silly subplot lifted from SUPERMAN III (they say so right in the movie!)
about stealing fractions of pennies from the company.
     That Peter gets a new girl (Aniston) in the bargain is foregone
conclusion.  That plenty of apropos, out-of-place wackiness is included,
courtesy of Judge, is also a given.
     Now I'm not a killjoy.  I've had lots of jobs that are very much
like Initech's idiocracy.  Sadly, I'm afraid that too many people are
going to genuinely take Judge's advice and try to get promoted by
sleeping in and being lazy.  While the underlying message is sound
(Don't take work too seriously:  IT'S JUST A JOB!), Judge might have
been wise to preface the film with the same message given on episodes of
B&B: "Don't try this at home."
Christopher Null - null@sirius.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        In my other life, the one in which I'm not pretending to
be Roger Ebert, I work for a nationally-known computer company.
I'm all too familiar with corporate bureaucracy, inefficient
procedures, and managers who think redundancy is the answer to
everything.  Dilbert is my soulmate.
        For those of you in the same boat, take note: the first
half of Mike Judge's "Office Space" is so dead-on in its portrayal
of corporate America that I had to resist the temptation to throw
up my hands and yell "Get outta my head!" at the screen on several
occasions.  Judge, the man who garnered fame for his animated
satirizations of youth culture (Beavis and Butthead) and Southern
life (King of the Hill), pulls no punches with his depiction of
Initech, the sort of faceless corporate conglomerate that many of
us can relate to.  You've probably worked somewhere similar: a
carpeted labyrinth of cubicles, where the fax machine rarely works,
the computers are woefully slow, and the managers have nothing to
do but hire consultants and chastise employees for improperly
filling out cover pages.
        Peter Gibbons (Ron Livingston) is a programmer working on
the Year 2000 problem for Initech, but he finds his job so tedious
and meaningless that he spends most of his time staring at his desk.
His friend and co-worker, the unfortunately-named Michael Bolton
(David Herman), enjoys listening to rap music as an act of defiance
to the singer of the same name.  Samir (Ajay Naidu), an Indian
computer guru, gets so frustrated by the traffic problems he
encounteres on the way to work every morning that he can't even
articulate the curse words.  And Milton (Stephen Root), a timid,
middle-age nobody who speaks with the voice of Droopy Dog, is about
to reach his breaking point after years of abuse by the corporation.
        After his boss (Gary Cole, sounding like a real-life
version of Mr. Mackay from "South Park") orders him to cancel his
weekend fishing trip because of a work backlog, Peter visits a
hypnotist in an attempt to relieve some work-related stress.  The
therapy works a bit too well, however: soon Peter is so relaxed
and laid-back that he's wearing T-shirts and shorts to the office,
completely ignoring his boss, and skipping work on a regular basis.
This new attitude intrigues Joanna (Jennifer Aniston), a waitress
suffering from workplace woes of her own.  The therapy gradually
wears off... but not before Peter's new approach to work is deemed
"refreshing" by the consultants, who recommend him for immediate
promotion even as the hardest-working employees are being laid-off.
        There are a lot of big laughs in "Office Space,"
particularly during the first hour; gags fly around with such
rapidity that I can almost picture director Judge jumping up and
down in the editing room, clapping his hands with glee.  I can
relate to these characters and empathize with their plight.  I'm
pleased to see someone else trying this type of humor; apart from
cartoonist Scott Adams (the creator of "Dilbert"), this genre has
been largely neglected.  He's done well; the majority of "Office
Space" works splendidly.
        It's a shame, then, that Judge is not confident enough with
the material to let it stand on its own.  Characters like Peter,
Michael and Joanna are fun, because they seem like real people.
Others, like Milton and Lamberg (Peter's boss), are cardboard-thin
and serve more as a distraction than anything else.  How extraordinary
"Office Space" could've been if it had stuck with believable people
and situations, rather than giving us character stereotypes and two
ridiculous plot twists in the film's second half.
        But a critic must judge a movie by what it contains rather
than what it lacks, and much of what's here is gold.  "Office Space"
bills itself as a comedy, and it certainly kept me laughing.  If you
work in a corporate environment and hate your job, get together with
a bunch of your fellow cubicle-dwellers and give this one a peek.
We are definitely not alone in our frustrations.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) As uneven and unfocused as OFFICE SPACE is, it hits
home with enough jokes to make it an enjoyable comedy.
You'd think a movie about life in a cubicle would necessarily resemble
Dilbert. But OFFICE SPACE gives itself some distance from the outlandish
comic strip by having more humanly interesting characters and being much
more insightful. Instead of going for the broad, exaggerated gags (well,
it goes for them too), it goes for the more mundane, subtle comedy and
irony of being a Gen-X drone.
For example, Peter (Ron Livingston) begins every day with an unavoidable
static electric shock as he opens the door to the Initech offices. All
the professionals drive plain, silver Toyotas and live in apartments
that look like they're furnished by Target. As naďve and whitebread as
they are, they still listen to gangsta rap. Their detached, monotonous,
mockable boss decorates his office with "Cathy" cartoons.  
Then again, some of the gags are just too obvious to be funny, like the
elderly man outrunning the flow of the traffic jam, or the
squeaky-pitched receptionist incessantly answering the phone across from
Peter, or Michael's (David Herman) heated, personal feud with his
printer.
The movie seems like a string of these skits, corralled together by
their common office setting. (Jennifer Aniston is introduced as a love
interest, which allows the movie to run a few gags at the
"Bennigans"-style restaurant where she works.) But eventually, one idea
starts to take shape as the movie's main plot: Peter stops caring about
work after a hypnotherapist fails to take him out of a trance.
Ironically, his new attitude boosts him up the corporate ladder, even as
his hard-working friends are being laid off.
Peter has not forgotten his friends, though, and to show his solidarity
with them, he helps them come up with a scheme to embezzle money from
Initech.
If Mike Judge had more guts, or any respect for his "work sucks"
message, his protagonists would have stuck it to the man and gotten away
with it. They could have been downsized Davids putting one over on the
corporate Goliath. Wouldn't that be a glorious, triumphant message in
this age of corporations denigrating their employees and customers in
order to worship their shareholders?
But it quickly becomes clear that our heroes are too clean and meek to
make good criminals. They fit the sitcom-character mold that says they
have to end the episode where they started. You can deduce, even without
seeing it, that in order for our heroes to get out of the mess they
made, the movie will necessarily have a contrived, DEUS EX MACHINA
ending.
OFFICE SPACE has the look and feel of a low-budget student film, with
cheap sets, lots of gags, and a few unknown actors. Combined with the
moth-eaten, patchwork plot, a less funny movie could have been downright
bad. But luckily for Judge -- and for us -- OFFICE SPACE actually is
funny. Not always, but often enough.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Steve Rhodes
In writer and director Mike Judge's brilliant comedy, OFFICE SPACE,
Peter Gibbons (Ron Livingston) is a software engineer who used to have a
big problem, his boring job, but he's fixed that. He's not quitting, but
since he doesn't like it, he has decided simply that he'll stop going
into the office anymore. Eventually, a relaxed Peter will show up every
now and then, but only on his terms.
OFFICE SPACE, the perfect movie for the cubical dwellers of the Dilbert
generation, has a low budget look, but its humor is right up there with
last year's THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY. Whereas the latter used
raunchy humor to get its laughs, OFFICE SPACE uses dead-on, topical
humor that is only sporadically risque to produce laughs so hard you may
almost get sick. I know I got into so many laughing convulsions that I
found myself choking.
As the movie opens, Peter and his coworkers are stuck in a parking lot
masquerading as a highway as they inch toward a company called Initech,
where they work on banking software. Peter has 8 bosses, probably due to
the wonders of dotted-line management, and each of them love to come
cooing into his office, complaining in the nicest but most irritating
tone. Today's crisis is that he forgot to put the cover sheet on the TPS
report. His bosses keep dropping by to remind him that there was a memo
about it. "Did you get that memo?" they chirp with dripping sincerity.
In a small supporting role, Gary Cole, from A SIMPLE PLAN, delivers the
best performance of the movie. As Lumberg, Peter's main boss, Cole gives
a chillingly gracious interpretation of a boss who appears compassionate
on the surface but underneath is all of life's annoying bosses rolled
into one. Patronizing and unreasonably demanding, he infuriates Peter
and his coworkers, Samir (Ajay Naidu) and Michael Bolton (David Herman)
-- no, not that Michael Bolton.
As Peter battles his office aggravations with little success, he wonders
out loud to his coworkers where it will all lead. "What if we're still
doing this when we're 50?" he muses. He tries the thought exercise from
school, "What would you do if you had a million dollars?" The test is
supposed to reveal what you really want to do with your life, but the
question proves as useless as it is trite.
There are other discontented workers as well, the company being a hotbed
of disinterested and unmotivated employees. "There are guys in life who
don't have to put up with all of this, like that guy with the Pet Rock,"
Tom (Richard Riehle) declares with a hopeless tone that belies his
words. The script mixes honest poignancy with crisp comedy that packs a
wallop. Even minor actors, like the one that plays a magazine salesman
from the ghetto and who appears in a single, brief scene, are
wonderfully funny.
Jennifer Aniston plays a small but important part as Peter's girlfriend
and a waitress without enough "flair." She works at one of those themed
restaurants, in which she is required to wear at least 15 pieces of
sloganed buttons and other accoutrements on her clothing. Her manager
keeps ragging on her because she only wears the minimum number of
pieces. If she really loved her job as she should, she should want to
wear more, as he keeps reminding her. As sweet and lovely as Aniston was
in the part, I kept thinking of Parker Posey from her role in a similar
movie, CLOCKWATCHERS, and how Posey would have added a interesting
harder edge to the part.
After an amazing first act, the movie appears to have painted itself in
a corner with the writer having milked the angst-filled employees idea
for all it is worth, but then the movie takes off again with some quite
surprising twists. Only in the short concluding act does the story lose
its footing a bit. Still, the structure of the movie is relatively
unimportant. It is in the small episodes that the movie delivers its
punch. Typical of these is the way some consultants determine an easier
way for a manager to lay someone off -- just stop paying him and he will
eventually get the idea. And it reveals a secret way for cubical
dwellers to get that window office that they've always coveted. You'll
have to see the movie to learn the trick.
Some movies have universal appeal, and some are more narrowly targeted.
Whereas I think most people will find OFFICE SPACE quite funny, those
who live in high tech meccas like the Silicon Valley or those who work
in cubicles will undoubtedly love the picture. Finally, there is a
litmus test. If you've tried reading the Dilbert cartoons about the
working world and have never been able to understand why there are
funny, OFFICE SPACE probably isn't the movie for you.
OFFICE SPACE runs a fast 1:30. It is rated R for profanity and brief
sexuality and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
I'm writing this as I'm waiting for Oracle to churn out a big new
tablespace for the developers to do some testing in later this week.
This exercise began, in 15-minute fits and starts and a spasm of
e-mail, late last week, when the request came down the line,
resurfacing Friday, when I got scheduled downtime to bounce the RDBMS
early Saturday to twiddle a parameter set by the guys who set up this
instance in the first place (two hours worth of Saturday morning
twiddling, most of it spent waiting around for the OS to do a cold
backup in case something disasterous happened), finally culminating in
executing three glorious SQL commands this Monday morning.  Yes, the
new Mike Judge movie, "Office Space", struck a small cord in the
stupidest of places, when Our Hero is watching his workstation get
bogged down in I/O.  Yes, it was a cliched scene, but I'm spending part
of my recent time watching I/O happen.  And I don't even have the
benefit of a little spinning disk to tell me something is going on.
It's an uneven movie, though.  Though it's far, far better than the
very disappointing Beavis and Butthead movie, "Office Space" is only
about as good as a good "King of the Hill" episode.  The best parts are
the wonderful moments that show the little frustrations of
post-industrial America.  Some scenes of wish fulfillment were
fantastic, most notably gutting the fish (if only he used a Leatherman)
and an ultraviolent, gangsta video inspired beating.  Their office
bulding, by the way, looked eeriely like my company's Dallas office,
which I recently had to visit: acres of parking lot surrounding a large
flat building.  The Dallas office, however, looks a bit more run down
and dimly lit than the one in the movie, at least the area where the
DBAs sat.
[Ah, that bit of I/O just finished.  Now to FTP (a continuation of I/O
by an admixture of means) a bunch of export files...]
The film loses steam towards the end, or when it gets too involved with
this Superman III-style plot hatched by Our Hero and his downsized
coworkers.  The writing's fine edge in depicting office life is lost
when it tries to move a story, a not particularly interesting one at
that.  This scheme, unfortunately, takes up a good part of the second
half of the movie.  As noted, the film is inconsistent, a better rental
than anything else.
The film also dips a toe in the more blue-collar world of food service
through Our Hero's love interest, a waitress played by Jennifer
Aniston.  No array of indignities confront the waitress, however, only
the single indignity of having to wear "flair" to spice up a drab
uniform: stupid little buttons, slogans and cheesy ties and
LED-enhanced ribbons to be worn as an expression of institutional
creativity.  The web of small indignities from, say, the customers, is
wholely absent: Judge apparently wants to focus on the absurdities that
descent from the managers up on high like manna.  Well, that, and
office equipment.  [Harpers Magazine a few issues ago had Barbara
Ehrenreich pose as a waitress for a month in a variety of places, a
sort of limosine liberal exercise in showing the inadequacy of minimal
wage.  If nothing else, that article suggests that Aniston's minimum of
fifteen pieces of flair is the least of worries.]
[So, the FTP is done.  Now, gzip -d.  Yes, I feel I'm being paid
absurdly much for absurdly little.]
Our Hero, incidentally, finds joy at the end in manual labor.
(Something I'm not unsymapthetic to, having noted that digging a ditch
at least lives you with a ditch at the end of the day, instead of this
abstraction running with the aid of metaphorical baling wire and duct
tape on some computer I've never actually seen.  But then, I've never
dug a ditch, so I really shouldn't be glorifying the whole thing, given
that I'd probably think ditch digging really, really sucks if I had to
do it, despite my going to the gym nowadays.) I suppose Judge's final
point is that there's dignity in labor or work, just that it's usually
lost in the actions of petty managers, clueless consultants and absurd
institutional rules.  It's a new dialectic: the bosses and the
bureaucracy are the new bourgeois, the owners of the mission statement
and time card.  The rest of us are the post-industrial proletariate,
office workers and glorified burger flippers.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com
Mike Judge, the man behind the infinitely stupid and funny BEAVIS & BUTTHEAD
animated series, jots down his first live-action movie, based on his
infamous "Milton" sketches from TV's "Saturday Night Live", and helms the
picture to boot. This movie is made for anyone who has ever worked in a
Dilbert-type office environment, hates their job, and doesn't mind laughing
at it all.
PLOT:
A guy working in a run-of-the-mill tech company hates his job. After some
help from a relaxation expert, the guy develops the capacity to become
indifferent to his stress, and ironically lands himself a position of higher
power. But when his friends are slated for downsizing, our boy and his
buddies decide to get even with a half-assed money-making virus scheme.
CRITIQUE:
This movie has many chuckles, some laugh out loud scenes, other shrugs of
the shoulder, in a humorous and poignant office setting, which touches upon
much of the inhumanity and hypocrisy that permeates the high-tech cubicles
environments of our day. I personally saw MUCH of myself in the main
character, since I, much like him, find myself wondering about the worth of
my cubey-employment every other high-tech-flying day. I sense this capacity
to identify with the main characters in this film, as a strong correlation
point to your appreciation of the humor within. And it is within that
environment that the authenticity and parody of the actual office rapport,
the insincere stooge bosses, the phony empowerment signs all over the walls,
and the daily frustrations that people face with the technological office
"advancements", were all dead-on perfect!
Having said all that, the plot of the film itself is actually quite thin,
with an irrelevant and cheesy romance with Jennifer Aniston (wasted in this
role) tossed in for effect. I would have liked to have seen more office
scenarios and incidents, as opposed to the last third of the film, which
essentially down-shifts into a semi-crime caper. The actors were all very
good with Ron Livingston playing an excellent laid-back dude, and his Bill
Gates Jr. buddy coming through as the geek with the love for the gangsta
rap. All in all, I would recommend this movie to all people who live, or
have survived, this kind of an office environment, are looking for a light
comedy, and don't mind a thin plot. Either way, always try to remember that
WORKS SUCKS!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Director Mike Judge apparently plays the role of Jennifer Aniston's idiot
manager at Chotchkie's in this film. He was born in Guayaquil, Ecuador.
A nod to actor Ron Livingston's better-known role in SWINGERS (9/10), comes
by the way of a button on Jennifer Aniston's restaurant costume which reads
"We're not in Kansas anymore". An infamous line from the film featuring the
then-unknown Vince Vaughn and Jon Favreau.
The guy playing the spectacled-nerd in this film, David Herman, has directed
two documentaries of his own. He's also done voices for the Mike
Judge-created TV series "King of the Hill".
The real-life Milton in this film, Stephen Root, has also done voices for
"King of the Hill", and might be better known as his character of Jimmy
James from TV's "NewsRadio". He's also had plenty of movie appearances in
such films as BLACK RAIN, GHOST and BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER.
Actor Gary Cole, who plays the condescending boss in this film, also played
the role of Mike Brady, father of the Brady's, in both of THE BRADY BUNCH
movies.
Paul Willson, who plays the second "Bob" consultant in this film, may be
best remembered as Paul, the character that he played in the wildly
successful TV sitcom "Cheers". He was the "other fat guy", besides Norm.
Goofy neighbor Diedrich Bader plays Oswald Harvey on TV's "The Drew Carey
Show".

Author
Murali Krishnan
Many office workers have experienced a "bad case of the Mondays", that
feeling of lethargy at the beginning of the week caused by the meaningless
banalities of the white-collar work culture. Peter Gibbons experiences this
with a horrible commute, multiple levels of bosses hounding him to adhere to
the minutia of corporate bureaucracy, and most of all, the feeling that this
type of life is not meant for him. After a mishap during a visit to a
hypnotherapist, Peter undergoes a personality change and begins to unyoke
himself from the norms of corporate culture. He parks in his boss' reserved
parking space, he disassembles his stifling cubicle, he dresses any way he
wants, etc. When he finds out that his two best friends in the department,
Samir and Michael Bolton (no relation to the pop singer) will be laid off in
the impending downsizing, he persuades the two software engineers to join
him in a plot to get even with the company.
Director Mike Judge has achieved success with his television creations
"Beavis and Butthead" and "King of the Hill". He also is behind the animated
"Milton" shorts, which have appeared on the television series "Saturday
Night Live" from time to time. This story is based on that series, and the
character of Milton (the wormy office pariah who is continuously dumped
upon) is a part of this story, but remains a side character. Typical of
Judge humor, there are satirical attacks on this particular subculture, and
also the general popular culture. From the business oriented restaurants
with insipid names like "Chotchkie's" and "Flingers", to the various
creatures who populate the corporate jungle, there is a continuous undertone
of cynically essaying the life of the office worker.
Although the film is consistently funny, the story lacks the narrative
continuity that even Judge's television episodes have. Peters romance with a
restaurant waitress is wholly superficial and uninteresting. It was
apparently inserted simply for marketing purposes. The Milton character is
grating and is mostly unnecessary also. The entire story has the feel of
being stretched in order for the kernel material (which is good) to fit
within the framework of a feature film. This film has many similarities to
another, "Clockwatchers", and although that is not as funny, it constructs a
better story.
Moderately recommended. The film is consistently funny. Anyone who works in
the office environment will see parts of their everyday lives reflected and
skewered on the screen. However, the story is not smooth and often is
conveniently manipulated to serve the narrative.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Just imagine Scott Adams' comic strip "Dilbert" on the big
screen and you've got the concept of this caustic comedy. Which is not
surprising since it's written and directed by Mike Judge, the creator
of "Beavis and Butthead" and "King of the Hill." Ron Livingston plays
a young computer programmer who hates everything about his geeky,
anonymous job at Initech Corp. - the mind-numbing routine, the
clock-punching, the procedure-obsessed supervisors, the "paper jams"
and the pettiness. Above all, however, he hates the humiliation of
being fired as the result of downsizing. To ease his frustration, his
yuppie girl-friend arranges for him to see "an occupational
hypnotherapist" who suffers a fatal heart attack in the midst of his
therapy session, leaving Livingston relaxed and free of all his
anxieties about unemployment. Unencumbered, he begins to enjoy life,
much to the consternation of his despicable, condescending boss (Gary
Cole) who is prone to tell his employees on Friday afternoon that
they're expected to report for work on Saturday and Sunday. "I don't
like my job," Livingston says nonchalantly, "and I'm not going to go."
Then, when he's interviewed by a couple of consultants, his candid,
carefree sarcasm about his uselessness is interpreted as a
qualification for an upper-management position. Meanwhile, he's
concocted an embezzlement scheme with two cyberwise cubicle nerds and
launched a personal pursuit of a pretty young waitress (Jennifer
Aniston). As a film, what you're seeing is a series of comedy sketches
created by Mike Judge over the last decade - but, given the right
frame of mind, it works. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Office Space" is a sharply satirical 6, a wickedly funny take on the
deskbound worker.
