Title
Review for Westworld (1973)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Monika Huebner
Clever marketing strategists created a very special theme park: At
Westworld the stressed-out vacationer can relax in an unusual way and
experience things he will never forget for the rest of his life. Who
hasn't dreamt of being a sheriff in the Wild West, see the pleasures
of ancient Rome or win the love of a medieval queen by defeating the
Black Knight? Westworld gives you the opportunity to live your dreams
at a time when time travel still belongs in the realm of science
fiction. The tourists are cared for by hi-tech robots that look
incredibly human. But as you know the best technology is only good as
long as it works. If the circuits blow due to a technical defect the
most human robot is just a machine...
Those somewhat familiar with the works of Michael Crichton can
probably guess what this movie is about. My first thought was: the
man's relation with theme parks is a bit strange. Even if Westworld
isn't plagued by rambling dinosaurs like JURASSIC PARK some 20 years
later, this early version of a story warning about the menace of
exaggerated use of technology is everything but colorless. On the
contrary: The fact that this story deals with human looking robots
that can't be told from real people makes everything more ghastly.
Imagine being chased by a gunslinger - played brilliantly by Yul
Brynner - whose only aim is to kill you because his circuits were
messed up by a major blackout in the conrol center. You can't kill him
like a normal man and he acts with the precision of a machine, cold
and unfeeling. The pleasure seekers in the ancient Rome and in the
medieval castle are no better off. There, too, the robots were
affected by the blackout and the Black Knight doesn't want to give up
his victory. The vacation turns into a nightmare, brilliantly and
eerily staged.
Many blame Crichton for being anti-technology, which I never quite
understood. His books and movies rather make you think about the
dangers of a naive faith in the infallibility of technology. And that
is an impulse that can't hurt in these times. His vivid imagination
and not exactly squeamish use of violence serve to entertain the
viewer or reader, which all in all is the purpose of a thriller.
A gloomy vision of an artificial world that hopefully never will come
true.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     WESTWORLD (1973) was famous author Michael Crichton's first
attempt at directing a movie for the big screen.  He also wrote this
erratic but nevertheless engrossing film.  Conceptually the film is
more interesting that the realization due to Crichton's poor direction,
all of this notwithstanding, the film is worth seeing.
     The show's premise is thought-provoking.  What if you could do
more at an amusement park than just ride through a pseudo-environment?
What if the Pirates of the Caribbean allowed you to actually become a
real pirate?  What if you could use real guns and kill robots that were
completely indistinguishable from real people?  In other words, how
about a park where you can enter a fantasy world that for all intents
and purposes is a real world?  You have got to admit that the setup for
this high concept movie is intriguing.  One part I especially like is
that there is a subtle way in which robots differ from real humans in
their appearance, and it stems from the same problem that great artists
have in drawing the human body.  I will not revel the difference.  Rent
the film to find out.
     Peter Martin (Richard Benjamin) and John Blane (James Brolin)
decide they want to get away from the stress of life by going to such
an amusement park.  Given many choices they choose to be cowboys in the
Old West.  They get to kill other cowboys in fights and to run around
with loose women.  They have a great time.  In an adjoining part of the
park another group of happy campers get to relive the bacchanal of
ancient Rome.  Their toga parties are much better than in ANIMAL HOUSE.
     The toughest gunslinger in the Wild West section is a robot played
by Yul Brynner.  Peter and John having great fun killing him, but
overnight the technicians back at the command center keep fixing him up
and giving him better programs so he will be harder to kill the next
day.  As anyone who has seen JURASSIC PARK can guess, the park develops
a bit of a problem and the robots start misbehaving.  They develop the
nasty habit of trying to kill the guests.  Imagine one of Disney's
pirates firing at you with real guns?  A bit more realism than most of
us would want.
     This all sounds much better than it is due mainly to Crichton's
plodding pacing.  The film goes so slow that you find yourself wishing
your VCR had one of those double speed modes where you could still hear
the voice.  The best part of the show happens at the command center
which is a 1970's version of the center in JURASSIC PARK.  Other than
the equipment differences, notice how they need many people to operate
the command center in WESTWORLD whereas in JURASSIC PARK a single
programmer does it all.
     Overall, watching this highly uneven movie is a blend of falling
asleep out of boredom when nothing is happening to being fascinated
with what is going to happen next.  If you like science fiction, you
will probably enjoy seeing the movie.  Be prepared however to be
frustrated by its low energy level.
     WESTWORLD runs just 1:28 but feels a lot longer.  It is correctly
rated PG for low key cartoonish violence.  It would be fine for any kid
6 and up although they probably need to be 9 or 10 to be interested.  I
recommend this unusual show to the adventuresome, but don't watch it
close to bedtime or you may never be able to see the ending.  It is
easy to find your eyelids getting heavy in the many slow parts.  I give
the film ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
