Title
Review for Fairy Faith, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by John Walker. Running time: 77 minutes. Rated PG by the MFCB.
Reviewed on March 22nd, 2001.
Last year, the wrestling chronicle "Beyond The Mat" became the first 
documentary to procure a regular engagement at a St John's cinema in 
recent memory. Now, the envelope has been pushed one step further, with 
the week-long screening of the Genie Award-nominated "The Fairy Faith" -- 
the first Canadian documentary to hit local theatres in probably an even 
longer time.
Of course, given the subject material, it makes sense that "The Fairy 
Faith" would find its way to this province. Newfoundland enjoys as close a 
relationship with rural Britain and Ireland as any region on Earth. 
Indeed, some outport communities probably bear a closer resemblance to the 
England of three centuries ago than anywhere in the present-day United 
Kingdom. And it is these sorts of places where the traditional fairy lore 
still holds some measure of influence -- where the oldtimers speak of 
strange things that happened to a friend of a friend, back in the day, and 
even the younger set is wary of peculiar shapes half-glimpsed in the
twilight mist.
"The Fairy Faith" is about these people: those who still adhere to the 
ancient customs, in spite of the onset of progress and skepticism. 
Producer/director John Walker is a man who was himself enthralled as a 
child by the stories of the Wee Folk, as told by his Scottish grandmother. 
His mission here is to explore why certain folk still have faith in the 
fairy lore -- why, to some, fairy tales are not mere bedtime fiction but 
indeed something unexpectedly close to the truth.
Much of the film is spent traipsing about the British Isles, from the 
Scottish highlands to the glens of Ireland. These scenes are beautifully 
filmed, often set to bewitching music. After giving a brief synopsis of 
the basics of fairy legends (accompanied by some lovely artwork in a 
variety of styles), Walker interviews several individuals who claim to 
believe in fairies. Unfortunately, there is little rhyme nor reason to the 
process of Walker's investigation. His subjects seem chosen haphazardly, 
and he strains sometimes to lend them credibility.
For instance, a university scholar and a Celtic harpist offer interesting 
insight into the subject at hand, and their segments are genuinely 
engaging. But then there is the man who avers that he has the power to see 
fairies; when he starts pointing out places where the creatures are 
supposed to be, things grind to an embarrassing halt. The camera, of 
course, captures nothing unusual, and Walker never really pursues the 
obvious questions. Why can this man see fairies but we can't? What is it 
that prevents us from seeing the curious sprite he insists is sitting at 
the foot of a cascade?
This failure of Walker's to strive for substance persists throughout the 
documentary. Later, he visits a castle in which is stored a piece of cloth 
allegedly once owned by a fairy. Walker describes being fascinated by the 
artefact when his grandmother brought him there in his youth. He comments 
that now it just looks like an old, ragged piece of material, possessing 
none of the wonder he formerly beheld. But he explores this no further. 
Why has his perspective changed? Does this mean his belief in the fairies
has wavered? Why? What does this say about him, given that he constantly 
insists to his interview subjects that he does, indeed, share their faith?
To make matters worse, for every well-presented conversation, Walker 
includes some testimonials which are sorely in need of the editor's touch. 
Consider, for example, the yawn-inducing story told by a bemused 
Englishman who claims his shadow was nearly stolen by two fairies. Or the 
extended detour in which Walker indulges, about a supposed fey tree on the 
verge of being uprooted to make way for a new bypass. "The Fairy Faith" is 
short enough at an hour and a quarter, so perhaps Walker felt the need to 
pad things out, but he could have done so by bolstering his analysis 
rather than just drawing out the proceedings.
Equally uneven is the latter third of the film, when Walker returns to 
Canada to examine how fairy lore persists in this country. 
Disappointingly, Walker confines his attention just to the Antigonish 
region of Cape Breton island in Nova Scotia. What about other parts of the 
country where the old legends are not yet forgotten, like Newfoundland or 
Quebec? While I enjoyed the parallels Walker drew between belief in 
fairies and the traditions of indigenous peoples, I felt a greater 
exploration was warranted of the translation of fairy legends to the New 
World. Are there any noticeable differences in the fairy folklore of Cape 
Breton and the British Isles? Have any characteristics arisen which are 
unique to Canada, or are things essentially unchanged?
Further, Walker spends so much time on his Native American angle that he 
largely neglects the more obviously Celtic-derived myths of the Atlantic 
region. When he does return to this theme, it's often without much 
coherence. For example, several minutes are spent with a schoolteacher who 
took photographs of a small cave in which fairies are thought to reside. A 
big deal is made about one photo, which is supposed to contain evidence of 
fey activity, and the camera returns to it on multiple occasions. The 
problem is that it's never explained just what that evidence is supposed 
to be -- it just looked to me like a bunch of shadows, and I had no idea 
what I was supposed to be seeing.
"The Fairy Faith" is a nice idea poorly executed. Fairy lore is a rich and 
fascinating topic -- there is, after all, a very good reason why it has 
survived down through the millennia. Unfortunately, Walker never probes 
far below the surface of the subject. The result is a movie which neither 
successfully examines the questions it poses, nor fully captures the sheer 
magic of the fairy realm.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/TheFairyFaith.html
