Title
Review for Scarlet Letter, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Demi Moore, Gary Oldman, Robert Duvall, Joan Plowright,
      Lisa Joliff-Andoh, Edward Hardwicke, Robert Prosky
Director: Roland Joffe
Producers: Andrew G. Vajna and Roland Joffe
Screenplay: Douglas Day Stewart "freely adapted from the novel by
            Nathaniel Hawthorne"
Cinematography: Alex Thomson
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     Welcome to Massachusetts, 1666, where Puritans, Indians, and
adultery come together in Roland Joffe's overlong, overwrought
re-interpretation of Nathaniel Hawthorne's classic, THE SCARLET
LETTER.  Literary purists will be aghast at some of the liberties taken
with the original text, but my complaints have more to do with
cinematic misjudgments than with those in the book-to-screen
translation.  And, believe me, there are plenty of problems with this
production without having to resort to a cry of "it's not faithful to
the book!"
     First and foremost is the casting of Demi Moore as Hester Prynne.
While Moore has acted effectively in contemporary films like ST. ELMO'S
FIRE and DISCLOSURE, she's out of her depth in this sumptuous period
piece.  Her range is insufficient for the fiery Hester, resulting in the
sort of weak performance that occurs when an actor tries too hard to
reach a character that's beyond them.  Moore's limitations are further
highlighted by the powerful, deeply-emotive job done by her co-star,
Gary Oldman, as Hester's guilt-wracked lover, Reverend Dimmesdale.
     The movie opens considerably in advance of the novel's first scene,
and the script by Douglas Day Stewart delves deeply into early events
only hinted at in Hawthorne's tale.  Much of this background, despite
being speculative, works, although it takes forever for the romance
between Hester and Dimmesdale to get off the ground.  Once we get
through the scene with the two groping in a barn, things start moving.
When the Puritan colonists of 17th century Boston discover that Hester,
the wife of an absent English doctor, is pregnant by a man whose name
she refuses to yield, she is thrown into prison until the child is born.
Dimmesdale pleads with her to let him reveal the truth, but she extracts
a pledge of silence from him.  Her eventual punishment for fornication
and adultery is to wear a scarlet "A" on her breast at all times to
remind the townspeople of her sin.  However, when her long-lost,
presumed dead husband, Roger Chillingworth (Robert Duvall), arrives
after a period spent as an Indian captive, his wife's public humiliation
does little to sate his need for vengeance, a cause to which he devotes
all his efforts.
     Joffe, who directed THE KILLING FIELDS and THE MISSION, is clearly
interested in the conflict between man's view of sin and God's.  This
forms the core of the film.  Is love wrong just because it contravenes
certain man-made laws?  Themes of guilt, which are so critical to the
book, are toned down in the movie, and the character of Chillingworth
has been reduced from a bitter, betrayed man to a bent, sadistic killer.
Robert Duvall's abilities are seriously underused in the role as
envisioned by Joffe and Stewart.
     One area where this movie version of THE SCARLET LETTER is
masterful is in its depiction of the setting.  The mock-up of colonial
Boston is convincing, and great care is taken to assure that there are
no obvious anachronisms.  The forest, which is virtually a character in
the novel, has its own life in the film, as well.  On the whole, this is
a beautiful-looking picture, but THE SCARLET LETTER is in need of more
than a nice appearance.
     The weakest part of the script is the ending.  Aside from straying
significantly from that of the book, the final quarter-hour turns this
rather lugubrious melodrama into an action film.  Someone tuning in late
in the proceedings might mistake the finale for a scene from THE LAST OF
THE MOHICANS.  In principle, I don't have a problem with changing
Hawthorne's downbeat conclusion, but the result should be more
thoughtful than this painfully facile, "Hollywood-ized" version.
     Credit should be given to the film makers for attempting to adapt a
classic American novel for modern audiences.  (The most recent previous
English-language motion picture treatment was made over sixty years
ago.)  Unfortunately, poor casting and script choices have reduced this
film to little more than a period piece soap opera.  The letter placed
upon Hester's breast may be an "A", but Roland Joffe's film doesn't
deserve much better than a "C-" on its report card.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Roland Joffé
Writer: Douglas Day Stewart (based "freely" on the novel by Nathaniel
Hawthorne)
Starring: Demi Moore, Gary Oldman, Robert Duvall, Lisa Jolliff-andoh,
Edward Hardwicke, Robert Prosky, Roy Dotrice, Joan Plowright, Malcolm
Storry, Dana Ivey
My theory when watching a film adaptation of a novel, whatever it may be,
is that the film can do anything it wants with it; it just has to work as a
film itself.  After all, if a film is EXACTLY like the book, why are we
wasting our time watching it?  Can't we just pick up the book and get a
better picture of everything?  When discussing this, I always bring up
Stanley Kubrick's adaptation  of Stephen King's "The Shining," a film that
is like the book for about the first 50 or so pages, and then takes off in
a completely different direction, yet is much more fun and all-around
better than the book, which soon pulls all of its punches and ends in a
manner that goes beyond cheap.
The main thing that this version of "The Scarlet Letter" has in common with
the famous novel by Nathaniel Hawthorne is the title and the basic set-up. 
It still tells the story of Hester Prynne, a puritan woman who has an
affair with the local priest which results in a baby, and is forced to wear
a scarlet-colored "A" on her chest to show everyone that she has sinned. 
And it features all of the same characters, and ALMOST ends the same way,
but that's about all that these two have in common.
This, in my estimation, would be totally fine if it all worked out as a
film.  If this could become a good film by doing what it does with its
source, then by all means I would personally have no problem with it.  But
I have many problems with this.  Instead of being a symbolism-laden parable
about hypocrisy and set-morals, it decides to become a condemnation of
Puritan lifestyles, not because they're a bunch of hypocrites, but because,
hey, they won't have sex!
That's barely the least of the problems.  I wish there was just one main
thing wrong with this film, but there are so many problems, ranging in
size, that this film just completely topples over, and instead of being the
"passionate" and "erotic" story it tries to be, it becomes "dull" and
"laughable."  Are we supposed to be moved in any way by that scene where
Hester is bathing and her young female servant girl decides to take a peak
at her through a hole in the door?  Introducing interracial homosexual
undertones would be fine if it fit at all with the rest of the film.  Here,
it just induces laughing.
I'm actually somewhat shocked that this film is so terrible, because apart
from the laughably horrible casting of Demi Moore as Hester (!!!), you have
what is a really competent cast...or at least is supposed to be competent. 
You have Gary Oldman, a totally amazing actor, in a very strong role,
perhaps the toughest role in the entire story: Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale,
the priest who boinks Hester, whose identity is not revealed, and who is
forced to live what with he thinks is guilt for "lowering" himself to
having an affair.  You also have Robert Duvall, one of the best living
actors, as Hester's husband, Roger, who is believed to be dead in the
beginning, but who comes back to disguise himself as someone else and to
try and torture not only Hester but Arthur as well.  And in smaller roles
you have the normally very competent Robert Prosky as a head servant of the
society, and the great Joan Plowright as a woman who is believed to be a
witch because she has a dirty mouth.  Look away from Demi Moore's name in
first bill and you see what is a great cast in what could have been a great
movie.
But alas, they have opted to remove some of the parts of the book which
really would have helped this out, primarily because it's a big budget
(somewhere in the range of $60 million) Hollywood fiasco, and since many
Hollywood distributors take their audiences for idiots (look at "Godzilla"
if you don't believe me, but just take my word for it), they have to dumb
it down.  The novel starts off when the "A" is placed on Hester's chest,
long after the affair; the film spends a ghastly hour filling in the
beginning, trying to make this a romance, even though the main reason
Hester loves Dimmesdale is because she saw him swimming naked (!!!), and
the main reason Dimmesdale loves Hester is because she has a big chest
(they had silicon back then?  okay, bad joke).
The good thing about the book was it didn't give a shit about all that;
it's more concerned with the aftermath, and revolves around the inner
problems the characters face.  Sure, the book spends hundreds of pages
dealing with inner toil, but the thing is it worked.  Spending an hour on
the romance, especially as silly as it is presented here, is a big fat
waste of time, and the second hour, instead of dealing with the
aforementioned inner toils, reduces itself to melodramatic and ridiculous
action.
And then there's the ending.  The book ends in a way that is literally
proposterous, but is simultaneously sad enough to become tragic and
satirical.  This film opts for a "happy" ending, with a big action showdown
between Indians (!!! - how many time do I have to do this?) and the
Puritans, featuring fire, carnage, and lots of people running around
screaming.  It also aims for its totally ridiculous and ignorant message,
that the Puritans were evil because they tried to stop sex and illicit
affairs when the Puritans were really evil because they were a bunch of big
fat hypocrites.
Not that the film is totally without merit.  Gary Oldman, despite having to
do some really ridiculous stuff, does give what would be a good
performance.  You can almost see him trying to bring out some of the
emotional and satirical depth of the novel in certain scenes, as if he
actually took the time to read the book and understand what it's about
(because we all can tell that no one else did, unless you count
screenwriter Douglas Day Stewart reading a couple pages of the Cliffs Notes
for this).  Duvall, try as he must, actually comes off as laughable, giving
what easily ranks as his worst performance, though in all reality it wasn't
entirely his part.  However, as we are speaking about acting, I suppose I
should mention Joan Plowright, who should be embarrassed for her
performance in this: she comes off as if she took muscle relaxers before
every shoot.  And there's Demi...I won't even waste the time.
The really weird thing about this is that anytime anyone mentions this book
to anyone who went to high school, including me, you get a nasty look. 
This really is one of the most painful and excruciating novels to read, and
it's all the more worse because you're forced to read it and disect it. 
Hawthorne may have been able to weave a complex and satirical story which
has great ideas, but for any entertaining value, this comes up snake eyes. 
Yet when you watch this film, you automatically yearn for the novel and how
it didn't treat you like a moron, and didn't come off as being completely
dull.  At the least you could get into a debate over morals or hypocrisy
with this, which is a lot better than talking about how you didn't like
what is basically a really dull, overly-melodramatic, and completely
incompetent love story.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It takes a lot of chutzpah (nerve) to take a classic book and
change the story around, including the ending.  Hawthorne, wherever he
is, must be seething.  Hollywood has done it again.  If you read the
book you will not believe the ending that was slapped onto the film.
Should anyone care, the screenplay was written by Douglas Day Stewart,
produced and directed by Roland Joff.
     If you read the book, beautifully written, many years ago, you may
want a refresher.  It takes place in the early 1700s when the Puritans
in Massachusetts ruled the colony with a strictness that took any joy
out of life.  As well, superstition and witches were prevalent.  The
story opens with a description of the Boston prison, the women
parishioners, in particular, outside the prison, a mean and vindictive
lot, who are angry at the light sentence given Hester Prynne (Demi
Moore), in the jail for adultery. After months of imprisonment she is
sentenced to wear the scarlet letter "A" for the rest of her life so
everyone would know her as an adulteress, a pregnant adulteress who
would not name the father of the child she was bearing.
     How she bears her punishment, how she earns her living are
described in the book but not in the film.  Many are the omissions and
changes made to Hawthorne's story.  Despite a mostly fine cast, (Gary
Oldman as Arthur Dimmesdale, the best-liked preacher, Robert Duvall as
Hester's husband, Robert Prosky as one of the ministers, Joan Plowright
as an independent and fearless woman destined to be accused of being a
witch) the film does not begin to come near the excellence of the
book.
     Hester looks like the Demi Moore we know, right down to the
shower in the nude, to a replica of the famous Vanity Fair cover where
she posed with her huge belly and navel.  None of that was necessary.
Hester's daughter, Pearl, eventually age seven, who in the book is an
important character is here relegated to being about three-years-old and
except that a birthmark "proves" she is a witch, she is not anyone of
note in the film.
     But it is the "cowboys and Indians" type of ending that was chosen
as the film's laughable ending that put the final stamp of mediocrity
on this version of THE SCARLET LETTER.
