Title
Review for Practical Magic (1998)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
David E. Smith
Practical Magic (1998) - Sandra Bullock, Nicole Kidman, Stockard Channing,
Dianne Wiest, and lots of people we'll never hear from again because this
movie utterly ruined their careers
   I don't know why, but witchcraft sells movie tickets. From "The Craft"
   to "The Witches of Eastwick," movies can instantly make a respectable
   profit just by invoking the magic of, well, magic.
   In deference to 100 years of Hollywood, I won't delve into the myriad
   religious inaccuracies all those movies, and the new "Practical
   Magic," are filled with. The truth about witches wouldn't sell many
   tickets.
   Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman, on the other hand, sell tickets in
   spades. In "Practical Magic" they play sisters, Sally and Gillian
   Owens, trying to shake off a family curse. Should one of them ever
   fall in love, the object of her affection will die a horrible,
   untimely death.
   Of course, this happens to Sally's husband (Mark Feuerstein), then to
   Gillian's latest fling, Jimmy Angelov (Goran Visnjic). Jimmy has a
   "thing" for kidnapping and beating women, though, so when they kill
   him it almost seems justified. He keeps coming back from the dead, and
   hilarity ensues.
   For some reason, "Practical Magic" is billed as a dark romantic
   comedy. (No, it doesn't sound terribly romantic or even funny.) There
   is a bit of comedy, though it's sparse and not terribly well-done.
   There's even a bit of romance, but it doesn't show up until nearly an
   hour into the film. When it does, it finally takes the form of Aidan
   Quinn as a cop from Arizona trying to track Jimmy down.
   The cast is top-notch. Bullock and Kidman are both capable actresses
   and have plenty of on-screen chemistry. They laugh and fight and jug
   as sisters do, and in the process almost manage to save the movie from
   the bottom of the barrel.
   Stockard Channing and Dianne Wiest play the family's eccentric aunts,
   but they seem restrained and not nearly as eccentric as they should
   be. Visnjic, in the inherently juicy role of villain, is fun to watch
   in that guilty-pleasure sort of way, but he doesn't get as much screen
   time as his subplot deserves.
   Sadly, even magic can't salvage very much of what was a very good
   idea. "Practical Magic" is based on the novel by Alice Hoffman; for
   the five bucks your movie ticket will cost, you can take the book home
   with you. The only reason to see the movie would be the popcorn.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Two sister witches have to live with a curse placed upon their family, which
prevents them from ever enjoying a full life with a lover. The hex invokes
the eventual demise of their loved one. When one of their past loves comes
back to haunt them, they have to figure a way out of their eternal dilemma.
CRITIQUE:
I've been waiting for a good witch movie for a while now, but hold on to
your brooms and incantations, cause this puppy is far from being it! For a
film that has the word "magic" in its title, this movie contains very few
moments of magic...or humor for that matter, drama, suspense, or romance.
Well actually, there is some manufactured romance within a plot that is so
muddled, it never lets you in on whether it's a comedy, a drama, a horror
show, or a murder mystery. Or maybe it's a romance, eh? It doesn't really
matter, cause the characters in the film are so boring and uninteresting,
that you have absolutely no basis on which to care for them, or the film as
a whole. If only the filmmakers had spent as much time on the plot as they
did the sinfully obvious soundtrack, this film might've had a chance to be
more than what it is now. Which is an unentertaining, crappy film that uses
the witch angle as a diversionary tactic to weave us away from its grab-bag
of stupid voice-overs, overdone songs, melodramatic romance, undeveloped
story and uneven acting. I only wish that I could make that one hour and
forty-five minutes of my life re-appear, but alas, it is lost in the
spiritual world of "interesting ideas gone wildly awry".
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This film is based on the novel written by Alice Hoffman.
Co-screenwriter Akiva Goldsman also wrote the screenplay for 1997's BATMAN &
ROBIN.
Director Griffin Dunne is known mainly as an actor in such films as AN
AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON and AFTER HOURS.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        So I took my little sister to see "Practical Magic" because it
seemed like a better choice than "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer - The
Movie" (even though "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer - The Movie" features a
new version of 'Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer' by Clint Black).
"Practical Magic" stars Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman who play sisters
who are also latter-day witches, and if you've seen anything else with
Nicole in it you'll know this isn't much of a stretch for her.  She plays
the slutty witch with the red hair whose freewheeling lifestyle gets her
into trouble.  Sandra plays the good witch with the black hair who has hung
up her broomstick and decided not to dabble in the black arts.  She wants a
normal life with a husband and two kids (one has black hair, the other red,
coincidentally) and a business selling shampoos, soaps, and body oils.  If
you've seen anything else with Sandra in it you'll know this isn't much of
a stretch for her.  Unfortunately Sandra and Nicole are the latest in a
long line of witches who have been landed with a nasty curse: any man who
falls in love with an Owens woman is doomed.  To sit through this movie,
they mean.  So I tried to keep my eyes off Sandra and Nicole as much as
possible, lest I fall in love with either of them, and marvel instead at
Stockard Channing and Dianne Wiest who play the girls' over-stuffed, campy
witch aunts, with whom they are forced to live and eat chocolate for
breakfast.  Stockard essentially recreates her over-stuffed, campy role as
a bordello proprietor in "Moll Flanders."  Dianne says something
funny--there's a big dramatic pause right before she says it--but for the
life of me I can't remember what it was now.  Maybe it was during the
embarrassing "midnight margaritas" sequence.  That's part of the problem
with the film; it's not very funny (unless substituting a dustbuster for a
broom is a new sight gag for you).  On the other hand, Sandra's tears are
quite convincing when her husband gets run over by a truck--think what she
could do if a storyline required her to blubber for 90 minutes
straight--but that's the other problem with the film.  It's all over the
place.  It's part light romantic comedy, part sappy sentimental tearjerker,
part Tuesday night domestic violence drama, part murder mystery, and part
"Exorcist"-styled demonic possession flick, and none of this fits together
particularly well.  I asked my sister what she thought of the film and she
said it was a bit "slow."  But her biggest disappointment was that Aidan
Quinn, who plays an Arizona cop who comes looking for Nicole's missing
boyfriend, didn't take his shirt off.  As for the film's soundtrack...  Oh
geez.  Just when the film gets quiet or moving or poignant the filmmakers
force some loud, inappropriate pop song down our throats.  Thankfully
someone must have whispered something in Griffin Dunne's ear--Griffin
directed the picture with far too much soft-focus and hand-held camerawork
for my liking--about halfway through the film because the songs stop, just
like that, until Stevie Nicks, a self-confessed witch in her own right,
warbles a new version of Fleetwood Mac's 'Crystal' right at the end of the
movie, following it immediately with another sudser over the end credits.
This so that they could stamp a big "features two new songs by Stevie
Nicks" on the print ads, presumably.  Maybe Clint Black crooning 'Rudolph
the Red-Nosed Reindeer' wasn't such a bad idea after all.

Author
James Brundage
Why do titles have to be so ironic? Not to say that Practical Magic is an
oxy moron, some of the camera tricks that they have are nice and neat. But
the movie itself is neither practical nor magic, which it would so much like
us to believe. It's not a witchcraft movie, it's not a female bonding movie,
or a family movie. It's not much of a romance, it's not much of a thriller.
It's not much of a PG-13 horror, either. What it is is OK. Nothing more,
nothing less.
It's one of those movies that I kind of just sat through. I was a passive
participant. I didn't even get to make my usual comments picking on it while
I watched it (except for one). It's not a waste of your time, if you have
time to kill. It's not a bad movie to take some witches to: I can say its
religiously accurate. But what use is that?
You'd think it be great, or at least good, starring Nichole Kidman and
Sandra Bullock, directed by Giffen Dunne (Addicted to Love). But instead its
just mediocre. It's just OK. End of story. End of film. End of review.

Author
Steve Kong
It's hard not to like Practical Magic. It has a talented cast, wonderful
music, and beautiful cinematography. The one thing that Practical Magic
doesn't have is a cohesive script to make all the good elements stick
together.
Practical Magic is like a witch's brew. To conjure up this brew, throw in
one part drama, one part whodunnit, two parts romance, and a sprinkle of
supernatural. This is the largest failure of Practical Magic. Once the
movie settles into a comfortable genre it jumps out and goes into another.
This is jarring for the audience and never gives the audience anything to
hang on to.
Sally (Sandra Bullock) and Gillian (Nicole Kidman) Owens are sisters. They
are from a long line of witches. The curse of the Owens women is that each
man they fall in love with will eventually die before his time. Sally and
Gillian are outcasts in their small town because their witch aunts (Dianne
Wiest and Stockard Channing) raised them both as witches.
There are a few subplots in Practical Magic. One talks about Sally's
children and husband. Another talks about a murder and an investigation
headed by an outsider, Gary Hallet (Aidan Quinn). Then there is a story of
a lost soul, one of a romance between a sister and Hallet, and finally one
about the town's rejection of the Owens family. With all these subplots,
the story is quite unfocused. Though, it didn't have to be if the script
were smarter and the director sharper.
Aidan Quinn's was the one good performance that stood out. His lonely but
strong cop is the best of the characters in Practical Magic. His
performance is also the best. His character gets stuck in a sticky
situation when he falls in love with a witch that is probably a murderer. 
Sandra Bullock does nothing new with her part. She continues to try to
regain what popularity she lost with her flop, Speed 2. Bullock brings back
her girl-next-door act making Practical Magic feel somewhat like a witch's
version of Hope Floats.
Nicole Kidman is good as the bad sister. Kidman just looks different in
Practical Magic. Her performance is slinky and snake-like. It was a pure
joy to watch Kidman onscreen.
The script by Robin Swicord and Akiva (Lost in Space and Batman and Robin)
Goldsman and Adam Brooks is an absolute mess. The script is based on Alice
Hoffman's book by the same name. Practical Magic just drips of Goldsman's
bad writing. In most cases, books are better than the movies made from
them. And in most cases screenwriters are smart enough to cut out some
subplots from books because of time restraints. Swicord, Goldsman, and
Brooks are not this smart. It feels as if they tried to squeeze every
subplot from the book into a two-hour script.
Practical Magic is nothing magical. Nor is it anything new. There is no
real target audience for Practical Magic because it drifts from one genre
to another. But it is somewhat entertaining. If you really want to see
Practical Magic, wait until it comes out on video.
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Griffin Dunne
Cast:  Sandra Bullock, Nicole Kidman, Dianne Wiest, Stockard Channing,
Aidan Quinn, Goran Visnjic, Evan Rachel Wood, Alexandra Artrip
Screenplay:  Robin Swicord, Akiva goldsman, Adam Brooks
Producers:  Denise Di Novi
Runtime:  103 min.
US Distribution:  Warner Bros.
Rated PG-13:  some violence, intense thematic elements, sensuality
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
At the center of Practical Magic are two immensely attractive women. 
The two women are, of course, Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman.  Both
are talented actresses, and have displayed their talents in many films. 
Any film in which they are visible for most of its running time is, by
definition, watchable.  Sometimes, however, they star in films that,
without their presence, would be simply unwatchable.  This is the case
with Practical Magic, which is a film so deeply entrenched in stupidity
that I fear my IQ dropped ten points from watching it.
Practical Magic is a the cinematic equivalent of a nuclear meltdown: 
it's disastrous from the first shot, and it only gets worse, waving its
wand of simpering senselessness over audiences until, finally, they
either give up or stumble out of the theater to safety.  This film gave
me a headache.  The bad dialogue attacked my ears.  The stupid concepts
assaulted my intelligence.  The pointless special effects scraped at my
eyes.  And it's all smashed together into one big wish-I-were-witty lump
by director Griffin Dune.  
It's the story of two sister witches, Sally and Gillian Owens (Bullock
and Kidman).  The film begins with a look into the past, as "their
ancestor" (as she's described) is shown to escape a hanging during the
Salem witch trials, thanks to her super special powers.  Flash ahead a
few hundred years, and our protagonists are young girls, learning that,
when they hear a certain kind of beetle squeak, then the man they love
is dead (this, of course, is how their father died).  So Sally wishes
never to fall in love, while Gillian can't wait to do so.  When the
setup finally ends, we're thwarted with a formula film of such
inescapable badness that I wonder if anyone was conscious during the
making of the film.  
Sally, as expected, wants to deny her witch heritage and raise a
family.  So, she meets and instantly falls in love with her
husband-to-be, who promptly dies after supplying her with a couple of
daughters.  Gillian, on the other hand, is running around in paradise,
drinking and dancing all the time.  But wait!  The plot synopsis isn't
done!  Conflicts arise when they accidentally murder Gillian's psycho
boyfriend.  Then, to give the film a romantic input, Aidan Quinn is
introduced as an investigator looking for the psycho (who, apparently,
is wanted in other cities for murder).  
This is the kind of film where every element is poorly conceived; the
most obvious deficiency is in the script.  Adapted from the novel by
Alice Hoffman, the story fails to recognize characters or plot on a
comfortable level.  Each character has one big trait:  Sally is
down-to-earth; Gillian is racy, etc.  And, due to the exceptional lack
of depth, story developments that are supposed to be sad and/or moving
strike with no impact whatsoever (the death of Sally's first husband,
for instance).  
The banality of the first half is soon accentuated by the pure idiocy
of the second half, which features elements from decent films like The
Frighteners the The Exorcist.  A good example of this is the scene in
which the psycho inhabits Gillian's body for no purpose at all.  When he
gets himself out, he's a black-and-white shade and really really crazy
(kinda like the spooks in The Frighteners).  It's poorly done and
derivative, but it's also pointless and unexplained.  The ending
sequence, which features a bunch of chanting soccer moms with brooms, is
truly abhorrent, and made me cringe with hatred.  
The strangest thing is that the film is totally arbitrary when it comes
to the magic and the witch stuff:  these women seem to have almost no
powers; all they seem to be capable of is putting people to sleep. 
Little details -- where the magic comes from, why these women are able
to use it, why the psycho comes back to life, why he keeps haunting them
(I could go on and on) -- are never explained or even hinted to.  But,
alas, by this point, I just wanted to escape the theater.  I was glad
they didn't spend more time explaining.
Dunne's direction is as misguided as any I've seen this year.  The film
shifts gears frequently, from soft and cuddly (scenes with the children)
to gooey and sentimental (all the romance junk between Bullock and
Quinn) to dark and evil (the ghost scenes) to slapstick comedy (anything
having to do with potions).  And it wants to be so funny; there are
scenes that try so hard to be edgy and wickedly clever (everything with
the psycho, for instance), but they all just fall flat.  It's a bubbling
cauldron of elements that make no sense and don't fit together.  I
longed for some consistency, some idea of what the film was trying to
accomplish.  It fails in every way:  I found none of it interesting,
engrossing, or funny.  
Well, I take that back.  Dianne Wiest is mildly amusing as one of two
aunt witches (the other is played by Stockard Channing, who just acts
silly).  The one scene that has a bit of life is the one in which
Gillian walks in on the soccer mom meeting and says, "Hold on to your
husbands, ladies!"  And, of course, there are two immensely attractive
women to look at.  But Practical Magic is just plain bad -- a confused
disaster, tedious and cloying and singularly moronic.  I'm sorry that
two beautiful women had to star in this example of stupidity; no matter
how attractive they are, their looks can't alleviate my aching brain.  

Author
Michael Dequina
_Practical_Magic_ (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
Akiva Goldsman.  If those two words don't strike fear in the hearts of
moviegoers everywhere, I don't know what will.  The _Lost_in_Space_ and
_Batman_&_Robin_ scribe is true to sloppy form with _Practical_Magic_, a
muddled melange of genres that fails to come up with a distinct identity.
Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman play Sally and Gillian Owens,
respectively, sisters who carry on the family tradition of witchcraft.
Slutty Gillian loves to use her powers, especially to lure men, while the
reluctant but more powerful witch Sally yearns for a normal life--and a
true love that, according to an apparent curse on all Owens women, can
never come.
After the basic setup, _Practical_Magic_ heads in a number of divergent
directions.  The film is being sold as a whimsical lark, and at times the
film is light and agreeable fluff, especially when Sally and Gillian's
proud witch aunts Jet (Dianne Wiest) and Frances (Stockard Channing) are
onscreen.  But then there are the sober sister bonding scenes, where Sally
and Gillian, generally teary-eyed, profess their love for and devotion to
each other.  Then there's a taste of macabre comedy, where the sisters find
themselves disposing of the body of a man whose death they accidentally
caused.  This sets the stage for a romantic subplot between Sally and the
police officer (Aidan Quinn) investigating the man's death.  Lest we forget
this is a movie about witches, events take a turn toward straight horror,
with an evil spirit threatening the life of Gillian and everyone and
everything around her.
The all-encompassing scope of _Practical_Magic_ would not be a problem if
these elements blended into a convincing whole; _Ghost_ proved that it is
not an impossible task.  But the reason why that film was able to
successfully cover a number of bases was that, for all its genre-hopping,
it had a clearly defined central concern: the undying love between the two
main characters.  Goldsman, co-scripters Robin Swicord and Adam Brooks
(adapting Alice Hoffman's novel), and director Griffin Dunne don't appear
to have a central concern other than to try to make the film as many things
as possible to all people.  As the film jumps from place to place, so does
one's idea of what the film is exactly about.  Witchcraft?  Sally's search
for love?  Sally and Gillian's relationship?  The evil spirit?  The Owens
women's "curse"?  Anyone's guess is as good as mine. 
If the makers of _Practical_Magic_ had kept things simple, it could have
been an amusing little popcorn flick.  As in all her films, Bullock is
instantly likable, and Kidman is fun as the wild witch.  That said, the two
have little sisterly chemistry, which brings to mind a direction the film
could have taken: the comical feud between two rival sister witches, one
reckless, the other reluctant but more powerful.  OK, maybe that's not such
a great idea.  But at least it's a clear direction, something the unfocused
_Practical_Magic_ is in constant search of.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Simon Calloway
 Practical Magic is no masterpiece, but it was one of the more enjoyable movies
of 1998.  I liked the way the story had characters worth caring for, and the
film is essentially a comedy, yet, had touching, dramatic moments.
 Based on the Alice Hoffman novel, the story revolves around the Owen sisters,
Sally (Sandra Bullock) and Gillian (Nicole Kidman).  The are witches in a long
line of Owens, and, like the rest, are cursed.  If they shall find happiness
and love, the curse will strike, as it did for Sally, ending in a fatality.
 For Gillian, the rebel, she is in trouble from her scuze boyfriend.  When she
is kidnapped, along with Sally, and almost maimed, Sally dumps a bunch of Bella
Donna into his drink, and ends up killing him.
 They try to bring him back from the dead using spells, but bring back
something even more sinister.  They bury him in the backyard, and tell no one. 
But, the guy just won't stay down.  He keeps haunting them.
 There is more to Practical Magic, but, it simply wouldn't be such fun if I
told you everything in this funny, magical movie from director Griffin Dunne,
whose credits include the hilarious Addicted to Love (1997).  Bullock and
Kidman have great chemistry, while Dianne Weist and Stockerd Channing both
offer wonderful performances as Sally and Gillian's aunts.  
 Practical Magic won't amount to a lot to the 'serious' film viewer.  Such as,
if you thought the wonderful Ever After or, even, Addicted to Love, were beans,
then Magic is your antimovie.  I loved both of those films, and Magic.  It
casts a spell, so to speak.  Plus, Sandra Bullock could make eating beans
interesting.

Author
Michael Redman
Witchy women have their enchanting charms
Witches? For many people, this word still conjures up images of either weird
hats and ugly, warted, old-woman masks for Halloween or devil-worshipers
sacrificing babies. I'm here to tell you that it ain't true.
How many Wiccans (modern witchcraft) or other practitioners of magick do you
think live within 10 miles of your house? Probably you've estimated in the
single digits; likely close to zero. Take your number and double it or
quadruple it or increase it tenfold. You're possibly still low. In a city like
Bloomington, multiplying your guess by 100 is more accurate.
Wicca is estimated by some to be the fastest growing religion in the country.
Although witches are slowly coming out of the broom closet, no one really
knows how many there are. According to the "Utne Reader", there may be as many
as 400,000 adherents in the United States alone and the practice is poised to
enter the mainstream. Witches are your doctors, nurses, bakers, bartenders,
business people, musicians and just about anyone else you could think of.
None are devil-worshippers: Wiccans don't believe in Satan. Although there are
dozens of denominations, mostly they honor in the sanctity and power of
nature. They're not out there summoning demons, but they are casting spells
and performing rituals. The tradition dates back at least to the occult
revival early in this century and some claim a lineage from the pre-patriarchy
Goddess religions.
Sisters Sally (Sandra Bullock) and Gillian (Nicole Kidman) Owens can date
their charming heritage back at least 200 years. Since the 1700s the family
women have all been witches. They've also all suffered the same curse: any man
who gets involved with an Owens woman is doomed to an early death.
When the orphaned young girls come to live with their maiden aunts Jet (Dianne
Wiest) and Frances (Stockard Channing), they are informed of their birthright
and schooled in the craft. Sally vows never to fall in love unless she meets
the impossible man of her spell. He must have one blue eye, one green eye,
ride a pony backwards and other odd attributes so designed that he will never
exist. Gillian on the other hand "can't wait to fall in love."
The girls grow in opposite directions. Although she is the more powerful,
brunette Sally isn't much interested in sorcery. Red-headed Gillian embraces
her skills and quickly leaves the Owens-hating small New England town to
discover the world.
Sally eventually mysteriously falls in love and settles into the quiet life of
wife and mother. Gillian dances poolside with a bottle in one hand, a vial of
belladonna in the other and following in love -- often and enthusiastically.
The death of Sally's husband and the cruelty of Gillian's current lover bring
the witchy siblings back together. After tearfully pledging their undying
fealty to each other, they must deal with Jimmy (Goran Visnjic), Gillian's
abusive "Dracula-cowboy" boyfriend, when he shows up on their doorstep.
Arizona policeman Gary Hallet (Aidan Quinn) also appears, investigating Jimmy.
It doesn't take a magic moment looking in his eyes to know that they don't match.
The film has several delightful scenes. When the sisters and aunts dance
around the kitchen table after doing tequila shots singing "You put the lime
in the coconut", it's a joy. They actually look like they're having a good
time and it translates to the audience.
The story is fairly successful in combining the esoteric life of witches and
the everyday. Like any mother warning her older relatives not to be too
permissive with her kids, Sally tells Jet and Frances not to let her daughters
dance naked at a Solstice celebration. When the little girls come back
exclaiming "Mommy, Mommy, we danced naked!" she cringes. Some of the
Hollywoodish effects are goofy though. Sally's coffee stirs itself though and
it's silly.
The comedic touches are hilarious at times. Looking for something white to
draw a pentagram, the witches reach for a can of whipped cream. As Gillian
brings her former lover back to life, she explains "but after this we're
breaking up."
There are several other notable aspects -- the set design is fascinating with
cryptic objects barely glimpsed -- but the film has a few problems. Director
Griffin Dunne ("Addicted To Love") gets off to a very slow start, includes too
many VH-1 moments and, worst of all, tries to be everything to all people. The
film shifts gears from romance novel to offbeat comedy to supernatural
thriller to family drama to horror faster than the viewer can keep up.
The "sisterhood is powerful" ending is touching and feel-good but comes out of
left field and doesn't make sense considering previous events. You'll somehow
feel energized and incredulous at the same time.
The strength of the movie lies in its casting. Bullock has never previously
impressed me with her acting talents, but she fills this role perfectly. 
Kidman's Gillian jumps off the screen and, if I can slip into the "Yeah, I'm a
guy and that's the way it is" mode, she's an absolute pleasure to watch as she
dances, prances and struts her wild woman stuff. Despite the vast differences
between the two, their chemistry makes it easy to believe their relationship.
Wiest and Channing are also looking good. The eccentric aunts feeding kids
chocolate cake for breakfast radiate power. Unfortunately they disappear for
half the film just when we want more.
The men don't fare so well. Quinn and Visnjic both are saddled with
one-dimensional characters and don't put much into their performances.
Although pivotal to the plot, they get in the way of the better stuff.
There's currently a media fascination with witches. "Sabrina" (from Archie
Comics of all places) and Charmed are both weekly television series.
1996's "The Craft" was a ground-breaker in presenting witches as everyday
people. "Practical Magic" for all its faults is entertaining in a lightweight
manner. I'm curious to see if we ever get a realistic look at Wicca on the screen.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 299 lunar cycles and has
never met a witch who could raise the dead or create explosions, but does know
a few just as bewitching as Sally and Gillian. Email your magickal tales to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 10/22/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Luke Buckmaster
PRACTICAL MAGIC
Cast: Sandra Bullock, Nicole Kidman, Dianne Wiest, Stockard Channing,
Aidan Quinn, Goran Visnjic
Director: Griffin Dunne
Screenplay: Robin Swicord and Akiva Goldsman and Adam Brooks based on
the novel by Alice Hoffman
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
One star
Many years ago people believed that witchcraft was not something to poke
fun at; witches symbolized evil in its most satanic and scariest form.
But nowadays, witches are funky and cool.  Compare the witchcraft in
Macbeth or The Crucible to that of Bewitched or Sabrina: The Teenage
Witch, and you'll notice an astonishing difference.  Vile old women have
now been replaced by the likes of Nicole Kidman and Sandra Bullock, and
the only thing scary about them is their choice of films.  Attractive
young women may give their characters energy and liveliness, but
witchery has lost its meaning and relevance in cinema.  In the case of
Practical Magic, it doesn't represent evil; it represents very bad
filmmaking.
For centuries, the Owens family of witches has suffered from a
disturbing curse: any man they fall in love with soon ends up dead.
Sisters Sally (Sandra Bullock) and Gillian (Nicole Kidman) deal with
this problem in different ways.  Sally chooses to ignore her family's
past and marries a man she is deeply in love with, whilst Gillian
pursues a life of loveless affairs.  Things get a little tricky when the
sisters kill Gillian's boyfriend, in self-defense.  They attempt to
cover up the murder, whilst likeable cop Gary Hallet (Aidan Quinn)
investigates who done it.
Any chance to pace Practical Magic in a sensible way has been
conveniently ignored.  The story moves from romance, to sanitized
horror, to a murder mystery, then back to romance, then back to
sanitized horror, and then to something even more ridiculous (let's just
say a group of ordinary women become part of an absurd ritual, and leave
it at that).  The three screenwriters who adapted the film from the
novel by Alice Hoffman have shown no talent for unraveling any hint of a
coherent story.  Practical Magic is never evenly faintly believable, and
only occasionally enjoyable.  Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman give a
sexy and fun feeling to their roles, but their performances are
simplistic and one-dimensional.
The film never succeeds in finding stable ground, but comes reasonably
close to it when Aidan Quinn arrives on the screen.  Quinn's previous
film was The Assignment, in which he boldly portrayed two different
characters, and was brilliant throughout.  Here, he looks out of place
and ignorant of the idiocy surrounding him, but at least provides the
reason why Practical Magic is (sometimes) tolerable.
Few films insult my intelligence and ever fewer inspire me to walk out
early, but Practical Magic did both those things.  Director Griffin
Dunne seems to have no idea of how to make a solid, respectable product,
largely because of the film's clumsy screenplay.  Condescending,
embarrassing and immature, Practical Magic is practically pathetic.


Author
Jamie Peck
PRACTICAL MAGIC
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
For a while, the movie is adept enough to juggle genres, but something 
wicked appears to have taken over scripting duties around its 
midsection. Not a whole lot of "Practical Magic"'s supernatural scenario 
is adequately explained, and it's a gargantuan goof-up when a film is 
given the opportunity to create its own rules and then refuses to play 
by them. Underwritten and overplotted, "Practical Magic" ultimately 
vexes more often than it hexes, culminating in supremely foolish 
business like straight-faced demonic possession and an exorcism that 
includes the neighborhood PTA. The varied light-and-dark agenda really 
clashes in moments like these. 
When all else fails, at least Bullock and Kidman make an enchanting pair 
of contemporary sorceresses. They're respectively cast as Sally and 
Gillian Owens, sisters in a bloodline of white magic-dabblers long 
plagued by a centuries-old curse - that any man who falls in love with a 
gal from their clan is guaranteed an untimely demise. Widowed Sally has 
learned this the hard way and moves in with her dotty aunts (Stockard 
Channing and Dianne Wiest); free-spirited Gillian spares herself the 
potential heartache by engaging only in quickie relationships all over 
the map. 
Gillian's latest squeeze is a studly cowboy (Goran Visnjic) who hails 
from Transylvania and drinks like a fish. A volatile encounter that 
involves him, them and some belladonna sets off an ugly chain of 
incidents that eventually gains the attention of an affable cop (Aidan 
Quinn); he may or may not be Sally's soul mate, but they fall for each 
other either way. It's here where "Practical" begins to lose the magic - 
not only does this budding romance lack both chemistry and credibility, 
it seems like a complete afterthought. And the Quinn character has other 
problems to boot: Could his ensuing detective work possibly be any 
shoddier? 
So "Practical Magic"'s strange brew never quite comes to a boil, despite 
consistently spellbinding performances and the promise of its first 
half. If the filmmakers had cleaned up the scatterbrained story threads 
and provided stronger explanations for some of their weirder tangents, 
this movie could have been an enjoyable little date flick. But the 
spells cast by the nifty premise and the adorable cast end up enchanting 
all by themselves, leaving "Practical Magic" to finish in a hazy place 
somewhere between the bewildered and the bewitched.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Dabbling is dangerous.  Sally and Gillian Owens, played charmingly by
Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman, were trained as witches when they were
young, but they've never been serious practitioners.  When their lovers
start dying on them, they turn to the book of magic for help with
disastrous results.
Director Griffin Dunne's PRACTICAL MAGIC, which isn't as whimsical as
the material warrants, starts during the time of the Salem witch trials
as an Owens woman is being hung.  She escapes that ordeal, but then her
lover abandons her while she is carrying his child.  In retaliation, she
puts a curse on any man who ever dares to love an Owens woman again, and
it works forever after.
The film, which has a long series of missed opportunities, starts slowly
and has trouble building any sustainable momentum.  When Dunne brings in
a few significant doses of the supernatural in the last part, the movie
finally begins to find its legs.
Dianne Wiest and Stockard Channing play Aunt Jet and Aunt Frances, the
quirky relatives who raised Sally and Gillian.  The parts of the aunts
are the least well developed in the generally unpolished script by Robin
Swicord, based on Alice Hoffman's novel.
Sally and Gillian are as different as sisters can be while still bound
by love and witchcraft.  Sally is happily domestic.  She lives on a
picture-book island and has a handsome husband and two delightful girls.
Gillian, in contrast, has a string of lovers and lives life totally on
the wild side.  She describes her current and abusive boyfriend as a
vampire-cowboy type.
Aidan Quinn steals the picture as an out of state detective
investigating some mysterious activities.  His likable character
provides a good-hearted spark that enlivens the film's second half.  A
romantic angle with him and one of the sisters is less satisfying.  As
in the rest of the movie, the director sets up the romance but keeps
pulling it back, never quite letting it ignite as it should.
The story works best when it unabashedly follows its offbeat roots.  The
spoon in Sally's cup keeps on stirring, for example, whether her hand is
on the spoon or not.  More of these cute little touches would have
helped, as would more of the film's black comedy aspects.  As delivered,
the film moves in fits and spurts, never quite taking off, yet providing
some bits of solid entertainment along the way.
The movie does suggest some fascinating possibilities for the parent
calling chain at school.  But the PTA would most certainly not approve.
PRACTICAL MAGIC runs 1:43.  It is rated PG-13 for mild profanity,
violence and sensuality and would be fine for kids around 10 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Matt Williams
Based on Alice Hoffman's novel, Practical Magic is a partially
enchanting film about the lives and loves of a family of witches.  The
film is never as magical as it needs to be, and it is harmed by some
overly simplistic solutions.
The Owens family is a family of witches...stubborn witches apparently.
For 300 years, their small Massachusetts town has persecuted and shunned
the Owens girls.  But, do they move away and start anew?  Nope.  They
don't even put a curse on the locals.  Instead, they live in the same
small town, and even suffer under a curse of their own.
You see, ever since one Owens girl was unlucky in love many many moons
ago, any man who ever loves an Owens is doomed to die young.  This curse
doesn't bother the flighty Gillian Owens (Nicole Kidman), who thinks
there are plenty of men around, so why should she get attached to just
one? However, for Sally Owens (Sandra Bullock), the curse presents a
problem... one she attempts to solve (but apparently unsuccessfully)
with magic.
Flash forward several years...a desperate plea from Gillian, whose
flighty ways have landed her in Florida, sends Sally on a rescue
attempt. Apparently Gillian's latest boyfriend, Jimmy (Goran Visnjic),
isn't a really nice guy.  But when the two witches start using magic to
get out of their predicament, they're unprepared for the dark forces
they are about to unleash.
For the most part, Practical Magic displays the light side of
witchcraft. There's one moderately gruesome spirit, but other than that,
the magic here is as tame as Bewitched.
Sandra Bullock is a bit bland as Sally.  She's likable, but her
character cries out for a magical zest which never materializes. Kidman
is a little better as the free spirited Gillian.  At least she
captivates your attention a little bit.  But both of the leads are a
little flat...too one note.  They both seem more like short descriptions
rather than full-fledged characters.
The supporting cast is a mixed bag of tricks. Stockard Channing and
Dianne Wiest seem to hit the right notes as Sally and Gillian's wise,
doting aunts.  But Aidan Quinn doesn't quite fit as a detective hot on
Jimmy's trail.  The townsfolk are amusing at times, but rarely
believable in their convictions.
Practical Magic is a nice enough movie, but, on the whole, it's
disappointing. Everything wraps up a bit too neatly, and the whole film
is missing a certain charm.  At best, it makes for a fluffy little
diversion.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Allan Woodward
    It's difficult to adequately review a film like Practical Magic, an
adaptation of author Alice Hoffman's bestselling novel.  Not because of its
excesses of brilliance or lack thereof, but because it's so many things at
once, both good and bad, that it's almost impossible to give justice to the
film without separating each portion of it into distinct areas of critique.
    Billed as a romantic comedy, or perhaps a late-'90s version of The
Witches of Eastwick, this film is neither.  While it has elements of
romantic comedy, Practical Magic, which stars Sandra Bullock and Nicole
Kidman as sisters who are also real witches, is also fairly equal parts
drama, tearjerker and horror film.  It begins with a near-hanging and a
voice-over which provides the set-up for what follows: the Owens clan of
women (witches all) are cursed never to love.  Ever.  The men they love will
always die.
    Sandra Bullock is the undisputed star of this picture and it's nice to
see a return to the sort of work she did before she became America's
sweetheart in movies like While You Were Sleeping.  Her character, Sally
Owens, is the reluctant one in a close-knit family unit of witches which
includes Stockard Channing and Dianne Wiest (in great supporting roles - you
know these women from the weird parts of your own family tree), yearning for
a normal life with a husband and a family.  She is more closed than cute,
more wounded than spunky.  When the seemingly inevitable tragedy strikes,
she plays it well.  As the film progresses, she brings weight to her role
and sometimes real emotion, even when events turn increasingly disjointed.
    And they do become pretty strange.  Nicole Kidman is the wild-one
sister, passing from man to man in order to avoid the curse of never having
love by never seeking love.  As usual, Kidman does a pro's job sinking into
the character, but it's disappointing that she didn't get a chance to take
on the stronger role of Sally, since she more than has the skills to play
women who reach down inside themselves to find an iron will when the need
arises.  Just watch Dead Calm to see what I mean.
    Anyway, Kidman gets mixed up with a hard-drinking Romanian Louis L'Amour
fan that she both desires and fears.  It's here that Practical Magic detours
into a fairly harrowing depiction of abuse and, ultimately, murder.  What
spins out from there is a bizarre, unbalanced mix of The Exorcist, Jack the
Bear and, lastly, Sleepless in Seattle (in the form of Aidan Quinn, who's
becoming better-looking and a better actor as he ages).
    Ultimately there are too many threads to deal with adequately.  The
aforementioned Aidan Quinn is a policeman from Arizona, who may also be The
One for Sally, investigating the Romanian cowboy, an evil spirit threatens
to tear the family apart and maybe kill Gillian and, if that's not enough,
Sally has a hard time with her relationship with her two daughters.  All of
this, jostling for screen time.  Sometimes the transitions aren't pretty.
    Despite all of its problems, Practical Magic isn't bad.  Director
Griffin Dunne (Addicted to Love) delivers a visually lush and
solidly-managed piece of work.  His cast is excellent and they work each
scene with verve.  Alice Hoffman, who also wrote the first draft of the
script, brings across her theme of women's empowerment through blood- and
symbolic-sisterhood.  However, this same script is unable to maintain a
consistent mood due to the proliferation of subplots.
    See the film if you like.  It's a nice way to spend a couple hours.  And
the worst that can be said of Practical Magic is that it's a noble failure
for having tried to do too much.
    Just Rent It This Week:  The Replacement Killers, Starring Chow Yun-Fat
and Mira Sorvino.  Grade: A.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Griffin Dunne.
Cast: Sandra Bullock, Nicole Kidman, Stockard Channing, Dianne Wiest, 
Aidan Quinn, Goran Visjnic, Chloe Webb, Lucinda Jenney.
1998 - 105 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for mild violence, profanity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed October 17, 1998.
"Practical Magic," is a film that is so misguided in so many ways that 
it makes you wonder how such talented and high-profile actors would even 
get involved in an embarrassing clap-trap like this one.
The film stars Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman as Sally and Gillian 
Owens, two sisters whose family comes from a long line of witches, 
spanning back 200 years. At the start, their parents die when they are 
still children, and they go to live with their two zany aunts (Stockard 
Channing and Dianne Wiest). Switch to the present day, Gillian, who is 
the stronger, more rebellious sibling, leaves home, and meets up with a 
dark, abusive guy (Goran Visjnic), while Sally stays in their hometown, 
meets and falls in love with a sweet, caring man, has two children, and 
then is devastated when her husband is hit by a truck and killed (come 
to think of it, she's not too devastated since she gets over it in about 
two minutes). When Gillian calls Sally to come get her after having 
another abusive spat with Visjnic, they accidentally murder him, and in 
desperation, bury the body in the backyard of their aunts' house. Add to 
this wildly convoluted story subplots involving the dead rising and an 
exorcism, not to mention a spattering of "light-hearted whimsy," and you 
have a pretty good idea how messy "Practical Magic" is.
After seeing the film, I reflected that there was not even one scene, or 
element, that I liked or enjoyed. It is a comedy, to be sure, but all of 
the humor falls astoundingly flat, and the occasional dramatic moments 
are the least bit touching. It is not charming or entertaining in any 
way. And then to top it off, we've got this dark, but bird-brained story 
of an evil spirit taking over Gillian's body. Whatever.
The characters are handled terribly, and actually, most of the actors do 
not have the fortune of even getting to be what you could call a 
character. There is no reason why Channing and Wiest should have decided 
to be in this film, and in every scene involving them, they are always 
standing side-by-side. No attempt is made to flesh them out into actual 
people. The same goes for Aidan Quinn, as a handsome police 
investigator, who has the misfortune of being the romantic lead opposite 
Bullock, even though he comes into it at around the 70-minute mark, and 
once again, there is no attempt to develop their relationship, or his 
character, in any way. In fact, every line of dialogue in the film is in 
service of moving the plot along, rather than getting to know the people 
saying the lines. I should have know I was headed for trouble during the 
opening credits, when I found out the screenplay was written by the 
deeply hated Akiva Goldsman, who managed to destroy the "Batman" series 
with "Batman Forever" and "Batman and Robin."
"Practical Magic" is directed by Griffin Dunne, primarily an actor, who 
last year made the contrived, clumsy romance, "Addicted to Love," with 
Meg Ryan and Matthew Broderick. I disliked that movie quite a bit, but 
since "Practical Magic" is even worse, that can only give you a taste of 
what a talentless filmmaker he is. I'd tell him to quit while he's 
ahead, but in these last two years, he's ultimately already buried 
himself.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
PRACTICAL MAGIC
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Sandra Bullock, Nicole Kidman, Dianne Wiest, Stockard Channing,
Aidan Quinn, Goran Visjnic.
Screenplay:  Robin Swicord, Akiva Goldsman and Adam Brooks, based on the
novel by Alice Hoffman.
Producer:  Denise DiNovi.
Director:  Griffin Dunne.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  104 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     PRACTICAL MAGIC cast a sort of spell over me, but I don't think it's
the kind a film-maker might have intended.  Rather than enchantment, it
produced a Spell of Befuddlement.  It's not so much a movie as it is a big
bubbling cauldron of confusion into which a mess of ingredients have been
tossed.  Among the items included in this concoction:
     1) A cup of THELMA & LOUISE.  The story focuses on a pair of sisters
(genetic, not just philosophical) named Sally (Sandra Bullock) and Gillian
(Nicole Kidman) Owens, who come from a long line of witchcraft
practitioners including the maiden aunts (Stockard Channing and Dianne
Wiest) who raised them.  Part of that legacy involves a curse on the men
in their lives, leading Sally into a tragic longing for true love and
Gillian to a pursuit of loveless affairs.  The whispers of THELMA & LOUISE
come when the two sisters kill an abusive lout (Goran Visnjic) while his
is in the process of assaulting Gillian.  The women then try to hide from
the repercussions of their deed, even as good-hearted cop Gary Hallet
(Aidan Quinn) tries to help them.  It's an obvious hook for a female
empowerment fable, one that plays female viewers for every whoop and cheer
it can wrest out of them, but it doesn't quite mix with other ingredients
like...
     2) A dash of THE FRIGHTENERS.  You see, Sally and Gillian don't just
kill the abusive lout once.  They kill him accidentally, cast a spell to
bring him back to life, then kill him a gain when the zombie-fied lout is
even more loutish than before.  The catch is that his restless soul is
still hanging about the sisters' picturesque New England home, appearing
occasionally to inhabit Gillian's body or attempt to hear out Gary's
heart.  Though the scenes of supernatural nastiness are sporadic, they're
nonetheless jarring.  As the Owens women attempt a climactic exorcism of
sorts -- joined by a bunch of townswomen who had until that point loathed
the sisters, but decided to help out because, darn it, that's just what
women do for one another -- you may wonder who took your saucy romantic
comedy and dipped it in THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK.  That's assuming you
still care by that point, given...
     3) A smidgen of HOPE FLOATS.  Sandra Bullock now appears to be in her
pensive, sorrowful single mother phase, and it doesn't suit her.  In the
midst of the magical hijinks surrounding her, Bullock plays her mourning
far too straight, as though the film were a deeply observational
relationsihp drama.  She should have taken a hint from her co-stars, all
of whom appear to be having a heck of a lot more fun.  Kidman is flashy,
fiery and sexy as the naughty sister, playing town tramp with plenty of
gusto; Channing and Wiest are both matronly and devilish as the eccentric
aunts.  Bullock, meanwhile, puts on her horn-rims from LOVE POTION NO. 9
and frumps about when she should be providing the stable, sympathetic
figure the story needs.  And it could have been a strange delight thanks
to...
     4) The eye of Griffin Dunne.  Actor-turned-director Dunne has a
unique, dark comic sensibility behind the camera, evidenced by his ability
to turn a tale of two obsessive stalkers (ADDICTED TO LOVE) into an
entertaining romantic comedy.  Here he offers a few of his cock-eyed
touches, including a midnight tequila party and Gillian's surreal
time-lapsed drive home, but there's no focus to the story.  It's a comedy
that gets too serious, a crowd-pleaser that turns too bizarre, and a
romantic love story that suddenly turns into a sisterly love story.  It's
certainly never a bore, not with Kidman throwing off sparks and so many
shifts in tone.  It also never comes together as anything more than the
sum of its disparate parts.  I'm not sure what the recipe for PRACTICAL
MAGIC was supposed to create, but it adds up to a casserole of clashing
flavors, a supernatural stew with the power to create a fog of
ambivalence.

Author
Brian Takeshita
I so much wanted to like this movie.  I so much wanted to love this movie.
I so much wanted to embrace this movie with both arms and once again be able
to hold my head up high when I say, "I just can't get enough of Sandra
Bullock."  These days, I have a difficult time convincing even myself of this.
Sandra, Sandra, Sandra.  What happened?  You used to be America's
sweetheart, now you can't make a truly good movie to save your life.  With
the possible exception of A TIME TO KILL, the last two and a half years have
not been kind.  If your next one is a critical as well as box office hit, it
will be called your comeback.  No Oscars, no Golden Globes, not even a
stupid Blockbuster Award look near in your future.  Excuse me while I shed a
tear.
It would be easier if I could say that you've just had a run of bad luck,
but I can't.  You've chosen the scripts yourself.  The last two movies were
even co-produced by Fortis Films, your very own production company.  Oh,
woe!  Oh woe!  Such is the man....who longs once more to be a fan!
Okay, I'll admit that was a tad melodramatic, but unfortunately, PRACTICAL
MAGIC really is only the latest in a string of mediocre movies for Sandra
Bullock.  This one finds her playing Sally Owens, a witch.  No, a real
witch.  Able to cast spells and all that stuff.  She and her sister, Gillian
(Nicole Kidman) were orphaned at a young age when their mortal father fell
victim to the Owens family curse.  You see, whoever falls in love with an
Owens woman (and they're all witches) is doomed to die.  Their mother died
soon afterwards of a broken heart (oh, please), and the girls are raised by
their aunts, who, besides eat chocolate for breakfast, don't care about
homework, and don't impose a bedtime, also openly practice  witchcraft.
Repulsed by the idea that love could cause such sorrow, Sally wishes for a
man who could never exist, so she could never be so enamored and therefore
never know such pain. Years later, however, Sally falls in love, gets
married, has two darling little daughters, and seems to live the ideal life.
But then, of course, the 'ol curse kicks in and the husband dies in one of
the most predictable surprises in a screenwriter's bag of tricks (if we
could figuratively see the truck coming, he should have seen it literally).
Sally learns that the impetus for her love was not natural, but rather a
spell cast by her aunts to give her that little "push."  Aghast that it was
magic that caused her such misery, she disavows witchcraft and attempts to
lead a normal life.
The scenes in the beginning with Sally and Gillian ("Gillybean," as Sally
insists on calling her throughout the movie) as little girls is kind of
cute, I'll admit, as are the scenes of Sally living the happy, married,
motherly life.  However, this stuff takes up about the first half hour, and
is interspersed with narrative exposition.  Ironically, the filmmakers
wanted to fast forward through adolescence and part of adulthood, but took
so much time doing so that it seems as if we're waiting forever to get on
with the rest of the film.  Not a good start.
The film seems to lose, regain, then lose focus throughout the course of
it's two-hour running time.  I wasn't sure whether the film was supposed to
be about love, about the supernatural, or a combination of the two.  I would
take a stab and say a combination, but it's a pretty poor one, not being
able to effectively intertwine the two motifs.  "Bewitched" was even better
than this.  Is witchcraft and love supposed to go together?  Are they
supposed to exist separately?  Is love a certain witchcraft of its own?
These are the kinds of questions which are alluded to, but never explored
and never answered.  The screenplay by Robin Swicord, Akiva Goldsman and
Adam Brooks seems content to throw things out and then never get around to
tending to them.  At one point, for example, one of the aunts takes money
from a woman desperate to get a man to love her.  The aunt says, "Be careful
what you wish for," and proceeds to cast a spell.  Yes, it's trite, but if
this isn't made into a theme for the movie, why even include the line in the
first place?
Did I go to see a movie, or a two-hour music video?  This was a question I
asked myself somewhere around the halfway mark after seeing the start of
just about every other scene punctuated by an obtrusively loud pop song.
What's worse, the movie includes the obligatory set piece where the
soundtrack is actually a part of the scene.  Oh, you've seen it before.
Think Tom Cruise dancing around in his underwear in RISKY BUSINESS.  Think
Tom Cruise swinging a cue stick around in THE COLOR OF MONEY.  Think Tom
Cruise slinging drinks in COCKTAIL.  Hey, isn't Nicole Kidman married to Tom
Cruise?  Bet they've got a serious stereo in the living room to score their
home life.
For most of the movie, magic is very low-key.  So low-key in fact, that one
wonders if the magic is actually supposed to be real, or just David
Copperfield illusions that the Owens women have learned.  Well, maybe more
like Doug Henning.  About the biggest trick we see is a coffee spoon
stirring by itself.  Oh, wow.  Okay, I guess more like that magician that
goes from table to table at T.G.I. Fridays.  You know, the one you want to
ask, "If I give you a dollar, will you go away?"  Anyway, the magic is so
unimpressive and so seldom in occurrence that you quickly forget that the
word "magic" is actually in the title of the film.  Then something really
big and laden with special effects happens, and it seems totally out of
place because we're so unprepared for it.  Don't even get me started on the
ending, which is resolved with so little explanation that it seems it was
thought up by someone in the last hours of a term paper all-niter who made
his mandatory word count and just wants to finish it up and turn it in.  He
knows he's going to get a D anyway.
There are a couple of things that save this film from the level of drivel.
First is the acting.  For all their differences, Bullock and Kidman actually
have some pretty decent sisterly chemistry.  Aidan Quinn, who appears upon
the scene as Sally's second love interest, is good as usual, and Dianne
Wiest and Stockard Channing are particularly delightful as the Owens aunts.
Secondly, for all its plodding pace and nonsensical scenes, the film manages
to pull off some entertaining moments and give us a few nice visuals.  It's
just too bad they're too few are far between.
As for you, Sandra, please pick some better scripts.  I've promised to wait
for you to come back to the world of the watchable, but a man can only be so
patient.

Author
James Sanford
        All Sally Owens (Sandra Bullock) wants is a normal life.
Unfortunately, her heritage keeps tripping her up.
 Sally is a descendent of a long line of witches -- she still lives
in a tumble-down old house with her kooky aunts (Dianne Wiest and Stockard
Channing) who sell love spells to local sufferers of heartache -- and
everyone in her small New England village insists on reminding her of that.
Her shamelessly raunchy sister Gillian (Nicole Kidman) split town long ago
to avoid local scorn but Sally has stuck around, trying desperately to live
down the ridicule and struggling to break the curse that dictates every man
an Owens woman loves will meet an untimely death.
 There's a lovely theme about coming to terms with your history at
the heart of "Practical Magic," and it's drawn straight from Alice Hoffman's
enchanting best seller. Would that screenwriter Robin Swicord had taken a
bit more from the book, a character-driven chronicle of passions both earthy
and supernatural.
 Instead, the movie beefs up one of the story's least interesting
elements, the violent relationship between Gillian and her derelict beau
Jimmy (Gorin Visnjic). It plays like "Bewitched" meets "The Burning Bed,"
particularly in a woefully miscalculated finale that almost sabotages the
entire film. In the novel, Jimmy's ghost makes trouble by haunting Sally's
garden; the movie opts for a more vicious, less intriguing form of
retribution.
 The most appealing aspect of "Practical Magic," unsurprisingly, is
the pairing of Bullock and Kidman, two of the most likable stars around.
Both are in terrific form here and the chemistry they generate
single-handedly powers the film.
 Sally proves to be one of Bullock's more challenging roles,
requiring the actress to bury her sex appeal beneath layers of grief and
dread until circumstances drive her to take action rather than always
cowering on the sidelines. Generally thought of as a dramatic lightweight,
Bullock's impressive emotional range here may silence some skeptics. Kidman
is handed a far less complex role -- Swicord sees Gillian as basically a
slightly long-in-the-tooth sex kitten -- but she packs enough humor and
subtle self-disgust into it that she manages to give a bit of depth to a
stereotype.
 Director Griffin Dunne, whose acid-tinged "Addicted To Love" was
one of those movies you either loved or hated, can't quite decide which way
he wants to play this material and the tone of "Magic" swings freely between
lighthearted fun and unscary horror. The movie is at its best when Sally and
Gillian are in the process of re-establishing their sisterly bond, making
mischief at a mothers' "phone tree" meeting or frantically casting a spell.
The scenes involving the small-minded locals are unconvincing and beg the
question of how Sally's boutique manages to stay in business when everyone
around seems to despise her.
 "Magic" ultimately gets by on the combined strength of its leads
and the able assistance of Channing and Wiest, who bring a gleeful
eccentricity to their work. The movie is agreeable fluff, but if the
filmmakers had thrown in an extra dose of Bullock and Kidman and several
more pages of Hoffman's original they would have concocted a much more
potent brew.
James Sanford

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Warner Bros./ Village Roadshow Pictures
 Director:  Griffin Dunne
 Writer:  Alice Hoffman (Novel), Robin Swicord
 Cast: Sandra Bullock, Nicole Kidman, Dianne Wiest,
Stockard Channing, Aidan Quinn
  Remember that song from Pal Joey, "I'm wild again/
Beguiled again/ A whimpering, simpering child again, /
Bewitched, bothered and bewildered am I"?  Director Griffin
Dunne probably does and so do the scripters of his movie
"Practical Magic," but in ways they may not entirely relish. 
The lead performers are bewitched, but the audience are just
bothered and bewildered.  "Practical Magic," adapted by
Robin Swicord from a novel by Alice Hoffman, is a Halloween
movie with amorous themes but is such a hodgepodge that it
serves as neither an effective, Charles-Addams-style spoof of
the supernatural genre nor a convincing romantic comedy. 
The story centers on a family of witches who have difficulties
both in falling in love and in keeping the objects of their
affection happy or even alive.  What emerges is a vehicle for
the talents of Sandra Bullock as the quieter witch and Nicole
Kidman as her more aggressive sister in a film that will
probably be called by detractors and supporters alike a "chick
flick."  While men play a role, two are portrayed in
cartoonishly undeveloped ways: a simpleton and a homicidal
maniac are the caricatures while a third, an earnest detective,
is found to have unexplained and similarly underdeveloped
mystical authority of his own.
   The story opens in a promising way, as a group of Puritans
gather around the figure of a 17th century woman on the
gallows about to be hanged as a witch.  She magically
escapes the perils of the rope, but when her lover fails to
meet her as promised, she pronounces a curse on all males
who enter into the romantic circle of the family for generations
to come.  Two twentieth century progeny, Aunt Jet (Dianne
Wiest) and Aunt Frances (Stockard Channing) are intent on
passing the gift of practical magic to their nieces, Sally Owens
(Sandra Bullock) and Sally's sister Gillian (Nicole Kidman).
The devil-may-care Gillian embraces the incantations while
Sally rejects the prerogatives fearing that she will never meet
the man of her dreams.  Gillian, basking in her pull over men,
embraces an evil drifter, Jimmy (Goran Visnjic), who turns out
to be a homicidal woman-beater and whose domineering
behavior leads to a fearful crime bringing in police detective
Gary Hallet (Aidan Quinn).
   Blandly portraying the abuse the women take from the
townspeople who rightly suspect them of being different from
them (i.e. witches), director Dunne attempts to infuse the story
with comic moments which simply fall flat.  A regular meeting
of the women who are provincial enough to feel great
excitement over their place on a figurative tree is prosaic,
while a concluding scene featuring a band of women dressed
in the black Halloween garb of sorcerers floating from the
rooftop to the earth is unimaginative.  The exorcism spectacle,
in which a company of the town's women cast their spells on
the writhing Gillian to wrest a dead man's spirit from her body
puts the special effects team to work with little consequence. 
Nor do we thrill to see the ghostly body of the corpse
complete with vampiric contact lenses, an image that
filmmakers persist in using in movies about the bloodsuckers.
   Sandra Bullock has a fan club but in my mind is neither
particularly appealing nor a great performer.  She is
outclassed by the more fiery and alluring Nicole Kidman but
their roles in this film are so foolish and ineffectual that they'll
have to use quite a bit more practical magic to enchant an
audience.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Practical Magic (1998)
Sandra Bullock, Nicole Kidman, Dianne Wiest, Stockard Channing, Aidan 
Quinn, Goran Visnjic. Screenplay by Robin Swicord, Akiva Goldsman and 
Adam Brooks, based on the novel by Alice Hoffman. Directed by Griffin 
Dunne. 103 minutes
Rated PG-13
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Beware, gentle readers, for there is a disease among us that is going 
unchecked. The disorder plaguing our society is called Sandra Bullock 
Syndrome. Victims of this nightmarish ailment spend great amounts of time 
whimpering while staring wistfully into the distance and periodically 
experience outbursts of uncontrollable lip synching and dancing to pop 
music oldies, generally in the company of others suffering from the same 
illness. Somebody please, organize a telethon now!
Sandra Bullock Syndrome, last seen in the film "Hope Floats," resurfaces 
in "Practical Magic," an occassionally entertaining, often silly and 
terribly disjointed romantic fantasy based on the book by Alice Hoffman. 
The story tells of sisters Sally and Gillian Owens (Sandra Bullock and 
Nicole Kidman), the latest in a long line of witches. Raised in a 
picturesque New England town by their giddy aunts, Jet and Frances 
(Dianne Weist and Stockard Channing), the girls learn of the family 
curse: anytime an Owens woman falls in love with a man, he dies.
After losing her husband to the curse, Sally adopts a quiet, withdrawn 
lifestyle, while Gillian moves from one Bohemian setting to another, 
having fleeting affairs along the way. When a boyfriend turns abusive, 
Gillian calls her sister for help and the woman unintentionally kill the 
man. Fearing legal reprisals, they decide the only logical thing to do is 
raise the creep from the dead. When Officer Gary Hallet's (Aidan Quinn) 
investigation brings him to the Owens' house, all hell breaks loose.
Parts of "Practical Magic" work. When Nicole Kidman looks at the corpse 
of her boyfriend and says, "Okay Jimmy, I will get you out of this, but 
then we are definitely breaking up," it's impossible not to smile. 
Towards the end of the film, a neighborhood phone tree is used in a 
unique fashion that is both ingenuous and entertaining. And, as 
outlandishly dressed old biddies, Stockard Channing and Dianne Weist have 
a certain loosey-goosey appeal.
But the production has no consistent tone, shifting awkwardly from one 
style to another. At times an occult "Thelma and Louise," the film also 
tries to be a spirited comedy, a horror film, a heartfelt romance and a 
story of empowerment. In more skilled hands the mixture might have jelled,
 but here it just feels disjointed. Even more annoying are the numerous 
MTV moments, where pop songs swell as the action turns into mini-music 
videos. And, of course, there's the scene where the women joyously line 
dance around the room, lip synching to the oldies. Oh, the agony of 
Sandra Bullock Syndrome.
Examining films like this on a logical basis is generally ill-advised, 
but I have to wonder why, if the Owens women have been reviled by the 
townspeople for centuries, they didn't just pack up and move. And 
speaking of the townspeople, it's maddening to watch their attitudes 
radically shift to meet the needs of the contrived script. At times they 
show open fear and hatred for the women, at other times they treat them 
as average fellow citizens, and later, they embrace the women's 
witchcraft without reservation. Why? Because one of the screenplay 
authors also wrote "Batman and Robin," that's why. 
"Practical Magic" has enough good moments to warrant a viewing on cable, 
or if you're on a long airplane flight, but otherwise, you'd be better 
served by watching virtually any episode of "Bewitched." At least there 
you wouldn't be subjected to the tragic results of Sandra Bullock 
Syndrome. Hopefully, medical science will eventually come up with a cure 
and talented female actors will never have to sulk, lip-sync or line 
dance ever again.
