Title
Review for Ladri di saponette (1989)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A satire on how films are treated on
     television becomes a weird fantasy, not totally original but
     surprisingly creative.  Rating: high +1 (-4 to +4).  (Note:
     heavy spoilers follow the first paragraph.)
     Italian actor, screenwriter, and director Maurizio Nichetti is probably
more recognizable by sight than by name to most American audiences.
Nichetti plays a little artists with a big (false) moustache in the
international hit ALLEGRO NON TROPPO.  That film was directed by Bruno
Bozetto, but now Nichetti is very much an auteur, writing and directing THE
ICICLE THIEF in which he himself plays the two main roles.  The subject of
the film, at least for a while, is what commercial television does to a
film.  The title is a reference to Vittorio De Sica's BICYCLE THIEF with
part missing, just as films are shown on television with part missing.  The
title, of course, works only once it has been translated into English,
indicating the film is aimed for an international market, which indeed it
has gotten.  As the film opens, Nichetti, playing himself, arrives at a
television station to host his own film, THE ICICLE THIEF.  We see the chaos
at the station, we see a typical family watching the film, and in black and
white we see the film itself.  What the television station does to the film
is the springboard (but only a springboard) for the pandemonium that is to
follow.  This is an innovative and at times very funny film.  I rate it a
high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     While it is not entirely a new idea, Nichetti very cleverly mixes the
three levels of the film with a fourth level, the commercials.  At one time
it was very common to have cross-over elements between the text of a radio
or television play and the commercials.  The FCC decided this was a
deceptive practice and made it illegal, though radio disk jockeys commonly
violate the rule.  There have been many times when usually disjoint planes
such as audience and actors interact in live plays and in fantasy films such
as THE PURPLE ROSE OF CAIRO.  In this case of the film characters, the
director, the people in the commercials, and the audience, five of the six
pairings of planes do take place.  Characters from the film at some point
find themselves in commercials, talking to the director, and even once
looking out from the television to see what the audience is doing.  The
missing pairing is that at no point does there seem to be any sort of
unexpected meeting between the audience and the characters in the
commercials.
     The use of color is singularly impressive, perhaps more so than the
script itself.  This is true not just in the amazing scene in which a
scantily-clad commercial actress breaks into the film world and has her
color wiped off by Antonio as her dries her off.  There is also use of
subtle color shifts throughout the black-and-white sequences to simulate the
variable film stock available in post-war Italy when THE BICYCLE THIEF was
made.
     Where Nichetti falls down most is in his acting of Antonio, the poor
laborer in the internal film.  Had Nichetti captured some of the tragic
desperation of Lamberto Maggiorani's performance in THE BICYCLE THIEF, it
would have strengthened the humor by contrast.  It would also have
demonstrated some depth in Nichetti's acting ability.  He may have felt such
a somber note had no place in a light comedy, but if so, it was a serious
lack of vision.  His failure to put any meat in his performance of Antonio
is the weakest point of an otherwise creative film.

Author
Stephane Payrard
[Moderator's note:  This arrived in French.  There seems to be a trend
here.  I am not up translating this, so in French it runs.  Spelling,
punctuation, and word choice are exactly as I received them.]
     Allez voir THE ICYCLE THIEF, un film clin d'oeil qui vous donne la
joie au coeur.  Le rouleau compresseur americain et le regne des films
techniquement parfaits mais completement impersonnels laisse
heureusement place a quelques films qui parlent au coeur.
     L'histoire: Un realisateur a fait un film miserabiliste en noir et
blanc; ce film est triste a tirer des larmes a une pierre: un chomeur
trouve enfin du travail, mais commet un larcin et est renvoye; il est
envoye en prison; sa femme doit se prostituer pour vivre et les enfants
sont envoyes a l'orphelinat.  Le realisateur est invite a l'occasion du
passage de son film a la tele.  Horreur! celui-ci est tronconne' par la
publicite; Mais par un facetieux phenomene spatio-temporel, un des
mannequins d'une pub echoue dans le film et va le perturber.  Imaginez
un charmant et souriant mannequin en deshabille' plonge' dans les
problemes d'une famille de l'Italie puritaine d'avant guerre...  Le
realisateur furibard decide alors de rentrer en scene pour remettre de
l'ordre dans son film...
     Que cette trame du scenario ne vous fasse pas penser a une resucee
des imbroglios spatio-temporels d'un "retour vers le futur."  Au lieu
d'un morveux desoeuvre' et gave de pop-corn et d'un Geo Trouvetout
carrement senile, les personnages d' "Icycle thief" sont attachants et
sympathiques.  Le realisateur se peint lui-meme comme un lunatique mal a
l'aise d'un le monde moderne et clinquant d'un studio tele, et
completement depasse par les personnages qu'il a engendres; dont le
heros joue' aussi par lui-meme .  Qd le mannequin passe du monde
artificiel a la "realite" du film noir et blanc, il sait laisser la
vedette a nos heros et est charmant de discretion et de poesie.  Ce
n'est pas parce qu'on vient du futur et des US qu'on est en droit de
refaire le monde!
      Pour le nombreux lectorat de la Silicon Valley: ce film se donnait
il y a qq semaines ds un cinema a Palo Alto; peut-etre se donne-t-il
encore?
     Dans un tout autre registre, je viens de voir un autre chef
d'oeuvre.  "Journal d'une femme de chambre" est un vieux film de Bunuel,
avec un jeune Piccoli meconnaissable en cul terreux veule a souhait et
une Jeanne Moreau en domestique machiavelique.  Alors que notre
realisateur italien (dont j'ignore jusqu'au nom) aime avec tendresse
jusqu'aux defauts de ses personnages, Bunuel jette un regard glacial sur
les siens.  Le vieux pere, un fetichiste qui collectionne bottines et
images pieuses a connotations erotiques se complait a caresser les
mollets de ses bonnes a qui il leur demande de lui faire la lecture.
Mais ces petites manies sont bien innocentes comparees aux jeux de
pouvoirs sordides des autres personnages.  Brr...  Sa fille, une
bourgeoise possessive et frigide se refuse a son mari (Piccoli) qui
ecume le voisinage et se rattrape sur les bonnes, mais il aura affaire a
forte partie avec Jeanne Moreau en domestique.  Dns cette hierarchie de
domination, les sous-fifres exploitent lamentablement les faibles des
faibles, innocent ou enfant.
     Le dialogue, par Jean-Claude Carriere et Luis Bunuel, est assez
corosif:
     Ainsi la femme, parlant a son mari, lui rappelle que ses dernieres
extravagances lui ont coute 1500 francs.  Voila une delicate et humaine
maniere de parler d'une domestique qu'on a fait avorter avant de la
renvoyer.
     Cette femme frigide confie l'etat de ses relations maritales et
suggere qu' "il y a peut-etre certaines caresses...," mais le pretre de
conclure que tout est OK "tant que vous n'y prenez pas de plaisir,"
"pour sur" repond-elle.  Elle se rattrape en etant une sorte de tyran
pour sa maisonnee.
     Tjs pour le lectorat de la Silicon valley: vous pouvez trouver
cette video (en asssez mauvais etat) dans la rachitique section "foreign
movies" au Tower Record de San Antonio road.

Author
Barry Margolin
     Over the weekend I saw the Italian film THE ICICLE THIEF.  I'm
surprised that I haven't seen any mention of it on the net (unless it
was all during my vacation a couple of weeks ago).  I'm cross-posting to
rec.arts.tv because TV is part of the subject matter of the movie.
     THE ICICLE THIEF is a wonderful satire and spoof.  It's a satire of
the butchering that is done to films in order to show them on TV, using
the "film within a film" technique and turning it inside-out.  The inner
film is a drama about a family after WWII, in turmoil because the father
can't find work.  The outer film is about activities at the TV studio
broadcasting the film, preceded by a review and interview with the
director (the outer director, playing himself); part of the outer film
also takes place in the living room of a family watching the movie (a
must-see for Lego lovers -- could someone tell me what the kid built).
     Since the movie is being shown on a commercial TV station, it is
periodically interrupted by commercials.  Things get strange, though,
when one of the children in the inner movie starts humming one of the
jingles and an actress from one of the commercials shows up in the
movie.  After this, things get *very* weird, but I won't say any more
since I promised only minor spoilers.
     This is definitely one of the funniest movies I've seen in a long
time.  The subtitling was done very well, I hardly ever had trouble
reading the dialogue.

Author
Jim Pellmann
     One of the most entertaining and imaginative movies I've seen in a
quite a while.  This is an Italian comedy which slickly combines a spoof
of television with an homage to the 1949 classic Italian movie THE
BICYCLE THIEF.
There are several stories intertwined:
1) The story of a film director (played by Maurizio Nichetti, who also
wrote
   and directed) whose dramatic film called "The Icicle Thief" is being
shown
   on television.  The film starts out as he arrives at the TV studio to
be
   interviewed by a pompous film critic before the film is to be shown.
The
   behind-the-scenes antics at the studio are almost slapstick.  
2) As the movie starts to be shown on the TV station, we switch to it
and
   watch the beginning of what seems to be a typical Italian post-World
War II
   tear-jerker about a man (also played by Nichetti) who can't find a
job, his
   starstruck wife, their small son who has to work in a gas station to
   help support the family, and a baby who's constantly ignored while he
   narrowly avoids one disaster after another (a running gag throughout
the
   movie).
     At the most melodramatic points in the story, the movie is
interrupted for some inane (but hilarious) commercials.  As the director
gets more and more outraged at the way the TV station is destroying his
masterwork, the commercials seem to come even faster.  
     We switch back and forth between the movie, the commercials, the
studio, and the living room, and before we know it, the characters from
the commercials start interacting with the characters from the movie.
It doesn't take long until the characters in the movie are dealing with
all new problems introduced by the commercial, and vice versa.  The
director, watches in horror as a whole new plot unfolds before his eyes,
and before long, he too enters the action of the movie to try to get it
back on course.
     This is a movie made with intelligence, care, and wit.  There are
many clever touches and special effects as the characters interact.  Pay
attention to all the details or you'll miss some of the gags.  If you're
sick of gangster movies, check this out.  Highest recommendation.
Postscript:  After this movie played in Italy, the government passed a
law limiting the number of commercial interruptions in movies broadcast
on TV!
