Title
Review for Hit and Runway (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Laura Clifford
Alex (Michael Parducci) works in his Italian American family's New 
York City cafe, but dreams of writing a script for his action adventure hero, 
Dirty Harry clone Jagger Stevens (Hoyt Richards).  Elliot (Peter Jacobson, 
"Cradle Will Rock") is a playwright attracted to Joey (Kerr Smith, "Final 
Destination"), an aspiring actor who works in Alex's family cafe.  When Alex 
finds the script Elliot gave to Joey, he dangles a date with Joey as bait to 
collaborate on his 'undercover cop breaks up fashion model smuggling ring' 
movie, "Hit and Runway."
Alex succeeds in hooking up Elliot, a self-described funny looking, Jewish
gay man, with good-looking Joey, who, it turns out, is attracted to Jewish
men.  While Elliot's flying high romantically, he's at wits end working with
Alex.  Alex has a dream, but his idea of a plausible plot line is having
models smuggle cocaine in breast implants.
The script, by real gay/straight writing team Christopher Livingston (who
also directed) and Jaffe Cohen (who also produced) won Best Screenplay at
the 1999 Los Angeles Independent Film Festival and US Comedy Arts Festival.
Yet despite Elliot's comic zingers and a general good heartedness, "Hit and 
Runway" is another cliched movie about first time filmmakers whose script 
ends up mirroring their life.
Alex is a gentle lunkhead who homophobically insists his relationship with 
Elliot is only business until he's left without Elliot.  His relationship with 
fellow writing class student Gwen (Judy Prescott, "Say Anything") doesn't take 
off until she removes her glasses (a cliche previously written into their joint 
script by Elliot as if it were inspired).  
Elliot is a brazen ripoff of Woody Allen made gay.  He whines, frets and
makes social blunders, accompanied by hilarious, self-deprecating observations
('I bought a dildo once and it lost its erection').  (To be fair, Woody is
cited more than once, particularly in a dream sequence where the real Allen
advises Alex to 'keep the title, drop the story.')
After dealing with cheating Rabbis, overbearing relatives, plot-dropped
deadlines and personal betrayal, Alex and Elliot end up achieving each other's 
dream.
The film's production is subpar, with most action taking place in murkily lit,
cramped apartment spaces.  A scene in an indoor basketball court is 
like a breath of fresh air when the characters are finally given some space
to exist in.  Alex and Elliot are provided the obvious ethnic musical queues.
The good nature on display in "Hit and Runway" makes it difficult to dislike,
but despite Jacobson's humorous efforts, it's not easy to recommend either.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Max Messier
Attention all screenwriters!  I have discovered the perfect masturbation
material for all you wannabe Joe Eszterhases and Michael Crichtons in
the world: Write a script about two guys writing a script.  Make sure
each of the characters initially will not like each other based upon
general stereotypical foundations - such as a black man and a guy from
the South, or an Italian guy and a gay Jew.  Toss in those standard and
predictable dramatic and comedic elements, include a bookworm girl with
glasses for the romantic interest, and always remember, keep it as light
as non-fat whipped cream.
Just from the press book, Hit and Runway had the smell of a misguided
idea.  A gay, Jewish man and a straight, masculine Italian guy join pen
and prose together to write the perfect movie script for action
superstar Jagger Stevens.  The Italian guy is homophobic and doesn't
understand the meaning of irony.  The Jewish guy is Woody Allen's lost
twin brother who berates everything and everyone around him with "witty"
Allen-esque dialogue.  It's a quirky romantic comedy about a straight
man and a gay man coming to terms with each other's personal identities
and dreams and learning to love, and yadda yadda yadda...
All I can ask is, who the hell would name their kid Jagger Stevens?
Alex (Michael Parducci), the hulking Italian knucklehead, has big dreams
of writing a hit Hollywood movie and leaving behind his family café and
a life of washing dishes.  Elliot (Peter Jacobson) is a struggling gay
playwright (aren't all playwrights struggling?) in love with a waiter
(Kerr Smith) who works at Alex's café.  When Alex pitches a film about a
New York cop working undercover as a fashion model starring Jagger
Stevens (Hoyt Richards) to a family relative, he gets the opportunity to
write his blockbuster script.  Without any knowledge of the proper prose
for action stars, he enlists the help of Elliot in exchange for setting
up a date with the waiter.  And then the trouble starts.
After this initial introduction, the movie ends up falling flat on its
keyboard.  The quirkiness becomes trivial through the blatant
stereotyping of each character and his motivation.  The acting is boring
and plods along to its own pathetic beat.  The endless talks of striving
for your dreams and never giving into your own self-doubts play out like
an infomercial for a hair-replacement product.  The script is stale, the
acting is sub-par and misguided, and the cinematography is on par with a
Turkish sitcom.
Watching the film, it's obvious that someone tried to make something
decent out of this mess.  Hit and Runway needed a second or third
opinion in its final execution instead of letting its maker hold those
strings.  By the end, I felt cheated and let down by the abrupt tone of
the finale.  It's as if the main characters sold themselves on the
cheap.  Instead of fighting for their integrity, they relinquish their
ideals for the cheap, wind-up toys of fame and recognition.
Director: Christopher Livingston
Producer: Andrew Charas, Chris D'Annibale, Christopher Livingston
Writer: Christopher Livingston, Jeff Cohen
Starring: Michael Parducci, Peter Jacobson, Judy Prescott, Kerr Smith,
J.K Simmons, Hoyt Richards
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Christopher Livingston's HIT AND RUNWAY, two reluctant writing 
partners, Alex Andero (Michael Parducci), a straight Italian, and Elliot 
Springer (Peter Jacobson), a gay Jew, join forces to develop a script 
for a Hollywood producer who wants a new project for Jagger Stevens 
(Hoyt Richards), his Clint Eastwood-style star.  Just in case we miss 
the similarities, the movie has Jagger say things like "Make my day!"  
And lest we miss the connection between Elliot's brand of Jewish humor 
and Woody Allen's, there is a dream sequence in which Elliot sounds just 
like Woody.
Since Alex, who lives in the basement of his family's restaurant, is 
just learning the art of screenwriting at a class, he prevails upon 
Elliot to help him turn his action film, also titled HIT AND RUNWAY, 
into a comedy as the producer wants.  About an undercover cop who 
investigates international crimes in the world of fashion models, this 
movie within the movie has the potential for some nice parody but get 
little screen time.  Instead, the film mainly concerns the petty 
bickering between Alex and Elliot and between Elliot and his young 
boyfriend, Joey Worciuekowski (Kerr Smith).  Joint screenwriting is 
"kind of like a marriage, only the people have to talk to each other," 
Elliot warns Alex.  Of course, Elliot and Alex's screenwriting marriage 
will be a highly dysfunctional one that will end in divorce.
Most of the comedy is flat and obvious.  As if it is some huge 
revelation, Elliot explains to Alex that the gay culture has a caste 
system in which the best looking men only date other similar hunks. This 
sounds exactly like the straight world, ignoring, of course, Julia 
Roberts brief marriage with Lyle Lovett, which gave false hopes to 
average looking men all over the planet.
Like a jet without enough power to lift off the runway, the film just 
taxis around slowly.  Slack pacing is deadly for comedy, especially for 
one like this in which the good lines are few and far between.  Even the 
best lines aren't anything to write home about.  "I think I need 
something more neutral on the walls," Joey says in the film's best 
interchange.  "You could always hang up a map of Switzerland," Elliot 
suggests as a solution.
HIT AND RUNWAY runs a very long 1:48.  It is rated R for language, 
sexual content and some violent images and would be acceptable for most 
teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
