Title
Review for Basquiat (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Steve Rhodes
     After the recent I SHOT ANDY WARHOL, the new movie BASQUIAT (also
as BUILD A FORT, SET IT ON FIRE) begs the question of whether we need
another movie about Andy Warhol's world.  Ignoring the answer, artist
Julian Schnabel wrote his first script and directed his first movie
about Jean Michel Basquiat (Jeffrey Wright) who was a black painter who
died at the age of 27 from a heroin overdose.  Basquiat's paintings
have been exhibited alongside both those of Warhol's and of Schnabel's,
and Basquiat was a personal friend of Andy's and a full fledged member
of his entourage.
     As the show opens, 22 year old Basquiat is getting out of the
cardboard box in which he lives.  Although he grew up in a middle-class
family, he spends his days spraying graffiti on the walls all over the
city.  He goes into a coffee shop and pours syrup all over the table
and then begins to finger-paint in it before they throw him out.  There
are quotes from the narrator about van Gogh - how he was considered
crazy in his day and managed to sell only one painting before he died.
The show tries hard to convince us Basquiat could be the van Gogh of
our time.
     Although Basquiat is considered important since he was one of the
first African Americans to become a famous pop artist, I found his work
on a par with a typical kindergarten class.  In one scene in the movie,
Warhol and Basquiat comment on a guy who is urinating on Warhol's
painting to give it just the right look.  If you can get beyond the
drug culture aspects, they smoke dope and blow it up their nose in the
show, and can ignore the quality of the "art", the acting is quite
good.
     The artists you meet in the film are a strange lot to say the
least.  Everyone is an artist.  As Andy's electrician (Willem Dafoe)
explains to Basquiat that he is an artist too, but "I'll be 40 in July,
and I'm glad I never got recognition.  It gives me time to develop."
     The show is full of the people that swarm around Basquiat as soon
as they realize that there is money to be made.  Every agent wants to
represent him, and every gallery owner wants to display his works.  One
of the earliest to write about him is Rene Ricard (Michael Wincott from
DEAD MAN).  As Rene explains it, "when I speak nobody believes me, but
when I write it down everybody knows it to be true."  Later Rene goes
on to claim that, "We're no longer collecting art; we're buying
people."  One of his first agents, Gina Cardinale (Clair Forlani),
glowing describes his art as, "This is the true voice of the gutter."
Gosh, I'll guess take two then.
     Unlike Jared Harris's more remote characterization of Andy Warhol
in I SHOT ANDY WARHOL, here David Bowie is great as the legendary pop
artist.  He throws himself into the role with gusto.  Andy's friend and
agent Bruno Bischofberger is played with amazing restraint by the
frequently combustible Dennis Hopper.
     Even after he becomes famous, Basquiat still dresses like a
homeless person.  The costumes by John Dunn are dead on.  Kind of
shocking having an apparent bum going into a fancy department store,
asking to taste the caviar and buying a three thousand dollar tin of
the best in the store.
     One of the more ironic lines in the film comes from his friend and
fellow artist Albert Milo (Gary Oldman).  Albert tells Basquiat that
"good conversation is hard to find in this town."  The irony is that
Basquiat seems incapable of forming coherent sentences.  Jeffrey Wright
is brilliant in his interpretation of the artist.  A nice piece of
acting.
     The music by John Cale and all of the songs chosen are one of the
high points of the show.  Frequently the camera (Ron Fortunato) will
slowly pan a scene without dialog but with beautiful songs being song.
I wish there had been even more of these scenes.
     Rounding out the cast, we have Benicio Del Toro, Christopher
Walken, Jean Claude Le Marre, Parker Posey, Elina Lowensohn, Paul
Bartel, Courtney Love, and Tatum O'Neal among many others.  It looks
like half of Hollywood wanted a part.  Although you may not care about
the people they play, the acting, as I said earlier, is worth seeing.
     BASQUIAT is incorrectly listed in the press kit as running 1:26.
I timed it at about 1:50.  The shorter length would have been better,
and we could have stood a few less stars and parts.  The film is rated
R for drug use and some bad language.  There is no sex, nudity, and
only one mildly violent scene.  It is possible to misinterpret the
show's message as graffiti is a way to great riches and drug usage is
cool.  As an adult, I can see beyond that, but teenagers might not.
For that reason, I am recommending that teenagers not see the show.
For adults, I give it a marginal thumbs up for the acting and the
music.  His paintings get a big thumbs down from me, but this is a
movie review, not an art review.  I award the film ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jeffrey Wright, Michael Wincott, Benicio Del Toro, Claire
Forlani, David Bowie, Gary Oldman, Dennis Hopper.
Screenplay:  Julian Schnabel.
Director:  Julian Schnabel.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Yes, I understand:  happy artists do not exactly make for compelling
drama.  Still, you have to admit that the Cult of the Tortured Artist
seems to have more adherents in Hollywood than Scientology.  Van Gogh in
LUST FOR LIFE...tortured.  Toulouse-Lautrec in MOULIN ROUGE...tortured.
Mozart in AMADEUS, Beethoven in IMMORTAL BELOVED, Rimbaud in TOTAL
ECLIPSE...call in Torquemada.  So why is it that BASQUIAT feels so
completely unique?  Perhaps it is because, for a change, its principal
character is portrayed as a tortured human being first and foremost.  Art
is connected to his suffering, but he does not suffer for his art.
     This measured approach is surprising not just because write-director
Julian Schnabel is a first-time film-maker, or because he was a friend of
the film's subject, Haitian-American artist Jean-Michel Basquiat (Jeffrey
Wright), but because Schnabel himself is an artist of no small renown.  It
has been a characteristic of the works of artists-turned-auteurs
(including Andy Warhol's and the ugly recent example of Robert Longo's
JOHNNY MNEMONIC) that you could expect to find very little beyond the
images.  Schnabel does create some extremely arresting images, including a
sharp opening title sequence underscored by The Pogues, but he has also
left no doubt that this is a film about _someone_, about some_thing_.  He
tells of Basquiat's days as a homeless teen-ager in the late 70s, living
in a cardboard box in New York and creating graffiti art with the
recognizable tag of "SAMO."  He is "discovered" by writer Rene Ricard
(Michael Wincott), who introduces Basquiat into the circles of art dealers
like Bruno Bischofberger (Dennis Hopper) and gallery owners like Mary
Boone (Parker Posey).  Before he even realizes it, Basquiat is the toast
of the New York art scene, and even becomes a close friend of Andy Warhol
(David Bowie).  But Basquiat's success changes him very little -- an
unfortunate situation, since he is a drug addict haunted by his
institutionalized mother (Hope Clarke).
     BASQUIAT is a film full of vibrant characters, none more so than
Jean-Michel Basquiat himself.  Jeffrey Wright, a Tony Award-winning stage
actor, gives a stunning performance as Basquiat, a lonely wraith who
always seems to be hovering just on the edge of coherence.  Schnabel
portrays him as a man who doesn't know how unhappy he is until he realizes
that fame isn't making him any happier, that it has changed nothing.
There is a series of wonderful scenes in which Basquiat, already a force
in the art world, is treated as just another black man to be viewed with
suspicion; in the best of them, he defiantly buys lunch for an entire
table of white businessmen.  But Schnabel also manages to show how
absurdly easy art came to Basquiat.  Indeed, when he is creating is the
only time he does not seem to be suffering.  Schnabel's direction and
Wright's wrenching work present a sad man whose brilliance can't save him.
     It is also impressive that Schnabel is savvy and confident enough to
acknowledge the flaws of his own milieu, and the perceptions of the
general public towards that milieu.  BASQUIAT opens with a quote from
Ricard about the art world's paranoia about overlooking The Next Big
Thing:  "Nobody wants to miss the Van Gogh boat."  The battle to represent
Basquiat is sometimes presented in melodramatic terms, with the artist
forgetting the little people as he hits the big time, but Schnabel doesn't
gloss over the cult of personality of the art world.  He adds the year's
second superb portrayal of Andy Warhol, with David Bowie perhaps providing
even more clever detachment than Jared Harris's work in I SHOT ANDY
WARHOL.  Watch also for a marvelous scene in which Christopher Walken
plays a journalist interviewing Basquiat, trying to bait him with subtle
jabs at abstract modern art; he speaks for everyone convinced that art is
an elaborate con.
     There are a few clumsy moments in the structure of BASQUIAT, notably
the presentation of his relationship with another aspiring artist (Claire
Forlani), and the first half of the film is rather sluggishly paced.
Still, for a newcomer to film, Julian Schnabel is remarkably assured.  He
knows his subject, and he knows the story he wants to tell.  BASQUIAT is
not about art as torture.  It is about creation as escape, and Schnabel
captures the vision of a tragic genius while refusing to diminish his life
with as simplistic an epithet as "tortured artist."

Author
Vallejo
 _____________________________________________________________
 Basquiat is a reason to believe why I still go to the movies. Jean-Michel
Basquiat, the urban New York painter which began as a nighttime graffiti
artist and went on to become an Andy Warhol protege, was not salvaged by his
art like Al Hirschfield or Robert Crumb. At age 27, he died of a heroin
overdose. 
  Basquiat, the miraculous biopic directed by Julian Schnabel and tenderly
acted by Jeffrey Wright, treats its central character as credulous enigma, one
which every question posed to him was a rhetorical one.We never quite see the
world in his eyes because no one ever really knew Jean-Michel Basquiat.
Schnabel doesn't sway us into insinuating the inspiration for his Creole art
-- a mix of Africa and Europe -- and this move, one of sheer bliss, is the key
to understanding this film and not understanding Basquiat.  
  The film chronicles the Haitian native from his early days as a homeless
adolescent in the late 70's, surviving in a cardboard box and feeding off his
graffiti art which rapidly grew conspicuous (signing everything with the tag
"SAMO"), striking enough to allure writer Rene Ricard (Michael Wincott), who
presents Basquiat to notable art and gallery dealer such as Mary Boone (Parker
Posey), Bruno Bischofberger (Dennis Hopper) and even Andy Warhol (a witty
David Bowie), with whom he becomes attached via an impromptu encounter.
 As he skyrocketed to being the filet mignon of the New York art scene, his
drug habit was as gradual as it was irreversible. His very successfulness
transformed Basquiat into an even more bewildering artist, both to his
companionship (Claire Forlani) and to his close friend Benny (Benicio Del
Toro), a Puerto Rican painter that tries to settle him down.
 For all its unknowingness Basquiat isn't detached. While his political,
social and spiritual views are inundated with mystery, Basquiat's feelings,
dreams and accomplishments are vividly drawn out in the movie, very
affectingly so. A surf board rippling through some crystal-blue waves signify
his hopes of someday visiting Hawaii, a land of purity and cleansing, one free
of exasperation, exasperation that may not be visible, but that's indicated by
his relentless drug use. The emptiness he experiences during his gallery
opening, as every extra freezes and he's left wondering: what next?
  Given this unusual protagonist, the stature and power of the work is highly
stylized by Schnabel gives the movie an unusual treatment. The New York
spotlight of the 80's -- a key movement for avante-garde artists -- is
presented as a universe of opportunity with an exquisite mix of black & white
footage, plenty of shots of the art, delightful locales and an exceptional
compilation of songs. Schnabel moves the camera around conservatively, but
with enough freedom to relieve any signs of staginess. 
  The cast excels brilliantly. Jeffrey Wright, the Tony-winning actor, is at
once wonderfully funny and immensely sympathetic, brazen and romantic, heroic
and shy; were it for his performance alone the picture would be well worth
seeing. Gary Oldman, Dennis Hopper, Benicio Del Toro, Michael Wincott, Parker
Posey and Willem Dafoe all bring flair to the supporting roles, but David
Bowie is the stand-out portraying Andie Warhol right down to his
characteristic "hand" moves. 
 It's sad it was overlooked by critics and audiences alike. While filmgoers
were in their fiftieth viewing of "Independence Day," Basquiat was struggling
to gain back its budget. I commend those who make the effort to view films
such as Basquiat. It's an experience that, unlike the bulk of what's out
there, is durable. (1:48)

Author
Christopher Null
     BASQUIAT -- or "Sasquiatch," as I am becoming increasingly fond of
calling this film -- may teach you a thing or two.  Now you may not want
to know any of the stuff you learn during its two long hours of running
time, but like it or not, you will learn something.
     That something is a base level of information about Jean Michel
Basquiat, a Haitian artist=E9 in the early 80's who became Andy Warhol's
favorite son.  (What is it with Warhol movies this year?)  Basquiat rose
from living in a cardboard box and decorating the streets of New York
with cryptic graffiti to a high-profile yet short-lived career in the
highest of art circles.  All before his not-too-untimely death at the
age of 27 from a (take a guess) *heroin* overdose.
     Now hailed as something of a James Dean to the art world,
Basquiat's bizarre life story is being told.  The idea was apparently
this:  take every freak working in American cinema in the 1990's and
transform him or her info a freak who lived in the 1980's.  And they got
all the freaks -- *all* of them -- starting with the granddaddy of all
that is inexplicable, David Bowie (as Warhol), plus runners-up Dennis
Hopper, Christopher Walken, Gary Oldman, Benicio Del Toro,
newcomer-freak Claire Forlani, Parker Posey, Willem Dafoe...  Hell, they
even got *Courtney Love* for God's sake!  The freaks are here.  All of
them.
     Perhaps the least freakish is he who plays Basquiat himself, soap
star Jeffrey Wright, who flits from scene to scene in his be-dreadlocked
hairdo (maybe a bit fancy for a guy living in a cardboard box), trying
his best to keep up in the race to see Who Can Overact The Most.  In
this regard, Wright does well.  And as you can imagine, this race runs
the film right into the ground.  Then again, it's a race that can be fun
to watch at times.
     I don't envy anyone the task of writing a screenplay about the
short life of a not-universally known person, someone who was basically
a strung-out junkie, overall a jerk of a guy, and whose sole talent was
making what, in limited circles, must pass for avant-garde art. =
However, Julian Schnabel has taken this challenge, and in most regards,
has failed, coming up with a self-indulgent work that captures what's
going on in Schnabel's head, and that's about it.  Basquiat's life is,
from the start of the film to the finish, succinctly described by the
first sentence of this paragraph -- little more than an wacko that was
hyped into the big time.  Not that that's suprising.  It happens even
more often today.  It just doesn't deserve a *movie.*
     Schnabel does pose one interesting dilemma -- when Basquiat is on
drugs, he's (apparently) a brilliant artist.  When he's clean, his art
sucks.  The question of "Is it worth it?" is an interesting one, but not
too interesting.  For Schnabel, it isn't interesting enough to justify
an answer... and that's sad, because by the end of BASQUIAT, there are
even fewer answers than when we started.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Pedro Sena
BASQUIAT, is a perfect example of what a film maker can do, when he cares
about what he is doing, rather than just making a film that is supposed to
mean something. The touches, the care, the details, and the totality of this
film, is what makes this so endearing and important. Never mind the artist
even.
The film itself, though, is as good as it gets about the artist, and while
it obviously does not approve of the artist's way, it never stops to make a
judgement about his lifestyle, and here is the beauty of it all. As Jean
Michel says " if I take it all out it will all become boring ... "
And this is what the film does so well. Wether the performances are close to
the originals or not is another question, but it is hard to fault the
attitudes that some people take here. New York does get its share of shit
for art, that becomes known as "art", and although Basquiat and Warhol were
not major
intuitive players, they did add a certain amount of freshness and weirdness
to the period that helped push the buttons, and expand the art business in
that area, and eventually around the world.
But it was not new. And it was not tremendously original. Jean Michel
Basquiat, did however have to offer something that others did not. He did
have an artistic perception that others around him did not, not even Andy
Warhol. And the film does go a bit out of its way to show that Andy Warhol
is really
not the artist that he was made out to be, and lacked the resolution to be
the intuitive force that Basquiat DID have.
Few films stand out in the art world. Generally films like this that deal
with music do better in film. Films about writers tend to be harsh to stick
with as the narratives get tiresome. But films about art, are even harder,
because it is necessary that one embroider the work into the film, and this
is not easy. The best of these, LA BELLE NOISEUSSE, is four hours long, but
it is riveting, and the main subject IS the art, and the main people
involved in it, the painter and the model. With Basquiat, he is his own
model through his feelings, and this allows for a nice place for the film to
come from.
Few films take care of things like this one does... it is excellent. And
should be seen. It's a shame that it did not get a wider release, because
the film has excellent music and visual imagery to really blow off most star
wars dilettantes.
4.5 out of 5 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Moderator of Centipede's THE FILM.
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1997. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Film biographies are probably the most difficult to make because you have to
draw insight into the main character, and dramatize the life he/she lived in
their own particular time and place. Recent biographies such as "Michael
Collins" dramatized the world the revolutionary lived in but remained aloof in
terms of his personal life and his motivations. "Basquiat" commits some of the
same errors but it is more energetic and vivid a portrait of a lost soul. 
The film is based on the true story of Jean-Michel Basquiat (Jeffrey Wright), a
graffiti artist who rose to prominence in the money-grubbing art world of the
80's, and went through a rapid decline through the abuse of drugs and instant
fame. At the beginning of the film, we see Basquiat (who calls himself Samo)
living in a cardboard box in a New York City park. He already is indulging in
heavy drugs, including heroin, but he has dreams of selling and displaying his
graffiti work in an art gallery. One day, he falls for a waitress named Gina
(Claire Forlani) while spreading tomato sauce on a table and making a portrait
of her. Eventually, Basquiat hits it big when a gallery shows his work to great
acclaim, and consequently acquires the interest of several gallery owners,
dealers, poets, pop artists such as Andy Warhol, self-promoters, etc. 
Julian Schnabel makes his directorial debut with this film, and he is a
justifiable choice since he was an actual friend of Basquiat's. Schnabel
creates a pointed commentary of the New York art world showing how eager
gallery owners and buyers embraced a new artist and eventually exploited him.
What Schnabel doesn't do as successfully is to capture the man behind the
artist. We see Basquiat as a frequently dazed and confused artist who loves
drugs and seems to love his girlfriend...and that's about it. There are no
glimpses into the artist himself, where his vision emanated from, or what drove
his creativity. Of course, Oliver Stone's "The Doors" remained curiously remote
about a similar artist, Jim Morrison, but that was a more visually dazzling
film of a certain era and we saw how living in those times could push someone
over the edge. "Basquiat" doesn't succeed on the same level: it presents
Basquiat as a man already in the gutter before his rise. In other words,
there's too little of the rise, and too much of the fall. The scenes with
Basquiat and Gina are too temporary to register any sense of loss of love
between them; we see that his drug abuse may have pushed them apart yet every
glimpse of Basquiat is presented in short vignettes with no particular payoffs.
He has one gallery showing after another but there's no sense of accomplishment
- for all we know, Basquiat could just be a junkie wandering around SOHO trying
to impress everyone, including Andy Warhol. 
Speaking of Andy, the relationship between Basquiat and Warhol works best, and
it's both melancholy and deeply moving. David Bowie is a real joy to watch as
the dazed Warhol who's consistently murmuring to himself. It's a portrayal on
par with Jared Harris's deadpan interpretation in "I Shot Andy Warhol." I love
the scene where Warhol is painting an Amoco logo and Basquiat paints right over
it causing Warhol to softly murmur "What are you doing? You're painting right
over it?"         
"Basquiat" has a slew of actors from what seems to be the Hall of Fame of
Independent Films. There's Dennis Hopper, Gary Oldman (very understated),
Parker Posey (as a snooty dealer), Willem Dafoe (as an electrician who gives
the movie's best line about art), Courtney Love, Elina Lowensohn, Christopher
Walken (as a TV journalist), Michael Wincott (as a poet), and Benicio Del Toro
as Basquiat's best friend. These people drift in and out of Basquiat's life
without making much of an impression except for his one true friend, Andy
Warhol. 
"Basquiat" is well-made and enjoyable throughout with fine performances,
including the ideally cast Jeffrey Wright in the title role. He brings pathos
and a sadness in his eyes that fitfully captures the artist. "Basquiat" the
film is not a complete portrait, though - it is mostly an assemblage of
exciting brush strokes. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Rob Reser
Writer/Director: Julian Schnabel
Stars: Jeffrey Wright, Michael Wincott, David Bowie, Dennis Hopper, Gary
Oldman, Christopher Walken, Willem Dafoe, Parker Posey, Courtney Love
and Tatum O'Neal.
        First time Writer/Director Julian Schnabel uses film as his
canvas to paint the portrait of Jean Michel Basquiat. JMB (played
elegantly by Jeffrey Wright) is an enigmatic individual who is never
fully explained. Coming from a fairly stable and supportive home-life we
never truly know why Basquiat decides to spend his nights in a cardboard
box at the films opening. A struggling "vandalistic" artist, Basquiat
moves through the streets with an uncaring and self-destructive
attitude. He fends for his daily meals by scrounging what he can and
ultimately stops wherever he feels like it to use any materials he has
on hand to express his feelings on walls, signs, and delicatessen
tables. Basquiat travels, much like Schnabel's camera work, aimlessly
from encounter to encounter sprawling his eclectic prose across
buildings and alleys as he goes. After impressing a small time waitress
by painting her portrait in syrup on the restaurant table, Basquiat
starts a relationship with the beautiful Gina Cardinale (played by Clair
Forlani).  Gina, herself, wants to be an artist and her works are
scattered throughout her meager apartment. Basquiat, who is so lost in
his own quest to alter all that is out of place, wakes up early one
morning to scribble all over her art and paint across one of her nicer
dresses. It is this kind of attitude that follows Basquiat throughout
the entire movie. He only answers to himself and fails to compromise his
integrity, or at least what he mistakes as such, by lashing out against
anyone and anything that doesn't see his vision. David Bowie does an
incredible job portraying Andy Warhol, the most notorious of "pop"
artists. In an early scene Basquiat interrupts a lunch Warhol is having
with his agent, Bruno Bischofberger (Dennis Hopper) to try and pawn off
some of his post-card size scribblings at ten bucks a pop. It is evident
that Basquiat is only motivated by his own means and when his works
begin to gain notoriety, the fame never really changes him. His attitude
is unwavering and he is completely unconcerned with who he angers,
antagonizes, lies to or dicks over along the way. The only thing that
his growing fame and increasing income affords him is the ability to
paint more and to take even more drugs. One of the biggest debates we
had after the movie was whether or not John Michel Basquiat (based on
the workds portrayed in the film) was actually artistic or simply a scam
artist. I believe he was an extremely talented individual who lived on a
higher plain than most other artists. In a scene where Christopher
Walken was interviewing him on his new found success and meaning of his
works, Basquiat was able to show us a little of how he thinks when he
draws. To me this served to show that his talent was out of the normal
scope of what most consider "art", which is what made his paintings so
remarkable. John Michel Basquiat was not a nice person, nor someone who
had any real feelings for anyone other than himself and his mother. He
did, however,  develop an interesting relationship with Andy Warhol, but
even that was a peculiar one. Basquiat's relationship with his mother
was never really revealed though we know that she was locked away in a
mental institution and that he made regular visits to see her. He even
attempted to rescue her from that place late in the film but was so
destructive to himself and out of control by then that he never managed
to help her. BASQUIAT is an incredible journey through the underground
art world and showcases an all star cast. Decidedly depressing and
visually out of sync, BASQUIAT triggers many emotions and succeeds in
all of it's endeavors to let us follow the obusive actions of a man
whose visions are only known to himself.  4 spots (out of 4)
Favorite Line: Andy Warhol - "I can't tell what's good anymore."

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 8/16/96 (limited); 8/23/96 (wide)
Running Length: 1:46
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, drug use, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Jeffrey Wright, Michael Wincott, Claire Forlani, David Bowie, 
      Gary Oldman, Benicio Del Toro, Dennis Hopper, Parker Posey, 
      Willem Dafoe, Christopher Walken, Courtney Love
Director: Julian Schnabel
Producers: Jon Kilik, Randy Ostrow, and Joni Sighvatsson
Screenplay: Julian Schnabel
Cinematography: Ron Fortunato
Music: John Cale
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     BASQUIAT, the fictionalized biography of graffiti artist-turned-
international sensation, Jean Michael Basquiat, is the latest in a long 
line of "suffering artist" motion pictures, following closely on the 
heels of last year's controversial TOTAL ECLIPSE.  As presented by 
first-time director (and rival painter), Julian Schnabel, BASQUIAT is a 
skewed and often shallow look at the man who became an icon, the forces 
that shaped his life and death, and the way he was treated by his 
contemporaries and hangers-on.
     The film, which is first and foremost a character study of its 
subject, opens in 1979 when Basquiat (Jeffrey Wright) was a graffiti 
artist going by the name of Samo.  After lurching erratically through 
the next nine years, BASQUIAT concludes in 1988, shortly before the 27-
year old artist died of a heroin overdose.  According to Schnabel, the 
movie is intended to celebrate the man's life, not to mourn his death, 
so Basquiat's last days are not shown.  It's one of many miscalculations 
made by the director, because, when the end credits roll, we're left 
without a sense of closure.  
     For the most part, BASQUIAT works as a series of anecdotes, but not 
as a deeper portrait.  Despite the screen time afforded to Jeffrey 
Wright, who gives a superlative performance, we never really connect 
with the painter.  His influences, both artistic and personal, are 
presented in a perfunctory and unsatisfactory manner:  his 
institutionalized mother, his long-suffering girlfriend (Claire 
Forlani), his supportive friend (Benicio Del Toro), etc.  As for the 
pressure and inner pain that drive him to drug use -- we've seen it all 
before, better portrayed and more convincingly dramatized.  In terms of 
feeling for Basquiat, this picture left me cold.
     Schnabel also appears to have a mercenary motive that makes parts 
of his film seem indulgent.  One of Basquiat's fellow artists, Albert 
Milo (Gary Oldman), is a thinly-veiled representation of Schnabel 
himself, and the writer/director populates BASQUIAT with many of his own 
paintings.  Although Schnabel probably intended the movie as a tribute 
to a celebrated colleague, his self-promotion lends a distasteful aura 
to the proceedings.
     One area where BASQUIAT succeeds is in its portrayal of the 
artificial, exploitative forces that encircled Basquiat, sucked him in, 
and eventually spit him out.  Since Schnabel moved in the same circles, 
it's not surprising that he would understand, and be able to effectively 
portray, this aspect of the artist's experience.  Using scenes that are 
pointed and nearly satirical in tone, Schnabel details the double-
dealing and boot-licking that surrounds successful artists -- how honey-
tongued sycophants and hangers-on replace friends and lovers.  Basquiat, 
seduced by his own fame, turns his back on the companions of his 
obscurity to bask in the adulation of Andy Warhol (David Bowie), and 
arts dealers Bruno Bischofberger (Dennis Hopper) and Mary Boone (Parker 
Posey).  In the end, the young painter ends up alone, with only drugs to 
ease the loneliness.
     BASQUIAT boasts a gallery of superlative performances.  A number of 
big names became involved in this project, including Dennis Hopper, Gary 
Oldman, Willem Dafoe, and Christopher Walken, all of whom provide solid 
support for Jeffrey Wright's amazing portrayal.  Wright's Basquiat is 
animated, passionate, and deserving of a better script than he was 
granted (the Tony award-winning actor is on record as having disagreed 
with Schnabel's interpretation of how the role should be played).  Also 
worthy of notice is Claire Forlani, who is heartbreakingly sympathetic 
in the thankless role of the girlfriend abandoned on the way up.  And 
David Bowie is every bit as good as Jared Harris (I SHOT ANDY WARHOL) as 
the effeminate, enigmatic Warhol.
     Every once in a while, BASQUIAT strikes a real nerve with 
statements like "[Dealers] are no longer collecting art; [they're] 
buying people" or "[Basquiat's] audience hasn't even been born yet."  
The film doesn't do a total autopsy of the art business, but it affords 
enough glimpses to enable us to read between the lines.  Unfortunately, 
Schnabel doesn't have the same success plumbing the secrets of 
Basquiat's soul.  For a subject with such depth and passion, it's sad 
that Schnabel's treatment is so uneven.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ivana Redwine
(Miramax 1996)
Starring: Jeffrey Wright, Michael Wincott, Benicio Del Toro, 
    Claire Forlani, David Bowie, Dennis Hopper, Gary Oldman. 
Written and directed by Julian Schnabel. 
Running time: 1 hour, 46 minutes. MPAA rating: R.
WARNING: This review contains spoilers!
        I find that the best movies touch me on an emotional level, 
and "Basquiat" moved me deeply. The film, a character study of 
artist Jean-Michel Basquiat, is a heart-felt masterpiece of 
innovative film-making.
        Jean-Michel Basquiat was a young black artist living a 
hand-to-mouth existence in New York when he was discovered 
by critic Rene Ricard and became a darling of the New York art 
world, skyrocketing to a Warholesque fifteen minutes of fame. 
Basquiat died of a drug overdose just a few years later. Unlike 
many artists who suffer because of the indifference of the 
public to their work, Basquiat's plight was one of too-early 
fame mixed with the exploitation of his talent by the art world 
of the 1980's. 
        Writer-director Julian Schnabel, who was also a 
successful artist and darling of the 1980's art world, brought 
something to this film that few others could--first-hand 
knowledge of the milieu in which Basquiat moved. In my 
opinion, no other film made about an artist has the 
verisimilitude of "Basquiat." Most film portrayals of the life of 
an artist present stick-figure characters that seldom go 
beyond the mythic archetype of the artist as troubled genius. 
The title character in "Basquiat" is a much more complex, fully 
developed character than the Van Gogh in old Hollywood's 
"Lust for Life."
        Schnabel's skills as an artist make this a visually vivid 
film, using powerful images to tell the story of Basquiat's life. A 
particularly memorable example is the scene where Basquiat 
as a child is standing with his mother in front of Picasso's 
"Guernica." The painting moves his mother to tears as a shiny 
crown suddenly appears on the child's head. I interpreted this 
as a metaphor for the ability of a great painting to touch the 
deepest human emotions and transform lives. When the 
crown appeared on Basquiat's head, I felt that the artist was 
born within him.
         I thought that the film's greatest strength is Jeffrey 
Wright's superb performance as Jean-Michel Basquiat. Wright 
slips so easily into the role of Basquiat that there were times 
when I felt there was some Boswell-like videographer following 
the real Basquiat around. Yet, Schnabel's artistry is such that 
the film never feels like a documentary or even a docudrama. 
        Basquiat had no contact with his father, and his mother 
was in a mental institution. He sometimes seemed to distance 
himself from the world by alienating people who were close to 
him. One of the first people he alienated was Gina Cardinale 
(played luminously by Claire Forlani). Gina was an early 
girlfriend who took him in when he was homeless and loved 
him with selfless devotion before he found fame and fortune. 
She saved his life once when she found him in their apartment
nearly dead from a drug overdose. But Basquiat committed an 
infidelity with an art-world groupie (played by Courtney Love) 
and lost Gina soon after she found out. After losing Gina, he 
lives an increasingly solitary existence, and here the actor 
Wright is particularly effective in his use of body language and 
facial expression to portray Basquiat's slow withdrawal into 
himself.
        In spite of his isolation, Basquiat did have a rather 
strange friendship with Andy Warhol, and their friendship 
struck me as one of the more fascinating aspects of this film. 
Warhol became something of a surrogate father to Basquiat. 
Warhol was the only person who seemed to care enough about 
Basquiat to warn him about the perils of drug addiction.
        I thought that one of the best scenes in the movie was 
when Warhol and Basquiat worked collaboratively on a series 
of paintings. There was a sadness and a loneliness common to 
both men in this scene. They seemed to be two lost souls who 
found solace in each other's friendship for a while.
        I enjoyed David Bowie's low-key performance as Andy 
Warhol. Bowie's Warhol was soft spoken and introverted; it 
was Warhol as the private man, not Warhol's better known 
flamboyant persona as a diva of pop culture. 
        Racism is another thread in the movie. All of Basquiat's 
genius and all of his art world success could not shield him 
from the racism that he confronted in his daily life. In one 
scene in an elegant restaurant, a table of white businessmen 
stare rudely at Basquiat. Basquiat does not openly confront 
them with his anger; instead he tells the waiter that he will 
anonymously pay their check. In another similar scene, 
Basquiat is in an upscale deli with Andy Warhol when a clerk 
treats him rudely because of his race. Basquiat responds to 
this by buying a thousand dollars worth of caviar from the 
clerk. In yet another scene, Basquiat reacts with open hostility 
when a long-time white friend says something about Basquiat 
becoming "uppity" since his success. Basquiat becomes 
quarrelsome, and to get away from him, the friend angrily gets 
out of the taxi they are sharing. 
        However, Basquiat's race and his background as a graffiti 
artist made him chic with the hip New York art crowd of the 
1980's. This is reflected in the scene where he is working on 
some paintings in his studio and is visited by a gallery owner, 
an art collector, and the collector's bimboesque wife. The gallery 
owner announces to the couple, "This is the voice of the street." 
Tatum O'Neal is hilarious as the art collector's wife, who 
indicates to Basquiat that she might buy one of the paintings 
if he will paint over a large area of institutional-looking green 
with a more pleasant color. 
        There are many fine performances in the film, including 
Parker Posey as gallery owner Mary Boone, Gary Oldman as 
artist Albert Milo (Schnabel's fictional surrogate), Dennis 
Hopper as art dealer Bruno Bischofberger, and an 
exceptionally strong effort by Michael Wincott as the art critic 
Rene Ricard. 
        "Basquiat" is a rare treat. Few films have performances of 
the caliber that Jeffrey Wright gives in playing Jean-Michel 
Basquiat. And even fewer films have the kind of original vision 
shown in this one by Julian Schnabel. A film like this comes 
around only once in a long while: it would be a shame to miss it.
