Title
Review for Fast Company (1979)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
While FAST COMPANY appears to be an unremarkable racing picture to the 
casual viewer, it's of some interest to film buffs because it is a most 
unusual entry in the oeuvre of horror director David Cronenberg.  If you 
were unaware of his filmography, you'd probably think that this was his 
debut feature - it certainly has that New World Pictures look about it, as 
if Cronenberg was part of the stable of up-and-coming film-makers recruited 
by Roger Corman during the 70s.  Its B-movie elements are also supplemented 
by a soundtrack of original rock tunes (which sound like a mixture of Bob 
Seger and Bruce Springsteen) and co-starring roles from exploitation 
regulars John Saxon and Claudia Jennings. 
The vehicles driven in FAST COMPANY are drag cars - fuelers and funny cars - 
which are an unusual subject for a film because their races are over as soon 
as they've begun, leaving little in the way of visuals.  It's this 
blink-and-you'll-miss-it factor that influences the documentary look of the 
racetrack scenes.  The cars look like hunched predators ready to strike, 
roaring, shuddering, and spitting fire as if they were machine-gunning each 
other.  They run not on gas, but a mixture of nitro and alcohol, and their 
edgy jockeying for position gives us the feeling of an imminent explosion - 
which their sudden, furious bursts of speed become.  Throughout, we're 
waiting for the crash that must be coming.  Racetracks generally make good 
metaphors for the film characters that inhabit them, but there's no endless 
looping around a static circuit in FAST COMPANY.  The short bursts of speed 
- their preparation, buildup and release - would fasten themselves easily 
enough to repressed, inarticulate characters, but paradoxically the drivers 
in FAST COMPANY are likeable and easy-going.  As the protagonist Lonnie 
'Lucky Man' Johnson, William Smith doesn't display any passion for racing.  
Instead he's simply resigned to spending his life on wheels, whether racing 
or in his lavish trailer (when he has conversations with people they always 
take place in or around vehicles).  This is America, as evidenced by the 
constant red-white-blue coloring of the film, and car culture is the thing 
that it's built on.  Cronenberg, who took on the project because of his 
interest in motor racing, doesn't attempt any of the body/machine collisions 
he is famous for in his work, but is settles for a more purely psychological 
approach: that in a motorized, mechanized age, those who make their livings 
around machines become consumed by them. 
There's little to distinguish FAST COMPANY from other speedway films, 
B-movie or otherwise, but it's still agreeable viewing and has a few 
interesting moments.  Somewhat uncharacteristically, Jennings is the only 
female member of the cast to keep her clothes on.  This would turn out to be 
her last film - ironically she would die behind the wheel in a car crash 
soon afterwards.  Cronenberg, of course, would go on to direct CRASH several 
years later, the seeds perhaps already having been sown by this earlier 
project.  As it turned out, FAST COMPANY became a victim of legal problems 
and the film's cinema release lasted about as long its drag races. 
