Title
Review for Lone Star (1996)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is not easy to pigeon-hole what John Sayles's new film LONE
STAR is about.  At least superficially it is a murder mystery, but
there is a lot more to this film.  Sayles has written a complex and
textured look at life in a border town wracked with ethnic tension from
the volatile combination of Whites, Blacks, Mexican immigrants (both
legal and illegal), and even some Indians.  This is a story of
corruption and of strained parent/offspring relationships.  There are
three father/son pairs and one mother/daughter pair and in each case
the parent has caused his offspring to resent him by some behavior or
action.
     The story takes place in the generally peaceful border town of
Frontera, Texas.  The plot is set in motion when the remains of a man
killed in the early 1970s are found.  A sheriff's badge is found among
the bones, and so current sheriff Sam Deeds (played by Chris Cooper)
assumes that the dead body belongs to a former sheriff of Frontera,
Charlie Wade (played in flashbacks by Kris Kristofferson).  Murdering
Wade was almost a public service since he was a corrupt sheriff and
vicious bully who had been seen murdering suspects.  Sam immediately
starts to suspect his own father Buddy (played in flashbacks by Matthew
McConaughey).  Buddy is something of a local hero for having kicked out
Charlie Wade and becoming sheriff himself.  The town remembers Buddy as
ending corruption and bringing integrity to the office of sheriff, but
this hero-worship does not quite square with Sam's remembrances of his
father.  Sam remembers his father as being a bad sheriff, only
appearing good by contrast to his predecessor.  The young sheriff has
unfinished business with his dead father and whom he remembers with no
little hatred.  Sam has to dig into his father's reputation and the
incidents of more than two decades ago to try to understand this new
case.  At the same time he is courting Pilar Cruz (Elizabeth Pena), the
daughter of Mexican immigrants, whom he loved at the age of fourteen
but from whom he was separated by his father and Pilar's mother.  Cruz
is a local history teacher who finds herself embroiled in ethnic
tension at her school, a new romance with Sam Deeds, and a touchy
relationship with her mother (Miriam Colon).  There is also a subplot
with the Black community.
     Sayles wrote, directed, and even edited the film.  He does a
reasonable job of weaving together several complex threads of plot into
a single story that very much give a three-dimensional view of life in
Frontera.  One weakness of the script is that the is an almost
completely disjoint plot of an Army base in the town and a Black bar
that George Wade would shake down for protection money.  This forms a
second whole line of plot sewn to the main line in only one or two
superficial stitches.  Some of the same themes appear in each story,
but neither story really depends on the other.  Together they do give a
better view of this small Texas town.  In each story the view includes
life not just at it is now, but also how it was when it was controlled
by sadistic Charlie Wade.  In the main story Sam needs to reconstruct
this past to find the facts behind the old killing.  In the other the
basis for the current trouble is also in the past of about the same
time.
     Chris Cooper is probably best remembered for his film debut as the
young union organizer from MATEWAN.  While the script calls for him to
make some of the hardest decisions of his life, he does not convey very
deep emotion beyond a sort of sad wisdom.  It is much more interesting
to watch Elizabeth Pena whose eyes seem to convey more of the sorrow
and pain of her life.  The role that will get noticed, though it is
much smaller, is that of Kris Kristofferson as the malignant corrupt
sheriff.  Kristofferson is not known for tough-guy roles, but here he
can be easily believed as the evil that hangs over the whole town, even
after his removal from the scene.  Good character performances come
from Joe Morton, Ron Canada, and Miriam Colon.
     Sayles has managed to turn a not-too-promising ethnic-tension plot
into a film that may well rank with MATEWAN as the best enjoyed of his
films.  The film is intelligent and at the same time clever.  I rate it
a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Sony Pictures Classics)
Starring:  Chris Cooper, Elizabeth Pena, Joe Morton, Clifton James, Miriam
Colon, Ron Canada, Kris Kristofferson, Matthew McConaughey.
Screenplay:  John Sayles.
Director:  John Sayles.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     This is how far I trust John Sayles' skill as a writer:  in the few
hours after I saw LONE STAR, when I couldn't quite get the pieces to fit
together, I figured _I_ had to be missing something.  Perhaps more than
any other filmmaker's next project, I look forward to the next John Sayles
project like a Christmas gift.  While he is still growing as a director,
his scripts are so unapologetically and relentlessly literate -- and
literary -- that unwrapping them is its own kind of pleasure.  LONE STAR,
as much as any film of the last several years, is a novel on the screen,
and a marvelous one.  When I finally did put those pieces together, I
realized how justified my faith had been.
     LONE STAR takes place in the Texas border town of Frontera, where two
men make a discovery near a former Army firing range:  a human skeleton
which appears to be the remains of Charley Wade (Kris Kristofferson), the
corrupt sheriff who used to run Frontera with an iron hand and an open
pocket.  The discovery is of great interest to current sheriff Sam Deeds
(Chris Cooper), whose late father Buddy followed Charley as sheriff and
became a beloved figure.  But Sam's own feelings about Buddy are
ambivalent, and when he begins to believe that Buddy might have been the
man who killed Charley Wade, he becomes determined to find out the truth.
That quest has Sam crossing paths with several townspeople, including
Pilar Cruz (Elizabeth Pena), a high school teacher and Sam's old flame;
mayor Hollis Page (Clifton James), formerly one of Charley's deputies; and
bar owner Otis Payne (Ron Canada).  Each one holds part of the key to a
forty year old mystery.
     On its most basic level, LONE STAR is a superbly acted study of life
in a border town.  The cast is uniformly in tune with Sayles' naturalistic
style, particularly Chris Cooper in a subtle but powerful performance as
Sam; even Frances McDormand, as Sam's manic-depressive ex-wife, lends
humanity to an edgy role in her single scene.  The multi-ethnic cast
provides a solid foundation for an examination of a place where the
"melting pot" is anything but.  The white townspeople feel overrun by the
Mexican-Americans, the blacks only feel comfortable in Otis' roadhouse,
and even some Mexican-American's like Pilar's restauranteur mother
Mercedes (Miriam Colon)express disdain for recent illegal immigrants and
their failure to assimilate.  It is a place which, while less overtly
racist than it was during Charley Wade's reign in the 1950s, is still
characterized by an omnipresent sense of "us" and "them."
     That is one of two crucial sub-texts of LONE STAR, both of which are
intrinsic to its South Texas setting.  This is a story about borders of
all kinds, set in a town which is named after the Spanish word for
"border."  Fathers and sons are divided by old emotional wounds, lovers
are separated by race, and everyone seems to be separated from the truth
by pre-conceptions about what the truth should be.  And that is the other
thread running through LONE STAR:  the nature of history.  In an early
scene, parents of various ethnicities sit in Pilar's classroom arguing
over the way she is teaching the Battle of the Alamo, the white parents
attacking her for suggesting that there is another perspective from which
it could be viewed.  The idea that history is personal is troubling,
because it destabilizes the past, and when history has crossed over into
legend, there will be many who prefer solidity.  That is the truth Sam
discovers as his investigation challenges the memory of his legendary
father:  myth has a power which simple facts cannot hope to match.
     These rich themes were always evident as I watched LONE STAR, but I
was bothered by a seemingly tangential sub-plot involving Otis Payne's
estranged son Del (Joe Morton), returned to Frontera with his family after
many years to act as commanding officer at the local army base.  Then,
finally, I saw it as absolutely crucial.  Del, like Sam, harbors
resentment towards his father; unlike Sam, his father is still alive.
Sam's investigation can only bring him so close to Buddy, and it is
telling that Buddy (played by Matthew McConaughey) appears only briefly in
the flashbacks which Sayles weaves through LONE STAR.  Sam and Buddy
are separated by an uncrossable border -- the border of history -- while
Del finds himself with a chance to be re-united with his father.  At times
it seems that Sayles is suggesting that the only history that has a chance
of being re-interpreted is the history which has yet to be created.
     LONE STAR is a haunting film, which deals with unexpectedly delicate
subject matter with startling confidence.  The experience of watching the
film sticks with me because I didn't just sit through two hours of film; I
was reading people's lives.  That is the kind of filmmaker John Sayles is:
an author with a camera.

Author
Steve Rhodes
I highly recommend this wonderful film that I saw recently at the
press screening. The film starts locally this coming Friday (June 21)
at the Camera One Cinema in San Jose.
     LONE STAR is the latest film from the great writer and director
John Sayles (THE BROTHER FROM ANOTHER PLANET, MATEWAN, EIGHT MEN OUT,
CITY OF HOPE, PASSION FISH and THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH among others).
Sayles's pictures are always bursting with humanity.  The scripts are
intelligent and his films are rich with talented actors.  He manages to
find excellent although usually lessor known actors to play even the
most minor roles.  LONE STAR is one of the high points of his body of
work.  Every member of the cast delivers a heartfelt performance.
     LONE STAR has at its core a 40 year old murder mystery that rears
its ugly head to confront and trouble the multiracial town of Eagle
Pass in Rio County on the Texas and Mexican border.  Although the
solving of the mystery provides an effect glue to keep the story
together, the movie is actually three parallel stories about the local
history of people of Anglo, African and Mexican ancestry.  These groups
are even more fragmented into some that are soldiers and others that
are illegal aliens.
     As the story opens, two soldiers, Cliff (Stephen Mendillo) and
Mikey (Stephen Lang), find a skull.  When new Sheriff Sam Deeds (Chris
Cooper) arrives, he is not sure what it means, reflecting, "No telling
yet if there's been a crime, but this country's seen a fair amount of
disagreements over the years."
     The locals are not impressed with their sheriff.  They say "he is
all hat and no cattle."  They still remember his father Buddy Deeds
(Matthew McConaughey) who was beloved by all racial groups and believed
to be the best sheriff there ever was.  Sam has a limited view of his
role in life declaring, "I'm just a jailer.  I run a 60 room hotel with
bars on the windows."  As John Sayles says in the press kit, "Just as
the legend of the Alamo has helped to define Texas, so has the legend
of Buddy Deeds defined his son Sam."
     The best thing Buddy did was run the racist, evil, and corrupt
previous sheriff Charley Wadd (Kris Kristofferson) out of town and then
get his position as sheriff of Rio County.  Since Charley has never
been heard of in 40 years and since the skull is about that old, the
narrative drive in the movie surrounds whether there could have been
foul play back then.  This mystery works really well, but it is not the
best part of the picture nor the centerpiece.  All of the acting by all
of the wonderful characters we get to meet is the reason to see the
film.
     The best performance is the reserved and lonely one by Chris
Cooper as Sam.  One bartender tells him, "I'm clever as the next guy."
Sam looks at him real serious and says, "If the next guy is a redneck."
Sam's ex-girlfriend from high school, Pilar Cruz, is played simply but
effectively by Elizabeth Pena.  Pilar's mom Mercedes (Miriam Colon) is
a first generation Mexican-American and is one of the biggest racist in
the show.  She detests illegal aliens and generally treats poor
Mexican-Americans like dirt.  As a one-dimensional bad guy, Kris
Kristofferson is perfect.
     The blacks in the story have two role models.  One is Otis Payne
(Ron Canada) who runs the local bar where the blacks have hung out for
years.  Canada is great as an old sage who is somehow connected to the
mysteries from the past.  His philosophy is "It's not like there's a
line between the good people and the bad people.  It is not like you're
one or the other."  One of my favorite philosophers from the show is an
Indian who runs an obscure little shop on a dusty road.  He tells Sam,
"This stretch of road runs between nowhere and not much else."
     Otis's grown up son Delmore is played by Joe Morton (THE BROTHER
FROM ANOTHER PLANET, TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY, OF MICE AND MEN, and
SPEED among others).  Delmore has just arrived as the leader of the
military base near the town.  Otis and he are estranged, and when they
meet, Otis says of him contemptuously that he had heard that "Colonel
Payne is a real hard case.  A spit and polish man."
     Sayles's script is naturally funny in a low key fashion.  It is
also full of poignancy.  So many scenes are special, but two of my
favorites are a slow dancing scene that is lovingly photographed by
Stuart Dryburgh, and the other is of the abandoned drive-in theater
where Sam and Pilar used to make out.
     The wonderful music (Mason Daring) runs from twangy mysterious
melodies to nostalgic Mexican songs.  As a native Texan, I liked the
way the accents were realistic.  Too often filmmakers overdo Southern
accents.  Certainly some locals have thick accents, but not all.  The
sets (Dan Bishop) are typical Texas hokey right down to the gun stocks
that are used as draft beer handles at the bar.
     Perhaps my favorite technical aspect of the film is the editing,
also by Sayles.  Many scenes would move 40 years with just a pan and
without any cuts.  This was a perfect way to show how the present is
just an extension of the past; they are one.
     Finally, look for Frances McDormand, the star of FARGO, who plays
Sam's ex-wife Bunny.  She again demonstrates her wide range of acting
talent.  Here she is a hyperactive sports junkie of all things.  What a
change from her role in FARGO as a laid back pregnant detective.
     LONE STAR runs a full 2:15, but given the time it spends delving
into the lives of so many people and many racial communities, this
feels short if anything.  The film is rated R.  There is a little sex,
no nudity, and a little violence.  I thought it should have been PG-13.
Perhaps they used the F word a few times, and I missed it.  At any
rate, I think it would be fine for kids 10 and up.  I strongly
recommend this wonderful, insightful, and heartwarming film to you and
award it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael Redman
John Sayles' films remind me of real life: often it's slow, sometimes
the important events don't seem dramatic and there are far too many
subplots to keep under control. These are, of course, his strengths and
also his weaknesses.
In "Lone Star", Sheriff Sam Deeds (Chris Cooper) is investigating the
recently uncovered body of long-dead former Sheriff Charlie Wade (Kris
Kristofferson) who may have been murdered by his successor, Sam's
father, Sheriff Buddy Deeds (Matthew McConaughey). For most films, this
story would be not only center stage, but would also exclude almost
everything else.
But that=92s not enough for Sayles. Not one to let advancing the plot get=
in the way of the characters and their interactions, the director gives
us the history of over a dozen people  in the racially mixed Texas town.
We find  out that Wade ran the town with an iron hand and was hated by
almost everyone especially Buddy and Big Otis...who runs the
mostly-black bar in town and who left his family years ago including his
young son...who now returns to town as the head of the nearby army base
and is having trouble with his own son...who sneaks over to see Big Otis
secretly.
And Sam helps out a young boy innocently jailed...whose mother is Sam's
high-school sweetheart but was forced not to see him again by her
mother...who came into the country as an illegal Mexican immigrant
decades ago but now runs a successful restaurant where one of her
employees is a boy....who is helping smuggle illegals over the border
and=85
Whew! It goes on and on. Everyone has a tale and in the two-and-a-half
hour film, we see many of them. Somewhere in between all of this, the
main plot of the murder (remember that?) is working towards being
resolved.
There are possibly too many things going on even for a movie of this
length. The film is a lot of work for the audience. Keeping track of
this many people and all of their history is difficult with friends
you=92ve known for years, much less with characters you were just
introduced to two hours before. =
By the time the movie is over, there=92s a certain amount of confusion
about some people and events. Hours or days later, after your mind has
had a chance to sort some of these things out, you=92ll have revelations.=
 =
The main themes are how history affects the living and the relationship
between parents and children. The issues are complex and very little is
tied up with a nice neat bow by the film's end. I would have been
disappointed otherwise.
[This review appeared in the 11/21/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Christopher Null
     LONE STAR can be simply described as an incredible mess.
     John Sayles, darling of the indie film movement, has created
this picture, an epic study of racial tension in mythical Frontera,
Texas, a border town in the Rio Grande Valley.  (The film was
actually shot in Eagle Pass, quite a ways upriver from the Valley.)
Set against the backdrop of a son investigating his father's
involvement in the murder of a sheriff some 40 years earlier, Sayles
wanders, SHORT CUTS-like, through the lives of 15 or so major
characters. 
     The film is full of excellent performances, including Chris
Cooper (Sam Deeds, the current sheriff and investigating son),
Matthew McConaughy (Buddy Deeds, his dad, in flashback), Kris
Kristofferson (the evil and long-dead ex-sheriff Charlie Wade),
Elizabeth Pe=F1a (Pilar, Sam's girlfriend), and Frances McDormand (in
a cameo as Sam's ex-wife).  The problem is that Sayles's script could
have used some work, as it meanders through 2 1/2 hours of plot that
is mostly irrelevant to the primary story line.  One of these
side-tracks involves Pilar's Mexican family, their prejudices, how
they want to teach Texas History, illegal immigration, and a host of
scattered other themes.  Another subplot involves the black
community, a closing Army base, a family drama between grandfather,
father, and son, and how this all fits in with the 40-year old murder
(answer:  very, very sketchily). 
     Sayles's biggest problem is that he likes the sound of his
writing so much that he lets it go on forever.  In fact, he
continually prefers to *talk* about things that have happened than to
actually *show* them happening (thus violating the first rule of
screenwriting).  It's no wonder that your legs (and mind) are asleep
when the movie's over. 
     Sayles also has a poor understanding of what the Valley is
really like, giving it a large black community that simply does not
exist there.  With LONE STAR, Sayles is trying to jam every racial
theme he's ever thought of into one movie, but he fails due to this
glaring inaccuracy (and interestingly, it's that very subplot which
is the poorest). 
     By the time the engrossing final 15 minutes arrive, we're
already too bored to care too much.  Sure, there are a few nice
twists along the way, and as a director, Sayles's use of flashbacks
is well-done and breaks up the monotony of the script.  Also, the
aforementioned solid acting does a lot to give this otherwise
mediocre film some credibility.  A real editor (Sayles did that, too)
would have saved the picture, though, by trimming off 45 minutes. 
     Finally, with this serious drama set in remote, rural Texas,
Sayles will achieve two things with certainty:  1) That most critics
will drool all over him with praise, and 2) that no one will actually
pay to see the film.  Sorry, John.  RATING:  ***
-Christopher Null  /
null@filmcritic.com -Screenwriter-Producer  /  Novelist-Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/ -and e-mail
requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Dennis Schwartz

LONE STAR (director/writer/editor: John Sayles; cinematographer: Stuart
Dryburgh; cast: Chris Cooper (Sam Deeds), Kris Kristofferson (Sheriff
Charlie Wade), Elizabeth Peńa (Pilar Cruz), Clifton James (Mayor Hollis
Pogue), Matthew McConaughey (Buddy Deeds), Miriam Colon (Mercedes Cruz),
Stephen Mendillo (Cliff ), Stephen J. Lang (Mikey), Latanya Richardson
(Priscilla Worth), Ron Canada (Otis Payne), Joe Morton (Colonel Delmore
Payne), Frances McDormand (Bunny, Sam's wife), Eddie Robinson (Chet
Payne), Gabriel Casseus (young Otis), Beatrice Winde (Minnie Bledsoe);
Runtime: 135; 1996)
Writer/director John Sayles weaves an intriguing story that is both a
mystery and a study about the relationship between the generations and
the races. It is set in a small Texas border town of Frontera, where 19
out of every 20 citizens is Mexican. When two soldiers (Mendillo & Lang)
are looking at desert plant life in an abandoned Army rifle range, they
discover a human skull, a Masonic ring, and a corroded sheriff's badge.
It turns out that this is the body of the venal Sheriff Charlie Wade
(Kristofferson), who was reported missing 40 years ago. He was a corrupt
sheriff who had his hand in every crooked scheme that went on in town
and loved to dish out his idea of the law with excessive force. He was
unaffectionately known as a 'bribes 'n' bullets' lawman. When the
current sheriff, Sam Deeds (Cooper), learns of the discovery, he thinks
that his father Buddy Deeds, the one who became a revered sheriff
afterwards, killed him to become sheriff.
Sam gets Hollis Pogue (James), the current mayor, who was Wade's deputy
back in 1957, to tell him again about the confrontation his father had
with Wade the night he disappeared and how his dad refused to obey
Wade's orders and Wade threatened to kill him, but Buddy never backed
down. The legend got started that, after the incident, Buddy made Wade
run away from town, because he was afraid his corruption would come to
light through Buddy.
Sam had gotten married and then divorced to a manic-depressive rich
woman (Frances McDormand), and returned to town two years ago when his
friends asked him to run for sheriff. He idolized his father for the
first fifteen years of his life, but in the next fifteen years of his
life he felt resentment toward him. He learned that his father also made
deals with criminals, had a mistress, and received bribes. But people
respected him for being fair to them and not being cruel in his
enforcement of the law, even his bigotry was not as hateful as in the
past, he only made sure that the races should stick to their own kind,
and did not have a grudge against the non-whites. He was the kind of man
legends were made of, as all the people liked him.
Sam's most traumatic moment came when he was a high school student and
was dating a Mexican girl Pilar Cruz (Elizabeth Peńa), whom he was
deeply in love with. His father and his deputy spotted the two of them
in a drive-in movie and separated them for good. Sam never forgave his
father for doing that, even though by the film's end we learn why he did
it.
Pilar was transferred to the Catholic high school and married someone
who died recently. She currently is a responsible high school history
teacher, teaching the course in a way the anglican community feels is
distorting their history, as she points out that their white heroes,
such as, Davy Crockett, were also slave traders. She has a daughter who
is an honor roll student, but she has trouble from her teenage son, who
has rebelled against her and is sometimes in minor trouble with the law.
Pilar's relationship with her mother (Miriam Colon) is still strained
because of their different viewpoints. Her mother owns a very successful
restaurant, where she hires Mexicans with green cards and treats them
harshly, shaking her head that they can't assimilate and speak English,
forgetting how she came to this country as a wetback herself and has now
risen to be the town's councilwoman. When her husband was killed, she
never took another man becoming a bitter woman, putting all her effort
into the restaurant. Upon seeing wetbacks crossing the lawn of her
luxurious ranch home, she calls the border patrol.
The black population comes mostly from Fort McKenzie, an Army post that
is on the verge of being closed. The black people's social life revolves
around either the church or Otis Payne's bar, or as Otis so aptly says,
most go to both, since there is no demarcation between good and evil.
Sam will learn in his informal investigation, one in which his Texas
Ranger friend is officially running but not trying too hard to discover
anything, that Otis was with Wade the night he disappeared. The past
also catches up with Otis, as the son he abandoned has become the new
colonel (Morton) in the fort. The colonel is a by-the-book military man,
with a rigid sense of duty. The confrontations he has with his father
are genuinely moving. His character grows as the story allows him to
show he is a dynamic person, capable of tender emotions and expressing
humane responses, as well as someone who is able to make his own breaks
in life and rise from his impoverished position in life all by himself.
This is a slow moving, superbly acted, thoughtful, provocative look at
America's past and where it is now, as seen through the past lives of
the main characters depicted in the three ethnic communities. The
laconic tone of the film and the strong intellect in the script bring so
many other things to the table, that the mystery, even though it is
followed through and wrapped up, is not quite as important as all the
other issues it brings up. The subtle message being that the past must
be remembered but it is more important that the future must not be
blurred by what already happened and can't be changed. That racial
conditions have improved in this country, but not to the point where
each group can accept the other, as each feels most comfortable only
with their own kind. The blacks have their own bar, as do the whites,
while the Mexicans have their own restaurant and cultural needs, which
include speaking Spanish. The whites feel like they are being pushed out
of their own country, the blacks feel that there should be more of them
in town, while the Mexicans feel they should be running things since
they are in the majority. But what is important for Sayles, is that
things must be allowed to change for the better in a loving way, and
each group must somehow learn to accept the other. The story challenges
race relations, borders, parent and child relations, the teaching of
history, government responsibility to its citizens, political
corruption, military duty, patriotism, and basically what it is to be an
American.
This ambitious project is an engrossing and an original work. There are
no predictable and formulaic messages, this is one of the great films of
the 1990s, one that is done with wit and tact. Everything about it rings
with truth, even if it has to break down a few legends to get its point
across --  proving that often enough, legends are not all they are
cracked up to be.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Chad Polenz
Lone Star
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, R, 135 minutes [2 hours, 15 minutes]
[drama/western]
starring: Chris Cooper (Sheriff Sam Deeds), Elizabeth Pena (Pilar Cruz), Kris
Kristofferson (Sherrif Charlie Wade), Joe Morton (Col. Delmore Payne),
produced by R. Paul Miller, Maggie Renzi, written and directed by John
Sayles.
Independent films have been gaining respect in recent years because they're
totally different from the mainstream, commercial films. What's so surprising
about John Sayles' "Lone Star" is that it's really a glamorous Hollywood
movie in dirty clothes. We get a 40-year-old mystery, a multi-layered story
involving 100 important characters, forbidden romances, and messages about
racism and family. The fact it tries to incorporate all of these things at
the same time and equally emphasize their importance makes you feel like
you've seen everything somewhere else.
The film starts off in a generic western manner as two men find a buried
human skeleton, a badge, and a ring (shouldn't the clothes still be in tact
too?). The good ol' Sheriff Sam Deeds (Cooper) is called in to check it out,
and since he's the sheriff-in-a-small-Texas-town-in-a-w he's capable of
solving mysteries almost immediately. He suspects the skeleton is that of the
infamous Sheriff Charlie Deeds (Kristofferson), who, we learn through a
series of multiple, inter-woven flashbacks, was a bully no one had the
courage to stand up to. Wade is easily hateable, but that's the problem -
it's so easy to hate him no other details are provided because Sayles assumes
you don't need them, and this is how the film works as a whole.
Much of the film involves Sam's efforts to learn more about Wade by
interviewing a lot of supposedly important characters like Wade's old whimpy
sidekick who is now the mayor, or the town's most prominent black man who
runs the place where all the blacks gather (there's a lot of ethnic
stereotyping here). He also runs into his high school sweetheart, Pilar Cruz
(Pena), who is now a school teacher.
You'd expect to see some detective work considering the elements, but this
does not happen. Sam is supposed to be a sheriff? He seems more like a guy in
beer commercial. All he does is wander aimlessly making for lots of
flashbacks and sub-plots, which become drawn out after a while. When Pilar
asks him why he "came back," he says, "for you" (gee, I wonder what they do
after that?).
The sub-plots are probably supposed to be the point of the film as a classic
literary theme of humanity is developed using racism and family conflict to
establish this. Some of individual scenes themselves are interesting, but as
whole they seem rather trite. A good example of this is a sub-plot involving
Colonel Delmore Payne (Morton) and his inability to communicate with his
troops and especially his own son - the same as what happened between him and
his father. It's this kind of cyclical irony the film uses to be poetic, but
it seems too generic to absorb.
What prevented me from really enjoying the film was the script itself. The
dialogue here seems like something from a book or a play (surprisingly, this
is an original screenplay), and the pacing often becomes tedious and boring.
The many overlapping sub-plots aren't organized well enough to appreciate and
follow them all. We follow Sam around for a large block of time, and then
suddenly come back to a sub-plot we had almost forgotten about, then the
pattern repeats itself.
"Lone Star" does not work as a mystery, especially considering how simple
the ending is. However, it does work as a good character study, only in that
many individual scenes are interesting. This film could have been great had
it chosen one of its many elements and stuck with it. Unfortunately, it tries
too hard to be too many things and it only seems to scratch the surface of
its potential.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @ http://members.aol.c
om/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Afterburner
        I had trouble watching LONE STAR (1996), but it was through no
fault of the movie.  Rather, I discovered that I've been conditioned by
Hollywood to expect a more-or-less direct line between the introduction of
the conflict and the resolution of that conflict.
        But LONE STAR doesn't take a direct line from beginning to end.  It
meanders.  John Sayles doesn't want to just tell you the story of a
skeleton dug up in the desert; he wants to give you a slice of life of the
town in which the story takes place.  And he does so masterfully.
        The primary plot involves Sheriff Sam Deeds (Chris Cooper) trying
to unravel the mystery of a skeleton found buried in the desert near
Frontera, Texas.  The skeleton is that of Charlie Wade (Kris
Kristofferson), a brutal and corrupt Sheriff of the same county who
disappeared over 30 years ago.  The disappearance happened the same night
Wade was threatened by a new deputy, Buddy Deeds (Matthew MacConaughey),
who refused to partake of the Sheriff's corrupt activities.  Buddy then
went on to become a wildly popular Sheriff in his own right, and Sam lives
under the long shadow cast by his father.
        Intermingled with the main story arc are several subplots.  A young
Mexican worker attempts to get his relatives illegally across the border; a
by-the-book Colonel of a nearby Army base attempts to come to grips with
the fact that his estranged father lives in Frontera; a shooting at a
nearby bar leads the Colonel to increase the frequency of random drug
tests, which may put a young private at risk.  These stories and more are
weaved skillfully into the fabric of the movie, and many are never
resolved.  In the hands of a lesser writer/director, these segments would
be distracting.  Sayles, however, manages to give them purpose despite
their irrelevancy to the central plot, and we find ourselves engrossed in
the lives of this small Texas border town.
        Solid acting is seen throughout the movie.  Kristofferson exudes
malignancy as the corrupt Wade.  Frances McDormand makes a brief but
wonderful appearance as Sam Deeds' "tightly-wound," football-crazed
ex-wife.  And Cooper is perfectly understated as the
not-quite-sure-of-himself Sheriff, trying to escape his father's legendary
status.
        To be fair, there are some flaws in the movie.  For instance, as
the payoff was building to its climax, I found myself thinking "If Buddy
Deeds *did* kill Charlie Wade, I'm going to be disappointed because it was
so obviously him.  And if he didn't, I'm going to be disappointed because
it's so obviously him that it *couldn't* be him."  A more subtle approach
could have heightened the mystery (and thus the enjoyment of the movie)
that much more.
        Also, the cutaways between the present and the past are done
seamlessly.  Instead of a fade, or other traditional flashback sequences,
the camera simply pans across the scene.  When the pan starts, the action
is in one time frame, and when it ends, the action is in another.  While
this was a novelty at first, I confess to being distracted by it later in
the movie.
        Finally, throughout the movie, Sam Deeds' desire to prove that his
father was a murderer seems completely out of proportion to any indications
of Buddy Deeds' personality.  Buddy Deeds seems to be a genuinely honest
and caring man, well deserving of his reputation.  Aside from the
resentment at having a legend for a father, we're given no motivation for
Sam's exceptionally hostile attitude towards Buddy, and I found myself
increasingly confused by this hostility as the movie progressed.
        But these are ultimately minor points.  The movie is well worth
watching, and I highly recommend it.  Especially to those folks like myself
who need to wean ourselves away from more conventional Hollywood fare.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
LONE STAR *** Written, directed and edited by John Sayles. 
Photography, Stuart Dryburgh. Production design, Dan Bishop. 
Music,  Mason Daring. Cast: Chris Cooper (Sam Deeds), 
Elizabeth Pena (Pilar), Miriam Colon (Mercedes Cruz), 
Matthew McConaughey (Buddy Deeds), Kris Kristofferson 
(Charley Wade), Clifton James
(Mayor Hollis Pogue), Frances McDormand (Bunny), Ron Canada 
(Otis Payne), Joe Morton (Delmore Payne), Eddie Robinson 
(Chet Payne), Gabriel Casseus (young Otis) and Beatrice 
Winde (Minnie Bledsoe). A Castle Rock release. 136 minutes. 
Rated R (violence)
John Sayles, who makes movies that are off the beaten track, 
has come up with a rather original, appropriately lengthy, 
and in some ways fascinating film. Nominally, is it a story 
of detection. Near the imaginary  small town of Frontera, 
Texas, across the Mexican border (the Rio Grande), a skull 
is found by chance. Rio County Sheriff Sam Deeds 
investigates. The clues lead him to the certainty that the 
deceased was Charley Wade, once a sheriff himself.
Wade was vicious and corrupt to the bone, a specialist in 
"la mordida" which is what Mexicans call payola or 
extortion. That's how you can get out of a traffic ticket 
south of the border, but Charley, like a gangster in 
sheriff's clothing, went beyond this to protection money. He 
was also a contemptible racist. 
In 1957, Buddy Deeds, Sam's father, was, along with Hollis 
Pogue, one of Charley's deputies. One day, Buddy decided to 
run the corrupt Wade out of town. Wade was never heard from 
again, while Buddy became Sheriff and a local legend.
Some 40 years later, with the now-deceased Buddy being 
locally worshipped (a plaque is being dedicated to him), 
with  Hollis now the Mayor,and Deeds Jr., a newish, honest 
sherriff who makes grafters uncomfortable, Sam becomes 
almost sure that it was his father who had killed Wade. In 
part this is wishful thinking: Sam, an estranged son, would 
like to place the guilt on his own father. 
This is merely the start and premise of the movie. Its 
official synopsis  runs to four pages, my own notes to 
seven. All this because "Lone Star" packs a huge number of 
local persons, acting, interacting, with connected pasts and 
present. Among them is widow Pilar, once Sam's high school 
sweetheart;  Pilar's mother, Mrs. Cruz, a successful 
restaurant owner, also widowed; roadhouse-owner Otis Payne, 
known as The Mayor of Blacktown; the son he had abandoned 
and who now returns as Colonel Payne, there to close an Army 
base; Payne's boy, rather alienated; Bunny, Sam's nutty 
ex-wife; and many others.
One can double the number of those characters as Sayles's 
main tactic is the flashback that shows them in times past. 
The flashbacks occur without warning, so that you must be 
get ready for them. And, whether the time is "now" or 
"then," Sayles adds to his system a large number of cryptic 
scenes that are connected to many a dark secret.  
The movie is ambitious, not limited to a whodunit but 
reaching into ethno-political territory. In a town where the 
gringos still rule yet 19 out of 20 people are of Mexican 
origin, problems of identity are enormous, including active 
or dimly felt racism, the teaching of history to students, 
etc. Some cases are especially interesting, like Mrs. Cruz 
who often says "Speak English! We're in the United States!" 
and denounces "wets" (wetbacks) to the Border Patrol. But 
it's not that simple. There are changes in attitude and the 
flashbacks are full of surprises.
We also get some good insights into non-white and 
non-Mexican matters. When  the spit and polish Colonel 
reprimands a black private, he asks her why , in her 
opinion, there are so many African-Americans in the Army. He 
expects a patriotic reply but what he gets is "This is not 
our country, but the Army is a good deal."  
There's not a dull minute in the film, yet it is not a 
touching work. It is somewhat cerebral, needs much 
concentration. You are kept very busy following and 
deciphering matters as it shifts back and forth to past and 
present. Some scenes are disjointed. Some characters  come 
to a dead end after having served the purpose of making a 
point.  Like Pilar's boy when he is arrested without reason. 
Like two Sergeants, one black one white, openly in  love ... 
to show that times have changed. Like an outdoors seller who 
warns Sam :" Be careful when you go poking, you'll never 
know what you'll find." This last item is a cliche, of which 
this maverick movie is not entirely free. 
This mystery wrapped in an enigma is also poorly miked (at 
least in my preview video), something that is a problem with 
many movies now that performers have stopped enunciating. 
The various accents (genuine or imitated) and Texas drawls 
can make some lines impenetrable. 
Sayles is not prodigal with humor, a point in his favor 
given the seriousness of the setup. The two exceptions I can 
think of is that Chris Cooper, in homage to Gary Cooper who 
played Longfellow Deeds in Frank Capra's "Mr. Deeds Goes to 
Town," has Deeds as his nom-de-film. The other is this 
exchange. Sam: "I'm going to the other side." Colleague: 
"Republicans?" Sam: "No, Mexico." 
"Lone Star", with its large cast of characters, is built 
like a thick novel or like a TV series whose material has 
been compacted. But contrary to television practices, Sayles 
is economical and un-repetitious.
At the Cannes Festival, where I missed it, the film was 
expected with some trepidation, yet after its showing I 
heard no comments whatsoever. I can see why. It must have 
puzzled audiences with its Tex-Mex nature, its convolutions, 
its dialogue that loses flavor in subtitles.
All that said, "Lone Star" is eminently worth seeing. It is 
beautifully produced, shot and performed. Kris Kristofferson 
is far better as a villain than as a hero. The  soundtrack 
of Mexican and American songs is first-rate and, for a 
change, provides the right commentary. Finally this is one 
of the rare films that deal (intelligently too) with 
ethnicities in the USA.

Author
Jun Yan
        Finally got around to see "Lone Star."  It's hard to find a word
to describe it since I'm still totally overwhelmed, awestruck.  I guess
the word is "BIG", like a huge object struck in my face.  It's a funny way
to describe a movie, but my still-pounding heart can prove my reaction to
it.  It's perhaps the most complicated film I've seen since I saw
"Chinatown" last year (on video of course).  
        The central character Sam Deeds (Christ Cooper), is the new
sheriff in a small Texas town.  Early on we are told that his deceased 
father, Buddy Deeds (Matthew McConnaghey), was a legend in this town
carrying the same badget 40 years ago.  Yet somehow Sam's resentment to
him and certain rumors about Buddy's old deeds make us wonder.  This
suspicion is backed by a skeleton discovered in the deserted area outside
the town that belongs to the town's sheriff before Buddy, the much feared
and hated Charley Wade (Kris Kristofferson), an old fashioned small-town
sheriff who's done every bad thing you've heard of in western movies, from
squeezing money from local business (legal or otherwise) to killing
whoever he feels like.  Haunted by his own emotional baggage, Sam digs
into the whole murder business, trying to tear down the idol worshiped by
the town, and the deeper he goes, the more skeletons come to see the
daylight.  
        In the mean time, we get to know a couple of other families in
town, including Sam's high school lover Pilar (Elizabeth Pena), a widowed
school teacher, and her mother, plus Otis Payne, an old black bar owner
who may have witnessed the murder 40 years ago, and Colonal Payne, Otis'
son who has his own problems with his father.  And that's just the main
players in this movie.  It is impossible to recap the plot in a couple of
paragraphs so I might as well give up trying.  It's simply dazzling to
create such intricate and interwound storyline within a seemingly "usual"
plot of a murder mystery.  What's more mind-boggling, however, is the deep
and complex emotional relationship between the characters, which is
presented clearly, delicately, smoothly and subtly.  There are a handful
of parallel storylines connected with each other by the long-passed
murder, linking both the past and the present.  
        And just when you think it can't get any more complicated, the
writer/director/producer John Sayles stuffs in more social commentary
about racism and racial division, corrupt politics, people's tendency to
make legends out of their needs, the Mexican heritage of Texas, etc. etc.
The amazing thing is that none of these topics feel forced and detatched
from the story, because the core is still about the characters and how the
past sins of their fathers affect them.  It's about one's past that cannot
be shaken off easily,  which in turn echoes the history and present of
America.  The mirroring of personal lives and the big society is one of
the heavy themes of this picture.  It is also the focus on the characters
that keeps our attention and makes the film successful.  
        With half a dozen major characters and 15-20 minor ones, it's
simply amazing that almost none of them feel unrealistic (almost, with the
exception of Frances MacDormand's character, Sam's divorced wife).  The
emotions are real and believable in a cliched setup.  It proves my
theory that there is more drama in reality if you know how to put them
together.  What's satisfying is that the writer presents the discussion,
but does not cheapen it by trying to find an easy way out like so many
other films tend to do.  So you can't make a disillusioned girl give up
drug and love life with one heart-to-heart talk.  That's life.  It's
amazing to see John Sayles resists an easy solution from big social
problem down to the smallest personal conflict.  
        The actors are a blast too. My favorite performance is Joe
Morton, playing a successful black colonal facing his troubled feeling to
his father again after years of bitterness.  He handles it with such
delicacy and depth that it may well be the best performance from last year
that I have seen.  Everyone else is all the way up there too.  The
romantic element between two tired adults who love each other is natural
and persuasive.  Both Cooper and Pena gave convincing performances.  Plus
most of the supporting cast. 
        With so many characters and conflicts, some of them are bound to be
weaker than others, but there are still plenty of pearls in this pile of
treature. The Mexican illegal immigrants issue could be handled better.  
Some dialogues are a little too politically oriented and simplistic, less
subtle than others, but most of the emotions and feelings are genuine and 
heart-felt.  John Sayles is a typical American (but not Hollywood)
filmmaker.  He goes for the big, big issues, big story, big emotional
rides.  It's miracle that the screenplay feels close to real life all the
way through. The style of "Lone Star" is more or less in the root of
traditional story-telling.  The ending, however, is not that satisfying.
I personally had problems with the big secret revealed in the end, which I
thought the film could have done without. (Not that it can't be done.  I
read a Sam Shepherd play years ago with same theme.  It's just a little
too much here for this movie.)  
        I had much expectation for "Lone Star," and it still surprised me.
It's not perfect, but anyone who can take care of so many things at the
same time is more unbelievable than perfection.  It doesn't feel terribly
"personal" to me, but the complexity of the whole production (from the
script to direction to the performances, from the certral characters to
the guy with only one line) surpasses anything I can think of presently.
How did they do that?  Grade: A. 

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Chris Cooper, Elizabeth Pena, Joe Morton, Ron Canada, 
      Miriam Colon, Clifton James, Kris Kristofferson, 
      Matthew McConaughey
Director: John Sayles
Producers: R. Paul Miller and Maggie Renzi
Screenplay: John Sayles
Cinematography: Stuart Dryburgh
Music: Mason Darling
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     In LONE STAR, writer/director John Sayles (CITY OF HOPE, PASSION 
FISH) cannily blends drama, romance, mystery, and social observation 
into a satisfying, if slightly overlong, whole.  In the hands of a 
lesser film maker, this material could easily have degenerated into 
routine melodrama, but Sayles keeps it on a consistently high level.  
While LONE STAR is not the director's finest work (CITY OF HOPE is), 
it's still a very good film with enough material to stimulate energetic 
post-movie discussion.
     Sayles has never made a recognizably "bad" movie, which is 
impressive considering that he has ten films on his resume.  From his 
early work, which includes RETURN OF THE SECAUCUS SEVEN (the inspiration 
for THE BIG CHILL), BABY, IT'S YOU, and MATEWAN, Sayles has eschewed 
Hollywood-influenced scripts with cliched plots.  The director's more 
recent films have moved around the globe, embracing a variety of 
settings, from the steamy bayous of Louisiana (PASSION FISH) and the 
shores of Ireland (THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH) to the Texas/Mexico border 
(LONE STAR).
     LONE STAR opens in the present time frame, and most of the 
narrative takes place there, with the exception of several, seamlessly-
interwoven flashbacks to 1957 and 1973.  These are necessary to breathe 
life into the film's mystery and love stories, and Sayles gives us just 
enough to satisfy the script's dramatic needs.  There isn't one moment 
during LONE STAR when we feel helplessly marooned in the past.  
Thankfully, there's no voiceover -- the editing is done so expertly that 
there's never any need.
     In 1996, the sheriff of Rio County is Sam Deeds (Chris Cooper).  
He's been on the job for two years, and he's filling huge footsteps.  
His late lawman father, Buddy (Matthew McConaughey), is a local legend, 
and Sam won election more because of his last name than because voters 
respected his talents.  For a variety of reasons, Sam's image of Buddy 
is far more tarnished than the one endorsed by the community, and, when 
the corpse of a bigoted ex-sheriff (Kris Kristofferson) is found on an 
abandoned rifle range, Sam tries his best to pin the forty-year old 
murder on his father.  
     Several other stories occur in parallel with Sam's investigation.  
One involves the sheriff's old flame, Pilar (Elizabeth Pena), trying to 
explain to concerned parents why she's teaching high school history with 
a nontraditional slant.  Instead of relying on the accepted anglo-
approved text, she's attempting to show how "cultures come together in 
both negative and positive ways."  In the meantime, she's wrestling with 
her feelings for Sam and coping with an unruly teenage son.
     We also get to know Colonel Del Payne (Joe Morton), the new 
commanding officer of Fort McKenzie, which is due to close.  Del's 
father, Otis (Ron Canada), lives in the area.  He and his son haven't 
spoken for decades, but, while Del is bitter about the estrangement, 
it's impossible for the two men to avoid each other.
     As is usually the case in a Sayles film, solid acting complements 
an intelligent script.  Chris Cooper, who was in MATEWAN and CITY OF 
HOPE, gives a subdued performance as Sam, and it's his low-key acting 
that allows one of the movie's most difficult scenes (dealing with a 
delicate and controversial subject) to work.  Mixing toughness and 
vulnerability, Elizabeth Pena carries off her scenes nicely.  Kris 
Kristofferson, despite limited screen time, makes an effective villain.  
Others, like Joe Morton, Ron Canada, and Frances McDormand (the star of 
FARGO), provide solid support.
     LONE STAR contains a number of "escape hatches" -- points when the 
story could have moved in a safe, predictable direction, but Sayles uses 
few of these.  The weakest aspect of the movie is the mystery, but it's 
also the least important.  LONE STAR is most intimately concerned with 
how different cultures and generations mix, match, and interact in a 
place where anglos have the wealth and power although 19 out of every 20 
people are Mexican by birth.  The black community, populated mainly by 
soldiers from the fort, is a small-but-important force.  Sayles explores 
the bipolar issues of racial divisiveness and tolerance, both as they 
exist today and as they were nearly forty years ago, and does so without 
ever losing sight of the characters.  With its numerous strengths and 
few weaknesses, LONE STAR is an example of why Sayles' films are so 
engrossing despite lengths which consistently exceed two hours.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    There's a lot of machinery at work in this multigenerational and
multiethnic drama from writer/director/everything else John Sayles
(PASSION FISH, EIGHT MEN OUT).  Set on the Texas side of the Mexican
border, LONE STAR follows Rio County Sheriff Sam Deeds (Chris Cooper,
inexplicably wincing and frowning through the entire thing) as he
attempts to solve a 40-year old murder mystery with apparent ties to
every prominent person in the county, including himself.  Mr. Sayles has
cast, oh, at least a hundred speaking parts in his 135-minute saga and
the confusion over "who's who?" begins early.  (Due, in part, to a weak
sound recording that often renders the dialogue difficult to understand.
How about handing out a program, someone?) The cast is expectedly
diverse and includes Clifton James, Kris Kristofferson, and newcomer
Matthew McConaughey, as well as regular Sayles items Joe Morton and
Elizabeth Pena.  However, as everything about this movie feels so...
over-staged, hardly anyone is given the breathing room to make a
believable impression.  We're presented with volumes of information
about these people, their lives, and their lifestyles, and we couldn't
care less.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>
