Title
Review for Eighteenth Angel, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1997. Director - William Brindley, Screenplay - David Seltzer, 
Producers - Douglas Curtis & William Hart, Photography - Thomas E. 
Ackerman, Music - Jeff Eden Fair & Dtarr Parodi, Visual Effects 
Supervisor - Jon Townley, Visual Effects - L2 Visual Effects, Digital 
Visual Effects D.Rez Hollywood (Supervisor - Howard Minkov), Special 
Effects - Richard Jones & Germano Natali, Makeup Effects - Kurtzman, 
Nicotero and Berger EFX Group Inc, Production Design - Stefano Maria 
Ortolani, Prague Clock Design - Gene Young Effects. Production Company - 
Rysher Entertainment.
Christopher McDonald (Hugh Stanton), Rachael Leigh Cook (Lucy Stanton), 
Maximilian Schell (Father Simeon), Enrica Maria Modugna (Maria Elena), 
Wendy Crewson (Norah Stanton), Stanley Tucci (Dr Todd Housen), Francesca 
De Capro (Gabriella), Branislav Tesanovic (Damiano), Stefano Vitali 
(Massimo Pena), Cosimo Fusco (Florian)
Plot: Beautiful fifteen year-old Lucy Stanton is offered a modelling 
course in Rome. But then her mother, who opposes the idea and is also 
digging up connections between the millenial prophecies of an 
astonomical clock predicting the return of Satan and their connection to 
an ancient order of Estruscan monks, falls from a roof in mysterious 
circumstances. Lucy's father Hugh agrees to go after he is offered the 
opportunity to study music at an Italian monastery. But amid a series of 
mysterious deaths, Hugh begins to discover that the monastery is really 
a part of the Estrucan order who are preparing the way for the coming of 
Satan, one which requires the bodies of eighteen beautiful girls to be 
offered for Satan to choose one to incarnate in, and that Lucy has been 
selected as one of these `angels'.
`The Eighteenth Angel' comes from screenwriter David Seltzer. Seltzer 
has written various films like `Lucas' (1986), `Punchline' (1988) and 
`Bird on a Wire' (1990) but is principally remembered for `The Omen' 
(1976). And maybe if `The Eighteenth Angel' if had come from someone 
other than Seltzer, it might have seemed a competent copy of `The Omen'. 
But coming from Seltzer it reads as a pallid and unimaginative attempt 
to rehash the same plot all over again. The points of similarity often 
become tedious - another plot concerning the Biblical End of the World 
and the birth of Satan in the form of a young child; a sinisterly 
conspiring coven within the Catholic church - who also hide in an 
ancient monastery in the Italian hillside; gory showcase deaths to those 
who get in the way of the Satanic master plan; killer animals in the 
service of The Devil - dogs in `The Omen', killer cats here; evil 
servants and so forth. Plus an almost identical twist ending.
Seltzer, it seems - both here, in `The Omen' and in his 1979 eco-horror 
film `Prophecy' (1979) - has a kind of wild-eyed sackcloth-and-ashes 
prophet's fascination with the imminently apocalyptic. `The Omen' had an 
audacious kind of originality to it with Seltzer whipping a frenzied 
hodgepodge of fundamentalist End Times prophecies into a lunatic horror 
show which was subsequently given a sheen of respectability  by an 
A-budget treatment which with a high-profile advertizing campaign 
succeeded in making it a major hit. It was endlessly imitated.`The 
Eighteenth Angel' comes across as a proficient and well-budgeted copy 
but alas one where Seltzer, in revisiting the material, does absolutely 
nothing new with it. There's a minimal thematic difference - `The Omen' 
featured merely an evil child while `The Eighteenth Angel' raises the 
age of the child a few years and features the potentially more 
intriguing corruption of an innocent theme (although again does 
absolutely nothing with it).
Almost as though he has failed to understand anything that made `The 
Omen' work, Seltzer fumbles all his cues here. The plot gives away all 
its surprises at the very beginning - the opening narration tells us all 
about the ancient Etruscan order and the need for eighteen angels to 
incarnate the Devil. A far more effective story would have enwrapped one 
in its mysteriousness and then slowly unveiled each surprise as it went 
along. Nor is Seltzer very clear about what the Satanic master plan 
actually entails - something to do with genetic engineering and the need 
for eighteen maidens who, for reasons unexplained, have to have their 
faces sliced off and transplanted onto corpses.
Where the film seems almost to work is in its A-budget polish - it is 
very nicely scored and photographed - and in director Brindley's often 
quite effective handling. Where Seltzer offers up predictable twists, 
Brindley at least crafts them with a sinister edge. There is one 
memorably way-out showcase death with a character being caught up in and 
hung in the bridles between two galloping black horses. Unlike `The 
Omen', which succeeded for much these same reasons, however Seltzer's 
plot is a second-hand copy of his own material that lacks the fire that 
made the original a success. 

