Title
Review for F.T.W. (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Every movie star must think about the time when his or her
career may take a downturn and consequent dip into
straight-to-video territory or character roles. However,
some of those stars don't take it lightly when it happens to
them. One of such examples is Mickey Rourke, one of the most
talented lead actors in 1980s, whose career took a deep dive
in 1990s. Obviously dissatisfied with the way tabloids and
other media described his road to oblivion, he took the lead
role in F.T.W., 1994 drama by Michael Karbelnikoff, film
that could be viewed as semi-autobiographical under the
circumstances.
In this film Rourke plays Frank T. Wells, rodeo rider who
served prison sentence for the manslaughter. After the
release Wells is determined to turn another page in his life
and return to his old career. However, on the way he meets
Scarlett Stuart (played by Lori Singer), girl who works as
car mechanic. Wells is attracted to her because she has his
initials F.T.W. tattooed on her arm. She is also attracted
to him and two of them begin the relationship. However,
Wells is unaware that Scarlett is the only surviving member
of bank robbing gang. When he finds that out, he would stand
by his woman, even if it means new trouble with the law.
F.T.W. from the title stands for "F**k the World", Rourke's
answer to all those who took great pleasure in describing
him as Has Been. Unfortunately, this uncompromisingly
individualistic message was not worthy of the low-budget
exploitation film masquerading as "socially conscious" story
about losers in rural America. Rourke and Singer play their
characters very well, though, and it is quite a surprise to
see late Brion James in the role of sympathetic lawman.
However, director Karbelnikoff didn't notice plenty of
cliches in Eddie Cook's and Mari Kornhauser's script, His
directing style, heavily influenced by MTV (visible in his
previous effort, MOBSTERS), seems inappropriate for what was
supposed to be grim, realistic story, and the ending seems
even more predictable and pathetic. F.T.W. is for some
unexplained reason (probably something to do with
controversial title) absents from many video guides, but
those who don't watch this film because of it won't miss
much.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
