Title
Review for Michael (1996)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Walter Frith
One thing or another kept me from seeing 'Michael' around the hoidays and
after finally getting around to see it I was pleasantly surprised.  I
expected it to be just another picture about and angel doing good deeds for
the sake of his eternal home but this is an offbeat picture which dwells on
the characters that matter and has a touching and good natured feeling.  A
group of tabloid newspaper employees from Chicago (William Hurt, Andie
MacDowell and Roberet Pastorelli) travel to small town Iowa with the paper's
mascot, a little dog named Sparky and investigate the claim by a kindly
elderly woman (Jean Stapleton --- yes, 'Edith Bunker') of an angel living
with her.  She tells the newspaper that her prayers were answered when she
asked for help and that Michael is her saviour.  At first the reporters are
humourously skeptical and doubt the claim is true but....well, without giving
away too much of the movie my plot description stops here.  As for the
analysis, John Travolta has made a wise choice in his career which continues
to grow and Travolta is remaining diverse since his comeback role in 'Pulp
Fiction' from 1994 and he has an amazing amount of droll charisma which women
find sexy and men find appealing.  'Michael' has all the makings for a
sensitive and moving holiday picture which plays amazingly well whenever you
view it.  There's a strange message of destiny in Travolta's character as the
movie's purpose is revealed in the end to a magical and heartfelt conclusion.
 Director Nora Ephron ('Sleepless in Seattle') uses a sure footed approach to
the material she co-wrote and blends it with tenderness and personality.
  Micheal isn't a great film but it never set out to be and is a picture that
knows it limits and deserves praise for that alone.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: John Travolta, William Hurt, Andie MacDowell, Robert Pastorelli, 
      Bob Hoskins, Jean Stapleton
Director: Nora Ephron
Producers: Nora Ephron, Sean Daniel, and James Jacks
Screenplay: Nora Ephron & Delia Ephron and Peter Dexter & Jim Quinlan
Cinematography: John Lindley
Music: Randy Newman
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     Undeterred by the universally hostile reaction to her previous 
holiday picture, MIXED NUTS, director Nora Ephron (SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE) 
is back at it again this year with MICHAEL, the second angel-comes-to-
Earth feature of the month.  While this may not be quite as sweet as THE 
PREACHER'S WIFE, the central theme of redemption is essentially the 
same.  And, even though the script for MICHAEL moderates its sugary 
flavor with a dash of cynicism, it's no stretch to guess that the film 
is going for the same audience that's enchanted by such life-affirming 
classics as A CHRISTMAS CAROL and IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE.
     John Travolta, fresh from PHENOMENON and seemingly twenty pounds 
heavier, plays a grungy, chain-smoking, womanizing archangel named 
Michael.  His purpose on Earth, in this, his final mission to the 
planet, is "to restore a man's heart" by imitating Cupid.  That man is 
Frank Quinlan (William Hurt), a former reporter for the CHICAGO TRIBUNE 
who has been reduced to writing stories for the tabloid NATIONAL MIRROR.  
Along with his best friend, Huey Driscoll (Robert Pastorelli), and 
Huey's dog, Sparky, they scour the country, looking for the unusual and 
the unbelievable.  When they receive a letter from an elderly woman 
(Jean Stapleton) in Iowa claiming that she's living with an angel, the 
lure is too strong.  The MIRROR's editor, Vartan Malt (Bob Hoskins), 
sends Frank, Huey, and Sparky on assignment, along with newcomer Dorothy 
Winters (Andie MacDowell), an "angel expert." 
     William Hurt, who never emotes much in any role, is essentially 
reprising his emotional transformation from THE DOCTOR.  He starts out 
as a cold, remote, cynical man, but, through Michael's manipulations, he 
comes to realize that he still has feelings and can love someone.  Hurt 
is excellent playing Frank before the thaw; his effectiveness diminishes 
greatly thereafter.  Andie MacDowell is dreadfully miscast as Dorothy.  
She's supposed to be uncertain and vulnerable, but MacDowell never 
successfully conveys those characteristics, nor does she give us any 
particular reason to care about her character. A more interesting and 
energetic performance is turned in by Robert Pastorelli (ERASER), who 
dutifully plays the thankless role of Hurt's sidekick. 
     Surprisingly, Travolta, despite his top billing, stays in the 
background for most of the film.  We don't actually see his face until 
twenty minutes into the running time, and, shortly thereafter, he takes 
a back seat (literally) to the humans. Michael's good for some one 
liners, but he's all charm without much personality.  We like him 
because he's played by Travolta, not because the script gives us any 
real reason to.  In fact, when you consider it, he's little more than a 
plot device. 
     There are times when MICHAEL seems afflicted with a split 
personality.  There's an edginess to the script that is repeatedly 
blunted by the feel-good saccharine that the Ephron sisters injected 
into their re-writes of Pete Dexter and Jim Quinlan's original 
treatment.  Bits of the original still come through -- Michael isn't the 
most sympathetic of angels, for example -- but it's in conflict with the 
film's prevalent tone.  There's a line spoken by Michael that 
illustrates the Ephrons' apparent view of life:  "You can never have too 
much sugar."
     Despite scenes of Travolta dancing, MacDowell singing, and Sparky 
attacking Bob Hoskins, MICHAEL is a surprisingly lifeless affair.  It's 
a little too low-key to be an effective romance and a little too soft to 
be anything more ambitious.  Ultimately, it's neither offensive nor 
horrible; it's just another unspectacular, uninspired entry on Nora 
Ephron's erratic resume.  I can't recommend MICHAEL, but it's innocuous 
enough to be watchable -- provided you can summon the enthusiasm to stay 
awake.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Michael (1996)
John Travolta, Andie Mac Dowell, William Hurt, Robert Pastorelli, Bob 
Hoskins, Jean Stapleton, Teri Garr, Wally Ward, Joey Lauren Adams, Carla 
Gugino, Tom Hodges, Wallace Langham. Directed by Nora Ephron.
Rated PG, *** stars (out of ***** stars)
John Travolta makes his first appearance as the archangel Michael  
wearing nothing but boxer shorts. The eyes focus on his large belly as he 
tromps to the kitchen, cigarette in hand, in search of a beer. Asked how 
he went about gaining weight for the role, Travolta explained that he 
didn't. He's willing to try and lose weight for a movie, but never gain 
it. He just happened to be fat when it came time to make this film. That 
simple honesty is part of John Travolta's charm, and part of the charm of 
"Michael," Nora Ephron's sweet romantic comedy.
In "Michael", Chicago-based tabloid reporters William Hurt, Robert 
Pastorelli, and Andie MacDowell travel to Iowa to get the story on an 
alleged angel. There they meet Jean Stapleton, the crusty owner of a run-
down motel, and her only tenant, a self-indulgent slob with very real 
wings. The stunned trio cut a deal with Michael - - he'll go with them 
and allow himself to be photographed once they arrive, but only if they 
make the trip to Chicago by car (he's anxious to see the world's largest 
ball of twine and other tourist attractions). And so the road trip begins.
The structure and details of "Michael" seem terminally cute on paper. 
Hurt is a world weary cynic, MacDowell is deadly earnest, Pastorelli is 
funny and a bit slow. Care to guess which characters will fall in love? 
The reporters are suspicious of their self-indulgent homily-spouting 
charge. Will they come to believe that Michael is really an angel and not 
just a genetic freak? Will they come to believe in his message of wonder? 
Don't think to hard on these questions.
The charm in "Michael" lies not in the cliched story, but in the 
performances of the powerhouse cast. William Hurt is a phenomenal actor 
whose ability to convey intelligence, directness and dry, acerbic line 
readings is unmatched.  What other actor could deliver a stilted line 
like "Don't say this was a mistake, I couldn't bear it" and make it sound 
real? Andie MacDowell has made a career of being a walking contradiction. 
She is an achingly beautiful woman who manages to somehow also look like 
"just plain folks." She appears bright and naive at the same time. 
MacDowell uses her skills to great effect as a reporter who is also an 
aspiring country songwriter, enduring much teasing from Hurt over her 
homespun lyrics. In one magical scene, she sings her "work in progress" 
at a honky-tonk bar. Her voice and facial expressions as she delivers the 
song's clunky, but true, lyrics provide one of the most graceful and 
elegant moments in the movie. And Pastorelli, "Eldon" from "Murphy Brown,
" does a fine job as a crusty innocent, although his character is 
tragically underused.
And then there's John Travolta, an amazing actor. Since his comeback in 
"Pulp Fiction," Travolta has selected his roles in an astute and 
audacious fashion. In "Michael," he gives one of his most winsome 
performances yet. After casting Lucifer out of Heaven, Michael has came 
to Earth many times. This is his last visit ("they only let you come down 
so many times") and he intends to wring every drop of hedonistic pleasure 
from it. In addition to his passion for food, drink and cigarettes, 
Michael loves women. His touch is magical, and his scent acts as an 
aphrodisiac (MacDowell explains, "He smells like cookies. It gets 
stronger when he's in heat".) Whether delivering greeting card wisdom or 
engaging in battle, Travolta makes the character work by conveying a 
great sense of self-comfort. Totally at peace with himself, he holds 
court effortlessly and effectively. When he urges the others to "listen 
to the Earth," his inflection makes the great truth behind the statement 
quite clear. Travolta's keen sense of wonder is contagious. Despite the 
cheesy plot and dialogue that ranges from inspired to insipid, the 
extraordinary performances by Travolta and company leave the audience 
feeling happy and very much alive. 

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Hopefully, MICHAEL will be the last nail in the angel-
obsession coffin. In the last couple years we've been overrun with 
the angel theme in the media. "Touched By an Angel," THE 
PREACHER'S WIFE, there was even a TV special where incidences 
of angels helping people in dangerous situations were re-enacted 
by bad actors. I'm still wondering why they didn't just get William 
Shatner to do voiceovers and call it "Rescue 777."
        The religious folk have been talking about how wonderful 
this angel revival is, apparently realizing that there's almost zero 
correlation between movie angels and Biblical angels. Nowhere is 
this polarization more concrete than in Nora Ephron's MICHAEL, 
in which the title character, who the Bible says threw Satan out of 
heaven, smokes, drinks, eats like a pig and beds down with multiple 
women. This kind of behavior isn't justified in any Bible not written 
by Anton LeVay, but I guess John Travolta doesn't care because 
it's not his religion to begin with. If he had to play a boozing, 
promiscuous L. Ron Hubbard, he'd probably feel differently.
        Travolta, of course, plays Michael, a slovenly New Age 
angel who quotes not John and Paul, the disciples, but John and 
Paul, the Beatles, with a love-is-all-you-need message. His mission 
on Earth involves match-making tabloid writers William Hurt and 
Andie MacDowell, who get a letter from an old women in Iowa 
(Jean "Edith Bunker" Stapleton) claiming she has an angel living 
in her house. Hurt, MacDowell, Robert Pastorelli and his cute dog 
cross several states to get the story, which they figure will probably 
win them the tabloid equivalent of the Pulitzer Prize.
        Michael's first appearance in the movie sets the tone for 
everything that follows. He wanders down the stairs, wearing 
nothing but a pair of boxers, his giant dirty wings flapping. 
Cigarette in mouth, he scratches himself, grabs a beer from the 
refrigerator and heads back upstairs. Travolta said in one of his 
myriad television interviews promoting MICHAEL that people who 
don't buy the entrance probably won't buy the rest of the movie. 
He was right; I didn't buy either.
        It's not just the fact that this is one of God's right-hand 
men having premarital sex with Teri Garr, it's also never clear why 
Michael would think the way he does. These movie angels live in 
a perfect heaven with the Creator of the universe Himself, but their 
main goal throughout eternity is to find ways to get back to Earth. 
With Denzel Washington's character in THE PREACHER'S WIFE, 
it made more sense because he was once a human. Michael's an 
archangel, though; he's never lived down here and therefore would 
have no reason to continually want to leave heaven to experience 
the pleasures of a flawed earth.
        One more thing I didn't buy -- this movie assumes the Bible 
is true. Michael says he wrote Psalm 85 and when Stapleton quotes 
from Revelation, he verifies it. But is this the same Bible that makes 
it perfectly clear that God hates sin? Fornication, drunkenness, 
gluttony, those are pillar sins. That God would let this winged angel 
come down from heaven every hundred years or so to do this stuff 
doesn't seem plausible.
        We're probably not supposed to think about the movie's 
theology, though. We're just supposed to sit back and let MICHAEL 
entertain us. Unfortunately, everything about the movie is just as 
muddled as its characterization of angels. The plot is thin and 
predictable. The tabloid writers drive Michael back to Chicago and, 
along the way, he does all sorts of human things and helps Hurt 
and MacDowell fall in love. There aren't very many laughs and the 
drama is forced and laughable.
        Travolta and everyone else do a decent job acting, but 
the fault here lies in the script. This movie was probably sold to the 
studio on the basis of, "Hey, we've got John Travolta as an angel in 
a romantic comedy that's going to open on Christmas Day." None of 
the executives had to read the script to realize the very concept 
would make money, but they should have realized Ephron's mix of 
dark themes and storybook romance would make for a bizarre 
combination. MICHAEL could have used a little divine intervention.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!

Author
Scott Renshaw
(New Line)
Starring:  John Travolta, Andie MacDowell, William Hurt, Bob Hoskins,
Robert Pastorelli.
Screenplay:  Pete Dexter & Jim Quinlan and Nora Ephron and Delia Ephron.
Producers:  Sean Daniel, James Jacks.
Director:  Nora Ephron.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  100 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Nora Ephron still has a lot to learn about making movies.  Yes, she
has shown that she has her finger on what audiences want to see in a
romantic comedy, both as a writer (WHEN HARRY MET SALLY...) and as a
director (SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE), but when it comes to her sense of
narrative as a film-maker, she has proven to be on a downward learning
curve.  SLEEPLESS coasted on the charm of its stars and a painstakingly
manufactured sense of whimsy; MIXED NUTS collapsed into a chaotic holiday
mess.  In MICHAEL, Ephron attempts to meld genial romantic comedy with
irreverent fantasy, and the result is one of the most mis-guided
high-concept films to come out of Hollywood in years.
     William Hurt stars as Frank Quinlan, a former investigative reporter
now writing for a Chicago-based supermarket tabloid.  Frank has had
trouble proving to his editor (Bob Hoskins) that he understands what the
tabloid audience wants, but a letter arrives for Frank which may save his
job.  A woman in Iowa named Pansy Milbank (Jean Stapleton) claims that an
angel is living with her, and Frank heads out to investigate with his
colleague Huey (Robert Pastorelli) and an "angel expert" named Dorothy
Winters (Andie MacDowell).  What they find is no ordinary, halo-wearing
angel, however: it is the archangel Michael (John Travolta), an
overweight chain-smoker with a very real set of wings.  Michael agrees to
be photographed for the paper, but only if they drive back to Chicago, and
thus begins a very odd road trip with one of the heavenly host.
     The story for MICHAEL is co-credited to Pete Dexter (PARIS TROUT,
RUSH), which leads me to believe that it was a very different story in an
earlier incarnation.  An eccentric angel enjoying a final go-around on
earth is an interesting concept, and John Travolta certainly appears to be
having a great time with it.  His early scenes are a riot -- a slovenly
descent of the stairs, dragging wings behind his bloated bare chest,
followed by a breakfast of alarmingly over-sugared Frosted Flakes -- but
then he becomes strangely sedate, even when he gets into a barroom brawl.
As an over-eager celestial rascal, Michael could have been an entertaining
character to follow, but Ephron appears worried that a lusty angel might
be too offensive.  Even when he has a one-night stand with a waitress,
Travolta maintains a smiling serenity rather than a bit of the devil.
     Ephron and her sister Delia probably contributed the romantic plot to
the mix, a plot which eventually subsumes Michael's story entirely.  Hurt,
playing yet another variation on his emotionally wounded ACCIDENTAL
TOURIST persona, is the lost soul in need of redemption; MacDowell does a
predictable turn as a sketchy dog trainer-cum-aspiring country singer.
Michael's mission seems to be to bring these two uncertain people
together, and the story ultimately is about their development.  They are
never nearly as interesting as Michael, though, and this budding romance
usually acts as a distraction between the angel's unpredictable pranks.
It is difficult to get wrapped up in the subtleties of a relationship
while you're watching John Travolta lead a seductive dance to "Chain of
Fools" or head-butt a bull into animatronic submission.
     MICHAEL is unfocused and disappointing for nearly all of its running
time, but it is in the final twenty minutes that it becomes absolutely
insufferable.  A sub-plot finds Pastorelli's Huey the owner of a dog with
a popular column in the tabloid, and little Sparky ends up playing a
depressingly significant role in the proceedings.  When the dog's fate
after a run-in with a truck becomes MICHAEL's major plot point, you know
Ephron is willing to do absolutely anything to crank up the audience's
sympathy.  She stages a drawn-out death scene which is a complete cheat;
she violates her own rules of angelic interaction with humanity to provide
the happy ending.  She doesn't give a single character a consistent
personality (except Hoskins as the grouchy editor), and she makes
indefensible choices in editing and shot selection which break up momentum
and make two-thirds of the frame useless.  In short, nearly every decision
Nora Ephron makes leads you to the conclusion that she had no idea how to
make MICHAEL a cohesive, coherent film.  I think MICHAEL was supposed to
be about someone who needed guidance.  I'm fairly sure it was made _by_
someone who needed guidance.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: John Travolta, William Hurt, Andie MacDowell, Robert Pastorelli,
Bob Hoskins, Jean Stapleton Director: Nora Ephron Screenplay: Nora
Ephron & Delia Ephron and Peter Dexter & Jim Quinlan
How does a man compete with an unkempt, invincible, chain-smoking
arch-angel "on heat"? Who also exumes charm, wit and pheromones
reminiscent of cookies, lavender and apple pie - how can a woman resist?
This multi-talented angel who defeated Lucifer on the heavenly
battlefields is currently on sabbatical from his Divine Armies. He has
decided to take one of his few RDOs on earth that each angel is
permitted within limits. Whilst here, Michael is on a mission outside
his usual tactical decision-makings of warfare, namely to practice his
other specialty of human match-making.
Sound odd? Well here's more quirkiness. This angel has claims to the
invention of "queues" for toilet usage, the institution of marriage and
the making of pie. The biblical sense of a good angel is also lost, when
this happy-go-lucky angel of the highest rank, hops into bed with the
first cute blonde to fly his way. His allure premotes helpless females
to adore and powerlessly surrender themselves to him. This is soon
followed by chaos on the dance floor tendered by raging male jealousy.
"Michael" carries a well written script at heart; professional rapport
and interaction between it's characters on screen; and a loveable dog
called "Sparky", who does a wonderful "Lazarus lives again"
impersonation towards the end. If you are expecting find a movie with a
"pocket full of mircales", don't expect too much from this worldy angel.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MICHAEL * 1/2 Directed by Nora Ephron. Written by Nora Ephron & Delia
Ephron and Peter Dexter & Jim Quinlan. Story by Dexter & Quinlan.
Photography, John Lindley. Editing, Geraldine Peroni. Production design,
Dan Davis. Music, Randy Newman. Producers, Sean Daniel, Nora Ephron, James
Jacks. Exec. producers, Delia Ephron, Jonathan D.Crane.Cast: John Travolta
(Michael), Andie MacDowell (Dorothy), William Hurt (Frank), Bob Hoskins
(Vartan Malt, the editor), Robert Pastorelli (Huey), Jean Stapleton (Pansy
Milbank), Teri Garr (the Judge), the dog Sparky, et al. A Turner Picture,
Alphaville Production released by New Line Cinema. 106 min. PG.
Movie fantasies about or with angels are a tricky genre. Not a
proliferating one, thank Heaven. "It's a Wonderful Life" is the perennial
champion. Other popular movies include Cocteau's classic "Orpheus,"
"Stairway to Heaven," "For Heaven's Sake," "Wings of Desire," "The Bishop's
Wife" (remade as the current "The Preacher's Wife"). A companion genre
deals with ghosts: the superb "The Ghost and Mrs. Muir," the amusing "The
Ghost Goes West," "Ghost," "Blithe Spirit," the old "Peter Ibbetson," the
wonderful, fairly recent "Truly Madly Deeply." There are also films with
heavenly envoys like "Here Comes Mr. Jordan" or entertaining visits to
Satan, like the original "Heaven Can Wait."
"Michael" is a disappointment, doubly so as it was made by the talented
journalist, novelist, essayist, and filmmaker Nora Ephron. Her excellent
track record as screenwriter and/or director, includes "Silkwood," "When
Harry Met Sally," "This is My Life," "Sleepless in Seattle" and the very
funny but terribly underrated Steve Martin vehicle "My Blue Heaven."
"Michael" is already making gadzillions at the box office, mostly on the
strength of John Travolta whose comeback has been stupendous. But ticket
sales are absolutely not a measure of movie quality.
Here we have partners Hurt and Pastorelli who are reporters (so to speak)
for the   Chicago-published "The National Mirror," one of those supermarket
tabloids that stop at nothing. With their irascible editor Hoskins the
buddies have an unlikely relationship which is also muddy, like most of the
movie.
Hurt gets a fan letter from Jean Stapleton (as Pansy Milbank), who invites
him to come to her home in rural Iowa and meet a real angel who is staying
with her. We never know how much of this the journalists believe, but they
quickly talk Hoskins into an assignment. As improbabilities pile up, the
boss adds to the team the just-hired MacDowell, a multi-divorced dog
trainer. In another of the film's arbitrarinesses Hoskins decides on the
spot that she is a specialist on angels.
Widow Milbank is the owner of a decrepit, 1930's style motel of clientless
cabins. The angel is genuine but not typecast. He is an ill-kempt,
chain-smoking, boozing, cussing yahoo who eats like a slob, likes sex and
in certain ways seems related to Archie Bunker -- the TV husband of Jean
Stapleton.  But he does have wings and some odd kind of maverick appeal.
"Michael" soon becomes a road movie as the trio drive Michael to Chicago.
It's a long trip because Michael, always cheerful and full of bad jokes and
hearty yuk-yuks wants to take in sights of Americana, such as the world's
largest  ball of twine and the biggest non-stick fry-pan.
No one ever notices that he is an angel, because the film cheats. Even
though he wears a large overcoat, his winged back ought to have bulged like
Notre Dame's Quasimodo's, but doesn't. More cheating follows as Michael
somehow becomes more couth.
In restaurants, no one objects to his smoking. Women go for him in the
blink of an eye. In one place Michael improvises a dance with two girls who
are joined by the rest of the female clientele. There's still a lot
Saturday night fever left in the older and bulkier Travolta. This part is
what, in my rating, accounts for the extra half-star.
Predictably, this leads to an attack by local yokels, a major melee and an
appearance before Judge Teri Garr who wants to see Michael in chambers. You
guess the rest. You are also guessing, for no valid reason except that you
know Hollywood's standards, that Andie and John will bond, to put it
politely.
Back on the road we learn that Andie is a part-time composer of country
music. She sings a sample in another eatery where a lot of "poetic"
nonsense about pies fills the air.
The main trouble with this movie is a boring, four-writer script which
illustrates the saying "A camel is a horse built by a committee." The
dialogue is dull, dull, dull,  uinteresting and unwitty. The acting by the
three non-angelic principals is minimal and wooden.These characters lack
character, appeal, personality, dimensionality or connections to one
another. Lifeless Pastorelli is even upstaged by his dog Sparky. This
sketchiness extends to the supporting roles.
Travolta does his best of a bad scene as he tries to be whimsical, funny
and likable. Nothing helps. Twenty-six songs try to rescue the movie. They
don't help either. You sense all along the frantic, exponentially growing
searches for what to do next.
It's a long trip to Chicago, longer for the public than for the actors.
It's not often that a would-be humorously feel-good picture goes by without
some audience laughter or appreciative sounds, yet the many people I saw it
with were entirely silent throughout. At least, nobody snored.
"le mauvais gout mene au crime" Stendhal

Author
Paul Miller
Going to see a movie about an angel is not my idea of a good movie.  But
if that angel John Travolta and he drinks, smokes, and has sex with any
beautiful girl that he meets, I might reconsider.
The movie begins with William Hurt (Frank Quinlan) and Robert Pastorelli
(Huey Driscoll) working for a paper called the National Mirror.  (sort
of like the National Enquirer). While sifting through his fan mail one
day, Frank finds a letter from a women that claims to have an angel
living with her.  Of course, Frank and Huey are eager to check this out.
They want to clear it with they boss (Bob Hoskins) and they find out
that they can go, but they have to take a so-called angel expert with
them.  So Dorothy (Andie MacDowell) tags along.  
Soon, they find themselves in Iowa and they find there angel.  Only he's
like nothing they ever imagined.  As questioning begins to why he
doesn't fit the "norm" of what angels are supposed to be, he responds
with "I'm not that kind of angel.".  Well, it turns out he's an
archangel and his job was to battle Satan and put him where he belongs.
They take him back to the National Mirror so they can draw up a story
and on the way back they get into adventures and see being an angel is a
hard job.
There were many familiar faces in this movie past the four already
mentioned.  Teri Garr plays a judge in a small Iowa town and the LOVELY
Carla Gugino (from Spin City) plays a wasted role as a bride in one of
the bars they visit.
If I said that I didn't like this movie even a little bit, I would be
lying.  As a movie fan I would say this was a good movie with believable
characters and a plot that was sweet and innocent.  But as a movie
critic, I honestly have to say that there just wasn't much there.
It still enjoyed this movie, but there could have been more to it than
just the straight forward material that was there.

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
Nora Ephron, who showed mixed talents in "Mixed Nuts" and "Sleepless
in Seattle," takes advantage of the rejuvenated career of John
Travolta in "Michael" the story of the earthly visit by the archangel
and his 'discovery' by the tabloid press.
Also starring William Hurt, Andie MacDowell and Robert Pastorelli as
the reporters for the Weekly World News-like Daily Mirror, "Michael"
is a not-so-heavenly story of the journey by the four principals from
the Milk Bottle Motel in Stubbs, Iowa, to the glass and glitter of
Chicago. 
Along the way, Michael performs miracles, both minor and major.
As you can tell from her filmography, Nora Ephron has proven herself
to be a hit-or-miss director.  Fortunately, mainly on the strength of
Travolta's on-screen charm and humor, "Michael" is a good-natured,
rambling little film that has its heart in the right place, even
though its point is muddled. 
Travolta, who must have jumped at the chance to do a film where he,
mainly, gets to smoke buts and grin a lot, brings such a relaxed
quality to the screen that you can't help but like him.
Andie MacDowell gives her second best performance, yet - her best
being "Unstrung Heroes" - and shows no small talent as a county &
western singer.
Robert Pastorelli does yeoman's work as a second-banana character,
lending some light humor to the light screenplay.
Speaking of screenplay, aside from the not-so-original concept of an
angel come to earth, the story is a cliched road/buddy film, with a
cute dog who is the focus of some cheap sentimentality.  Cheap enough
to hurt the otherwise entertaining little story.
I'm still not a Nora Ephron fan, but had a pleasant little meandering
visit with "Michael" and give it a C+.
Yet another unoriginal piece of product from Nora Ephron and the
Hollywood machine, "Michael" still manages to charm due to Travolta's
star wattage as an angel who drinks, smokes, has sex, likes a rumble
and piles obscene amounts of sugar and salt on everything he eats
(which strangely does not seem to include meat - maybe a
non-vegetarian angel was just pushing things too far :-).
Of the supporting cast, Robert Pastorelli ("Murphy Brown's" Eldon) is
the most appealing as a tabloid journalist who manages to keep his job
because his boss (Bob Hoskins) loves Pastorelli's dog Sparky. 
William Hurt and Andie MacDowell are both serviceable as the bruised
characters gently nudged to try love again by Michael.  In fact,
MacDowell has one of her most appealing roles in "Michael" (although
she shone brightest in "Unstrung Heroes"), and even trots out quite a
lovely singing voice.
Jean Stapleton is whimsical as the Iowa motel owner who harbors the
angel. Bob Hoskins is gruffly clueless as the editor of the Daily
Mirror.  And there's a delightful turn by an actress whom I am unable
to name from the information given in the press kit as a pie-serving
waitress who gives in to Michael's charms.  Terri Garr also makes a
surprise appearance as a judge whose verdict is swayed by Michael in a
most unusual way.
There is some clever dialogue to bolster the stale story line,
particularly Michael's witticisms.
However, we get to see yet another dog saved (is this becoming a trend
or what?) and I'm afraid Ephron's just another safe Hollywood
hitmaker.
         Visit "Reeling" at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     An angel as an oversexed slob.  Is the world ready for this?
Acclaimed director of WHEN HARRY MET SALLY and SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE,
Nora Ephron believes so.  Her new film MICHAEL features John Travolta
as an angel like you've never seen before.
     Quirkiness is not funny in itself, providing only one of the
ingredients from which comedies can be created.  Ephron gives holiday
audiences a film that is dead on arrival.  Although not as miserable as
her last film, MIXED NUTS, this picture is a mess.  Most of the
laughter you will hear in the theater comes from Travolta who
thoroughly enjoys being an archangel.  He and the dog Sparky give the
only compelling performances in the film.
     The setup for the story is that Vartan Malt (Bob Hoskins), the
editor of a Chicago tabloid called the National Mirror, is on the
lookout for bizarre articles.  A letter from the Milk Bottle Motel in
Iowa is sent to his chief investigative reporter, Frank Quinlan
(William Hurt).  The motel's owner, Pansy Milbank (Jean Stapleton),
claims to have an angel staying there.
     Frank takes his partner, Huey Driscoll (Robert Pastorelli), and a
reputed angel expert, Dorothy Winters (Andie MacDowell), to Iowa to
find the angel and bring him back alive.  Accompanying them is Malt's
dog Sparky, who has his own column in the National Mirror.
     When Michael finally makes his much anticipated appearance to our
three crack reporters, he is looking for his smokes and a bottle of
beer.  He has a two day stubble, a beer belly, dingy wings, and a
hangover.  Michael addresses Dorothy's confusion at his appearance by
explaining, "Halos?  Inner light?  I'm not that sort of angel."  In his
room, Frank reflects to Dorothy, "It is definitely the weirdest thing
I've ever seen.  It like some big bird made love to his mother."
     Michael agrees to go back with them to Chicago on condition that
they drive so he can visit eccentric places along the way, including
the world's largest ball of twine and the biggest non-stick frying pan.
     Although some of his antics on the journey include yelling
"battle" so he can butt heads with a bull and eating prodigious amounts
of sugar, most of his escapades are sexual.  He picks up whole groups
of women as he goes.  He justifies it with, "Remember what John and
Paul said?"  Frank quizzically replies, "The Apostles?"   "No, the
Beatles," corrects Michael.  "All you need is love."  Later Dorothy
will explain his sexual proclivities with, "He smells like cookies, and
the smell gets stronger when he is in heat."  (Go ahead, before you get
to the end of the review, guess what its MPAA rating is.)
     In the press kit, MacDowell says about fellow actor Travolta,
"John takes such wonderful chances with his character.  It is very
endearing the way he has this childlike quality to him."  I agree, but
he needed a better script that this one by the screenwriting committee
of Nora Ephron, Delia Ephron, Peter Dexter, and Jim Quinlan.  The
visuals are shockingly cute, but the story has little energy.  Hurt,
MacDowell, and Pastorelli are given poorly written characters and do
little with them.  Hoskins overacts his meager part.
     The pacing of the show is way off.  Be prepared to nod off at the
many slow places.  Regretfully, I stayed awake.  The ending of the
movie is a trick.  Just as in horror movies, when you think it is
finally over, it isn't.  After the natural conclusion point, there is
another ten minutes of uninteresting "resolution."  I did not care
about any of the characters, so I certainly was not wild about sitting
through ten more minutes while they worked out their troubles.
     MICHAEL runs 1:40, but feels much longer.  It is rated just PG,
but contains some needless profanity, sexual innuendoes, sexual
situations, fist fight violence, people dying, and a dog who gets run
over by a truck.  Much of this could prove confusing and frightening to
some kids.  My son, Jeffrey, 7 1/2, says it is an okay movie, but he
wouldn't recommend it to his friends.  He liked the "battle" parts, but
didn't like all the kissing scenes.  He gave it a thumb almost up and
said it was for kids four and up.  I would say six and up, but I am not
sure if anyone will like the show very much.  I don't recommend it, and
I give it only * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
