Title
Review for Cabin Boy (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Chris Elliott, Ritch Brinkley, James Gammon, Brian
Doyle-Murray, Brion James, Melora Walters.
Screenplay/Director:  Adam Resnick.
     A couple of years ago, Chris Elliot and writer/director Adam
Resnick teamed up for a Fox television series called "Get a Life" which
lasted, oh, about three weeks.  I enjoyed its silly humor, but if the
microscopic ratings were any indication, the audience for Elliott's fey
goofball character was severely limited.  It's therefore hard to figure
why a studio would green-light a project like CABIN BOY, particularly
assuming anyone actually saw a script before shooting started.  CABIN
BOY is dumb even by the standards of a Chris Elliott project, depending
almost entirely on Elliott's dopey grin and taking far too long to get
to anything with any real wit.
     Elliott plays Nathanial Mayweather, an obnoxious and overly-
sheltered lad just out of prep school.  Looking for the ship which will
take him to his father's Hawaiian hotel, he instead mistakenly ends up
on board The Filthy Whore, a fishing boat with a considerably less
cultured crew:  Captain Greybar (Ritch Brinkley); Skunk (Brian
Doyle-Murray); Paps (James Gammon); and Big Teddy (Brion James).  The
salty fishermen are none-too-pleased with their prissy stowaway, but
they're even less pleased when he inadvertently causes the ship to end
up in Hell's Bucket.  There many dangers await, which Nathanial must
overcome to win the respect of his new comrades and the love of the
girl he pulls out of the ocean (Melora Walters) ... who, incidentally was
trying to set a world record for swimming across the ocean.
     CABIN BOY gets off to a bad start from which it never really
recovers.  This includes a prologue at the prep school which seems to
last about twice as long as the ten minutes it actually is.  Elliott
adopts a supremely annoying quasi-Brahmin accent that makes most of his
dialogue grating, and makes about twelve jokes too many based on
Nathanial's condescension toward common folk.  Then we get a bizarre
cameo by David Letterman, which is almost funny simply for its bald
refusal to disguise his regular TV personality.  In a film which runs
under eighty minutes, a tedious set-up is more than a hindrance ...
it's a pre-emptive first strike.
     Once CABIN BOY hits open water (or at least as open as it gets on
the sound stage), it's no longer actively annoying.  It's also not much
more funny.  Elliott's schtick always tends to the surreal, but as
weird as things get, they remain curiously uninteresting.  Among the
loopy perils of Hell's Bucket are a stop-motion living glacier, a giant
appliance salesman and a half-man/half-shark called Chocki (played by
Russ Tamblyn).  If any of that sounds funny on paper, well, it did to
me, too.  It's the execution that fails.  While the bargain basement
production values might be endearing to some, I found the visual gags
in CABIN BOY painfully unfunny.  Some of the verbal bits work, but in
their rarity I hesitate to spoil them.
     I think one of the main reasons CABIN BOY comes up short is that
it is so obviously a Chris Elliott vanity project.  The four fishermen
are virtually interchangeable characters; not one of them is given a
distinct comic personality out of which some humor could arise.  There
is a glimpse of what could have been in the character of the impossibly
dense first cabin boy, who has a few brief scenes worth a chuckle or
two, but he soon disappears.  Melora Walters as Trina is only asked to
react, which is fortunate because she has about as much presence as a
slight breeze.  Almost every punch line is Elliott's, and a little of
him can go a very long way.  His comic vision is certainly unique, and
viewers perfectly attuned to a mind that concocts a giant talking
cupcake that spits tobacco might have much more fun with CABIN BOY than
I had.  However, I suspect a larger percentage will find it slow going,
and exceedingly short on solid laughs.
     Like caviar, Chris Elliott is an acquired taste.  Also like
caviar, he should probably only be digested in very small portions.
CABIN BOY was just too much for me to swallow.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Chris Elliott, Ritch Brinkley, Brian Doyle-Murray, 
        Brion James, James Gammon, Melora Walters, Russ Tamblyn
Director:  Adam Resnick
Producers:  Tim Burton and Denise Di Novi
Screenplay:  Adam Resnick
Released by Touchstone Pictures
     As with any movie that Tim Burton appends his name to, CABIN BOY
possesses a distinctive flavor--visually impressive, and containing
elements of fantasy and mythology alongside the ordinary and
commonplace.  Inspired by such diverse sources as CAPTAINS COURAGEOUS,
the SINBAD movies, and PEE-WEE'S BIG ADVENTURE, this film should
provide a fun--if bizarre--eighty minutes.  Unfortunately, it stars
Chris Elliott, a man with little charisma and less screen presence.
     Nathaniel (Chris Elliott) has just graduated from the Stephenson
Finishing School, where he has successfully completed all the requisite
courses to become an official "fancy lad" (a stuck up, aristocratic
juvenile).  After leaving the school, he's all set to take over the
running of his father's hotel in Hawaii.  However, on the way to the
ship port, he encounters a few difficulties, and instead of getting on
the luxury liner "Queen Catherine," he mistakenly boards "The Filthy
Whore," a fishing scow.  When the roughneck crew, led by Captain
Graybar (Ritch Brinkley) refuse to take him to his destination,
Nathaniel does some meddling of his own to attempt the course change.
It doesn't work, and "The Filthy Whore" ends up in a section of the sea
called "Hell's Bucket," where icebergs walk, cup cakes talk, clouds
laugh, green women (as played by Ann Magnuson) have six arms, and
hardware store managers (Mike Starr) are fifty feet tall.
     CABIN BOY has its share of clever moments, but the most
frustrating thing about Adam Resnick's script is that, while toying
with a host of intriguing concepts, it takes neither the time nor the
effort to develop any of them.  There is enough untapped potential in
this film to provide fuel for half a dozen full-length features.
     The humor is distinctly unfunny, as the picture repeatedly courts
cheap laughs.  A cameo by David Letterman lacks wit (and
intelligence)--a condition shared by more than that scene.  By comic
standards, CABIN BOY is a failure, proving that no matter how badly a
movie wants to make its audience laugh, it needs to be amusing to do
so.
     Chris Elliott is appallingly bad as the title character.  Although
his role cries out for an over-the-top performance, Elliott's grating
personae cancels out any positive contributions made by his inability
to act.  His work is amateurish, transforming possibly-entertaining
sequences into tedious interludes.  Without its star, CABIN BOY might
have gotten by on sheer whimsy, but Elliott is nearly omnipresent.
     The film makes occasional stabs at satire, but many are
poorly-delineated and difficult to identify, while others are entirely
too obvious.  Frequently, CABIN BOY doesn't seem to know what tone to
adopt, wobbling uncertainly between lighthearted fantasy, silly comedy,
and biting parody.  This split personality quickly becomes obvious to
those sitting in theater seats.
     In this time of visual masterpieces like JURASSIC PARK and THE
NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS, the special effects work evident in CABIN
BOY is embarrassing, and it would be stretching matters to believe that
such poor quality is an asset to the film's satirical bent.  There are
numerous times when it's obvious that "The Filthy Whore" is a model,
and when a giant lifts Nathaniel into the air, it takes a lot of
imagination to identify the rag doll with Chris Elliott (since the doll
turns in a far better performance).
     CABIN BOY is writer/director Adam Resnick's directorial debut, and
the presence of his good friend Elliott helps sabotage it.  Resnick's
next project is something called HOPETOWN, which he describes as
"another sort of offbeat comedy--that doesn't take place at sea."  If
he can expand on his current release's flashes of inventiveness,
there's reason to be optimistic about HOPETOWN, especially since it
won't feature CABIN BOY's marquee "actor."
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Exec. Producers: Denise Di Novi and Tim Burton (!!!)
Writer, director: Adam Resnick from a story with Chris Elliott
Cast: Chris Elliott        (GROUNDHOG DAY, THE ABYSS, TV's "Get a Life")
      Ritch Brinkley       (TV's "Murphy Brown")
      Brian Doyle-Murray   (GROUNDHOG DAY, WAYNE'S WORLD, JFK)
      Brion James          (THE PLAYER, ANOTHER 48 HRS., 48 HRS.)
      James Gammon         (LEAVING NORMAL, MAJOR LEAGUE)
      Melora Walters
      and a bizarre supporting cast including David Letterman (!),
        Andy Ritcher (!!), Ricki Lake, Russ Tamblyn (!!!), and Bob Elliott.
MPAA Rating: "PG-13" (but still full of *very* salty language :-)
Running Time: Approximately 90 minutes.
     David Letterman and Conan O'Brien TV sidekick Andy Ritcher
starring in a comedy produced by Tim Burton?
     Believe it or not, both appear in the goofy Chris Elliott vehicle
CABIN BOY.  Elliott, of course, is an old Letterman alumni who went on
"bigger things," including his show "Get a Life" on Fox.  Now, Bob
Elliott's boy has gone and got his own movie.  And, believe or it not,
it's actually kinda funny.
     Elliott stars as Nathaniel, the prim but quite obnoxious student
of a fine finishing school.  On graduation day, he's supposed to catch
a cruise ship to Hawaii where he'll work for his rich father (guess who
plays him? :)  But, true to slapstick convention, young Nathan goes to
the wrong seaport and boards the wrong boat.
     He hops onto a fetid fishing boat (called The Filthy Whore) and
joins its rag-tag, drunken crew of five thinking that he's booked on a
"theme cruise."  Only when he's several miles out to sea does our
not-very-intrepid hero learn the bitter truth.
     And, since he's a moron, he manages to steer the boat straight
into "Hell's Bucket"--an uncharted region populated by all manner of
supernatural creatures....
     CABIN BOY is a strange piece of work.  With a supporting cast
that includes a giant, a six-armed siren, and a half-man/half-shark,
the film feels like a lower budget version of Terry Jones' ERIK THE
VIKING.  That film, if you recall, successfully combined droll comedy
with strong fantasy.
     In CABIN BOY, both the comedy and fantasy are substantially
subdued, but no less enjoyable.  What other film this year is likely to
feature giant flying cupcakes that spit tobacco?  Or gusting winds that
are blown by clouds with human faces?
     The humor--like the film itself--is spotty in spots.  The jokes
vary in quality, but the cast gets off some good one-liners.  Make a
few provisions for the slower moments, mix in the fantasy, and you get
one very goofy movie.
     As expected, Chris Elliott plays Chris Elliott.  If you enjoy his
grating speech and effeminate mannerisms, then he'll amuse.  His
shipmates are a motley crew of familiar character actors.  They have a
whale of a time overacting and shouting nonsense like "Holy Christ in a
dump truck."  Newcomer Melora Walters is a waste as Elliott's "love
interest," but she gets good lines like "I'm always flattered when a
psychotic gets smitten on me."
     And, any casting deficiencies are overcome by the periodic
appearances of more-famous faces.  Blink and you'll miss Ricki Lake,
Russ Tamblyn, or Bob Elliott.
(Letterman shows up early--you can't miss him.)
