Title
Review for Bossa Nova (1999)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Bruno Barreto. Screenplay by Alexandre Machado and Fernanda
Young, based on the story "A Senhorita Simpson" by Sergio Sant'Anna.
Starring Amy Irving, Antonio Fagundes, Alexandre Borges. Running time: 95
minutes. Rated AA by the MFCB. Reviewed on November 11th, 2000.
"Bossa Nova" is a movie so trite, it feels as though it got lost on its
way to the Brazilian version of "Must See TV". That it wastes some good
performances and touching scenes -- as well as an all-too-rare sensitive 
depiction of middle-aged romance -- makes the experience all the more
exasperating. Although it serves moderately well as a feel-good picture,
"Bossa Nova" is ultimately not dissimilar from a night spent carousing in
Rio: a dim impression of amusement, fading rapidly from the memory.
Amy Irving, wife of director Bruno Barreto, stars as Mary Ann Simpson, an
American teaching English in Rio de Janeiro. She becomes the object of
affection of contract lawyer Pedro Paulo (portrayed by prolific Brazilian
actor Antonio Fagundes). At the same time, Pedro is defending his father
Juan (Alberto de Mendoza) against litigation by his fourth ex-wife, which
may mean the loss of Juan's beloved tailor shop. Also employed at the
tailor shop is Pedro's half-brother Roberto (Pedro Cardoso), who is 
smitten with Pedro's pretty new intern Sharon (Giovanna Antonelli).
Meanwhile, amongst Mary Ann's other students are soccer star Acacio
(Alexandre Borges), who is developing an unhealthy interest in his teacher
while preparing to move to London with his gregarious manager Gordo
(Sergio Loroza), and the lonely Nadine (Drica Moraes). Nadine, trying to
encourage the solitary Mary Ann to meet someone, introduces her to the
world of Internet romance. Nadine herself has been involved in an online
relationship with a New York artist named Gary, and is trying to work up
the courage to visit him. She is encouraged in this endeavour by her
travel agent, Tania (Debora Bloch), recently divorced from none other than 
Pedro Paulo.
It is true that the existence of so many characters, all so completely
intertwined, strains at one's sense of belief. But within the confines of
this kind of movie, it is not in of itself an object of criticism -- it is
part of the grammar of this type of romantic comedy, which relies on the
timeworn gambits of mistaken identity and misunderstood dialogue to garner
laughs and propel the storyline. Indeed, "Bossa Nova" becomes even more
incestuous as it progresses -- for example, Pedro Paulo and Acacio develop
a strange sort of semi-rivalry, which leads to Acacio becoming a client of
Pedro's, which results in Acacio getting involved with Sharon, which means
that he and Roberto have also become inadvertent rivals.
Other films have utilised similarly unlikely set-ups and mined them for
great laughs. But the screenplay for "Bossa Nova", by Alexandre Machado
and Fernanda Young, is only fleetingly funny. More often than not, the
comedy is the sort reserved for short-lived network sitcoms, such as a
painful sequence where Nadine goes to apply for a visa and quickly talks
herself into trouble until Tania makes the rescue. And then there's the
appearance by Stephen Tobolowsky's geeky Trevor, who inexplicably insists
on referring to Pedro Paulo by the groan-inducing Anglicisation "Peter
Paul".
When "Bossa Nova" succeeds, it is usually when it concentrates on the
central relationship between Mary Ann and Pedro Paulo. Although the
plethora of competing subplots prevents this romance from being anything
but cursorily explored, it is a touching and effective pairing which
makes good use of the skills of both Irving and Fagundes. There is a
superb scene, for instance, where Pedro takes Mary Ann's measurements
thoroughly, without touching her or otherwise arousing her suspicions,
while they ride in an elevator, and then puts his long-dormant tailor
skills to use in making her a blouse. But even here the movie undercuts
itself: the blouse scene over with, it appears Machado and Young had
little idea what else to do with the concept, and quickly skip to the
inevitable result of Pedro's secretly sending it to Mary Ann.
There is too much going on in "Bossa Nova", and none of it receives the
attention it deserves. A subplot involving Tania and her Chinese lover is
almost criminally underexploited, such that it appears to exist only to
keep Tania from Pedro for a long period of time.Several characters receive
so little development that it is difficult to feel any reaction to the
unfolding of their respective story arcs. This is especially true of
Sharon, who flip-flops back and forth between Roberto and Acacio seemingly
at whim, without any clear motivation (in a cute touch, her backpack
changes shape to reflect her current allegiance).
Beyond Irving and Fagundes, only Borges and Loroza stand out. Although
neither has much to do individually, they do make for an amusingly 
arrogant double act. Although she looks very good, Antonelli never finds
her groove as Sharon, and feels awkward and out of place; the same can be
said of Tobolowsky. Others simply seem to be filling space. Consider
Cardoso and Bloch, for example, whose final fates are so offhandedly
treated that they come across as mere plot facilitators.
Director Barreto at least keeps the pace of "Bossa Nova" moving, such that
only a few scenes seem to go on well past their sell-by date (a
fortuitous accomplishment, giving the paucity of much of the humour).
But Barreto is also too preoccupied with showing off the beauty of Rio.
Right from the opening shots, Barreto allows his depiction of the
landscape to become gratuitous. And, ironically, sequences where he could
really show off the territory to good effect -- like Mary Ann's daily 
forays into the ocean -- are so tightly lensed as to be almost
claustrophobic.
Also disappointing is the incidental music by Eumir Deodato. Given the
movie's title, one could be forgiven for expecting a riveting and 
attractive bossa nova score. But Deodato's compositions are generally
tedious and sleep-inducing, and the music never becomes the crucial
ingredient that the filmmakers seem to be trying to set up. Indeed,
Deodato's score is perhaps emblematic of "Bossa Nova" as a whole -- not
really bad, in fact occasionally alluring, but for the most part simply 
failing to be at all interesting.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/BossaNova.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Sony Pictures Classics
 Director: Bruno Barreto
 Writer: Alexandre Machado, Fernanda Young, novel "Miss
Simpson" by Sergio Sant'Anna
 Cast: Amy Irving, Antonio Fagundes, Alexandre Borges,
Debora Bloch, Drica Moraes, Giovanna Antonelli, Rogerio
Cardoso, Sergio Loroza, Favio Sao Thiago, Alberto De
Mendoza, Pedro Cardoso, Stephen Toboloswky, Kazuo
Matsui
   Contrary to the opinion of just about everyone in the 16-28
prime movie audience, people over 40 enjoy romance.  When
attachments are lacking, they may cover up their loneliness
to themselves and the outside world, but rest assured that
they need love in our lives like everyone else.  Among the
features that make "Bossa Nova" such a marvelous treat is
that the principal characters are over 40, the amorous
adventures of their youthful supporting actors communicating
erotic charges considerably less than those of the leading
personalities. Filmed by Bruno Barreto Rio, one of the world's
most charming cities, "Bossa Nova" recalls that director's
best known "Dona Flor and Her Two Husbands," made in
1978 and starring the sultry Sonia Braga as a woman torn
between giving herself to her dead, irresponsible husband
who returns regularly to earth or to the bore who has become
her new spouse.
   Though not as rich in fantasy as "Dona Flor," "Bossa Nova"
departs occasionally from the roundelay of mistaken identities
and fluctuating love affairs to take flight, as when leading
man Antonio Fagundes in the role of Cariocan lawyer Pedro
Paulo imagines herself dancing Fred-Astaire style with the
woman who has caught him on the rebound, Mary Ann (Amy
Irving--who is the real-life wife of the director).
   Utilizing an adaptation of the novel "Miss Simpson" by
Sergio Sant'Anna by screenwriters Alexandre Machado and
Fernanda Young, director Barreto juggles a fine cast of actors
in the diverse roles of people of various ages and cultures
whose actions veer from the wacky to the tender, from
bewildered to centered, as courtships cross lines feverishly
under the hot sun of the Portuguese-speaking country.
   At the heart of the story is a widowed American, Mary Ann
(Amy Irving), a former air hostess whose pilot husband had
drowned two years previously.  Perhaps taking seriously the
adage that a woman over 40 has as much chance for
marriage as she has of winning the lottery, she has written
romance out of her life as she teaches English to a
boisterous lot of Rio's denizens in a well-appointed private
language school.  Her teaching brings her into contact with
Nadine (Drica Moraes), a computer buff who has been
enjoying a virtual romance with an American who calls
himself Gary (Stephen Tobolowski)--allegedly a loft-living
Soho artist with hair down to his waist.  On one fortuitous day
she shares an elevator with Pedro Paulo (Fagundes), who
becomes smitten with her and signs up for one of her classes
(though he already speaks English well).  Pedro Paulo is on
the rebound after his wife Tania (Debora Bloch) left him for a
Japanese tai-chi instructor (Kazuo Matsui), but Pedro Paulo
has competition from the brash soccer player, Acacio
(Alexandre Borges), who has just been bought out by a
British team.  
   When Acacio turns his attentions to Pedro Paulo's bright
but mercenary legal intern Sharon (Giovanna Antonelli),
Sharon must decide whether to shift her allegiance from the
sweet fellow who has been courting her, Roberto (Pedro
Cardoso), who is Pedro Paulo's half brother.
   It's small world after all.  As is typical in merry-go-
roundelays, a group of strangers ultimately find that somehow
they are all connected, and in the final scene, after some
comical incidents of mistaken identity, all players get the
mates whom they merit.  A hospital room makes the madcap
resolution a fitting conclusion to a romance that is more
mature, more complex, and with more real atmosphere than
the typical Hollywood production featuring bubbleheaded 20-
somethings.  Antonio Carlos Jobim's bossa nova soundtrack
adds zip to the proceedings while the entire package serves
as remarkable free advertising for the Government of Brazil
Department of Tourism.
Rated R.  Running Time: 95 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Love is in the air in BOSSA NOVA, starring Amy Irving and directed by
her husband Bruno Barreto.  It's a comedic romance with the comedy used
as a relaxation device to put you in the mood for love.
Several couples are in the process of forming relationships, and all of
the relationships are touchingly genuine, thanks to the meticulous
direction and to the delicately effective script by Alexandre Machado
and Fernanda Young, based on Sérgio Sant'Anna's novel.
Although some of the lovers are the traditional young twentysomethings,
popular in the cinema, the leads (Irving and Antônio Fagundes) are both
around 50.  Most motion pictures believe that significant love stops
around 35 and isn't reborn, except for some patronizing films about
senior citizen romances.
The film is set in Rio, which is shown so gorgeously, particularly in
the scenes set at dusk, that you may feel compelled to consult your
travel agent after the picture is over.
With a twinkle in her eye, Irving plays an English language teacher
named Mary Ann.  A widow, Mary Ann hasn't dated in over 2 years, and she
isn't on the prowl now, even if, subconsciously, she's receptive to the
right gestures.  One day, a dashingly handsome lawyer, Pedro Paulo
(Fagundes), sees her and is instantly smitten.  Pedro is on the rebound,
having recently separated from his wife.  You can tell by the way he
ignores his beautiful legal assistant, Sharon (Giovanna Antonelli), that
he hasn't been exactly knocking doors down to find another woman.  But
Mary Ann is something different, so he enrolls in her language class in
the hopes of sparking her interest in him.
Barreto's brilliance can be seen in the way he stages the scenes.  One
of the best has Pedro behind Mary Ann in a crowded elevator.  He opens
his palm and sneaks it toward her rear.  We, of course, think he is
going to do some Latin, macho thing and secretly fondle her before she
knows who touched her.  But his hand never quite comes in contact with
her body.  He quickly moves his hand all over her backside, measuring
her for a blouse that he is going to make.  You see, he comes from a
long line of tailors.
In another scene, we meet Pedro's father, Juan (Alberto de Mendoza), a
tailor of the old school.  He literally listens to the fabric to grade
it and to determine how best to use the material.  Also at the tailor
shop is Pedro's brother, Roberto (Pedro Cardoso), who falls for Sharon,
as does soccer star Acácio (Alexandre Borges).
Acácio, one of Mary Ann's private pupils, also has eyes for her.  But
she's more flattered than interested.  Since he is about to move to
England, he needs her to teach him how to cuss in English as well as he
can in Portuguese so that he can intimidate the players in his new
country.  The profanity lesson is the movie's funniest episode since
it's done so sweetly.  It's also one of the few fast paced scenes in the
picture, which usually takes its time.
There are many other key characters, and they are all linked together in
various ways, many being English language students.  Characters are only
introduced if the writer has a plan for the character's development.
Most movies fail when they become too ambitious in the number of plots
and subplots, but BOSSA NOVA never overreaches.  Every character is
worth caring about, and every romance is worth our attention.  The
film's dreamy, old-time music invokes memories of the movie romances
from the 1940s. There is even a dream sequence in which the two leads
take a spin around the dance floor, actually Mary Ann's classroom.
Even the smallest details are carefully designed to reinforce the
story's romantic mood.  The sheets in the hospital, for example, are a
peaceful sea green.  The contrasting clothes include some of the best
looking, and best tailored, suits that you've ever seen on Pedro and
some of the flashiest silk shirts on Acácio.
Not all of the relationships turn out exactly as you might guess and
some are left not completely resolved.  Nevertheless, the good-spirited
story leaves you with a warm glow.  A very satisfying film about the
possibilities and the joys of love, BOSSA NOVA shows what can happen
when romantic comedies tone down the comedy and accentuate the romance.
The result can be splendid.
BOSSA NOVA runs 1:35.  The film is in English and in Portuguese with
English subtitles.  It is rated R for language and some sexual content
and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
Brazilian writer/director Bruno Barreto and his wife, actress
Amy Irving, have concocted a mid-life romance set in exotic Rio de
Janeiro. In the screenplay by Alexandre Machado and Fernanda Young,
based on Sergio Sant'Anna's novel, "Miss Simpson," Irving plays an
enigmatic widow, a retired flight attendant, whose Brazilian airline
pilot husband drowned two years earlier. While teaching English, she's
romanced by two suitors: a randy soccer player (Alexandre Borges) and
a lawyer (Antonio Fagundes) whose wife (Debora Bloch) left him for a
tai chi instructor (Kazuo Matsui). Meanwhile, the lawyer's
half-brother (Pedro Cardoso) falls for a sexy legal intern (Giovanna
Antonelli) who, in turn, develops a crush on the soccer star. One of
Irving's students (Drica Moraes) has fallen for a New Yorker (Stephen
Tobolowsky) in a chat room on the Internet. To add to the tropical
turbulence, the language school in which Irving teaches is housed in
the same building where the lawyer's father (Alberto De Mendoza) is
trying to maintain his tailor shop after his latest wife split. All of
this interconnected drama pulsates to the beat of Antonio Carlos
Jobim's bossa nova classics. While it's sumptuously photographed by
Pascal Rabaud, it should be paced like a screwball romantic farce,
complete with mistaken identities and comedic confusion, but,
unfortunately, at times it's somewhat stilted. On the other hand, I
was entranced by a fantasy in which Fagundes imagines himself as a
'40s Fred Astaire, romancing Irving's Ginger Rogers - and an elevator
scene as he surreptitiously measures her for a garment. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bossa Nova" is a bittersweet, sensuous 7. In
Portuguese with English subtitles, it's a movie that makes you want to
call your travel agent.
