Title
Review for Lawn Dogs (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     To the brick mansions of Camelot Gardens with their wide expanses
of green grass interrupted sporadically by scraggly trees comes the
only poor person for miles around.  Trent Burns, played with subtle
power by Sam Rockwell, doesn't live there, but he visits periodically
to take care of those lush lawns and generally be abused by the
mansion's condescending owners.
     "The way I see it, you have people who own lawns and people who
mow them," Trent says, explaining his role at the bottom of the social
hierarchy.  "And they are never the same."  Full of self-deprecating
humor, Trent faces his reduced opportunities in life with spunk but not
much hope.  He lives in a beat-up trailer parked illegally in a state
forest.
     John Myhre's interior sets of the homes have cool, pale blues
accented with perky roses and purples.  As the quirky film starts, it
looks like another plastic parody, but director John Duigan has
something else entirely in mind.  The imaginative director of SIRENS
stages scenes in ways shocking, surprising, and generally quite
satisfying.  With rampant sexuality, violent undertones, and
fascinating characters, the film has something for everyone.
     The central character in this modern fable is a precocious,
10-year-old girl, Devon Stockard, played with wonderful complexity by
newcomer Mischa Barton.  She delivers a riveting performance that
constantly surprises.  With her wide-eyes and broad smile, she is
devilishly delightful and ever inquisitive.  Although Devon seems as
though she might turn into a Lolita, she never does.  She is, however,
a completely free spirit and a perfect match for her bosom buddy,
Trent.
     Devon's father is played by Christopher McDonald from last year's
LEAVE IT TO BEAVER and her mother by Academy Award nominee Kathleen
Quinlan from APOLLO 13.  Devon rebels against them.  In her most
palpable protest, she sits on the top of her father's car and urinates
on his car's windshield.
     Devon's wildness comes out in other vivid ways.  She walks out of
her bedroom window one moonlit evening onto her rooftop.  Once there,
she discards her gown, which is shown magically floating upward on a
warm summer breeze.
     Devon has a bad heart (hers goes "dee dee dum, dee dee dum" when
it should go "dee dum, dee dum, dee dum") and a propensity to see the
world in terms of a fairy tale that she keeps inventing.  ("Once upon a
time in the middle of a dark forest, a boy lived alone") The chemistry
between Devon and Trent is a delight to behold and in moves in ways the
audience never quite suspects.
     Kathleen Quinlan, whose specialty is loyal, suffering housewives,
plays an erotically charged one this time.  Having a most unusual
affair with one of the local young men, she manages to transmit a raw
sexuality solely through her facial expressions.  The director's
talents are best seen in those scenes in which he transforms weed
pulling and salad preparation into incredibly erotic undertakings.
     LAWN DOGS, like SIRENS, basically defies description.  Suffice it
to say that it has just about everything in it, including a director
who knows precisely how to combine the ingredients in amazing and
compelling ways.  The performance by young Mischa Barton alone is worth
the price of admission.
     LAWN DOGS runs 1:41.  It is not rated but would be an R for
nudity, sexual situations and violence and would be fine for older
teenagers.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   They say that the suburbs are the best place to bring up
kids, but you've got to wonder sometimes whether that's just
an excuse parents use because they want to leave the big
city.  In screenwriter Naomi Wallace's vision, the suburbs are
about the worst place for growing up, and they're not all that
great a location for adults either.  In her script for "Lawn
Dogs," directed by John Duigan, all of the adults to
whom we are introduced living in Kentucky's Camelot
Gardens are bad news, while the three working-class types
who live in a mobile home and what could best be described
as an enlarged tin can are salt-of-the-earth good guys.
   "Lawn Dogs" is as much a fable as it is a straightforward
narrative about a few days in the lives of two unlikely buddies
and the circle of people who surround them. Trent Burns
(Sam Rockwell) is a twenty-one-year-old guy who lives in a
broken-down trailer on the outskirts of Camelot Gardens,
mows lawns, and does tree work for the upscale residents of
the wealthy but improbably pristine community.  His clients
include members of the Stockard family: Morton (Christopher
McDonald) and his wife Clare (Kathleen Quinlan) whose
10-year-old daughter Devon (Mischa Barton) takes refuge in
fantasy.  It's not that Devon is abused: quite the contrary. 
She is patronized by her parents who want her to make
friends, and given gentle advice when she goes out to market
cookies to the community.  Eschewing kids her own age, she
becomes pals with the impoverished mower of lawns with
whom he shares a common surgical operation and makes
daily excursions to his trailer which in her eyes is the retreat
of Baba Yaga, a powerful figure in the stories she had heard
from her uncle.
   While the adventures of these two unlikely friends follow a
temperate and routine course for a good deal of the movie,
director John Duigan uses a great many opportunities to
come on like a contemporary American Bertolt Brecht in his
aversion to segments of the upper middle class.  The owners
of property are as soulless as the acreage they inhabit, using
their spare time to razz, torment and otherwise demonstrate
their disdain for the working class--whom the hapless Trent
represents.  At one point, Trent interrupts a backyard steak
barbeque to ask Morton for his fee: Morton short-changes him
ten dollars, kiddingly pointing out, "I gave you two hot dogs,
didn't I?"  A snotty blueblood abuses him verbally, asking
what Trent expects to do when he grows up...sarcastically
suggesting that he take a college major in computer design. 
Even Nash (Bruce McGill), a security guard who thereby
shares a working-class background with Trent, warns the slim
and sometimes disdainful lad to clear out of Camelot Gardens
by five o'clock each day.  Trent is, after all, the sort of person
from whom the denizens ran to Camelot Gardens to escape.
  By contrast, Trent is a decent fellow who sends what he can
from his spare income to his aging parents, particularly since
his dad, Jake (Tom Aldredge), lost a lung after being infected
by food poisoning during the Korean War.  (The U.S.
government denied all blame for the tragedy--yet another
Brechtian dig at the arrogance of the rich and powerful.)
   The central relationship is played out in a predictable style
for the most part, though Duigan successfully employs magic
realism toward the conclusion of the film, dovetailing the
habitual lives of the locals with Devon's favorite fable of Baba
Yaga. While Trent is at first unenthusiastic about the
unannounced visit of the 10-year-old Devon, he is drawn to
her and she to him, the two loners finding comfort with each
other amid a circle of uncomprehending, twisted suburbanites. 
While it does nothing for Devon's emotional health that she
discovers her mother in the midst of an affair with a
handsome but loathsome college kid, she takes the incident in
stride as if to say, "What do you expect from people with no
soul?"  
   The picture, whose funding is provided by the Rank Group
(remember the guy who hammers away in slow motion at
the gong in the logo?), is targeted to a sensitive audience, the
sorts of folks who liked last year's French favorite, "Ma Vie En
Rose."  Devon's performance stays properly shy of being
terminally cute, and despite the stylizations with which the
lawn community is photographed, the picture is believable,
mildly amusing, and for the right audience is worthy of
attention.

Author
James Berardinelli
     The first thing to notice about John Duigan's LAWN DOGS is the 
astounding performance of newcomer Mischa Barton, who plays Devon, the 
10-year old protagonist.  Barton is a natural actress, and manages to 
convey the perfect blend of maturity and innocence necessary for us to 
accept her character as something more vital than the construct of an 
uneven plot.  Amongst all the weeds of LAWN DOGS, she represents one of 
the few true blades of grass.
     The second thing to recognize is the keenly-realized relationship 
between Devon and a 21 year-old lawn cutter named Trent (Sam Rockwell, 
from BOX OF MOONLIGHT).  Theirs is basically a friendship between 
outsiders, and, although there is an undeniable sexual undercurrent 
inherent in their interaction, it's kept subtle, and Duigan never 
exploits it.  This is no LOLITA; these two have a great deal in common 
on an emotional level, but neither is interested in entering into a 
physical relationship.  In fact, on the one occasion when Trent thinks 
Devon is making a sexual overture, he becomes extremely uncomfortable, 
and she laughs at the foolishness of his presumption.  
     Sadly, Barton's standout performance and the core relationship are 
really the only two worthwhile aspects of LAWN DOGS, a film that never 
quite gels into a satisfying whole.  The problem is twofold.  The plot 
is unwieldy and peppered with familiar, melodramatic moments.  Worse, 
the supporting characters are all pure caricatures.  The plentiful 
attempts at satirizing the suburban lifestyle consistently strike a 
wrong note, often seeming cruel, uncomfortable, or out-of-synch.  Every 
scintilla of thought and creativity evident in LAWN DOGS was lavished 
upon Devon, Trent, and their peculiar relationship.  All other elements 
of the film are disappointingly banal.  
     One of the primary themes evident in LAWN DOGS relates to the 
differences between the "haves" and "have nots" of the world, or, as 
Trent puts it, "people that own lawns and people that mow them."  Trent 
is one of the latter, a college-aged loner who lives in a run-down 
trailer outside of town because he can't afford anything better.  To 
raise a little cash, he transports his mower to the nearby, gated 
community of Camelot Gardens, where, for forty dollars a lawn, he does 
the cutting and trimming necessary for everyone to keep up with the 
Joneses.  The home owners in the lavish, perfectly-manicured development 
tolerate Trent's presence because he serves a necessary function, but, 
when it comes to using their lavatory facilities or socializing with 
their children, he is persona non grata.  And when a theft occurs, he is 
the automatic suspect.
     Devon is the precocious daughter of Morton (Christopher McDonald) 
and Clare (Kathleen Quinlan), two newcomers to Camelot Gardens.  Their 
overriding concern is to earn the approval of their neighbors by 
presenting the facade of a perfect family.  Devon is bored, unhappy, and 
profoundly depressed by her parents' shallow behavior.  Her disdain for 
other kids ("they smell like TV and they talk too fast") prevents her 
from having any friends her own age.  One day, when she's out selling 
cookies for a girlscout-like organization, she meets Trent and senses a 
kindred spirit.  It isn't long before the two of them have become 
unlikely pals, and are doing all sorts of fun things together, like 
stealing and cooking chickens, dancing to a Bruce Springsteen song on 
the roof of Trent's truck, and mooning a couple of startled fishermen. 
     Sitting through LAWN DOGS is like watching two entwined movies of 
vastly different quality.  One is a well-written, atypical buddy story.  
The other is an uneven, cliché-riddled look at the inherent schism 
between the outsider and the citizens of the closed, privileged 
community of Camelot Gardens.  The film expends enough effort on the 
latter to mute the impact of the former, and the climactic sequence is 
an exercise in violent, predictable melodrama.  Director John Duigan has 
made a career out of exploring conflicts between mavericks and the 
establishment (see his FLIRTING, SIRENS, and THE JOURNEY OF AUGUST KING 
for prime examples), but this is his weakest feature to date. While 
there are things to appreciate in LAWN DOGS, especially Barton's 
performance, the film as a whole left me strangely unfulfilled.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."
