Title
Review for Magic In the Mirror (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1996. Director - Ted Nicolaou, Screenplay - Ken Carter Jr & Frank 
Dietz, Producers - Kevin Hyman & Vlad Paunescu, Photography - Adolfo 
Bartoli, Music - Richard Kozinski, Visual Effects Supervisor - MacKenzie 
Waggaman, Digital Visual Effects - OCS, Freeze Frame & Pixel Magic 
(Supervisor - Ray McIntyre Jr), Creature Effects - Mark Rappaport, 
Production Design - Cristian Niculescu, Art Direction - Viorel Ghenea. 
Production Company - Bibi Productions.
Jamie Renee Smith (Mary Margaret Dennis), Saxon Trainor (Sylvia 
Dennis/Queen Hysop), David Brooks (Gilbert Dennis), Godfrey James 
(Melilot), Kevin Wixted (Tansy), Eileen T'Kaye (Dragora), Ion Haiduc 
(Admiral Dabble), Cristian Motriuc (Swanson/Dr Francis Schmott), Ileana 
Sandulescu (Bella), Daniela Marzavan (Donna)
Plot: Young parentally neglected Mary Margaret Dennis discovers some 
magical berries which open up a doorway to another world through her 
late aunt's mirror. But there, as she tries to find some more berries to 
get back home, she is sought by the crazed duck queen Dragora who has 
discovered a taste for tea made out of humans dunked in hot water and 
desires to find a way through the mirror in order to plunder the people 
world.
Although it is not produced under either the Full Moon or Moonbeam 
banners, this is another of Charles Band and director Ted Nicolau's 
low-budget fantasy films. Every now and again Band and Nicolaou manage 
to pull something quite unique and unexpected out of the hat - they did 
with `Dragonworld' - and do so here again. One sat down to watch `Magic 
in the Mirror' with no real expectations - after all the majority of the 
Band/Moonbeam children's films like `Pet Shop' and the `Prehysteria!' 
films are utter dross. But in no time at all the film manages to take 
one completely by surprise and one suddenly wonders exactly what sort of 
drug-induced hallucination they are in the midst of. It is quite a 
bewildering, head-spinning experience, not unakin to sitting down to 
watch something like `Pufnstuf' for the first time. Nicolaou creates a 
unique secondary world fabulation filled with journeys through magical 
mirrors and tyrannical duck queens threatening to dip young girls into 
giant boiling teapots to serve up as a rare delicacy. There are moments 
of bizarrely surreal imagery - armies of flying mallards ("I love the 
smell of duck gas in the morning," comments the duck general); a whole 
field of doors leading to magical mirrors; gardens of planted people. 
For once the usual Band low-budget does not show through too much and 
the duck costumes are surprisingly lavish and effective. The result is a 
unique fantasy which succesfully ventures into that rare arena of 
surreal fabulism that so few children's films get right - lone examples 
being `Willie Wonka and the Chocolate Factory' and `Pufnstuf'.

