Title
Review for Good Policeman, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Protagonists of police films come in various shapes and
forms, but hardly any of them resembles protagonist of THE
GOOD POLICEMAN, 1991 thriller by Peter Werner. Isaac Seidel
(played by Ron Silver) is not an ordinary cop - he is
actually commissioner for New York Police Department.
Despite his lofty position he stayed in touch with the
situation in the lower echalons, thanks to the semi-private
unit of "Paladines" who help him sort out the trouble both
within and without his organisation. As a result, almost
everyone in the Big Apple - media, mayor, politicians,
church and even some elements of the organised crime -
either loves him or respect him, and he even has time to
lead children's baseball team. However, as usual in such
circumstances, there are those who aren't particularly
satisfied with the current state of affairs, namely some
members of Mafia and FBI agents who feel uncomfortable with
close relations between Seidel and organised crime. When
Seidel tries to prevent mafia war, his own life will be in
danger.
Despite somewhat preposterous concept (official burdened
with every day responsibility of running tens of thousands
of policemen has enough time for detective work of his own),
THE GOOD POLICEMAN looks a fine film at first glance. Ron
Silver and Tony Lo Bianco play their roles very well, and
the musical soundtrack by Stephen Endelman is very
effective. Unfortunately, the script by David Black and
Jerome Garyn seems unfinished - many important characters
are only fleshed out and not sufficiently explored, creating
impression that THE GOOD POLICEMAN is nothing more than the
pilot for rejected TV-series. The ending is predictable and
cliched, and the romantic subplot involving Seidel's
chlidhood love is too distracting. THE GOOD POLICEMAN is
nevertheless watchable, but disappointing film which again
reminds us that the good films rely on something more than
original concepts alone.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
