Title
Review for Fly Away Home (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Anna Paquin, Jeff Daniels, Dana Delany, Terry Kinney, 
      Holter Graham, Jeremy Ratchford
Director: Carroll Ballard
Producers: John Veitch, Carol Baum
Screenplay: Robert Rodat and Vince McKewin
Cinematography: Caleb Deschanel
Music: Mark Isham
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     Let me say up front that I have never been especially fond of 
Canadian geese.  Sure, they're cute when they're young, but they are 
long past the adorable stage when they first take to the air.  Now that 
I've made that admission, you might be surprised to learn that I 
actually liked the goose-fest, FLY AWAY HOME.  However, while there are 
geese aplenty here, the movie isn't so much about birds as it is about a 
lonely little girl and how, in pursuit of a common goal, she and her 
estranged father find one another.
     FLY AWAY HOME starts with one of the most disconcerting scenes I've 
seen in a recent motion picture:  a silent car accident that takes place 
during the opening credits while a soft, gentle melody plays in the 
background.  The effect created by this juxtaposition of tragic and 
hopeful elements is sufficient to arrest anyone's attention.  And, while 
the film never again attains this level of artistry, there are a few 
scenes that come close.  Caleb Deschanel's photography is one of the 
movie's highlights.
     The opening crash occurs in New Zealand, where Amy Alden (Anna 
Paquin) and her mother live.  Amy's mother dies in the accident, and the 
thirteen-year old is forced to move to Ontario, Canada, where her 
father, Thomas (Jeff Daniels), has a home.  Thomas, a sculptor and 
wilderness conservation activist, doesn't understand his daughter, and 
his earnest attempts to get close to her are rebuffed.  When asked why 
he didn't visit her more often when she was younger, he says that New 
Zealand is a long way off.  Her response to that:  "That's a lame 
excuse, Dad."  And, of course, it is.
     While Thomas is busy with his work, Amy plays mother to 16 goose 
eggs that she finds abandoned in their nest.  After constructing a 
makeshift incubator, Amy awaits the big moment.  One day, when she comes 
home from school, a brood of newly-hatched birds are waiting to greet 
her.  The story then shifts to the question of how Amy, recognized by 
the geese as their mother, can teach them certain basic necessities of 
survival -- namely, how to fly and migrate.  Thomas comes up with the 
answer:  instruct Amy to pilot an ultra-light plane, then accompany her 
in his own craft on a 600-mile, 4-day aerial flight to North Carolina, 
with the geese tagging along behind.
     As a family film, FLY AWAY HOME has something for members of every 
temperament and age group:  adventure, pathos, technical detail about 
the design of the aircraft, cute animals, and human drama.  On the other 
hand, FLY AWAY HOME could be accused of attempting too much, and, as a 
result, shortchanging its best dramatic material (Amy and her father's 
developing relationship).  There's a subplot involving attempts to clip 
the birds' wings, a look at how the media covers Amy's flight, and a 
sequence where Amy and Thomas' crafts are mistaken for UFOs by the U.S. 
military.  There's also a pro-conservation message that, while laudable 
in intent, comes across as simplistic and heavy-handed (land developers 
= bad; geese = good).
     For the first time in her short career, Oscar-winner Anna Paquin 
gets a shot at playing a relatively-normal, contemporary teenager.  
However, while her tendency towards histrionics has been an asset for 
the period pieces she has appeared in (THE PIANO, JANE EYRE), there are 
times when it is jarring in a movie like FLY AWAY HOME.  When she's 
quiet and reflective, Paquin is excellent; but there are too many 
instances when she goes overboard.  Playing opposite her are two subdued 
performers:  Jeff Daniels, who makes a sympathetic (although not 
dynamic) Dad, and Dana Delany as his girlfriend.  While Daniels has 
something to do, Delany is pretty much relegated to the background, 
although, in the wake of EXIT TO EDEN and LIVE NUDE GIRLS, it's a little 
odd to see her in such a "tame" role.
     Director Carroll Ballard, who brought 1979's THE BLACK STALLION to 
the screen, has long since proven his ability to produce solid family 
fare.  This time around, he has used the true-life experiences of 
scientist Bill Lishman as his inspiration.  Lishman's life's work has 
been devoted to saving endangered species of birds, and the migration 
experiment shown in the film is drawn from trips that actually happened.  
Ballard uses this as the backdrop for a warm drama that's more about 
love and trust between a father and daughter than inter-species 
connections.  The result, even for geese-haters, is charming.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Fantasies that the whole family can enjoy are few and far between.
Studios executives generally look for kids' shows with minimum
intelligence and maximum slapstick humor.  The result is that these
films are either major silly in an attempt to play down to the little
tykes or they are full of gross bathroom humor thinking that is the
only type that will keep the attention of the teens and subteens.  FLY
AWAY HOME proves them wrong.  It is a delight for all ages, and miracle
of miracles, it does this without any crude jokes or anything
offensive.
     The story opens in New Zealand where a car crash leaves 14 year
old Amy Alden (Anna Paquin) without a mother.  She goes to live in
Ontario, Canada with her Dad, Thomas (Jeff Daniels).  He is an inventor
and sculptor whose chief passion is building and flying ultralight
planes and gliders.  Amy has not seen him in ages.  He rationalizes
that New Zealand is far away, to which she grumbles, "That's a lame
excuse."  So far the show is nothing more than your formulaic
despondent adolescent flick.
     The fantasy kicks in when loggers come and cut down the trees
nearby where Canadian geese are nesting.  Amy finds about 15 eggs left
by the scared mother geese.  She takes them to her room and creates an
incubator out of nothing more than a blanket, a chest, and a portable
light.  One of the attractions of the show for parents is it provides
good role models for their children.  Amy is inventive, dedicated, and
compassionate.  In a perfect metaphor, Amy comes out of her shell when
the cute little geese come out of theirs, and she discovers that her
dad is a great resource and her biggest supporter.
     Jeff Daniels is one of my favorite lessor known actors.  From his
recent 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY to his best performance ever in GETTYSBURG,
he adds something special to the roles he plays.  Here his relentless
approach is both exhausting and inspiring to watch.
     Anna Paquin (THE PIANO and JANE EYRE), who is a dead ringer for a
Welsh girl named Lizzie that Jeffrey met on vacation this summer in
Denmark, is charm personified.  Her every motion is graceful, and when
she is one with the geese, it becomes hard not to cry for reasons
having to do with nothing more than the love of life that she radiates.
     Also visiting and sometime living in Tom's house is his girlfriend
Susan Barnes (Dana Delany) and his sort of daffy brother David (Terry
Kinney).  On meeting Amy, David greets her with, "You must be Amy.  I
gave you Silly Putty once for Christmas.  You ate it."
     Besides the fantasy aspect there are two compelling reasons to see
the show.  One is the inventiveness previously mentioned, but the most
enchanting is the rapport between Amy and her geese.  She becomes their
mother, and a better mother or more loyal children could not be
imagined.
     The tension in the story is that the geese must migrate in two
months or they will die, and without adult geese to show them the way,
they will not know how to get there or ever get back.  Soon a plan is
hatched whereby they built an ultralight plane that can fly at the slow
speed of the geese and can direct them to a preserve in North Carolina.
Amy ends up flying the plane.  The show then is about the geese growing
up while Amy prepares for and then flies the big flight.
     You will soon lose count of the many precious scenes in the
picture, but let me cover a few lovely ones that brought me joy and
mirth.  When they are young, Amy has the geese on a cloth on the
kitchen table where they demonstrate their lack of litter box training.
Tom shakes his head about what he has gotten himself into.
     The scenes of the geese waddling behind Amy had the entire
audience smiling and was mentioned as a favorite by the kids that
accompanied us to the picture.  The most breathtaking scene and the one
most likely to engender tears was the sheer majesty of the scene where
Amy's minions follow her on her first big flight.
     The cinematography by Caleb Deschanel (THE NATURAL, THE RIGHT
STUFF, and THE BLACK STALLION) is the key underpinning to the film's
success.  He has a genius for knowing just how to form a visual.  When
filming the egg breaking he alternates between sharp close-up work on
the eggs to a wide-angle look at Amy's face as it glows in awe of the
new, little life forms.  In FLY AWAY HOME he uses a lot of shadow work
to accentuate the warm browns and earth tones of his color palette.
His aerial shots are certainly the most spectacular.  That crazy little
plane with the geese flying behind filmed against the clouds and the
sunset is a marvelous sight to behold.
     The villain is provided effectively by the local wildlife agent.
Since the geese are the "property of the crown," he tries to clip their
wings.  In this show, his fingernail clippers were as effective as the
weapon in THE TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE.  Amy steps in and saves her
geese, but the villain will return.
     Taken as a fantasy, the film makes perfect sense.  Don't ruin it
for yourself by over analyzing it.  When they finish the plane that
will make the journey, Uncle Dave says, "With this baby you could fly
over the Empire State Building."  Less confident Tom concludes, "or end
up as a big pound of ground round.  One of the two."  This was my son's
favorite line.  Only Susan is concerned with reality so she warns Tom,
"Broken promises are the worst.  Better not to promise anything."
     Director Carroll Ballard (THE BLACK STALLION and NEVER CRY WOLF)
has an imaginative and deft touch.  Why Ballard has only made five
films in seventeen years is a mystery to me.  The fine script was
written by Robert Rodat and Vince McKewin, and is based on the
autobiography by Bill Lishman.
     I do have two quibbles with the movie.  First, why do we have the
scene where the Uncle gives Amy a nose ring which she then wears for
the rest of the picture.  This would get her kicked out of school in
most school districts, and she is the only person in the film with such
body jewelry.  If this was a film about generation Xers, I would
understand, but this little fourteen year old is the epitome of
sweetness and innocence.  The nose ring is just out of character.
     Second, why did we need the cliched subplot where the
environmentalists are shown confronting evil capitalists, or is that an
oxymoron in movies, who are raping nature.  Rather than just have her
racing to get the geese to the preserve before winter, we have her
getting there before a developer bulldozes down the land to build
houses.  We have a guy putting his body in front of the bulldozer while
waiting for Amy's plane to arrive.  Kids' movies uniformly show
environment issues as totally one sided.  That these kids live in
houses made of lumber, drive cars powered by gasoline, and generally do
lots of things where environmental tradeoffs are made every day is
never discussed.  Just mention the word environment and you have
trumped any possible argument.
     FLY AWAY HOME runs 1:47.  It is rated PG for three mild cuss words
and a very subtlety handled car crash.  There is no sex, nudity, or
violence.  The film would be fine for kids of absolutely any age, but
should delight adults as well.  We took Jeffrey (age 7) and his
neighborhood friends Jessica (age 7) and George (age 5) to see the
picture.  They all loved it with Jeffrey giving it six thumbs up.
Never were they scared, and they were entranced with it from beginning
to end.  I loved the show and think you will too so I recommend it and
give it ***.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 22, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     Anna Paquin's first starring role after stealing an Oscar for THE
PIANO is the harmless family movie FLY AWAY HOME.  Following in the
footsteps of countless family movies before it, FLY AWAY HOME tries too
hard to appeal to both children and their parents and ultimately loses
much of its appeal to everybody.
     In case you missed the movie's trailer, which provides a nice plot
synopsis, FLY AWAY HOME is about a teenage girl (Paquin) from New
Zealand who moves in with her Canadian father (Jeff Daniels) after her
mother dies.  The young girl is utterly bored and lonely until she finds
a family of young goose eggs (eventually geese) to take care of.  After
she becomes the geese's mother, she finds happiness, and the whole
family bands together to figure out how to take care of the geese.  This
ultimately leads to the decision to have young Anna fly the geese down
south for the winter.
     The first problem with this film comes in trying to understand why
Anna's mother packed her up and moved to New Zealand of all places.  The
answer is of course that the studio execs wanted Anna in this picture,
and everyone knows Anna Paquin is from New Zealand.  Hence, the rewrite.
     The second problem comes with trying to understand how important
the death of Anna's mother actually is.  Presumably since the filmmakers
show us the whole car crash in the first scene, the mother's death is
important, but after this scene she is not really discussed again for
the next hour.  Because of this, Anna's moping and whining for the first
half of the film seems to have little motivation and Anna's character
comes off as basically obnoxious.  This is just about the kiss of death
for a family movie, when the child star begins to become unlikable.
     The rest of the characters, however, fit very well into the
stereotypes they are trying to fill (and because they do, they help
Anna's character fit into hers):  Jeff Daniels plays the caring father
trying to get through to his depressed child, Dana Delany is the
terribly nice father's girlfriend who has an even harder time trying to
make friends with Anna, and supporting characters fill out the various
other good guy and bad guy roles.  The character arches also fit nicely
into the stereotypical family movie fare.  Those being that as the story
goes on, the bad guys get worse, forcing Anna to turn to the good guys
for help, where she finds it.  Of course, the story's development is not
quite this simple, but it might as well be.
     As I mentioned at the outset, FLY AWAY HOME is a family movie. 
This being the case, the filmmakers have thrown in plenty of cute things
(baby geese) and silly things (Anna making funny faces) to keep the kids
occupied.  What hurts it though is that they have also tried to build
rounded characters and a complex plot.  In trying so hard to do both
however, they have accomplished neither.  The film jumps continuously
from cute scene to mature scene resulting in 1) an emotional film that
never quite lives up to its potential and 2) a lot of distracted
children.  FLY AWAY HOME is an on-and-off movie founded on the
philosophy that it is better to please all of the people some of the
time, which doesn't really work with children.
-Bradley Null is a filmmaker, guest critic, and brother of Christopher
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Scott Renshaw
     You will not find many family films which radiate the fundamental
warmth and decency that FLY AWAY HOME does, and somehow that makes it more
disappointing that it is not a better film.  It is a story with an
agreeably casual demeanor, positive messages to spare, and virtually
nothing which could give offense (except for a pair of gratuitous
profanities included in a calculated effort to avoid a "G" rating).  Yet
FLY AWAY HOME rarely manages to make the leap from agreeable to genuinely
involving.  In an era where most films seem to be striving to deafen you,
FLY AWAY HOME is a film so soft-spoken it may cause a run on the theater's
assisted listening devices.
     Based on a true story, FLY AWAY HOME tells of 13-year-old Amy Alden
(Anna Paquin), a child of divorce who returns to live in Ontario with her
father Tom (Jeff Daniels) after the death of her mother.  The two have
trouble re-connecting after a decade apart, leaving Amy rather lonely.
She finds unexpected companionship after she discovers a goose nest
orphaned after a tractor plows through, and she cares for the eggs until
they hatch.  The result is a dozen goslings who imprint on Amy, believing
her to be their mother.  The problem is that the geese will need someone
to teach them their southward migration route, leading artist and inventor
Tom to consider a unique solution:  teach Amy to fly an ultra-light
aircraft so that she can guide her geese to their winter home in North
Carolina.
     I don't think that anyone will argue that the first half of FLY AWAY
HOME is not simply lovely.  Director Carroll Ballard (THE BLACK STALLION)
inspires confidence in where he is likely to take us with a a credit
sequence in which the car accident which claims the life of Amy's mother
(after this film and BOGUS in consecutive weeks, will any child be willing
to let his mother drive again?) is given a mournful weight.  The sparkling
cinematography, by the gifted Caleb Deschanel, and Mark Isham's
multi-faceted score contribute to the charming scenes of Amy bonding with
her flock, and clever low-angle shots make them more comical.
     As sweet and unassuming as those scenes are, it soon becomes clear
that there isn't much going on beneath the surface of FLY AWAY HOME.  On
the one hand, it is refreshing that we are not beaten over the head with
the metaphorical significance of Amy's attachment to her avian orphans, or
with weepy professions of father-daughter love after the obligatory period
of estrangement.  On the other hand, Robert Rodat and Vince McKewen don't
give their characters enough substance, and the nominal family drama of
FLY AWAY home is muted by the absence of enough early scenes showing us
Amy's difficulty adjusting to her new circumstances.  Amy tells us that
school was terrible, but we don't see her experiencing any troubles; Tom
pays little attention to her, but we don't see how that affects her.  Jeff
Daniels, Dana Delany (as Tom's girlfriend) and Terry Kinney (as Tom's
brother) all do perfectly nice work, but the characters lack spark, and
the story lacks the drama to accommodate their one-dimensional benevolence.
It is almost as though Anna Paquin, still possessing the spooky detachment
of THE PIANO even with the nose ring she sports in the film's second half,
infects the entire production with her preternatural serenity.
     The first half of the film does include a nominal villain, a fish and
game warden (Jeremy Ratchford) who is made into a nastier character than
he needed to be when he threatens the geese with pinioning; the second
half tries to make up for the lack of conflict by including a handful of
potential heavies, including sport hunters, real estate developers, and
even the U. S. military.  There are some fanciful moments during that
flight, including Amy's late-night surprise at a military airfield, but
other episodes serve little purpose, and the film drags a bit as it
approaches its conclusion.  None of this is likely to matter tremendously
to young viewers, who will enjoy the adorable geese, and their parents,
who will welcome the fundamental warmth and decency which they haven't
seen nearly enough of.  I just couldn't help wishing that FLY AWAY HOME,
although it was based on a true story, had been pitched a bit less like a
matter-of-fact documentary and allowed the conflict between Amy and Tom to
matter a bit more.  On the one occasion where Amy actually raises her
voice, it is quite startling.  Perhaps a few more voices could have been
raised.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FLY AWAY HOME ***  Directed by Carroll Ballard. Written 
by Robert Rodat and Vince McKewin, based on the 
autobiography of Bill Lishman.  Photography, Caleb 
Deschanel. Editing, Nicholas C. Smith. Productiondesign, 
Seamus Flannery. Producers, John Veitch and Carol Baum. 
Music, Mark Isham. Cast: Jeff  Daniels (Thomas Alden), Anna 
Paquin (Amy Alden), Dana Delaney (Susan Barnes), Terry 
Kinney (David Alden) et al.  A Columbia release. 110 
minutes. Rated PG. 
Technically and pictorially, "Fly Away Home" (by Carroll 
Ballard of "The Black Stallion" fame), is a small gem. In 
other aspects, some questions come up. 1) Will a bushy 
beard make likable lightweight Jeff Daniels more of a 
pronounced character? 2)Will Anna Paquin make the 
transition from Oscar-winner ("The Piano") child 
performer to teen-age star? 3) Does the movie move 
you? 4) Is it entirely believable? 5) Is this overall a good 
film? 
The answers: 1) just a little; 2) perhaps; 3) now yes, now 
no; 4) not really; 5) yes.  
When her mother dies in a car crash in New Zealand, 
13-year old Amy is taken back to her native Canada by 
her long estranged (and idiosyncratic) father. She has 
trouble adjusting until she finds a raison d'etre by 
becoming Mother Goose to several orphan goslings. Dad, a 
hand-glider devotee among other things, helped by 
friends succeeds in building two motorized ultra-light 
craft. Rescuing the now grown-up geese from the Law, 
father and daughter fly south to winter quarters in North 
Carolina, each one his/her machine, followed by the now 
migrating birds.  
This is no tall tale. In 1988, Mr.William Lishman 
successfully led a flock of geese in like fashion. In 1993, 
with a team, he guided 18 geese some 400 miles from 
Ontario to Virginia, and in 1994, 38 birds over 800 miles, 
from Ontario to South Carolina. These and other 
experiments have been of major importance to 
threatened or endangered migrating species.
The film takes on even greater Mother Goose-ey fairy 
tale dimensions as it invents the character of Amy, with, 
however, elements from real life. Anna Paquin was born in 
Canada, her father was Canadian, her mother a New 
Zealander, and they were divorcing during the making of 
the film.
What personal traits William Lishman and Thomas Alden 
(Daniels) share, I cannot tell. Thomas is sketched out  as 
an eccentric, a sculptor, conservationist, flyer, inventor 
and a nut of sorts who lives in an "artistic" mess. Yet we 
still have no clear image of or feeling for him. 
Little Orphan Amy is a rather sullen, a resentful daughter 
who doesn't warm up to a father she hasn't seen since she 
was three. To a characterless score by Mark Isham, Amy 
goes to boring school. Life is dull until the birds and their 
causes predictably bond father and daughter. Predictably 
too, Dad has a sweet, understanding girlfriend who is 
anxious to make friends with reluctant Amy. 
A parallel sub-plot ties ecology and animal welfare. 
Technology and land development ("civilization") 
encroach as bulldozers tear up  Ontario's bucolic 
landscape. This factor figures later in the migration 
sequences.  
For its first thirty minutes the movie is one of mood, 
eccentricities and lovely nature, but lacks focus and is not 
particularly involving.  The turning point for me was 
esthetic, when at minute 32 Amy is briefly shown lying in 
a field in what looks like a beautiful imitation of the 
painting "Christina's world" by Andrew Wyeth. 
The tempo picks up with the nurturing of the eggs, the 
hatching, the goslings who (as is common) identify the 
first being they see (Amy) as their mother.  She walks, 
runs, twirls as she calls to them. They follow her faithfully. 
Amy and her birds become an irresistibly enchanting 
sight, many degrees above plain "cute," especially as few 
things in life are as soul-satifying as humans and animals 
connecting with one another.  
When an official quotes ordnance 9314, which requires the 
clipping of wings of such geese, father and daughter 
explode and unite in protest and opposition.  Esthetic and 
emotional levels rise considerably.
The project to lead the birds to migration takes over the 
story, with good rhythm, interesting experiments made 
with flying machines (you wonder where the money comes 
from), the training of people and birds, the actual trek by 
air. For many of us the sense of worry and danger will be 
heightened by the memory of Jessica Dubroff, the 7-year 
old pilot who, with her father, crashed to her death 
several months ago. No doubt this gave nightmares to the 
filmmakers.
But talk of uplift! When we enter prime National 
Geographic territory, the flight of the humans and the 
birds is a gorgeous, fascinating succession of patterns, 
colors, landscapes and skyscapes. The incidents are quite 
attaching, even when they lean more to movie-movie 
events than fact. Some outlandish, even absurd scenes -- 
like flying through the canyons of Baltimore -- can only 
have been computer-generated, but still, they are not 
blatantly heroic.  As the film escalates from feel-good to 
feel-great, it becomes a joy for old and young.
Performances are good, partly because the characters 
play in quiet fashion, miles away from bombastic. It is 
more like the mood produced by massed strings than by a 
marching band. I do deplore the diamond that is put in 
Amy's nose, a trendy desecration of Indian culture -- but 
then the birds and the bird people make up for this 
generously.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Young Amy Alden (Anna Paquin of THE PIANO) is the daughter of
separated parents, her mother living in New Zealand, her father (Jeff
Daniels) in Canada.  When her mother is killed in an automobile
accident, she must go to Canada and live with her father.  Now it is
clear to the audience that Thomas Alden is about as nifty a father as
anyone could have.  Non-conformist Dad creates fantasy sculptures and
builds and flies his own gliders.  But Amy refuses to forgive him for
separating from her mother.  The two absolutely cannot connect until
Amy needs her father's help.  She finds some goose eggs, ready to hatch
and broods them herself, inadvertently imprinting herself on the
goslings as their mother.  She then finds she has the responsibility to
raise them and teach them what geese need to know.  Her greatest
challenge is the dilemma of whether to have their wings clipped or to
teach them to migrate.  Finding the former unthinkable, she is left
with the seemingly impossible task of the latter.  It is her father's
idea to teach them how to migrate by actually leading them on a
migration with the use of a single-person aircraft he would build.
Even with so impossible a task, there are human impediments in their
way including a local official who insists that legally the young geese
have to have their wings clipped.  In some ways the plot of FLY AWAY
HOME has many of the same messages as APOLLO 13.  It teaches that faced
with a prodigious task you break it down into small pieces and solve
the problem a piece at a time.  And there is a fascination for the
audience in simply watching as the formidable list of obstacles is
whittled down one by one.
     Jeff Daniels adds another off-beat role to his collection,  this
one more charming than some of his other recent ones.  Anna Paquin
turns in a performance more like one would expect of a thirteen-year-
old than of an Oscar-winner.  Dana  Delaney is winning but does not
have enough to do as the father's girl friend (and by implication in
this family film, his lover).  Director Carroll Ballard previously
helmed the excellent NEVER CRY WOLF and the lyrical BLACK STALLION.
Like the latter film, this one starts very well but falls apart in the
final act when a race is thrown in to create synthetic tension.  In THE
BLACK STALLION, Ballard may have been constrained by the book on which
the film was based. However, FLY AWAY HOME had already taken large
liberties from the original story, part of the autobiography of Bill
Lishman, and one suspects that the final race against time was not in
Lishman's story.
     The photography is in the hands of Caleb Deschanel, who formerly
filmed THE BLACK STALLION for Ballard and more recently was Oscar-
nominated for THE RIGHT STUFF and THE NATURAL.  His photography of the
geese at all stages of their lives is flawless, though at times it
looks like the geese grow much too quickly, sometimes in a single day
of the plot.  Still, Deschanel's ability to capture the birds in flight
together with the small ultra-light airplanes is extraordinary.  Mark
Isham's score is generally undistinguished and usually just lays in the
background.  That is good because when the one song is sung it is
basically telling the audience just the same things they could see with
their own eyes if they have been paying attention.  Frankie Lane could
get away with that in the 50s, but it is a little out of place in the
90s. There is also something wrong with having Anna Paquin making a
plea for the protection of the natural world wearing two pendulous
earrings and a nose-ring.  There may be nothing wrong with the jewelry,
but it really is jarring to see it in this context.
     The film needed a final sequence better than a race against time
to preserve wetlands.  Also superfluous was the conflict with a local
game official and how it was resolved.  Telling this story simpler
would have been better and less might have been more.  Still, this is
one the adults will enjoy perhaps more than the children.  I give it a
high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
