Title
Review for Pokémon the First Movie: Mewtwo Strikes Back (1999)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Pokémon: The First Movie
English Screenplay by Norman J. Grossfeld, Michael Haigney and John
Touhey
with voice direction by Michael Haigney
Original screenplay by Takeshi Shudo
Based on characters created by Satoshi Tajiri
Directed by Kunihiko Yuyama
website: http://www.pokemonthemovie.com
The phenomenon that is Pokémon so outstrips early kidlet addictions such
as Power Rangers or Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles that you should be glad
that the American movie has been totally reedited and aimed at the
insistent low digit kidlet demographic target. Pokémon: The First Movie
is the final result of editing three Japanese vids into a single,
English dubbed movie. What was removed was described to me as a
slaughter sequence in which the Pocket Monster called Mewtwo,
scientifically cloned from the remnants of a long lost Pokémon, Mew,
goes on a bloody killing rampage that would make Kurosawa turn his eyes
away from the screen. Having problems with the concept that Pokémon are
subservient to their human masters puts this monster in such a funk
that, in the original film, it goes on a killing rampage that lasts
close to eight minutes. That's more reference to the Source Material
than I'm supposed to give you but, on the off chance that you come
across any of the bootlegged, subtitled versions of the original
Japanese versions, be very warned that the violence level in the
non-American released is far beyond what any adult would consider
acceptable for single digit kidlets.
That being said, in the American version, Mewtwo still questions his
Reason for Being, but only blows everybody up. No blood or anything that
would warp sensitive young minds. Just a Big Bang, unleashing upon the
Universe something that makes sense only to the properly initiated.
There's no explanation of what Pokémon are, why they are or where they
come from. Nothing about humans training them for battle or the unique
relationship between Ash Ketchum and his `friend' Pikachu. Either you
know what it is, or you sit with only the vaguest comprehension of what
is playing out on screen
Mewtwo's plan is to clone the existing Pokémon into super warriors who
have no inclination to be subservient to the Humans. Afterwards the new
Pokémon will destroy the old and Mewtwo will do his part by wiping out
humankind. The only thing in his way is the original, the very bestest
and mostest powerfulest Mew and a Pokémon battle unlike anything seen
before. The net result is that Mewtwo realizes that fighting is wrong.
He and the rest of the SuperPokémon fly off into the sky, but not before
wiping the memory of their existence out of the minds of the Pokémon and
trainers that witnessed the battle. Net result? The trainers and Pokémon
don't get to keep the knowledge that fighting is bad, and thus can go
off and have more Pokémon battles. Just as they did at the beginning of
the movie. Just as they''ve always done.
Does that strike anyone else as a screwed up message to send to the
kidlets?
The kidlets in the audience, especially the six year old sitting in his
uncle's lap, were happy as clams. They cheered and applauded and, for
the life of me, I can't tell you why. If you've had no exposure to
Pokémon, there's nothing here to widen your horizons. Two years from
now, there'll be something else to hold the next generation of kidlets
in its sway.
Preceding The First Movie is a short called Pikachu's Vacation. This has
something to do with how Pokémon behave when they're free of their human
masters. Beyond that, I was totally lost.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Brandon Herring 
Rated: G but contains mild animated violence. 
Voices...Veronica Taylor, Racheal Lillis, Eric Stuart, Iikue Ootani. 
Ok so your probably wondering why I gave this movie the rating I did. Well the
answer is because the movie was actually good. Even though you can tell it's
definitely made for kids, the message it gives in the end and it's charming
characters bring out the good side in the movie and cover up the bad. It's far
from being a great movie however kids will love it because it is Pokemon and
parents will like it because of the end and the important message it gives to
kids without being mean or complicated. 
Since there really isn't a strong plot I will try and explain it the best I
can. Ash is a Pokemon trainer trying to become one of the world's best. He
receives an invitation to go to a championship hosted by the world's best
Pokemon trainer. Ash of course being a trainer wants to immediately go and
compete. Well in the meantime a new Pokemon has been created from another
Pokemon. This Pokemon is Mewtwo, an evil psychic Pokemon which can read
people's mind and wants to take over the Earth. While Ash is on his way to the
Pokemon championship, Mewtwo causes a big storm so no one can pass through and
get there. Other trainers however take their Pokemon to get them there and
eventually do as does Ash. What Mewtwo's evil plans are to clone all the
Pokemon and make them fight each other. Ash has to try and stop him in a battle
in the end that will leave you heartbroken as well as feeling good with it's
important message of fighting. 
That's about all there is. Pokemon: The First Movie is not Disney, you can tell
that by first glance. The story is one that is light and fluffy with a heart
hidden below somewhere we can't see. From the plush animation and rich colors
to the kicking soundtrack with some great songs and noticeable voices. Pokemon
has become a big thing in the last couple of months: Trading Cars, Toys,
Clothes you name it Pokemon is on it. My little brother and sister are huge
Pokemon fans and do not miss any episode and if they do they are depressed
until the next episode comes on. 
You really can't meet a kid now who doesn't like Pokemon. It's the new trend
I'm sure other things have been big like this but when both theatres sell out
on the first day, it's a big bet Pokemon is going to be huge. I've also heard
that this was Japan's biggest grossing movie of all time. You can call it an
anime if you want, but I really do not think it deserves the name of an anime.
The movies only real big flaws come from spots that are so slow that it could
put one to sleep and that fact that it takes itself too seriously at times even
though the TV series doesn't. 
When you see Pokemon you wonder why this just couldn't be a direct-to-video
feature. I mean it is a low-brow kids movie with overviews of humor and
violence. But it has something there that makes it worth all the while and
trouble to see it. I wasn't surprised that all the kids came out of the movie
with a huge smile on their face saying over and over Pika Pika after the cute
and cuddly little Pokemon Pikachu. 
Overall Pokemon: The First Movie is a surprisingly sweet, funny and good
animated movie that the whole family can enjoy. With it's lovable character,
plush and colorful animation and humor all embedded in one Pokemon fans will
not be let down. Kids will definitely love it for the fact it's Pokemon and
it's big important message at the end will make parents proud and knowing that
even though a movie is all about fighting it can actually be against it too.
Doesn't make any sense? See the movie. 
Reviewed by Brandon Herring    November 10, 1999 
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Brandon Herring 
Pokemon: The First Movie (Mewtwo Strikes Back)
Rated: G but contains mild animated violence. 
Voices...Veronica Taylor, Racheal Lillis, Eric Stuart, Iikue Ootani. 
Ok so your probably wondering why I gave this movie the rating I did. Well the
answer is because the movie was actually good. Even though you can tell it's
definitely made for kids, the message it gives in the end and it's charming
characters bring out the good side in the movie and cover up the bad. It's far
from being a great movie however kids will love it because it is Pokemon and
parents will like it because of the end and the important message it gives to
kids without being mean or complicated. 
Since there really isn't a strong plot I will try and explain it the best I
can. Ash is a Pokemon trainer trying to become one of the world's best. He
receives an invitation to go to a championship hosted by the world's best
Pokemon trainer. Ash of course being a trainer wants to immediately go and
compete. Well in the meantime a new Pokemon has been created from another
Pokemon. This Pokemon is Mewtwo, an evil psychic Pokemon which can read
people's mind and wants to take over the Earth. While Ash is on his way to the
Pokemon championship, Mewtwo causes a big storm so no one can pass through and
get there. Other trainers however take their Pokemon to get them there and
eventually do as does Ash. What Mewtwo's evil plans are to clone all the
Pokemon and make them fight each other. Ash has to try and stop him in a battle
in the end that will leave you heartbroken as well as feeling good with it's
important message of fighting. 
That's about all there is. Pokemon: The First Movie is not Disney, you can tell
that by first glance. The story is one that is light and fluffy with a heart
hidden below somewhere we can't see. From the plush animation and rich colors
to the kicking soundtrack with some great songs and noticeable voices. Pokemon
has become a big thing in the last couple of months: Trading Cars, Toys,
Clothes you name it Pokemon is on it. My little brother and sister are huge
Pokemon fans and do not miss any episode and if they do they are depressed
until the next episode comes on. 
You really can't meet a kid now who doesn't like Pokemon. It's the new trend
I'm sure other things have been big like this but when both theatres sell out
on the first day, it's a big bet Pokemon is going to be huge. I've also heard
that this was Japan's biggest grossing movie of all time. You can call it an
anime if you want, but I really do not think it deserves the name of an anime.
The movies only real big flaws come from spots that are so slow that it could
put one to sleep and that fact that it takes itself too seriously at times even
though the TV series doesn't. 
When you see Pokemon you wonder why this just couldn't be a direct-to-video
feature. I mean it is a low-brow kids movie with overviews of humor and
violence. But it has something there that makes it worth all the while and
trouble to see it. I wasn't surprised that all the kids came out of the movie
with a huge smile on their face saying over and over Pika Pika after the cute
and cuddly little Pokemon Pikachu. 
Overall Pokemon: The First Movie is a surprisingly sweet, funny and good
animated movie that the whole family can enjoy. With it's lovable character,
plush and colorful animation and humor all embedded in one Pokemon fans will
not be let down. Kids will definitely love it for the fact it's Pokemon and
it's big important message at the end will make parents proud and knowing that
even though a movie is all about fighting it can actually be against it too.
Doesn't make any sense? See the movie. 
Reviewed by Brandon Herring    November 10, 1999 

Author
Michael Dequina
_Pokémon:_The_First_Movie--Mewtwo_Strikes_Back_ (G) * 1/2
with _Pikachu:_The_Movie--Pikachu's_Vacation_ (G) *
The question when it comes to
_Pokémon:_The_First_Movie--Mewtwo_Strikes_Back_, is not whether or not
it's any good (and, let it be known from the get-go, that it isn't).  The
question is just how much money it will make in what surely be a huge
opening weekend, for children across the country will undoubtedly make
their parents take them to this theatrical spinoff of the popular
animated TV series/trading card game.  The film could simply be a
_Pokémon_ screensaver projected onto the silver screen, and kids would
want to go anyway, regardless of any objections parents--or anyone
else--may have.
A _Pokémon_ screensaver is what the pre-feature short,
_Pikachu:_The_Movie--Pikachu's_Vacation_, sometimes resembles.  For the
uninitiated, Pokémon are "pocket monsters," little animals kept in "Poké
balls" and are pitted in battles against each other by their human
trainers.  The thin plot thread holding together the twenty minutes of
_Pikachu's_Vacation_ has the most popular Pokémon, the adorable
electrical-powered Pikachu, going to a retreat for Pokémon; the intent is
to study the creatures' behavior while in "a state of complete
relaxation."  Relaxation--to the point of drowsiness--is likely to be
felt by the adults in the audience during this "mini-movie," for nothing
of interest to anyone over 10 happens.  Pikachu and his fellow critters
get into all sorts of competitions and petty conflicts before working
together to get one out of a jam--literally: a Pokémon gets his head
stuck into a pipe, and the others collectively try to pull him out. 
Every so often, as a new Pokémon is trotted out, the screen fills with
its repeated image, not unlike a computer screensaver.  The only
difference is that I've seen screensavers that are better drawn and
animated, not to mention more entertaining to watch.
The jaunty tone takes a surprising turn to the dark side once
_Pikachu's_Vacation_ and _Mewtwo_Strikes_Back_ begins.  The main feature
opens with a scene that seems to be torn from a much more mature animé,
with Mewtwo (voiced by Philip Bartlett), the most intelligent and
powerful Pokémon, murderous rebelling against the scientists who created
him.  Even the narration is strangely pretentious; the first lines spoken
are, "What is the meaning of life?  That is the question that human and
Pokémon alike have pondered for years."
But before long, it's familar Pokémon battle time as we meet our heroes
Ash (Veronica Taylor), Misty (Rachel Lillis), and Brock (Eric Stuart);
and their nemeses, Jessie (Lillis) and James (Stuart), a.k.a. Team
Rocket.  Ash, trainer to Pikachu and others, is invited to take part in a
big Pokémon tournament taking place at a remote island.  Little does he
and his fellow invitees are walking into a trap set up by Mewtwo, who
plans on proving his superior intelligence and strength as well as that
of his troop of Pokémon super-clones.  Naturally, this is just the first
step of a world domination plot by Mewtwo, who hates Pokémon as much, if
not more, than humans, for they allow themselves to be "enslaved."
Obviously, the makers of _Pokémon:_The_First_Movie_ are striving for 
something weightier than the daily cartoon show.  It's an admirable
ambition, to graft on a message while they have the kiddies' unfettered
attention.  What is questionable, however, is the choice of message.  The
tournament on Mewtwo's island becomes one huge free-for-all between the
Pokémon and their super-clones, and the trainers look on in horror at the
violent display.  One character even says something to the effect of,
"It's OK for them to battle, but NOT LIKE THIS!"  Excuse me, but I fail
to see any real difference between this battle and the ones the trainers
routinely stage, except that in this case, everyone's going at it all at
once.  It goes without saying that everything resolves itself in the end,
but what do our heroes learn?  Nothing, apparently, for it's back to
individual Pokémon battles as usual.
If _Pokémon:_The_First_Movie--Mewtwo_Strikes_Back_ had simply been a big
screen version of the cartoon show, it would have been better than the
overreaching, hypocritical mess that it is; why bother with a message if
it goes against what the show is, and then not even follow through with
it?  Children obviously will miss the point, as best summed up by my
7-year-old nephew's reaction after the screening.  While he said he liked
the film, he complained, "There wasn't even a winner."  Of course, one
side lesson of the film is that winning doesn't matter, but you try
explaining that to every child who walks into the theatre expecting, as
the ads and commercials promise, "the Pokémon match of all time."
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Shane Burridge
A POKEMON PRIMER!  MYSTERIES REVEALED TO THE UNINITIATED!  AND SOMETHING 
ABOUT THE MOVIE!
I love the idea of middle-aged film critics who have paid their dues, worked 
their way up the ladder, and secured their credibility now finding 
themselves in child-packed audiences watching a cartoon derived from a 
phenomenon that they find incomprehensible, all the time aware that they 
have to write about it afterwards.  The dilemma: this is a product with a 
very specific target audience.  To review it from a purely adult perspective 
would be uncharitable.  To leave its verdict in the hands of the 
ten-year-olds it was pitched at would bring only the conclusions that "it 
sucked" or "it was cool", or perhaps a little of both, if the ten-year-old 
in question had any future vocation as a film critic.
I'm not a fan of POKEMON but I find it more interesting and enjoyable than 
most other cartoons that are around, although it's hard to tell what may 
have been 'improved' in translation (the English-language version is crammed 
with puns).  For a start, the episodes are not stand-alone entries, but 
follow a story arc that enables minor developments to enter the growing 
storyline unobtrusively (this is why I imagine many adults find any 
randomly-tuned episode mystifying: POKEMON the series makes no apologies for 
the fact that you need to have been watching from the beginning - but isn't 
this true of many adult television series' also?).  The characters, too, are 
a little more complicated thanwell, let's say COW AND CHICKEN, why not?  
The central character, Ash, is overconfident, mulish, and has an obsession 
with Pokemon (a portmanteau of 'pocket monsters') that is destined for a 
major dysfunction.  Ash's friend Brock, meanwhile, has a fetish with women 
in uniform that's downright embarrassing, leaving their female companion 
Misty to provide the sole voice of reason (their adversaries, a trio known 
as Team Rocket, are just as single-minded but far more entertaining).  One 
can uneasily draw comparisons to the boy hero of this series and the 
Pokemon-crazed viewers watching him: each show begins with the signature 
tune "gotta catch 'em all", as simple a philosophy as you'd ever need when 
you're ten years old, and most likely the main reason this show has become 
so popular.  Despite its complex narrative, the core purpose - to find 
Pokemon and train them - is what drives its appeal.  Forming a roster of 
creatures from the Nintendo game upon which the cartoon was based, POKEMON 
offers its followers the irresistible urge to *collect*, either vicariously 
through Ash's adventures or more practically for a few bucks at K-Mart.  The 
whole collecting bug doesn't just stop at the Pokemon themselves: once 
caught the creatures are then used as pawns in staged combat to aid Ash's 
further obsession to collect combat badges (this show has the moral stance 
of cockfighting) which in turn will allow him to enter a higher level of 
arena in the Pokemon League, and so on and so on.
It may be that the values of POKEMON's protagonist have tapped into the 
unconscious of a generation that compulsively watches the show and codifies 
its critters without really knowing why.  This at least is a more valid 
platform for criticism against the show than its supposed violence.  Unlike 
POWER RANGERS and NINJA TURTLES and other intense (though short-lived) 
television crazes, POKEMON does not promote rough play in the schoolyard.  
In fact, any kid wanting to emulate the combat routines of their favorite 
Pokemon is going to have their work cut out for them.  Most of these 
monsters are just plain dorky and their attacks, reminiscent of the D&D 
role-playing game, diverse to the point of absurdity.  Some sing to their 
opponents and then scribble on their faces when they're asleep; others kiss; 
create gusts of wind; cause headaches; throw leaves; blow bubbles.  When 
it's time for the real fighting to get underway it usually involves a group 
of Pokemon hurling lightning bolts, water cannons, and flamethrowers at each 
other.  It sounds lethal, and it probably is - but Pokemon don't fight to 
the death.  At least not intentionally.  At least not in any scenario we'll 
ever get to see.
But now from the small screen to the big one, and where does this leave the 
movie?  It's the same, but a little different.  The candy colors of the TV 
show have gone, overwhelmed by shadows and voids.  The tone is less 
frivolous, so gone too are the opportunities for the often hilarious 
combination of Team Rocket to play out their hapless schemes.  As villains, 
they are outclassed by the newest and most powerful addition to the Pokemon 
catalogue, a genetically-created creature called Mewtwo.  Unlike its kin, 
Mewtwo is a figure of evil, more of the Manga mold than Pokemon, and the 
film is slanted accordingly.  It's an interesting move of the film-makers 
because it positions POKEMON: THE FIRST MOVIE as a 'safe' introduction to a 
more adult form of Japanese animation, as if they are aware that their 
audience is growing older and that they must grow with it.  Such themes 
synchronize with another significant element of the show, which in itself 
grew from simple beginnings like computer games and playing cards: Pokemon 
evolve from cuddly pets to more fearsome (but still tame) variations.  This 
is usually accomplished unexpectedly in the heat of battle and takes but a 
few moments, as if a hormonal rush has given them the growth spurt to end 
all spurts.  You can get as psychoanalytical about this as you want, but 
bear in mind that Ash's most precious creature, Pikachu, is unlikely to ever 
evolve into its mature counterpart.  As strongly connected as they are to 
each other, Pikachu and Ash will always be children, never 'evolving' or 
growing out of their play-fight universe.  It's about time they were shown a 
darker side of their world this time around, even if it has to bear forth 
the clumsy revelation that "Fighting Is Wrong!".
POKEMON isn't great, but it isn't bad either.  Regular viewers will 
appreciate the in-jokes (e.g. "Who's that Pokemon?") and first-timers 
shouldn't have any problem keeping up with the story.  The animation is 
serviceable, although not as eccentric as in the television series, and 
there are a couple of exciting action sequences involving a storm at sea and 
a panicky chase in a laboratory.  There's also the rare appearance of Mew, 
the much sought-after Pokemon that was circulated among a small percentage 
of the Nintendo games - I have a feeling that this movie will definitely 
boost his popularity.  Curious and playful, this powerful kitty will 
probably give even Pikachu a run for his money as the cartoon's unofficial 
mascot.  After all, he is colored a newborn pink, emerges from an embryonic 
bubble in the ocean, and is even less likely in danger of ever growing up.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Honesty is always the best policy, so let me start with a confession.
When it comes to Pokémon, I just don't get it.  My fifth grade son and
his friends of both sexes love it.  The teenaged girl who sat next to me
at our screening of POKÉMON THE FIRST MOVIE: MEWTWO STRIKES BACK acted
like the teens did with the Beatles when I was young.  She laughed and
oohed and aahed like she was at a live concert of a superstar rock
group.
So what is the fascination?  This fad is much larger than previous ones
like the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles and the Power Rangers.  What is it
that draws kids to the Pokémon series like flies to honey?
In an age of amazing graphics from TOY STORY to THE PRINCE OF EGYPT to
STAR WARS, why would kids be so mesmerized by flat two-dimensional
images that barely move?  Could it be that the story is so simple that
it doesn't tax their minds, leaving them to be put into a trance by the
repetitive images?  (For the record, I'm not against Japanese anime.
PRINCESS MONONOKE will appear high on my best of the year list this
year.)
Before the feature film, Warner Brothers is showing a twenty-minute
short, PIKACHU'S VACATION.  The purpose of a warm-up act is to get the
audience energized and ready for the main feature.  If that was their
purpose this time, they failed miserably, as this short was probably the
worst film that I've seen this year.  Like a cartoon for kids too young
for Teletubbies, there was no discernable plot.  The characters floated
by in relatively random fashion with the effect being that of a
cinematic aquarium.  Even the Pokémon aficionados with me found this one
terminally stupid.  It will probably produce a sleep-inducing effect on
most adults, if it doesn't  produce a gagging one.  After this, anything
had to be better.
In the movie itself, the rare Pokémon named Mew is cloned into Mewtwo --
"a real Pokénstein."  An evil scientist helps Mewtwo become invincible.
Mewtwo then plans on purging the planet of humans and Pokémon alike.
Ash Ketchum (Veronica Taylor), the series hero, tries without much luck
to send his Pokémon to battle Mewtwo.  It gets even trickier when more
Pokémon are cloned into powerful, evil helpers of Mewtwo.
At the end, a little message is thrown in as a way to suggest the movie
has some larger purpose.  "The circumstances of one's birth aren't
relevant," a repentant Mewtwo decides.  "It is what you do with your
life that determines who you are."
Now for the bad news.  "For Ash and his friends," the narrator tells us
in the conclusion, "the journey has just begun."  Yes, more Pokémon
movies are on the way.
I'm going to make a recommendation that I've never made before.  If your
son or daughter wants to see the movie, try to see if they can go with a
neighbor or a relative.  You may not want to deny your children the
pleasure of seeing it, but there's no reason whatsoever that you can't
try to spare yourself from the ordeal.
POKÉMON THE FIRST MOVIE: MEWTWO STRIKES BACK runs 1:09.  It is rated G
and would be acceptable for all ages.
All of the kids with me complained about how bad the twenty minute short
was.  The movie was another story entirely with all of them liking it,
especially the graphics.  My son Jeffrey, age 10, gave the movie ***
1/2, saying the movie was cool.  His friend John, age 11, gave it ***
1/2, liking particularly the story and the action.  His twin Steven gave
the picture *** but complained that the sounds didn't seem right somehow
and made him feel stressed.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Mac VerStandig
A copy of this review can be found at =
http://www.moviereviews.org/pokemon_the_first_movie.htm
There are only two explanations for why anyone would make Pokemon: The 
First Movie: alien abduction or drugs.
Children were running around, waiting to get in hours before the movie 
started; one parent openly contemplated "How are we going to keep track 
of our kids?" Then the film began and near-deafening levels of applause 
were heard at the very sight of the opening credits. From there it was 
all downhill. Before long, people were walking out and cries of "I want 
to go home" replaced the children's glee. To say that the movie was a 
bomb would not do it justice. The movie was more like a bomb that is 
accidentally dropped at the wrong time over a country's closest ally, 
who just happens to have a massive nuclear arsenal and short temper.
The movie actually begins with a short film meant to introduce the 
audience to the world of Pokemon; a place filled with fictional 
characters, strange powers and human masters. Unfortunately, the film 
appeared to be little more than a fairy tale gone horribly astray. The 
characters' language was absolutely undecipherable and sheer pandemonium 
dominated the moment. The morals displayed for the film's young audience 
were despicable, including scenes where all the characters would point, 
stare and laugh at some poor creature who had fallen down. Worst of all, 
the piece doesn't accomplish its goal. Not only is the audience no 
closer to understanding the world of Pokemon, but the all-important 
first impression sets a negative tone that is constant throughout the 
feature film.
The nadir of all kids' movies this decade has a plot that makes that of 
Mission: Impossible seem self-explanatory. From the little that can be 
gathered, the Pokemon universe is in grave danger. Mew, an extinct 
Pokemon, has been cloned by an evil human and the result is Mewtwo, a 
Pokemon that is absolutely evil and more powerful than any other. The 
creature comes with the standard villain-sized ego, boasting "Behold my 
powers! I am the strongest Pokemon in the world." This creation then 
takes on all other Pokemon in a battle that is haplessly drawn out 
over much of the film's duration.
The production does use some techniques displayed in older, and more 
successful, movies. Gloomy colors and equally dark music act as constant 
tip-offs that evil is approaching. Some sewer scenes wreak of borrowed 
elements from the old Ninja-Turtles television series. A little palm 
communicator appears to be more like something Q would use in a 007 film 
than these annoying little creatures have a right to play around with. 
And the memorable moment in Star Wars, that was tastefully recycled in 
Men in Black, of a bunch of strange looking creatures hanging around 
nonchalantly (Star Wars was in a bar, Men in Black in headquarters), is 
not so tastefully exhibited here.
At the end of the film, Mewtwo suggests to all the other Pokemon 
"Perhaps for you, these events are best forgotten." So be it.
---EDITORIAL CRITICISM OF THE MPAA---
The Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) rated Pokemon: The 
First Movie "G." That is the lowest possible rating and means that the 
film may be seen by anyone and everyone.
Pokemon: The First Movie displays considerable amounts of violence. 
The entire plot is dependant on hand-to-hand style combat. Although 
there is a moral solution to this fighting at film's end, it is too 
little and too late. It must also be pointed out that the numerous 
people who will walk out mid-movie will never receive this anti-violence 
message anyway.
Another film opening this weekend, The Insider, was rated "R". That 
means that anyone under 17 who wishes to see the film must do so with a 
parent or guardian. The Insider is a true story that people read about 
in unrated newspapers a few years ago. The only remotely questionable 
aspect of the movie is foul language.
I guess what the MPAA and its president, Jack Valenti, are trying to say 
is that fighting in a deranged and far-fetched film is okay for everyone 
to see but a real life story with real life language should only be seen 
by adults.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
I'll be the first to admit that I know precious little about the whole
Pokémon phenomenon that has captured the attention of our nation's
littlest ADD sufferers.  I know the translation of Pokémon is `pocket
monsters,' which sounds like something you would hear in a seventh grade
boys locker room, or possibly as a feature at your local porno theater.
I know that the television show gave a bunch of Japanese kids seizures.
And I know that I was secretly thrilled when it debuted here, just
because I thought the seizures might lead to a `thinning of the herd.'
You know, a good way to test that whole survival-of-the-fittest thing.
Now that I've seen ninety-five minutes of Pokémon, I know a few more
things.  I know that they resemble a chew toy that you would buy for a
dog  if you really hated your dog.  I know that the most popular
Pokémon is Pikachu, a yellow thing that looks a bit like Ernie's rubber
ducky.  I know that Pokémon are kept in Pokéballs until they are
instructed by their masters to come out and fight another master's
Pokémon.  And I know that once, in a billiard hall, I experienced
something very similar to Pokéballs, when I walked into a horizontal
pool cue.
The theatrical version of Pokémon begins with a twenty-minute short
called Pikachu's Vacation.  In the short we meet several of the chew
toys as they take a trip to what appears to be a Pokémon theme park.
Pikachu is responsible for a baby Egg Pokémon while he holidays with his
friends the Turtle Pokémon and the Duck Pokémon.  At the end, prepare to
be amazed when the Lonely Pokémon, who ordinarily only cares for itself,
helps to rescue the trapped Dragon Pokémon.  The short is mostly
composed of these horrible bumpers that are supposed to serve as
transitions between the scenes.  There's nowhere to go but up once the
feature starts.
In the feature, which is called Mewtwo Strikes Back, scientists have
replicated a Pokémon named Mew, which was apparently the Babe Ruth of
Pokémon.  The clone, called Mewtwo, is upset that it is an experiment
and goes Carrie on its creators.  Mew also hates all Pokémon masters
because it sees the relationship between them and the Pokémon as more
owner/slave, thinking that the humans and the chew toys should not and
could not be friends.
Mewtwo falsely leads the world's best Pokémon masters to a Pokemon
convention at Pokemon Center, inviting the protagonist, a young Pokémon
master named Ash.  He's the kid who owns Pikachu and his little chew toy
friends.  There is a big battle and everything works out.  Then I went
home.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Warner Bros on April 14, 2000; certificate PG; 69 
minutes; country of origin Japan; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Kunihiko Yuyama; produced by Norman J. Grossfeld, Tomoyugi 
Igarashi, Takemoto Yori, Choji Yoshikawa.
Written by Takeshi Shudo.
Photographed by Hisao Shirai; edited by Toshio Henmi.
CAST.....
Voice of Veronica Taylor..... Ash Ketchum
Voice of Rachael Lillis..... Misty Williams/Jessie of Team Rocket/Minor voices
Voice of Eric Stuart..... Brock Harrison/James Morgan of Team Rocket/Minor 
voices
Voice of Ikue Otani..... Pikachu
Voice of Philip Bartlett..... Mewtwo
Voice of Addie Blaustein..... Meowth of Team Rocket
Voice of Ted Lewis..... Giovanni
Pokémon are cartoon warrior pets that are stored in magical tennis balls and 
carried around by human masters. The characters began life in a Nintendo 
video game and then inspired an immensely popular card activity that is 
essentially a dressed-up version of Trump Cards. There's also a comic book 
and television show. It's a weird and soulless phenomenon, exclusively for 
people under the age of twelve, who seem less interested in the merchandise 
itself than its escalating monetary value.
The TV programme is the most detestable of these spin-offs; the Japanese 
style of animation makes the Pokémon look like mouldings of gelatinous goop, 
and the dialogue and voices are a reminder of such crude productions as 
"Speed Racer" and "Lost in Space". It was therefore with great reservations 
that I entered "Pokémon: The First Movie - Mewtwo Stikes Back". My mood was 
worsened by the preceding 20-minute short film, which played like a bad acid 
trip.
In the story, a genetically modified Pokémon named Mewtwo plans to lure the 
greatest living Pokémon to his island for a fight tournament, and then kill 
them and create improved clones. He's ever so subtle in revealing his plans: 
"I shall destroy you for consorting with humans, and then take over the world 
with a band of super-Pokémon!"
Most of the running time is taken up by long Pokémon battles. We also get so  
many meditations on the greatness of the Pokémon way that you'd think it was 
a real religion. The movie is an overlong advertisement; logos and brand 
names are all over the place, and the only function of the human characters 
is to collect more Pokémon. "The Simpsons" couldn't satirise this, because 
it's far too over the top already.
If we ignore how dangerous this kind of materialist brainwashing is for our 
children, we can possibly enjoy "Pokémon: The First Movie" as good cheesy 
fun. It's hard not to admire the courage of a film that actually has lines 
like "Now I realise we weren't put on this earth to fight each other!" and "I 
guess we've all learned an important lesson!" The voice-over narration seems 
to have come straight out of an infommercial. The Pokémon owners all speak 
with tones more phoney than those of the humans in the "Teenage Mutant Hero 
Turtles" cartoons. And one little Pokémon, a squeaky little thing called 
Pikachu, is actually rather cute in some tacky kind of way. He made me want 
to go home and cuddle my dog.
I'm not recommending "Pokémon: The First Movie" because I'm not sure how much 
of its so-bad-it's-good appeal is intentional, and besides, much of it is 
boring and repetitive. This is not a wonderful guilty pleasure in the 
tradition of "Mortal Kombat", although at times it does come close. Possibly 
my judgement has been coloured by my initial determination to hate the film, 
but I don't think so; I can admit that it's distinctive and lively, and will 
probably be eaten up by Pokémon fans. Right after they take their medication.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Pokemon is more of a worldwide phenomenon than a movie. Its
name is short for "pocket monsters." These creatures are stored in
spheres carried by human trainers who free them for friendly combat
whenever they're challenged by trainers of other Pokemon. The
merchandising madness began in 1996 as a Nintendo video game in Japan
and became an animated TV cartoon. There was a quick bout with infamy
when its editing techniques were said to prompt seizures in children
but that problem has been corrected. Pokemon next appeared in card
form, the collectable, swapable baseball variety, featuring more than
150 characters. Card trading so distracted children that many schools
have banned it; as a consequences, its popularity has soared. Pokemon:
The First Movie begins with a 22-minute short called "Pikachu's
Vacation." Then comes "Mew Strikes Back." Mew is a tiny, adorable
Pokemon but then comes Mew/Two, a bio-engineered mutation, who escapes
from the lab where he was created, bitterly vowing to take revenge on
the human scientists who enslaved him. He heads a super race of
Pokemons who have declared war against the original Pokemons and their
human friends. There's non-stop fighting until, finally, the human
hero, named Ash Ketchum, sacrifices himself to save Pikachu, his
chubby yellow Pokemon, a gesture that causes Mew/Two to re-think his
assertion that humans and Pokemons cannot exist in harmony. Written by
Takeshi Shudo, based on characters by Satoshi Tajiri, and directed by
Kunihiko Yuyama, Pokemon is contradictory in that it preaches the
futility of fighting while presenting non-stop violence. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Pokemon is a frenzied 5 - but kids
love it. Don't underestimate the tsunami of Pokemon Power.

Author
Ronald O. Christian
Capsule review:  Big build-up at the beginning to a big snore at the
end.   I give it a probably overly generous two stars, only because I
so recently suffered through Elmo in Grouchland to which Pokemon seems
like Shakespear in comparison.
Ok, so like every other kid under eleven, my daughter absolutely had
to see Pokemon The First Movie as soon as it came out.  And so, armed
with our popcorn and tooth-decaying drinks, we sit in the third row
and stare up at 20 foot high animated toys.  Heigh-ho.
The movie is divided up into two segments, a short called something
like "Pikachu's Vacation", and the main attraction Mewtwo Strikes
Back.
The less said about Pikachu's Vacation, the better.  Most of the
pokemon don't speak, you understand, except to say their own names
with various inflection.  I suppose this is so you can tell the
200-odd creatures apart.  I recognized maybe four of them, which shows
how woefully short I am on Pokemon lore.
A long dreary time later, the real movie starts.
The first ten minutes of Mewtwo Strikes Back, before the beginning
credits, are actually fairly engrossing.  The origin of Mewtwo is
interesting, the voice talents are very well done, and the animation
is first rate.
Then, after the credits, we degenerate into rather mundane tv-quality
animation and a very plodding plot.  The action picks up as the
Pokemon trainers attempt to get to an island arena through a heavy
storm, but things get uninteresting again soon after.  We learn that
the villain of the piece is Mewtwo (big surprise) and the plot slowly
builds up to the inevitable confrontation between Mewtwo and his
Pokemon against the Pokemon of the trainers.  Somewhere along the line
a Mew pokemon joins the good guys.
If you saw the commercials you know all of this.  The trailer of the
film covers the entire plot up to the square-off for the climactic
battle.  You sat through an hour of plodding, uneven plot and mediocre
animation to get to this point.  So what happens?  What's the final
pay-off?
What happens is that the film falls on it's flabby animated butt.  No
battle of any consequence occurs.  Instead, all the pokemon are
rendered powerless through Nonsensical Plot Device and must resort to
bitch-slapping each other until through exhaustion they can no longer
move their various appendages.  Then the trainers suddenly decide that
Fighting Is Bad and everyone kisses and makes up.  And the audience is
left with their mouths hanging open going "What the hell was that??"
There's not much else to say, except that I could not figure out the
purpose of Jesse and James of "Team Rocket".  Perhaps there is some
other Pokemon movie that explains their existence and motives.  They
didn't seem to serve any purpose or have any goals.  They just
stumbled about opening doors, sitting on things and getting
frightened.
Pokemon rates a very generous two stars for the very nice Origin of
Mewtwo sequence.  I'm tempted to subtract a star for that nonsensical
ending, but I hesitate only because of a nagging doubt that this was
the real, unedited ending as it came from Japan.  I have to wonder if
the flatness was specifically designed to appeal to what they imagine
that American children want to see.  If so, I'd be insulted.

Author
David Bezanson
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member David Bezanson.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/759a34e0a6186893882568a6006b9928?OpenDocument
 Just because something makes money doesn't mean that it is good.
 This is a hard lesson to learn, especially for Americans, but
fortunately there are always things like POKEMON: THE FIRST MOVIE to
remind us.
 No one at Nintendo thought to wonder if a video game could really
provide sufficient backstory to sustain an entire movie.  Nor has anyone
at Nintendo ever stopped to think about whether children might enjoy
childhood more if they didn't spend it mindlessly repeating nonsense
words like "pikachu" made up in spare moments by Nintendo employees.
Instead, Nintendo saw a chance to make billions of dollars, and moved
forward monolithically with their cynical hypermarketing.
The resulting Pokemon craze is the emptiest craze yet --- a fantasy
world of garbage, without plot, compelling mythology, or point.
 Before now, children's literature was dominated by writers like Dr.
Seuss, A. A. Milne, C.S. Lewis, Lloyd Alexander, Disney, etc., who took
seriously the responsibility of creating entertainment that might shape
the thinking of children.  No longer.  The content of POKEMON is
probably harmful to kids in a dozen ways, but to even try to find any
intellectual subtext in the movie at all is pretty iffy, so I will not
waste readers' time with a lot of analysis of how the movie fosters
violence, discourages environmental awareness, and so on.
 This is the most cynical movie ever made.  Even the movie's subtitle,
"MEWTWO STRIKES BACK", is cynically derivative --- the filmmakers secure
in the knowledge that the film's target audience doesn't care that there
is already a movie called THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK (which was itself an
amalgam of earlier works).
 There are no redeeming qualities of POKEMON... and only one serious
question: Should entertainment products be designed solely to please
children too young to understand what is entertaining? In previous
centuries, people thought not.  Is this progress?
 For an adult, the only appropriate response to the Pokemon craze is
simply, ostrich-like, to try to pretend it doesn't exist. After writing
this review, I'm going to try to do just that.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
