Title
Review for Nightmare Before Christmas, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Brandi Weed
     Since I live not too far from Los Angeles (and the El Capitan),
I've had the good fortune to see THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS this
weekend.
     Okay, let's get the bad news out of the way first.  The film is
only 75 minutes long, so some things which are set up are never very
well explained; similarly, the plot is rather thin (but I've seen
thinner films do well--HOME ALONE 2, anyone?).  Ideally, this film
should have been 90-100 minutes long.
     Now the good news: It's a genuinely likable film, grotesque and
heart-warming at the same time (don't ask me to explain how they pull
it off).  It's also very funny, with great ghoulish sendups of
Christmas sentiment and a surprise reference to The Fly (I'll let you
experience that yourself!).  The animation is terrific, and you may end
up seeing it twice (as I did) just to look at some of the wackier
character designs.
     The score by Danny Elfman is decent (people who've complained
about his "la-la-la" tendency can complain again), and so are the
songs, which are definitely influenced by/stolen from Kurt Weill.
Three songs in particular stand out:  the opening song about
Halloweentown (which could be easily used as a new score for
Disneyland's Haunted House), a song sung by three nasty little urchins
about kidnapping Santa (sample lyric: "Kidnap Santa Claus/Stuff him in
a box/Lock him up for 90 years/and see if he'll talk!"), and a Cab
Calloway-esque number by the film's nominal villain Oogie Boogie (who
also has a few really eye-popping scenes of animation).
     On the whole, I'd say it's definitely one of the better Tim Burton
films (he did not direct, but he seems to have come up with the story
and the main character designs), and probably ties with EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS for being his best film.  It'll be in wide release this
Friday (the 22nd): go see it!

Author
Steve Rhodes
     When you see the name Tim Burton on the marquee, you know you are
about to enter an unknown world.  Even if you hate his films (including
EDWARD SCISSORHANDS, BATMAN, BETTLEJUICE, ED WOOD, and JAMES AND THE
GIANT PEACH), you have to give him credit for originality.  With the
except of BETTLEJUICE and BATMAN FOREVER, I have liked every film with
which he has been associated.
     Although his 1993 THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS is not one of my
favorites of his, I am fascinated by it.  Since I am taking my son with
me this week to see the press screening of MARS ATTACKS!, we thought it
a good time to rent Burton's dark vision of Christmas.
     Jack Skellington (speaking voice by Chris Sarandon and singing
voice by the film's composer Danny Elfman) is the king of the pumpkins.
His specialty is scaring kids out of their wits on Halloween, but he is
looking to expand his franchise to other holidays.
     One day he comes upon a picture perfect village getting ready for
Christmas.  Overwhelmed by its peacefulness, he sings, "What's this?
They're busy throwing snowballs instead of throwing heads."  So much of
the dialog is sung in this stop-action animated film that it could be
considered a musical.  The production numbers are lively, and the songs
by Steve Bartek are fun.
     The cinematography by Pete Kozachik and the sets by Tim Burton and
Denise DiNovi are the key to the success of the film.  The ghoulish
Halloween based sets are mainly gloomy shades of gray.  In contrast,
the Christmas sets are full of bright and happy primary colors.  All
the images are intriguing and strangely lovely.  Watch, for example,
how long legged Jack is beautifully framed in silhouette against the
enormous Halloween moon.
     Young children could be quite frightened by the figures, but grade
schoolers and above will more likely be mesmerized.  Among other
memorable figures are a guy with an ax permanently slicing through his
head and a bad guy named Oogie Boogie (Ken Page) whose insides are full
of maggots and scorpions.  There are also scenes of Oogie Boogie about
to kill Santa Clause.  My favorite mannerism for a character is Dr.
Finklestein (William Hickey) who takes off his scalp to scratch his
brain when he is trying to think up an idea.
     If the story sounds familiar, DR. SEUSS'S HOW THE GRINCH STOLE
CHRISTMAS (1966) has a similar theme.  There, the Grinch does not want
Christmas to happen so he steals all the presents in a futile attempt
to stop Christmas.  Watching "the Grinch" is a family Christmas
tradition in our household, and I admit I much prefer its simple
message and rhyming dialog to Burton's story.  Nevertheless, there is
to admire in THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS
     Jack Skellington has much less sinister plans than the Grinch.
Although he does kidnap "Santy Claus" (Ed Ivory), he has no malevolent
intent towards him.  Jack just wants to be Santy Claus himself.  He has
his friend Sally (Catherine O'Hara) knit him a Santa outfit, and Dr.
Finklestein crafts him some flying reindeer skeletons out of old bones
he has laying around his laboratory.  Jack even tries in vain to
discover scientifically the meaning of Christmas by putting the holiday
decorations under a microscope.
     Jack and Santa do have different ideas on what constitutes
acceptable gifts for the little kiddies.  Jack prefers severed heads
and other such demonic trinkets.
     The calls start pouring into the police station when the children
begin opening their presents.  "Attacked by Christmas toys," says the
police officer.  "That's strange, that's the second toy complaint we've
had."
     After scenes that include huge guns firing at Jack dressed as
Santa, the movie does find its way to a happy ending.  Be warned,
however, that Jack and Sally kiss at the conclusion.  This is the only
scene my son did not like and the only reason his thumb was not totally
up for the film.  Personally, I can handle the scene.
     A bizarre, but engrossing film.  Whether its quirkiness is
compelling enough to make it worth seeing is problematic, but its
freshness won me over.
     THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS runs just 1:16.  It is rated PG.
There is no sex, nudity or profanity, but there is threatened violence
and some potentially frightening images.  My son Jeffrey, age 7 1/2,
gives it "a thumbs up, but only about one half of a centimeter down."
His increasingly eccentric scale makes this my first metric review.  He
says the picture should be for kids six and up, and I agree.  I give
the movie a thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
When I was a child, one of the reasons I enjoyed the Christmas season so 
much was because of the annual arrival of those endlessly-repeated 
television specials:  RUDOLPH THE RED-NOSED REINDEER, SANTA CLAUS IS 
COMING TO TOWN, THE YEAR WITHOUT A SANTA CLAUS.  Tim Burton must remember 
those programs too, because in his own inimitable way, he has paid homage 
to them in this most twisted of holiday fairy tales, THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE 
CHRISTMAS.
The scene is Halloween Town where, not surprisingly, October 31 is the 
biggest night of the year.  However, after arranging and carrying out his 
most devilish Halloween yet, Jack Skellington (voiced by Chris Sarandon 
when speaking, Danny Elfman when singing) is suffering the post-holiday 
blues.  He craves something different in his life, something that can't 
be found in Halloween Town.  Wandering out in a forest, he discovers 
gateways to different holidays, and finds his way to Christmas Town.  
There, he is captivated by the lights, the festivity, and the joy.  He 
returns home to tell everyone that this year, Halloween Town is going to 
celebrate Christmas.  To make things complete, he, Jack Skellington, will 
replace "Sandy Claws" on his yearly December 31 ride, delivering presents 
and spreading good cheer.  Everyone is enthused by the idea except Sally 
(voiced by Catherine O'Hara), who has a premonition of doom if Jack goes 
through with his plans.
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS is a visual splendor.  Done on the cheap, 
this could have been a gimmicky, unsatisfying motion picture, but 
considering the obvious time and effort put into constructing the movie, 
it is an unqualified success.  Everything moves smoothly and naturally, 
and the attention to detail is exquisite.  We are given a clever cast of 
characters that look like something from Edward Gorey's sketchbook in a 
setting that oozes atmosphere.  It is not difficult at all to become 
wrapped up in this movie.
The film is designed to be suitable for all but the youngest children, 
some of whom might be frightened by any of the bizarre inhabitants of 
Halloween Town (you know your childrens' natures and whether animated 
ghouls and goblins will terrify them or not).  On its surface, the story 
has little more complexity than THE YEAR WITHOUT A SANTA CLAUS, so 
younger viewers will be able to enjoy the movie without feeling lost or 
bored.  However, as is too rarely the case with family films, there is 
another level to this film.  Much of the wryest humor is designed for 
adults.
Even those who aren't taken in by the charming-yet-simple story or the 
likable characters, will be enthralled by the world Tim Burton and 
director Henry Selick have created.  It is, quite frankly, an amazing 
achievement, and one that we are not likely to see repeated for a long 
time.  
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS is HOW THE GRINCH STOLE CHRISTMAS thrown 
into reverse (although clearly the Dr. Seuss tale had a part in 
formulating some of the images of Christmas Town).  While the Grinch made 
Christmas better by trying to destroy it, Jack Skellington ruins the 
holiday by trying to improve it.  But don't worry - everything turns out 
all right in the end.  This is, remember, a family film.
The biggest failing of THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS, and it shouldn't 
be overlooked, is the weakness of Danny Elfman's songs.  With the 
exception of one or two, these are uniformly lifeless, and there are 
times when the movie might have been better without them.  Something a 
little more energetic is called for.  Elfman's score is more than 
adequate, but the songs are lacking.
Caroline Thompson, Tim Burton, and Danny Elfman have worked together 
before, and they appear have a good rapport when it comes to the unusual 
(the trio were all involved in EDWARD SCISSORHANDS).  Each of them has 
invested a part of themselves in THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS, even as 
has Henry Selick, coordinator of the stop-motion animation.  
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS has something to offer just about 
everyone.  For the kids, it's a fantasy celebrating two holidays.  For 
the adults, it's an opportunity to experience some light entertainment 
while marvelling at how adept Hollywood has become at these techniques.  
There are songs (even if they aren't nearly as noteworthy as they should 
be), laughs, and a little romance.  In short, THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE 
CHRISTMAS does what it intends to do:  entertain.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Tim Burton proves himself a creative
     genius with a film deserving of instant holiday classic
     status.  Just about everything comes together and genuinely
     works in the best holiday film since Alistair Sim starred in
     A CHRISTMAS CAROL.  Rating: +3 (-4 to +4)
     From the on-again off-again career of Tim Burton comes a film so
original and incredibly creative that it genuinely is unlikely to be
surpassed as a holiday film for decades.  While Burton did not actually
direct in this outing (Henry Selick did), Burton produced and wrote the
story, creating the characters.  And THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS shows an
unmistakable Burton style.  The entire film is done in beautiful 3-D
animation and is the culmination of the poetic fairy tale style we saw some
of (but not enough) in EDWARD SCISSORHANDS crossed with the tongue-in-cheek
horror-spoof style of "Frankenweenie" and "Vincent."  This film dazzles the
viewer with so many beautiful images that I found just taking my eyes off
the screen to make notes meant I was missing something I wanted to see.  The
style the film kept reminding me of some exceptionally creative Czech films-
--particularly those of Jiri Trnka--and wishing more films like that could
be done elsewhere.  Now a visual style every bit as compelling, perhaps
more, has found its way into an American film.  The fairy tale style that I
liked so much in EDWARD SCISSORHANDS I attributed to Caroline Thompson, a
then first-time screenwriter whose talents I claimed were just what Burton
needed.  I am very pleased that Burton seems to have had the same insight.
Thompson wrote NIGHTMARE's screenplay also and this time she and Burton have
completely fulfilled the promise their pairing showed in that film.  The ten
musical pieces here are written and scored with the clever style and quality
of a Gilbert and Sullivan operetta.
     The story takes place in a land where holidays are born.  One town
makes Halloween each year, another makes Christmas.  The artistic genius of
Halloweentown is one Jack Skellington, a sort of skeleton with a globular
head.  But then everyone in Halloweentown is a horror, that is the spirit of
Halloween.  The town is full of werewolves, vampires, bats, spiders, mad
scientists, and things for which there are no names.  Jack is dissatisfied
with Halloween and stumbles on Christmastown.  He is  enchanted and puzzled
by the idea of Christmas and decides he and his town of horrors can do it
all better.  Halloweentown starts working on putting on a horror-tinged
Christmas.  If that seems a silly plot, well you don't expect a holiday film
is going to have a Dostoyevsky-level story.  Just accept the story and watch
how well it is told.  Regardless of the plot this is a film that you *will*
find rewarding.  Take it from me you may possibly have seen a film like this
before but only rarely, and you have never seen it done so well for 75
minutes.  If you thought THE WIZARD OF OZ was an impressive children's film,
go see THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS.  Amazingly to me I give a Christmas
film a rating of +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Voices:  Danny Elfman, Chris Sarandon, Catherine O'Hara, William
Hickey, Glenn Shaddix.
Screenplay:  Caroline Thompson.
Director:  Henry Selick.
     If JURASSIC PARK proved one thing, it was this:  image *is*
everything.  What the public seems to want most from movies is
spectacle; show them something they've never seen before, and they'll
beat a path to the theater door, even if the story is fairly
simplistic.  This news should come as a great comfort to Touchstone
Pictures and Tim Burton.  THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS is a
straightforward, somewhat bland fable which would have put me to sleep
if done with live action or traditional hand-drawn animation.  However,
its stop-motion figures and incredible production design are dazzling
enough to give NIGHTMARE a delightfully timeless quality which make it
far more entertaining than it could have been.
     THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS posits the existence of separate,
inhabited towns which hold dominion over the major holidays.  In
Halloween Town, the residents are celebrating the successful completion
of another October 31st, but Pumpkin King Jack Skellington (voice of
Chris Sarandon, sung by Danny Elfman) is not so happy.  Tired of
Halloween after Halloween just like every other, Jack longs for
something different to shake him out of his ennui.  He finds it when he
stumbles onto Christmas Town, and is enchanted by what he sees.  Jack
decides to have Santa kidnapped and stage his own Christmas, despite
warnings from lovelorn rag doll Sally (Catherine O'Hara) that it will
be a disaster.
     First, the good news:  NIGHTMARE is truly unlike anything you've
ever seen before.  The look combines old Rankin/Bass Christmas
specials, Edward Gorey illustrations and the Beatles' YELLOW SUBMARINE
to create a remarkably distinctive and detailed world.  The animation
is incredibly fluid, to the extent that I began to wonder whether a
couple of characters were real humans somehow edited into the film.
Cheers also to the marvelous character design, from spindly Jack to the
lecherous Dr. Finkelstein (William Hickey) to my favorite, the
literally two-faced Mayor (Glenn Shaddix).  It was the kind of film
where I never took my eyes off the screen because I was afraid of
missing something.  Director Henry Selick avoids the pitfall of
"showing off" his toys; he keeps the camera moving, telling the story
visually with style and effectiveness, particularly Jack's graveyard
song after his Christmas coup.
     The down side of this complex and expensive animation technique is
that the story had to be packed into under 75 minutes.  There is no
time for nuance of character or well-developed motivations; the
filmmakers slam through the plot at a breakneck pace, avoiding lags in
pace but also avoiding a truly engaging story.  The biggest loser is
the romantic subplot involving Sally's unrequited love for Jack,
resolved out of nowhere.  The villainous character of Oogie Boogie also
comes up a bit short, and a slightly grumpy Santa could have been very
interesting.  The story is a fairy tale, so I don't take issue with the
simplicity of the plot.  I was just disappointed with the apparent
decision to throw everything into the visuals.
     Perhaps most disappointing is the song score by frequent Tim
Burton collaborator Danny Elfman.  Taking an operatic approach,
NIGHTMARE is almost entirely through-sung, making the songs a crucial
element of the film.  But with the exception of the lively "What's
This?" during Jack's discovery of Christmas Town, the tunes are fairly
tedious and the lyrics lacking in wit.  They seemed designed simply to
move the story forward, not to inspire humability like the best
Ashman/Menken tunes from the recent Disney films.  It's surprising
given Elfman's playful Oingo Boingo oeuvre that his songs here are so
somber and uninspired.
     Some movies are called feasts for the senses.  THE NIGHTMARE
BEFORE CHRISTMAS qualifies as a feast for the sense, singular.  While
there is very little worth listening to in the film, there is more than
enough worth looking at to compensate, particularly for those with a
slightly twisted sense of humor.  NIGHTMARE is delightfully unique,
just not a dream come true.

Author
Laura Clifford
Touchstone Pictures is rereleasing one of its modern classic this
holiday season, "Tim Burton's A Nightmare Before Christmas," in
which Jack Skellington (speaking Chris Sarandon/singing Danny Elfman)
yearns to ditch his Halloween gig and dispense gifts from a
sleigh, even if it is drawn by skeletal reindeer.
Tim Burton's 1994 production was directed by an animation friend of his,
Henry Selick, from 10 yrs before when Burton was a Disney animator 
but it has Burton written all over it.  Disney didn't want it back then but 
became very interested when their young animator turned into the director of 
Batman.  
Skellington, voiced by Chris Sarandon, is the Pumpkin King and ruler of 
Halloween land, where the Halloween holiday is worked on all year by its 
strange inhabitants.  Jack's getting bored, though, when an accidental trip 
to Christmas Land inspires him - why not take over this new fun holiday and 
let Sandy Claws have a rest this year!  Jacks sends his best trick or 
treaters, Lock, Shock and Barrel, out to kidnap the old man.
Lock, Shock and Barrel eventually get it right, and even though his
admirer Sally has premonitions of doom, Jack proceeds with his Christmas
production.  Unfortunately, his experience isn't what's required of
this job - the results are unusual.
This is an amazing looking film.  The stop motion animation required a
painstaking five days for five seconds of footage.  With a crew of
fourteen animators working on twenty sets, moving puppets a fraction of an
inch at a time, it took one week for every minute of this 75 minute film.
Their labor of love paid off.
Long time Burton collaberator Danny Elfman not only wrote the score and song
lyrics, but the former Oingo Boingo frontman did Jack Skellington's singing
as well.  The tunes are memorable.
This one shouldn't scare children any more than "The Grinch that Stole
Christmas," which would make a great double bill with this film.  I know
I had a grin on my face throughout.  It may be a weird holiday pairing, but
it works!

Author
Aaron Sherman
Directed by: ? (Henry Selick, director of animation)
Music: Danny Elfman
Starring: Danny Elfman, Chris Sarandon, Catherine O'Hara, Glenn Shadix,
         Ken Page, Paul Reubens, Ed Ivory, Sherwood Ball, Debi Durst,
         Randy Crenshaw, Kerry Katz, Susan McBride, Bobbi Page,
         Greg Proops, Carmen Twillie and Glenn Walters
     Others can, I'm sure, point out a lot more technical detail about
this movie than I (this is why I am not giving more credits info).
But, there are a few highlights that I thought I should point out,
after seeing another review in this newsgroup.
     First, NIGHTMARE is about traditional, modern, American holidays.
As such, you will see no note made of the many origins of Holloween, or
anything other than a stereotype witch, etc.  This is unfortunate, but
only to be expected in modern film.
     Second, Elfman is fantastic (IMNSHO)!  He pulls a lot of his work
together for this one, and blends everything well.  I had only a few
problems with his work here and they mostly centered around my
impression that he seemed to be toning himself down, so that he would
not be "too dark."  Other than that, he turned in an incredible
performance, and I hope that this is a real boost to his career.  Of
special notability are: Elfman singing as Jack (the main character,
whose speaking voice was done by Chris Sarandon) in "What's This?";
Elfman, O'Hara and Reubens (Peewee Herman) singing "Kidnap the Sandy
Claws" and Oogie Boogie's Song.  The last, sung by Ken Page and Ed
Ivory which, though it lacked the scariness that it should have had,
made up for it in personality.
     Aside from Elfman, the movie had only the visuals going for it, as
it was a fairly simple story about the towns where holidays are made.
But, what visuals they were!  Tim Burton dropped SOME of his usual
claustrophobic feel, and Selick (director of anim.) pulled off the
slickest stop-motion we're likely to see for a long time.  Jack's
expressions were VERY life-like, and all of the backgrounds made me do
a double-take or three.
     Overall, I give this movie an 8 on a 1-10 scale. (8.5, just
because Elfman didn't let his music get used for the Burger King adds
;-)

Author
Christopher Null
Just in time for Halloween and Christmas, the reissue of The Nightmare
Before Christmas couldn't be more appropriate.  With all of the
attention thrown to "family films" in recent years, namely those
starring pocket monsters and Nickelodeon characters, it's high time we
raised the intellectual level of children's fare as well as the
animation achievements of the movie studios.  With that in mind, it was
refreshing to revisit an animation classic on the big screen that still
retains the originality and freshness it had seven years ago.
Nightmare is the story of one man's quest to discover his true purpose
in life -- to look beyond the accolades of his peers, the achievements
of his years, and the praise of his ego.  Jack Skellington, the pumpkin
king of Halloweentown, is the main dude behind the Halloween holiday for
kids everywhere.  But during his reign as pumpkin king, Jack has somehow
lost his understanding of his place in the world and the magic he
creates with his Halloween holiday.  After the completion of one
particular Halloween season, Jack walks with a heavy heart and ends up
discovering in the woods outside Halloweentown a grove of trees with
doors to all of the other holidays in the world.  Imagine his surprise
to discover Christmastown, a far more impressive and uplifting holiday
than Halloween, surrounded by happy elves making toys, and with good
cheer all around.
Upon his return to Halloweentown, Jack decides to combine Halloween and
Christmas together by kidnapping "Sandy Claws," employing all the
residents of Halloweentown to build toys for children.  He then aims to
take over the role as primary joy-provider and gift-bearer to the
children of the world, in the hopes of rediscovering the zest for life
he once had.  Alas, the co-mingling of Halloween and Christmas creates
disastrous results involving shrunken heads, psychotic wooden ducks, a
sleigh pulled by a phantom dog with a lighted nose, and a large,
sinister, singing bag named Oogie Boogie
Tim Burton -- the man behind such great films as Ed Wood, Beetlejuice,
Pee-Wee's Big Adventure, and Edward Scissorhands -- is the creative
force behind Nightmare.  Originally, Burton authored a poem that became
the basis of the storyline, and he was jointly involved in the
production design of the film (though many mistakenly assume he directed
the picture).  The stamp of Burton is clearly everywhere in the film --
with bold colors, imaginative character design, and it's simple yet
compelling story.  The direction of Harry Selick, who also directed
James and the Giant Peach, is strong, offering intimate views of the
strange collection of characters.  Also memorable are the songs in the
film, written by former Oingo Boingo lead singer Danny Elfman, the next
John Williams of film composing.
The Nightmare Before Christmas is intended for both the kid and adult in
everyone.  It's not just child's play for the holidays; it's a movie
about how to be truly happy in a tough world, saying that all you need
to do is just be exactly who you are, without compromise.  What better
message is there for Christmas?
Director: Harry Selick
Writers: Caroline Thompson
Starring: Chris Saradon, Danny Elfman, Catherine O'Hara, William Hickey,
Paul Ruebens
Producers: Tim Burton, Denise Di Novi
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Tim Burton creates another fantastical world of dark imagery and
isolated characters, and douses this world of the macabre within a
wonderfully upbeat and original musical menagerie by Danny Elfman. This
Academy Award-nominated stop-motion film is geared towards children,
but could thoroughly be enjoyed by adults with youthful & darkened
imaginations as well. This film annually visits the inside of my VCR,
and should be dubbed as one of the most original and classic Halloween
stories ever told.  
PLOT:
Jack Skellington, is the Pumpkin King of Halloween Town. Every year, he
demonstrates his delicious capacity to deliver scares and frights to
the entire town's grotesque population, but this year, he has run bored
with his annual routine. He sets out to find something different, and
does in the town of Christmas. The lights, the joy, the happiness of
this town burn the dimmed light within Jack's head, and lead him to
attempt a Christmas parade of his own in Halloween Town. The
consequences of this blending of the holidays leads to various
misinterpretations, excitement, harmonies and hilarity.
CRITIQUE:
Wonderfully dark and moody children's Halloween tale that gently stirs
all of the required elements of humour, musical charisma, children's
imagination and amazing special effects in a successful simmering pot
of entertainment. This film is filled with many wonderful images and
sounds from the wildly imaginative mind of Tim Burton, the man behind
the original BATMAN (8/10) and EDWARD SCISSORHANDS (8.5/10). The story
is as original as any one that I've ever seen for Halloween, and moves
along at an excited pace through its short running time of only 76
minutes.
The special effects are stunningly coordinated and surpass any Disney
animated films that I have ever seen. After a few minutes of staring at
these characters in awing disbelief, I completely fell under their
spell and in love with the personas. The musical numbers are easy to
understand and hummingly addictive (The album was nominated for a
Grammy for Best Musical Album for Children), while the dark and moody
atmosphere created in Halloween Town (Dali and Gaudi would be proud!),
is equated only by the cheery and charming ambience of Christmas Town. 
There are elements of other Halloween tales intertwined in this
masterpiece, along with a little GRINCH WHO STOLE CHRISTMAS, but
overall, this story is truly original, and gave me a truer appreciation
of both seasons involved. Of course, Halloween has always been my
favourite holiday of the year by a long shot, but don't let that bias
sway your vote. This film should capture anyone's dormant imagination,
with its wild visuals, upbeat musical renditions, sharp and exact
imagery, and creative story. See this one with your kids, if you have
any...if you don't, rent some for the weekend, it's worth it!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Tim Burton began drawing at an early age, going on to attend the
California Institute of the Arts, studying animation after being
awarded a fellowship from Disney, for whom he went on to work. Some of
his trademarks include films with a Gothic feel to them, plots that
often focus around a misunderstood outcast, the frequent use of
composer Danny Elfman, the featuring of dead or dismembered dogs, and
the fact that he often likes to open his films with a quiet nighttime
snowfall.
Music composer Danny Elfman has been involved with most of Tim Burton's
directorial projects (except ED WOOD (6.5/10). He also provides the
singing voice for Jack Skellington in this movie. Furthermore, Danny is
the uncle-in-law of TV's "Dharma & Greg" star Jenna Elfman. His mom is
Blossom Elfman, an author of children's books. He is also a member of
the music band Oingo Boingo (nowadays known simply as Boingo), and
wrote the score for 1994's BLACK BEAUTY for his two daughters from a
collapsed marriage. Danny's brother Richard Elfman directed the
cult-classic sci-fi musical FORBIDDEN ZONE. Danny Elfman played Satan
in that very film.
Director Henry Selick followed this effort with another stop-action
feature titled JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH, which was also produced by
Tim Burton.
