Title
Review for Boxing Helena (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
BOXING HELENA is a real act of nerve.  It takes the two very worst kinds of
movies -- the Pretentious Art Bore and the Ludicrous Cheat -- and
synthesizes them.  Which is not what the filmmakers were thinking, of
course, but there you are.
The movie is the product of Jennifer Lynch, who has the distinction of being
director David Lynch's daughter.  On the basis of the evidence, talent
skipped a generation in the Lynch dynasty.  The movie is painfully like a
bad Lynch movie -- or better to say, like a bad imitation that didn't have
the initative to at least be a parody.  It also speaks well for Kim
Basinger, who sued to be let out of the production, and has since gone on to
redeem herself in the majestic L.A. CONFIDENTIAL, among other things.
Julian Sands stars as Dr. Nick Cavanaugh.  We know he's a cold-hearted snot
because he walks away from his dad's coffin before it's lowered all the way
into the ground.  He is a surgeon who specializes in putting arms and legs
back on, and based on what little we know about the movie, we can also guess
(correctly) that he has a thing for yanking 'em off as well.  Sands plays
Cavanaugh as the kind of oaf who has women "accidentally" set fire to his
clothing at parties.
Nick grows obsessed with a woman named Helena (Sherilyn Fenn), an
insufferably irritating person.  In an attempt to make her sexy and
mysterious, the filmmakers stoop to ripping off LA DOLCE VITA and have her
bathe in the fountain at a party.  Yes.  When she gets hit by a truck and
loses her legs -- in what has to be the single most unconvincing auto
accident ever put on film, short of Ned Beatty's in the horrible SHADOWS IN
THE STORM -- Nick kidnaps her and keeps her as a kind of human statue. Just
to make sure the point is hammered brutally home, we constantly get insert
shots of the armless Venus DeMilo sculpture.  And shots of a bird in a cage.
Yes.
Is there a good story lurking anywhere in this?  Maybe.  Part of the problem
lies in the fact that obsession alone does not make a character interesting.
Neither Nick nor Helena are the kind of people that would be worth five
minutes at a lunch counter, and so no matter what weird paces they get put
through, no one's going to care.  Movies about obsessions that the viewers
do not share are hard to make, unless you make it satirical (as did CRASH)
or at least try to convey something of what the obsession means personally
(as did LOLITA).
And then there's the idiotic cheat of an ending, which borrows from Emilio
Estevez's execreable WISDOM. Which, if you don't know what that refers to,
you're encouraged to find out.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  9/3/93
Running Length:  1:42
Rated:  R (Nudity, sexual situations, language, mature themes)
Starring:  Julian Sands, Sherilyn Fenn, Bill Paxton, Kurtwood Smith
Director:  Jennifer Chambers Lynch
Producer:  Carl Mazzocone and Philippe Carland
Screenplay: Jennifer Chambers Lynch; story by Philippe Carland
Music:  Graeme Revell
Released by Orion Classics
     Dr. Nick Cavanaugh (Julian Sands) is obsessed by Helena (Sherilyn
Fenn), a woman with whom he had a brief affair and is now hopelessly
smitten.  Helena, however, feels nothing but disdain for Nick, and
shows it at every possible opportunity.  Nevertheless, one day the good
doctor manages to lure the object of his desires back to his home.  The
"romantic lunch" doesn't turn out as planned, but when Helena storms
away from his house and into the street out front, she's struck by a
truck and seriously injured.  Not wanting to lose Helena to a hospital,
Nick elects to operate in his home lab, amputating Helena's legs, then
keeping her captive during her convalescence.  When she becomes too
difficult to control, he takes things one step further and removes her
arms, turning her into "a possession."
     Like father, like daughter.  Those who expected a nice, normal
film from the offspring of actor/director David Lynch are in for a big
shock.  Jennifer Chambers Lynch has borrowed a lot of her father's
technique and style, and Mr. Lynch's own response to the film is that
he (not surprisingly) "really liked it."  BOXING HELENA is far from the
beaten track, covering subjects guaranteed to scare away major
Hollywood studios and big-name stars.  An example is Kim Bassinger, who
was signed to play the title role, then backed off when she discovered
that the script demanded her to play a character without arms and
legs.  She lost the battle in court, and BOXING HELENA won not only by
receiving a monetary settlement, but by having a much better actress in
the part.
     Suspension of disbelief is crucial to BOXING HELENA's success (and
the most probable reason it fails for those who dislike it).  So much
of what happens during the course of the film is impossible to accept
given the logical confines of the real world, so for those unable to
slip into the mood of the movie and naively accept the often-absurd
intentions of the film makers, BOXING HELENA will be a huge
disappointment--a mix of gigantic contrivances and impossibilities of
ludicrous proportions.  Of course, if one assumes that Ms. Lynch is
going for dark comedy, that changes the viewer's entire perspective of
the picture, shedding a new and warped light on some of what is
supposed to be serious (my own contention is that most--but not all--of
the humor is unintentional).
     Once it gets beyond a hard-to-swallow setup and into the meat of
its story, BOXING HELENA is surprisingly involving and
intelligent--especially considering how fingernail sketches of the plot
paint the movie.  The script is certainly not concerned about the
reality of circumstances and the actions of characters, focusing
exclusively on the weird and unusual relationship the develops between
Sand's Nick and Fenn's Helena, the inevitable captive/captor emotional
bond.  The movie discloses its terms early, and expects the audience to
buy into them, making no apologies for what it is or intends to be.
     There are powerful moments in BOXING HELENA, most resulting from
the interaction between characters.  Neither of the primary parts is
three-dimensional, but a fair amount of character development occurs
during the course of the movie.  A scene where Nick presents the
limbless Helena with a gun and offers to kill himself or her at her
request is effective because it touches on the core emotions
experienced by both parties.  There are other such scenes, but
intermingled with them are events better ignored--including a dumb
subplot involving the search of a boyfriend (Bill Paxton) for the
missing Helena, and an even dumber attempt to explain Nick's bizarre
actions through flashbacks to a neglectful, promiscuous mother.
     One of the things that works against BOXING HELENA is the
performance of its lead actor.  While Julian Sands doesn't precisely do
a bad job, he rejects subtlety in favor of overstatement.  While not an
over-the-top performance (take a look at what Bill Paxton does for one
of those), neither is it an example of studied, careful acting.  Too
often, Ms.  Lynch's direction mirrors the job done by Sands.  There are
a number of scenes that are handled in a rather heavy-handed way, with
a little too much meaningless symbolism thrown in for good measure.
     Fortunately, Sands' opposite, Sherilyn Fenn, is superlative,
giving an entirely credible performance as she turns a one-dimensional
part into a vibrant character.  It must be difficult to portray a
limbless puppet, but Ms. Fenn never falters, making us forever grateful
that the lackluster Kim Bassinger backed out.  Admittedly, Ms. Fenn
looks a little too good for someone who had gone through Helena's
trauma, but that's another area where suspension of disbelief comes
into play.
     The prosthetics of the amputations are never shown, and Ms. Fenn's
own limbs are hidden through simple trickery, so there's no real need
to comment on "special effects".  They are, in this case, no more or
less than are necessary to tell the story.  Although Helena's armless,
legless impotence might be somewhat macabre, it isn't presented
distastefully, resulting in a production that's more erotic than
misogynistic.
     A series of about five scenes comprises an ending which will
probably polarize viewers into two different camps--those that approve
of the choices made by Ms. Lynch, and those who feel cheated and
betrayed by them.  Personally, I accepted this part of the movie as
reasonable, and certainly no more outlandish than what went before.  A
great deal is explained that would otherwise have remained mystifying.
However, I disliked the final scene, especially the voiceover by Julian
Sands.  If Ms. Lynch wanted ambiguity, she should have left things as
they were; if she wanted a clear resolution, she should have added a
few more minutes of footage.  As it is, her mix of the two methods is
decidedly unsatisfactory.
     The general opinion will probably be largely negative, but there
are people who will love this film.  BOXING HELENA has elements to
recommend it, but there's a lot that has to be willingly overlooked to
get to that.  Cynical viewers will not enjoy it, except as something to
poke fun at.  My own opinion is divided, although I will admit to
having enjoyed the picture more than not, but any recommendation I make
comes with heavy reservations.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the indicator of badness in film is the hype being
remembered more than film itself. Such was the case with
BOXING HELENA, 1993 directorial debut of Jennifer Chambers
Lynch, daughter of the great David Lynch. Made in the dying
years of post-TWIN PEAKS Lynch craze among movie snobs, it
was hyped as another, "warped, twisted masterpiece" of Lynch
clan. Kim Basinger also provided extra publicity by quitting
the lead role and being sued for the breech of contract.
But, the result was extremely disappointing film, which
quickly sank into well-deserved oblivion.
The movie protagonist is Nick Cavanaugh (played by Julian
Sands), talented surgeon who is getting obsessed by Helena
(Sherilyn Fenn), beautiful woman who ditched him after brief
affair. Cavanaugh stalks her and uses every opportunity for
the pathetic attempts to re-establish the relationship.
During one of such occasions, Helena is hit by a car, and
Nick quickly takes the role of her personal physician in
order to have his way with her. After she wakes up, Helena
discovers not only that she is prisoner in Cavanaugh's
stylish residence, but also that Cavanaugh amputated her
legs in order to prevent her from escaping. She is still
trying to escape, so Cavanaugh takes off her arms.
Apart from casting Sherilyn Fenn (Audrey Horne in TWIN PEAKS
and small cameo in WILD AT HEART) and the use of twisted
characters and their perverse fantasies, this film by Ms.
Lynch hasn't got anything in common with the works of
director's more talented father. Despite rather bizarre
subject, the style of this film is conventional and setting
is light, characters are beautiful - but the result at the
end is quite sterile and the film in the end looks too
artificial for dark sexual fantasy it was supposed to
portray. Jennifer Lynch obviously lacks talents in directing
and it becomes painfully obvious in the scenes that are
supposed to erotic - its banal artificiality is even bellow
the standards of Playboy videos. The actors aren't good
either. Julian Sands is terribly miscast as emotionally
disturbed man - this actors is best either when he plays
charismatic protagonists or villains; being neurotic doesn't
suit him. Bill Paxton was better for this role, but his
presence was wasted in forgettable and unnecessary subplot
dealing with Helena's boyfriend. Sherilyn Fenn contributed
to this film mostly by her looks, but even the her greater
effort in acting couldn't help this film. The screenplay, on
the other hand, is awful, at least for someone who had made
best-seller with Laura Palmer's diary - the events in this
movie are implausible, characters come and go without
purpose and many unnecessary subplots only slow down the
film and add to the total confusion. One of those subplots
involves character of Cavanaugh's "regular" girlfriend,
played by Betsy Clarke. The twist at the end, although
unpredictable, is unbelievable and the viewers, who had the
stomach to endure entire film, would feel cheated. All in
all, BOXING HELENA is disorganised quasi-artistic mess of a
movie that should be remembered as nothing more than one of
the wiser decisions in Kim Basinger's career.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Dr. Nicholas Cavanaugh (played by Julian Sand) has overcome his unhappy
childhood--mostly.  The neglected son of a great surgeon is himself a great
surgeon.  He has a beautiful house, an attractive mistress, and a king-sized
obsession.  The object of his obsession is Helena (Sherilyn Fenn), a
stunningly beautiful woman with whom he has had sex once (as apparently has
just about every able-bodied man available) and who now wants nothing to do
with him.  Forget his status, his position as chief surgeon of his hospital,
he cannot stop himself from thinking about and even stalking Helena ... even
to the point where he is climbing the tree outside her bedroom window in
order to watch her love-making.  Nick tries to invite Helena to his home
only to be treated with contempt when she comes to a party he is throwing.
He lures her back to the house the next day only to have her escape, running
from the house and into the path of a hit-and-run driver.  Nick could take
her to the hospital, but decides to treat her in his home, amputating both
her legs and  making her his prisoner.  Eventually, when she tries to
strangle her captor, Nick will amputate her arms also.
     What we have then is a rather ghoulish variation on John Fowles' THE
COLLECTOR and at the same time an erotic fantasy.  Nick lives out his dream
of having his beloved Helena dependent on him and at the same time at his
mercy.  She obviously has objections to him personally, but he hopes if he
is sufficiently disarming she will be left without a leg to stand on.  The
ending of the tale will be disappointing to some, but one that has a time-
honored tradition, particularly in early film.
     BOXING HELENA is directed by Jennifer Chambers Lynch, daughter to David
Lynch.  Her father probably would have done the same story every bit as
weirdly but it also would have been full of images that would be meaningful
only to him.  His daughter's style is at least comprehensible.  Perhaps as
one allusion to her having a famous father, incidentally, Lynch includes on
the soundtrack the aria "O mio babbino caro" ("Oh my dear little papa") from
Puccini's GIANNI SCHICCHI.  Speaking of Puccini, to convey the upper-class
feel of Nick's house Lynch uses as background music to scenes in the house
no less than four arias from Puccini and also fills the house with Greek
statuary--indicating she does know high class when she encounters it.  Of
course the primary piece of statuary, a reproduction of the Venus di Milo,
does fit thematically into the film.
     There are some problems with this story, but it does show promise for
Lynch.  My rating is a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jon A Webb
     A while ago I saw a movie called something like LADY IN THE
WINDOW, which was filmed here in Pittsburgh.  It was about a
department store window designer and the man who was sexually obsessed
with her.  She eventually defeated him by incorporating him in her
window design, or something.  I remember Horne's department store
figured prominently.
     BOXING HELENA makes me think of this movie for two reasons.
First, like LADY IN THE WINDOW, it is about sexual obsession.  Second,
LADY IN THE WINDOW is the only movie I can remember that is actually
worse than BOXING HELENA.  (To be fair, I'm sure there have been five
or so more; I just can't think of them right now.)
     BOXING HELENA has the raw, gritty feel of a junior high-school
drama production.  People spit out ridiculous lines with no conviction
whatsoever.  More than anything else, it shows how important good
direction is to a film, and how badly things can go wrong when the
director has no idea whatsoever what she is doing.
     Jennifer Lynch, who directed this amazing bomb, should have worked
for a while as assistant director, or something like that, on other
films.  She might have picked up a few pointers on motivating people,
and learned how to pace a film.  As it is, her creation of this stinker
is a strong argument for the passage of anti-nepotism laws in
Hollywood.  Who knows -- this movie could ultimately have the impact
JFK did, and lead to national legislation. (And probably also to a
movement to make sure film stock is recyclable; it is the only way some
good will come of the print.)
     The actors are real professionals: Sherlyn Fenn, Julian Sands, Art
Garfunkel.  They have all been in reasonable films.  Sherilyn Fenn even
achieves a kind of effective performance here; there's something about
the way she holds herself in the quadraplegic scenes that is moving, a
little.
     One thing that is sad about this movie is that Lynch seems to have
had some interesting ideas.  Besides the plot itself, which is at least
original, there's one scene where Fenn teaches Sands how to make love
to a woman, that is fun.  There are also Sands's nervous habits, like
changing his shirt all the time and putting some sort of ear drops in
his ear, neither of which is explained, that are intriguing in a
Lynch-esque way.
     *No one* should see this film.  Even if you are thinking about it
because it sounds strange and interesting, don't go.  You will live a
happier life if you don't have to carry the memory of this dreck around
with you.
