Title
Review for What Becomes of the Broken Hearted? (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
WHAT BECOMES OF THE BROKEN HEARTED? (M).  
(Polygram/Universal)
Director: Ian Mune
Stars: Temuera Morrison, Clint Ereura, Nancy Brunning, Pete Smith,
Rena Owen, Edna Stirling, Tammy Davis, Julian Arahanga, Lawrence
Makoare, Anaru Grant, Warwick Morehu
Running time: 100 minutes.
One of New Zealand's most successful films, Once Were Warriors
was a powerful, harrowing and unforgettable movie experience.  It
explored themes of cultural disintegration, and the destructive,
pervasive machismo culture of a once proud warrior race now
depressingly shaped by alcoholism, domestic violence, bar brawls and
gang warfare.  This eagerly anticipated sequel also taps into the
double edged reality of contemporary New Zealand, but is somehow less
impressive.  Nonetheless, What Becomes Of The Broken Hearted? is still
quite powerful and compelling.
Whereas the original focused on the abused Beth and her
courageous struggle, this new film concentrates on the character of
Jake (Temeura Morrison) and his path towards redemption.  Morrison has
a frightening and intense screen persona which dominates the screen.
His volatile and unpredictable performance seems to explode off the
screen, but he also manages to bring a touch of compassion to the
role.  Rena Owen brings dignity and intelligence to her smaller role
as the long suffering Beth, and proves once again that she was the
emotional core of the original.
When the film opens, Jake is alienated from his family.  A bar
brawl in the opening minutes reveals that he hasn't changed his
violent ways.  He is involved with Rita (Edna Stirling), the new woman
in his life, but when she witnesses his unpredictable and violent
rages, she shies away.  When his son Nig (Julian Arahanga, briefly
reprising his role) is killed in a gang clash, much of the family's
anguish and anger is directed at Jake.  His son Sonny (Clint Eruera)
wants revenge on the gangs, but Jake refuses to become involved.
Sonny joins forces with Nig's girl friend Tania (Nancy
Brunning) and infiltrates a rival gang hoping to seek revenge.  But
things don't work out as planned, and Jake is forced to step into the
breach and use his street brawling skills to save his son and finally
begin the process of healing old family rifts.
Again written by Alan Duff, this sequel retreads some familiar
themes, but it also pushes the material in new directions.  The film
has some very powerful and evocative scenes, but the final climax is
marred by some excessive, Mad Max-like violence and carnage.  Director
Ian Mune, a veteran of New Zealand's film and theatre industry, has
set the film in some of the sleaziest looking areas of Auckland, which
gives the film a sense of gritty reality.
What Becomes Of The Broken Hearted? exposes a seedier view of
contemporary urban New Zealand and its gang culture, but somehow its
nihilistic vision occasionally lacks credibility.  Many of the
characters here also seem one dimensional and the drama ultimately
lacks the depths and emotional pull of the original.
