Title
Review for Still Smokin' (1983)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
Cheech and Chong have never been favorites of mine in comedies. I remember
liking "Nice Dreams" and "Up in Smoke" but basically their act consisted of
getting stoned and scoring some babes while certain hijinks would ensue. "Still
Smokin" is nothing different except that during its entire 90 minute running
time, I hardly smiled or chuckled while watching it. It is one of the unfunniest
pictures I have ever seen, so desperate to make us laugh that it even includes
stock footage of animals mating!
Cheech and Chong play themselves as they mistakenly arrive at a film festival in
Amsterdam to promote their comedy routines. Apparently, Burt Reynolds and Loni
Anderson were to attend the festival. How did Cheech and Chong end up going?
Well, the film festival director gave out the wrong tickets, or something like
that. Nevertheless, C & C arrive at a ritzy hotel where they are introduced as
Burt and Loni and the onlookers cheer them on, believing they are Burt and Loni!
This stupid joke is repeated again and again that I swear a half-hour had passed
by before the next joke. 
Meanwhile, Chong gets the bright idea of saving the financially troubled
festival by raising a dope-a-thon and performing live for the festival
attendees. So we get scenes from their own live act and a few snippets of other
routines shot as movie in-jokes that would have greeted more groans than laughs
on "Saturday Night Live." All of it so cheaply produced and poorly directed, not
to mention rottenly written, that it leaves a sour taste in your mouth. 
The idea of two comic stoners coming to Amsterdam where marijuana is legal seems
like a good idea but the film never follows suit. It is so boring and insipid to
sit through that I began to wonder if I ever really liked Cheech and Chong in
the first place. Maybe I was too young when I saw "Nice Dreams." To be fair,
there are some moments of acceptable humor during the last ten minutes such as
watching the twosome bark like dogs. Otherwise, you may as well keep smoking
that joint than watch such a painful movie experience.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com
