Title
Review for When Night Is Falling (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Max Hoffmann
     Although it won the Best Screenplay Award at the Los Angeles Gay
and Lesbian Film Festival, WHEN NIGHT IS FALLING ultimately proves that
a woman (in this case writer/director  Patricia Rozema) can make a film
as badly as any man.  The film is *so* bad, in fact that its high camp
watermark might make it a candidate for the next BAD MOVIES WE LOVE
book.  Rozema makes quite a departure from her earlier, brilliant I'VE
HEARD THE MERMAIDS SINGING, and turns in a tepid, softcore epic worthy
of Zalman King (RED SHOES DIARY).
     While the Canadian location is never specified, we suspect it's a
few miles from LAKE CONSEQUENCE, due to truck-sized plot holes and
missing character bone structure.  Rozema has taken a paint-by-numbers
approach to lesbian romantic adventure: take two disparate, but exotic
women from different worlds (in this case, the Circus and a seminary),
give one of them a beautiful but boorish man to choose from, and have a
crises to make one of them emotionally vulnerable.  Also have one of
the women be incredibly brazen in her pursuit of the indecisive
beginner.  Preferably, make the romance interracial or cross-cultural
(Rozema does both).
     In this case we have Camilla (Pascal Bussires), a stone-faced
Isabelle Hubert wanna-be who teaches mythology in a strict Protestant
seminary.  She's emotionally distraught from hiding her passionate
affair with fellow faculty member, Martin (a throw-away performance by
Henry Czerny, the evil woofcake of BOYS OF ST. VINCENT).  We know that
she's really torn over the conflict between her religious convictions
and pre-wedlock sex, because she's sends him to work with a sloppy kiss
on the doorstep, wearing only his pajama tops!  (Focus, Camilla,
focus!)
     Camilla's emotional vulnerability is heightened by her dog, who
mysteriously bounds out of her office and dies in an alley-way, with no
evident sign of injury.  The distraught Camilla installs the pooch in
her Frigidaire, then heads to the laundromat for relief.  A chance
encounter there with the exotic Petra (Rachel Crawford) leads Camilla
into new territory.  Petra is a circus acrobat!  Knowing a good thing
when she sees it, Petra pulls a switcheroo on the laundry so Camilla
will have to track her down at the weird warehouse Circus where she
performs exotic dances.
     Camilla's first glimpse of Petra in her "other world" of the
circus is when Petra steps out of a silhouette against a drumskin to
reveal shes done up in a skin-tight leather jump suit, with pilot
goggles like Rocky the flying squirrel.  (Who could possibly resist
that?)  Petra also has one of the best lesbian pick-up lines of all
time, "Camilla!  I like that name, it sounds like "Come here.'"
     Zalman King dished up a Chinese steambath for Joan Severance and
Billy Zane to do the nasty in at LAKE CONSEQUENCE.  Rozema creates a
never-never circus world with disco lights on the ceiling, and interior
decorating in Petra's trailer that would make Andy Warhol swoon!  (Just
how much they pay you to perform in a Canadian circus).
     Over-the-top background characters are used to make Camilla's and
Petra's lack of motivation more believable.  The circus is run by kooky
but lovable Tim (Don McKeller with an accent he picked up somewhere
between Transylvania and Detroit) and streetwise Tory (Tracy Wright).
In one of their many altercations, Tory is accusing Tim of being
incompetent.  "Oh, yeah," shoots back Tim, "what about that raccoon act
you did!" Tory pauses and sighs, "How could I know they'd be so
selfish!"  Sure, it doesn't make sense, but neither do any of the major
plot points.
     Softcore flicks with woman-on-woman action aimed at straights
usually have a musical key to alert viewers that something is about to
happen.  In NIGHT IS FALLING, an irritating cello solo begins sawing
away whenever these gals are ready to shed their clothes and have at
it.  The love scenes are interspersed with a pseudo Cirque d'Soleil
trapeze act between two women to symbolize the dangerous balance they're
in.  (The speechless high-wire artists prove much more interesting than
the two main characters).
     The rest of the plot doesn't much matter, as it offers few
surprises.  Lighting, pace and tone for each scenes comes straight from
Zalman King.  Rozema pays a nod to PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT with
a ludicrous surprise as the credits roll.  (Remember the Judy Doll/kite
landing in the Japanese monastery?)  Camilla has buried her beloved dog
in a pile of soap flakes (uh, snow!) before trying to do herself in.
After being revived by her beloved, Camilla head towards the
international Circus Festival in San Francisco with Petra.  We see a
paw emerge from the snow ... and voila!  The pooch bounds, resurrected,
across the snowy landscape, (in slow motion of course).  It's an
appropriate ending for a film that is a dog, in every sense of the
word.  We can only assume that like River Phoenix in MY OWN PRIVATE
IDAHO, the dog was a victim of narcolepsy.  Or maybe he tried to make
it through the script.
     Viewers wanting answers to missing character motivation and more
can meet Screenwriter/Director Patricia Rozema when her film screens at
the Mill Valley Festival on Saturday, October 14 at 10 PM, in the
Sequoia II theater in Mill Valley.  Contact BASS for ticket info.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Symbolism isn't the only blatantly obvious aspect of Patricia
Rozema's WHEN NIGHT IS FALLING, but it is the most distracting.
Symbols are supposed to be subtle, but Rozema is intent upon
bludgeoning the audience with them.  In addition to the film's most
pervasive symbol--a dead, refrigerated dog, there are trapeze artists,
hang-gliders, and allusions to Cupid and Psyche.  All have at least one
secondary meaning.
     The story is basically a romantic triangle between Camille (Pascale
Bussieres), an emotionally uptight, morally upright mythology professor
at a Toronto Protestant College; Martin (Henry Czerny), her lover of
three years; and Petra (Rachel Crawford), an itinerant circus performer
who comes to town and mesmerizes Camille.  In addition to setting up a
dichotomy between heterosexuality and homosexuality, WHEN NIGHT IS
FALLING toys with the inherent conflict in a deeply religious woman
whose sexual proclivities are in conflict with her beliefs.
Unfortunately, Rozema's script doesn't do justice to these potentially
charged issues, preferring cliches and shallow dialogue to something
more challenging and compelling.
     As is too often the case, Camille's religious convictions are shown
to be a negative influence while Petra's open sensuality is positive.
There's no middle ground here; it's all black-and-white.  Likewise,
Camille's relationship with Martin is pretty much a hollow sham.  He
represents the anchor that holds her back.  On the other hand, her
lesbian encounters with Petra are delightful and erotic.  There's no
depth to WHEN NIGHT IS FALLING; the script is too determined to
categorize and compartmentalize everything.
     Pascale Bussieres is appealing as Camille, doing her best to
breathe life into a shallowly-drawn personae.  The supporting cast is
less impressive, however.  Henry Czerny (CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER) is
flat, although he can perhaps be forgiven since Martin is little more
than a foil.  Rachel Crawford, despite being pleasant and perky, hampers
the film with her unpolished acting technique.  And Don McKellar, who
recently appeared in Atom Egoyan's EXOTICA, is annoying in the largely-
superfluous role of the circus organizer.
     WHEN NIGHT IS FALLING is a beautifully-filmed motion picture, but
even the most glorious cinematography can't eclipse the story's flaws.
Instead of plowing new ground, Rozema churns up soil that has long since
been exhausted.  All that's left are stock characters and situations,
contrived emotional conflicts, and a slightly preachy narrative style.
Like a postcard, WHEN NIGHT IS FALLING is pretty to look at but devoid
of significant content.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Christopher Null
     You know right from the start that WHEN NIGHT IS FALLING isn't going
to be the uplifting tale that you might have thought it would be, as it
cuts quickly from a bizarre underwater dream to a scene in which the main
character, Camille (Pascale Bussičres), discovers her dog has died.
     Patricia Rozema's odd melodrama tells Camille's story.  A Calvinist
professor at a Christian college, she is on the fast track to a position
as co-Chaplain of the university along with her conservative boyfriend
Martin (Henry Czerny).  Suddenly, circus performance artist Petra (Rachael
Crawford) comes into her life, and everything changes.  Petra is almost
obsessively infatuated with Camille, and the once-traditionalist Camille
very quickly finds herself developing an inexplicable attraction for
Petra.
     Unfortunately, this obsession and inexplicability together create a
situation which is difficult to empathize with, largely because Camille's
motivation is a complete mystery to us.  The movie is thankfully
well-constructed technically, with nicely-crafted cinematography, tight
editing, and an interesting variety of settings and costumes.  Of course,
this can't overcome a very weak story, but it does give the film a
worthwhile aspect to balance the plot.
     By the end of WHEN NIGHT IS FALLING, we're not really sure if
Camille's metamorphosis was a spur of the moment infatuation or if she
really harbored these emotions deep inside.  The producers are obviously
hoping you'll go for the latter, but I don't think we'll ever know.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list
