Title
Review for Moonraker (1979)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Houston calling, Houston calling," a frustrated NASA ground
controller says, trying reach James Bond and his female CIA companion
out in space.  Well, devotees of the series can guess their
compromising positions, so when the controller announces he is about to
initiate a live video feed directly into the White House and Buckingham
Palace, the audience knows that we are about to have some embarrassed
world leaders.  Bond, on the other hand, remains typically unfazed.
He's used to having his affairs being interrupted and observed.
Another hard day in the life of the planet's most famous secret agent.
     In the opening to 1979's MOONRAKER, the American space shuttle of
the same name is stolen from the top of the 747 on which it is being
carried to Britain.  In a spectacular action sequence, the shuttle
blasts away, turning the 747 into a fireball.
     The maker of the shuttle and several others like it is a wealthy
industrialist named Mr. Drax (Michel Lonsdale).  He lives in California
in an enormous French chateau, which he had brought over stone by stone
from France.  (He purchased the Eiffel Tower as well, but the
inhospitable French wouldn't give him an export permit.)
     When the British government enlists the aid of its best agent to
investigate the shuttle's disappearance, James starts his inquiries at
Mr. Drax's home and laboratories.  With complete lack of subtly, the
nefarious Mr. Drax sends his henchman, Chang, played without much
energy by Toshiro Suga, to see that Mr. Bond's visit isn't a pleasant
one.  "Take care of Mr. Bond," Drax instructs Chang.  "See that some
harm comes to him."
     In his fourth outing as James Bond and now firmly entrenched in
his role as the superspy, Roger Moore seems comfortable in his
perfectly tailored blue suit as he charms every female character.  One
of them, CIA agent Holly Goodhead, played by Lois Chiles from BROADCAST
NEWS, has a knockout body and her own little bag of spy gadgets that
rivals Bond's.
     From France set in California, James hops the globe to Venice in
pursuit of Dr. Goodhead -- she's in disguise as a member of Drax's
space institute.  And to the serenity of the peach colored stone walls
of the Venetian canals, Bond and those chasing him bring powerboats,
machine guns and gondolas that go on land as well as water.  There's
even a knife-wielding corpse who pops out of a gasket during a funeral
procession through the Venetian waterways.
     On the next stop in our spy adventure cum travelogue we take the
supersonic Concorde to Rio de Janeiro as Bond follows a lead on an
ultra-poisonous gas.  Like any tourist James relaxes a bit.  His
version of casual dress is to trade his blue suit in briefly for a
white one.  His informality doesn't last long.  Soon he's decked out in
a formal tuxedo, in which, as in everything he wears; he looks straight
out of a GQ fashion shoot.
     Jaws (Richard Kiel), the man with a mouth of metal from THE SPY
WHO LOVED ME, returns again to try to thwart our hero.  Although his
metal may make mincemeat of his victims, we do learn some of its
downsides, clearing security's metal detectors at airports being one.
Why Bond and Dr. Goodhead choose to engage a seven-foot giant like Jaws
in hand-to-hand combat rather than just plugging him is one of the
story's many mysteries.  But just as you're not supposed to question
the logic of cartoons, neither should you waste too much time pondering
the likelihood of Bond's predicaments and their resolutions.
     The bad guy's plan this time is suitably dastardly.  Our
megalomaniac plans on ending civilization on the earth, it's a complete
annihilation with repopulation by carefully selected humans.  With
shades of the ark, the space shuttles carry young couples who look like
the cast of STARSHIP TROOPERS.
     The space odyssey scenes, although fresh, slow down the pacing of
a story already having trouble keeping up its momentum.  And although
the fight with a big rubber snake, I mean a man-crushing python, isn't
much, the battle with the green-light laser weapons does have good
visuals even if it looks lifted straight out of STAR WARS.
     Besides, any movie where the lead wears a coat and a tie in a
centrifuge is clearly one that doesn't need to be taken too seriously.
Just kick back and enjoy it.
     MOONRAKER runs a little long at 2:06.  It is rated PG for comic
violence and sexual innuendo and would be fine for kids around 9 and
up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, said he thought it was a good movie, and
he ended up liking Jaws, whom he hated in the last episode.  He
especially liked the scenes in space with all of the super-lasers
shooting at each other.  His favorite weapon was Bond's "flick of the
wrist gun."

Author
Andrew Hicks
        They were going to pit James Bond against an evil 
groundskeeper and call the movie LEAFRAKER, but then they 
realized if they put Bond on a space shuttle they could call it 
MOONRAKER instead. It's silly at times, but it is entertaining, and 
how could I give a bad review to the only movie in the series in which 
Bond has zero-gravity sex? Interestingly enough, the escapade is 
broadcast to the leaders of the free world (pay-per-view, of course). 
"What is he doing?!" The head of NASA shrieks, to Q's quick reply, "I 
believe he's attempting re-entry."
        Bond gets not three but four women in the sack here, 
including a scientist from NASA he teams up with to investigate the 
disappearance of a space shuttle. He goes from Venice to Rio De 
Janeiro, with 7-foot-tall, indestructible metal-mouth villain Jaws (who 
also popped up in THE SPY WHO LOVED ME) following. They find 
in Rio that an evil businessman has been sending the shuttles into 
space to form a master race space colony (Adolf enters the space age). 
Satellites containing nerve gas are sent to destroy the earth's 
population. Not a bad idea, but I'd personally extinguish the human 
race by showing them life-sized nude pictures of Bea Arthur.
        The planets are all aligned here, so to speak. The chases are 
edge-of-your-seat entertainment (pure movie magic!), including two 
boat chases, and the death traps are clever, with Jaws being at the 
helm of most of those. The climax on the space station is also good 
stuff. MOONRAKER is an all-around entertaining movie, with that 
zero-gravity sex thrown in to boot.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Roger Moore, Lois Chiles, Michael Lonsdale, Richard Kiel, 
      Corine Clery, Bernard Lee, Desmond Llewelyn, Lois Maxwell
Director: Lewis Gilbert
Producers: Albert R. Broccoli 
Screenplay: Christopher Wood based on the novel by Ian Fleming
Cinematography: Jean Tournier
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     MOONRAKER is a sort of James Bond meets STAR WARS.  Released in 
1979, the year that saw the arrival of STAR TREK on the big screen, 
MOONRAKER was the latest film to latch onto the science fiction revival 
started by George Lucas' 1977 picture.  Audiences flocked to see 
MOONRAKER, making it the highest grossing 007 movie before GOLDENEYE.  
The mixture of escapist action and space shoot-outs found favor with the 
American public.  Indeed, while parts of MOONRAKER are rather silly (a 
trend during Roger Moore's tenure), solid special effects, well-executed 
action sequences, and a strict reliance upon the "Bond Formula" keep 
this film among Moore's better entries as the British superspy.
     Although promotional material for the film highlighted the outer 
space sequences, most of MOONRAKER takes place on Earth, in such diverse 
locations as California, Brazil, and Venice.  Both Bond girls are 
residents of this planet, as well (007 has yet to bed an alien) -- Lois 
Chiles as Holly Goodhead, CIA operative and trained astronaut, and 
Corinne Clery as Corinne Dufour, the assistant to megalomaniac du jour 
Drax (Michael Lonsdale).  
     The film opens with the hijacking of a Moonraker space shuttle on 
loan from the United States to Great Britain.  Anxious to get to the 
bottom of the situation, the British government sends agent 007 to 
investigate, beginning with Drax Industries in California, where the 
shuttle was produced.  Bond arrives, starts poking around, and becomes 
the immediate target of several murder attempts.  Along the way, he 
strikes up a relationship with Dr. Holly Goodhead, one of Drax's chief 
scientists, and encounters an old adversary -- Jaws (again played by 
Richard Kiel).
     While MOONRAKER's centerpiece is the final half-hour, which takes 
place aboard an Earth-orbiting space station, this is actually the least 
entertaining portion of the film.  It's essentially a special effects 
demonstration, with laser bolt shootouts and space shuttles firing at 
deadly satellites.  Most of the tense action scenes occur before Bond 
blasts into outer space.  If nothing else, this film proves that Bond is 
best on Earth.  
     Special note should be made of John Barry's score, his best since 
ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE.  Barry weaves the familiar "James Bond 
theme" and "007 theme" into a rich musical tapestry whose main thread is 
the MOONRAKER title track.  In addition, Barry uses an unusually diverse 
selection of musical cues, including the familiar theme from THE 
MAGNIFICENT SEVEN and the five-note greeting from CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF 
THE THIRD KIND.
     Normally, characters in Bond films don't go through much 
development.  Such is not the case with Jaws, however.  One of 007's 
best adversaries returns for a second engagement (he was also in THE SPY 
WHO LOVED ME).  This time, however, the steel-toothed bad guy has 
mellowed as the direct result of falling in love.  Although Jaws is 
still as indestructible as ever, we see a different side of him as 
MOONRAKER draws to a close.  Just don't expect anything too dramatic -- 
this is still a James Bond movie, after all.
     MOONRAKER marked Bernard Lee's final appearance as M.  The actor 
died while preparing for the next Bond film, FOR YOUR EYES ONLY.  No M 
since has matched Lee's interpretation, and only with his passing did it 
become apparent how important this minor character is to the 007 
adventures.
     As Roger Moore's fourth Bond outing, and the eleventh film in the 
series, MOONRAKER is a satisfying followup to THE SPY WHO LOVED ME.  
Science fiction fans may be offended by some of the liberties taken 
here, but tolerance is necessary.  The film is, after all, geared 
towards a specific audience.  Accent the "fiction" in science fiction, 
and recognize that with Bond, realism is the last thing anyone expects -
- or wants. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin
