Title
Review for Chopper (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
David Sidwell

Cast: Eric Bana, Simon Lyndon, Vince Colosimo, Kate Beahan, David Field,
Dan Wyllie, Bill Young, Kenny Graham
We here in Australia were founded - partially at least - as a big prison.
>From 1788 England dumped its poor, tired and huddled convicts down here. No
statue with an engraved welcome waiting for them, just a hostile, dry and
hot open air continent/prison.
To me, this explains two characteristics that people find puzzling about
the Australian psyche:
1) Our dry, dark "gallows" humour.
2) Our fascination with Bad Boys - the darker elements of our otherwise
shiny, happy society
A classic example of the former is in "Breaker Morant." As Morant is about
to be executed - by an English firing squad -  the Aussie yells out to the
gunmen "shoot straight you bastards, don't make a mess of it".
One of our major folk heroes is a Bad Boy. Mr Edward "Ned" Kelly.
Bushranger, circa 1880. Our favourite song is probably Waltzing Matilda.
It's about a sheep thief, who eludes the law by drowning himself.
And so to "Chopper". Not to compare him to Mr Kelly, nor to imply he is
anything like a folk hero, but to put him - and this movie - into the
broader context of the Australian mind-set. Well, that's the theory anyway.
Mark Brandon "Chopper" Read is real. Very much alive and living in
Tasmania. To say he has lead a colourful life is to not understand the word
colour. He started out in the 1970's as a streetfighter, moved on to
standover man and underworld executioner.  In 1991, whilst still in prison,
he wrote his memoirs. The book "Chopper: From the Inside" was a phenomenal
success. Part confession, part bragging and all wrapped up in Read's
disarming, chatty and funny style. He even wrote poetry about some of his
victims.
He became one of our bestselling authors and has written many a sequel
book. And now we have the movie.
So how to make a film about a bloke who claims to have killed 19 people
(but never an 'innocent member of the public') and yet makes jokes and
writes poems about such things?  Should it be judgemental or just feed us
the data and let us decide?
It's a mercy that debut writer/director Andrew Dominik went for the latter.
To be fair, it's not 'data' in the true sense; the film starts with a
disclaimer implying that some liberty was taken with the facts per se.
However the result is still stunning. 
"Chopper" is a snappy, stylish mixture of extreme violence and wicked
humour.  Using unusual colours and playing with the film speed, Dominik
transports us into the complex and intriguing world of
Chopper.Brutal.Funny.Com. 
He even uses poetry in one memorable scene, with all characters giving
their rhyming lines to camera with the film strangely sped up. The result
is all surreal and jerky; like a coloured-up version of an ultra-violent
Charlie Chaplin.  Oh, they are waxing lyrical about their roles in the same
murder. The victim is in there too. You don't know if you should laugh or
be appalled.
In the lead role Eric Bana is mesmerising. Best known here for his TV comic
skills, Bana's electric performance dominates and carries the film. Bana is
hardly ever off the frame.  "Chopper" is a complex role, which Bana
captures with great aplomb. He stabs someone and then we see the shock and
concern - for the victim - build up in his eyes. The two dimensional pulp
fiction character suddenly spawns an unexpected third dimension. 
You may recall the disarming style of "Muriel's Wedding" - nearly every
time there was a blissfully happy event, it ended in tragedy or despair.
"Chopper" has the reverse; probably reflecting Read's own style. Episodes
start off fairly friendly, but you know that it's going to end in mayhem.
Chopper is rated R here and is not for the feint hearted.
Everything works - the writing, direction and postproduction. Bana and his
excellent support cast bring it all together. The film doesn't take sides
in a complex and dangerous playing field. Walking that fine line and still
being an adventurous and entertaining movie is just one of its many triumphs.

Author
Steve Rhodes
CHOPPER, written and directed by Andrew Dominik, is based on the books 
written by one of Australia's most notorious criminals, Mark "Chopper" 
Read, but the film is careful to point out that the story is not a 
biography, per se.  What it is is a chilling tale that is made even more 
intriguing by being based on a real criminal.  
The compelling reason to see CHOPPER is the tour de force performance by 
Eric Bana as Chopper.  (A reason not to see it, for some, is that it is 
intense, realistic and graphically violent.)  Bana so inhabits his part 
as Chopper that it becomes hard to belief that he is just acting.  Bana 
is probably a sweet guy in real life, but, after seeing this movie, 
you'd probably run away if you met him in public.  
Chopper, looking like a Hell's Angel with an almost indecipherable 
Aussie accent, has rolls of fat on his beer belly.  His skin is 
tattooed, not with works of body "art" but rather with something that 
looks more like doodling, and his mouth is filled with shiny metal 
teeth.  Even with all of these bodily distractions, he still comes 
across as a strangely likable guy, who just happens to be a sociopath 
who might kill you instantly because of a real or imagined offense 
against him.
Between violent episodes in and out of prison, there are some humorous 
scenes as well.  Chopper knows that his girlfriend, Tanya (Kate Beahan), 
works in a brothel.  Jealous since he thinks she's seeing someone, he 
asks her whom she's screwing.  Laughing out loud, she reminds him what 
she does for a living.  After thinking a minute, which doesn't come 
naturally to Chopper, he demands to know whom she has been kissing, 
figuring that she saves that for her lovers.  Chopper is the kind of guy 
to whom there are no right answers.  Luckily, she and her mother are 
only beaten, not killed.
Although most viewers are probably uncomfortable with such intense 
experiences as CHOPPER, for those who can stomach it, this movie is a 
fascinating portrait of a frightening man.  And it contains a great 
performance by Eric Bana.
CHOPPER runs 1:34.  It is not rated but would be NC-17 for graphic 
violence, drug usage and language and would be acceptable for college 
students and older.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 First Look Pictures/Pariah Films/ Mushroom Pictures
 Director: Andrew Dominik
 Writer:  Andrew Dominik, book "Chopper" by Mark Read
 Cast: Eric Bana, Simon Lyndon, Vince Colosimo, David
Field, Kenny Graham
   People serving time in jail live in their own worlds,
organizing themselves into status hierarchies just like the
folks churning out a living outside.  The common mugger,
often a semiliterate young person going from victim to victim
to feed a drug habit would be fairly low on the totem pole
except perhaps among his fellow street criminals.  Those who
rape children are pretty low on the scale as other prisoners
may think of their own sisters, while members of organized
crime are on top--doubtless because fellow inmates fear them
but also have respect for the businesslike ways they carry out
their activities.  The subject of Andrew Dominik's compelling
drama, Mark Read (aka Chopper), is a killer but in a different
way from the hit men who do jobs for the mob.  He is not
organized, he has few and ultimately no real friends, and yet
he has garnered the respect not only of the prison guards but
of TV interviewers, detectives, and readers of best-sellers. 
The film, a character study of one of Australia's most best-
known criminals, examines Read from various perspectives,
with scripter Dominik placing words in his mouth that make us
laugh at the very moment we witness some gruesome, violent
acts.  Based on Read's autobiography--which sold 250,000
copies in his home country--"Chopper" look like a biopic but
in reality is not for two reasons: some of the characters that
inhabit the man's world are composites, and some of the
braggadocio of Read himself is scarcely to be believed.
   Late in the story, we hear Read boasting that he killed
nineteen people, slicing off the toes of some of them simply
to hear them pop; in the film, we observe this killer murdering
only two.  Read is a bundle of ironies and contradictions: he
is human just like the rest of us, feeling guilty for what he
does, and yet he persists in his alarmingly violent behavior.
He is witty, a guy with a great sense of humor, yet when he
carries a grudge he relentlessly seeks out vengeance.  His
basic demeanor is an engaging one so that those who have
no idea what he has done would consider him a worthy
subject for a chat on TV (which indeed he participated in),
and yet he can change his mood from delight to fury as
quickly as a giggly baby who suddenly wets himself or a
wiseass adolescent who is told to leave the room and see the
principal.
   This Sundance 2001 entry which has already won three
major awards from the Australian Film Industry (best actor,
best supporting actor and best director) is divided into two
segments, the first taking place in 1978 while the latter part
follows Read's life eight years later.  We see him in the H
Division, the maximum security section of Melbourne's
Pentridge Prison, watching the interview that he took part in
some time earlier on the small screen of his cellhouse TV. 
Two guards sit with him laughing when he does and generally
seeming to bond with this paradoxically charming murderer
more than with their fellow screws.  Dominik then takes us
back to Chopper's earlier days in the brig, where he had
been sentenced for kidnapping the judge who was presiding
over the trial of his pal Jimmy (Simon Lyndon).  Taunted by a
fellow inmate (who uses shoe polish to cover a bald spot),
Read wreaks terrible vengeance only to be betrayed later by
his best friend--who stabs him multiple times, compelling
Read to plot vengeance later when both are released from
prison.  Dominik follows Read from his earlier days as a slim,
in-shape fellow to a pudgy, tattooed and scarred wreck who
had lost none of his sense of humor.  While the subject
remains obsessed with vengeance, he has time to spend with
his hooker girlfriend Tanya (Kate Beahan), who makes little
attempt to hide her affection for a rich drug dealer Neville
Bartos (Vince Colosimo).  Read becomes so obsessed with
hatred for Neville and Jimmy that we are amazed he can
smile broadly, whether interviewed by a comely and
fascinated  host (Renee Brack) or chatting with his
understanding and forgiving dad, Keith Read (Kenny
Graham).
   Eric Bana, who is ethnically German-Croatian and is well
known as a TV comic in his native Australia, turns in a
remarkable performance, easily combining the severity of his
character's passion with the easy wit and carefree charm that
could--and did--win over a jury which refused to convict him
for murder.  As evidence of his appeal even to those who are
properly horrified by his deeds, simply go to Amazon.com and
note the titles of his books which include "How to Shoot
Friends and Influence People."  My distinguished online
colleague from Australia, Luke Buckmaster, has said of this
picture, "Hollywood has built a foundation that relies on
stuffing films down the viewers' throats...we are told what to
think and how to react....'Chopper' cannot take this
stance...[it]doesn't treat viewers like consumer purchasing
morons."  Absolutely true: as with "Natural Born Killer," we
are not told what to think of the subject of the picture. 
"Chopper" is a thinking person's comment on a brutal man
with a wry sense of humor, its lensers (Geoffrey Hall and
Kevin Haywood), filming the prison scene in what could best
be called puke green while writer-director Dominik confronts
us with a barrage of contradictory emotions, at one point
even having his characters speak in rhymed couplets as
though he were staging a comedy by Moliere. 
Not Rated.  Running time: 94 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
A title card that precedes Andrew Dominik's first film declares the work to
be a dramatization rather than a biography, but it doesn't really lessen the
impact Chopper can have on an audience.  It's essentially a biopic about
notorious Australian bad boy Mark Brandon Read, who earned the nickname
"Chopper" by hacking off the toes of his victims (of which there are,
reportedly, 19).
Unlike America's infamous nerdy killers, the heavily tattooed Read is as
charismatic as they come.  When he explains the world really would be a
better place without his victims, we believe that just might be the case.
The public's fascination with Read doesn't stop with rehashing the grisly
details of his crimes, either.  Read has written a series of books from
prison, and each has become a bestseller.  Although Read's exploits are
probably a bit exaggerated, make no mistake about it - he's one bad dude.
The film begins in the '70s, where Read (played by Eric Bana) is in the
pokey for botching a kidnapping attempt he'd been dreaming of since he was a
boy (and all I was concerned with was scoring me some Batman Underoos). It's
a maximum-security prison (it still looks like a country club compared to
Oz), and Read makes some pretty big enemies while inside. So big, in fact,
Read had his own ears sliced off to get himself moved to a different cell
block.
Fast-forward to the '80s, where Read is back on the streets, raising all
kinds of hell in the seedy underbelly of Melbourne. And he does a lot of
really bad things, most of which probably actually happened. It's ghastly,
horrible stuff, but Chopper is the rare film in which you can root for a
heinous, real-life criminal and not feel like a tool for doing it, making it
a bit like John Boorman's The General in some respect. Also appealing is
Dominik's decision to neither demonize nor praise Read, leaving that
decision to be made by each individual viewer. Dominik fills the film with a
number of pretty dazzling visual tricks, as well.
The real star here is Bana, one of Australia's biggest standup comedians He
doesn't have much acting experience (he had a small part in The Castle), yet
is still able to stick this performance. Think about Ray Romano nailing the
lead role in a Ted Bundy biopic to get an idea of how impressive this feat
is. Bana is probably just as charismatic as Read, and his deadpan one-liners
make the film something special. When Read is shanked by one of his friends,
he doesn't roll around in agony, but responds, "What's gotten into you?"
When he stabs a foe in the neck, Read doesn't run away, but instead asks,
"You all right, mate?"
I think President Dubya would call that Compassionate Callousness.
1:33 - R for graphic violence and adult language
