Title
Review for Halloween: The Curse of Michael Myers (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Alex Fung
HALLOWEEN: H20 - TWENTY YEARS LATER (Dimension - 1998)
Starring Jamie Lee Curtis, Adam Arkin, Josh Hartnett
Screenplay by Robert Zappia, Matt Greenberg
Produced by Paul Freeman
Directed by Steve Miner
Running time: 85 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   No compendium addressing Hollywood cinema in the 1990s would be
   complete without a reference to the remarkable effect the works of
   screenwriter-of-the-moment Kevin Williamson have had on the film
   industry.  Churning out successive blockbusters SCREAM, I KNOW WHAT
   YOU DID LAST SUMMER, and SCREAM 2 (not to mention TV's latest trendy
   teen serial, DAWSON'S CREEK), he's reinvigorated the slasher genre
   to a point where an installment of the venerable HALLOWEEN franchise
   is not only being treated like an event movie by its handlers at
   Dimension Films, but looms so fearsome that its competitors have
   scrambled to avoid matching up against it -- the opening for
   DISTURBING BEHAVIOUR jumped two weeks, while VIRUS has been shuttled
   off to 1999.  When one considers the relative indifference which met
   the previous entry in the series a mere three years ago, HALLOWEEN
   6: THE CURSE OF MICHAEL MYERS, the shift in the climate is obvious.
   Mr. Williamson's fingerprints are all over this latest installment,
   HALLOWEEN: H20 - TWENTY YEARS LATER, as well.  An avid fan of the
   original John Carpenter classic, it's no secret that the current
   project was originally based on his story (Mr. Williamson eventually
   took an executive producer credit), and that he drummed up a cameo
   role on request for actress Janet Leigh.  In addition, his
   now-trademark referential style is clearly evident throughout --
   there are obvious nods to key scary films of the past, including the
   FRIDAY THE 13TH series, PSYCHO, and even PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE.
   (Well, *that* one's just dreadfully frightening.)
   The big hook for this 20th anniversary edition, of course, is the
   return of erstwhile scream queen Jamie Lee Curtis as Laurie Strode,
   the heroine of the first two films; as such, it's entirely
   appropriate that she enters the story shrieking her lungs out.  Take
   that, Neve Campbell -- the queen is back in town.
   But first, the film opens with a derivative, albeit capable, prologue
   involving another returning character, nurse Marion (Nancy Stephens),
   who finds her ominous, darkened house seemingly burgled.  As anyone
   familiar with the slasher genre can tell you, *don't go in there* --
   fortunately, she's been in two of these films before, so she knows
   what she's doing; two neighbourhood boys are dispatched instead to
   investigate the deathtrap.  It all ends rather messily, of course
   (and echoes -- you guessed it -- the opening scene in SCREAM [which
   itself referenced HALLOWEEN] by ending with cries of terror falling
   upon oblivious ears), but director Steve Miner adequately mimics
   John Carpenter's roaming POV Panavision images and conveys a nice
   sense of titillating dread during the segment.  The preface is capped
   off with an atmospheric opening credits sequence encapsulating the
   backstory (and winningly homaging the late Donald Pleasance's
   character, Dr. Loomis -- whom, in my book, was the series' most
   intriguing) which conveys two unmistakable points: a) Laurie Strode
   has faked her death and gone into hiding, and b) homicidal boogeyman
   (and brother, natch) Michael Myers is coming to get her.
   The final confrontation between the estranged siblings is clearly the
   showcase for the picture, but some forty minutes of maddening
   banality must be endured first.  While The Shape makes his
   cross-country trek, the film establishes its new characters and
   revisits Laurie, who's changed her identity and moved to California,
   leading a low-key life as the headmistress of a posh boarding school.
   Despite twenty years of anonymity and relative tranquillity, all is
   not right with our heroine -- for one thing, disconcerting visions of
   little brother pop up every five minutes or so.  The picture so
   mindlessly overkills with its reinforcement of Laurie's traumatized
   state (she pops pills, tosses down drinks with utter abandon, and is
   even referred to in dialogue as a functioning alcoholic) that it all
   becomes tiresome; any creepy effect generated by her neverending
   series of Michael Myers-themed hallucinations is sapped.  (It doesn't
   help that the eventual payoff scene is fumbled, either.)
   One of the requisites of the slasher genre is fodder for its maniac,
   and H20 oblingly complies, tossing a quartet of nubile adolescents
   and a couple of bumbling authority figures into the fray and then
   numbingly extending copious amounts of uninteresting screentime to
   these generic, disposable characters.  (Ronny, the would-be comic
   relief in the film, distinguishes himself the most, if only for being
   perhaps the most incompetent security guard on the planet.)  Although
   it's interesting to consider how it all might have played out had
   original choices Robert Forster and Charles S. Dutton took on the
   roles which ultimately went to Adam Arkin and L.L. Cool J,
   respectively, the weakness lies with the thinly-drawn archetypes
   thrust upon the actors.  The picture's interminable middle stretch is
   tedious, dreary material, punctuated by Mr. Miner's annoying attempts
   to elicit cheap shocks by zinging the sound board with every opening
   door.
   The problem is that there's just not enough story to sustain this
   film; although its running time is already a thin 85 minutes, if one
   cuts the fat off this flick we could conceivably be looking at a
   short film.  As a result, liberal doses of padding are used to occupy
   the bulk of the picture, killing time until Michael Myers arrives on
   the scene in a stolen car (the thought of which, forgive me, always
   makes me smile -- The Shape may be one bad-ass psychopathic maniac,
   but he's a mighty careful driver).
   The stretch drive of the film, featuring Michael Myers making the
   rounds and finally facing off against sis Laurie in a fight to the
   finish, is what we've been waiting for the entire film, and well
   worth the wait, almost redeeming the preceding monotony.  Though
   none of it is particularly original, it's nonetheless good fun to
   watch Michael stalk his prey (at one point, Michelle Williams put on
   a petrified expression that made me break out in a grin) and the
   sibling combat is about as exciting as a battle with a relentless,
   unstoppable villain can be.  The showdown includes the film's two
   best moments -- a shot of Myers, just out of reach from his victims,
   zestfully slashing away, and a terrific cinematic scene which finds
   Laurie calling out a challenge to the killer as the camera cranes
   back and an orchestral rendition of John Carpenter's unmistakable
   theme explodes on the soundtrack.  (It'd have been more effective if
   it were the simple, more elegaic piano original, but no matter.)
   What really makes the sequence work is the crazed intensity which
   shines through as Laurie shrieks into the darkness, indicating her
   shift from hunted to hunter; at that moment, she's the scariest
   person in the film.
   That being said, H20 isn't a noticeably scary film -- it relies more
   on adrenaline thrills than chills to keep the audience involved --
   and for a slasher flick, it's hardly gory; the resolution of a
   perversely intriguing tyke-in-jeopardy moment is indicative of its
   toothlessness.  It remains to be seen how the sheer predictability of
   its by-the-numbers plotting is received by savvy audiences -- I don't
   think it's any coincidence that the (annoying) eight-year old next to
   me that snuck into the screening was able to both correctly identify
   SCREAM 2 as the video tape playing onscreen and accurately (and
   loudly) assess the fates of the various extraneous characters.
   Among the three key horror franchises which emerged from the slasher
   era, HALLOWEEN is the sole survivor, having watched Wes Craven's A
   NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET gracefully bow out and FRIDAY THE 13TH go
   belly-up (although rumblings still persist about a Freddy vs. Jason
   project in the works, God forbid -- in terms of charisma, it's a
   mismatch).  Like all sequels of this genre, this film ends with a
   note of perceived finality, made all the more convincing by the
   characters involved and the manner in which it's dispatched.  Still,
   I don't buy it -- considering the plethora of inventive previous
   demises and after all he's been through, do we really have a reason
   to believe they can keep a good man down?
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"...a first screenplay unaccompanied by a powerful agent or industry
 sponsor is generally a pathetic fetus of a film, nothing more."
                               - Andrew Sarris

Author
Richard Scheib
HALLOWEEN: THE CURSE OF MICHAEL MYERS
USA. 1995. Director - Joe Chappelle, Screenplay - Daniel Farrands, 
Producer - Paul Freeman, Photography - Billy Dickson, Additional 
Photography - Tom Calloway, Music - Alan Howarth, Halloween Theme - John 
Carpenter, Special Effects Supervisor - Larry Fioritto, Makeup Effects - 
Magical Media Industries Inc (Designer/Supervisor - John Buechler), 
Additional Makeup Effects - Image Animation (Supervisor - Gary J. 
Tunicliffe), Production Design - Bryan Ryman. Production Company - 
Nightfall Productions.
Marianne Hagan (Kara Strode), Paul Stephen Rudd (Tommy Doyle), Donald 
Pleasence (Dr Sam Loomis), George P. Wilbur (The Shape/Michael Myers), 
J.C. Brandy (Jamie Lloyd), Kim Darby (Debra Strode), Bradford English 
(John Strode), Mitchell Ryan (Dr Terence Wynn), Devin Gardner (Danny 
Strode), Keith Bogart (Tim Strode), Mariah O'Brien (Beth), Janice 
Knickrehm (Mrs Blankenship)
Plot: Michael Myers returns to Haddonfield on Halloween night where he 
stalks Laurie Strode's cousin Kara and her family who have moved into 
the old Myers house. Kara's nerdish neighbour Tommy Doyle discovers 
abandoned the baby that is the last surviving inheritor of the Myers 
name that Michael is determined to kill. As he tries to protect the baby 
he discovers that Michael Myers is the incarnation of an ancient druidic 
personification of evil and is being sought by a group of modern druidic 
cultists in the town.
A strong case could be made that John Carpenter's cult 1978 hit 
`Halloween' was a film that shaped the face of the modern horror film. 
With `Halloween' Carpenter set out with no real intent other than to 
craft a pure rollercoaster ride of jolts and shocks. `Halloween's appeal 
rested as much in the ability to streamline the horror film into a pure 
shock machine, as it was to take it out of the shadows of Hammer Gothic 
and the melodramatic thriller contrivations of `Psycho' and its ilk and 
make it a wholly modern new form. The film's influence can be felt 
through an enormous number of other films from `Friday the 13th' and `A 
Nightmare on Elm Street' and their various sequels and imitators through 
to the obvious homages in the current `Scream' films.
After the success of `Halloween', Carpenter oversaw the obligatory 
`Halloween II' in 1981 but then with 1982's `Halloween III: Season of 
the Witch' tried to use the `Halloween' name to kick off an original, 
unlinked anthology series. That was an idea that promptly went nowhere. 
Carpenter then sold out interest in the franchise and 1988's `Halloween: 
The Return of Michael Myers' made a predictably sequelistic return to 
The Shape/Michael Myers saga. By the time of this, the fifth sequel to 
`Halloween', a thorough sense of pointlessness hangs over the series. 
What stood `Halloween' above the mostly worthless run of slasher film 
imitators - the `Friday the 13th' films being a perfect example - was 
the seat-edge directorial grip with which it was crafted. Sadly what 
made `Halloween' work is a lesson that almost no slasher film succeeded 
in learning, with almost all  substituting potpourris of gory despatches 
and a lineup of faceless teen victims over the creation of suspense and 
characters that one could give a damn about. And even more sadly this is 
a lesson that all of the `Halloween' sequels have even failed to learn 
from the source they owe their own name to.
There are occassional moments were director Joe Chappelle seems on the 
verge of rediscovering some of the style that Carpenter infused the 
original with - the there again/gone again pop-up tricks and the spooky 
peripheral shots with The Shape appearing on the edge of the camera 
frame or behind people's shoulders. But these occasional moments are 
ruined by pointlessly gory payoffs which show the film has no real focus 
above the conveyor belt line of splattery novelty deaths served up in 
the average `Friday the 13th' sequel. The exercise is disappointingly 
hollow and by comparison manages to make both `Halloween's II' and `IV'  
suddenly seem a whole lot better by comparison.
The film is further shot in by a plot which throws in an absurd spin 
that turns Michael Myers into some druidic avatar of evil incarnate. The 
explanation for this is murky and sounds just as silly when offered up 
on screen as it does in description here.  Even more ill explained are a 
series of subplots that reveal several of the cast members as belonging 
to some type of baby-snatching druidic cult that wants Michael Myers and 
the last surviving Myers baby. (Why, is never made clear). You could 
almost argue that the film might be trying to establish some type of 
grand  thematic link to unite itself up with the druidic witchcraft plot 
of the unconnected `Halloween III'. But in truth the film is shabbily, 
indifferently plotted and a disgracefully poor blackening of the eminent 
name of its original that it bears.


Author
Richard Scheib
HALLOWEEN: THE CURSE OF MICHAEL MYERS
USA. 1995. Director - Joe Chappelle, Screenplay - Daniel Farrands, 
Producer - Paul Freeman, Photography - Billy Dickson, Additional 
Photography - Tom Calloway, Music - Alan Howarth, Halloween Theme - John 
Carpenter, Special Effects Supervisor - Larry Fioritto, Makeup Effects - 
Magical Media Industries Inc (Designer/Supervisor - John Buechler), 
Additional Makeup Effects - Image Animation (Supervisor - Gary J. 
Tunicliffe), Production Design - Bryan Ryman. Production Company - 
Nightfall Productions.
Marianne Hagan (Kara Strode), Paul Stephen Rudd (Tommy Doyle), Donald 
Pleasence (Dr Sam Loomis), George P. Wilbur (The Shape/Michael Myers), 
J.C. Brandy (Jamie Lloyd), Kim Darby (Debra Strode), Bradford English 
(John Strode), Mitchell Ryan (Dr Terence Wynn), Devin Gardner (Danny 
Strode), Keith Bogart (Tim Strode), Mariah O'Brien (Beth), Janice 
Knickrehm (Mrs Blankenship)
Plot: Michael Myers returns to Haddonfield on Halloween night where he 
stalks Laurie Strode's cousin Kara and her family who have moved into 
the old Myers house. Kara's nerdish neighbour Tommy Doyle discovers 
abandoned the baby that is the last surviving inheritor of the Myers 
name that Michael is determined to kill. As he tries to protect the baby 
he discovers that Michael Myers is the incarnation of an ancient druidic 
personification of evil and is being sought by a group of modern druidic 
cultists in the town.
A strong case could be made that John Carpenter's cult 1978 hit 
`Halloween' was a film that shaped the face of the modern horror film. 
With `Halloween' Carpenter set out with no real intent other than to 
craft a pure rollercoaster ride of jolts and shocks. `Halloween's appeal 
rested as much in the ability to streamline the horror film into a pure 
shock machine, as it was to take it out of the shadows of Hammer Gothic 
and the melodramatic thriller contrivations of `Psycho' and its ilk and 
make it a wholly modern new form. The film's influence can be felt 
through an enormous number of other films from `Friday the 13th' and `A 
Nightmare on Elm Street' and their various sequels and imitators through 
to the obvious homages in the current `Scream' films.
After the success of `Halloween', Carpenter oversaw the obligatory 
`Halloween II' in 1981 but then with 1982's `Halloween III: Season of 
the Witch' tried to use the `Halloween' name to kick off an original, 
unlinked anthology series. That was an idea that promptly went nowhere. 
Carpenter then sold out interest in the franchise and 1988's `Halloween 
IV: The Return of Michael Myers' made a predictably sequelistic return 
to The Shape/Michael Myers saga. By the time of this, the fifth sequel 
to `Halloween', a thorough sense of pointlessness hangs over the series. 
What stood `Halloween' above the mostly worthless run of slasher film 
imitators - the `Friday the 13th' films being a perfect example - was 
the seat-edge directorial grip with which it was crafted. Sadly what 
made `Halloween' work is a lesson that almost no slasher film succeeded 
in learning, with almost all  substituting potpourris of gory despatches 
and a lineup of faceless teen victims over the creation of suspense and 
characters that one could give a damn about. And even more sadly this is 
a lesson that all of the `Halloween' sequels have even failed to learn 
from the source they owe their own name to.
There are occassional moments were director Joe Chappelle seems on the 
verge of rediscovering some of the style that Carpenter infused the 
original with - the there again/gone again pop-up tricks and the spooky 
peripheral shots with The Shape appearing on the edge of the camera 
frame or behind people's shoulders. But these occasional moments are 
ruined by pointlessly gory payoffs which show the film has no real focus 
above the conveyor belt line of splattery novelty deaths served up in 
the average `Friday the 13th' sequel. The exercise is disappointingly 
hollow and by comparison manages to make both `Halloween's II' and `IV'  
suddenly seem a whole lot better by comparison.
The film is further shot in by a plot which throws in an absurd spin 
that turns Michael Myers into some druidic avatar of evil incarnate. The 
explanation for this is murky and sounds just as silly when offered up 
on screen as it does in description here.  Even more ill explained are a 
series of subplots that reveal several of the cast members as belonging 
to some type of baby-snatching druidic cult that wants Michael Myers and 
the last surviving Myers baby. (Why, is never made clear). You could 
almost argue that the film might be trying to establish some type of 
grand  thematic link to unite itself up with the druidic witchcraft plot 
of the unconnected `Halloween III'. But in truth the film is shabbily, 
indifferently plotted and a disgracefully poor blackening of the eminent 
name of its original that it bears.


Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995 
U.S. Availability: 9/29/95 (wide) 
Running Length: 1:28 
MPAA Classification: R (Extreme gore, violence, brief nudity, profanity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
Cast: Donald Pleasence, Marianne Hagen, Devin Gardner, George Wilbur, 
      Paul Stephen Rudd, Kim Darby, Mitchell Ryan, J. C. Brady 
Director: Joe Chappelle 
Producer: Paul Freeman 
Screenplay: Daniel Farrands 
Cinematography: Billy Dickson 
Music: Alan Howarth; "Halloween" theme by John Carpenter 
U.S. Distributor: Dimension Films 
     Before Jason and Freddy, there was Michael Myers, wearing his
white-painted Captain Kirk mask and stalking Jamie Lee Curtis.  Michael
made his debut in John Carpenter's 1978 horror classic, HALLOWEEN,
possibly the best scare movie to come along in the last twenty-five
years.  It set a standard that nothing since has come close to
equaling--not five HALLOWEEN sequels or numerous rip-offs.  Now, with
the release of the sixth (and hopefully final) movie to bear the
HALLOWEEN moniker, we see how far the mighty have fallen.
     It's six years after the events of the last film and Michael
(George Wilbur) is back.  So too is the mysterious cloaked stranger
with steel-tipped boots (try not to laugh too hard when you find out
his identity).  As predictable as ever, Michael is still after his
niece, Jamie (J. C. Brandy).  He reaches his quarry a little late,
however.  By the time he impales her on a sharp object, Jamie has
already given birth to a baby boy.  Therefore, since the bloodline
continues, Michael's work isn't done.  And because the baby is on its
way to Haddonfield in the care of someone Michael terrorized during his
original night of terror, guess where the killer is headed?  And, of
course, what kind of party would it be without an appearance by
doddering old Doctor Loomis (Donald Pleasance, who died soon after
completing this film), looking more decrepit than ever?
     Never has the HALLOWEEN series appeared worse than in its latest
incarnation.  This one makes installment five look like a veritable
masterpiece.  Just goes to show that if they keep making these kinds of
films, they'll find ways to screw things up even more.  There's no
sense of danger--Michael is stalking characters we don't care about.
Haddonfield has turned into a town without a personality or soul, and
even Michael doesn't seem the least bit menacing.  His murderous
tendencies are mechanical by now--he sees, he goes after, he
kills--usually in the bloodiest manner possible.  Even the unmistakable
theme music sounds tinny and hollow, and is mixed with the generic
strains of something credited to Alan Howarth.
     Needless to say, the gore level is high and the scare level
low--although not as low as the intelligence level.  Half the
     time, I didn't understand what was going on.  The other half, I
didn't care.  I tried to keep a body count (making tick marks on my
notepad gave me something to do), but I lost track during the climactic
massacre.  I guess the total must have been somewhere around twenty,
but it's difficult to be sure.  By now, you'd think Haddonfield would
be prepared for this sort of thing whenever Dr. Loomis shows up
muttering about "pure evil" and Michael "coming home."  Heck, if I
lived there and saw Loomis coming, I'd get out of town.
     Perhaps the saddest thing about this HALLOWEEN is the dedication
at the end:  "For Donald Pleasence."  What a tragic epitaph for the
once-great British actor that this tripe should represent his last
on-screen appearance--even if it is true that over the past seventeen
years, Pleasence and HALLOWEEN have become synonymous.  Indeed, many of
his younger fans know him only from this series.
     The release date of the film is odd--one would have expected a
HALLOWEEN sequel to open a little closer to October 31 (actually, it
was originally scheduled for October 13, but the competition was deemed
too stiff).  As it is, this movie will no longer be around by the time
Halloween arrives, the marketplace for slasher movies having dwindled
dramatically.  In the final analysis, THE CURSE OF MICHAEL MYERS is a
horrific motion picture--just not in the way the film makers
intended.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Jerry Saravia
It has been over twenty years since the original "Halloween" film which spawned
several terrible imitators and endless sequels. The Michael Myers character in
the first film was shrouded in mystery since we didn't know what his motivation
was or why he chose to revisit his hometown of Haddonfield where he killed his
sister. Michael was unspeakably evil - an inhuman monster walking at a snail's
pace and seemingly indestructible. The John Carpenter original remains a
classic, scary, imaginative, low-budget independent film with a great, heroic
role by a very young Jamie Lee Curtis. After "Halloween II," however, the series
became repetitive and unnecessarily gory - a never-ending spectacle for
witnessing the numerous methods Michael employed in killing his latest victims.
1995's "Halloween: The Curse of Michael Myers" is so awful that it defies
description and also wants to offer explanations for Michael's behavior -
questions better left unanswered. 
The opening scene is promising. A young woman carries her baby outside of a dank
hospital and drives away in rainy weather. She stops at an empty bus station. A
shadow appears and a white mask emerges from the shadow. It's of course Michael
with a big, glinting knife! Oh, well, it seemed promising. The woman in this
opening sequence is Michael Myers' niece from the last two "Halloween" pictures,
but who cares? 
Michael goes back to Haddonfield since the Halloween season is around the corner
again. A dysfunctional family has the misfortune of living at the former Myers
house where Michael killed his sister. Wait a minute. If the house was boarded
up and considered haunted by the townsfolk, why would anyone want to renovate it
and resell it? Haven't these people heard of Amityville before? The plot
thickens. If you are one of two people who has seen "Halloween 5," you'll recall
the mysterious character with a black cloak and hat who rescues Michael from
prison in the ludicrous finale. That mysterious stranger (no doubt, a homage to
the Shadow) is back, and apparently runs the ominous hospital we see at the
beginning and, get this (*spoilers ahead*), Michael Myers works for him! 
Paul Rudd ("The Cider House Rules") appears as the little kid whom Laurie
babysitted in the original film. Now he's all grown-up and looks rather creepy.
He claims to know why Michael Myers is indestructible and is aware that Myers'
wrath is about to be set off again, thanks to complex charts that revolve around
the Druids! Poor Donald Pleasance in, sadly, his last role as Dr. Loomis returns
as a man who has retired and is living in isolation. Still, he decides to get
rid of Michael one more time thanks to Mr. Rudd. What for? The monster couldn't
be killed after five sequels so what makes Loomis think he can kill him now. 
"Halloween" The Curse of Michael Myers" exists in two versions, one is a
producer's cut that has forty minutes of restored footage, an alternate (and
sillier) ending and new music. It is considered the superior version but all I
can say is that it is as poorly made, amateurishly acted, unscary and
unsuspenseful as the theatrical version. The fact is that this "Curse" should
have ended the franchise for good and ever but no. One more sequel with Jamie
Lee returning surfaced in 1998 not to mention yet another upcoming sequel with
Jamie Lee again! Probably the scariest element of "Curse" is that Donald
Pleasance saw it fit to reprise his Dr. Loomis role. A curse, indeed. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com
