Title
Review for Et Dieu... créa la femme (1956)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
When French film director Roger Vadim died last month, most
of the obituaries dealt less with his work and more with the
fact that he had been married or had romantic relationship
with some of the most beautiful film actresses of his time.
Vadim's romantic relationships were intertwined with his
professional life, though, and many of those actresses had
their careers launched or boosted by appearing in his
movies. The best known example is Brigitte Bardot, probably
the most famous French movie icon of this century, married
for Vadim in the early 1950s. She reached world-wide fame by
starring in her husband's 1956 melodrama ...AND GOD CREATED
WOMAN, film that pushed the limits of screen erotica in its
time.
Brigitte Bardot plays the heroine of the film, Juliette,
18-year old orphan who lives with her foster parents in
small French Riviera town of St. Tropez. Juliette is
sexually attractive woman, object of desire among entire
male population of the town, and being quite aware of it,
she takes the kick out of teasing men by dressing and acting
provocatively. Nobody is immune to her charms, including
wealthy businessman Carradine (played by Curd Juergens), but
Juliette is going out with Antoine Tardieu (played by
Christian Marquand), eldest son in the family of
impoverished local shipbuilders. Antoine and everyone else
is going to lose her, though, because her foster parents had
enough of scandals and want to send her back to orphanage.
When Carradine suggests that she could be saved from such
fate by marrying one of the local boys, Antoine's shy
younger brother Michel (played by Jean-Louis Trintignant)
suddenly volunteers for the job. Because of the bride's slut
reputation, everyone in town is ridiculing the marriage, but
newlyweds suddenly realise that they love each other. Their
idyll ends when Antoine gets back in the town, since
Juliette can't resist opportunity to cheat on her husband.
The script by Vadim and Roger Levy is simple, hardly
original and more in the class of television soap operas
than great cinema classics. Observation of social
relationships in small town (the way that people's action
are led more by their wallets than by their feelings) are
only hinted and not explored enough. Characters are hardly
memorable, although they are played by more than capable
actors (especially in the case of Curd Juergens and young
Jean-Louis Trintignant). Vadim is, however, never impressed
with the lack of content in his picture, and he compensates
it with packing into visually attractive film. Colours are
bright, locations quite charming and the new Cinemascope
technique used with great skill. But the biggest attraction
of the film is, of course, Brigitte Bardot. She not just
looks stunnigly beautiful, she uses all her acting talent to
simply ooze raw sexuality from the screen, creating
character that seems to be the living embodiment of male
sexist ideals - woman who is virgin and slut in the same
time. Vadim enhances his wife's seductive abilities by using
Cinemascope to show her body in a ways it was never shown in
mainstream cinema before. Her first appearance in the film -
when she sunbathes in the nude - might seem quite tame,
almost kindergarten material for our standards, but it must
have been quite shocking for 1950s audience. However,
despite being almost half a century old, this cheap
melodrama still posseses certain charm that would endure
same as the legend of Bardot.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
