Title
Review for Brazil (1985)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Terry Gilliam
Writers: Terry Gilliam, Charles McKeown and Tom Stoppard
Starring: Jonathan Pryce, Kim Greist, Michael Palin, Robert DeNiro, Ian 
Holm, Bob Hoskins, Katherine Helmond, Jim Broadbent, Charles McKeown, 
Ian Richardon, Peter Vaughn, Gordon Kaye
Terry Gilliam has a warped mind.  We all knew he was a tad off-kilter 
when we saw his bizarre animation on "Monty Python's Flying Circus" and 
other brit shows in the 60s, but this is the film that separated him 
from the "Python" pack and established him as not only one of the 
greatest directors of our times, but as an intellectual, cryptic and 
bizarro individual.
"Brazil" is a black, black, black comedy set in an alternate reality or 
a future (the film cryptically says in the beginning "Somewhere in the 
20th century") probably in England.  The world is ruled by "The 
Ministry" which serves as a place where everything is ultra-organized 
and superefficient.  But everyone seems to be happy because everything 
is convenient.  Every room has little TVs (without Big Brother's face - 
heh heh) and behind the walls are tons of tubes and wires.  But things 
keep breaking but can't be fixed because you need a billion forms to 
even walk out of the office to go and fix it up.
Our hero is the daydreaming Sam Lowry (Jonathan Pryce, pre-"Miss Saigon" 
days), a low-level government worker who has fantasies of him flying and 
saving a beautiful woman trapped in a cage.  This dream sequence is 
shown intermittingly in the film.  His mother, Ida (Katherine Helmond - 
you know, from "Who's the Boss?"), is a filthy rich woman who dines with 
her superficial friends, gets bizarre face-lifts from Dr. Jaffe (Jim 
Brodbent) - the coolest effect in the film, by the way - and wants her 
son to be a high-level worker with an office and benefits and the whole 
nine yards.  But Sam seems content with his dreams.  But it seems 
everyone wants him to wake up to reality and be shallow like everyone 
else.
The plot of the film is set in motion when a government worker 
accidentally screws up an arrest form and gets the wrong man.  The 
police break in in a hilariously ridiculous arrest scene, break all the 
windows, bust up the apartment above theirs and put a sack cloth over 
their man - a Mr. Buttle.  The scene is handled perfectly, with 
satirical comedy, as the family is distraught and confused by what is 
happening and the big cheese walks in and coldly gives her forms to sign 
("This is your receipt, and this is my receipt for your receipt.").
We then meet Sam who has to sort this mess out for his nervous and 
slightly incompent boss, Mr. Kurtzman (the always amazing Ian Holm).  
But he is distracted because on his way to work one day, he sees a woman 
who is a dead ringer for the woman in his dreams.  She turns out to be a 
butch truck driver/alleged-rebel, Jill Layton (Kim Greist), who wants 
nothing to do with him but is somewhat drawn by his kafkaesque ways of 
wooing her ("I love you...er, er, in my dreams I love you!").  
Sam also gets into the rebellion thanks to an encounter with a renegade 
air-conditioner repairman (Get that for a rebel!), Harry Tuttle (Robert 
DeNiro, awesome as usual), who was the man the Ministry was looking for 
in the beginning and who quit the government because of too much 
paperwork.  His interception of a phone call when Sam's air conditioning 
dies winds him in a lot of trouble with the Ministry of Works, 
represented by two weird repairmen, one being Spoor (Bob Hoskins). 
Sam ends up taking the big promotion his mother set up for him just so 
he can track down this Jill Layton easily, but finds himself overwraught 
with even more paperwork and a tiny, claustrophobic office where he 
shares a desk with a bizarre man named Lime (co-writer Charles McKeown). 
 In possibly the best scene in the film, he has a Chaplin-esque war over 
who gets the majority of the desk with Lime.  His boss is a 
quick-talking Mr. Warren (Ian Richardson), who shows him to his office 
and yells at him for having a messy desk since all he's doing is 
becoming obsessed with Jill.
The film is a plunge into the deepening insanity of a man who is having 
a war between his dreams and the reality of a burdonsome world which is 
too uber-efficient for its own good.  Soon everyone has turned against 
him, including his best friend, Jack (a memorably menacing Michael 
Palin, who gets to don the coolest mask in 80s cinema).  And by the end, 
he has won - he is totally numb and lives inside his mind, flying in the 
clouds with his dream girl and humming the cool latino song "Brazil."  
The film is deeply satirical, almost as much as what seems to be its big 
inspiration, "1984."  For one thing, everyone but the rebels and Sam are 
superficial twits.  In one scene, he attends his mother's party ("Simply 
everyone is here!") and meets some of the weirdest people.  There is 
also a running gag about plastic surgery - his mother has been getting 
it and as the film goes on she's getting younger and younger.  
Meanwhile, her one friend has been getting complications to her 
complications to her complications and by the end, is wrapped like a 
mummy being pushed in a wheelchair by her shallow daughter (one scene, 
he meets her while she's lingerie shopping, prompting what may be the 
funniest joke in the film).
And the end prompts a huge action sequence which is set into motion 
after a frightening torture sequence where Sam is strapped into a metal 
chair in the middle of a huge dome.  There are many explosions in the 
film since there are terrorists who are always trying to get people to 
realize how horrible society is but they're too wrapped up in things to 
even notice.  In once scene, Sam has lunch with his mother at a fancy 
restaurant and in the middle of the meal, an explosion takes place but 
they don't even look and the Matire D' sets up a block and has the 
orchestra keep playing.
This also features several brilliant tracking shots.  The most menacing 
one is when Sam is strapped down before the torture sequence and the 
camera pulls back from his face to show how small he is in the dome.  
Another one - the best one - shows an office full of people running 
around and the camera quickly zooms from the back up to the front with 
people running in front if the camera but never hitting it and then 
zooms right up to Ian Holm.
This is possibly one of the best films of the 80s and one of the most 
cryptically brilliant films ever made.  Terry Gilliam's image of a 
superficial society where dreams have become scarce is perfectly done 
the way he wanted it, even though he had to fight a company who wanted 
to manufacture it for the masses, even though it's more of a cult film 
nowadays.  But never has Terry Gilliam's direction been more on target. 
 He perfectly bullseyes who he wants to get and makes the film hilarious 
if not totally bizzare.  Indeed, this film deserves multiple viewings 
just to get everything.
The Oscar-nominated script is wonderfully biting.  It pokes fun at 
everything and contains some of the most clever lines ever.  It also has 
some of the most eccentric characters in all of cinematic history.  
Terry Gilliam's masterpiece so far would be "Brazil" since it perfectly 
shoots at what he wants and gets right on target.  Besides, it's just so 
damn cool.
Visit my homepage: http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/hills/8335

Author
Pedro Sena
I think that Monty Python, for the most part was an over indulgent group of
comedians, that lacked a solid direction.  This was quite apparent in most
of their work, in that it was ever changing and rarely took on a different
tone from their usual dialogue oriented sketches.  There are some bits which
were always pleasing, but all in all, while they produced a very good amount
of work, they never could reach the beauty of their predecessors, like THE
GOONS [ Peter Sellers, Spike Milligan and Harry Secombe, a BBC serial of
radio comedy sketches with various ( same ) characters going through
different adventures. ]; or even Peter Cook and Dudley Moore [ with their
off the wall Derek & Clive albums ], whose material was beautifully written
and acted out.
But Monty Python did have one thing that most of these didn't have. Where
the Goons were a radio cartoon, Monty Python mixed in a series of cartoons
to  their work,... thanks in part to their only American member,  Terry
Gilliam.
>From the opening sequence of their show ( the news caster is wheeled off
thru the streets of London until he is dumped off the peer ), in between
their theatrical moments, and on occasion mixed in their films, perhaps this
man's work was, consistently, the part which added a little more laissez
faire  attitude of the spirit to the otherwise quasi intellectual dialogue.
It was no wonder that Terry Gilliam became a film maker, because his work
was all visual, and above all, a bit weird, perfect chemistry for the
celluloid.
There were a handful of films done by HANDMADE FILMS ( George Harrison's
group ) which Terry participated in, I believe the early Python films, Time
Bandits, culminating with The Life of Brian, when it was obvious that a
small studio wouldn't be able to handle the proportion of growth which these
guys were developing.  Terry Gilliam designed the settings for THE LIFE OF
BRIAN and put together a slick cartoon in the middle of it ( the small
spaceship that goes for a trip in the galaxy before crashing next to Reg and
the boys ) that set the tone for his later work.
BRAZIL is the first Terry Gilliam film that marked he was on the way to
becoming a major director and writer.  It was a futuristic tale of a gross
computer mistake that did away with the wrong man as a revolutionary, in a
society which spends much of its time eliminating those who do not agree or
live by the rules,.... a little of agilicism, anyone ...??? ... And amidst
all this rumble, is a loner of a guy, who lives his visionary space, and has
hopes of leaving the place he inhabits.  He fantasizes in an over exuberant
fashion, which comes alive in the screen, making it that much bigger,... and
a come down when he has to continue on with the daily chores.
His fantasy girl is not only a revolutionary ( he is tired of the senseless
system ), but also beautiful, and dreamy, if not a bit too violent at first,
until later she relents and becomes .... a woman.  Compared to the rest of
the women in the film who are mostly vain and totaly overdone with make up.
All in all, it is hard not to appreciate this film, although its pace is too
fast for most film go'ers.  You have barely figured out what has happened
and the next bit is on the way.  And if you don't listen carefully, all the
lines get wasted.  In between, is a beauty of enjoyment and a harsh
statement on the modern systems of today, where people do not mean anything,
unless they have to be eliminated because they do not fit.
Jonathan Pryce is absolutely excellent.  And the endless cast of characters
that comes in and out of the film is fun to keep up with.  Everyone has a
bit part somewhere.
There are few futuristic films that discuss the paranoia, and the fears that
we have regarding it.  The lack of human-ness is what this film is really
about.  The ending is most satisfying in that for once the FANTASY has won,
and the social order does not stand a chance. Sam Lowry has a smile, and
that's all that matters to both you and I.  The vision has won, the social
beast has lost.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
I admire a movie like BRAZIL for what it tries to do, but as I've said many
times before, I can only review what's on the screen. BRAZIL is a cluttered,
jumbled, overlong and underfocused movie that has many moments of inspiration
-- and little else.
The story takes place in a dystopian future where everything is mechanized
and yet somehow nothing works. Terrorism is commonplace. Sam Lowry (played
with mousy insouciance by Jonathan Pryce) is one of the worker-ants in the
big machine, and fantasizes about epic struggles to save a dreamlike beauty
from the clutches of an evil techno-samurai. By plot complications too weird
to reveal here, he gets involved with a terrorist cell (who alternate between
blowing things up and repairing them) and is eventually branded an enemy of
the state, but not before enduring a whole slew of near-psychotic adventures.
In the abstract, it sounds great, but on screen, it doesn't come together.
What's wrong here? The set design is astonishing and inspired -- there's one
tracking shot inside a really, REALLY big room that may almost be worth the
cost of the ticket alone -- the actors do fine jobs, and there are many
flashes of brilliantly ugly wit (as when a criminal is persuaded to give
himself up so his credit rating won't be too badly slashed). But... some
larger sense of an overall design is missing. There's no sense that Gilliam
has something really cogent to say about a world like this, or even about
Lowry's place in it, other than the usual platitudes about the Individual vs.
the State.
Terry Gilliam makes movies that are crammed with ambitious, eye-attacking
power, but are also frequently confused or meandering. In BRAZIL, Gilliam is
less concerned with a coherent plot than with an overall mood, a sense of
rushing madness and overarching, indomitable paranoia. And sure, he achieves
it. Trouble is, a movie like this could have used a more focused story to
make it really stick, instead of just making it a series of good-looking but
splattery meditations on the same vague subject.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Brian Matherly
See this review as it was intended at: http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
Cast: Jonathan Pryce, Kim Griest, Bob Hoskins, Robert DeNiro, Ian Holm,
Katherine Helmond, Michael Palin 
Written by: Terry Gilliam, Tom Stoppard and Charles McKeown 
Directed by: Terry Gilliam 
Running Time: 142 minutes 
One of the most talked about films of the 80's, Brazil is one of the
most stunning (but also the most bleak) films ever to be produced.  Part
of the trilogy of science fiction genre films (including Legend and
Dune) which were torn apart, re-edited, and rescored by then Universal
head honcho Sid Sheinberg, Terry Gilliam's piece de resistance has
garnered the largest amount of press.  This is due mostly to Gilliam's
determination to have the film restored to its original version and his
willingness to discuss the situation to anyone who will listen.  Gilliam
also had a full page ad taken out in Variety magazine after the film was
released asking Sheinberg when he was going to release his complete
edit.  It has taken almost twelve years, but Gilliam's final cut has
finally been released on both laserdisc and DVD.
In an eerily ironic twist, the film's incredible narrative parallels
Gilliam's battle for the proper treatment of the material.  Jonathan
Pryce is featured as an everyman that dreams of a life outside the
Metropolis-like bureaucratic hell (known as the Ministry of Information)
he is trapped in.  His life seems to turn around when he gets a
promotion within his company and literally meets the girl of his
dreams.  Everything appears to be working out until he suspects that the
girl he is in love with is a terrorist.  When he pursues her, he is
singled out as a terrorist as well and must fight the same system he
once worked for in order to restore his life.  His dreams quickly turn
to nightmares as his world comes crumbling down around him.  Despite its
futuristic setting, Brazil echoes many of the problems felt by any
modern day person who feels trapped in their current job. 
The film has been released in three different versions since it
originally appeared in 1985: the 131 minute theatrical version, the
"Love Conquers All" 94 minute TV version, and the 142 minute director's
cut.  Of the three, Gilliam's 142 minute cut is obviously the most
magnificent. I had only seen the film in its truncated 94 minute
television version prior to this recent release and had originally found
the movie hard to understand and uninvolved (a problem which is more
than solved with the director's cut).  In fact, I don't think I had ever
made it through an entire viewing of the cut film before finally seeing
Gilliam's original vision.  If I had never read any information
concerning Gilliam's wishes for the film, I may have never bothered
watching the complete version years later when it became available on
laserdisc.  I'm glad I did though, because Gilliam has constructed one
of the most incredible films I have ever seen. 
Brazil is especially remarkable on a visual level, thanks to Norman
Garwood's impressive designs.  Not only do the cities feel oppressive on
an Orwellian degree, but also every indoor set is claustrophobic enough
to lend the feeling of being trapped in a job where death is literally
the only escape from the rut.  The dream sequences are very imaginative
and grow steadily darker in tone as the film progresses until they
become the stuff of nightmares.  No film Gilliam has made before or
since has had the incredible visuals that this one contains.  Brazil is
definitely his most personal work and an obvious labor of love. 
The full director's cut special edition of Brazil was initially made
available on laserdisc and has recently made its way to DVD, both
courtesy of The Criterion Collection.  Split onto five discs for laser
and three for DVD, the Brazil special edition is one of the most
detailed box sets ever released.  The film is presented in its original
1.82:1 aspect ratio with a commentary track recorded by Gilliam, two
documentaries detailing the making of the film and fights that Gilliam
went through in order to get his film released properly, storyboards for
all of the dream sequences, production and promotional stills, and
trailers.  
The most impressive inclusion on the two sets is the "Love Conquers All"
94-minute version.  After watching the director's cut, seeing the
chopped-up version (that was originally intended for theatrical
release!) is a disturbing experience.  Gilliam's entire message is
nearly lost or severely altered thanks to the wishes of Sid Sheinberg to
have a film that ran under two hours and included a happy ending.  A
commentary track by film historian David Morgan is also included, which
details all of the changes and inclusions the editors made and how they
affect the original narrative.  For those who don't mind spending a
little more cash than they are normally used to, the Brazil special
edition is well worth the extra money. 
Reviewed by Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com
AOL Instant Messenger: Widescreen25
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Editor - The Jacksonville Film Journal
http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Craig Good
     I know it's out of the ordinary to have a book review in this newsgroup.
THE BATTLE OF BRAZIL, Jack Mathews's book about Terry Gilliam's struggle with
Hollywood to release his film, is an extraordinary book.  It chronicles in
frightening detail what it is like to deal with the big studio system and how,
just this once, the Director won.
     Life imitated art when Gilliam's masterpiece of fantasy and dehumanizing
bureaucracy fell into the fell clutches of a lawyer cum studio exec, Sid
Sheinberg (Hint: It was Sheinberg's idea to replace the symphonic Jerry
Goldsmith score for LEGEND with syntho-pop Tangerine Dream music).  There it
sat at Universal, perhaps the most Orwellian, overgrown, Big Hollywood Studio
of them all, and they didn't know what to do with it.
     What they tried (and almost succeeded) to do with it was turn BRAZIL into
a confused, bland, happy-ending romantic comedy.  One of the best features of
the book is a complete, annotated script.  Many of the notes explain what
changes were made for the Universal version.  Chilling.  Absolutely chilling.
Illustrative are a few of the alternate titles sent by Universal to Gilliam
(who figured they must have a drawer of unused movie titles somewhere).  I'm
not making these up, and they're all at least this bad:
     This constitutes the best evidence I've ever seen for rampant drug abuse
in Hollywood.  Film buffs and people who appreciate Gilliam's brilliant vision
will devour THE BATTLE OF BRAZIL with a passion.  And it even has a happy
ending.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Welcome to "somewhere in the twentieth century."  It seems that
our future soon will be heating and air-conditioning ducts.  Your walls
will be filled with them like human intestines.  Don't cut open the
walls or the guts will spill onto the floor.
     Forget those LANs, you need pneumatic tubes.  And that big monitor
on your personal computer, get rid of it too.  The future is an old
typewriter hooked to a six inch TV screen made to look bigger by
putting a magnifying screen in front of it.  Yes, welcome to the
wonderful world Terry Gilliam (TWELVE MONKEYS, THE FISHER KING, and the
MONTY PYTHON films) created in 1985 and called simply BRAZIL.
     One week at the Science Fiction Festival at San Jose's Towne
Theatre, I saw THE DAY THE EARTH STOOD STILL (1951) and the next it was
BRAZIL (1985).  How visions of the future do change.  To be fair, the
former was a serious treatment, and the latter a black comedy.  Very
black.
     I am quite partial to the writings of George Orwell, especially
his 1984.  Although there is a lot to admire in BRAZIL, it plays as
MONTY PYTHON VISITS BIG BROTHER.  The technical aspects of the film are
a delightful assault to our senses, but the script by Terry Gilliam,
Charles McKeown and Tom Stoppard is too derivative, and it is a mess.
The show is hard to follow and plays as if they are ad-libbing the plot
as they go.  Perhaps this is supposed to be the charm of it, but I
think they should have concentrated more on structure and less on the
bizarre happenings.  Actually, one could argue that the show is nothing
more than the sets (Norman Garwood) and the costumes (James Acheson).
     One day, through a glitch physically caused by a house fly, the
government arrests a Mr. Buttle (Brian Miller) when they should be
taking in a terrorist named Harry Tuttle (Robert De Niro).  In this
society based on forms, the police tell Mrs. Buttle (Sheila Reid),
"this is your receipt for your husband, and this is my receipt for your
receipt."
     Jonathan Pryce (Juan Peron in the upcoming EVITA) plays Sam Lowry.
Sam is a low level government worker and big time day dreamer.  He has
great fantasies where he is a Lohengrin-like figure but with wings so
he can fly through the clouds.  His dreams have him battling both
figures with doll faces and a large mechanical shogun.  He fights them
so he can save the love of his life, an unknown woman who turns out to
be Jill Layton (Kim Greist - the mom from the HOMEWARD BOUND film
series).  Jill becomes a fugitive from the law, and he helps her on her
escapades.
     Along the way, Bob Hoskins shows up playing Spoor, a member from
the hated Central Services organization that is charged with fixing
those ducts.  Sam is befriended by Tuttle who is a terrorist and a
rogue repairman.  He quit Central Services because he refused to fill
out the forms.  Now he lives an existent on the fringes of society.  He
carries a gun and dresses like a Ninja warrior.  Actually some of the
customes are so outlandish that they look like rejects from WILLY WONKA
AND THE CHOCOLATE FACTORY.
     When Sam gets promoted, his new boss is Mr. Warrenn (Ian
Richardson who was sinister prime minister Francis Urquhart in the TV
series "House of Cards" and its sequels).  Mr. Warrenn shows Sam to his
tiny office with the congratulatory remarks, "There you are, your own
office with your very own door."  Working in Silicon Valley, the land
of the cubicles, these remarks are easy to understand.  In some parts
of the country having your own office is no big deal.  The newspaper
cartoon character Dilbert could certainly understand it.  Later Mr.
Warrenn is not pleased with Sam's office clutter, and tells him, "What
is this mess?  An empty desk is an efficient desk."
     The best scene in the show is the one where Sam fights for control
of his desk.  To save money the government has given one desk to two
employees with part in one office and part in another.  Sam and the
other owner of the desk engage in a tug of war to see who can get the
larger half.
     I particularly liked the way the film dealt with security.  Most
buildings are so secure you have to get forms to get forms just to be
admitted, but when he gets promoted to the most sensitive building, it
has no security.  This reminded me of my first job in the Silicon
Valley.  I worked for a successful company who had a receptionist by
the front door.  If you took equipment in or out of that door, you had
to sign forms in triplicate.  The backdoor was never locked so people
totally ignored the receptionist.
     The movie is a cornucopia of images and events.  It is Christmas
time, and one person carries a "Consumers for Christ" banner through a
department store.  Next to her a little girl sets down on Santa's lap
so he asks, "What would you like for Christmas?"  The quick reply is,
"my own credit card."  Gilliam seems happy only when he is throwing
everything he can think of into his films.  Restrain is a word with
which is not familiar.
     Since this is basically a convoluted remake of 1984, the eventual
torture scene has the torturer threatening with, "Don't fight it son.
Confess quickly.  If you hold out too long, you could jeopardize your
credit rating."  Except for the pie in the face gag, Gilliam includes
every other possible scene in this farce.  Although the good outweighs
the bad, the film is, nevertheless, one big muddle.
     BRAZIL runs too long at 2:11.  It is rated R for a few bloody
scenes, threats of torture, and a few expletives.  It would be fine for
any teenager.  The gems in the film make it worth seeing, but it could
have been a much stronger film.  I give it a thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
