Title
Review for Trixie (2000)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/6de7368c8c0e0a258825690d0006428c?OpenDocument
It's a damn shame when a bad movie happens to a great actor.  It's even
worse when you try to enjoy their performance in the film while being
distracted by a terrible wasteland of a script.  Such is the sad case of
Alan Rudolph's latest "screwball noir" farce, Trixie, a misguided
attempt at expanding the noir genre by giving it a comedic twist.
Everything seemed to be in place to make a good film out of Trixie,
starting with a great cast of Nick Nolte, Will Patton, Dermot Mulrooney,
newcomer Brittany Murphy, Nathan Lane, and the wonderfully versatile
actress Emily Watson.  The story follows a misunderstood girl named
Trixie, who has an annoying habit of mixing up her metaphors - with such
memorable lines as "life is no bed of gravy" and "it's like looking
through a needle for hay."  Trixie holds dead-end jobs as a security
guard for low-rent department stores but yearns for something better in
her life.  Don't we all.  Eventually she takes a job at a casino resort
as an undercover cop and gets involved in a tangled mess of a political
sex scandal/murder mystery.  Don't you just hate when that happens?!
A slew of characters that seem drawn from the well of mediocrity and
melodrama entertain and challenge Trixie as she searches for the truth
in a sea of misplaced plot points.  Nathan Lane hams it up as a
washed-up lounge singer, Will Patton growls through lines as a corrupt
businessman, Dermot Mulroney tries to act sincere as a knucklehead of a
ladies man, Lesley Ann Warren is just plain annoying as a sex tart, and
Nick Nolte is a politician playing Nick Nolte.
The one bright light in the film is Watson, proving she can go from a
depressed Irish mother of a million kids in last year's Angela's Ashes
to a wisecracking working class Chicago chick who knows how to hold her
own.  The film starts off with a bang by giving the audience a strange
look at Trixie's life and the way she interacts with the things and
people around her.  It seems she strives to remain true to her beliefs
and her actions despite her failure at communicating with others.
Director Alan Rudolph speaks of this film as an examination of
communication and how people interact with one another, yet never seem
to understand each other completely.  The main problem is that he never
succeeds in delivering an interesting product for review.  The first
half-hour is solid and moves with purpose.  The last hour and half
simply sink under the movie's, and Rudolph's, pretentious voice.
Writer/Director: Alan Rudolph
Producers: Robert Altman, James McLindon
Starring: Emily Watson, Nick Nolte, Brittany Murphy, Will Patton, Nathan
Lane, Dermot Mulroney, Lesley Ann Warren, Stephen Lang
Rating: R
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html"> 
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Susan Granger
  With Robert Altman as his mentor/producer, Alan Rudolph is
truly an experimental film-maker and, as with any innovator, he has
some hits ("Choose Me," "Afterglow") and misses ("Breakfast of
Champions," "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle"). Unfortunately,
"Trixie" - an attempt at screwball comedy-turned-film noir - is one of
the latter. Oscar nominee for "Breaking the Waves" and "Angela's
Ashes," Emily Watson plays the title role of a quirky, gum-chewing
undercover casino security guard-turned-detective. It's supposed to be
cute that she's confused and mangles metaphors like "I'm a little
green behind the ears," "You can't just sit there like a sore thumb,"
"Take the bull by the tail," "Fish or get off the pot," "I've an ace
up my hole" etc. but this malaprop device soon grows very, very, very
tiresome. Trixie stumbles on a porn racket and a political cover-up
involving a swaggering, corrupt State Senator, played by Nick
Nolte. Supposedly, all of the Senator's garbled, inane dialogue is
culled verbatim from actual political slogans but that doesn't make
the double-talking gibberish easier to listen to. Credit Alan Rudolph
for lining up stellar talent, because Lesley Ann Warren plays a sleazy
aging showgirl who mysteriously disappears with Brittany Murphy as a
sleazy wannabe starlet, while Dermot Mulroney is a womanizing gambler
and Will Patton is a sneering, scheming developer. Nathan Lane is a
boozy lounge comedian who does celebrity impressions and spews lines
like "We're all tap dancers in the canoe of life." On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Trixie" is a tortuous, trivial 3. Don't be
tricked into spending your entertainment dollar for this
self-indulgent garbage.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TRIXIE (2000) * Directed  and written by Alan Rudolph. Story by 
Rudolph and John Binder.  Photography, Jan Kiesser. Editing,  Michael 
Ruscio. .Production design, Richard Paris and Linda Del Rosario. 
Music, Mark Isham and Roger Neill. Produced by Robert Altman. Cast: 
Emily Watson (Trixie Zurbo), Dermot Mulroney (Dex Lang), Nick Nolte 
(Senator Drummond Avery), Nathan Lane (Kirk Stans), Brittany Murphy 
(Ruby Pearli), Lesley Ann Warren (Dawn Sloane),  and Patton (Red 
Rafferty). A Sony Pictures Classic release. 117 minutes. R. 
(language, violence, sex) At the Art
Richard Brinsley Sheridan's play "The Rivals"  opened in London in 
1775  and  introduced the now famous character of Mrs. Malaprop. The 
most recent, non-fictitious characters in the USA to cause mirth by 
mangling the English language include Dan Quayle and George W. Bush, 
but they can't hold a candle (or is it a flashlight?) to the 
character of  Chicagoan Trixie Zurbo, played by  London-born  Emily 
Watson of justified fame for her parts in "Breaking the Waves," 
"Hillary and Jackie " and other recent movies, plus British stage and 
TV.
She is 33 but looks like a recent teenager. She has no education to 
speak of,  she  chews gum incessantly. Her brother was a cop killed 
in the line of duty, so, perhaps for this reason, she has opted for 
being a security guard. But soon she goes to work as a plainclothes 
sleuth in a small casino, where she is on the lookout for thieves and 
such. She refers to herself as a "private defective." Which brings us 
to the real uniqueness of Dixie. Her speech is peppered, salted with, 
and in fact drowning in,  malapropisms. In this respect she is the 
undeniable gold medalist of twisted language, the paramount killer of 
English, the Lady Executioner of metaphors  and figures of speech..
"My sister is expecting a baby, but I don't know if I'll be an uncle 
or an aunt." "I won't let you drink yourself to Bolivian." "Fish or 
get off the pot." "He smokes like a fish." "A Parasite for sore 
eyes." "To grab the bull by the tail." "Do I have an ace up my hole?" 
"Getting your quarry by hook or ladder." "I wouldn't eat a steak if 
it came on a ten-foot pole." " "It's time to swallow the bullet." 
"Even if I am between a hard rock and the deep blue sea."  " I want 
to go back to square zero." And so on ad nauseam and absurdum.
This fractured English,  like a germ  is caught by other characters 
who say things like: "If I want your opinion, I'll give it to you." 
"The sword of Damocles is hanging over Pandora's box." "I make no 
bones, except this one," "Hypocrisy, not Democracy."
Writer-director Alan Rudolph has been an independent  with a maverick 
style since 1973. His nearly 20  films are a mixed bag, with some 
among those he was able to write and direct --as opposed to having to 
hire out to others as a director--having a nice following, notably 
"Remember my Name" (1978) and "Choose Me," (1984).  More recently 
"Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle" (1994)  (about Dorothy Parker 
and the Algonquin Round Table ) was exceptionally good,. wonderfully 
acted... and criminally neglected. "Afterglow" (1997) with Julie 
Christie and Nick Nolte, was quirkily interesting, but never got the 
public it deserved. The 1999 "Breakfast of Champions" bombed, with 
good reason.
Rudolph must have made a huge collection of malapropisms, and only 
then decided to build a plot around them. It centers around Trixie, 
her new, low-life boyfriend Dex,  shady operator Red, underage bimbo 
Ruby (Dex's ex, with a son by him), overage bimbo Dawn (but Lesley 
Ann Warren is quite attractive), shady Senator Avery,  friendly 
casino-performer Kirk, and other characters. They are invariably un- 
or ill-defined.
The plot somehow involves a murder, a mystery, sleuthing, politics 
and action, all of which make no sense, most of which are 
impenetrable, and the sum of which results in two painful hours of 
viewing. There is no single believable character around. Trixie is a 
dimwit. The crooked, hard-drinking and deep down stupid  senator's 
speeches may interest those who listen to them or read them in the 
media, because they are an assembly of actual politicos' speeches, 
with a healthy amount of Newt Gingrich quotes. As TRixie might spell 
it, it's a "hair-brained" movie all the way.
Rudolph was ever championed by critic Pauline Kael and the protege of 
director Robert Altman. The latter produced some of the films, 
including  "Trixie" which Rudolph calls ":a screwball noir." But 
then, just as  that hyenas think that their little ones are 
beautiful, Mr. Rudolph may be alone in thinking that the movie is 
what he says it is. In reality, it's such a mess. that it qualifies 
Rudolph as a red-faced film-maker.

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     Quick.how funny is this:  "Fish or get off the pot."  Or "Grab the 
bull by the tail and look him in the eye."  Or "Don't just sit there 
like a sore thumb."  Or "Do you think I've got an ace up my hole?"  
Or.or..
     Now imagine them multiplied a thousand-fold.  Imagine a new one 
every time the title character opens her mouth, a mouth filled with gum 
and a painfully off-the-mark Chicago accent.  It's like spending the 
holidays with your wiseacre brother-in-law who thinks he should have 
been a professional comedian.  Worse than that.  It's like spending two 
hours in an Alan Rudolph movie. 
     Emily Watson, an actress with a previously sparkling resume' 
("Breaking the Waves", "Hilary and Jackie") but a shallow track record 
at comedy, is the eponymous Trixie, and the fall girl for Rudolph's 
embarrassing go at what he calls "screwball noir".   She's a security 
guard who gets a job undercover at a casino spotting pickpockets, and 
comes to think of herself as a "private defective".  There she falls for 
Dex (Dermot Mulroney), a two-bit Lothario who works for a scumbag 
building contractor (Will Patton), and gets mixed up in trying to solve 
the murder of a lounge singer (Leslie Anne Warren) who is the mistress 
of a state senator (Nick Nolte). 
     It's hard to tell what Trixie's main interest is - solving crime or 
mangling the language.  Her relentless torrentof malapropisms could only 
be intentional, but she delivers them with a stonefaced determination 
that spreads a leaden pall over any spark that might ignite the story.  
Come to think of it, there is no such spark, and no story.  There are, 
however, a few game performances.  Nolte works hard as the obfuscating 
legislator with a mouthful of political platitudes, though Rudolph's 
determined lack of writing, pacing, and editorial sense leaves him high 
and dry, especially in a long, long restaurant scene that goes nowhere.  
Almost rising above the mess is Nathan Lane as a stand-up comic who does 
nifty impressions in his casino lounge act. 
     Alan Rudolph is a miracle of modern cinema.  Backed by his 
producer/mentor Robert Altman, he has put out a numbing string of movies 
over the years without ever resorting to talent.  It may be time to put 
him together with Keanu Reeves and see what magic they can make 
together.   

Author
David N. Butterworth
It takes unenviable skill to squander the talents of Emily Watson, Dermot
Mulroney, Nick Nolte, Nathan Lane, Will Patton, and Leslie Ann Warren, but
Alan Rudolph--ironically known for being an actor's director--has done
precisely that in his latest film, "Trixie."
Rudolph shouldn't take sole responsibility for this misfire, however.  Any
one member of this capable cast should have taken a look at his sorry
script and realized it just wouldn't play in Peoria (or anywhere else for
that matter).  There's plenty of potential here, as there always is with a
Rudolph story idea, but that potential got left in the dressing room, or on
the cutting room floor, or in the mind of the man who hasn't hit artistic
paydirt since 1988's "The Moderns."
Trixie (Watson) is an ineffective security guard with the darnedest
Chicago accent.  She takes a recuperative assignment in a lakeside casino
after witnessing her partner stabbed by a shoplifter and quickly becomes
involved with a stockpile of typical Rudolph oddballs.  We've got a pushy
ladykiller who hits on her (Mulroney, in the role Keith Carradine would
have played ten years ago).  We've got a smooth-talking lounge singer who
befriends her (Lane, who escapes with most of his dignity intact).  And
we've got a pleasure boatload of multicolored miscreants--Nolte as a
corrupt senator, Warren as a low-cut, washed-up diva, and Patton as...well,
the boat owner.
Warren, who's been in a couple of Rudolph pictures, is the most
underutilized of the impressive cast.  As Dawn Sloane she acts tipsy and
flaky on the boat, has a serious moment in a hotel room, and then she's
outta there.  Nolte's bent congressman borders on caricature, and Patton's
Red Rafferty is simply undefined.
What makes Trixie's character interesting, supposedly, is her propensity
to drop malapropisms at the drop of a bat, mangling metaphors and
butchering the English language every time she opens her mouth.  This is
not a particularly original idea, of course, but Rudolph overwrites it as
if he's just invented the palindrome.  If you can think of Trixie's
condition as a mental disease, a "Rain Man"-kind of syndrome, then you'll
feel more sympathetic towards her character.  But Trixie's constant abuse
of familiar sayings and incessant frowning every time someone says anything
the slightest bit contrary grow pat and predictable after about twenty
minutes (and the film is a long--a very long--two hours).
Murdering free speech isn't Trixie's only annoying habit, however.  If
she's not chewing wads of gum then she's sucking on a sodapop straw.  More
often than not she's doing both.
There are hints of what Rudolph might have been attempting when Trixie
waxes detective with Nolte's Senator Avery, Lane's Kirk Stans, and
Mulroney's Dex Lang.  Here the men's "straight" talk starts sounding not
unlike Trixie's botched babblings--maybe she's not so crazy sounding after
all?  But before long Rudolph loses all perspective with several multiple
endings and some out-of-leftfield zaniness in a restaurant kitchen that
recalls a Three Stooges movie.
With "Trixie," Alan Rudolph is reveling in redundancy.  Or, to quote his
overwritten heroine, "flogging a dead horse until it's dead."
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf" online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TRIXIE (director/writer: Alan Rudolph; screenwriter: from a story by
John Binder & Rudolph; cinematographer: Jan Kiesser; editor: Michael
Ruscio; cast: Emily Watson (Trixie Zurbo), Dermot Mulroney (Dex Lang),
Nick Nolte (Senator Drummond Avery), Nathan Lane (Kirk Stans), Brittany
Murphy (Ruby Pearli), Lesley Ann Warren (Dawn Sloane), Will Patton (Red
Rafferty); Runtime: 115; Sony Pictures Classics; 2000)
Offbeat film director Alan Rudolph (ChooseMe) makes films that require
an acquired taste to fully enjoy. In this fluff piece, which the
director calls a "screwball noir," it suffers mostly because its mixture
of being a formula noir tale and a comic farce is overtaken by its
forced comedy and a story that has little drama in it, but it perks up
at times because of the charming performances by all concerned and the
constant barrage of wacky dialogue.
Trixie (Emily Watson) is a simple-minded square espousing innocence with
her wide-eyes, but by her constant misuse of language through the use of
malapropisms, she becomes a comic figure. She came from Chicago with her
misplaced Midwestern accent to be an undercover lakeside resort casino
security guard somewhere in the Pacific Northwest. She is chewing the
fat even when she's chewing gum, romancing a confused young lustful man
and while on a murder case is desperately trying to overcome her lack of
knowledge about romance.
Through her overnight casino job she meets those who the story revolves
around. She befriends a lounge comic Kirk (Nathan Lane), who offers her
platonic-paternal counseling. His shopworn act of imitating celebrities'
well-known sayings, is the pits. Dex (Dermot Mulroney) is a young Romeo
bumbler who picks her up in the casino and arouses the young virgin's
sexual interest. Dawn (Lesley Anne Warren) is a kept woman, enamored by
her own sexiness though not particularly liking sex and, on top of that,
is a pill-popping, mediocre pop-country singer. Red Rafferty (Will
Patton) is a sleazy real estate developer and a small time gangster, who
keeps Dawn as his mistress and has Dex as his lackey attendant. The
femme fatale role falls to the spurned lover of Dex, the one who had his
child, barfly Ruby (Brittany Murphy). Senator Drummond Avery (Nolte) is
the incarnation of a white-maned politician who is both lecherous and
corrupt, and he is the partner of Red in debauchery and in smelly land
deals. He is in the habit of excusing his indiscretions by pointing out
other politicians who had affairs on the side, like Ike and FDR and how
that didn't prevent them from doing their job.
The film starts off in an amusingly pleasant way, as Trixie's banter is
laced with continuous malapropisms such as, 'By hook or ladder,' 'He
smokes like a fish,' and 'Nobody is human.' But this one-joke idea of a
film soon starts to wear thin and the laughs become harder to get, as
her malapropisms come with every sentence she utters and eventually
bring the film down.
The film's strongest scene is set on Red's boat, where violence and a
possible sense of an orgy happening clouds the pleasure cruise. It
culminates in Trixie attacking Red for pinching her and of Dex coming to
her aid, and of them getting kicked off the boat by the hired thugs Red
employs.
When Dawn disappears, Trixie tracks her down and learns of a videotape
she has of a sexually incriminating act, which she has hidden and is
using it as a means of blackmail for money. After Trixie locates the
tape, Dawn is thrown out of the hotel window she had been hiding out in
and Trixie decides that she must solve the murder. To do this, she joins
the martini drinking senator in the upscale restaurant he frequents and
from there on the film turns into a suspense story, as Trixie begins to
unravel the mystery of the murder. Unfortunately, the picture itself
also unravels.
This is an actor's picture, where they are given every chance to do
their thing, even if it results in over-acting. Emily Watson is featured
in every scene and makes the best of what she's given to work with. Nick
Nolte hams it up and unmercifully chews-the-scenery whenever he can,
especially when ranting about his impoverished childhood and the
peccadilloes of other politicians. The film was mildly enjoyable, but
could have been much better if Rudolph tried to put a coherent story
together instead of just going for cheap comedy.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
