Title
Review for Tree Grows in Brooklyn, A (1945)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"A Tree Grows in Brooklyn" may be the greatest of
all tear-jerkers.  "Schindler's List", it is true,
can bring out the tears.  But if you have a predeliction
for crying, nothing will do the trick for you like
this film will.  Its emotional impact on the viewer
is strong, because the script and the performances
bond us to the characters and their struggles.
Dorothy McGuire stars as Katie Nolan, mother of
earnest young teenager Francie (Peggy Ann Garner) and
streetwise pre-teenage Neeley (Ted Donaldson).
McGuire's husband is charming dreamer James Dunn,
whose drinking and inability to find steady
work condemn his family to poverty.  Their free
spirited, oft-married Aunt Sissy (Joan Blondell)
is an occasional visitor.  The story takes place
around 1900, in a Brooklyn tenement.
If one tries hard, it is possible to criticize
"A Tree Grows in Brooklyn".  At age 27, McGuire was
too young to be ideally cast as Garner's mother
or Dunn's wife.  She keeps her splendid figure
both during and immediately after her pregnancy.
Blondell's problems vanish too readily as the
story progresses.  Donaldson's character is subtly
shunted aside in preference to Garner.  Although
the family is quite poor, they seem to live in
a nice neighborhood.  All of these weaknesses
are trivial, due to straightforward direction by
Kazan, and the extremely high quality of the script.
"A Tree Grows in Brooklyn" marked a comeback for
James Dunn, whose performance won the Oscar for
Best Supporting Actor.  Dunn's career flourished
in the mid 1930s, often co-starring with Shirley
Temple as an attentive father figure.  He soon
developed a reputation for drinking, and his
soft personality did not make for easy casting.
His role in this film seems tailor-made.  It would
not be as great a film with someone else playing
the part.
"A Tree Grows in Brooklyn" was Elia Kazan's first
film.  It remains his best film, although subsequent
titles such as "A Streetcar Named Desire" and "On the
Waterfront" are more famous today.  It is an adaptation
of the Betty Smith novel.  The screenplay was credited
to Tess Slesinger and Frank Davis, who received an
Oscar nomination for Best Adapted Screenplay.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
