Title
Review for Dropping Out (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/ab14e15ef3d6cbf5882568b7000c4a22?OpenDocument
Starring Kent Osborne, David Koechner, Vince Vieluf, Adam Arkin, John
Stamos, Katie Segal, Fred Willard, Doug Savant, Jennifer Elise Cox
 Emile (Kent Osborne) is a pretty humble guy.  He just wants one simple
thing out of his life: for it to be just as picture-perfect as the TV.
The opiate of the masses known as television is Emile's drug of choice
as he wanders through the world of the nicotine-stained San Fernando
Valley.  Everything is, as in the television, just fine and dandy until
one day a squirrel lands on Emile's cable, disconnecting it.  So,
confronted with an absolute dearth of television reception, Emile
decides to slit his wrists.
 From there on in, we enter into one of the funniest and most meaningful
dark comedies since Happiness.  You see; Emile's suicide attempt is
interrupted by a call from the manager of a hotel, at which Emile begins
to work the night shift.  One night, after the local supermarket is out
of chicken potpies, Emile announces to Henry (David Koechner), his
co-worker, that he wants to commit suicide.  He also requests that Henry
will send the tape to Emile's ex-girlfriend and clean up after the act.
 Henry decides to bring in Andrew , a Hollywood wannabe to help him with
the mess, only to discover that Emile has repeatedly flubbed what he
wanted to say to his girlfriend.  Andrew, upon looking at these flubs,
begins turning Emile's suicide into a full blown documentary.  Pretty
soon, everyone is in on it.  The entire hotel staff has quit their jobs
to be on the production crew of the film.  A major Hollywood studio has
signed on to pay for trailers for Emile and the crew not to mention
provide 35mm cameras (rather than Mini-DV, the format that Andrew had
originally been using).
 Of course, since Emile's entire desire to end his life was because his
life wasn't like the movies, Emile must now deal with the desire to
live and his so-called friends' reactions if he does.
 Premise alone could carry this movie to side splitting laughter from a
college or teenager target audience, and premise serves to provide for
some of the darkest lowbrow comedy I have ever seen (i.e. Henry draws a
diagram on the correct way to slit one's wrists while Emile helps a
terrified hotel patron check out), but the script has some more
surprises in store for us.
The film takes every opportunity to scathe the Hollywood system, to
boost the power of the Independent revolution, and to take on America's
obsession with fake reality (better known as `reality based television
shows').  The maxim `if it bleeds, it leads' is especially prevalent
when, at one point, the studio pressures Andrew to ensure that Emile
actually not only goes through with the suicide, but also provides
Andrew with a gun for Emile to use.
Beyond this absolute mastery over the narrative, director Mark Osborne
(who did the Academy-Award nominated short More) serves up a technically
brilliant film.  Making use of the same tactics as Blue Velvet and
Happiness, Osborne over-lights sequences in which Emile imagines his
television world in order to make them especially removed from reality,
and then under-lights the `reality' so that it takes on a
nicotine-stained quality.  He switches from slow-motion to regular time
with absolute ease, giving the impression at times that we are watching
an extremely sick and twisted version of a Nuclear family TV show.
The fact of the matter is that Dropping Out is one of those films so
absolutely great that everything you end up saying is either clichéd or
repetitive.  The performances were great.  The direction was great.  The
script was great.  The entire damn film was great.  It is a must-see.
It is brilliant.  It is all of the other spiels that a critic says when
they are forced to make blurbs and sound intelligent, and when all they
really want to do is convince someone to go and see it.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
