Title
Review for Man with a Plan (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ben Guaraldi
     I have seen many an independent film all made with a spare budget
at breakneck speed, driven only by the director's will to create, yet
the most outstanding example of this art I have seen recently was A MAN
WITH A PLAN, a semi-fiction film made by John O'Brien.
     From its opening credits we are stunned and entertained by
O'Brien's originality and irreverence.  We see "HERO (choose not more
than ONE):" in bright, friendly blue and white with a few names after
it.  A red X is placed next to Fred Tuttle, completing the patriotic
metaphor.  With this simple satiric element, O'Brien sets the tone for
his absurd political commentary; an especially refreshing movie in the
light of THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT, the 1996 Presidential race, and the
recent shutdown of the American government.
     The story is tried and true:  for some reason, an unknown underdog
political candidate runs for an office he cannot hope to obtain.  By
fighting his way against incredible odds that would destroy a lesser
man, he wins (of course).  Pretty formula.  The motivation here?
Money.  Pretty standard.  The candidate?  Here is where we begin to
deviate:  Fred Tuttle (played by none other than O'Brien's neighbor Fred
Tuttle) is not young, not attractive, not wildly intelligent, but he
does have wit, charm and charisma.  He is desperately in need of money
to repair his farm, to buy a new hip for his father, and do the many
other things that his social security check cannot provide for, and he
figures entering the government is the only way he can make a six-figure
salary without a college education (surely this comment is intended as a
tribute to the intelligence of our representatives).  While Tuttle gives
us mountains and mountains of physical, intellectual and social
commentary and comedy, he remains true to the believability of his
character, showing that he is a talented performer though he may be
untrained in any art, performance or otherwise.
     Herein lies the brilliance of O'Brien's work: its
unprofessionality.  In Italian neo-realism we see what amateur actors can
bring to a picture, but A MAN WITH A PLAN takes that much further.
Nothing here seems professional.  The camera work is shaky,
unintentionally (or so it seems) in the style of cinema verite;  it
roams without regard to mise en scene, color or lighting, and this
yields a documentary style to this obviously fictional work.  The acting
is clearly improvisational, sometimes with long, confusing passages of
dialog, leading to an unclear point.  (Some of the off-the-cuff remarks
are great, though, such as this exchange between Tuttle and the
reporter: "So, you're going to put a chicken in every pot?"  "Yup, a
chicken in every egg.")  The visual effects are simplistic and
unrealistic, most markedly in the scene where Tuttle decides to run for
the House, seeing a government building masquerading as his father's hat
in a scene which looks distinctively like Terry Gilliam's Python
animations.
     But this amateurism imbues the film with a sort of freedom, both
giving it realism through its documentary style and absurdity through
its loony comedy.  The former is needed to let the latter remain
plausible and the latter gives the movie its distinct impression and
hold on the viewer's memory.
     And with this indelible marker poised over his viewers mind,
O'Brien imparts his ideology.  By showing Bill Blachly (Tuttle's
incumbent opponent, played by (you guessed it) Bill Blachly) as a rotten
scoundrel who will do anything to win the election, we see that O'Brien
is disgusted with government as it stands, and figures that it would be
better to let regular people like Fred Tuttle, who are truly
representative of the people, run our country.
     All of this is communicated with force and with comedy, neither of
which would have been possible in O'Brien's unique way without his
rejection of the high gloss, high glitz archetype of a Hollywood movie.
Here O'Brien has created a small masterpiece, with neither the studios
nor their ethic, both of which can destroy art for commerce.  A MAN WITH
A PLAN, though technically lacking from time to time and often quite
camp and not a little silly, is a grand tribute to the tenets of
independent film and the artistic core of all great filmmaking.
     So, where can you see this film?  Sadly, at the moment, nowhere.
John O'Brien is feverishly working to find a distributor, submitting it
to contests and clearinghouses everywhere.  If this plan fails, he
hopes to follow the Presidential primaries with screenings, capitalizing
on the political mind-set, which means your only option would be to sit
tight and wait for John O'Brien to ride into town.  But, have no fear,
this zephyr of independent spirit certainly will.
