Title
Review for Outremer (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     OVERSEAS is a film by Brigitte Rouan, from a script by Rouan,
Philippe Le Guay, Christian Rullier, Cedric Kahn.  It stars Rouan,
Nicole Garcia, Marianne Basier, Philippe Galand, Yann Didet, Bruno
Todeschini.  Cinematography by Dominique Chapuis.  No rating, but
includes nudity.  In French with English subtitles.
     OVERSEAS is the story of three sisters living in French Algeria in
the period from after World War II until the return of de Gaulle to
power (and the imminent withdrawal of the French from Algeria).  The
story is told three times with each sister as the narrative focus each
time.  Each sister's reactions to the events around them is recorded:
one trapped by her provincialism and Catholicism has her sensuous
instincts blocked at every turn, and almost oblivious to the changes
happening around her; one is practical, but is pressured into marrying a
dreamer when she really wanted a strong man and winds up with one she
must protect from financial ruin and assassination; the third and
youngest is a volunteer nurse who crosses the line between the "colons" 
and the Algerian nationalists.
     Rouan as writer and director, ably assisted by cinematographer
Chapuis, controls and manipulates the three point-of-view stories deftly
and with great clarity, to say nothing of wit.  Each time we go through
a scene like the initial airplane landing we learn new details, see new
textures, understand more deeply what is really going on under the
surfaces and off in the shadows on the edges.  Rouan and Chapuis mix
naturalism with bold touches of near-Greenaway stylizations.
     Her achievement will make one think of Kurosawa's RASHOMON and the
novels of Virginia Woolf, but she keeps to her own vision and purpose in
exposing the injustices and beauty of Algeria's colonial past.  She
creates an indictment of and an homage to the *colons* and the
Algerians.
     I highly recommend this highly crafted, witty, ironic, and
insightful film at full price.  I hope you get a chance to see it.

Author
Pedro Sena
There are few of us, in this side of the ocean, that can really feel  and
understand the horrible destruction that overcame Europe this century, and
what it left behind.  After all these years, there are still deep scars,
which nowadays, get used up by a different breed in an empty fight for a
dream that is sicker than freedom ever will
be.  It isn't all about love..... it is about giving in to what is
available.... it's all there is.
There are three sisters, and they are good friends, and differ in many
respects.  The oldest one promptly marries a naval officer ( story starts in
1946 ) just before the French go off to try and save their Algerian
province, and later the Vietnamese country.  The marriage is  fine, and
there are four kids, a fifth on the way, and the officer goes off to Japan.
He disappears.  The happy marriage is now history, and the mother tries to
kill herself ( fails ) because she misses her  husband.  The second sister
gets married to a guy who does little,
except reading books.  He gets taken to Algeria, where he has a wine farm,
and employs Algerians.  And the younger sister lives with them.
The younger sister has become a nurse, a valiant battler to a cause that
prevents her from speaking about it to any one.  She has a loved one who
happens to be an Algerian, and on occasional evenings they visit together in
the middle of the night.  The tensions in Algeria get tougher, the marriage
of the second sister is falling apart, she does all the managing of the
farm, and the husband reads.  The younger sister's line of men has
increased, suitors to an idea they can not find.  And one day the lover is
caught and shot.  She leaves for
France, after taking abuse by Algerians who didn't know better.  The second
sister, saves her husband, but gets shot in the process.
And as the film ends, it is 1964, and the third sister is finally going  to
get married, and can't even say the words.  It is clear, that  this is not
what she really wanted, but it is what she has to settle for, the knight on
a white horse she spoke of never materialized, or if he did, he was shot by
the very people she is a part of.... a
meaningless fight for colonialism.
The filming of this story is actually extremelly romantic, and has moments
that come off like a romance novel, in that at times it  appears overly
emotional, and then immediately after shows us another side, full of
fantasy.  In other words, there is a lot to be desired by the choices people
have to make, or end up with,.... and even
when they have a choice, they may not come away with it.  A sad commentary
on idealism versus realism.
One sister had hopes, and ended up dis-illusioned.  One had a good start,
but ended up not seeing the man's faults.  And the third has met her man,
but can never really enjoy it, or make anything out of it.  The two who
never had an idea of what they wanted, eventually find that they are not too
happy, despite their outward appearance that they are....it all comes out in
a scene, when the two older sisters are upset because the younger one is
over thirty, not married, and refuses the approaches of a well to do
architect.  The one who
couldn't consume her private inner marriage, was more courageous and fought
a more humanitarian battle.. but where she has courage, it  also is the
means to her destruction.
While the film ends a bit on an upbeat note, it had to go through a tough
period to finally afford a chance for the third sister to  accept what
society has to offer.  The catholic rites she is  undertaking are extremelly
strict ( the camera stays on the priest's face for it ) and even have a hint
that the foreigners are not children of god.
In its own way, it is a scathing attack on what was does for an individual,
and the stupid notions many of us get, when something comes around, and we
immediately take sides and guns to our cartel. And it is this attitude,
which is destroying the beauty, and the humanity in all of us, despite the
glorious battle some of us have, or are, fighting.  In its own way, the film
deplores the belief systems which create the hypocrisies.... And deservedly
so.
