Title
Review for WarGames (1983)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jerry Saravia
1983 was the year of the computer revolution in the movies. Computers were
ubiquitous, even appearing as a deadly villain against Superman in the dreary
"Superman III." The following year, it became an instrument of jealousy in a
relationship in the sweet "Electric Dreams." "WarGames" is different though,
since it is not really about computers in the general sense - it is about how
much trust we put in computers, and how we may erroneously depend on them when
it comes to the inevitable threat of nuclear war. 
Matthew Broderick, in his pre-Ferris Bueller mode, stars as David Lightman, a
teenage high school student with a fixation for his bedroom computer. His
parents are unaware of his computer hacking methods, but they do know his
school grades are suffering (he breaks into the school's computer and advances
his grades to A's). One day, David unknowingly accesses the WOPR computer at
the NORAD missile-defense system, which makes 24-hour decisions regarding the
plight of a possible World War III. David only he thinks he is playing some
advanced video games. Before you know it, the country is embroiled in a
possible war with the Russians, but it is all orchestrated by the supercomputer
- the question remains: Does the computer know it is only a game? 
"WarGames" starts off with a thrilling prologue where we see the men who pull
the switches for the silos preparing for an unforeseen attack. One of the men
fails to operate the switch to launch the missile, afraid of killing millions
of people. It turns out that the attack was a test but they did not know this -
this sets up the rest of the film's theme about the paranoia centering on the
threat of nuclear war. We also get lots of "Dr. Strangelove" scenes of Barry
Corbin (best known for TV's "Northern Exposure") as General Beringer
commingling with other advisers in front of giant computer screens showing
several Russian missiles destroying U.S. military bases. The coup de resistance
is seeing Dabney Coleman arguing with Beringer while John Wood shows up as
Stephen Falken, a former scientist who created the WOPR, insisting that it is
all a game. 
"WarGames" is skillfully directed by John Badham ("Blue Thunder," "Stakeout")
and the thrills and tension abound with restless unease. The threat of nuclear
war seems real enough because it is all at the mercy of a computer, and that is
what makes the film a thrillingly scary ride. "2001: A Space Odyssey" warned us
of the dangers of computers in 1968 and "WarGames" tells us that it is no
longer a warning - it is a very real possibility. Now in 1999, we are all
dependent on computers for all our daily needs such as the Internet, banking,
shopping, the arts, etc. I am using a computer right now to type this review,
though they say writing improves greatly when first written on paper. The last
straw, though, is to have a computer making life-threatening decisions for us. 
One of the best scenes is when David tries to get the WOPR to play
thermonuclear war. It asks: "Wouldn't you prefer a fine game of chess?" David
says: "No, let's play global thermonuclear war." Its response: "Fine." That
scene still keeps me horrified and tense probably because we also hear the
computer talk with David's use of an electronic transmitter - the voice sounds
properly inhuman and soulless. 
"WarGames" may not be a great thriller nor is there much weight to certain
characters, particularly the  underdeveloped Stephen Falken role played by John
Wood. Still, it has its share of surprises and thrills along the way, and its
relatively simple theme - do not rely on anyone but yourselves in the event of
a crisis - is as resonant today as it was in 1983. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or complaints at faustus_08520@yahoo.com
or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Mattias Thuresson
Cast: Matthew Broderick [David], Ally Sheedy [Jennifer],
Barry Corbin [Gen. Beringer], John Wood [Stephen Falken]
It's a fact that a good thriller or
action movie doesn't need violence to
be good or worth watching. All it takes
is potential violence to make the
audience bite their nails. And what
kind of violence could be more efficient
than a global thermo-nuclear war?
And potential violence is the premiss WarGames
is built upon. A computer whiz-kid, David,
is usually contended with hacking into
the school computer to change his grades.
But after having read an advertisment
for an upcoming computer game, he wants to
be the first to play it. Instead of
getting into the computer at Protovision
Software he accidentally comes to the frontgate
of NORAD. With the help of Jennifer, a girl
in his biology class, he starts to play a
nice game of nuclear war with WOPR, War Operation
Plan Response (a top-notch computer at the time,
but now hardly faster than my own computer)
I remember being 12 and watching this
at the cinema. It was very efficent at giving
you a scare in those days and that hasn't
changed. Of course, a nuclear war seemed to
be much more of something that could actually
happen back in 1983. I wouldn't be surprised
if this gave people nightmares. I hope it still
does since you still hear about school kids
hacking into the computers at Pentagon.
Broderick and Sheedy are just fine as the
young teenagers (although her interest in David
remains a mystery). But the rest of the actors are,
by no fault of their own, restricted by the script
to play one-dimensional grownups. David's parents
are the same kind of parents that populate all
these college comedies from the 1980s, movies like
Secret Admirer, Porky's or Zapped and the NORAD general
Beringer is straight out of Dr. Strangelove.
If for no other reason, you should see this movie to enjoy
how far the computer technology has gone since those days.
David uses the same telephone for calling friends as calling
other computers. The modem is some kind of device that
he puts the headset on. Far from any 56K modem my guess
is that it's some kind of 2400 bps modem, the kind of
technology you now find at your local technical museum. The
big computer at NORAD has a lot of flashing lights (just like
those you see on Star Trek or any old sf-movie) but it's
hardly impressing compared with what you can get today.
What are the lessons we can learn from WarGames?
1. Make sure there are no secret backdoors into
military computers.
2. Thank you, whoever it was, for giving us
a graphical user interface when we use our computers!
