Title
Review for Picture Bride (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     PICTURE BRIDE is straightforward and poignant tale simply told.
It is reminiscent of one of John Steinbeck's short novels.  Although
the movie is full of tragedy, hardship, and miserable living
conditions, it is nevertheless, a serene and peaceful show.  The quiet
determination of the people, as amply demonstrated by their ability to
sing joyfully even when oppressed, shows an inner peace that seems to
permeate the audience as well as the characters.  The scene of the
peaceful lanterns floating out to sea during one of the Japanese
festivals provides an apt metaphor.
     PICTURE BRIDE tells a part of history that I did not know about.
One of the exciting reasons to be a movie-goer is to be able to live
vicariously segments of history that our teachers never taught us.
Here we learn that in the first 20 years of this century, there were
tens of thousands of women living in Japan who were chosen to be brides
by Japanese farm laborers living on Hawaii.  The choice of bride was
based mainly on their pictures, hence the title.
     In PICTURE BRIDE, our protagonist, Riyo (Youki Kudoh), has to
leave Japan for some mysterious reason and agrees to be a picture
bride.  Unlike most of the brides who will go to be laborers in Hawaii
on sugar cane plantations, Riyo is not from the country.  Instead, she
is a frail "city girl" (Yokohama) not well suited for a harsh life
toiling in the fields.
     Her new husband, Matsuji (Akira Takayama), seems to be a handsome
young man in his 20s based on his photo.  When Riyo is asked to
identify her new husband she is horrified to see how old he is.  She
tries unsuccessfully to refuse him like one might send back a book from
a mail order book club.  She then spends most of the film taking on
extra work so she can save enough money to leave him and return to her
native land and to the easier life of the big city.  Eventually, he
does confess his age to her, and he is, gasp, 43!
     Riyo becomes good friends with Kana (Tamlyn Tomita) who too is
saving to leave her husband and return to Japan.  You may remember
Tomita from the wonderful THE JOY LUCK CLUB.  I do not recall having
seen any of the other actors before.
     Although the movie is about inner strength, coping, and finding
fulfillment, there are other themes.  One is the multidimensional
racism of that era.  As portrayed in this film, the caste system in
Hawaii was rigid.  At the top were the English managers, next were the
Portuguese supervisors, followed by the Japanese laborers who got the
best pay, and last were the Filipino workers who did the same work and
received the worst wages.  There was hatred and jealousy among them
all.  The worst was the Portuguese supervisor.  As a surprising change,
the English manager was shown as a good guy.
     I liked the script by Kayo and Mari Hatta based on a story by
Diane Mark - clear and crisp.  Another writer that came to mind while
watching the movie was Hemmingway.  My only problem with the story was
that I did not find the bad character credible.  He was written as too
much of a caricature.  A more realistic evil would have improved the
tale.  It may have been that director Kayo Hatta just wanted to paint
his canvas in nothing but stark black and white images.
     One final aspect of the movie worth mentioning is the nighttime
cinematography (Claudio Rocha), set decoration, and sound effects.  All
came together to evoke a magical feel of a cane field at night.  The
daytime images of the burning cane fields was also striking.  The
sometimes dramatic and sometimes serene music (Cliff Eidelman)
throughout the movie provided just the appropriate ambiance.
     There is not much of a plot to PICTURE BRIDE.  It does provide
nice imagery and low key but well done acting.  It is not a terrific
show, but a peaceful diversion.
     PICTURE BRIDE runs 1:41 including 10 minutes of extremely long
credits that acknowledge 18 historical advisors (16 of whom were Dr.
this or that) and even thanks the shoe repairmen.  It is rated PG-13
for reasons that escape me.  This is a PG movie bordering on a G
rating.  If you think your kids would be interested in the story, it
would be fine to take them.  I recommend this little movie to you and
award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This is a love story quite unlike others.  In 1918,
sixteen-year-old and beautiful Riyo (Youki Kudoh), an orphan is
coaxed into leaving Japan to marry a Japanese sugar cane worker in
Hawaii after an exchange of photos.  As we learn, both her parents
died some years ago of tuberculosis, a contagious disease.  Riyo's life
with her well-meaning aunt was miserable because the parents of her
schoolmates forbade their playing with her for fear of catching the
illness.  Going to Hawaii, far away from Japan, no one would know the
shame she had felt about her parents' illness.  Riyo, herself, is
healthy.
     Arriving at immigration in Hawaii, she is introduced to her
prospective husband who has paid her fare.   Royo looks at him and at
the photo and says, "There must be some mistake.  This is not the man
in the photo."  He, Matsuji (Akira Takayama), sheepishly explains that
it is indeed he but it was the most recent photo he could find.  He is
now 43.
     There is no turning back to Japan as Riyo does not have any
money.  Next day she is out in the cane fields working away with other
Japanese and Filipinas.  At the shack that is her home, she will not
allow her husband, Matsuji, to touch her.  She decides to work twice
as hard, save her money and return to Japan.  Things do not work out
that way.
     The film portrays the life of the sugar cane workers who were led
to believe they would one day return to their homeland ... but never
did; the "Simon Legree" on horseback with his whip, as he rides up and
down the furrows spurring on the workers.  And it tells about Riyo's
friendship with Kana (Tamlyn Tomita) another woman worker who shows her
how to do laundry for the workers, after her own day is done, so she
can save more money for the trip home that never happens.  Some 20,000
of these "picture brides" came from Japan, and many came from Korea and
Okinawa in the first twenty years of the 20th century.  Nevertheless,
this is a love story and a lovely one at that.
     Toshiro Mishune appears in a film about Samurai warriors that is
shown to the workers.
     Tamlyn Tomita appeared in THE JOY LUCK CLUB, KARATE KID II, and in
many TV shows.
     The film is approximately divided between spoken English and
Japanese with Japanese subtitles for the spoken Japanese.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release beginning 4/28/95 
Running Length: 1:30 
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Mature themes, brief nudity) 
Starring: Youki Kudoh, Akira Takayama, Tamlyn Tomita, Cary-Hiroyuki 
          Tagawa, Toshiro Mifune 
Director: Kayo Hatta 
Producers: Lisa Onodera 
Screenplay: Kayo Hatta and Mari Hatta based on a story by Kayo Hatta, 
            Mari Hatta, and Diana Mei Lin Mark  
Cinematography: Claudio Rocha 
Music: Mark Adler 
Released by Miramax Films 
In English and Japanese with subtitles 
     At the beginning of the 20th century, Hawaii's economy was 
dominated by the output of its sugar cane plantations.  To boost 
production, plantation owners imported workers from China, Japan, Korea, 
the Philippines, and other countries.  Men arrived in droves, with 
illusions of getting rich.  Reality, of course, was far from the dream, 
and the immigrant workers had little choice but to accept their lot and 
limit their expectations to what was realistic.  So, instead of wealth, 
they sought the comfort and stability of a family.  Attaining even this 
modest goal proved difficult, however, as Hawaii lacked an abundance of 
available women.  The eventual solution was the concept of the "photo 
marriage"--arranged matches established through photographs and 
letters sent between the plantation workers and their prospective 
partners across the sea.
     More than 20,000 picture brides came to Hawaii between 1907 and 
1924, primarily from Japan and Korea.  Most were young and, armed only 
with a photograph of their intended groom, they arrived to find hardship 
and disillusionment.  In person, the men often bore little resemblance 
to their black-and-white representations, and the day-to-day work that 
awaited the new wives was grueling.  City girls especially had a hard 
time coping.
     Writer/director Kayo Hatta spent five years researching stories of 
the picture brides, and at one point considered producing a documentary 
rather than a feature.  In the end, however, she blended real-life 
anecdotes with historical facts to form what is, in essence, a simple 
love story.  Hatta tells her tale with a heartfelt sincerity that comes 
across on the screen, and the Hawaii of the early 1900s is realistically 
portrayed.  PICTURE BRIDE has its faults, but artifice and melodrama are 
not among them.  
     The title character is Riyo (Youki Kudoh), a 16-year old girl from 
Yokohama who has come to Hawaii to escape her past and begin a new 
future with Matsuji (Akira Takayama).  When she first meets her husband-
to-be, she is shocked:  the aging plantation worker barely resembles the 
young man in her photograph.  Somewhat shamefacedly, Matsuji admits that 
he didn't have a good recent likeness, so he sent one taken a long time 
ago.
     The marriage starts on shaky ground.  Riyo will not sleep with 
Matsuji, and thinks of nothing but earning the money to return to Japan.  
With wages of about $11 a month, however, raising the necessary $300 
seems an impossible task.  And, as Matsuji informs her, "After a while 
you think of the homeland less and less.  Going back to Japan becomes an 
old dream."  Kana (Tamlyn Tomita), a veteran worker of the cane fields 
who also came to Hawaii as a picture bride, befriends Riyo and attempts 
to bring a little harmony to her unsettled marriage.
     With a congenial tone and fresh historical backdrop, PICTURE BRIDE 
maintains a pleasing balance between sweetness and poignancy.  Hatta has 
used a group of talented actors who grace this film with strong, 
restrained performances.  There is even a cameo by the legendary Toshiro 
Mifune.  The photography, by LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE cinematographer 
Claudio Rocha, shows off Hawaii, both the cane fields and the "real 
paradise", to its best advantage. 
     Character development is uneven.  Through much of PICTURE BRIDE, we 
feel like we're viewing the story rather than experiencing it.  We 
understand the motives of Riyo, Matsuji, and Kana, but moments of 
intimate identification are rare.  Hatta's tale is designed primarily as 
a series of narrative scenes; there aren't many sequences that reduce 
the distance between the inhabitants of the film and those watching it.  
There are times when the story moves almost too quickly.
     Like THE JOY LUCK CLUB, PICTURE BRIDE depicts the struggle of a 
strong-willed, female Asian-American protagonist.  As an attempt to re-
create a segment of Hawaii's colorful history, this film is extremely 
effective.  As a love story, it is only marginally less so.  You don't 
have to be of Asian descent to appreciate the difficulties of bridging 
the gap between Riyo and Matsuji.  For Kayo Hatta, PICTURE BRIDE 
represents a satisfying culmination to a labor of love.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
