Title
Review for Big (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     There is a moment towards the end in BIG (1988), director Penny
Marshall's ode to the dichotomy between youth and maturity, when Tom
Hanks looks wistfully over his old neighborhood.  Although now a man in
an expensive double-breasted suit, it was just weeks ago that he was a
naive 13-year-old, who enjoyed the simple pleasures of childhood --
playing baseball with his buddies and having leaf fights with autumn's
soon-to-be-buried treasures.  In a rhetorical question, he asks himself
silently whether he is willing to give up his newfound power and riches
to go back to the challenges and wonderment of youth.
     From the first story of the fountain of youth, authors have
explored the divide between childhood and adulthood, with each having
their merits.  Those older wish to be younger and vice versa, the grass
always being viewed as greener on the other side of the fence.
     Even with this overdeveloped theme, the Academy Award nominated
script by Gary Ross and Anne Spielberg manages to say fresh things and
to draw the viewers into a story populated by likable characters.
     Although Hanks was nominated for best actor for his part, he was
beaten that year by Daniel Day-Lewis in MY LEFT FOOT, the sort of
sentimental, big message film that Hollywood favors.  In BIG Hanks
gives one of the best performances of his impressive career.  Most
actors would have approached the part with a heavy emphasis on
slapstick and exaggerated gestures, but not Hanks.  Hanks rightly sees
the boy as being as frightened and awkward as he is giddily elated at
the prospect of instant adulthood.  His most moving scene in the show
occurs as he lays alone in a NYC fleabag hotel.  As the noise of the
city's terrors filter into his room, he lies on the bed gently sobbing
as he grips his pillow.  This 13-year-old is just barely a teenager
even if he now has a full-sized man's body, and Hanks's reactions to
his predicament could not be more realistic or touching.
     It all started because Josh, played by David Moscow when young and
Hanks when full grown, was impatient.  As he watched an older guy pick
up the girl he dreamed of dating, he wished he were older.  And when a
carny machine called "Zoltar Speaks," offered him a wish, his was a
simple one -- "I wish I was big."  When the machine just spit out a
card stating, "Your wish is granted," he was not impressed.  Well, not
until the next morning when he woke up in a man-sized body.
     Marshall is a master at the staging of scenes.  From the thud of
Josh's big feet getting out of bed for the first time to the wind swept
leaves of the vacant lot where the carny once was, she captures the
essence of the situation with her typically parsimonious approach.
Avoiding frequent opportunities for special effects, she relies instead
on the actors and the dialog to tell the story.  When the inevitable
scene occurs in which the full grown Josh reverts back to his teenage
body, she cuts away from a rear view of Tom Hanks back and then returns
to David Moscow, who is seen walking away in a suit several sizes too
large.
     In a story with more depth than might be expected, Josh secures a
position as a "computer operator," actually a data entry clerk, at a
toy manufacturer.  By chance he impresses the company's president,
played with great good spirits by Robert Loggia, who ends up giving
Josh the position of Vice President of Product Development.  As part of
Josh's fairy-tale life, he gets to play chopsticks with his boss on a
huge floor piano at FAO Schwarz in easily the most captivating scene in
the picture.
     In contrast to Josh's innocence, Elizabeth Perkins as Susan and
John Heard as Paul play yuppie executives on the move.  Toys to them
mean focus groups and demographic studies, but to Josh toys only mean
fun.  When Heard gives a stellar presentation on a toy building that
transforms, Josh disagrees, arguing that there is nothing fun about a
building.  Josh suggested bugs instead, which the president loves.
     The most delicate part of the film is Susan's crush on Josh, which
leads to a "sleepover."  Marshall, by cutting away just after Susan
takes off her blouse and Josh touches her with childlike innocence,
manages to keep the show's PG rating and give the scene incredible but
simple beauty.
     It would be easy to miss how important Perkins's performance is in
the film.  Dressed in proper but alluring ankle length dresses at the
office, Susan starts with a tough edge, but her contact with Josh
changes her life forever.  After going to a party in a frilly black
skirt, she gets herself invited into Josh's apartment.  In the perfect
cure for her stiffness, he gets her to join him on his trampoline.  As
her ruffles fly all about her, her transformation is palpable.
     Although the story is set in the adult world, Josh's childhood
companion, Billy (Jared Rushton), appears frequently to remind Josh of
his childhood roots.  When Josh eventually becomes as hard driven an
executive as the others and has no time for Billy, Billy poses a simple
question to him.  "I'm your best friend," he says.  "What's more
important than that?"  What indeed.
     BIG runs 1:44.  It is rated PG for some profanity and the
beginnings of a love making scene.  The film would be fine for kids 8
and up, but they may need to be 10 to enjoy it.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Every once in a while the Law of Averages works especially well or
poorly for filmmakers.  Columbia made MAROONED just before Apollo 13 and THE
CHINA SYNDROME just before Three-Mile Island.  On the other hand, three
different filmmakers independently decided to make the films PLACES IN THE
HEART, COUNTRY, and THE RIVER a few seasons back, all "save-the-farm" films.
Of late it has been "child-and-adult-changing-places" films.  In little more
than a year, we have seen LIKE FATHER, LIKE SON; VICE VERSA; and 18 AGAIN.
Now Tom Hanks joins the ranks of Dudley Moore, Judge Reinhold, and George
Burns, playing a younger person in an older person's body.
     Well, the first major difference is that this is not two people
changing places.  The story is not really two stories of people adapting to
sudden age change.  Instead we have a 13-year-old suddenly finding himself
about twice that age.  Josh Baldwin finds a mysterious wish-granting machine
at a carnival.  After this point the story gets more realistic and at the
same time less so.  Josh's own mother thinks the older version of him
(played by Tom Hanks) is a kidnapper and he has to flee, with the help of a
friend, to Manhattan.  He is a child who for the first time is seeing the
gritty real world without the protection of his parents.  Then the realism
dissolves as he enters the business world and finds his winning, boyish ways
open doors for him.  Previous versions of the idea have children in older
bodies trying to seem normal and failing miserably or at least humorously.
Hanks wears silly-looking clothing and acts like a kid and in some sort of
film blanc manner it all works out for him as if he was Chauncey Gardner
from BEING THERE.  His secret boyhood catapults him to success in business
and love in the toy business.  None of this is very believable.  And on top
of that, the ball of string that I collected as a boy may have had more
loose ends than BIG, but I doubt it.
     Supporting Hanks is Elizabeth Perkins, who played a second banana role
in ...ABOUT LAST NIGHT.  As the woman intrigued by the boyish Hanks, she
reminds one at times of Debra Winger and at other times of Jill Clayburgh.
Also on hand are the venerable Robert Loggia (whose second career in film
seems more successful than his first) and John Heard, who tarnishes some of
his earlier nice-guy roles playing an ambitious executive.  And who can
forget the grungy hotel clerk played by Rockets Redglare?  And the whole
production is directed by Penny Marshall--formerly of LAVERNE AND SHIRLEY.
I would say BIG is a step up from her first film, JUMPIN' JACK FLASH, but it
still gets just a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
