Title
Review for Killer (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
[This film was previously titled KILLER when it played in film
festivals.]
     BULLETPROOF HEART is a movie with a strange name and a bizarre
twist on an old theme.  Anthony LaPaglia, who was great as the Mafia
boss's nephew in BETSY'S WEDDING, again plays a Mafia type.  This time
he is a highly paid professional hit man.  He gets a quick contract
from Peter Boyle to kill Mimi Rogers.  The twist is that Rogers knows
this and is waiting for LaPaglia to show up at her place to kill her.
The mystery is why is she being killed and is she actually in favor of
it or not.
     The script is good and provides several large laughs.  One of my
favorite scenes involves LaPaglia's incompetent sidekick played by Matt
Craven.  Craven explains that the reason he seems afraid of his own
shadow is that he has a Magnesium deficiency.  He pops these little
Magnesium pills at the right time and instant courage just like the
badge for bravery on the Cowardly Lion in the Wizard of Oz.
     The acting was good all around except I did not like the character
played by Craven--he got on my nerves after a while.  I have seen
Rogers give much stronger performances (see sometime SOMEONE TO WATCH
OVER ME or THE RAPTURE), but she was pretty good here. (She certainly
is one beautiful forty-year-old woman!  An age I can certainly indentify
with.)  The best work was done by LaPaglia and Boyle.
     Ultimately BULLETPROOF HEART is not a mystery as it is trivial to
guess the simple twists in the plot.  The ending is certainly
telegraphed from the beginning.  This movie is a two-person character
study, and either that works for you or it doesn't.  For me, I liked
some of the banter of the dialog, but kept feeling left empty.  The
show never offends, has some quite good moments, but it just did not
work for me.
     If you see the show, be sure and stay to the absolute end.  After
you have learned in the credits that this New York and "Jersey" movie
was actually filmed in Vancouver and after the very last credit has
rolled past, you get more movie!  I am not sure if you would call it a
serious outtake or an epilogue, but whatever it is and whatever it is
supposed to mean, most people will probably miss seeing it--unless
they are smart enough to read my reviews that is.
     The movie runs about right at 1:37.  It is not rated, but I
suspect it would get a (soft) R for its very low key, less than most TV
shows, violence, some heavy and a little unusual sex, and 10
milliseconds of female nudity.  It would be fine for any mature
teenager, but I can not bring myself to recommend it to anyone.  I
award it ** for the script and some good acting.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: February 24, 1995
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my
employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     The suave hitman Mick creeps out of a closet to finish off "the
guy that got away."  As Mick flexes his leather sap in preparation to
beat the mark to death, the poppy strains of The Troggs' "Love Is All
Around" pervade the atmosphere, RESERVOIR DOGS-style.  We know we're in
for something out of the ordinary.
     Such is the opening of BULLETPROOF HEART, a feature finally making
it to Austin after months in release.  The film (originally screened as
KILLER) stars Anthony LaPaglia as Mick, a hitman that can't make up his
mind whether or not he wants out of his smarmy profession.  Tonight's
target:  Fiona (Mimi Rogers), a classy lady who crossed the wrong
people once too often.  The movie really gets interesting when Mick is
sent to finish her off, Fiona seduces him, and the two develop a
profoundly strange and twisted relationship.
     What results is a solid entry of the noir vein.  Mick falls for
the woman and can't bring himself to finish the job, but for some
reason (revealed later), Fiona *wants* to die.  Matt Craven plays
Archie, Mick's bumbling assistant who botched the last job, and who
wants to make amends with Mick by passing a self-created test of faith
and courage.
     BULLETPROOF HEART is a strange film.  Many nice touches abound:
clever photography, good attention to detail, particularly in costuming
and Rogers's makeup, and hauntingly believable acting.  The only real
problem with the film is the talkiness.  The action scenes, when
they're on, are scorching, full of gritty, stomach-lurching suspense.
Unfortunately, 90 percent of the film is nothing but the principals
chatting--vital to the characterizations, but often lifeless and just
not engaging.  Still, it's interesting as a character study, but it
doesn't *quite* make it as a real noir.
     BULLETPROOF HEART is ultimately a solid film (although the use of
title cards between sequences is very annoying).  In the end, I thought
the most intriguing part of the film was its title.  BULLETPROOF HEART
is supposed to refer to Mick, as a lead-hearted character who can't be
swayed from doing his job by anything as blas as a conscience.  But I
feel it could refer to Fiona just as well, as a woman who can't seem to
get herself killed despite all her efforts.  The dichotomy between
these two characters makes for some interesting investigation.  I know
I'll be talking about them for awhile.

Author
Raymond Johnston
Directed by Mark Malone
Starring: Anthony LaPaglia, Mimi Rogers, Matt Craven, Peter Boyle
Written by Gordon Melbourne from a story by the director
     There was a time before television that all films were shown as
double features.  The low budget B films, if they were to be remembered
at all, had to make creative use of the left over sets and small
non-star cast.  B film makers found that instead of expensive action,
they  were better off offering dramatic tension based in offbeat
characters.  BULLETPROOF HEART takes the B crime dramas of the Forties
and Fifties like HE WALKED BY NIGHT and D.O.A. as its model.
     Director Mark Malone masterfully recreates the ambiance of the
B-film New York- misty night streets, fancy apartments, the inevitable
docks and warehouses.  In it he sets forth several people in the throws
of inner turmoil: Anthony LaPaglia as the edgy hit man, Matt Craven as
a screw up begging for a second chance, Peter Boyle as a middle
management mobster and Mimi Rogers as the femme fatale.  These character
actors play out the events in one night of an emotionally troubled mob
hit man.  Like several recent crime films, the main thing isn't so much
the story as the telling of the story.  Since the film is basically a
four way character study, all of the performances have to be dead on.
Luckily everybody delivers.  The cynical banter between the main
characters is the center of the film.  As the long night progresses and
the characters go to stranger and stranger locations,  the motivations
of the characters are revealed.  Some of this revelation includes a
fascinating set of flash backs.  The simple job of the hit man takes on
more complexities as the characters become fully developed and
intertwined.
     BULLETPROOF HEART is a near perfect recreation of the 1950s film
noir mood.  If anything, it stays too closely within genre conventions.
Ultimately that makes the surprise ending a little predictable.  It
takes fewer chances than the recent RESERVOIR DOGS or RED ROCK WEST and
next to those films it is an 'also ran.' The problem with trying to
recreate a B film is the original B films were never supposed to be
worth the price of admission on their own.  They were thrown in for free
with another better film.  BULLETPROOF HEART would be a real find for
free on cable TV or a good video rental.  Standing as a single feature
at full admission price, it is for diehard fans of film noir.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Anthony LaPaglia, Mimi Rogers, Matt Craven, Peter Boyle 
Director: Mark Malone 
Producers: Robert Vince and William Vince 
Screenplay: Gordon Melbourne 
Cinematography: Tobias Schliessler 
Music: Graeme Coleman 
U.S. Distributor: Keystone Pictures 
     The chief problem with Mark Malone's stylish BULLETPROOF HEART is 
the schism between plot and dialogue -- one is (supposedly) thoughtful 
and meditative, the other is pulpy.  It's the sort of thing you might 
expect if Raymond Chandler wrote an existential novel or if Chekhov 
tried his hand at a story about a hit man.  Over the course of the 
movie's ninety-eight minute running time, we get the toughest assassin 
in New York mulling over the question "What's the meaning of meaning?" 
while brandishing a gun.  Despite the apparent thematic relationship 
with the closing scenes of PULP FICTION, BULLETPROOF HEART is distinctly 
inferior. 
     Anthony LaPaglia plays the murderous Mick, one of the best in the 
business.  This is the story of a bizarre and disastrous night in his 
life.  First, his best friend and ex-partner Archie (Matt Craven) 
arrives from Florida, begging forgiveness for a past screw-up and asking 
for a second chance.  Then Mick's regular client George (Peter Boyle) 
shows up with a job:  a beautiful woman (Mimi Rogers) in debt for more 
than $1 million has to be taken out.  The twist is that she knows what's 
coming and actually welcomes it.  And the problem for Mick is that after 
spending a short time with Fiona, he falls for her. (Anyone remember 
Forrest Whitaker and Sherilyn Fenn in DIARY OF A HITMAN?) 
     Vaguely echoing Daniel Auteuil's male lead from UN COEUR EN HIVER 
(in both appearance and demeanor), Mick is as emotionally repressed as 
they come -- even a sensuous call girl can't elicit more than a "who 
cares?" reaction.  Then enter the seductive, distraught Fiona, and 
Mick's emotions come rushing out like an uncapped geyser.  BULLETPROOF 
HEART certainly isn't an original exploration of feelings and issues, 
but there are a few moments of genuine impact.  Unfortunately, these 
tend to be cut short by silly dialogue and so-so acting.  Mimi Rogers is 
appealing and Matt Craven is hilarious, by Anthony LaPaglia has 
difficulty convincing the audience that his entire life has undergone a 
radical transformation.  Only towards the very end do we get a sense of 
what all this means to Mick, but then it's a little too late. 
     By too frequently straying into the cliched realm of the noir 
thriller instead of really plumbing the emotionally-wrenching situation 
of a man forced to kill the woman he loves, BULLETPROOF HEART loses 
momentum.  The ending is telegraphed far in advance and several scenes 
seem overplotted and mechanical.  Fiona is supposed to die before 
sunrise, but as the morning approaches, the film bogs down.   
     Perhaps director Mark Malone was too ambitious, trying to merge 
Shakespearean tragedy, dime novel themes, and comedy into one.  Strip 
away all the trappings, and this is essentially about the reviving power 
of love.  The premise is intriguing, and the romance between Mick and 
Fiona is often as fascinating as it should be, but BULLETPROOF HEART is 
crammed with nonsensical and pointless elements that severely curb the 
film's effectiveness.  In the final analysis, I liked this film far less 
than I wanted to. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
