Title
Review for Diva (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mike Turton
Diva
Directed by Jean-Jacques Beineix. Starring  Wilhelmenia Fernandez (Cynthia
Hawkins), Fredric Andre (Jules), Richard Bohringer (Gorodish),  An Luu Thuy (
Alba). A  Films A2 Greenwich Film Production / Les Films Galaxie production.
Runtime:   France:117 / USA:123  Reviewed by Mike Turton.
This stylish film has it all -- a complex plot, plenty of action, beautiful
music, exotic and interesting people, improbable relationships, a satisfying
ending -- even a few gratuitous breasts thrown in for good measure (this is a
French movie, after all).
_Diva_ tells the story of a mail courier in Paris who, among other things, is
the obsessed fan of a famous opera singer who has sworn never to make a
recording of her singing.  One day he secretly tapes her giving a concert. 
News of the tape gets out and he becomes the object of an intense hunt by a
comically sinister Japanese company eager to cut a record. At the same time,
in an entirely unrelated incident, a set of gangsters, under pursuit by the
police, ditches a tape which implicates a powerful politician in the carryall
of his moped.  The tapes become confused.................
There are so many things to like about this offbeat visit to Paris.  The
juxtaposition of intensely punk, strongly-drawn characters from the mean
streets with the unearthlyl beauty of the world of opera provides a kind of
postmodern mixture of frames of reference that gives the film a surreal,
kinesthetic feel. Jules the courier (and the viewer with him) is constantly
finding himself navigating in worlds whose boundaries and taboos are unknown
to him, pursued by the police, the mob, record companies and his own
conscience.  The film becomes the story of his on-the-fly improvisations.
Driving the film too is the threat and reality of violence, including a
terrific motorcycle chase through the streets of Paris, and a chilling killer
who speaks only once.  The tremendous presence of Fernandez and her amazing
voice anchor the film, giving it a psychic weight that prevents it from
becoming too light.
In sum, _Diva_ is one for curling up with your SO and a bag of popcorn.  This
reviewer gives it a 4.5 out of 5.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum
