Title
Review for Every Time We Say Goodbye (1986)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
EVERY TIME WE SAY GOODBYE (Israel, 1986) Directed by Moshe Mizrahi.
Written by Moshe Mizrahi,Rachel Fabien,Leah Appet from a story by
Mizrahi. Photography, Giuseppe Lanci. Editing, Mark Burns. Music,
Philippe Sarde. Producers, Jacob Kotzky & Sharon Harel. Cast : Tom
Hanks(David), Cristina Marsillach(Sarah), Benedict Taylor(Peter), Anat
Atzmon(Victoria), Gila Almagor(Lea), Moni Moshanov(Nessim) Avner
Hizkiyahu(Raphael), Caroline Goodall(Sally),Esther Parnass(Rosa), Daphne
Armony(Clara),Orit Weisman(Mathilda). 95 min. PG-13.
A fine small film about an inter-faith romance, with more than meets the
eye.  It was written  and directed by Moshe Mizrahi, one of the finest
Israeli filmmakers.   
During World War II,  before the U.S.A. joins the fray, American Tom
Hanks , the son of a  pacifist minister, joins the Royal Air Force. In
1942 Jerusalem, recuperating from a wound, he meets , through a British
fellow-officer who marries a Jewish girl,  the 19-year old daughter (
Cristina  Marsillach) of a large Sephardic family.  It's a Romeo and
Juliet romance (but with a happy ending) which runs afoul the
conservatism of the girl's people . These are not shown as particularly
intolerant or Orthodox, but they are still quite determined to prevent
this sort of alliance.  
Granted that this  basic theme has  been  explored before, this movie's
particular context is  original. Writer-director Mizrahi brings a great
deal of authenticity to his subject, his people and   his treatment.  He
has a sharp eye and ear in his observation --objective yet warm-- of 
the expanded family. Note how well staged, among other sequences, is the
Sabbath meal to which Hanks is invited. Mizrahi covers quite a bit of
territory: the people's  prejudices; the workings of patriarchy and
matriarchy; the  traditionalists who may  hurt others in their honest 
conviction that "they know what's best";  the affectionate yet
second-class treatment of women in pre-Israel days. 
The heroine's own hesitations are perfectly captured. In an
unspectacular (and, I wager, not costly) but intimate way, location
shooting, settings and period reconstruction add  truth and interest .
The background does not obtrude yet  it sketches in nicely some of the
life and mentalities of the times.  
The acting, mostly low-key, acting is  realistic, convincing  and helped
by the naturalness and ordinariness of the entire cast.  Nice British
and American pop tunes of the period, well sung, add to the period's
atmosphere. 
The work is unusual in another way: much of its  dialogue is in
Judeo-Spanish (a.k.a. Ladino or Spaniolit), with clear subtitles. This
is the only film use of this language I know of, though  Ladino surely
is present in other, but unexported or little distributed Israeli
productions. There is a rich variety of Ladino accents here. Linguists
should  enjoy this movie doubly and might detect  that some of the older
people have  intonations different from those of Miss Marsillach's,
which show the influence of standard, mainland Spanish. 
"Every Time..." has solid, international production credits. It was Tom
Hanks's first serious film, was underrated or dismissed in the few
reviews I have seen, went by and large unnoticed in the US  and moved
rapidly to television. I believe that even then it was only sporadically
shown until, later, the growing prestige of Hanks brought about frequent
shedulings on cable. This is understandable, but the film's appeal
extends to the rest of the overwhelmingly Israeli cast too. The actors
may be familiar to Israelis (especially Gila Almagor) but unknown to
most others. A pity, since some of the same performers, in a big
Hollywood production, would probably have advanced their career beyond
the modest boundaries of Israeli cinema. (Edwin Jahiel)
