Title
Review for Return of the Living Dead 3 (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
The Phantom
     It's been a while since the Phantom has seen a good, solid horror
film, and to be honest he went into RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD 3 with a
certain amount of trepidation.  After all, although the first
installment in this series was a top-notch horror/comedy, well directed
by Dan O'Bannon (of DARK STAR fame and one of the creative forces
behind ALIEN), its sequel was a complete botch--an utterly
forgettable, poorly-made rip-off of its popular and successful
predecessor.  Sadly, that's often the way with sequels; although on
occasion a TERMINATOR will pave the way for a T2, an ALIEN for an
ALIENS, more often than not we go from the pinnacle of happiness with
the witty and original ROBOCOP to the depths of despair with the stupid
and mean-spirited ROBOCOP 2.
     Bad sequels are even worse than bad original films, since not only
do they disappoint us while we're watching them--they also cheapen
their fine predecessors and perhaps even make us forget why we ever
liked them in the first place.  (Most of the recent NIGHTMARE ON ELM
STREET sequels are like this; ever since DREAM CHILD, it's been
difficult for the Phantom to remember what was so fresh and original
about Wes Craven's take on the sometimes porous barrier between our
nightmares and reality.)
     So RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD 3 turned out to be a nice surprise
indeed, a well-made and literate film, balancing its obligatory zombie
effects and gore with interesting characters and a thoughtful
screenplay.  And enhancing the theater-going experience still further:
the Criterion theater, conveniently located in the heart of Times
Square and currently quite ably defending its reputation as the
premiere palace of sleazy cinema in midtown Manhattan.  Although United
Artists has spent a considerable sum of money on the Criterion over the
past few years (in order to differentiate it from the true slime-pits
on 42nd Street), the gentrification really hasn't taken hold--although
the basement theaters are somewhat nicer than they used to be (seeing a
film in one of the Criterion's fine basement theaters used to be a lot
like watching TV underneath a subway platform--rats, garbage and all),
most have almost entirely reverted to their former extremely sleazy
state: lots of people smoking (and not all King Tobacco); people
tending to amble in about 15 minutes into the film with their whole
families and a bucket of KFC; and of course, lots of unsolicited advice
from the audience to help the fictional characters on the screen guide
their next move.  No previews for the latest Merchant/Ivory snoozer,
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY; instead, we got MAN'S BEST FRIEND, the Robo-Dog
pic.  From the response in the theater, we're all looking forward to it
with great anticipation.  You just don't get this kind of experience
watching a video....
     So the environment was right for true horror film enjoyment.  Yet
the Phantom suspects that he would have enjoyed this film even had he
seen it in the worst possible environment for cinematic horror (any
theater on the Upper East Side, surrounded by Eurotrash who couldn't
get into whatever that week's hip Spanish sex farce happened to be);
perhaps it was just the chronic lack of good cinematic horror that did
it, but the Phantom found RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD 3 to be standout
entertainment.
     The success of this film can be directly attributed to both its
screenplay and its director, Brian Yuzna, a veteran director of quality
horror films.  In fact Yuzna, who directed BRIDE OF REANIMATOR,
SOCIETY, and the best of the SILENT NIGHT, DEADLY NIGHT series (part
4), is one of our best horror film directors, right up there with Frank
Henenlotter, Sam Raimi and Stuart Gordon.  He has an eye for the
shocking, and there's nothing he loves more than gore.  Yet his films
don't shortchange the characters by relegating them to two-dimensional
bystander status; in particular, RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD 3 is one of
the more literate and serious horror films in a while, reminiscent in
many ways of Romero's thoughtful DAY OF THE DEAD.  The point being that
while anyone with a sufficient budget can do gore, not everyone can
sustain an audience's interest with nothing more than good
characterization and dialogue (not to mention snappy editing, which is
very much in evidence here).  Yuzna is the director that Clive Barker
wishes he could be.
     But although he had to labor mightily against the constraints of a
very low budget, Brian Yuzna handles the well-written screenplay with
his usual flair and has produced a winner.  In fact, he shows real
courage by inviting comparisons to both Clive Barker and George
Romero's best films and succeeding in paying homage to them while still
delivering an original horror film of his own.
     The screenplay uses the original RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD as a
starting point and then expands on it in two different directions, both
of which come together by the end of the film.  The story focuses on
two teenagers (Curt and Julie, both ably portrayed here by talented
unknowns) who stumble upon strange goings-on in the military
installation supervised by Curt's father.  It seems the military is
interested in using the recently dead as weapons--not a completely
outlandish thought, considering what unstoppable killing machines they
were in the first two installments in the series.  Naturally a way to
control them is needed, and Curt's father believes he's found it; of
course, things don't work out quite as planned, and the recently
reanimated find themselves less interested in being all they can be,
and more interested in wreaking zombie havoc.
     Things with Curt and Julie don't go as planned, either; Curt finds
that a motorcycle accident has rendered Julie a prime candidate for
reanimation herself, and since this is a horror film, we all know that
no good opportunity for reanimation is ever wasted.  What happens after
Curt brings his girlfriend back to life comprises the bulk of the film,
though the screenplay does swing back around to the military angle in
time for a truly horrific denouement.
     Although much of this territory has been covered by Stuart
Gordon's classic over-the-top horror/comedy REANIMATOR, RETURN OF THE
LIVING DEAD 3 deals with it in a more serious fashion: Julie is brought
back to life, yes, but at what cost?  And if Curt really loves her, how
can he stand to see what she must go through to stay "alive"; yet how
can he let her die once again?  It would have been nice had Coppola
dealt with these issues in DRACULA with the same degree of subtlety,
rather than wasting his time and ours producing a dopey, special
effects-laden costume drama; in some ways, RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD 3
is a better DRACULA than DRACULA, and a REANIMATOR that takes itself
seriously.  It's that rare example of what can be done within a genre
that does not normally lend itself to thoughtfulness and insight, one
in which special effects often overwhelm whatever thin screenplay has
been used as an excuse for generic mayhem and gore.
     When RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD 3 does falter, it's generally
because of the most important constraint under which it was made
(besides the R-rating it needed to get to get any sort of theatrical
release at all): its very limited budget.  With only so much money
available for creature effects, we miss out on the one or two more
"incidents" (shall we say) that probably should have been added to keep
the film well on the right side of becoming too talky.  It's a
difficult juggling act, of course, since Yuzna obviously intended to
make something more than just a zombie-fest.  Yet the film does drag at
times, and there's nothing wrong with keeping the living dead at the
forefront of the action--especially if the title of the film implies
that they're going to be returning from somewhere.  Yuzna redeems
himself by the time we reach the last act--all hell breaks loose,
just as we knew it would, and it's at this point that we get a feeling
for how all the money in this film was (well) spent.  Until then,
though, we can do little but sit tight and listen to the dialogue,
which is happily well above the Camp Crystal Lake level one expects
from horror films these days.  No one says "Darn!  The basement light
just blew--let me just pop down there and change it."  Or "I'm *sure*
he's dead--no need to check."  Or even "Hello?  Anyone here?
Hel--hey!  What's wrong with the lights!?"  Very satisfying to be able
to enjoy a solid screenplay backing solid special effects--it's just
too bad that this is the exception to the rule that all but requires
horror filmmakers to insult the intelligence of their audiences.
     All in all, a quite satisfying film, and another winner from
Trimark, the tiny independent distributor that's fast becoming the New
Line of the nineties.  RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD 3 and the two WARLOCK
films are almost enough for the Phantom to forgive Trimark for the
unending pain of LEPRECHAUN, incredibly enough their most successful
film to date.  RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD 3 is currently enjoying
Trimark's investment of zero dollars in advertising, so it's not likely
to do better box office than LEPRECHAUN; let's just hope that phans
starved for good horror descend upon it in droves once it hits the
video stores in a couple of months.  For those who will have no chance
to see it in the superior ambience of the Criterion, it will be worth
the wait.
