Title
Review for Night We Never Met, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
     Sam (Matthew Broderick) has just broken up with his girlfriend
Pastel (Jeanne Tripplehorn).  Nursing a broken heart and needing a
place to spend a couple of nights a week away from the madness of an
apartment that he occupies with several friends, he agrees to
time-share a Greenwich Village brownstone with three other people.
Also living there is Ellen (Annabella Sciorra), a married woman looking
for a place where she can paint without ridicule from her husband, and
Brian (Kevin Anderson), a man unwilling to completely let go of his
bachelor's ways despite an upcoming wedding.  These three never meet,
but by way of notes passed between Sam and Ellen, an unusual attraction
develops.  When Ellen mistakes one of her apartment-mates for the
other and decides to embark on an extra-marital affair with him,
Brian--not Sam--becomes the object of her advances.
     This film, despite countless problems, is actually kind of cute.
The coupling of Sciorra and Broderick is unusual, but it works--at
least for the few minutes when it's shown on-screen.  Romantic comedies
are often riddled with plot flaws, and THE NIGHT WE NEVER MET is an
exceptional offender.  It would take an inattentive and gullible viewer
to accept everything that happens during the course of this picture.
     There may be an original element or two in the story, but most of
what's here has been covered by numerous TV sitcoms (not a good place
to draw from for a major motion picture).  For THE NIGHT WE NEVER MET
to work, the script needs to be scintillating, and it's far from that.
Not only are there many plot holes, but the pacing is all wrong.  The
movie takes an incredibly long time to get moving, plodding through
useless setup material.  In trying to tease the audience, the film
drags and we start to lose patience, since it's obvious what the
eventual goal is.
     Without exception, every character is taken from stock--plain
stereotypes found littering mediocre-to-bad movies.  Even the "unusual"
supporting players are little more than typical Hollywood fare.  For
the most part, the acting isn't good enough to allow any standouts.
Only Annabella Sciorra's Ellen has personality, and that's exclusively
because of a fine performance by the actress; her character is no
better written than any of the others.
     People who are addicted to romantic comedies will find something
to like in this movie.  Others will likely regard this as a
light-but-pointless film that is tedious more often than enjoyable.
There's nothing about THE NIGHT WE NEVER MET that will drive people
away in droves, but there's little to attract them either.
Note:  in response to some requests, all movie reviews written by me may
       be reprinted provided that they carry the following notification:
       "Copyright 1993 by James Berardinelli".
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
