Title
Review for Ponette (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Edwin Jahiel
PONETTE (France, 1996) *** 1/2 Written and directed by Jacques
Doillon.Produced by Alain Sarde. Photography, Caroline Champetier. Editing,
Jacqueline Fano (Leconte). Production design, Henri Berthon. Music,Philippe
Sarde.Cast:Victoire Thivisol (Ponette), Xavier Beauvois (the father),
Claire Nebout (Aunt), Matiaz Bureau (Matthias),Delphine Schiltz (Delphine),
Marie Trintignant (the mother) et al. An Arrow Release.French with
subtitles. 92 min. Not rated.
At the 1996 Venice Film Festival -- one of the Big Three with Cannes and
Berlin -- the film "Ponette" won the International Critics award, the
"Office Catholique" award, and Victoire Thivisol won for Best Actress.
Like the girl Ponette she portrays, Victoire was still four years old when
the filming was finished. Her age is much more than a new entry in the
Guinness Book of Records. Victoire's performance is incredibly good and
totally credible.
This movie is unusual and the successful result of experimental techniques.
It is also in  the French tradition of exploring childhood and adolescence.
Hollywood mostly shows the young the way the studios or the adults imagine
them to be or wish them to be -- though some fine pictures have come out of
this approach. France shows them as they are, and mostly from the
children's point of view.
The Gallic gems  include works such as "Poil de Carotte," "Crainquebille,""
La Maternelle, "" Zero for Conduct," "The Two of Us," Truffaut's  "Les
Mistons" and "Small Change."  The long list is unfamiliar to American
audiences except for Truffaut's "The 400 Blows" and Louis Malle's "Murmur
of the Heart," and " Au Revoir les Enfants." The 1951 classic "Forbidden
Games" links the most closely to "Ponette" through the theme of death as
seen by orphaned five-year-old Brigitte Fossey.
The story of Ponettte could be called high-concept, summarized in a single
sentence. "Four year-old Ponette loses her mother in a car accident, cannot
accept her absence, waits for her to come back from the dead." But this is
not a simple concept like "U.S. boxer Stallone beats the Russian champion."
Ponette's grief and her hopes for Maman's return do not abate. It is
understandable in a girl who thinks of her beloved rag doll as a living
creature.
When the child's loving father must go to Lyon on business, he leaves her
for some time with his sister-in-law and her two kids. The.little cousins,
with alternating seriousness, playfulness and teasing, tell her that dead
is dead: "Papi (Grandpa) did not come back from the dead." Ponette's
wonderful, poetic reply :"It's because no one waited for him."
The solidly Catholic aunt  (who reminded me of Barbara Hershey) has her own
ideas about Resurrection ("like Jesus") or the power of God. Symbolic or
contradictory abstractions confuse Ponette who firmly believes that Maman
will materialize. When Ponette's father, an agnostic, returns, he is
irritated at Auntie's approach. "God is for the dead. Leave Him alone."
Cut to a summertime boarding school in which mostly children somewhat older
than Ponette --all extremely well observed and well played -- contribute
their own theories or  advice. There is as well much hilarious talk on
subjects ranging from suppositories, to what "single people" means and
who/what are the Jews.
On all matters Ponette is referred to supervisor Aurelie, and to Jewish
schoolmate Ada "who know everything." "How is it that Ada knows all about
Jews?" Answer: "Because Jesus was a Jew." Then comes an amusing discussion
which confuses Catholic, Arabs and Jews in fanciful ways.
The dialogue, naive, fresh, imaginative, is not fabricated comic relief but
typical of genuine talk of French chidren who, like so many in France,
possess an astoundingly rich and grammatical vocabulary. The single error
here is when Ponette says "J'ai mal a ma tete."
Aurelie tries to help Ponette by introducing her to prayer. Ada -- who says
she is a Child of God -- and pal Mathieu, want Ponette to become one. This
entails passing a number of physical tests. e.g. a five-minute stay in a
dumpster. With elegant kindness Ada times this out after one minute.
When Ponette sleeps, she speaks to Maman who even visiits her once. "She
smelled good." But as she is reaching utter despair, something good and
magical happens. I can only disclose that the girl is "cured," accepts
death's finality and starts out on the road to a normal life. After a
single viewing I am still undecided: Is the ending hokey or is it a
convincing culmination of a child's imagination?
Since 1972 writer-director Jacques Doillon has made some 20 features, plus
shorts and movies for televison. Though unknown in the U.S., he is much
admired in France for his original, intimate subjects (many of them about
young people), his skills with actors, his ear and eye for real life, his
sympathetic and empathetic analyses and techniques. For example, here the
camera stays almost always on the girl, with many closeups, yet smooth
framing variations prevent monotony.
Doillon sent video crews to French preschools all over. Four- and
five-year-olds were taped in interviews that elicited opinions on many
topics, including death. He then set up workshops, playing games, talking,
doing skits with the selected children. This went on for six months. Then
he wrote the screenplay using the workshop dialogues, and cast the
children.
The movie spends an absolute, minimal time on adults and their backgrounds.
In spite of unspecified times and places  there is no feeling of
incompleteness.  The grownups screen is both necessary and sufficient. The
older people are the supporting cast to the children, who themselves are
the supporting cast for Ponette. The story belongs to Ponette.
Superbly directed Victoire Thivisol becomes as real as a documentary shot
by a hidden camera. Doillon, with no maudliness, recreates a specific case
among universal traumas, in ways never quite seen before on the screen.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     When people learn in social settings that I am a film critic, two
inevitable questions arise.  The first -- "So what's good?" -- is always a
pleasure to answer; in fact, telling people what's good is the purest
pleasure in this job.  Unfortunately, many of my recommendations are
unfamiliar to casual movie-goers, which begs the second, more aggravating
question:  "So what's it about?"  It seems simple enough, a harmless
request for a thumbnail sketch of the plot, but it also asks one to strip
a film down to the single sentence you might find in a "TV Guide" summary.
     If someone asked me what PONETTE was about, I'd grit my teeth and say
that the plot set-up concerns a 4-year-old French girl (Victoire Thivisol)
coping with her mother's tragic death in a car accident.  I would then
refuse to let the individual walk away until I explained that PONETTE
isn't really "about" a grieving little girl, that it's not the maudlin
drama full of teary-eyed waifs that such a hopelessly under-descriptive
synopsis might portend.  At turns genuinely touching and delightfully
amusing, PONETTE is really about that point in childhood where every
question has a hundred different answers.
     Little Ponette's question seems to her to be a very straightforward
one -- she simply wants to know how she can talk to her mother again.  The
problem is that every single person she encounters approaches that
question in a different way.  Ponette's Aunt Claire (Claire Nebout) tells
her about Jesus' resurrection and subsequent appearance to the disciples
waiting for him, leading Ponette to the logical conclusion that her mother
could also return from the dead if someone were waiting for her.  Her
young cousins Matiaz and Delphine (Matiaz Bureau Caton and Delphine 
Schiltz) suggest the use of a magic word; a young classmate named Ada
(Leopoldine Serre), a self-proclaimed "child of God," offers to put 
Ponette through several trials so that she too can speak to God and ask
for an intercession; Ponette's father (Xavier Beauvois) discourages all
thoughts of religion and tries to make her cope with the real world.
Overwhelmed by a dizzying range of possibilities, Ponette does what any
reasonable 4-year-old would do:  she tries all of them, then finds her
grief deepening when nothing seems to work.
     The truth writer/director Jacques Doillon mines is that, between the
well-intentioned happy talk and half-truths of adults and the ill-informed
"facts" of peers, it's a wonder that children learn anything about life's
complicated questions.  In one hilarious scene, Delphine explains to
Matiaz the difference between Catholics and Jews (including the
little-knows fact that Arabs are actually Catholics, because they too are
"not Jews"), while another scene captures two girls struggling to
understand what it means when a person is "single."  Childhood at this age
may never have been portrayed with more grace, humor or startling realism,
from the spectacular performances of the young actors (none better than
the mesmerizing Thivisol) to Doillon's plucked-from-preschool script.
     Doillon's insights are so honest for so long that his conclusion,
involving a supernatural visitation, comes as a real disappointment.  It's
too obvious and too pedantic a resolution to a film which is built around
the absence of easy answers.  The beauty of PONETTE comes from watching a
child who is just coming to understand the basic truths of the world
struggle with the ambiguities of life, death and God.  There are no
simple questions in PONETTE, no even a question so apparently simple as,
"So what's it about?"

Author
Alex Fung
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
It is certain that the lion's share of attention that Jacques
Doillon's film, PONETTE, has drawn is due to the acclaim heaped upon
the performance by the film's lead, Victoire Thivisol, who grabbed
headlines and turned heads when she was awarded the Best Actress
prize in a unanimous decision in September 1996 at the prestiguous
Venice Film Festival. The kicker is that Ms. Thivisol was *four
years old* when PONETTE was filmed.
I have always considered it condescending and somewhat insulting to
differentiate quality of any type of work based solely upon age
(random example: "that film review was pretty inept, but *he's only
a teenager*, cut him some slack"), so it should be pointed out that
Ms. Thivisol's performance is not simply excellent *for a child
actor* or excellent *for a four-year old* -- her performance is
simply excellent *period*, no qualifiers necessary. It's a truly
incredible piece of work -- bold, poised, and completely
true-to-life without seeming remotely forced or artificial. Ms.
Thivisol demonstrates a remarkable sense of ease in front of the
camera with astonishing emotional volatility, and glimpses in her
phenomenal work in PONETTE are perhaps the definitive cinematic
portrayal of grief.
It is important that Ms. Thivisol is superb in the title role of the
film, since the nature of PONETTE virtually demands her to be nothing
short of excellence; her performance is absolutely critical to the
success of the film. PONETTE's storyline is a fairly straightforward
one - young Ponette, left with a broken arm from an automobile
accident, is told by her father that her mother has died in the
crash, and spends the remainder of the film coming to terms with this
loss. PONETTE focuses intently on Ms. Thivisol, who has a daunting
amount of screentime, and anything short of a superb performance by
her would have shattered the aura of authenticity permeating the film
and resulted in a work which would have seemed more contrived and
melodramatic.
While I was captivated by the wonderful performance of little Ms.
Thivisol and her castmates (child performers Matiaz Bureau and
Delphine Schiltz, playing Ponette's cousins who try to help in her
healing process, are also nothing short of outstanding), I was also
acutely aware that very little was occuring onscreen -- the film
tends to become somewhat repetitive in the second act, rehashing the
same motifs. This material seemed to be overextended for a
feature-length film, even one that has a relatively short running
time of 92 minutes, and could have been much more powerful had it
been trimmed down significantly.
Mr. Doillon, perhaps aware of the lack of material in PONETTE and
enraptured by the performance coaxed from Ms. Thivisol, consequently
spends a great deal of time with lingering close-ups of her. Too much
of the film involves grief-stricken Ponette bursting into tears,
which is always affecting but begins to lose its emotional impact
when repeated incessantly.
The ultimate resolution of PONETTE is inevitable from the outset of
the film, but I question whether or not it was wise for Mr. Doillon
to approach it in such a literal fashion -- on its own, independent
of the rest of the film, it works well, as Marie Trintignant and Ms.
Thivisol play well off each other and demonstrate an easy fluidity
(although in terms of pacing their scene could stand to be
shortened), but given the naturalistic tone of set by the preceding
scenes in PONETTE, it seemed vaguely out of place within the context
of film. I am also unconvinced that Mr. Doillon successfully
extracted the raw emotional power of the film's final scene,
resulting in a conclusion which is only halfheartedly cathartic.
Many of the film's great moments involves the interplay between
Ponette and her cousins Matiaz and Delphine, and later between the
three children and the other youngsters at the boarding school. It is
fascinating to watch them naively and guilessly discuss and attempt
to grasp such involved, challenging abstractions as death, heaven,
God, and reincarnation, stripping down many of the theological
discussions to their basic elements in the manner that only young
children, free from preconceptions or prejudices, are able to do.
Perhaps the most remarkable aspect of Mr. Doillon's PONETTE, other
than the astonishing way in which he elicits outstanding performances
from his predominantly young cast, is how he easily infiltrates the
mind of a young child, and immerses the film in elemental simplicity
to such an extent that the audience is coerced into observing the
proceedings though unsullied eyes, with childlike perception.
Watching PONETTE harkens back to an easier, more innocent time, where
issues and concepts of complexity could be satisfactorily addressed
with seemingly crystal clarity by simple answers.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Few of us who call ourselves "adults" truly remember the experience 
of childhood, except as a dim and distant illusion.  Oh, we can recall 
what we did as a child, and often our memories of that period are among 
our most precious, but, looking back, we view things through the haze of 
maturity.  Every once in a while, however, something comes along that 
breaks through that filter -- a movie, a scene on television, a page in 
a book, or a moment in real life.  Jacques Doillon's PONETTE is one such 
catalyst.  By presenting the world through the eyes of a grieving four-
year old, PONETTE manages to do what few motion pictures can -- regress 
an audience into childhood.
     I would place PONETTE in the company of two other recent films that 
have successfully attempted something similar: Dorota Kedzierzawska's 
CROWS and Rebecca Miller's ANGELA.  In both of those movies, however, 
the protagonist was older (9 in CROWS, 10 in ANGELA), and neither 
featured a young actress with as much emotional power as Victoire 
Thivisol, who plays the title character in this film.  When Thivisol's 
eyes well up with tears and her upper lip begins to quiver, viewers 
reach for Kleenexes.  
     PONETTE works in large part because of its simplicity and realism.  
The plot is minimal -- just enough to give us a reason to stay with the 
tiny protagonist for ninety minutes.  Ponette has recently lost her 
mother in a car accident.  Her father, a somber, emotionally-detached 
man, informs her that "Mommy was broken," then disappears for a while, 
leaving his daughter in the care of her aunt.  So, with the aid of two 
cousins and, later, a group of other school children, Ponette must 
grapple with confusing religious issues while trying to understand the 
meaning of life and death.
     The film effortlessly takes us into the magical world of a four-
year old, where stuffed animals have extraordinary powers, dolls are 
more than inanimate objects, and God is someone you can talk to and 
expect an answer from.  Some of the most memorable moments in PONETTE 
center around the innocent conversations of children -- how Catholics 
are different from Jews, what it means to be "single", and how eating a 
certain candy can make you fall in love forever. 
     For more than eighty minutes, PONETTE continues strongly, but, in 
the end, writer/director Jacques Doillon seems at a loss how to end the 
movie.  His choice, while admittedly cathartic, feels like a cheat.  The 
pseudo-realistic, almost-documentary quality of the film evaporates; 
PONETTE's final scenes jar us out of the fragile reverie generated by 
what preceded them.  Fortunately, the contrived ending does little to 
dampen my enthusiasm for the picture as a whole.  When I recall PONETTE, 
the first thing I think of is the heartbreakingly pure performance of 
young Victoire Thivisol.
     From start to finish, Thivisol is nothing short of amazing.  This 
is the kind of portrayal that would be labeled as a standout from an 
actor of any age, but, from someone who's only four, it's astonishing.  
A share of the credit must be lavished upon Doillon -- it takes a 
masterful film maker to elicit this kind of unforced performance from a 
child.  Had Thivisol shown a hint of artifice, PONETTE would not have 
worked.  The strength and consistency of her acting keeps this film on a 
high level.  Even if the movie was not so moving and evocative, it would 
be worth viewing simply for the character that Thivisol brings to life.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Your mommy is in bad shape," says the father to his hospitalized
four-year-old daughter, Ponette.  "The doctors think she may die."
     Told completely from the perspective of the child and containing
one of the most mesmerizing performances of the year by Victoire
Thivisol as Ponette, the film's development is as unusual as the story
itself.
     According to the press kit, French writer and director Jacques
Doillon first composed only the synopsis for the film and then spent
the next six months interviewing four- and five-year-olds, asking them
their thoughts on a wide variety of subjects, including death.  From
the words and actions from these discussions, which he taped, he
prepared the script.  When you listen to the film, the dialog almost
always rings true.  (Only in one sequence, set in the kids' bedroom,
does he try to stuff too many adult sized sentences down their little
mouths.)
     More than finding the dead-on dialog, he made an even bigger
discovery when he met Thivisol, then a three and one half, in a
preschool in Lyon.  I have not seen a better performance than hers this
year.  Stunning and richly textured, her acting more than makes up for
the film's limitations.  (Sometimes listening to a bunch of
preschoolers babbling on can become tedious.  Hollywood would gloss
over this by hiring some adult stars and shifting the focus away from
the children.)
     In the film's second scene, the despondent father (Xavier
Beauvois) drives along while talking to Ponette.  He is angry because
his wife was foolishly not wearing her seat belt when the accident
occurred.  He tries to impress upon Ponette the reality of what has
happened.
     "Mommy is dead," he tells her.  "Do you know what that means?"
Although quite intelligent, Ponette has the mind of a child.  "Yes,"
she responds.  "She is flying with her magic mirror."
     Thivisol expresses her sadness though a wide range of emotions.
When confronted with devastating reality, her lower lip extends, she
hopelessly tries to fight back the tears, and her cheeks get rosy red.
In others, she uses her big eyes to penetrate the very souls of those
addressing her.  Her spoken words are touching even if you can't speak
a word of French.
     The story is full of the misinformation found on a playground.
Ponette believes that her mother is still alive, and her friend's
theories confuse her even more.  Her father takes her to live with her
aunt (Claire Nebout), who tries to help by telling her the story of
Jesus's resurrection.  This, of course, becomes garbled in little
Ponette's mind, who becomes convinced that her mother will come back
just like Jesus did.  She reasons that Jesus returned merely to visit
with friends, so her mother would have a much stronger motivation to
return from the dead since she could visit her own daughter.
     As you watch the movie, it is impossible to keep from contrasting
the images one normally gets of kids in the movies with those in
PONETTE.  Most movies have kids in minor, but terminally cute roles, as
in JERRY MAGUIRE.  If a child actor does have a substantial role, it is
rarely in a serious picture.  The few potential dramatic roles tend to
be adventure yarns, like ALASKA, where the characters have little
depth.
     The father in PONETTE is a very unsympathetic character.  Spending
most of the movie being AWOL, he arrives again in the middle only to
yell at his daughter for clinging to the belief that her mother will
come back.  "How much longer will you wait for her?" he barks.  "Are
you crazy or what?"
     Ponette's most emotionally draining scene occurs when she sneaks
into a chapel one night.  In a scene reminiscent of Emily Watson's in
BREAKING THE WAVES, Thivisol cries her eyes out while praying.  "God
Almighty," she petitions.  "You know my mommy is dead because she is
with you.  I want to talk to my mommy."  That she could pull this off
without seeming manipulative of the audience's emotions is a tribute to
both her and the director.
     Parts of the film are lighthearted.  Fellow preschooler Carla
(Carla Ibled) secretly kisses a candy and then tricks poor Mathias into
eating it.  This causes all of the boy's friends to burst into the
chant, "Mathias loves Carla, Mathias loves Carla."  Mathias is
completely embarrassed.
     Usually, however, the story stays firmly in the tragic.  Little
Antoine (Antoine du Merle) taunts Ponette on the school grounds with,
"You killed your mother because you were mean."  She was no such thing,
but kids can sometimes say extremely cruel things.
     The ending is somewhat of a cheat and goes on too long, but the
dazzling performance by Victoire Thivisol as Ponette is not to be
missed.  Not a perfect show, but a wonderfully revealing one.
     PONETTE runs just 1:32.  It is not rated, but would be G or PG.
The film would be fine for all ages.  It is in French with English
subtitles so those too young to read may be lost.  I highly recommend
the picture to you and give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
