Title
Review for Cookie's Fortune (1999)
Number of Reviews
21

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
Robert Altman's latest begins with the free-floating point of view sometimes 
employed by the novelist Sinclair Lewis.  We first see a black man inside a 
dark bar, Theo's Place.  He's drinking heavily, and when he leaves he spots 
a cruiser passing in the street.  The drunken Willis Richland (Charles S. 
Dutton) drops his pint of Wild Turkey, returns to the bar and steals 
another.
Meanwhile, across the town of Holly Springs, Mississippi, we are shown a 
rehearsal of an Easter pageant, Camilla Dixon's (Glenn Close) version of 
Oscar Wilde's 'Salome'.  Camilla is bossing around the players, including 
her sheepish and slow-witted sister Cora (Julianne Moore) and a young 
sheriff's deputy, Jason Brown (Chris O'Donnell).
Thus Altman establishes the arena in which his story unfolds.  He adds 
dashes of other characters to the recipe, and somehow manages quite a 
successful result:  a small movie with a large cast, an art film that is in 
no way snooty or snotty, the kind of picture that stars worth their salt 
give up scads of cash to be in.
These threads of plot keep crossing as the narrative gets passed among the 
many eccentric and convincing characters.  Willis appears to be breaking 
into a house through a kitchen window.  He stumbles upon a cabinet and 
begins to remove several handguns, just as an old woman descends the steps 
and surprises him.  We discover they are friends, and the woman (Patricia 
Neal) - the Cookie of the title, Jewel Mae "Cookie" Orcutt, beloved widow of 
Buck Orcutt - treats this man like a son.  The two keep a running count of 
wrongs they've done each other, and Cookie has been wronged more often:  
it's a playful and endearing piece of characterization.
We find out that Cookie's relatives have abandoned her.  Nieces Camilla and 
Cora are not on good terms with her (rather, Camilla is not, and Cora 
blindly follows any direction coming from Camilla).  Niece Emma Duvall 
(apparently Cora's daughter, played by Liv Tyler) has just returned to town 
from a life of alleged decadence.  She hasn't had the chance to see Great 
Aunt  Cookie before the old woman, in a state aggravated by loneliness, 
senility, and some heavenly descriptions she got from Willis, uses one of 
Buck's old pistols to blow out her brains.  What keeps our interest is the 
filmmaker's handling of the body's discovery.  Again the camera seems to be 
floating:  Altman is wisely unafraid to sustain a shot when very little is 
happening.  Hence we see Camilla searching the house in real time, and we 
are treated to a masterful scene when she finds the body in bed, a ruined 
feather pillow covering the head, pistol dangling from a dead finger.  
Thinking quickly, Camilla reveals her true colors:  she begins to gather any 
traces of Cookie's crime against the family name; knocking over jewelry 
boxes to simulate a robbery; stuffing the suicide note, which is addressed 
to Willis, into her mouth, to hide it from the approaching Cora;  finally 
lifting the pistol out of the peaceful grip of Cookie's hand.  In short, 
Camilla flagrantly violates the crime scene.
Needless to say, Camilla's actions hold serious repercussions for most of 
the characters.  What is very impressive is Altman's sense of humor - a 
refined dark comedy that also functions as social satire.  This director is 
experienced in manipulating the large cast, as he did in 'Mash', 
'Nashville', 'Short Cuts' and others.  We watch brilliant spurts of 
characterization followed by astounding revelations about human nature.  
Viewers can tell Altman is always on task, whether it's coaxing crazy 
expressions out of the actors, timing the implications of a lingering shot, 
or even including a couple of visual jokes other directors would shun (such 
as Close's Camilla getting caught with her hand in Cookie's cookie jar!).
The acting is thoroughly solid in this piece.  Close shows her mastery of 
megalomania:  she plays Camilla as an aging Southern belle more concerned 
with appearances than with family relations.  Sister Cora, who sleeps in the 
same room with Camilla, and kneels dutifully during Camilla's self-righteous 
prayers, is a classic example of a dominated adult.  Sometimes Moore's 
expressions are hilarious in their simple-mindedness, as when she sucks in 
her lips, as though they are zipped, when one of the cops comments about the 
terrible scene in the bedroom upstairs.  Moore has worked with Altman 
before, in 'Short Cuts', the adaptation of Raymond Carver's superb short 
stories, and she shows a marvelous range here.  Cora is so plain she's 
almost unattractive, and some of the most funny and subtle moments are given 
to her, as when she incorporates Biblical-sounding poetry from 'Salome' in 
her everyday speech.  Just as good is Patricia Neal, the title character, as 
she shows her attachment to Willis, and especially to her dead husband Buck. 
  Finally, Charles S. Dutton seems to be the main character - he links the 
other characters with strands of plot that many times display their foibles 
and his virtue (as when he buys a pint of bourbon and returns it to the 
shelf in Theo's bar).
Supporting roles are jewels as well.  Chris O'Donnell as Jason Brown is a 
green but over-confident deputy, and receives with telling ignorance the 
condescension of Camilla and his superior officers.  Jason is in lust with 
Emma, played with low-key loyalty by Liv Tyler.  Ned Beatty plays Lester 
Boyle, another deputy, who is not afraid to point out the incompetence of 
senior investigators on the case of Cookie's death.  I don't know if Beatty 
has the most acting credits among the cast members, but he's certainly one 
of the more natural-acting veterans Altman has ever found.  In a smallish 
role, Lyle Lovett's Manny Hood is quietly obsessed with Emma, employing her 
in his catfish business and refurbishing a caboose in which he is hoping she 
will live.
My sole complaint is the convolutions that come in late.  Yes, some of them 
are crucial and well-explained, but others seem like they're included out of 
respect for the novel from which Anne Rapp developed her screenplay.  A few 
details are crammed in and possibly expendable.
Another of Altman's recent films, 'Gingerbread Man', is set in the South, 
and 'Cookie's Fortune' furthers the director's exploration of things 
American and gothic.  There are wonderful depictions here of manses and 
gardens, gentility and jealousy.  It would take me awhile to come up with a 
director comparable to Altman;  if he were purely a writer he would be 
called literary, sprawling but coherent, sarcastic but touching.  At last, 
he's an original, big-name independent whose small masterworks should be 
included in any canon


Author
Christian Pyle
Robert Altman is back!  After a series of muddled efforts ("Pret-a-Porter,"
"Kansas City," and "The Gingerbread Man"), Altman has delivered a quirky comedy
that deserves its place on his distinguished resume.
In "Cookie's Fortune," an elderly woman nicknamed Cookie (Patricia Neal)
commits suicide to join her late husband.  The body is discovered by her niece
Camille (Glenn Close), a domineering neurotic who hurriedly makes the suicide
look like a murder so that no one will suspect there is insanity in her family.
 (Of course, anyone who has met Camille KNOWS there is insanity in her family.)
 Suspicion falls on Cookie's only friend, Willis Richland (Charles Dutton), and
the small-town police try to investigate the murder with the help of some
outside experts.
Altman's trademark is the peopling of a film with a variety of unusual
characters, and the population of Holly Springs, Mississippi, has familiar
faces.  Julianne Moore plays Camille's mousy sister Cora, who knows about the
cover-up but says nothing.  Liv Tyler plays Cora's rebellious daughter Emma,
who takes up residence in Willis' cell.  Boy wonder Chris O'Donnell plays a
bumbling deputy who has the hots for Emma.  Ned Beatty is also on the force;
his character, Lester, has a simple reason for knowing that Willis is innocent:
 "I've fished with the man."  Courtney B. Vance is a suave expert who takes
charge of the investigation.  And lurking around the fringes is Altman regular
Lyle Lovett selling catfish.  Altman's genius is that he can develop characters
with only a few strokes and manage to keep them all in motion without the movie
seeming crowded.
Altman and first-time screenwriter Anne Rapp also texture "Cookie's Fortune"
with lots of wonderful comic touches.  Many of the funniest occur when the
developing investigation disrupts a church group production of "Salome" and
several characters wander around the jail in their costumes from the play. 
Willis' lawyer (Donald Moffat) walks in wearing the purple robes of a king of
Judea topped with a Fedora hat.
Glenn Close gives a flawless comic performance.  Camille is a self-obsessed
refugee from a Tennessee Williams play who is audacious enough to cut down the
yellow crime-scene tape and take up residence in Cookie's house on the same day
as the suicide.  As I watched Close work, I realized that it had been years
since I'd seen her in a project worthy of her talent.  Hollywood tends to
discard its actresses as they reach the middle of life; let's hope that this
role generates more opportunities for her.  
It's a joy to see Patricia Neal again.  Even at 72, she retains the gentle
strength that made her performances in films like "The Day the Earth Stood
Still," "A Face in the Crowd," and "Hud" so memorable.  "Cookie's Fortune" is
her first theatrical release in ten years (in the meantime, she's appeared in
three TV movies).
Holly Springs seems like an updated version of  Mayberry.  Its jail cells are
left unlocked, and there's a genial atmosphere that pervades the town.  The
only person who doesn't fit that mold is Camille, who is wound way too tight
for the pace of small town life; like any great comic character, she is extreme
and rigid while everyone around here is free and loose.  "Cookie's Fortune" is
delightful because it welcomes the audience as friends and invites them to
chuckle at the townsfolk's quirks.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
.">http://www.wpd.net/madreview/>.

Author
Matt Williams
Director Robert Altman's latest film, Cookie's Fortune, is an easygoing
portrait of a small Southern town and its eccentric inhabitants.  The
film doesn't have a lot to say, and it takes its time in doing it...but
it's a pleasant and relaxing duration.
The main plot of Cookie's Fortune involves an elderly widow named Cookie
Orcutt (Patricia Neal).  She has three surviving relatives in the small
town of Holy Springs, Mississippi. There are her two nieces, the haughty
Camille (Glenn Close), and the simpleminded Cora (Julianne Moore).  And
then there's Cora's flighty daughter, Emma (Liv Tyler), who's just
recently returned to Holy Springs.
But the person who loves Cookie the best would have to be her friend
(and employee) Willis (Charles S. Dutton).  Taken in by Cookie's late
husband, Willis now takes care of the elderly Cookie, running errands
and fixing his famous catfish enchiladas.
The small town has its share of eccentric characters, including Deputy
Jason Brown (Chris O'Donnell), who is smitten with Emma. His rival for
her affection is Manny Hood (Lyle Lovett), the town's primary source of
catfish.  And then there's the scrabble-playing town lawyer (Donald
Moffat), and the fishing-obsessed sheriff, Lester Boyle (Ned Beatty).
Altman is a master of the layered storyline, and Cookie's Fortune is no
exception.  He weaves together all of these characters and then some,
with no one ever seeming to get the short end of the stick. Altman
juggles the multiple subplots with such ease and finesse that it is
never disruptive or confusing.
The thing to watch Cookie's Fortune for is the performance of Charles S.
Dutton.  Willis is the heart of this movie,  and Charles Dutton the role
perfectly.
Glenn Close is the closest this film has to a villain.  However, her
character is not really evil, just a control freak.  But that doesn't
stop Close from giving a shrill performance just two steps removed from
Cruella DeVille.
Still, you can't let one bad catfish enchilada spoil the whole batch.
And, in Cookie's Fortune, there's plenty to go around.  It's a change of
pace from your average film, but the result is mighty tasty.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Homer Yen
The fine thing about being in a small town is exactly that.  It's
small, cozy and familiar.  We accept the charms and the peculiarities
of the citizens because that's what gives these kinds of small
communities a wonderful life of its own.  Take Holly Springs,
Mississippi, for example.  It's the kind of town where a murder suspect
gets one phone call, coffee, a copy of Field & Stream, and a friendly
game of Scrabble with the local officer and lawyer.  Also, everyone
within the community seems to be in the local church play.  There are
just so many likable people, and director Robert Altman lets us easily
slip a peek into the many lives of this town.
Most noteworthy is that of Willis (Charles S. Dutton).  He's a simple,
aging black man who wouldn't hurt a soul.  Sometimes he fishes and
other times he sneaks more than a few sips of whiskey.  But his true
devotion is to friend Cookie (a sweet-as-can-be Patricia Neal).  He
helps her with her errands and likes nothing better than to fix her
catfish fajitas.  But Cookie is aging rapidly, and painfully misses her
dear, departed husband.  Unable to bear her loneliness, she decides to
kill herself.
Camille (Glenn Close), Cookie's niece, first discovers the body.  She
is first shocked, but then outraged by her apparent suicide (`only
crazy people would commit suicide,' she blurts out).  She decides to
make the suicide look more like a murder.  With a few carefully placed
clues here and a few footprints there, Camille has effectively turned
this peaceful town upside down.  Once the news of this gets out, we
meet more of the pleasant townsfolk.  They include another niece, Cora
(Julianne Moore), grandniece Emma (Liv Tyler) and various other
unprepared-for-murder-in-my-small-town police officers, including
officers Boyle (Ned Beatty) and Brown (Chris O'Donnell).  More
disbelief occurs when circumstantial evidence points to Willis as the
killer.  He's innocent exclaims Boyle.  How does he know?  Well, as he
puts it: `I fish with him.'
Cookie's Fortune isn't a murder mystery, and it isn't about one batty
woman's attempt to salvage the dignity of the family name, as Camille
would have you believe.  Rather, Cookie's tragedy serves as a way for
the movie to highlight the close-knit nature and the colorful
characters that populate this small town.  We like Willis and find
humor in the laid-back attitudes of the citizens.  We like Liv Tyler as
a trampy vagabond who would rather skin catfish than do something
better with her life.  There are also the owners of a blues bar who
exude radiance and a profound yet simple wisdom.  They don't say much,
but know quite a bit.  Consider this film something of a church social
where everyone you meet has an interesting story to tell.


Author
Murali Krishnan
The nature of small town life in the American South is the topic of
this film by established director, Robert Altman. This film follows a
traditional narrative, rather than having a ensemble style of earlier
Altman works, such as Nashville or Ready to Wear, but in typical
Altman fashion, the characters are given surprising depth considering
the number that are presented.
The oldest living member of the Orcutt family is Jewel Mae "Cookie"
Orcutt (Patricia Neal). She is a widow living alone and missing her
beloved husband. Her primary company is close friend Willis Richland
(Charles Dutton), who acts as the caretaker of Cookie's estate, which
mainly consists of a stately home and its possessions. Cookie's
closest family in town are her two nieces, Camille Orcutt (Glenn
Close) and Cora Duvall (Julianne Moore). The eccentric Camille is
director of the Easter play that the small town in putting on, in
which the dim-witted Cora is playing the lead. In the play as in real
life, Cora always taking orders from her bossy sister Camille. Cora's
daughter, Emma Duvall (Liv Tyler), has recently return to town.
Although she has a strong attachment to her friend Willis and her
lover, police officer Jason Brown (Chris O'Donnell), she does not get
along with either her mother or her aunt, who disapprove of the
spirited young woman's lifestyle and disregard for decorum. Life in
the small town is quiet until Cookie's death. Although the frail old
woman was longing to rejoin her departed husband, her departure
resembles a murder scene.
Fishing a recurring theme, as it symbolizes the tranquillity of the
small town and the camaraderie it fosters between people. When people
fish together, the long quiet times together build a bond of trust.
This is why one of the deputies, Lester (Ned Beatty), is sure his
fishing buddy Willis is innocent, even though the circumstantial
evidence initially makes him the prime suspect in Cookie's death.
The languid pace of southern life pervades even the murder
investigation. Although all initial evidence incriminates Willis, no
one really believes he is involved. In such a small, interconnected
society, people understand the character and motivations of others.
Indeed, even as he is being held in jail, Willis is surrounded by his
friends and lives a comfortable existence until the investigation
finally unravels the truth.
Altman extracts strong performances from the cast, except from Close,
who goes too far. Camille is an exaggerated and exceedingly annoying
character. Given the narrowness of her character, she is given too
much screen time. Dutton and Tyler are strong as the other main
characters who are given enough time to develop.
The narrative becomes weak when the uninspired theme of just desserts
and racial politics is presented. This part of the story is annoying
because it is unnecessary. The interesting components are the variety
of characters and their relationships. The criminal act and
investigation give a skeleton on which to build a story, but too much
importance is given to this component alone.
Recommended. As usual, Robert Altman uses a composite of many
characters to draw a larger picture, capturing the flavor of the
locale. The writing is capable when it is developing the characters,
but sags when it becomes somewhat preachy. The acting is generally
strong and enjoyable except for one grating character and manic
performance.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Robert Altman's (Short Cuts) latest film is a slow-moving,
southern-fried tale about an inbred small town and its annoying
inhabitants.  Set in Holly Springs, Mississippi, Fortune is cleverly
acted, but unfortunately its script is on the fast track to the tri-city
area of Predictaville, Boringstown and Dullsburg (which is, ironically,
just outside of Holly Springs).
Altman is the most celebrated ensemble-cast director of recent memory,
but his direction can't save the blah story by first-time writer Anne
Rapp, who previously was a script supervisor for The American President
and The Color Purple.  Her story centers around a rich eccentric widow
named Jewel Mae Orcutt (Patricia Neal, Hud) or "Cookie" to her friends.
She has a warm, Driving Miss Daisy-type relationship with Willis
Richland (Charles S. Dutton, Get on the Bus), the town drunk and catfish
enchilada guru, but on the eve of Easter she decides to blow her brains
out in hopes of being reunited with her late husband.  This simple
premise takes over thirty minutes to set up.
The trouble is that Cookie's carcass was discovered by her busybody
niece Camille Orcutt (Glenn Close, Paradise Road), who, believing she
will be the heiress to the Orcutt fortune, decides to make the suicide
look like a murder.  Since his prints were all over the gun - he had
cleaned Cookie's collection the previous evening Willis becomes the
most likely suspect and is immediately incarcerated.
The rest of the film unfolds like a bed sheet forged in extra static
cling.  The only thing that livens it up are the kooky characters 
especially Julianne Moore (Psycho) as Cora Duvall, Camille's nitwit
sister and the star of the town church's stage presentation of Oscar
Wilde's `Salome.'  Things liven up a bit once Courtney B. Vance (The
Preacher's Wife) shows up to investigate the murder/suicide, but by that
point the film has already overstayed its welcome.  All the viewer can
do is sit back, relax, and wait for the obligatory shot of someone
getting caught with their hand in the cookie jar.
2:00  PG-13 for violence, sexual content and some mild adult language

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Robert Altman.
Cast: Glenn Close, Charles S. Dutton, Liv Tyler, Julianne Moore, Chris 
O'Donnell, Patricia Neal, Ned Beatty, Courtney B. Vance, Lyle Lovett, 
Matt Malloy, Donald Moffat.
1999 - 118 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and a suicide).
Reviewed May 11, 1999.
Since 1975's "Nashville," an American masterpiece and one of the 
greatest films ever made, Robert Altman has proven that he is a 
world-class filmmaker. Although his career since then has been noticably 
uneven, he always manages to come out on top, and in the last decade has 
made several successful motion pictures, including "The Player," "Short 
Cuts," and even "The Gingerbread Man." His latest film, the 
southern-based dark comedy "Cookie's Fortune," which gained a lot of 
buzz at this year's Sundance Film Festival, unfortunately falls into 
Altman's pile of disappointments (joining the likes of the inane "Ready 
to Wear"), and probably is his biggest misfire I've seen.
Set in the humble, little town of Holly Springs, Mississippi, Cookie 
(Patricia Neal) is an elderly and grieving widower who has several 
relatives nearby, none of which much seem to bother visiting her, and 
whose only actual friend is Willis (Charles S. Dutton), a kindly black 
man who lives with her to keep her company. Easter is quickly 
approaching, and when her two nieces, the kooky, determined Camille 
(Glenn Close), who is the director of the church's violent holiday play 
of "Salome," by Orson Welles, and the dim-witted, flaky Cora (Julianne 
Moore), drop by, they are horrified to discover Cookie dead in her 
upstairs bedroom, the victim of a suicide. Stating that suicide will not 
be permitted in their family, the quick-thinking Camille immediately 
brainwashes Cora into telling the police Cookie was murdered, and then 
goes about destroying evidence (she literally eats the suicide note) and 
setting up a "murder scene." Soon, however, the planted gun happens to 
contain the fingerprints of Willis, who is taken to the town's jail by 
the reluctant cops, who keep the cell door wide open and set up a game 
of Scrabble for him to play. Hearing word that her best buddy is in the 
slammer, Cora's tough 19-year-old daughter, Emma (Liv Tyler), becomes 
Willis' jail partner, taking time out only to make out with her "iffy" 
cop boyfriend (Chris O'Donnell). 
There are two many obvious problems in "Cookie's Fortune" to count, but 
many that can't be ignored. The ensemble cast that Altman has gotten for 
this film is truly exceptional, but (aside from Dutton and Tyler) every 
single one of them is burdened with an annoyingly one-note character 
that isn't given any chance to grow within the nearly eventless 2-hour 
running time. Amid all of the "charming" eccentricities, all signs of 
realistic or even human characteristics have been abandoned for blatant 
caricatures that quickly test the viewer's nerves. In a film in which 
the majority of characters are related in some way, there is no excuse 
for the amount of relationships that aren't the least bit explored, or 
even given one scene, particularly between mother and daughter Cora and 
Emma, who have all of one scene together and one line exchange. Similar 
and far superior films in the "Southern eccentricity" genre are 1989's 
"Miss Firecracker" and 1997's "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil." 
It's been at least a year since I've viewed both of these movies, but 
they are more fresh in my mind, and certainly more memorable, than 
"Cookie's Fortune" which, as I write this, I saw about an hour ago.
It's a shame, too, because the performances are the central saving grace 
(which isn't nearly enough to save any graces at all concerning this 
movie). Since Dutton and Tyler are given the two fully-realized roles in 
the piece, their performances easily stand out, making the most out of 
what is certainly a lackluster screenplay, by Anne Rapp. Julianne Moore 
is the most lovable character in the bunch, mostly because of her 
genuine naivety. Ultimately, she is turned into the main comic relief 
and is forced to stand at a distance from the material. Glenn Close also 
is fine here, but too off-beat by a half for us to get involved or care 
at all about her, even though, I suspect, she wasn't meant to be 
particularly likable. Chris O'Donnell sleepwalks through his first film 
in two years (since the disasterous "Batman and Robin"), but it isn't 
his fault that he pretty much is put in a corner with nothing to do but 
occasionally kiss Tyler. Courtney B. Vance shows up three-fourths of the 
way into the film as a crime investigator and comes off as nothing more 
than an afterthought, as does Lyle Lovett, as Tyler's boss and friend at 
her fish hatchery job.
By the time "Cookie's Fortune" reached its climax which, to say the 
least, leaves something to be desired, I was left with one nagging 
question: what was the point? The movie is rarely funny, straining for 
laughs that no doubt sounded better on paper than in actual film form; 
there is no human interest, or any sort of interest at all, in the 
story; and very little at all comes to satisfying closure. Unlike 
Altman's "Nashville" or "The Player," "Cookie's Fortune" has nothing at 
all to say about anything, hoping that utter wackiness will be enough to 
salvage the proceedings. It isn't. Not by a long shot.
   - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
     Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated PG-13
starring Glenn Close, Julianne Moore, Liv Tyler, Chris O'Donnell, Charles
Dutton, Patricia Neal, Ned Beatty, Courtney B. Vance, Donald Moffat, Lyle
Lovett
written by Anne Rapp
directed by Robert Altman
Robert Altman has earned his reputation as one of America's most
distinguished filmmakers. He has made war films(MASH), historical
dramas(VINCENT & THEO) and legal thrillers(THE GINGERBREAD MAN). But
this time around, he has directed COOKIE'S FORTUNE, a hilarious and
quirky dark comedy that opened 1999's Sundance Film Festival. First
time writer Anne Rapp wrote this kinda-sorta murder mystery that
slightly echoes the Coen brothers' FARGO and David Dobkin's CLAY
PIGEONS. What is kind of ironic about COOKIE'S FORTUNE is that 15
minutes into the movie, we know who commited the murder and how, and
during the course of the film we are watching the citizens of a small
town called Holly Springs try to figure out what it going on.
Willis Richland(Charles Dutton) has noticed that Cookie(Patricia
Neal), an old lady whom he cares for, has started acting a trifle
odd. One day, when he goes out to run a few errands, Cookie commits
suicide to finally reunite with her dead husband.  Unfortunately, the
first to arrive at her home is Camille(Glenn Close), a quirky relative
who has come to fetch a salad bowl. She notices that Cookie isn't
answering her, so she goes upstairs to find Cookie dead, the gun in
her hand. Camille's dimwitted sister, Cora, wanders inside and also
sees what has happened. "Cookie did not commit suicide," Camille
assures her. "Only crazy folks commit suicide." Camille, for reasons
unknown to anyone except for her, wants to prove that her family isn't
crazy, so she tries to pass off Cookie's suicide as a murder. She goes
through all the steps trying to make it seem like a murder, and then
calls the cops. Meanwhile, Cora's delinquent daughter, Emma(Liv
Tyler), is back in town. When the police suspect Willis of commiting
the crime, and lock him up, she decides to become her
cellmate. Infact, the jail cell is basically an open room where the
cops come in and play Scrabble and talk about fishing with the
criminals. One of the cops is Jason, a very dumb young man who is in
love with Emma. Jason is excited to be coping with the town's first
real crime, and Camille is trying to cover it up right in front of
him.
COOKIE'S FORTUNE isn't one of Altman's more important films, but it is
still a cut above most dark comedies. Unlike many directors, Altman
isn't trying to show off any derivative new style. He just wants the
viewer to see the characters in their real life form, which makes the
film all the more convincing. I'm surprised to see that the film
recieved somewhat lukewarm reception at Sundance. Perhaps the viewers
were hoping for something different. But I, for one, loved this
entertaining gem. Infact I may have even enjoyed it better than
Altman's last outing, the John Grisham's scripted THE GINGERBREAD MAN,
which was also a very good picture. COOKIE'S FORTUNE is a breath of
fresh air from other derivative movies made by twentysomething film
students.  It shows patient, developed filmmaking from a truly
knowledgable filmmaker.  COOKIE'S FORTUNE is one of the new year's
smartest comedies.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST 


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 October Films
 Director:  Robert Altman
 Writer:  Anne Rapp
 Cast: Patricia Neal, Charles S. Dutton, Glenn Close, Julianne
Moore, Liv Tyler, Lyle Lovett, Chris O'Donnell, Ned Beatty,
Courtney B. Vance, Donald Moffat
   There's a popular belief that America's psychos hang out in
big cities where they can hide their craziness amid millions of
people who seem not to notice anything, while pleasantly
eccentric people inhabit the cute little towns and villages of
the country--especially those in the south.  For all his
reputation as a non-conformist, long-time director Robert
Altman is not one to challenge this homespun conviction.  In
his considerable output, he has shown us the craziness of big
cities in "The Player," a black comedy featuring a paranoid
young movie executive (played by Tim Robbins) who is
threatened by a disgruntled screenwriter--until he takes the
law into his own hands.  This biting examination of greed and
power in a cosmopolitan ambiance was countered by his
magnum opus, "Nashville," vignettes of twenty-four people
who are in involved in a political rally in the country-music
capital of the world--far from Tinseltown's variety of wheeling
and dealing.
   With his latest work, "Cookie's Fortune," the director
appears to be pulling inward, affording us an entertaining but
only mildly amusing comedy of the sort that playwright Beth
Henley made famous with her greater flamboyance.  Here,
Altman focuses on neither a megalopolis nor a noted
southern city but rather on a fairly nondescript town of Holly
Spring, Mississippi, territory upon which the armies of North
and South marched almost a century and half back but
otherwise just a convenient spot to work out a comedy of
manners from Anne Rapp's insular screenplay.  A movie
which could be taken as a fantasy by Northern Americans on
what the rural south must still be like, "Cookie's Fortune" can
be decoded as a gentle spoof on the zaniness that the rest of
us think exists down there, particularly if the rest of us have
read too much Tennessee Williams.
   Altman typically trots out a variety of characters, each
unique, so that the viewer could not possibly go away form
one of his works confusing one with another.  In "Cookie's
Fortune," the central focus is on Camille Dixon (Glenn Close),
a combination of Tennessee Williams' Blanche Dubois and
Alexandra Del Lago--a grande dame who appears to live in
the antebellum days of gentleman callers and the unequivocal
need to keep up appearances.  Her younger sister, Cora
Duvall (Julianne Moore), lives across town and, often
appearing slow and lacking confidence, she bends to the will
of her older sibling.  Emma Duvall (Liv Tyler), who is
allegedly Cora's 18-year-old daughter, is the favorite relative
of the bizarre title character, Cookie Orcutt (Patricia Neal),
who has lived alone in a well-appointed house since the
death some years back of her gun-collecting husband, Buck. 
But the aging Cookie reserves the major part of her affection
for the town's most benevolent resident, Willis Richland
(Charles S. Dutton), who frequently pilfers bottles of Wild
Turkey bourbon from the local bar only to return the bottles
secretly, new and filled, when he is able to buy them.  Willis,
whose love for catfish enchiladas competes with his passion
for the bottle, looks out for Cookie's welfare and is particularly
concerned when the old lady appears to be "losing it."
   Altman, who was born and brought up in Missouri, has an
obvious affection for his characters and if he confers
idiosyncratic behaviors on them, he does so only to set each
apart from the others as an archetype of a disappearing way
of life in America.  Lacking untoward animosity toward
anyone, he casts most of his barbs against the pretentious
Camille, who is so intent on upholding the honor of her family
that when she finds her aunt Cookie lying dead on her bed
from a self-inflicted gunshot wound, she takes steps to cover
up the transgression.  Informing her sister Cora only crazies 
commit suicide, certainly no one in her family, she eats the
suicide note, makes the death appear to be the result of a
robbery, and causes more trouble than she imagined when
Willis is arrested for the crime, detained, and questioned by
both the town's only lawyer Jack Palmer (Donald Moffat) and
an ambitious investigator, Otis Tucker (Courtney B. Vance).
   Altman declines as usual to focus the camera for long
periods on one character or scene. We are made privy to a
the down-home jailhouse cell which presents defendant, his
good friend, his arresting officer, and his lawyer competing
together in a game of scrabble.  Our attention then shifts to a
quick roll in the hay between young Emma Duvall and Jason
Brown (Chris O'Donnell), a sheriff whose prowess in the sack
is undoubtedly more graceful than his bumbling conduct as a
police officer.  
   Glenn Close plays well according to type as a domineering,
garish patrician who directs the church play "Salome" with the
same imperious spirit with which she dictates to her younger
sister.  Charles Dutton is the real catch as the friendly, wholly
unpretentious citizen who asks little more of life than a bottle
of bourbon, a plate of catfish, and the company of some of
the good people of the whimsical town.  The story cries out,
however, for the off-the-wall zaniness of Beth Henley's
comedy "The Miss Firecracker Contest," likewise a Southern
Gothic but with broader humor, more suspense and conflict,
and much larger-than-life characters.

Author
Steve Rhodes
The problem with a story that relies almost exclusively on small talk is
that they don't call it "small" talk for nothing.  In Robert Altman's
COOKIE'S FORTUNE, in which fishing is a favorite subject, a Scrabble
game gets significant screen time.  You know the movie has problems when
you find yourself more interested in the words on the board that the
characters holding the tiles.
Altman, a director with his hits (SHORT CUTS) and his misses (KANSAS
CITY and THE GINGERBREAD MAN), usually tries to shoehorn too many stars
into his pictures.  The resulting confusion leaves you wondering why he
can't restrain himself.  One thing is certain; Altman can create
atmospherics with the best of them.  COOKIE'S FORTUNE is full of
credible Southern images, from the wide porches and ante-bellum homes to
the sounds of the crickets and the banjos.
With excruciating slowness, Altman directs the script by Anne Rapp,
which is so painfully obvious that you can guess all key events almost
immediately.  Patricia Neal plays Jewel Mae "Cookie" Orcutt, a
pipe-smoking widow who misses her husband and wants to be with him
again.  Charles Dutton plays her black handyman, Willis Richland, who
lives with her.  In the opening, he comes to clean her guns.  As soon as
you see that scene, you know that Cookie will kill herself and Willis
will be blamed.  And when a young boy sees the key to the mystery, you
can be sure that the adults will ignore him until just before the end of
the movie.
Altman requires his viewers to endure half of the movie before the
inevitable happens.  You find yourself thinking that Cookie should go
ahead and shoot herself so the story can finally get in gear.  The
story's few tiny twists don't come until the end, but they involve a
fairly uninteresting little subplot anyway.
Along the way we get to watch Glenn Close overact as one of Cookie's two
estranged nieces and Julianne Moore underact as the other.  Liv Tyler
and Chris O'Donnell play two sex obsessed twentysomethings.  Ned Beatty
is the good-old-boy police officer who is sure that Willis didn't do it
because he's a fishing buddy.  Courtney B. Vance is the no nonsense
investigator.  And Lyle Lovett is given a part that has little obvious
purpose other than to give him a part in the movie.
In the film's biggest lost opportunity, the community is putting on an
amateur production of Oscar Wilde's "Salome."  Some humor ŕ la WAITING
FOR GUFFMAN would have been much-appreciated relief from the plot's
tedium, but Altman shies away from lampooning it as strongly as he
should.
In the town's liquor store is an old sign that proudly proclaims, "In
this store in 1897, nothing happened."  The same could be said of the
movie.
COOKIE'S FORTUNE runs too long at 1:58.  It is rated PG-13 for adult
themes, brief violence and some profanity and would be fine for kids
around 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
Cookie's Fortune (1999)
Reviewed by Eugene Novikov
http://www.ultimate-movie.com/cookiesfortune.html
Member: Online Film Critics Society
 Starring Glenn Close, Julianne Moore, Liv Tyler, Chris O'Donnell, Charles S.
Dutton. Rated PG-13.
Robert Altman's Cookie's Fortune is that rare movie that does not depend on
sentimentality to be uplifting and to make its viewers feel good. It is a
sunny, delightful, dreamy comedy, filled with lovely performances, skillful
direction and topped off with an understated, clever, extraordinary script.
As this is an ensemble piece, it is forced to start of slowly as it
introduces us to its characters, all of them residing in a southern town
called Holly Springs. First we meet Willie (Charles S. Dutton), an honest man
with a slight drinking habit. We then see that Willie takes care of an
elderly lady nicknamed Cookie, who is slowly losing her grip on sanity and is
being filled with loneliness, despair, and want of her dead husband. We cut
to Camille (Glenn Close) who is obsessively directing a play with her sister
Cora (Julianne Moore). Then we briefly get acquainted with Emma (Liv Tyler),
an apparent relative of Cookie, who is a down-but-not-out teen outcast, still
full of love and hope even though she has no real place to live. We also
fleetingly see Emma's lover Jason (Chris O'Donnell), an ambitious but far too
excitable young cop.
We are now about one quarter through the two hour picture, and Robert Altman
decides that it is time to set the plot in motion. We see the ecstatic Cookie
stare hopefully at a picture of her husband. She exclaims "Here I Come!" and
then puts a pillow to her face and shoots herself. Soon after, her niece
Camille stops by to get a fruit salad bowl, comes upstairs, finds Cookie dead
and flips out. Convinced that suicide is a disgrace and that she will have
none of that in her family, she eats the suicide note and convinces her
slightly slow (yet sweet) sister that it was a murder. She makes sure that
she stages it like a murder as well; scattering jewelry all over the floor,
breaking a few cabinets, windows and doors, and then throwing the gun out in
the back yard.
The only reasonable suspect is Willie, who immediately gets taken into
custody, and put in a jail cell (they all know he didn't do it, so the cell
stays open and he plays Scrabble with the sheriff and the faithful Emma).
Meanwhile, the unperturbed Camille continues her none-too-subtle
manipulations trying to further cover up for the murder while at the same
time making her Easter play a success.
So begins Cookie's Fortune, a film aptly described by critic Scott Renshaw as
"a southern spin on Fargo," except that this one is far funnier and much more
enjoyable than the Coen brothers' darker, somewhat disturbing and slightly
overrated escapade. Robert Altman's slight picture is in some ways
reminiscent of something like Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil as
well, in that both films focus (on and off) on the eccentricities of the
residents in a southern US town. Indeed, most of the characters in Cookie's
Fortune are loads of fun to observe, and a portion of them are fascinating
and surprisingly multi- dimensional.
Glenn Close turns in an insubstantial (in terms of her career) but
magnificent performance as the conniving Camille and is also the source of a
good portion of the many laughs that we enjoy in this movie, and she is
perfectly cast as the prolific "Aunt Alexandria" character, endlessly
obsessed with family dignity. The equally essential role of Willie is handled
with an intangible grace by veteran thespian Charles S. Dutton (Mimic, A Time
to Kill)
There is nothing like a movie which leaves you feeling all warm and fuzzy
inside hours, even days after the film ends. Cookie's Fortune is such a
movie. I loved the light, kindhearted approach Altman (whose last project was
the dark, intense drama The Gingerbread Man) took towards the tricky subject
matter. I enjoyed the talented ensemble cast. I even liked the trite "In the
south everybody is related to everybody" cliche that is inevitably employed
by the time this movie draws to a close. I'm not sure why Cookie's Fortune
had such an all-around pleasing effect on me. Perhaps it's that good ol'
southern charm.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Dennis Schwartz
COOKIE'S FORTUNE (director: Robert Altman; cast: Glenn Close (Camille
Dixon), Julianne Moore (Cora Duvall), Liv Tyler (Emma Duvall), Chris
O'Donnell (Jason Brown), Charles S. Dutton (Willis Richland), Patricia
Neal (Jewel Mae "Cookie" Orcutt), Ned Beatty (Lester Boyle), Courtney B.
Vance (Otis Tucker), Donald Moffat (Jack Palmer), Lyle Lovett
(Manny Hood), Ruby Wilson (Josie Martin), Danny Darst (Billy), Matt
Malloy (Eddie, the expert), 1999)
When I look at the deep south, the first thing that comes to my mind is
their history of racial problems. In the sleepy town of Hollis Springs,
Mississippi, much of the town is registered as a landmark in historical
memories, as Altman gently moves his camera across the various
personalities who live there, it is as if each one is an archetype
specially depicted for this comic/drama story, and the town stands out
in the background as a reminder of the past.
Firstly, we look in on the local police, the dreaded bigots from the
days of segregation, as we see them appear as forbearing as they always
do, as they leave their stationhouse before going on patrol, but we will
see later on that this is an integrated force now and a more amiable
one, then the camera takes us to a black bar, where we hear the rich
sounds of the blues being belted out in the wee morning hours, by a
sultry Josie (Ruby), and then we switch over to the white folks, putting
on a rehearsal for an Oscar Wilde Easter play about John the Baptist, at
the Presbyterian Church, with the drama being directed by the
intractably arrogant Camille (Close), with her not too talented younger
sister Cora (Moore), being unduly manipulated by her, as she is being
coached for her lead role of Salome. These two scenes contrast how the
blacks and whites of Hollis Springs spend their evenings.
Next, we follow Willis (Dutton), who is the soul of this film, standing
for trust and reconciliation with the past, as he drunkingly walks out
of the black bar and heads across town, passing a van with the sleeping
Emma (Liv) inside, who just returned from leaving town over something
that frustrated her, but is back now working for Manny (Lyle), gutting
catfish, his love for her being a one way street, as he acts like a
Peeping Tom, hovering around her van. Finally, we see Willis break into
the house of an old rich white lady, Cookie (played with charm and
crackling wit by veteran actress Patricia Neal, who rarely makes a film
appearance anymore), but it turns out these two are the best of friends,
and he only came by to clean her guns at one in the morning, since he
promised her he would do it that evening, as he looks after her ever
since her husband Buck died a few years ago; and, he also wants to tell
her that her daughter (Emma) is back in town. We will later on learn, as
it is one of the town's well-kept secrets, that she is actually the
18-year-old daughter of Cora.
What Altman has done, is paint a picture of the town, full of local
flavor, trying to test us to see if we guessed right at what our first
impressions of the locals was, as those of us who have not kept up with
the changes in the south or have not been brought up there, might view
things from an outdated way of seeing the new south, thinking the worst
of them, but now surprised to find that the only thing that has not
changed about our perceptions of the south, is how dull witted some of
them can still be.
Altman's other aims are to uncover all the town's little nasty secrets
that is so easily hidden by its southern hospitality and history of
racism. Though, the tone of Altman's film is always light and never very
haunting. This is one of his mild films, he doesn't penetrate deeper
than the story itself takes us, even if it is tightly directed, with no
visible flaws in the storyline and the film's purpose, everything about
it turns out to be as pleasing as the smell of magnolias in the spring,
and thereby we are cheated into seeing something that could have been
most revealing, instead we are offered something that is really too
bland and simplistic for its own good, even if it is a satisfying film,
it is still most easily categorized into the "feel good" type of mold,
something Altman might have winced at in his heyday of filmmaking in the
70s.
The climactic scene revolves around Cookie's desire to join her husband
in the afterworld, since life has no meaning for her without him, as she
is only living for her memories of him, therefore she shoots herself,
leaving a suicide note for Willis, but unfortunately her diabolical Aunt
Camille, who comes over for a fruit bowl, finds her body and eats the
suicide note while stealing worthless trinkets from the house, and then
telling Cora, that this wasn't a suicide, only insane people kill
themselves, and no one in our family is insane, as she takes the gun out
of Cookie's hand and throws it into a flower bed, and has Cora call the
police, while reminding her to tell them it was a robbery and murder,
supposedly covering up the suicide to protect their cherished family
name.
Unfortunately, the good-hearted Willis becomes a suspect because his
fingerprints are all over the house and on all the guns. What is comical
or tragic, depending on what kind of a sense of humor you have, is
watching how the crime scene is being trampled on, and the murder
investigation done in such an amateurish way, that the investigators of
the little Jon Benet Ramsey murder in Boulder, Colorado, would look like
Scotland Yard  investigators in comparison to this sheriff's department.
There is a love story played out by Emma and Jason (Chris), who is the
junior member of the police department. Their romance is a series of
lustful encounters, that is mostly comical, as it adds to the story, by
giving it a more local flavoring.
As far as the police go, they don't think Willis did it, but they hold
him in an unlocked cell and play scrabble with him, while he puts all
his trust in them to uncover the truth. Now this is as far a cry from
the old Mississippi, as one can imagine, though there are still some
lingering subtle racial prejudices around. But the best argument given
for why Willis couldn't have done the crime, is given by the sheriff,
Lester (Ned), who  says, " Because I went Fishing with him." Which, I
guess, could best be understood as a very logical statement by those who
were brought up in a small-town.
The film ends on Cora's spiteful comment to her sister, as she sticks to
the story her controlling sister gave her, that it wasn't a suicide, as
she triumphantly exclaims, " I did good, didn't I ?"
The film's decency shines through all the past racial injustices, and
maybe things are getting better in the south, at least that is the
message we are left with, and I see no reason to be of a different
opinion. But that last framed shot of the sheriff and Emma and the
lawyer and Willis sitting on the dock fishing was a little too rosy a
picture for me to take in all at once.
Cookie's Fortune turns out to be in the unlocking of the past by the
revelation about heritage and parenthood for the family members of
Cookie Orcutt. Trying to come to terms with the past is something the
south, as well as the rest of the country, is still hopefully working
on. Race relations might be the biggest problem Americans are still
faced with, and finding a cordial way out of it is the aim of a lot of
good folks. The weakness of this film, is that its over-all decency is
not moving enough of an experience to make this anything but a mildly
entertaining film, that captured a little something about the south's
past and future, and made us feel a little better that we saw it, but
did not set off any bigger sparks, or really create any excitement about
the town or its inhabitants that is worth taking note of.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jamey Hughton
Cookie's Fortune is a light, quirky and enjoyable small-town comedy
about a single homicide that shakes everyone up. However, it's not a
murder mystery. We know how the events transpired. What Cookie's Fortune
revolves around is the manner in which the townspeople react to the
tragedy - some with despair, and others with insane lunacy.
The title character, played by Patricia Neal, is a kindly and thoughtful
old lady has inherited the wealth of her husband who died several years
earlier. Just as Easter weekend approaches, Cookie has gone and done
something shocking: she's committed suicide. Her two nieces, Camille
(Glenn Close) and Cora (Julianne Moore), stumble onto the body while
searching for a salad bowl. Camille is disgusted by the thought of
suicide in the family, and so she rearranges the scene to make it appear
as if Cookie had been murdered by an unidentified burglar who broke into
the house. Cora, desperately short on brain cells, agrees to back up
Camille's story when the police investigation begins.
The small local police force is led by Sheriff Lester (Ned Beatty), and
backed up by rookie officer Jason (Chris O'Donnell), who jumps
enthusiastically at the chance to grab his gun from the holster and
approach a crime scene like the fourth member of Charlie's Angels. After
Camille and Cora explain their tall tale to everyone, a fingerprints
check is run. A match is found in local booze-hound Willis (Charles S.
Dutton), a good friend and loyal companion of the victim. In reality,
Willis was only cleaning Cookie's guns the night prior to the incident,
one of which was used as the murder' weapon.
Altman's detailed character relationships are what makes Cookie's
Fortune such a pleasant experience. The interactions between Willis and
catfish girl Emma (Liv Tyler), Cora's rebellious daughter, are flat-out
delightful. Everyone in the film has a sweet, agreeable characteristic
of some kind. Jason and Cora are dim-witted but charming, Willis is
honest and reliable, and Emma has a magnetic personality. The one
character who perhaps doesn't register under that category is the
apprehensible Camille, who treats even her closest relatives like dirt.
Close, with wonderful over-the-top zaniness, shines brightly with the
stand-out performance of the cast.
Another actor who demands immediate attention is the swift and assured
Charles S. Dutton. A veteran actor of countless supporting roles, Dutton
is easily one of the most convincing auras to grace the good screen in
months. The natural charm that he so amiably carries is welcome
throughout Cookie's Fortune - but he's backed in style by the remainder
of the talented cast, with particular emphasis on Close and Tyler.
Veteran Academy-award winning actress Patricia Neal lends just the
required amount of lovable nature to the instantly endearing character
of Cookie, up until her expected demise.
Cookie's Fortune lacks the nasty edge of other Altman material (such as
The Player and MASH), but there are a lot of minor delights. For
example: the romantic liaisons between O'Donnell and Tyler, as they slip
behind a Coke machine for some secretive physical engagements. And the
way Tyler slips in some appreciated Jack Daniels into Dutton's coffee
when he's camping out in his jail cell. `Do you want cream with that?'
she asks. `Yeah,' he replies, `heavy on the cream.'
Cookie's Fortune cannot maintain it's comic ease until the credits roll,
but the experience, although somewhat slight, is a pleasantly diverting
method of spending a few hours. The ensemble cast is delightful, and
while the film doesn't offer any groundbreaking elements, it's engaging
from beginning to end. The bottom line: this light Cookie will do for a
tasty snack if you should feel a craving for something mild and
enjoyable.
Feedback Appreciated!  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Like so many of the great Robert Altman films--"Nashville," "The
Player," "Short Cuts"--and even some of his not-so-memorable ones
("Pręt-ŕ-Porter"), "Cookie's Fortune" is a character-driven drama that
engages the viewer through the slowly unfolding interactions of its
multiple leading players.
        Altman's latest round robin relies a little too heavily on plot,
plus some of the characterizations are too eccentric for their own good.
But even a minor Altman movie challenges an audience in a way few Hollywood
products can.
        The setting of Cookie's Fortune is the sleepy Southern hamlet of
Holly Springs.  Here, the local police force spend more time fishing--or
talking about fishing--than they do citing parking violations, the most
serious crime in town.  But that's about to change.
        The Grande Dame of Holly Springs is an aging matriarch called
Jewell Mae Orcutt, known to everyone as Cookie.  Recently widowed, Cookie
is so starved of her husband's company and affection that she decides to
join him in the afterlife via a pistol shot to the head.  Upon discovering
the body, Cookie's nieces Camille and Cora decide to disguise the suicide
as a murder, not simply to eliminate any chance of a scandal blackening the
family name, but to make a bid for the sizable ancestral estate.
        As Cookie, veteran actress Patricia Neal ("Hud") heads Altman's
cast of keen ensemble players.  Whereas Neal is convincing in the role, her
character outplays her welcome early on.  Cookie moves slower than
molasses, all the time ruminating over her recent loss.  When the gunshot
comes, it's a relief to all.
        Charles Dutton, as Cookie's hired hand and confidante, fairs much
better.  As Willis, Dutton evokes a sympathetic character of immensely
human proportions.  He's the kind of person who "borrows" a half pint of
bourbon from the local bar only to return a fresh bottle, surreptitiously,
the next day.  When he's accused of the murder (because his are the only
fingerprints besides Cookie's found in the house), even the cops don't
believe it.  Fortunately for them, Willis proves a game Scrabble opponent.
        Glenn Close (in the role of Camille) continues her recent trend of
wide-eyed, melodramatic characters.  When Camille is not crossing police
lines with gay abandon, she's directing the local congregation in an
adaptation of Salomé.  Julianne Moore, wearing little if any makeup, is
oddly effective as the impotent Cora.  Rounding out the cast is Altman
favorite (although I still haven't figured out why) Lyle Lovett, who plays
the same creepy oddball he played in "Pręt-ŕ-Porter" and "Short Cuts."  Liv
Tyler is the tomboyish Emma, and Chris O'Donnell plays the young cop who
has the hots for her.
        Altman doesn't quite know when to call it quits, and that twanging
guitar constantly reminding us of where we are soon grows tiresome.  But
along the way we're treated to some assured performances, stunning
cinematography, and exchanges of wonderfully wistful dialogue courtesy
former script supervisor Anne Rapp.
        "Cookie's Fortune" might not be among Altman's best works, but it's
another rich and intriguing film from this most creative of filmmakers.

Author
Scott Renshaw
COOKIE'S FORTUNE
(October)
Starring:  Glenn Close, Julianne Moore, Liv Tyler, Chris O'Donnell,
Charles S. Dutton, Patricia Neal, Ned Beatty, Courtney B. Vance.
Screenplay:  Anne Rapp.
Producers:  Robert Altman and Etchie Stroh.
Director:  Robert Altman.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  117 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In his last film, 1998's little-seen THE GINGERBREAD MAN, Robert
Altman took his unique perspective to the finer points of the legal
system's workings in the American South.  Apparently he decided he hadn't
yet explored it in all possible depth, because he's back in Dixie for
COOKIE'S FORTUNE.  The region's easy rhythms and idiosyncracies seem to
suit the film-maker well, and he seems to be having a heck of a good time
with his visits there.  COOKIE'S FORTUNE finds Altman laying down a blues
jam of intertwining characters spiced with a deft, dry comic touch into a
surprising, off-beat entertainment.
     The Cookie of the title is eccentric matriarch Jewel Mae "Cookie"
Orcutt (Patricia Neal), strong-willed inabitant of a Holly Springs,
Mississippi manor with her black houseman Willis (Charles S. Dutton).
Cookie is estranged from her only family in town, nieces Camille Dixon
(Glenn Close) and Cora Duvall (Julianne Moore), but that doesn't stop the
overbearing Camille from considering everything connected to her family
her business.  That's especially true when Camille visits Cookie's home,
only to discover a scene which could potentially bring embarrassment to
the family, and contrives a story to cover it up.  Her story sets in
motion a strange chain of events which finds innocent people jailed,
secrets revealed, and plenty of Wild Turkey consumed.
     COOKIE'S FORTUNE is probably most easily summarized as a Southern
spin on FARGO's tale of polite, common-sense police investigation, but
that doesn't entirely capture the film's quirky rhythms.  On the surface
it's the story of Camille's manipulations -- of simple-minded Cora, of
Cora's wild-child expatriate daughter Emma (Liv Tyler), of everyone
involved in the investigation at Cookie's estate -- providing Glenn Close
with a grand showcase for a woman who turns her own life into a Tennessee
Williams play.  Yet even as Camille's plans begin to unravel, COOKIE'S
FORTUNE is less about the suspense and tension of guilt exposed than it is
about the pleasures of watching it meander to its inevitable conclusion.
As it is in many Altman films, the plot -- well-constructed as it is by
Anne Rapp -- works best as a place for a handful of appealing performances
to unfold.
    And there are certainly plenty of appealing performances, of which
Close's is only the most gaudy.  Charles S. Dutton wraps himself around
Willis's good-natured roguery, giving the character a well-worn charm; Ned
Beatty similarly entertains as the police chief little concerned with
by-the-book procedure among friends; Matt Malloy has a funny minor role
as an overzealous investigator.  Even Chris O'Donnell, so often an
attractive blank hole as an actor, acquits himself well in the ideal role
of a puppydog-eager-to-please deputy.  The only stumble comes from
Julianne Moore, who doesn't know quite what to do with Cora, whether to
make her a simple naif or an even sadder case of a woman with a genuine
developmental disability.  Fortunately she's a rare false note in Altman's
smooth orchestration.
     COOKIE'S FORTUNE is the kind of unconventional narrative of lingering
takes that may leave some viewers shifting in their seats waiting for the
point of it all.  For Altman, in this particular case, taking the time to
get to the point is actually part of the point.  It's a comedy of details
dropped in almost off-handedly, and others -- a hand literally caught in
the cookie jar, for instance -- underlined at just the right moment.  It
doesn't add up to all that much either as character study or as crime
drama, nor does it take the straightest path between any two points.  It's
merely a lazy, crazy, consistently amusing diversion about a place where
you only know the true measure of a man (or a woman) after you've gone
fishing together.  It's a place Altman might consider visiting more often.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "COOKIE'S FORTUNE" (October Films)
Robert Altman, one of the screen's most intriguing
story-tellers, is back again with writer Anne Rapp's sweetly satirical
tale about the genteel citizens of a small Southern town. Holly
Springs, Mississippi, is a place where very little happens which is
why - when an eccentric, old lady is found shot in the head in her bed
- everyone becomes involved. Patricia Neal plays the indomitable
matriarch, Jewel Mae "Cookie" Orcutt, who lives with her kindly black
handyman Willis (Charles S. Dutton), much to the consternation of her
pretentious, hypocritical niece Camille (Glenn Close) who, in turn,
dominates her sweet, simple-minded sister Cora (Julianne Moore). While
Camille's directing a production of Oscar Wilde's "Salome," which she
has adapted for the local Presbyterian Church, Cookie decides to join
her late husband in heaven and commits suicide, using a "peacemaker"
from his gun collection which Willis has just cleaned and
polished. When Camille finds her aunt's bloody body, she is determined
to avoid the "disgrace." "Only crazy people commit suicide," she
mutters. So she messes up the house and makes it look like a
murder. And, of course, Willis becomes the prime suspect. Poor Willis!
All he wants in life is some Wild Turkey bourbon, catfish enchiladas,
and hanging out with his friends at a Theo's Bar, a blues club.
Fortunately, the sheriff (Ned Beatty) is Willis's fishing buddy, as is
the town's only lawyer (Donald Moffat) who comes to his
defense. Meanwhile, there's a muddled subplot involving Cora's
rebellious daughter Emily (Liv Tyler) and a naive young deputy (Chris
O'Donnell).  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Cookie's Fortune"
is a rambling but whimsical, fascinating 7, a deliciously nutty black
comedy of manners.

Author
DeWyNGaLe
COOKIE'S FORTUNE by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: A-
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe
Lately, I have seen a similar plot in three movies.  In Jawbreaker (D), Dead
Man on Campus (C), and The Curve (A-).  In all three films, the characters are
trying to cover up a murder to make it look like suicide.  In Cookie's Fortune,
I got a little break from the repetitive plot.  Instead of making the murder
look like suicide, the goal is to make the suicide look like murder.  Cookie's
Fortune comes from legendary director Robert Altman.  Unfortunately, I have
only been able to see one of his either films, The Gingerbread Man (C+), but he
is also the director of Academy Award hits M*A*S*H (1970) and Nashville (1975).
Cookie, played by Patricia Neal, is an elderly widow who is very lonely.  She
is kept company by Willis, played by Charles Dutton.  We are also introduced to
two nieces of Cookie's, Camille, played by Glenn Close, who is desperately
trying to organize her Easter play, and Cora, played by Julianne Moore, who is
the star of the play.  When Cookie commits suicide and her body is discovered
by Camille, Camille is desperate to cover it up to make it look like murder. 
She thinks that it is a disgrace for people in her family to commit suicide. 
She destroys all evidence of it looking like a suicide, including eating the
suicide note she left to Willis.  Now, the police must solve the case of who
killed Cookie.  Everyone related to Cookie in any way is a suspect.  Willis
becomes the prime suspect, even though it is the last thing in the world he
would do.
There is an abundance of great subplots in Cookie's Fortune, which make this
movie mostly about the characters.  Sure there is the main plot dealing with
Cookie, but there is also the subplot of Willis becoming a suspect, Cookie's
great niece Emma, played by Liv Tyler, and her relationship with Jason, a
police officer played by Chris O'Donnell, the play that Camille is putting on,
and many, many more.  At times there are too many, and I wish some of them
could have been developed a bit more.
Cookie's Fortune is much like the 1997 film Playing by Heart.  It follows
different characters with different stories behind each one of them, and it
relates them all with each other.  Both of them are both realistic films, but
Cookie's Fortune dealt with human emotion a little better.  Charles Dutton in
particular turned out a very emotional performance as he has to suffer through
the hardships of losing one so close to him.  The other thing that I liked
better in this film than in Playing by Heart was that it really went somewhere,
and it didn't just lead up to one small scene.
The performances in Cookie's Fortune are wonderful.  Glenn Close leads the
large cast, and she did a good job of it.  Her character was funny, yet very
unlikable.  Patricia Neal, in her smaller role as Aunt Cookie, is very good. 
Her character is a very, very realistic one.  Julianne Moore is hilarious.  Her
character is completely clueless as to what is going on around her.  I'm really
glad to see Liv Tyler in a great film again.  She just gave me another reason
in this film to make me think she is one of today's best actresses.  There are
also some underdeveloped characters in the film, played by Ned Beatty and Lyle
Lovett.  
Cookie's Fortune was a comeback movie of sorts, especially for Chris O'Donnell,
who last appeared in the 1997 film Batman and Robin.  Batman and Robin was
trashed by critics, and then O'Donnell disappeared for a while.  In Cookie's
Fortune, he was great, and now people shouldn't look back on his performance in
Batman and Robin anymore.  Julianne Moore, who last appeared in the re-make
Psycho, was much better in Cookie's Fortune than in Psycho.  Also making a
comeback in Cookie's Fortune is Liv Tyler, who played Grace in the 1998 box
office smash, but the critically trashed film Armageddon.  In Cookie's Fortune,
Liv is able to go places that she wasn't able to in Armageddon or any of her
other movies, such as That Thing You Do! (A+) or Empire Records (A-.) 
It was great to see a mixture of comedy, black comedy, drama, and mystery all
in one film.  I would most likely classify this film as a black comedy, but
nothing as dark as the terrible Very Bad Things (D-).  All of the different
genres in one worked really well.  Each one of them stood out in different
characters and different times.  There are the funny parts which made me laugh,
but there are also the sad, sad scenes, especially involving Cookie.  Luckily,
all of the different elements did level out to equal one fun, great film.
The Bottom Line- This cookie is worth a fortune.

Author
Christopher Null
     Nope, it's not SHORT CUTS.  It's not THE PLAYER.  It was THE
GINGERBREAD MAN.  Before that it was KANSAS CITY.  And before that,
READY TO WEAR.  It's been six years since Altman's last decent picture.
And he's got a lot to redeem himself for.
     COOKIE'S FORTUNE goes a long way toward reminding us why we ever
cared about Altman in the first place.  Wryly funny, COOKIE is a black
comedy about an ancient woman, nicknamed Cookie (Neal), who decides to
off herself.  When sister Camille (Close) discovers the body, she opts
to cover up the suicide, making it look like a robbery of Cookie's
precious necklace gone awry.  And a web of sometimes-funny and
always-silly deceit and duplicity ensues.
     As an "Altman picture," COOKIE is well outside the lines of his
classic oeuvre, sticking to a fairly traditional structure, albeit with
a few non-sequiturs (the staging of the play "Salome," namely) that
serve mainly to run the clock while the action is going on.
     Done wrong, COOKIE could have been as bad a film as something like
GREEDY (greedy heirs fight over will of dying man).  Done right, it
could have been a reinvention of PULP FICTION.  COOKIE'S FORTUNE is
neither, of course, but it's happily closer to the latter than the
former.
     Kudos to Charles Dutton, who takes his role as Cookie's closest
friend to excellent heights.  Julianne Moore is, of course, underused, but
even Liv Tyler failed to annoy me the way she normally does.
Director: Robert Altman
Producer: Robert Altman
Writer: Anne Rapp
Starring: Glenn Close, Julianne Moore, Liv Tyler, Chris O'Donnell,
Charles Dutton, Patricia Neal, Ned Beatty, Courtney B. Vance
http://www.octoberfilms.com/cookiesfortune/index.html
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The South is frequently represented negatively in film and
television, particularly since the civil rights movement of the 1960s.
While few even from the South would claim that reputation is entirely
unearned, like anywhere else there is good and bad in that part of the
country.  Most frequently, "Mayberry, RFD" notwithstanding, the views
of the southeastern part of the country have been the unpleasant images
one sees in NORMA RAE and IN THE HEAT OF THE NIGHT. Some of the
negative stereotypes met and were defeated by a more positive and even
sentimental view in MY COUSIN VINNEY.  MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD
AND EVIL took things a step further and actually portrayed the fancy
section of Savannah as having dignity, charm, and appealing people.
COOKIE'S FORTUNE goes even another step to spread the charm to the
middle and lower middle class.  Holly Spring, Mississippi, the setting
of Robert Altman's new film, seems to have only one unpleasant person.
These people are just a pleasure to watch.  In fact, Altman has finally
mastered a problem that he has had with his films for years.  Altman
makes films in which a lot of individual strands come together in the
final reel.  Too frequently there seems to be no obvious reason for the
audience to follow a strand other than faith that it will become
relevant eventually.  In COOKIE'S FORTUNE his characters are eccentric
and interesting enough, that they would worth watching even if the
strands did not tie together.  This is an amiable film to watch, one
with rich characters and one with frequent chuckles.  We would not feel
cheated even if the various plotlines did not come together.  For that
reason it may be Altman's film best coordinated with his style.  Even
without the important messages of NASHVILLE or THE PLAYER, it may be
Altman's most successful piece of art.
     Holly Spring, Mississippi is one of those sleepy towns where the
sun takes three days to come up and five to go down.  The only thing
that is complex about Holly Spring is the leading family's family tree.
The leading citizen is Cookie, legally known as Jewel Mae Orcutt (hey,
Patricia Neal is still acting).  Cookie has a modest fortune, but her
close companion Willis Richland (a show-stealing Charles Dutton) is
afraid that she might be getting a little *too* eccentric.  One of the
most touching things about this film is the platonic, cross-racial love
that these two have for each other. Then there are Camille Orcutt
(Glenn Close) and her pet human Cora Duvall (Julianne Moore)--sisters,
and nieces to Cookie.  Camille absolutely dominates the dim Cora,
though Cora was married once (hence the different surname) and had one
child, the town's scandal, Emma Duvall (Liv Tyler).  Emma has had a
checkered past and is also the town's leading criminal--flagrantly
disregarding parking laws as she delivers fresh catfish to local
restaurants.  This makes things difficult for her current boyfriend and
lover Jason Brown (Chris O'Donnell), the only young policeman in town.
All the rest of the police seem old enough to be his grandfather.  When
Cookie decides it is time to move on and commits suicide, Camille sees
this as her chance to get her fair share of Cookie's fortune.  She also
wants to avoid the stigma of having a suicide in the family, so tampers
with the crime scene to make the suicide look like a burglary and
murder.
     In the end, the plot of COOKIE'S FORTUNE seems a little contrived.
But at the same time it is beguiling.  In what are generally considered
to be Altman's best films he nevertheless talks down to his audience.
There are frequently laughs in an Altman film, but in THE PLAYER the
laughs are cynical and cold.  Here they are richer and not at all
mean-spirited.  It is the old distinction between laughing with someone
and laughing at him.  For once Altman's message is simply "kick off
your shoes and enjoy people."  That might make this the best and
ironically the most important film he has ever made.  I give it an 8 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Cookie's_Fortune_ (PG-13) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
Robert Altman's most fun movie since 1992's _The_Player_ is this wickedly
enjoyable dark comedy--which, any way you slice it, is one steaming slab of
Southern-fried soap.  Among those populating the small town of Holly
Springs are scheming spinster Camille (Glenn Close); her spineless,
half-wit sister Cora (Julianne Moore); Cora's rebellious daughter Emma (Liv
Tyler), who is carrying on with another half-wit, sheriff's deputy Jason
(Chris O'Donnell); Camille and Cora's octogenarian aunt Cookie (Patricia
Neal); and Cookie's only friend, ever-faithful handyman Willis (Charles S.
Dutton).  As in any soap, this family has more than its share of scandalous
secrets--which gradually break through the surface when one of these people
turns up dead.
But unlike any soap, there is an uncommon richness of character in Anne
Rapp's script, which carves out memorable niches for even the most
peripheral of characters, such as a sheriff's department receptionist
(Niecy Nash) with the hots for a suave investigator (Courtney B. Vance).
Rapp, Altman, and the well-cast acting ensemble are fully aware of the
preposterousness of the twisted goings-on.  What isn't preposterous,
though, is the craft behind the whole affair, from the precision of
Altman's direction to the uniformly fine work by the acting ensemble, whose
standouts are the terrific Dutton and Close, the latter displaying a comic
gift too rarely seen onscreen.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
James Sanford
Imagine Tennessee Williams penning a script for NBC's Must See TV
lineup and you'll have some idea of what director Robert Altman's
"Cookie's Fortune" is like. Though Altman is best known for such
incisive films as "Nashville," "The Player" and "Short Cuts,"
"Fortune" finds him in a mellow mood; it's a tale as easygoing and
eccentric as its characters.
What the movie does have in common with most of Altman's other works
is a mightily impressive cast, led by a delightfully batty Glenn
Close, the sweetly low-key Julianne Moore and the terrific Charles
Dutton, arguably the closest thing to a normal person Anne Rapp's
screenplay can come up with. So skilled is Altman at bringing out the
best from the people he works with that even the usually bland Liv
Tyler and Chris O'Donnell don't seem out of their league acting
alongside Close and Dutton. Though it's the screen equivalent of
cotton candy, "Fortune" is made with a very high grade of sugar.
The story is set in Holly Springs, Miss., where the suicide of kooky
Cookie Orcutt (Patricia Neal) triggers one sticky situation after
another. First, her nieces Camille (Close) and Cora (Moore) rearrange
evidence to make it look like Cookie was murdered since "nobody in
this family commits suicide - it's a disgrace," huffs Camille.
Unfortunately, the women's meddling makes Cookie's old friend Willis
(Dutton) the most likely suspect and spoils his plans to cook up some
catfish enchiladas as a homecoming dinner for Emma (Tyler), a wanderer
who's just returned to town after some hard times in the big
city. Waiting for her with open arms is Jason (O'Donnell), a dopey but
kind cop who is assisting in the investigation into Cookie's demise.
"Fortune" is practically a catalog of quirks, from Cookie's garish
lavender sneakers and junk jewelery to Willis' protestation that he
never drinks "before Tom Brokaw."
The presiding wacko is Camille, an amateur writer and director nervy
enough to rewrite Oscar Wilde's "Salome" - and give herself a
co-authorship credit - for a church production, and so demented she
demonstrates Salome's Dance of the Seven Veils with a roll of toilet
paper and moves into Cookie's house hours after discovering her
body. "You'd think the police could at least take their stupid crime
tape with them when they leave," she crabs as she tramples evidence
under foot.
Altman's last film, the failed fashion industry expose "Ready To
Wear," was crucified for its formlessness and self-indulgence, and
from the evidence presented here, he must have taken those criticisms
to heart.  Though "Fortune" goes on a bit too long and includes a
couple of running gags that wear thin, for the most part it's a tight
little story that never leaves the audience behind. The lunacy proves
surprisingly contagious.
