Title
Review for Session 9 (2001)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Robin Clifford
Gordon Fleming (Peter Mullan) is in a bind. He has a new, unexpected baby
and his business, hazardous material removal, is in danger of going under.
When he and his crew get a job opportunity at the long-abandoned Danvers
State Hospital, he underbids the competition to secure the contract and
promises to get the three-week job done in one. It will prove to be a
fateful week for them all in "Session 9."
Gordo gets the job to remove asbestos and other hazardous materials from
the spooky old mental hospital in preparation for relocating town offices
there. Their guided tour of the facility by a local official, Bill Giggs
(Paul Guilfoyle), brings them through some of the creepier parts of the
former asylum. But, a job is a job and, if they finish in a week, as
promised, there is a $10000 bonus in store.
As they get down to their work, things, normal and not so normal, begin to
happen. Gordon hears a disembodied voice beckoning him. Phil (David Caruso)
is conflicted working with a guy, Hank (Josh Lucas), who is seeing his old
girlfriend. Mike (co-screenwriter Steven Gevedon) has discovered a cache of
audiotapes and transcripts from old psychiatric sessions (hence, the title)
with inmate Mary Hobbs, a multi-personality patient with a dark secret.
Gordo's nephew, Jeff (Brendan Sexton III), suffers from night phobia and is
afraid to venture into the dark bowels of the hospital. As the agreed upon
week draws to an end, Hank mysteriously disappears from the workplace after
a nocturnal confrontation with someone (something?) in the hospital.
Tensions mount and distrust build among the rest as they watch their chance
for the bonus start to slip away. But, there is more, much more, at stake
as the hospital and its history of insanity weigh on them all.
I don't want to give away too much of the story of "Session 9," so I'll
stop there. What we have here is a spooky horror flick that uses none of
the jump-out-at-you-from-the-dark cheap shots that have become part and
parcel with horror films since the advent of "Halloween" and "Friday the
Thirteenth." There is no cat leaping out of the dark or the shock of
suddenly seeing oneself in a strategically placed mirror. With the
exception of one shadowy and chilling image at one point spooky interlude
in the film, there is little that you can get your arms around as far as
what, specifically, is "frightening."
As I watched "Session 9" I became aware of the subtle things that built up
during the story that make it a true horror movie. The striking
high-definition video camera work by Uta Briesewitz (who worked with the
director, Brad Anderson, on his "Next Stop Wonderland")
helps to build up tension with close-ups, fluid camera movement and odd
angles in a way that would make Alfred Hitchcock proud. Music, too, is used
to intense effect, joining with the camera to make simple scenes
frightening, even horrifying. Couple these tech feats with an intelligent
story that uses elements of "The Shining," "The Blair Witch Project" and,
even "The Texas Chainsaw Massacre" and you get a decent, intriguing horror
flick. Additionally, the brilliant decision to shoot at Danvers State
Hospital gives the film another starring character, the institution itself,
which lends even more chills to the equation.
Acting is another factor that raises "Session 9" above the usual dreck
presented in recent horror hits like "Scream," "I Know What You Did Last
Summer" and their sequels. Those films took good-looking, though generic,
young actors and actresses and put them to use to build up a body count,
substituting mayhem for real horror. Anderson opted, instead, to use
mature, experienced actors like Peter Mullan and David Caruso to fill his
characters' shoes and the difference in casting quality is notable. Mullan,
in particular, puts an arc on his character, Gordon, as the troubled guy
who slowly and inexorably falls under the pressures of family, job and,
finally, Danvers State Hospital.
The rest of the small cast fit the bill as people, not just fodder for the
mayhem. David Caruso, as Gordo's senior man and near equal in the business,
shows just how good an actor he is. He made the jump from TV's "NYPD Blue"
to film far too soon and his decisions in the roles he took (I'll never
forget the horrendous "Jade") were less than star making. He rolls his
sleeves up and does the job well here. Gevedon, Lucas and Sexton are more
than fodder, too.
The only problem with "Session 9" lay in the uninspired ending. It takes on
a fairly conventional finale that covers old ground and is a bit of a
disappointment after the terrific (and inspired) build up. The pleasure is
getting there and I wish that Anderson and Gevedon had kept up the steam
they had so ably built during the bulk of the film
"Session 9" is an unusual feat. It is scary, doesn't use cheap tricks and
raises goose bumps with its intelligently rendered, subtle horror. Because
of the local interest of Danvers, it should do well with the Northeast
crowd. I hope it gets the national distribution it deserves. I give it a
B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A group of asbestos cleaners get a job removing the gunk from an old insane
asylum. As each day passes, the crew members begin to discover things about the
place and themselves which set other things in motion. Saying anything else
about the plot would be a crime. Have fun...
CRITIQUE:
"I feel like shooting myself in the head" are the first words that came out of
my mouth after seeing this movie, a good indication as to what kind of film to
expect here. This ain't your average "happy go lucky" kind of picture. This is a
deliberately slow-paced mystery-horror film drenched in atmosphere, with a very
creepy insane asylum (in which most of the film takes place), very few clues
up-front and lots to talk about afterwards. Will it bore some people to sleep?
You bet it will! Is it made for the SCREAM audiences of the day? Absolutely not!
I guess you can describe this film as a horror movie for the "cerebral crowd". A
film that patiently unwraps itself frame after frame, giving away very little
with each step and each sound, unwinding itself until its final scenes offer up
a world of revelations and plenty more to discuss later. I've always loved
movies that have me talking about them afterwards like THE SHINING and LOST
HIGHWAY and this film fits right into that group. In fact, I guess I can
pussyfoot around the actual word all I want but the best way to describe this
kind of movie is a "mindfuck".
If you feel like watching a movie that moves very slowly, gives you a handful of
characters with divergent backgrounds, tosses a few very ambiguous and
supernatural cookies your way and is extremely disturbing once you put it all
together, well, then this movie is definitely for you! It's the kind of film
that you actually have to see twice to fully appreciate (damn, I missed that
whole "peanut butter" thing!) and one that will likely creep the shit out of you
if watched alone in the dark. "Brrrrrrrrr...now what was that sound in the
basement? Honey, can you go check?" And one thing this film doesn't have, unlike
its Hollywood-ian counterparts like THE HAUNTING, is special effects. In fact,
that's one of the greater things about this movie: it feels real because it
looks like it's actually taped on video with very credible actors in very
credible circumstances (I did some research and it was, in fact, shot on digital
video...ah-ha!). Another great thing about it is that it's actually very gory
and somewhat violent in theme, and yet we rarely see anything of the sort on the
big screen (it's mostly implied, kids!). And as clichéd as it might be to
say...it's usually much scarier when stuff is left to our imagination or implied
in movies as such.
Other films that this one reminded me of include HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL
KILLER and THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT, with that same real sense of dread, brooding
and terror. The film does however move awfully slow and if you really don't get
"into" it completely (you really need to concentrate here), you will lose the
motion of the story and the pent-up tension might be released. But overall, this
film is yet another great example of the horror genre making a very cool
comeback this year with no tight tanktops in sight. And with David Caruso acting
like the king hotshot like only he can, how can you go wrong? Definitely not a
film for everyone but a must-see for anyone looking to throw themselves into the
psyche of the disturbed (count me in!). Stanley Kubrick would be proud! Oh
yeah...so where's that gun again...?
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Blair Witch Project (4/10) - Blair Witch 2 (7/10) - The Haunting (3/10) -
The House on Haunted Hill (7/10) - Lost Highway (10/10) - The Pledge (6/10) -
The Shining (9/10) - The Sixth Sense (8/10) - Unbreakable (8/10)

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "SESSION 9" (USA Films)
   Sometimes you just get more than your bargained for...like when
Boston-based Hazmat Elimination, run by Scottish actor Peter Mullan and his
trusty assistant, David Caruso, assures a town engineer (Paul Guilifoyle) that
they can remove insidious asbestos fibers from a Victorian hospital facility in
a week. Erected in 1871, deserted and decomposing since 1985, the Danvers Mental
Hospital, is one of the most malevolent "locations" ever chosen for a film. The
structure is so massive - with its labyrinth of rubble-strewn corridors,
collapsing floors, stagnant pools of water, isolation cells, and ominous
surgical chambers where experimental pre-frontal lobotomies were performed -
that their task seems impossible within that time frame. And each member of
their inexperienced crew (Stephan Gevedon, Brandon Sexton III, and Josh Lucas)
is coping with his own personal demons as, one by one, their minds seem to be
affected by the grim areas in which they're working. The film's title is derived
from salvaged reel-to-reel audio-recorded sessions involving the demonic
possession of a young woman who is suffering from multiple personalities. By the
time Session 9 occurs so do dreadful disasters.
 Filmmaker Brad Anderson obviously envisioned this as a gruesome
chainsaw-massacre-type ghost story but the script lacks structure and isn't
particularly scary. The conclusion is more ludicrous than convincing. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Session 9" is a dark, gloomy 4. Silly me...at
first, I thought that the original name of the Danvers Lunatic Asylum bore some
reference to Mrs. Danvers, the creepy housekeeper played by Judith Anderson in
Alfred Hitchcock's truly terrifying "Rebecca" that also involved a cavernous
mansion called Manderley.

Author
Laura Clifford
'Well, you know Doc, when something happens it can leave a trace of itself
behind.  Say, like if someone burns toast...'  
New dad Gordon Fleming (Peter Mullan, "My Name Is Joe") desperately needs to
win a contract to keep his Hazmat Elimination Co., an asbestos removal firm,
afloat.  He startles his crew chief Phil (David Caruso, "Proof of Life") by
promising town engineer Bill Griggs (Paul Guilfoyle, "In Dreams") they can
complete a massive job at the abandoned Danvers State Mental Hospital in one
week.  The pressure is on when they and three additional workers enter the
foreboding place in cowriter/director Brad Anderson's "Session 9."
Brad Anderson, whose last film, "Next Stop Wonderland" was also shot in the
Boston area, has found a magnificent location in Massachusetts' Danvers
State Mental Hospital.  He and cowriter/star Stephen Gevedon have fashioned
an homage to Stanley Kubrick's "The Shining," with the modern feel of "The 
Blair Witch Project."  The film loses its tense grip at its climax, when
the titular Session 9 is revealed, but it provides an intensely nerve racking
ride getting there.
We know Gordon is under a lot of pressure, not only because of his shaky
business and some hinted-at problems at home with his beloved wife and new
baby, but because he hears an eerie voice on his first visit to the site.  
Phil begins to doubt his boss's judgement, particularly concerning Gordon's 
loyalty to crew member Hank (Josh Lucas, "You Can Count On Me"), who stole 
Phil's girlfriend and continues to needle him about it.  Hank also rides Jeff 
(Brendan Sexton III, "Welcome to the Dollhouse"), Gordon's neophyte nephew 
who's afraid of the dark.  Mike (Gevedon) is a failed law student who 
immediately gets drawn into the records and patient histories he finds in the 
basement, especially the taped nine sessions of split personality Mary Hobbes. 
Mike, whose uncle was a DA during a satanic ritual abuse case with one of the 
hospital's patients, knows the history of the place and delights in regaling 
his coworkers with tales of horrific abuse and botched lobotomies (based on 
actual stories from Danvers State).
As Mike listens to tapes, Hank discovers a load of silver coins and other
treasures hidden behind a brick wall in a basement corridor (we're made privy
to the other side of that wall where an unsavory looking medical lab still
stands).  Hank returns at night to recoup the treasure and doesn't return to
the
job the next day.  Gordon visits the hospital cemetery to make private phone
calls to his wife.  Phil begins to speak to Mike about Gordon's state of mind.
Mike listens as Mary Hobbes takes on one persona after another.  Jeff's forced 
to face his fears replacing a fuse in a darkened room.
"Session 9" strongly resembles "The Shining" as each passing day is announced
by title card that precedes aerial shots of a forbidding and abandoned old
building with a dark history.  A central figure is a father with job
pressures who can hear the voices of the past.  The film's look is more akin
to "The Blair Witch Project" as shot by a professional (cinematographer Uta
Briesewitz uses the 24P HD camera - widescreen digital video that apes the
frames per second of film and captures every dust mote, paint peel and ray 
of light).  Characters meet their fates in much the same style as Blair Witch 
(camera blackouts) and one is even found facing the corner.  While the name 
Hazmat surely refers to hazardous materials, it sounds mighty similar to
"Blair Witch's" production company, Haxan Entertainment.  "The Texas
Chainsaw" gets a nod via the prominence of a loud, belching generator and
a bloody hand print on a van's exterior.  
The cast all turn in good performances, with Caruso being the standout as
a serious crew chief trying to keeping things pulled together.  Mullan projects
just the right amount of confusion to make us wonder if Phil's concerns
are valid and an air of sadness that matches the gloom of his surroundings.
Sexton III injects a freshness and innocence into the tough, experienced group.
Anderson knows how to build tension.  As his characters go off on their
individual side tracks, he cuts to the other team members innocently going
about their jobs.  Each will be impacted by the actions of the others in
some way.  But above all, Anderson knew a location in need of a horror 
film when he spotted one.
The grounds of Danvers State Mental Hospital are off limits to visitors.
If Burkittesville, Maryland is any indication, they better get more guards.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The blocks surrounding my apartment complex are undergoing
gobs of construction.  The Emmanuel Cellar Federal Building
across the street was demolished to make way for a larger
courthouse; Polytechnic University is making good use of a
multimillion dollar bequest the college recently received to put up
a dorm and an entirely new principal structure; a Department of
Social Services office has been demolished to make room for
who know what.  As I pass these buildings I see the workmen
joking with one another, sending out for coffee and doughnuts,
ogling the women passersby and talking about the latest game
they saw the other day on their 50-inch projection TVS.  Some
workers  look like the stereotypical all-American, others are
remarkably short to be doing this heavy-duty labor.  Most of all
everyone looks so NORMAL.  Ah, but what goes on underneath
the wholesome looks, the friendly chatter, the macho bluster?  Is
Cunningham on the outs with his wife?  Did Klein just get
dumped by his girl friend?  Do McGraw and Bradley hate each
other so much that at least one of them would like to shove the
other from the scaffold?  There are forty or fifty stories up there
on the unfinished eighth floor of this federal building as each
member of the construction crew does his best to put on a cheerful 
face, get the job done, and take home a good paycheck.
   "Session 9" has the makings of such a tale, but what gives
Brad Anderson's piece its feeling of dread--a sensation that
increases steadily, incrementally until the doozy of a payoff--is
that the construction team depicted are working inside a huge
asylum for the insane at Danvers, Massachusetts, which had
been abandoned in 1985 when the federal government and
various states determined to cut the budget and release what
were considered harmless to themselves and others.  Filmed by
Uta Briesewitz with one of those cool, new digital cameras that
knock out 24 frames per second just like film (so you'd scarcely
know the difference) and crisply edited by the director, "Session
9" is what a horror movie should be about.  No teens getting
impaled on meathooks, no false alarms that cause you to hold
your breath for a second only to realize that it's just young
Michael coming up from behind and tapping Susan on the
shoulder.  And happily "Session 9" takes itself with deadly
seriousness.  In other words this is in no way "Scream" or the most 
detestable of the recent mock-slasher fare, "Scary Movie 2."  Brad 
Anderson has surrounded himself with a crackerjack crew of performers
playing a team of asbestos removers who are working against
the clock to get rid of all the junk in the former looney bin in just a
week rather than in the usual three so that they can collect a fat
bonus promised to them by the city.
     For purposes of a review it doesn't hurt to know right off that each 
of the workers has a dark side, the potential to do bad things or to
have criminal acts performed against him.  Phil (David Caruso)
lost a girl friend to a fellow worker on the crew, Hank (Josh
Lucas) and wants to fire him from the start but is prevented
from doing so by his partner, Gordon (Peter Mullan)--who is
currently on the outs with his wife, living in a motel, and
desperately trying to reach her on a cell phone to make up with
her.  Jeff (Brendan Sexton III) is the kid of the outfit who got the
job from his uncle Gordon, but he is burdened with nyctophobia. 
He has fear of darkness--and you know what sort of horror this
can lead scripter Brad Anderson to hand to him during the week
of the project.  Hank tempts the fates by razzing Phil on the latter's
loss of a girl friend, and probably speaks for the entire crew when
he says that everyone there would rather be doing something
else.   Of all the members of the team, Mike (Stephen Gevedon--
who co-scripted the piece)--is the bright one, the guy who
dropped out of law school and simply does not belong in this
blue-collar atmosphere.  His curiosity gets the best of him. 
Despite the deadline, he becomes obsessed with a series of
tapes he finds from the 1980's--a psychotherapist's recording of
nine sessions conducted with a person afflicted with multiple
personality disorder.  Things becoming increasingly hairy partly
because of the secrets that lie within the asbestos-choked walls
of the Danville asylum, more because of the friction that develops
increasingly among the workers--as director Anderson holds the
audience in his grip by upping the ante as the hours tick away.
   The year 1999 brought us the superb ghost story, M. Night
Shyamalan's "The Sixth Sense," which meets its match this year with
Alejandro Amenabar's  terminally spooky "The Others," starring
Nicole Kidman as a mother of two who becomes increasingly off
kilter as she witnesses invisible people opening and closing
doors in her large home while an equally unseen person
performs on the piano.  "Session 9" is right up there with those
dread-inspiring works.  As Anderson cuts from the laborers to the
labyrinthine areas of the serpentine building,  we watch each
begin to chat normally as co-workers are wont to do everywhere,
then get increasingly paranoid, even off the wall in two cases. 
But unlike "The Sixth Sense," "Session 9" deals not so much with
demons who lie outside the perimeter but with the devils who
inhabit the minds of the people racing to complete a job.  In that
regard, Anderson's picture is more like Roman Polanski's 1965
masterwork "Repulsion," a psychological shocker depicting the
deterioration of a repressed girl left alone for days in her sister's
apartment.  The men here may not be alone, but like all of us,
they are to an extent isolated in their own psyches.  That is what
gives "Session 9" its believability, and most of all, its distinct
relevance to each of us sitting in the audience. 
Not Yet Rated.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Norm Schrager
Director/writer Brad Anderson, who turned heads with the winning
romantic comedy Next Stop Wonderland, does a narrative about face with
Session 9, a creepy, psychological thriller more likely to twist heads
than turn them.  After displaying a knack for witty dialogue and strong
pacing with Wonderland, Anderson applies those skills to the difficult
horror genre, and delivers an exciting, low-key treat.
You can think of Session 9 as a kind of 5 Angry Men meets The Shining. 
A crew of asbestos removal workers -- played with solid force
throughout, with notable performances by David Caruso (Kiss of Death,
NYPD Blue) and Peter Mullan (The Claim) -- has the unenviable task of
spending a week in an enormous, abandoned insane asylum, gutting it at a
fever pitch pace in order to make it safe for renovation.  The hospital
once housed 2,300 "patients" at its peak, and very few of them were
happy.  Makes for an excellent haunted house story.
As the week progresses, the building, the job, and the lives of the men
begin to eat away at them.  As the floor and ceiling tiles get peeled
away, so too does the crew's psyche, and Anderson (with co-screenwriter
and actor Stephen Gevedon) does an outstanding job keeping both us and
his characters guessing.  Who's cracking?  Who's lying?  Who's trying to
make the job work well for all?  The script keeps just enough
information away from everyone, resulting in a film that gets tighter
and tighter as the days start slipping away.
Shot on digital video (with impressive cinematography by Uta Briesewetz
-- sometimes you forget it's video) at an actual empty asylum in
Danvers, MA, Session 9 works for all the reasons a thriller should. 
There's strong, ensemble acting, with Anderson allowing his talented
cast to talk over one another, giving the movie a conversational reality
and weight.  There's a spiraling pace, which deftly picks up speed as
the movie heads toward the final act.  And, of course, there are spooky
visuals -- simple family photographs that hide pain behind the smiling
faces, dilapidated "treatment" rooms, and long, dark, corridors.
Anderson's one downfall is in allowing the final act to unravel with a
lack of structure.  It ends up drawing out the resolution a little too
far, and doesn't feel as satisfyingly tight as the rest of the movie. 
It doesn't taint the total experience, but it does need some restraint. 
Also, his choice of scary imagery is effective, but he tends to use it
too much toward the finale, diluting the freaky feel just a bit.
Overall, though, Session 9 is a real summer winner, with a lot more
punch than that Blair Witch craziness from two summers ago.  You know
you're watching a good thriller when audience members start giggling
with excitement when they see something coming (wait, is the generator
losing power?).  Add in a solid dose of well-acted drama, and that's the
general feeling of Session 9.
Director: Brad Anderson
Producers: Dorothy Aufiero, David Collins, Michael Williams
Writer: Brad Anderson, Stephen Gevedon
Starring: David Caruso, Stephen Gevedon, Paul Guilfoyle, Josh Lucas,
Peter Mullan, Brendan Sexton III
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
The Brad Anderson Sessions: On Session 9 and Happy Accidents 
A feature story by Jeremiah Kipp - Copyright Š 2001 filmcritic.com
Brad Anderson's character-driven horror film Session 9 charts the
deteriorating mental states of a waste management team as they clear out
an abandoned, dilapidated asylum.  Shot in and around an actual
Victorian-era mental hospital in Danvers, Massachusetts, it remains
ambivalent whether some supernatural manifestation of evil is taking
over these men and forcing them to inflict physical and psychological
damage upon each other.  It could be all in their minds, the stress of
dead-end lives catching up with them.  Over the course of a single week,
their lines of defense gradually break down.
It's a paranoid creepshow that takes itself seriously, going for genuine
dread rather than the postmodern riffs on the slasher genre we've become
accustomed to.  Anderson's style may seem revolutionary if you're only
familiar with Scream or I Know What You Did Last Summer (not to mention
their seemingly endless knock-offs), but it actually recalls spooky
classics from the 70's and early 80's.  Don't Look Now and Stanley
Kubrick's The Shining are cited as obvious references, but there are
echoes of Invasion of the Body Snatchers, Dawn of the Dead, The
Exorcist, and John Carpenter's The Thing.  I run through this makeshift
laundry list only because if you're a fan of those particular movies,
you really ought to check out Session 9.  More frightening and mature
than The Blair Witch Project, it's enough to bolster new hope for the
horror genre.
Anderson was open to discussing Session 9's upcoming release (August 10)
with filmcritic.com during the press junket held at the Regency Hotel in
NYC.  Session 9 cast members Josh Lucas and Stephen Gevedon (who
co-wrote the screenplay with Anderson) also shared their thoughts on the
film.  Anderson also brooked philosophical about Happy Accidents, his
long delayed (and quite enjoyable) romantic comedy about a girl who
falls for a guy who claims to be from the future.  Picked up by IFC
Films, Happy Accidents will be in limited release starting August 24.
filmcritic.com: Let's talk about Session 9.
Brad Anderson: With Session 9, we weren't going for jolts (things
jumping out of closets and stuff) as much as we were creating an
atmosphere of dread or menace that lives with you.  These faux-horror
movies made nowadays are much more "teen thrillers" in my mind.  We
didn't want to use kid actors in our movie.  Besides Brendan (Sexton
III), we used older guys! (claps Gevedon on the shoulder, laughs)
Is it significant that the main characters are all men, or a certain
working-class type of man?  There are no central women characters.
BA: That was a conscious effort on my part.  At least two of my three
movies prior to this could be described as women's pictures.  Part of my
reason for Session 9 was to break out, to destroy the illusion of me as
"Mr. Romantic Comedy Guy."  The idea of making a movie focused on this
crew of guys was really appealing.
Josh Lucas: The script had a very classy element of something you very
rarely see in this culture, which was a group of working class men.  For
these struggling guys, the idea about the American Dream (prosperity and
wealth) doesn't necessarily exist.  It's fascinating to see them put
into circumstances where some horror elements emerge.  I became
interested because it was a very different take on the genre, and also
because I knew they had Peter Mullan (playing Gordon).
BA: I think the thing that drew Peter to the project was that he saw
Gordon's story as a tragedy.  A man from overseas comes to this country
to pursue the American dream, is trying to keep his own business afloat,
and is struggling with the stress of having a new baby and being a
father.  All of these things are impinging on him at once and he's about
to snap.  Unlike most horror movies in this day and age, the horror is
around the edges.  It's largely interior for Gordon.
Session 9 can be interpreted in different ways.  You can get the sense
that Gordon breathes in an evil spirit, but can also be read as a much
more clinical movie that shows a man who becomes unhinged, or may be
going mad.  An inspiration was Nicolas Roeg's Don't Look Now.  That's a
really good horror movie.  What we drew from that movie was the place
(the back alleys of Venice) being so instrumental in creating the tone. 
Donald Sutherland's character is realizing that he has the gift of
clairvoyance, trying to figure out a mystery, and at the end of the day
figures out that he himself is the center of that mystery.  Peter Weir's
The Last Wave ends the same way!  It's the most awful epiphany that you
can have!
Josh, your character (Hank) has a monologue midway through the movie
about the way these men deal with stress.  Did that strike a chord with
you as an actor?
JL: Yeah, absolutely.  While making the movie, it was a little more
intimate than usual.  The core group of actors sat around every night to
talk about those things.  It's a low-budget movie, not easy to make by
any means, made wicked fast with huge chunks of filmmaking (not
necessarily dialogue, either) to achieve on a given day.  There is the
question of how to handle it.  I wondered how these characters handled
themselves, too, because they come from such a different space.  There's
no passion in what they do.  It's pure survival.
Go with me here for a second and let me know what you think.  Of the
five guys, I thought Hank was most alone in some ways.  Pete (David
Caruso) is the manager and has his crew, Mike (Gevedon) is the college
guy who everyone seems to like and respect, and Jeff (Sexton) and Gordon
(Mullan) are family.  Hank doesn't have anything besides his dream of
winning the lottery.  Even when he's home, he's seen watching television
not interacting with his girlfriend.  Do you think that contributes to
his character, or am I entirely off the mark here?
JL: No, you're right.  It's a fascinating comment and I agree.  Hank
isn't even attached to someone like his boss, Pete, who seems to be a
really good man.  He's truly at a point where he just doesn't care and
will do anything to get out of his situation.  That's just an amazing
place to be in your life.  He's the person who has nothing.  When you
start to do that, you want to take from other people.  "I want to make
you feel the same way."  That's what really happened when he stole
Pete's girlfriend.  It has nothing to do with her at all.  His
loneliness is so acute that he will screw over his friends.
Session 9 was obviously built around this very creepy location (and it
seemed like you could point the camera in any direction and get a good
shot).
BA: I had been to the Danvers State Hospital before, since I used to
live in Boston and always thought it would make a remarkable setting for
a horror movie.  There's asbestos everywhere, floors are caving in,
ceilings are collapsing, everything's cold and damp -- exactly the way
we present it in Session 9.
Stephen Gevedon: Once it starts getting overcast, the place gets dark
very quick, even in the upstairs buildings where the windows aren't
boarded up.  It's a pretty dangerous place.
BA: Steve and I went up there last spring and had a chance to explore.
SG: Let's just call a spade a spade.  We broke in.  It's lucky we didn't
get caught.  We wandered around and discovered many of the movie's
setpieces (like Jeff wandering around in the underground tunnel) from
that first visit.
BA: We found all sorts of creepy medical instruments and a
straightjacket and stuff.  
We also got a sense of the asylum's history.  Even if you're a very
skeptical person about the supernatural, that place is so emotionally
heavy.  Hundreds of thousands of people were wrongfully committed and
lived out their lives locked in these tiny little rooms that they call
"seclusions".  It's tragic.  Even in the pauper's cemetery [seen in the
movie when Gordon wanders off alone to make a desperate phone call to
his wife], the patients didn't even have the courtesy of having their
names placed on the numbered headstones.  It was like throwing them into
a mass grave. 
How did you research the taped sessions that Mike discovers (between a
doctor and a woman with multiple personality disorder)?
BA: I did some research into multiple personality disorder and found
some transcripts online.  (I'm telling ya, you can find everything
online!)  These transcripts were not that different from what you see in
the movie.  In an instant, the patient would make a switch from one
multiple personality to the next.  Her voice and entire personality
would change while the doctor was listening and asking questions.  Even
reading about it is creepy.
How did you determine the "look" of Happy Accidents, your other movie
coming out this August? Were you going for something otherworldly
because of the science fiction angle or did you have something else in
mind?
BA: Since the story felt conceptual and had a high-concept sci-fi twist,
I wanted the look to be very raw and real.  With that in mind, I
purposefully shot hand-held with 35mm cameras.  I've done that with all
my other films (except for Session 9, which has a more formal
approach.)  It's a little bit documentary-style, which probably evolved
out of my early interest in non-fiction film.
What did you see in Vincent D'Onofrio's audition? It's a role that seems
open to different interpretations.  
BA: Part of it was Vince's ability to transform himself into whatever
the role may require.  He had to be a guy who might be mentally ill,
walking the thin line where he could be insane or potentially
dangerous.  Vince had those qualities but was also can be incredibly
endearing and sweet, with a sort of boyish charm.  He's a chameleon.
It was also fun to cast him against type.  Aside from maybe Mystic Pizza
or a couple others I don't think he's has done much in the way of
comedy.  He's not some movie matinee idol.  Vince (as Sam) and Marisa
Tomei (who plays Ruby) are a goofy couple!  He's this big, lumbering guy
and she's this sweet, petite woman.  You don't see that in movies! 
Everyone's always so perfectly paired, so I thought this was a chance to
break down some of the more obvious romantic comedy conventions.  If
this were a studio picture, they would never cast Vince.  They would
probably cast Josh Hartnett!  That doesn't interest me.  If you're
making a smaller movie, you're almost obligated to do something
unexpected and surprising.
Could we talk about your use of specific cities?  Next Stop Wonderland
was Bahhhston -
Yeah, and Happy Accidents is New York.  Do you think shooting in
different cities lends a unique character to the movies you work on?
BA: Yeah, up until this point I've pretty much written about the things
I know or places I know.  With Boston, certainly, you could say, as the
producer of Next Stop Wonderland likes to describe it, "a valentine to
Boston." (laughs) Whatever that means!
Happy Accidents is somehow imbued more with the chaos of New York --
these crazy people you meet on the street who might be time travelers. 
Or, as in the last scene, it's about the traffic and noise and madness
of this city (which is a wonderful thing but could also drive you
nuts.)  I had moved here from Boston around the time that I worked on
that script and was still a newbie fascinated by New York and all the
big buildings.
You do this thing in the movie which is kinda cool -- I guess you would
call it "memory photos" or something, done with stills --
Am I being pretentious to ask if that was inspired by Chris Marker's La
Jetee, or what?
(laughs) I've heard that referenced so many times, but I haven't seen
the movie! I know what you're saying, though.  No, those little
sequences were described in the script as visions of the future by way
of Ruby's imagination.  It's Sam telling her what the future is like,
why he came back, and all that.  He's sharing with her this stuff and
she's looking at him like, "You're insane."
As Ruby is describing this stuff to her friend, we're seeing all these
strange images.  It was kept expressionistic. I didn't want these
"glimpses of the future" to be grounded in realism because we want to
keep guessing: is Sam a nut or is he from another time?
Originally, we were gonna play into the stupid sci-fi clichés of time
travel, all these green-screen images of Sam sitting on a weird
mountaintop against a purple sky.  Since I didn't have the budget, I
decided instead to take actual still images from the movie itself to
vaguely illustrate what Sam was describing.  The other very subtle thing
was that all the images in these sequences are actually from later
sequences so in some ways they actually are images from the future (of
the movie).
I promise not to bring up La Jetee again.
BA: Hey, man, compare the movie to as many classics as you want! 
Do you consider Happy Accidents science fiction?
No.  I consider it a kitchen sink dramatic romance.  The sci-fi angle is
really a twist.  The initial premise was to do a very simple
relationship movie.  Then it was trying to think what could be the most
absurd monkey-wrench that could screw it all up.  What could be
something that one of the people reveals about themselves that could
throw everything off?  I'm from the future, or I'm an alien, or I'm gay,
or whatever the revelation might be between the two partners.
The problem actually becomes the very thing that keeps the relationship
interesting.  You don't fall in love with someone because they're
perfect and meet your requirements -- you fall for the things that are
different about them or even problematic.  If you're in love with the
perfect person, that's gonna be over the moment the sex starts becoming
routine.
Ruby's character is against the wall.  How's she gonna react to this? 
The logical, most obvious response would be to immediately kick this guy
out onto the street, but the fact that she holds on to him is an
indication of her way to deal with these kinds of relationships.  She
tries to "fix" men, so she sees it as a challenge.  I've known some
women like that in my life, not that I'm a problem that needs to be
fixed! (laughs)
Sam is very articulate about time travel.  Did you do any homework or
was it all just fancy?
BA: It was a combination of both.  Once again, I did a lot of research
online!  You can find all these wacky internet people who genuinely
believe they're from the future.  I read books about time travel theory,
just to get into the meat of it.  In Happy Accidents, if you go back
into time, you don't simply replicate the exact series of events that
lead to your future.  It's not pre-determined.  You go back into time
and the moment you arrive wherever you arrive, your actions then begin
to bud off and create a new line, which is a parallel universe.  There
could be an infinite number of parallel universes!
As for all of Sam's kooky descriptions of the future, those were somehow
found deep in the recesses of my imagination.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
