Title
Review for Diabolique (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Michael Redman
        The word to describe Sharon Stone is "wonder". Not that she _is_ a wonder,
but rather that I wonder how she can be so inconsistent. She has a dynamic
screen presence in "Basic Instinct", turns in a surprisingly fine acting job
in "Casino", but possesses neither of those here.
        Stone teams up with private school headmaster's wife Isabelle Adjani to kill
Adjani's thoroughly unlikable husband (Chazz Palminteri). In a comedy of
errors and unexpected twists straight out of Hitchcock (as in `homage to'
[read "steal from"]), it turns out that someone saw them or he's not dead or maybe...
        Kathy Bates turns in a credible, if unspectacular, performance as an
investigative police detective. Her character is a bit dull but realistic,
although her actions at the end are puzzling. Adjani is more than satisfactory
as the timid beaten spouse driven to desperation.
        It's Stone that is a disappointment among the actors. How can she be the
epitome of a femme fatale in previous films and come off as a blank in this
one? Costumed in skin-tight clothes and looking down her nose at everyone, she
is someone you would want to avoid because she is boring, not enticingly
dangerous. Even the threat (or promise?) of a lesbian relationship between the
conspirators is only half played out.
        On the positive side, there are enough unexpected plot developments to keep
your interest alive. That is if you can put up with Stone's cardboard cut-out
character and scenes directly lifted from Hitch's movies.
[This appeared in the 3/28/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Christopher Null
     I've been awaiting this update of the 1955 classic French thriller
with a mixture of nervous anticipation and deep-seated dread.  The
original DIABOLIQUE was one of the few examples of how thrillers ought to
be made...and I figured Hollywood would find some way to screw up the
remake.  (They did, of course.)
     The story is timeless.  Evil boarding school principal Guy (Chazz
Palmenteri) is married to ex-nun Mia (Isabelle Adjani), a nervous "child
bride" with a penchant for heart medication.  Guy also has at least one
mistress, the cold-as-ice Nicole (Sharon Stone), and everyone knows of and
quietly accepts the affair.  They all work and live under the auspices of
the school, and in the darkness of its halls, a plot is hatched by Mia and
Nicole to do away with Guy for good.  It starts to get a little hairy
when, after a seemingly perfect murder is pulled off, things start to seem
not-so-perfect and questions over potential witnesses and the actual
life-or-death-ness of Guy begin to surface.
     As it turns out, my skepticism that DIABOLIQUE could be successfully
Americanized and transplanted into the future 40 years was partly
unfounded.  While it retains a distinctly nostalgic look and feel, the
update is mostly a seamless job.  Stone pulls off an excellently icy
performance, reminding us why audiences like her so much, and Adjani,
while maintaining a look of total surprise on her face for the whole film,
is too innocently cute to think anything ill of.  Pieces of DIABOLOQUE are
stylish and cool, even bordering on edge-of-your-seat suspense at times.
     Then come the problems.  Enter Kathy Bates, whose philosophy about
acting is "More is Better," as an obnoxious investigator who really gets
on your nerves.  Add Palmenteri's just-like-I-did-in-JADE performance and
you've got a mixed-quality picture already.  The kicker is the pasted-in
additions to the script, as writer Don Roos just couldn't leave the
original alone, adding in some long and uninteresting expository scenes,
some silly high-tech bits, and, the worst of all, a new, schlocky
horror-style ending.  With all this, the picture starts to seriously fray
around the edges.
     What this all ends up with is some good performances and some bad
ones in an uneven film with some high points and some low ones.  The
remake ends up nowhere near the mastery of the original, which *still*
ought to surprise you even after you watch the 1996 version.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter  /  Novelist  /  Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Steve Rhodes
     For reasons that probably have more to do with money than art,
Hollywood has decided to remake the 1954 French thriller LES
DIABOLIQUES.  This time it is a hopelessly muddled mess called simply
DIABOLIQUE, which isn't very simple at all for American audiences I
guess since the guy in front of me at the box office at local multiplex
said "give me two tickets to that show with the strange name."
     In this remake by director Jeremiah Chechik, he got himself some
big box office stars, but skimped on the best part of the original
movie which was the elaborate and well constructed script.  In this
disastrous version, written by Don Roos, most of the motivational
scenes that set up the character's later actions have been excised from
the original script and the time filled out with scenes of meaningless
fluff.
     The plot for the movie is that Guy (Chazz Palminteri) runs a boys'
boarding school that is actually owned by his wife Mia (Isabelle
Adjani).  He is having one of his many affairs, this time with a
teacher named Nicole (Sharon Stone).  This much you can figure out if
you listen carefully.  Harder to see is that Guy is supposed to be a
sadist and that Mia and Nicole are in love with each other.  We have a
scene where Guy forces Mia to eat some food she does not like, and then
she is off to kill him with Nicole's help.  This is all laid out in
much more detail in the original so you can understand better what the
characters' motivations are.  When all of a sudden she is killing him
early on in this version, the audience is needlessly confused.  Yes,
maybe she should divorce him, but why does she have to kill him?  The
movie plays like a Readers Digest version of the original.  Eventually,
Kathy Bates (Shirley) is added as a wisecracking detective that Mia
hires.  Ultimately the movie is about who actually killed whom and who
will be caught.
     The script is a travesty and features dialog that is so trite as
to be silly.  After Mia calls Guy, Nicole says, "Why don't you take him
off speed dial?"  When Mia decides to divorce Guy and give him the
school, Nicole advises her, "If you give him the school, he'll just
sell it, and then where would all the future Lee Harvey Oswalds come
from?"  When the script does not have characters uttering inanities, it
relies on classic cliches like lots of thunder and lighting to provide
the right atmosphere, and it mimics many of the low budget horror shows
that are on late night cable.  It is so poor it may put you to sleep so
I would avoid going to the evening show if you feel you just have to
see this remake for some reason.
     Ignoring for a minute the poor direction and the hacked up script,
how is the acting you ask?  Well, Sharon Stone's make up by Tricia
Sawyer turns her into a harsh caricature.  She has a tube full of red
lipstick on in every scene and with bright red nails to match.  She
chain-smokes, frowns constantly, and is an extremely unsympathetic
character.  You keep hoping that someone will knock her off or maybe
she will fall in the swimming pool and drown.  You never believe for a
moment that Guy or Mia could in love with her or could have a affair
with her.  Who could stand this mean rock of a woman.
     I usually like Chazz Palminteri, although he has been bad in some
movies like MULHOLLAND FALLS, but here he is simply miscast.  He is
never convincing as a sadist.  The only characters with any appeal in
the film are Adjani and Bates.  Parts of Adjani's character make the
audience care about her, but her performance is frequently wooden.
Bates is good only for a little comic relief and has several funny
lines, but I did not buy her as a detective.
     The cinematography by Peter James is too didactic for my taste.
Items like ice buckets will crash to the floor and the camera with zoom
in tight to overemphasize its importance in the plot.  There was one
part of the movie I totally loved and that was the overboard, but fun,
old fashioned dramatic movie music by Randy Edelman.  Hey, if we have
to sit through this mess, lets at least have something exhilarating to
which to listen.
     DIABOLIQUE runs a long 1:48 which is amazing since so many key
developmental scenes were either deleted by editor Carol Littleton or
more likely judged not important for American audiences and so were
never in the script in the first place.  The film is correctly rated R
and has bad language, sex, full frontal nudity, gratuitous violence
copied straight from low grade horror flicks, and heavy smoking.  I
suppose it will be okay for most teenagers, but I hope they do not
bother with this one and rent the much better original instead.  Even
with subtitles, the original is a much easier film to follow.  I give
thumbs way down to DIABOLIQUE and award it a single *.  Finally, to be
fair, I should point out my wife liked it, flaws and all.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
DIABOLIQUE  (1996) * Directed by Jeremiah Chechik. Written by 
Don Roos from the (uncredited) French film "Les Diaboliques," 
itself based on the Pierre Boileau & Thomas Narcejac novel 
"Celle qui n'etait pas" ("The woman who wasn't"). Photography, 
Peter James. Editing, Carol Littleton. Production design, 
Leslie Dilley. Music, Randy Edelman. Cast: Sharon Stone, 
Isabelle Adjani, Chazz Palminteri, Kathy Bates, Spalding Gray, 
Alan Garfield, Adam Hann-Byrd, Shirley Knight.  A Morgan Creek 
film released by Warner's.115 minutes. Rated R (violence)
Recently, in a benevolent mood I wrote that Hollywood remakes 
are generally worse than the originals, with some exceptions. 
"Diabolique" reminds me that I was too kind, that the enormous 
majority of remakes are bad. And they can stink when you know 
the orginal, like the classic thriller-suspenser by 
Henri-Georges Clouzot, "Les Diaboliques" of 1955.
The plot. A boarding school for boys somewhere in the 
mountains of Pennsylvania, within easy driving distance to 
Pittsburgh. The establishement was inherited by Mia (Adjani) 
who suffers from 1) a weak heart and 2) lousy husband Guy 
(Palminteri). He is the headmaster, rules the roost, abuses 
Mia, has as a mistress Nicole (Stone), whom he regularly beats 
up. 
The two women are teachers and friends. The school is a manor 
that ought to be shabby and run down, but that's not made 
clear. Shabby, because Guy is also an s.o.b. who skimps on 
food, feeds the kids and the staff disgusting things. He 
doesn't even have the swimming pool cleaned. ("Dirty pool" 
applies both literally and figuratively to the plot). The 
women, fully aware of each one's relations and relationship 
with Guy, decide to kill him.  
End of plot so far as this review is concerned. For two 
reasons. First, because what little you might get from the 
movie depends entirely on the twists and gimmicks. Second, to 
honor the memory of Mr. Clouzot, his wishes must be followed. 
When his film was shown there was a final "don't divulge the 
end" plea to the audience.
That's probably where Alfred Hitchcock got the idea of doing 
something like this for his "Psycho." Hitchcock loved "Les 
Diaboliques" and its source book. Unable to get permission to 
remake it, he used another novel ("From Among the Dead," which 
some critics wrongly translate as "Between Deaths"), by the 
same writers, and made "Vertigo," a gem with an improbable 
plot.  
The new version follows its model in bizarre ways. Many parts 
are copied scene-for-scene, other not. Even when copied, those 
sections always manage to do something stupid or cheap. 
Consistent with Hollywoodmania for sex and violence, the 
remake heavily insists on both, while the original was subtle 
on sex and had more shocks, suspense and surprises than 
violence. Like Hitchcock.
In the French film, the mistress was the excellent, already 
famous Simone Signoret; the wife was the unknown Vera Clouzot, 
then the director's wife. Signoret had presence and nuances. 
Clouzot was a born victim totally subjugated by both Signoret 
and Paul Meurisse, the husband. 
Here, Sharon Stone mercilessly overdoes her hardness and 
cynical repartees, so much that she telegraphs plot 
developments. She's so hard that SS could easily play an SS 
guard. 
Tarted up with heavy makeup, tight clothes (selected by 
herself) in terrible taste, with tops that never miss a chance 
to show her breasts, she's like a floozy. In the movie's 115 
minutes she does not once crack smile. How mechanical.
Adjani, at the start, has a full nudity scene. Her body is 
beautiful body, not just for a 40-year old but for any woman. 
But it is used only as a cheap, gratuitous come-on. She has 
minimal expressions and in general is a ninny. 
As in the French film, Nicole is the strong one of the pair, 
Mia by far the weaker. But she lacks the wispiness, the 
convincing frailty and ill health, the helplessness, the 
pathetic religiosity of Vera Clouzot. 
The school's staff is very small. Spalding Gray and the fine 
Alan Garfield have microscopic, irrelevant parts, unlike those 
of their atmosphere-enhancing French counterparts. The latter 
help set the mood for the women's fatal decision. The remake 
makes a flat mess even of the model's superior dining room 
scene, where rotten fish was served. 
Nobody is more than skin-deep in version 2. While we don't 
need full-fledged background records or psychological 
analyses, all characters are paper thin.
Thrown in are two young men who are doing a promotional video 
for the school. It's plain padding. Thrown in too is an overt 
lesbian relationship instead of the original's hints.
Worse yet, Adjani has a scene where, after being disgustingly 
insulted by Palminteri, she revels in a kiss, with absolutely 
illogical and uncharacteristic passion. Cut to vigorous sex 
.. but wait, this is between Stone and Palmenteri! 
The French police inspector was played by talented veteran 
Charles Vanel, who, I am told, was the model for Lieutenant 
Columbo. Vanel, like Signoret, had a weighty presence. Here, 
to feminize the movie, he's replaced by private investigator 
Cathy Bates. Her presence is depressing, her sleuthing 
improbable. 
Bates is addressed as "detective," as in " What do you think, 
detective?" I've never heard this turn of speech before. Her 
character's name is Shirley. There's another Shirley in the 
cast, the likable actress Shirley Knight, in another 
depressing role. The odd thing is that she is not even 
mentioned in the blurbs given to the press. Sic transit...
Now to Mr. Palminteri and all that Chazz. Where the original's 
Meurisse was a diabolical, malevolent snake, Palminteri is 
just a coarse, crass, vulgar brute. It's like replacing a 
sports car with a dumpster.
The cardinal sin is the doctoring up the French film's climax, 
one of the cleverest, most unexpected and startling in the 
history of movie thrillers. Be prepared for more cheap and 
dumb turns, false twists, Grand Guignol and additional 
crassness.
The camera-work is OK though overdone and showy. Hitchcock 
would never have tolerated it. Strange too are the close-ups 
of Adjani that often elongate her face, like an El Greco 
painting or a CinemaScope film projected through  a regular 
lens. Beats me.  
The film is soporific. Instead of being an edge-of-the seat 
affair, it is a bottom-of-the-seat proposition. The torpor is 
intercut by the music's sudden bursts of energy, drumbeats and 
all, with imitations of Hitchcock scores by the great Bernard 
Herrmann.
Get the French film or most any Hitchcock movie.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Woof!  DIABOLIQUE reminds me of those activity-book pages that I
used to love-- the ones titled "what's wrong with this picture?" So many
problems surface in this failed French-film remake that it's difficult
to know where to start!  The tone is the worst-- an overly oppressive
mood that lands with an almost-audible thud.  The characters then play
too close to camp, which is probably the best way to take this tabloid-
worthy tale of a wife (Isabelle Adjani) and a mistress (Sharon Stone)
who conspire to kill their husband/ lover (Chazz Palminteri).  Try this
for dialogue:  "If it's all the same to you, I'd rather not hang for
fried chicken." No, not as good-bad as SHOWGIRLS, but close.  Very
close.  The defining moment comes at the end, when Stone and Adjani are
finishing some business in the shallow end of a swimming pool.  Cut to
an underwater shot of their struggle and both actresses are still
wearing heels.  Ouch.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
     It astonishes me that two films with essentially the same story can 
be of such different quality. Henri-Georges Clouzot's 1955 murder 
mystery, DIABOLIQUE, was a taut, atmosphere-saturated thriller filled 
with unexpected twists and turns.  Jeremiah Chechik's ill-advised rip-
off is a lame Hollywood attempt to re-create a similarly suspenseful 
experience.
     I suppose it's possible to argue that, because Clouzot's picture 
was made over forty years ago, a remake isn't unreasonable.  The problem 
is, the original DIABOLIQUE was as much a cinematic landmark as 
Hitchcock's PSYCHO (Clouzot and Hitchcock had a tremendous influence on 
each other).  One should not undertake remaking a great film lightly, if 
at all.  Unfortunately, in this case, "integrity" wasn't a concept the 
film makers were concerned with.  
     Mia (Isabelle Adjani) and Guy Baran (Chazz Palminteri) co-run the 
St. Anselm's school for boys, which is located outside Pittsburgh.  Not 
only is Guy abusive, but he's flagrantly unfaithful, flaunting his 
affair with one of the school's teachers, Nicole Horner (Sharon Stone).  
Yet Nicole hates Guy as much as Mia does, and, together, the wife and 
mistress plot his murder.  One night, they lure their victim to a house 
in the city.  Once he's there, they drug him, then drown him in a 
bathtub.  Soon after, however, the body disappears, and Mia and Nicole 
must consider whether Guy has inexplicably survived or some previously-
unknown party intends to blackmail them.
     A significant predicament results from updating DIABOLIQUE, since 
certain key events demand a level of docility from Mia that is not 
typically found in a nineties American woman.  Had the new film been set 
in the fifties, it might have worked better, because some of what 
happens here (such as Guy humiliating Mia by ordering her to "swallow" 
her food during a public dinner) rings false in a current setting.  
     Modernizing DIABOLIQUE also means adding some exploitative 
elements.  Isabelle Adjani disrobes early in the film for no apparent 
reason other than to give viewers a chance to ogle her.  A blatant 
lesbian attraction between Mia and Nicole replaces the oblique one of 
the French version.  There's also a steamy sex scene featuring Nicole 
and Guy that serves no purpose -- we already know that the two are 
lovers.
     As was the case with the American rendition of THE VANISHING, the 
film makers here have decided to change the ending.  Gone is the 
deliciously diabolical finale of Clouzot's picture, replaced by 
something that's unambiguous, unambitious, and manifestly unoriginal. 
Don Roos' routine conclusion is the kind of massive cop-out likely to 
disappoint anyone hoping for something fresh.
     Isabelle Adjani gives a horrible performance, overacting almost 
every scene.  There were instances when her expressions of speechless 
horror reminded me of Fay Wray's exaggerated reaction to King Kong 
(albeit without the screams).  Sharon Stone and Chazz Palminteri are 
barely adequate as cartoon-like characters, displaying little range in 
one-dimensional roles.  The only one who does anything with her part is 
Kathy Bates, but her energetic portrayal as a cynical detective is 
largely wasted.
     Everything seems to be wrong with this version of DIABOLIQUE.  The 
acting is subpar, the direction is pedestrian, and the screenplay is 
moronic.  Certain lines are laughably bad ("It's not like you burnt the 
toast, Mia.  You killed your husband.  That's a little off the chart, 
demerit-wise", "Killing him is a good thing, like planting a tree").  
The cinematographer has unsuccessfully attempted to recapture the 
original's eerie, black-and-white atmosphere by using everything from 
inappropriately-placed shadows to foggy rainstorms.  Little about this 
DIABOLIQUE is worthwhile, and nothing is laudable.  My advice is to 
ignore the remake and rent the original.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin (or) http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin
