Title
Review for Ging chaat goo si (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chris Casino
Crew: Produced by Raymond Chow, Written by Jackie Chan and Edward Tang,
Directed by Jackie Chan
Cast: Jackie Chan (Officer Jackie Chan), Bridgette Lin (Selena Fong), Maggie 
Cheung (May), Ken Tong (Inspector Bill Wong), Chu Yeun (Tom Ku)
I have a tremendous amount of respect for Jackie Chan.
He makes his fight scenes realistic in that he gets hurt all
the time (unlike American action stars) and he risks
his life for his audience. I can't ask any more
from my action heroes than that. Except for one thing:
They should keep making movies like this. 
After returning to Hong Kong after shooting the amateurish
Dirty Harry wannabe movie The Protector for James Glickenhaus
(And where's he now? HELLO!) and putting the finishing touches 
on his version, Jackie Chan decided he wanted to do a cop movie 
his way and cooked up one with his frequent screenwriter Edward 
Tang, and, as expected of Jackie, it's a doozy!
The plot concerns Officer Kevin Chan (renamed Jackie in the
dubbed-for-US version I saw) who is framed for the murder
of a fellow officer trying to protect a witness. He spends
the rest of the movie running from Tom Ku's mobsters,
policemen, and, in a hilarious subplot, his jealous
girlfriend May.
Not much of a plot, I realize, and plots are usually irrelevant
in a Jackie Chan movie. You have so much fun watching the
kung fu stunts and action mixed with the Chaplin-esque
comedy, you don't mind that there's no story around
what's going on. Here is no exception.
However, I do realize I complained particularly in my review
of The Protector of the film's lack of a plot. That
in itself isn't really a problem. The fact that
James Glickenhaus would not allow Chan to be himself
*was*. By turning him into a Dirty Harry cop,
he ruins the appeal of Jackie in the first place.
In an interview years afterward, Glickenhaus
said he did not regret his decision (he obviously never
saw the movie) and said he thought people in the States
wouldn't accept his Asian style. Well, James,
after Rush Hour and Rumble in the Bronx's successes
here, I'll bet you're eating your words (not to mention
free cheese from the government) now, aren't you?
Here, Jackie had total control of this movie.
That is good because he knows how to film
an action movie. James Glickenhaus does not.
Don't believe me? Rent The Protector and Police
Story and compare them side by side, then talk to me again.
As I said in my review of the latter film, if Golden Harvest had hired
John Woo to direct and juice up Glickenhaus' script, it might have
been halfway decent. In the Glickenhaus attempt its'
only saving graces were Jackie and one or two decent fights and
stunts. This isn't the case here. Jackie has total control
and his screenwriter, Edward Tang, totally knows how to
write a real Jackie Chan movie.
I also said in my review of the Protector that they should've
let Jackie be himself in it because Americans would go
wild over a kung fu comedian. In that case, maybe this
film should've been distributed to the U.S.
when it was made like Rumble in the Bronx later was.
Maybe then Americans would've realized what a novelty he
was and he wouldn't have had to've been soured on Hollywood
by The Protector.
