Title
Review for Let's Talk About Sex (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Michael Dequina
_Let's_Talk_About_Sex_ (R) no stars (out of ****)
Let's not.  Troy Beyer's directorial debut (she also wrote and stars)
offers plenty of the bawdy talk the title promises.  But it's wrapped
around a load of dreck.  Advice columnist Jazz (Beyer) aspires to be a talk
show hostess, and the candid woman-to-woman interviews she shoots for an
audition tape send Jazz and her two roommates, Lena (Randi Ingerman) and
Michelle (Paget Brewster), on that dreaded "journey of self-discovery"
traveled in too many independent films.  Jazz unlocks a secret trauma that
keeps her from committing to her perfect man (Joseph C. Phillips); slutty
Lena realizes she just wants to be loved; bitchy Michelle realizes that her
coldness comes from fear.
And the audience, what does it discover about these characters?  They're a
bunch of crybabies.  Make that just "babies," because the duct-challenged
Beyer, Ingerman, and Brewster cannot muster a single tear between them,
which is a glaring problem once the film settles into its almost laughably
dissonant tone: raunchy interview segments alternating with soppy,
melodramatic crying scenes that sent my eyes rolling.  The film's
hilariously overblown housework-as-grieving climax, complete with cleanser
cans being thrown in frustration, has to be a cinema landmark of some sort.
 As for the film's purported insight into female sexuality (most of the
interviews are done with real people, not actors), to me it seems that
Beyer simply chose the most outrageous segments for inclusion in the film,
rather than the most honest.  Terrible writing, terrible acting, terrible
direction--terrible film.  (opens September 11)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "LET'S TALK ABOUT SEX" (Fine Line Features):
Let's not. Better to let Jerry Springer or Monica Lewinsky do
it.  At least, that way you don't have to pay at the box-office. This
sleazy excuse for a docudrama, written and directed by Troy Beyer, who
played Diahann Carroll's daughter on "Dynasty," stars Beyer as a Miami
advice columnist who wants to graduate from newspaper work to TV.  In
order to make the transition, she has to come up with a sample program
about "what makes girls tick," so she and her two roommates (Paget
Brewster, Randi Ingerman) hit the streets with their videocam to
discover women's biggest gripes about men, the insensitive
brutes. There's lots of graphic, titillating talk, which bears a
striking similarity to reading aloud the raunchy walls of a public
rest-room, as the trio come to terms with their own sexual
problems. Talk about hypocritical, cliche-drenched, psycho-babble!  On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Let's Talk About Sex" is so
cheesy and shallow that it's barely a 1. Yeah, it gets laughs - all
the wrong kind.

Author
Marty Mapes
First Troy Beyer wrote the critically panned "B.A.P.S." Now she makes her
directorial debut, writing, directing, and starring in this sub-par film
about women talking about sex. Though not without redeeming qualities, this
film is bad. 
The basic story follows three single friends -- Jazz (Beyer), Lena (Randi
Ingerman), and Michelle (Paget Brewster) -- in their search for love. Jazz
has an idea for a local talk show; it would feature women talking about sex
and dating. She and her friends make a demo tape of interviews with the
women of Miami. 
The film itself is sprinkled with these real interviews throughout, both as
part of the plot and as commentary on the situations of the main characters.
The fact that they are real provides a refreshing break from some of the
more melodramatic moments in the film. 
There are several moments of bad acting, corny dialogue, and emotional
overextension. In a low-budget independent film from a first-time director,
these faults can sometimes be forgiven, IF the screenplay is fresh and
solid. That is not the case here. 
The script suffers from random plot developments. There are four or five of
these turns in the plot, each one raising the question "where did that come
from?" At one point, a character has a lifelong reconciliation with her
mother. We are supposed to be moved, but since the scene is completely
un-led-up to, we really don't care if she and her mother get along. We've
never seen her mother before. We never see her again. Who cares? 
What's worse, these sudden developments are supposed to engage our sympathy.
At another point, a character announces that she can't have children.
Apparently, this is devastating. We wouldn't know this because she never
talked about having kids before, but we are nevertheless expected to be
devastated for her. The scene feels like an afterthought, its emotion
manipulative and shallow. 
These scenes grow worse and worse, culminating in an absurd climax. Two
scenes were played with such overwhelming melodrama that I found myself
laughing. One scene is a lover's spat between two minor characters. The
other has the main characters expressing their copious grief by cleaning
house in wails of despair and clouds of Ajax. 
Thinking on these scenes, it is hard for me to admit that the film has
redeeming qualities. But it does. 
First, it is original. We men often wonder what women talk about when they
are alone in groups, and I imagine this film gives me a pretty good idea.
It's something I don't think has been the subject of a film. 
Second, the interviews of the Miami women are sincere. Taken together, they
form a mosaic picture of Miami beachwalkers and bistro diners. The mosaic is
made of sound bites and stereotypes, but each tile is some woman's real
experience. Neither the picture of women, nor their picture of men, is truly
representative, but the point is that both sets of generalizations are
telling in their own way. At some level, the stereotypes that emerge can be
called true. 
I can imagine some people liking this film when its characters talk about
their "likes, dislikes, skills, and thrills," but on the whole, it's pretty
bad. And that makes it even harder to forgive the bad acting, corny
dialogue, and emotional overextension. 
I'll give Beyer one more strike, and then she's out. 
Rated R (almost got an NC-17) for explicit sexual dialogue and nudity. 
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/
