Title
Review for Toy Story (1995)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring the voices of Tom Hanks, Tim Allen, Don Rickles, Wallace
      Shawn, John Ratzenberger, Jim Varney, Annie Potts, and others
Director: John Lasseter
Producers: Ralph Guggenheim and Bonnie Arnold
Screenplay: Joss Whedon, Andrew Stanton, Joel Cohen, and Alec Sokolow
Music: Randy Newman
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     Ever wonder how toys apparently get from one place to another with
no human help?  TOY STORY, Disney's first feature-length foray into
computer animation, postulates that they do it all by themselves.  Toys
have their own magical world which comes to life any time the lights
are out or people aren't around.  Any who doubt this should take a look
a t TOY STORY.  You'll never again feel quite the same way about Mr.
Pota to Head, Monkeys in a Barrel, or Slinkies.
     Of course, the visual aspect is the centerpiece of TOY STORY.  T
he computer-generated effects are a marvel.  Rich in unexpected detail
( the grain of a wood floor, fingerprints and chipped paint on a door,
reflections in polished surfaces, and so on), this colorful and
brilliantly-rendered aspect of the film would alone be worth the price
of admission.  It's something of a bonus that the characters, dialogue,
and story provide entertainment value of their own.
     TOY STORY is a buddy movie/adventure tale with an understated
lesson about the value of friendship.  Parents might also be able to
use some of what transpires to encourage their offspring to put away
toys after playtime.  While the screenplay isn't a marvel of
originality, it is capable of holding the attention--light, undemanding
fun that n ever gets too immature or syrupy.  There's also quite a bit
of intelligent wit that will go above the heads of younger
viewers--that stuff's for Mom and Dad.
     The two main characters are toys:  cowboy Woody (voice of Tom
Hanks), the old-time favorite, and space ranger Buzz Lightyear (voice
of Tim Allen), the battery-operated newcomer.  The supporting cast
includes a dinosaur (voice of Wallace Shawn), Mr. Potato Head (voice
of Don Rickles), a piggy bank (voice of John Ratzenberger), a slinkie
(voice of Jim Varney), Little Bo Peep (voice of Annie Potts), and an
army of tiny plastic soldiers who scout out the new arrivals on
birthdays and Christmas.  The humans who appear in TOY STORY are
intentionally rendered to look artificial.  In this movie, people are
"unreal"; all the vividness and multi-dimensionality is saved for the
toys.  But that's a typical convention of animation.
     TOY STORY opens with Buzz's arrival.  Woody is upset that this
high-tech neophyte has usurped his rightful place on the bedspread an d
in his six-year old owner's play time.  The disgruntled cowboy comes up
with a plan to eliminate Buzz, but it backfires, and soon the two rivals
are out in the real world, forced to help each other in their
struggle to escape the clutches of a toy-torturing juvenile
delinquent.
     How does TOY STORY compare to Disney's more conventional animated
features?  They're really very different types of productions.  This
film is less artistic and more technologically impressive.  Despite a
few Randy Newman songs, it's not really a musical.  Of course, the
target audience is the same, and everything from Disney embraces
"family values", but it's difficult--and unfair--to make an effective
contrast of the two film making styles.
     The one big negative about TOY STORY involves Disney's
overcommercialization.  Already, Woody and Buzz dolls line store
shelves.  Burger King is coming out with figurines.  It won't be long
before the movie is drowned in hype.  So, from the perspective of pure
entertainment, it's a good idea to see TOY STORY before the deluge of
promotions becomes so excessive that it turns off every adult.  Frankly,
the movie deserves a less ignominious fate than the marketing
overkill which will surely overcome it.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Before the Ninja Turtles, the Transformers, and the Masters of the
Universe; before the Micronauts, the five-inch G.I. Joe's, and the STAR
WARS-action figures; before Sega, Nintendo, and Atari, there existed a
world of stranger, simpler things such as Slinky, Mr.  Potato Head, and
Etch-a-Sketch.  Mostly plastic, sometimes with a battery or two, these
were the *real* toys, the toys of our youth, and the toys "brought to
life" by Pixar Animation (in conjunction with Disney) in the
appropriately titled TOY STORY.  Both jaw- dropping and heart-warming,
the first fully computer-animated feature film is *the* holiday movie
to see.
     The animation is nothing short of stunning.  Plastic has never
looked so good, nor seemed as real.  *More* surprising are the story
dynamics, which raise the film above the level of a novelty piece, or
just another children's picture.  You know, for kids.  The charming
premise is that, when nobody's around, toys have lives all their own.
They fight, they frolic, and even suffer the occasional identity
crisis, especially when they think they *are* the action-figure that
they've been molded in the likeness of.  Like Buzz Lightyear (voiced by
Tim Allen), the gleaming spaceman with an impressive wingspan and a
chin to rival Jay Leno's.
     He's the new arrival in Andy's bedroom; a birthday gift that has
cloth-cowboy Woody (voiced by Tom Hanks) worried about losing the
much-coveted position of Andy's Favorite Toy.  So they bicker and feud,
and through a very amusing set of circumstances, end up *outside* and
lost in the "real world."  I won't say much more, except that a portion
of the plot involves a vicious next-door neighbor who tortures toys.
Deceptively simple and straight- forward, yet as adult as any of the
issues in CASINO or THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT.  There's also plenty of
activity on the fringe.  Small jokes pepper the film, such as a box of
"Binford Tools" that falls on Woody.  Just pay attention.
     Given the dubious moral messages that season the season's seasonal
releases, many may find themselves disarmed by the purity of essence
(POE?) in TOY STORY.  The tale is told from the viewpoint of someone
who loves toys.  Before the tie-in's were discussed; before the
marketing could be mustered; even before the ace casting was completed,
the gang at Pixar were creating the code that built the art that
brought their favorite toys to life.  The result is a such an
overwhelmingly fun movie, both so bold and so harmless, that it
deserves praise in any circles.  Even Bob Dole (and Baby Newt) could
enjoy this one.
--
Michael J. Legeros - Raleigh, NC        
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Check triangle.movies for weekly reviews from MOVIE HELL

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Computer animated film features a behind the scenes look at all of the toys
which we've had the pleasure of playing with over the years. The story
centers around the main toy, Woody the cowboy, who fears his place among the
kingdom of toys being taken over by the latest and greatest action figure
plaything called Buzz Lightyear.
CRITIQUE:
Cute, inventive, entertaining little toy adventure for young and old alike.
Now despite the fact that computer animated graphics barely impress me
anymore, I did find much to like in this fun story about toys and their
apparent human personality traits and emotions. The fulfilling rivalry
between Woody and the newest toy in the room, Buzz Lightyear, was also quite
engaging, especially with the latter toy paying little attention to the
supposed competition. In fact, the best part about the movie was the whole
personality struggle which Buzz had to endure between his own belief that he
was an actual Space Ranger and Woody's constant reminders that he was "just
a toy". The action and the computer animation in the last half hour of the
film was the topper of it all, while the first half seemed more like a
build-up thereof. Overall, this movie should inspire many small children to
appreciate their lifeless toys on a more serious level (or at least not blow
them up!), while the bigger children, namely us adults, may just be
surprised to find themselves appreciating the sheer joy and childhood
reminiscences which this film aims to incite.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TOY STORY is an absolutely wonderful movie for both kids and
adults.  It stretches your mind creatively to look at inanimate objects
with a new respect, and it dazzles your senses with a wonderful new art
form, the full length computer generated movie that is a cross between
a Disney cartoon and a live action film.  Moreover, in a year with some
quite imaginative kids movies (THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD and THE
SECRET OF ROAN INISH being the second and third best of 1995), this one
stands head and shoulders above all of the rest.
     TOY STORY has some good voices: Tim Allen as Buzz Lightyear, Tom
Hanks as Woody, Laurie Metcalf as Mrs. Davis, John Morris as Andy,
Annie Potts as Bo Peep, John Ratzenberger as Hamm, Don Rickles as Mr.
Potato Head, Wallace Shawn as Rex, Jim Varney as Slinky and Erik Von
Detten as Sid, but the voices are not what make the show as in some
animated movies, e. g., Robin William in ALADDIN.  TOY STORY is special
because of the story itself and because of the computer generated
animation that is nothing less than phenomenal.  The computer work
stands alone as a major new contribution to the magic of movies.  Yes,
this has been done before perhaps, but not to this scale and degree of
sophistication.  Pixar (and Disney) have a major hit on their hands.  I
look forward to many more magical pictures from this creative team.
     As the story unfolds we find the toys in Andy's room having their
morning staff meeting chaired by their leader Woody.  Woody holds this
elevated position by virtue of being Andy's favorite toy.  Woody
announces that, "Tuesday's plastic corrosion awareness meeting was a
big success."  The staff meeting is broken up by Andy's birthday party.
The tension surrounds what toys Andy will get.  Although Mr. Potato
Head is hoping for a Mrs. Potato Head, most toys are dreading the
event.
     Woody sends out toy soldiers with a Fisher Price monitor to bug
Andy's party.  The walk of the toy soldiers is great.  They have to
shuffle along.  Remember that cheap toy soldiers have their feet stuck
on a single strip of plastic which makes sneaking up on the enemy
extremely difficult.  The old toys wait in Andy's room listening to the
monitor with the dread that people listened to reports of World War II
on their radios.  This could mean their demise too, and as Hamm, the
piggy bank, puts it, "Yes sir, we're next month's garage sale fodder
for sure."
     It is at the birthday party that Andy gets Buzz Lightyear.  Unlike
the other toys, poor Buzz thinks he actually is a spaceman.  He keeps
communicating with his command center since he is afterall on a
critical intergalactic mission.  The toys fall in love with him, and
Woody drops out of favor with Andy.  Woody laments, "What chance does a
toy like me have against a Buzz Lightyear action figure?"  The majority
of the movie is about the conflicts between Woody and Buzz.
     There are excellent lessons taught to kids along the way.  The
story is full of demonstrations of good moral values as well as the
illustration of what leading an evil life like that of the neighborhood
bad kid, Sid, can get you.  Sid has a room full of "cannibal toys".
Whether or not Sid will get Woody and Buzz and then blow them to
smithereens is the other highlight of the show.  I will not give any of
this away.  The ending is perfect too.  See it all yourself.
     The toys are hyper-realistic, but the people in the movie are
drawn more cartoon characterish.  My wife, Sally, said that she thought
this was to make the point that it is the toys in the story that are
real more than the people.  I suspect she is right.  The colors of the
toys have a luminescence that I have not seen before on the screen.
The accuracy of the toys is reminiscent of the Vermeer and the other
great Dutch painters of the seventeenth century, absolute devotion to
the small details and to lighting effects.  The toys in the good boy,
Andy's, room are perfect, but the ones in the evil Sid's room are pure
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS style.
     The wonderful script (Joel Cohen, John Lasseter, Alex Sokolow,
Andrew Stanton, and Joss Whedon) uses dialog to make the toys come
alive and yet be extremely funny.  Rex, the dinosaur, introduces
himself to Buzz saying, "I'm from Mattel.  Well, actually I'm from a
smaller company that was purchased by Mattel in a leveraged buyout."  I
hope the writers win a lot of awards.
     TOY STORY runs a fast and extremely well paced 1:17.  I posit no
one will get bored during this movie.  It is rated G but I should warn
people that young viewers may get scared by Sid and his toys.  This is
not overdone, but I did hear several very young (age 2?) kids screaming
at the top of their lungs at a couple of spots in the show.  Jeffrey (6
1/2) and his friends Allison (6 1/2) and Josh (4) went.  They gave it
double thumbs up.  Luckily our two families had more laps than kids so
that when the scary scenes came, all kids had a place to go.  Perhaps
you should check your kid to lap ratio before you go.  Jeffrey gets
angry at shows that scare him, but not this one.  He took it in stride
as part of the movie going experience.  His version of revisionist
history, by the way, claims that he actually gave the movie six thumbs
up rather than just two.  I give the movie my strongest recommendation
and award it a full ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This movie sucks! No, just kidding. I'd like to be able to voice 
an opinion on this movie that doesn't match that of every other movie 
critic and film buff in the country, but I too enjoyed every second of 
TOY STORY. It is quite simply a movie for everyone, young or old, tall 
or short, thin or fat, ribbed or regular... And it proves audiences in this 
day and age can still be entertained by something wholesome and 
positive. It's a shame I haven't quite reached that point yet, but maybe 
in some distant utopian society of the future I won't feel the need to 
crack "ribbed or regular" jokes for cheap laughs.
        TOY STORY is a landmark achievement in that it's the first 
fully computer animated feature film, if you don't count Oliver Stone's 
NIXON. (I don't know what that was supposed to mean.) TOY STORY 
is a kids movie, but a lot of the jokes can be appreciated solely by us 
older folk. Don't tell me elementary school kids have any idea what the 
"laser envy" comment refers to, but they can enjoy the myriad physical 
comedy scenes in the movie. In every single appearance by Mr. 
Potatohead, you can count on some or all of his face being knocked 
off.
        There are a few humans in the movie, but the main characters 
are toys that act like humans when the humans aren't around. The toys 
belong to an elementary school kid named Andy, with Woody the 
sheriff cowboy (voiced by Tom Hanks) as their leader because, after 
all, he's Andy's favorite. Every birthday and Christmas brings new toys 
to the universe, and a platoon of plastic soldiers is sent down to the 
living room on one such birthday to find out what presents may 
threaten Woody's position as favorite.
        Enter Buzz Lightyear (voiced by Tim Allen), an intergalactic 
astronaut action figure based on a popular cartoon show. He can fly 
and has laser beams and every other possible gimmick. 
Understandibly, Andy is in awe, as are the other toys. Afraid of losing 
his superiority, Woody decides to put Buzz in his place. That plan 
backfires and they both end up out in the real world, one dominated by 
speeding cars, dogs and mean little boys named Sid who torture toys 
for fun. Buzz and Woody are now forced to team up for survival, in a 
journey that comprises most of the movie.
        The vocal performances in the movie are all noteworthy. 
Hanks and Allen, as expected, are great but the minor characters also 
boost the movie. Don Rickles plays Mr. Potatohead devoid of his usual 
insensitive, politically-incorrect demeanor (Rickles, not Mr. 
Potatohead--although he's been known to crack an anti-egg joke every 
now and then too). John Ratzenberger provides the voice of Andy's 
piggybank as pretty much a revitalization of his Cliff Clavin character 
from "Cheers." The only thing missing is the catchphrase "It's a 
known fact..." And I didn't stick around for the closing credits but I'd 
swear the voice of the slinky dog was Jim "Ernest" Varney.
        TOY STORY is the best movie I saw at the theater this year, 
but then again the competition includes such bombs as NINE 
MONTHS, CLUELESS and HALLOWEEN VI. It's a terrific 
achievement in the field of computer animation (eclipsed only by the 
Dire Straits "Money For Nothing" video) and is also one of the most 
entertaining movies I've ever seen, certainly the best kids movie I've 
seen. If you haven't seen this movie yet, what the heck is wrong with 
you?!
--
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
and check out the 40+ new reviews since Christmas.

Author
Thomas Wheeler
     A lot of hoopla has been made about the fact that this film is the
first one ever done entirely on computer.  Fine and well, but I am one
of those people who remains decidedly concerned about computers
becoming too much a part of society (so naturally I'm writing on the
Internet, right?!).  Computer technology is a *tool*, in essence and
basic form no different than a screwdriver or a hammer  just a little
more sophisticated.  Ultimately, by its very nature, computer
technology is mindless, heartless, and soulless and so are many of the
people, I suspect, whose lives revolve completely around it.  I don't
care how advanced the technology gets (and the producers of this movie
are already claiming that within  two years it will be outmoded, and I
don't doubt it), this basic aspect of the technology will NEVER change.
     Will the fact that within a few short years the technology that
made this movie possible make this movie any less enjoyable?  I hardly
think so.  The writers and producers of the film have prepared a story
with a good deal of human warmth, conflict, drama, and no shortage of
humor, centering on a world which we have never seen before  the hidden
world of toys.
     Yes, maybe those toys of yours that seemed to have lives of their
own--really did!  What we have here are intelligent, adult characters
whose occupation is essentially to be a toy!  The conflict comes from
the fact that the favorite toy in Andys Room, a talking pull-string
sheriff doll named Woody, has some new competition, a sleek,
push-button talking science-fiction character named Buzz Lightyear.
Buzz has a few problems of his own, though.  Its not until well into
the movie that he realizes he *is* a toy, and it throws him into a deep
depression, until Woody convinces him that being a toy is actually a
pretty good job.
     Of course, by this time, the two have been captured by the
neighbors kid  a sadistic whelp named Sid who likes to blow up his toys
with firecrackers, and rebuild the parts into horrible plastic
abominations.  Worse still, Buzz and Woodys kid, Andy, and his family,
are moving the next day!  The remainder of the adventure, and I wont
give it away for those of you who haven't seen it, focuses on Buzz and
Woody getting away from Sid and making their way back to Andy.  Its a
great adventure that I highly recommend.
     Just one word of warning: don't go to see it just for the
technical aspects of it.  Sure, the computer animation is highly
impressive.  And maybe it *will* be outmoded in a couple of years, but
this movie *won't* be, and neither will the very *human* talent and
imagination that *really* made this movie possible, and thats something
no computer will *ever* be able to accomplish!

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     For years one of the more interesting aspects of the annual
tournees of animation was to see the developments in computer
animation.  An early example--early meaning 1986--from Pixar was "Luxo,
Jr." in which metal lamps behaved in human ways.  Pixar started life in
1979 as a division of Lucasfilm but became an independent company in
1986.  The Luxo lamps were ideal for early attempts at computer
animation since they were articulated collections of rigid pieces.
Certainly in computer animation rigid body movement is easier to
describe to a program than is the movement of something soft and
pliable.  In fact, Pixar has done a lot of showing toys and other
inanimate objects coming to life since if they come off too rigid it
can look like part of the characterization.  With that in mind it is
not difficult to understand why their first feature film is a story in
which toys are the main characters and humans play a relatively small
role and are not the center of attention.  Different animation
techniques have different advantages, but TOY STORY is certainly a
milestone in computer animation.  Pixar still has to prove that their
animation techniques are more versatile than Will Vinton's clay
animation or the Puppetoons of the 1940s and 1950s.  In fact, their
style is very like the results of Puppetoon animation.  There is
nothing wrong with what they do here, but they need to be thinking
about how to get more variety in their themes, particularly if they
want to be more than hi-tech Puppetoons.
     That said, the film is certainly as watchable for the adults in
the audience as for the children.  We are not talking Merchant-Ivory
level here but the adults should appreciate most of what is aimed at
the kids and there is some intelligence in the humor (including a very
nice bit about the origin of religions--hot stuff for a Disney family
film).  The story deals with a collection of toys owned by young Andy.
What Andy does not know is that when he is not watching, the toys come
to life and live lives of their own (a very familiar fantasy theme).
Andy's current favorite is Sheriff Woody (voiced by Tom Hanks), but he
has just gotten a new toy, Buzz Lightyear, Space Hero (Tim Allen).
Woody is not happy about being displaced as Andy's favorite for reasons
never made clear-perhaps it's job security.   And it does not help that
Buzz is not quite bright enough to realize that he is not the real
thing.  The rivalry is watched by the community of toys including
tyrannosaurus Rex (ironically voiced by Wallace Shawn), Mr. Potato Head
(Don Rickles), Slinky Dog (Jim Varney), and Bo Peep (Annie Potts).
Just how Bo Peep got into this collection of Andy's toys is anybody's
guess, but she adds a love interest for Woody.  Eventually the rivalry
will get out of hand and will have the two racing to return home first
from the outside world and then from the house of the neighbor boy Sid,
a budding sociopath with an impressive imagination when it comes to
mutilating toys.  One rather nice touch here is that Disney animations
nearly always equate beauty with goodness and ugliness with evil, but
it is not necessarily true here.
     The animation technique used here is extremely good.  The
attention to details like reflective surfaces and the play of light and
shadow get better and better with succeeding Pixar productions.
Surface texture still seems to be a problem.  Pixar does a sort of
semi-gloss surface very nicely, which may be one reason they do so much
with plastic toys.  But the detail and texture they would need to do
realistically a man's arm with hair, for example, is not really there
any place.
     Pixar has made a charming movie carrying their current plot
concepts and animation techniques to what appears to be about the
limit.  TOY STORY is a lot of fun.  Now the important question for
Pixar is what do they do next.  This one gets a high +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.  (And special kudos to the Supervising Layout Artist.)

Author
Christopher Null
     The wizards at Pixar and Disney have created a film that is unlikely
to be forgotten in the next few years.  TOY STORY, the first completely
computer-animated movie ever, is fresh and funny, and it takes the state
of animation to a heretofore undreamed-of level.
     Sheriff Woody (Tom Hanks) is the leader of a group of toys who come
alive when no one is watching.  Owned by young Andy (John Morris), they
find new toy Buzz Lightyear (Tim Allen) thrown into the mix, and when
Woody's insecurity causes him to try almost anything to get Buzz out of
the picture, he almost succeeds with catastrophic effects.  Soon, both
Woody and Buzz find themselves captives in the next-door home of toy
molester Sid (Erik von Detten).  Not only must they get out of Sid's
place, but the family's moving day is nigh, and no one wants to be left
behind.
     Hanks brings the apprehensive Woody alive better than most live
characters are done.  And a gaggle of supporting toys round out the cast,
including Don Rickles as a sarcastic Mr. Potato Head, Wallace Shawn as a
pacifist Tyrannosaurus Rex, and Annie Potts as Woody's love interest Bo
Peep, all of whom add another twist to comic happenings.  Even questions
of identity are brought up without being too silly, as Buzz doesn't
understand he's not a real spaceman.  Not only is TOY STORY visually
spectacular, but it's downright hilarious.
     Nice touches make the film a true delight to watch, with details like
water droplets on windows, the detailed underbelly of the moving van, and
reflections of the family in Christmas tree ornaments.  I'd wager
something new could be found every time the movie is seen.
     The only problems I had were the corny songs and the fact that the
animation, while it works spectacularly well for the stiffly mechanical
toys, doesn't translate so easily to human movement.  While people aren't
the ultimate subject of the piece, it is a bit of a distraction when
they're in the focus.
     Nonetheless, TOY STORY is a visual feast, perfect for the holidays. 
Director John Lasseter ups the stakes with every scene, the best of which
is a nightmarish sequence in Sid's room, whose toy experimentations look
straight out of Tim Burton's brain.  Highly recommended "for kids of all
ages."
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Lewis Butler
Capsule:  You want computer animation, we got computer animation.
        We're not talking about some piddly stuff like the feather
        in FORREST GUMP or the effects in TRON, we're talking wall
        to wall computer effects.  Interested?  (+2 on the -4/+4)
     TOY STORY is the first film from the combined efforts of Disney
and a computer effects company named Praxis.  It is part of a three
picture deal, and it looks like we have something to look forward to.
     What we have is amazingly good computer animation, combined with
an adequate story, some memorable characters, and a lot of funny
dialog.  The basic plot is pretty straightforward; Andy gets a new toy,
which looks to beat out his former favorite.  A jealous tiff starts to
develop, but in the end everyone's friends.  Not a lot there,
admittedly, but the basis for an entertaining movie.
     The main characters are quite good, but the movie is almost stolen
by Mr.  Potato Head.  Hasbro should be very pleased, chances are there
will be a strong upswing in Mr. Potato Head's sales.
     There is a lot of humor in the film, and small touches that really
make the film work, at least for me.  One thing I noticed was that the
army men actually *look* like army men, including the little circles
stamped on their body's and the occasional translucent plastic ring
that's still attached.
     There is also a wonderful scene in which the mutilated toys of the
"evil" next door neighbor kid come to life in front of him and literally
scare the kid silly.  It's quite satisfying.
     That said, this is not completely a kids movie.  Some young
children might be a little scared of the mutilated toys, they evoke
memories of NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS with their twisted shapes.
-- 
kreme@netcom.com
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.

Author
Brian Koller
"Toy Story" is a landmark in cinema animation, not only for its
unique and high-quality "virtual reality" look, but also for 
the quality of the script and story.
"Toy Story" is about Andy's toys.  Andy is a typical kid,
perhaps ten years old, and is blessed with an assortment of
toys that walk and talk independently when no humans are
looking.  Andy's favorite toy is a cowboy doll (Woody, voiced by
Tom Hanks).  However, Woody soon has serious competition
from a Space Ranger toy (Buzz, voiced by Tim Allen).  Woody's
jealousy of Buzz ultimately leads to both toys in the
clutches of disturbed neighbor kid Sid, who destroys toys.
Can Woody and Buzz find their way back to Andy?
Meanwhile, Buzz must learn to accept that he is just a toy.
The animation of "Toy Story" is superb.  From a technology
standpoint, this is the most important animated film since
"Snow White."  The toys live in a virtual reality world,
where everything is very lifelike, yet clearly animated.
Andy's toys have a very entertaining rapport.  Some of the
toys are suspicious and cruel, others endearingly earnest.
Their petty squabbles and jealousies are funny and very 
well written.  It is interesting to contrast Andy's toys
with Sid's.  Sid enjoys "operating" on his toys, interchanging
parts until they look like worse than one of Dr. Moreau's
freaks.  It is not an original observation to note that
Sid's toys are hideous but gentle, silent yet organized,
while Andy's toys are conventional but bicker endlessly.
The quality of "Snow White" was never fully repeated.  The
prospects are brighter for topping "Toy Story" since the
animation techniques may become cheaper and better over time.
It will prove more difficult to improve upon the clever 
dialogue, and the plot which is full of dramatic tension.

Author
Chad Polenz
Toy Story
Chad rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1995, G, 81 minutes [1 hour, 21 minutes]
[animated - fantasy/comedy]
starring the voices of: Tom Hanks (Woody), Tim Allen (Buzz Lightyear), Don
Rickles (Mr. Potato Head), Erik von Detten (Sid), written by Joss Whedon,
Andrew Stanton, Joel Cohen, Alec Sokolow, John Lasseter, Andrew Stanton, Pete
Docter, Joe Ranft,  produced by Bonnie Arnold, Ralph Guggenheim, directed by
John Lasseter.
"Toy Story" is a good movie that remembers the fun and simplicity of
children's stories but adds an intelligent, mature theme that everyone will
love. It tells an innocent, plausible story about toys who come to life when
no one's around.
The entire film is composed of computer-generated animation, and it is the
exquisite detail that makes the film work so well. Tom Hanks stars as the
voice of Woody, a talking cowboy rag doll who happens to be Andy's (the
little boy who owns all the toys) favorite toy. Every single line he says has
reason and purpose, not so much to build character or make for plot, but just
to tell the story. It's adorable to watch him act as a leader because he
seems so mature and intelligent for just a toy.
A big problem occurs when Andy gets the latest, coolest toy for his birthday
- a Buzz Lightyear Space Ranger action figure (voiced by Allen), who has
lasers, wings, and a voice chip! When Buzz introduces himself to the group he
actually believes he's a space ranger, the other toys think so too, except
for Woody. 
There are many funny scenes between Woody and Buzz as they fight for the
"favorite toy" position. But what's also great is Woody's cynicism as he
tries to explain to Buzz that he's just a toy and not real, but Buzz can't
comprehend this. The vocal chemistry between Hanks and Allen is excellent, as
Hanks sometimes yells hilarious dialogue, Allen is able to counter with a
deadly serious attitude.
The rivalry between the toys eventually results in the two of them getting
lost a few times while fighting over who gets to play with Andy. They go from
Andy's room, to the car, to a gas station, to an amusement park, and then to
the evil-kid-next-door's house.
There's always that one twisted kid everyone stays away from, and Sid
(voiced by von Detten) is the epitome of that character. His voice makes for
the perfect bully as it is clear and high-pitched, but with just the right
emphasis to make him menacing. I've never seen such a realistic evil kid in a
film before.
What disappointed me was the way the toys ultimately escape Sid's house.
It's fun to watch, but it essentially contradicts the premise of the film.
Still, "Toy Story" is original and fun, not only in its animation, but its
storytelling. Just watching the toys go through their motions if quite
fascinating, and it really makes us stop and wonder - are we playing with the
toys or are the toys playing with us? 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
films reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings or quick capsules.
