Title
Review for Night of the Lepus (1972)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
What can the producers of this film have been thinking?  With the
taxonomical charts all but exhausted for likely movie monsters it
appears that one of the few options left available was rabbits.  For
rabbits, read the six-foot killer variety.  You might think that such
material could only be interpreted, filmwise, as camp, but Z-feature
director William F. Claxton (this is his best-known film) treats his
story as soberly as the Latin denotation of the title would have it. 
You can call a spade a spade,  but a lepus is still a bunny, and no
amount of spooky lighting and blood-spattered muzzles doth a monster
make.  By-the-numbers plot involves Professor Roy Bennett (Stuart
Whitman) and his wife Gerry (Janet Leigh) trying to rid Arizona
farmland of a rabbit plague by injecting them with an experimental
(what else?) virulent serum.  Said serum, in the tradition of all
sci-fi horror flicks, increases rabbits to giant size and sends them on the
rampage ("They're getting meaner and hungrier,"  says Whitman, and
that's while they're still pet-sized!).  The expected bunny attacks
ensue until our quick-thinking heroes come up with a means to destroy
them.  This, as it transpires, involves a subtle mix of electrocution,
machine-gunning, and incineration.
To tell the truth, I feel a little sorry for the makers of this film. 
They'd obviously gone to some effort to have us take the rabbit threat
seriously.  These intentions last about as long as it takes to get to
the first rabbit attack, which should coincidentally mark the first
time everyone watching will laugh out loud.  But apart from this
scene, film is quite dull and has little that is humorous.  There are
a couple of moments: The sheriff exhorts the help of a drive-in
audience who unquestioningly obey his absurd-sounding orders; a man
driving across state ignores hitch-hiking Whitman, reminding his wife
about not picking up hitchers, "especially when they're carrying
guns".  
Film is a failure on every level - it was even rated PG, not an
auspicious start for a horror film - but it isn't too hard to imagine
it being terrifying for young children, by dint of the interminable
slow-motion stampeding rabbit footage (which begins to take on a
surreal quality) and the mixture of monster-bunny noises (they sound
alternatively like cattle, elephants, and cassettes being chewed up in
a tape deck).  The juxtaposition of harmless cuddly animals turning
into hopping mad omnivores (not carnivores, as the film suggests) may
be exactly the kind of thing to give some kids nightmares.  Based on 
Russel Brandon's novel "The Year of the Angry Rabbit".  Also with
DeForest Kelley (as Elgin Vlark, a character with a name even sillier
than his own).  Footnote: The real-life Australian and New Zealand rabbit plagues
mentioned in the film have their own solutions - in NZ you can spend
one day of the April holidays participating in the Annual Easter Bunny
Shoot! 
