Title
Review for Bang (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Nusair
"Bang", filmed on a budget of $20 000, is proof that a big budget
is not necessarily needed to produce a quality motion picture.
The movie opens with a young woman being kicked out of her house
for failing to pay her rent.  She's not too concerned, though,
as she is scheduled to audition for the leading role in a movie
opposite "Dustin" and "Julia".  However, when she arrives at 
the producers house, it is quickly made quite apparent that his 
only motive for asking her there is to sleep with her.  She 
refuses his advances and is thrown out without haste.  Outside,
she bumps into a somewhat insane homeless man (played very well
by Peter Greene), who starts literally trashing the street.
He exits, and leaves the woman to be arrested by a police officer
who offers to drop all the charges in exchange for "sexual
favours".  She grabs his gun, handcuffs him to a tree, and steals
his uniform.  The remainder of the film follows her exploits as
she roams the streets of Los Angeles dressed as a cop.
"Bang" is one of those films that, while not heavy on plot, it
always keeps you interested, just because you want to see what's
going to happen next.  Through the main characters eyes, we get
to see both the perks (free coffee) and downsides (the 
responsibility of the job) that come with being a police officer.
The film has been shot in a kind of pseudo-documentary style, 
with a hand-held camera following the characters around.  Whether
this was a conscious decision by the director, Ash, or a budget-
induced constraint does not really matter; the technique gives
the movie a realistic feel. . .almost as though this actually
happened.  And on that same note, there isn't one performance
here that doesn't ring true.  Even the smallest roles have been
filled by actors who seem real.  It's not often you see a movie
in which no-name actors actually do better than mainstream
Hollywood actors would.
"Bang" is a movie that needs to be seen by Hollywood producers.
It just goes to show that you don't need a gargantuan budget
to create a good movie; you just need qualified actors and a
well-written script.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The most shocking four-letter word in the English language
is a three-letter word: GUN.  In the November 10, 1997 issue
of The New Yorker magazine, a police officer writes "....Short
of gunfire, nothing has as  strong an effect on a cop as the
word 'gun.' Guns are unique in their ability to change
nobodies and wanna-bes into genuinely bad men in an
instant."  Long before that article appeared, Mao Tse-tung
said that all political power emanates from the barrel of a gun. 
What's more,   Ash's movie, "Bang"--shot for $20,000 but
looking much better--both agrees and disagrees with that gem
from The Red Book.  In a single, event-filled day his principal
character, named simply "Woman" (Darling Narita),
accumulates quite a bit of empowerment through her use of a
gun. Ultimately, though, she realizes that she doesn't really
need a piece to flex her muscles, and manages to put down
corrupt people in various walks of life who use their authority
to get what they want.
  While probably not an Oscar contender, this sleeper of a
movie is in some ways the most exciting contribution of the
year, partly because of the way it treats its subject matter but
mostly because of the way it was filmed.  A cinematic
example of "guerrilla theater," "Bang" was filmed without
official approval.  In hit-and-run fashion, the production team
quickly zipped through scene after scene (some improvised)
and disappeared before they could be rounded up, handed
summonses, or arrested for impersonation of a police officer
and working without authorization.  
   Ash divides a section of Los Angeles society into two
groups: the powerful and the impotent.  The former camp
includes a landlord, a Hollywood producer, a police officer, a
cold-blooded killer, and a pimp.  The latter group include a
homeless man, a fun-loving and helpful pair of Latinos, a
desperate drug peddler, a coterie of black street people, and
most of all an Asian-American woman who is kicked around
by all elements of the power structure.
   Ash begins with film with a bang, zooming in on a ticked-
off, uncompassionate landlord slamming a "For Rent" sign on
his quarters as he vehemently throw out his tenant (Darling
Narita).  Reporting for an acting audition to a Hollywood
producer (David Allen Grafs) who barks into his cordless
phone and may or not be actually in the movie business, she
is put off by his sexual coming-on.  She discovers a homeless
man (the remarkable Peter Greene), who lives in a tree,
represents the good guys, and serves as her mentor-for-a-
day.  When the homeless man trashes the producer's garden,
she is chased by a cop (Michael Newland), who is willing to
drop his plans to arrest her if she would take two minutes to
alleviate the distress of a lonely man.  She gets the jump on
the officer, handcuffs him to a tree, puts on his uniform, and
notices almost immediately how differently people respond to
her.  It's unfortunate that the great playwright Bert Brecht did
not live to see this movie: "Bang" astutely demonstrates that
writer's Shakespearean view that the apparel oft proclaims the
man.
   To their credit, the actors performed in this guerrilla movie
for free.  The entire crew go through their roles with verve
and sincerity, but Greene and Narita are standouts.  The
funniest scene, a rather tense one, has two police officers
asking to join the Woman at a coffee shop, thinking that she
is one of their own.  Luckily for her they are more involved in
recounting an anecdote involving the theft of a kidney from a
sleeping victim than in looking her over to discover her real
identity.  In one poignant moment a charming young Latino,
Jesus, is gunned down by a drug dealer, an incident which
both infuriates and frustrates the Woman--who is unable to
help the casualty but instead goes after his killer.
  Unlike Sal Stabile's vigorous, no-budget indie "Gravesend,"
"Bang" does not look at all messy but rather comes across as
well planned despite the chaos of its production, the mise-en-
scene delightfully composed and vivid.
   It's just amazing how many experiences a would-be cop
can go through in a single day: running out of fuel and getting
a lift to a gas station from a couple of guys; showing her
benefactors that she's a regular person despite her badge by
sharing a beer with them and looking with amusement on
their stash of weed; running into a couple making love and
giving them her blessing once she discovers that they love
each other; handing out money to street people (actual folks
playing themselves who almost riot as the bills are delivered
to their hands).
   You wonder just how much cooperation the police might
really get if they all acted like the Woman: genuinely friendly,
compassionate, and generous, rather than brutal, cold or
indifferent.  Ash plays close attention to detail and by doing so
has made a film that is poignant, humorous, tense, and all-
around fun. Not Rated.  Running Time: 98 minutes.  (C) 1997
Harvey Karten
