Title
Review for Life During Wartime (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Andrew Hall
Don't be deceived by the title; this is not another film about America
in World War II.  "Life During Wartime" is set in modern-day Los
Angeles and has nothing to do with warfare. 
Tommy (David Arquette of "Dream with the Fishes") is a young,
likeable, up-and-coming salesman of home security systems.  Things are
going well for him; he's got a new job and a new girlfriend, Gale
(Kate Capshaw, aka. Mrs. Spielberg).  His boss, Heinrich (Stanley
Tucci of "Big Night"), likes Tommy enough to put him in the company's
new TV commercial.  But Heinrich's company is struggling; reduced crime
hasn't helped *everyone*.  Heinrich, it turns out, has a few dark
secrets that could make Tommy's life a living hell.
Evan Dunsky's sometimes hilarious debut film "Life During Wartime" has
a dark side to it, but the film isn't all black comedy.  Some of the
sexually-oriented humor is outrageously funny - the packed house at
our theater was in hysterics several times.  Only later in the film
does it get darker.   And the film avoids being stagey even though it
is based on a play (by Keith Reddin).
"Life During Wartime", made on a low budget, is still playing the
festival circuit; it's debut was Toronto in the fall and also showed
at Sundance before I saw it here last week at the Portland
International Film Festival.  The film has been picked up by one of
the Sony distributors and should be opening in limited release 
later this year.
"Life During Wartime" is not a perfect film by any means.  David
Arquette is so cute that you just want to strangle him.  And the film
does wane towards the end; the ending itself is kind of an
unsatisfying whimper.  But there are enough hearty laughs earlier
to make it very worthwhile.  If you aren't put off by dark humor or
sexually-explicit dialogue, check it out.  It may show up at your
local art house instead of the suburban multiplexes, but  "Life
During Wartime" isn't really an art film.  Mainstream adult audiences
should enjoy it too.
For more information, see
http://us.imdb.com/M/title-exact?title=Life+During+Wartime 

Author
Steve Rhodes
It's a nasty world out there.  Rampant crime is everywhere.  There's a
burglary committed every 10 seconds in America, and 60% of all rapes are
committed by burglars.
Whether these statistics have any validity is beyond the point in writer
and director Evan Dunsky's offbeat comedy, THE ALARMIST, based on Keith
Reddin's play.  Heinrich Grigoris, the head of Grigoris Home Security
Systems, trains his salesmen to use the statistics to maximum advantage
in selling the systems to terrified clients.
Grigoris, played with a masterful comedic turn by BIG NIGHT's Stanley
Tucci, likes to live life just a bit on the edge.  There's nothing more
exciting than breaking down the door of a client's house to set off the
burglar alarm.  If Grigoris isn't caught, then the whole neighborhood is
likely to be so impressed with the efficacy of the system that scared
away an intruder that they'll want one too.
As the story opens, Grigoris and his assistant Sally, played with a
nerdy attractiveness by Mary McCormack, are training a new sales
recruit.  Tommy Hudler, a cherubic looking young man played with a
lovely sweetness by David Arquette, wants to learn everything he can to
be successful.  Smiling from ear to ear in a nervous grin, he makes a
sale on his first cold call at the Ancona residence.
A menopausal, ex-flower child named Gale Ancona, played with just the
right sexy swagger by Kate Capshaw, lays one eye on Tommy and decides
she wants more than just a security system from him.  In the best
May-December romance in a long time, they engage in fun, energetic, but
not very explicit sexual relations.  Gale, a strawberry-blonde who likes
to wear her hair in little girl pigtails, has a "gigantic" son, who
turns out to be one of many quirky characters in the inviting movie.
The story dishes up equal measures of the pupil and mentor relationship
between Tommy and Grigoris and the romantic one between Tommy and Gale.
The character-driven comedy is memorable not for the plot or the dialog
but for the way the director creates such a fascinating little world.
The characters are all sympathetically drawn, and, until the slightly
darker second half, it stays completely good-spirited.
The acting is all dead-on, and the script takes the time to develop all
of the characters.  Gale's spaced-out, twenty-something son, played  by
Ryan Reynolds, has an absolutely hilarious monologue describing his big
sexual encounter to a stunned Tommy.
As successful as most of the movie is, it doesn't know how to end.
First-time director Evan Dunsky puts a partial finish on it, but the
conclusion needs more work.  Still, the rest of the picture is
delightful, and Evan Dunsky establishes himself as someone to keep an
eye on for his next project.
THE ALARMIST runs 1:32.  It is rated R for sexuality and profanity and
would be fine for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "The Alarmist" is filled with characters who delight in
mugging for the camera and in striking absurdist poses; and
why not?  The movie, which is based on a play by the
imaginative writer Keith Reddin, is an absurdist comedy.  Not
that's it's far-out like something by Ionesco or Beckett.  It's
quite accessible.  The first half is an absolute gem, but Even
Dunky, who adapts the staged work for the screen, cannot
sustain the momentum once the narrative turns serious, even
tragic.  He must be given credit for taking the risk: he
precariously walks the fine line between waggery and woe in
showing that life, despite its anguish, is well worth
living, and manages to send up capitalist shibboleths without
giving up the light touch.  While the con game played here will
bring to mind some treasures by David Mamet such as "The
Spanish Prisoner" and "Glengarry Glen Ross," "The Alarmist"
does not really have unique style like those major prizes. 
Its rewards are ample, however, making a trip to the movies a
worthwhile one.
   The con involved here does not involve selling a defective
product or any sort of fly-by-night scheme.  The commodity, a
security alarm system, works well, but considering its
price--which we do not unearth but which is apparently quite
high--it requires some creative selling. What is being sold is
not so much a security system for one-family homes as much
as fear.  If the clients can be persuaded that they need to
install the alarm setup despite a steadily declining crime rate
in the area, some hard sell is needed.  That's just what is
provided by Tommy Hudler (David Arquette), a naive young
man being trained for the job by Heinrich Grigoris (Stanley
Tucci), the leathery, cynical owner of the company.  The
comic highlight of the 93-minute story occurs near the
beginning as Heinrich carries through a sale in the home
office to a fearful woman, Sally (Mary McCormack), whose
husband is deadly ill and who cries voluminously, protests the
high cost of the system, but is persuaded to sign.  When
Tommy goes into the field, he proves to be an effective
merchant indeed, but what he did not count on was falling
instantly in love with an older woman, the widowed Gale
Ancona (Kate Capshaw), who has a precocious teenaged
son, Howard (Ryan Reynolds).  The comic gives way to the
cataclysmic as a double-murder leads Tommy to suspect his
boss. After all, he has discovered that his mentor makes most
of his income not on the product he sells but on the jewels
and cash he burgles, burglaries which keep the neighborhood
fearful and thereby increase sales.
   The film, particularly during its initial, better half, sustains a
theatrical feeling, with characters from widow Gale to Tommy
to Tommy's father Bruce Hudler (Louis Arquette) adopt
exaggerated facial expressions.  In the staged work, which
was performed in 1990 in New York prestigious off-Broadway
Manhattan Theatre Club, ghosts appear on the platform
including the phantom of the 16th Century Calvinist thinker,
John Calvin.  Concepts like sin and predesination were
explored there but dispensed with in debut director Dunsky's
filmed adaptation.  Stanley Tucci continues to amaze us with
his comic depth, striking clever poses in films like Woody
Allen's "Deconstructing Harry" and especially in his role as a
gourmet chef in one of the great indies of 1996, "Big Night." 
David Arquette is a convincing protege allowing Kate
Capshaw--as the older woman--to get her groove back in a
dazzling little love affair.  Uneven that this movie may be, it
conveys the humor and misery of life in a series of bright
vignettes which, for the most part do work, but do not quite
cohere.  The movie is, on the whole, a worthy first incursion
by Mr. Dunsky.
