Title
Review for Shiloh (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     11-year-old Marty Preston has a predicament.  Since his family has
had to mortgage the house to pay the doctor bills of his recently
deceased grandmother, his dad does not look kindly on the idea of
adding a canine member to the family.  ("No dog, no way.")  Even if
Marty could come up with the money to buy one, his dad complains that
there are still the food, the shots, and the doctor visits that the dog
would require.
     To further complicate matters, Marty has set his heart on the
unobtainable.  He knows a local redneck hunter, Judd Travers, who
abuses his friendly beagle for not responding quick enough.  This
nameless dog -- Judd only gives his dogs numbers -- has been christened
Shiloh by Marty, and the animal has won Marty's heart.  Judd believes
the dog will be a great hunting dog so he refuses to part with him for
any amount.
     First-time writer and director Dale Rosenbloom's film SHILOH
garnered rave reviews when it was released earlier this year.  As a
film critic, I understand the marketing of non-family films -- I can't
say adult films since the pornography industry has absconded with that
moniker -- but the marketing and distribution of family films continues
to baffle me.  After these sterling reviews, Warner Brothers chose to
give the movie only a limited release.  After missing such major
markets as California's Silicon Valley, they gave up on the film and
sent it to video.  With mediocre products such as THAT DARN CAT, A
SIMPLE WISH and GONE FISHIN' getting a wide distribution, why couldn't
they have promoted an intelligent family film?  Doesn't quality count
for something?
     SHILOH is a richly textured film populated with completely
believable family and friends.  It even has a villain worth hating and
yet sympathetic too.  And then there is the dog.  Shiloh has a
metronome for a tail, a sweet, slobbery tongue, big soulful eyes,
playfully floppy ears and an intense loyalty.
     Judd, played with crusty demeanor by Scott Wilson, was whipped by
his father from age four.  Judd makes his living by hunting, mainly
illegally, and views his dogs as little more that the tools of his
trade.  Since he is single, he abuses them as his father abused him.
In the backwoods town of West Virginia where the story takes place,
this rings true.
     After a wounded Shiloh shows up again at his house, Marty, played
with touching sincerity by Blake Heron, devises a scheme whereby he
will hide Shiloh and find enough odd jobs to secure the money for his
purchase.  The fatal flaw, of course, is that Judd has no intention of
ever parting with the dog, regardless of the price.
     In less capable hands than Rosenbloom's the film could easily have
dissolved into maudlin cliches.  The smartly written script makes for a
warm hearted and realistic tale.  Typical of the film's strengths are
the depths of the supporting cast.  Michael Moriarty plays Marty's
father as a stubborn and controlling parent, but one with a sweetness
just below the surface.  His mother, played by Ann Dowd, works hard to
earn extra money.  The battles between the parents, both on and off
screen, avoids the overacting usually found in disagreements among
parents in films.
     Easily the biggest surprise in the picture is Rod Steiger's
heartwarming role as Doc Wallace, the local doctor and general store
owner.  Doc is the grandfather and guardian of Marty's girlfriend Sam,
played by J. Madison Wright.  Sam has a big crush on Marty but manages
to hide it most of the time as they pal around.  When she steals the
inevitable kiss, he acts like he hates it.
     The script is full of homilies inserted so naturally that you
don't realize they are present.  "Don't ever run away from a problem,"
advises the father.  "Sometimes the biggest test of love is how much
you're willing to fight for it," says the Doc.
     Cinematographer Frank Byers shot the film in warm nostalgic shades
of browns and golds.  Amy B. Ancona's sets are evocative without ever
being overloaded with gaudy country nicknacks.  And Joel Goldsmith's
music has a wonderful dreaminess to it.
     The film has a long and completely plausible resolution of the
conflict, but it seems at first to lack the tension needed to make it
compelling.  A twist towards the end changes everything.  The result is
a completely satisfying picture with a touching little story, nicely
resolved.
     SHILOH runs just 1:33.  It is rated PG for mild violence.  The
show would be excellent for kids six and up.  Younger ones might have
trouble with the couple of scenes of a dog being kicked.  My son
Jeffrey, age 8, liked the film "very much," but added that it would not
make his best of the year list.  I recommend this fine film to your
family and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Blake Heron, Michael Moriarty, Scott Wilson, Ann Dowd, 
      J. Madison Wright, Rod Steiger, Bonnie Bartlett 
Director: Dale Rosenbloom 
Producers: Zane W. Levitt and Dale Rosenbloom
Screenplay: Dale Rosenbloom based on the novel by 
      Phyllis Reynolds Naylor
Cinematography: Frank Byers 
Music: Joel Goldsmith
U.S. Distributor: Legacy Releasing
     Perhaps Disney should take a lesson from writer/director Dale 
Rosenbloom regarding how to make a family film.  SHILOH, Rosenbloom's 
first foray into the field of family entertainment, easily outclasses 
any live-action movie the Mouseketeers have released in the last three 
or four years.  Here are some Disney staples that SHILOH has managed to 
avoid:  plastic characters, ogre-like adults afflicted with terminal 
stupidity, moronic humor, pointless action sequences, and a nauseating 
overdose of cuteness.
     Rosenbloom has remembered something that Disney has forgotten:  the 
key to fashioning good family entertainment is to make the movie 
enjoyable to everyone in the family, not just the five and six-year 
olds.  Any adult who has suffered through the likes of 101 DALMATIANS 
(live action), JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE, and THAT DARN CAT! will appreciate what 
Rosenbloom has wrought with this low-key, thoughtful motion picture.  He 
takes the time and effort to develop real, imperfect characters rather 
than recycling familiar types.  
     I have never been a big fan of "animal in danger" tales, but SHILOH 
is far better than most.  Not only does it show the animal, a one-year 
old beagle, being abused (although not graphically), but it doesn't turn 
the dog into some sort of living cartoon character.  Likewise, the young 
protagonist, 11 year old Marty Preston (Blake Heron), doesn't have all 
the answers and isn't constantly outsmarting his parents.  And the 
film's villain, Judd Travers (Scott Wilson), isn't just inherently evil 
-- there's a legitimate reason why he's so nasty, as Marty comes to find 
out during the movie's second half.
     SHILOH takes place in the tiny town of Friendly, West Virginia.  
It's a lazy summer and Marty is wandering around town looking for odd 
jobs to earn a little cash.  On his way home one day, he encounters a 
beagle with a cut over its eye.  It follows him, and Marty, a loner by 
nature, develops an immediate attachment to the injured animal.  He even 
gives it a name -- Shiloh -- after the bridge where he encountered it.  
His father (Michael Moriarty) recognizes Shiloh as the new hunting dog 
of the reclusive Judd Travers, and Marty reluctantly agrees to return 
it, even though he suspects Judd of mistreating the animal.  Several 
days later, Shiloh again runs away from Judd, and this time, when the 
dog seeks him out, Marty decides not to tell his parents.  So, with the 
help of his friend Samantha (J. Madison Wright), he hides the beagle in 
a fort and sneaks food to it every night.  But it's only a matter of 
time before someone else learns his secret.
     The strength of SHILOH is that it approaches its subject matter 
intelligently.  There are no easy answers to Marty's dilemma -- the Law 
is on Judd's side, but the boy believes his position is morally 
defensible.  At one point, when his father accuses him of not doing the 
right thing, Marty's response is a simple question:  "What's right?"  
Later, the kindhearted town doctor (played by Rod Steiger) tells him 
that if he wants to keep Shiloh, he may be forced to fight for the dog.
     The adults in SHILOH are not one-dimensional.  Marty's dad, despite 
being somewhat domineering and old-fashioned, understands his son's 
affection for Shiloh, and, to a degree, is willing to support him.  
Likewise, Mrs. Preston (Ann Dowd) is developed into more than a 
sympathetic maternal figure lurking in the background.  Everyone, from a 
veteran like Rod Steiger to a newcomer like Blake Heron, gives a 
heartfelt and believable performance.
     SHILOH, which is adapted from a Newberry Award winning book, fits 
nicely into the class of better animal-related family films, joining the 
ranks of LASSIE and BLACK BEAUTY.  And, while the primary target 
audience is undeniably children, few adults who sit through this motion 
picture will wish they had done otherwise.  SHILOH represents something 
that's all too rare at theaters these days:  a pleasant surprise.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
