Title
Review for Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery (1997)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Scott Renshaw
(New Line)
Starring:  Mike Myers, Elizabeth Hurley, Michael York, Robert Wagner.
Screenplay:  Mike Myers.
Producers:  Suzanne Todd, Demi Moore, Jennifer Todd, Mike Myers.
Director:  Jay Roach.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  87 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Boy, did AUSTIN POWERS: INTERNATIONAL MAN OF MYSTERY take me back.
Not to 1967, when I was a mere babe in arms, but to those carefree,
halcyon days of 1990.  George Bush was still flying high in the approval
ratings, GHOST was making millions of Americans "believe," and Mike Myers
was a cast member of a still-popular "Saturday Night Live."  Myers
provided some moments of comic genius in those days, even as the show was
developing this habit of allowing sketches to exceed their welcome by 
several excruciating minutes.  I was reminded of both aspects of 1990-era
"SNL" as I watched AUSTIN POWERS:  Myers' appeal, and the inability to
recognize when enough is enough.  
     AUSTIN POWERS opens in 1967, where the title character (Mike Myers)
is a legendary fashion photographer, secret agent and ladies man, battling
arch-nemesis Dr. Evil (also played by Myers) alongside his partner Mrs.
Kensington (Mimi Rogers).  When Austin thwarts yet another of Dr. Evil's
plans, the criminal mastermind has himself cryogenically preserved and
launched into space to await another opportunity for evil.  Thirty years
later, Dr. Evil returns to earth, but the joke is on him:  Austin Powers
has _also_ had himself frozen, and is thawed out to take on his old foe.
Together with Mrs. Kensington's daughter Vanessa (Elizabeth Hurley),
Austin tries to stop Dr. Evil from blackmailing the nations of the world,
while also trying to adjust to a world with different sexual mores,
different fashions, and better oral hygiene.
     AUSTIN POWERS is a parody which could have run out of gas in seconds
if Myers had been interested only in late 60s anachronisms.  As it turns
out, there are relatively few gags based on the culture shock of the hero
and the villain.  For the most part, AUSTIN POWERS is a fairly
straightforward parody of James Bond-ian secret agent adventures, with gags
more amusing than their obviousness gives them any right to be.  Austin's
British Intelligence superior (Michael York), whose only purpose is to
explain the plot, is named Basil Exposition; the buxom femme fatale is
suggestively named Alotta...well, the last name completes the picture.
Myers energizes all these ideas with an odd-ball edge and the sheer
exuberance of his performance in both roles.  It's not possible to do
justice to Dr. Evil's self-revelations in a father/son encounter group, or
the "erotic" dance with which Austin subdues a horde of lethal female
robots.
     As long as AUSTIN POWERS feels vaguely original, and doesn't remind
you of "Saturday Night Live," it's actually very funny.  Unfortunately,
if you watched Myers-era "SNL" at all, it's going to look awfully
familiar.  The characterization of Dr. Evil is a cross between Myers'
Dieter character and Ed Sullivan; Austin is a grown-up version of his
naughty British schoolboy Simon.  He invokes his loud-mouthed thespian
from "Theater Stories" in one early scene, and in another does a nearly
word-for-word re-creation of a bit from a "Wayne's World" sketch.  He
seems so enamored of invoking memories of "SNL," in fact, that he invokes
nightmares of jokes which refuse to die.  On at least five separate
occasions, Myers and director Jay Roach seem to have no sense of how long
is too long to stick with an extended gag.  They usually feel something
like this:  funny for five seconds, not funny for ten seconds, funny for
five more seconds, not funny for eight and a half minutes.
     After so many begging-to-be-pulled-from-life-support sequences,
AUSTIN POWERS feels like one of the most padded 87 minute movies you'll
ever see.  It didn't need to be.  The early scenes set in 1967 are
hilarious, including a goofy opening credits sequence and the promise of
nice repartee between Myers and Mimi Rogers as the Emma Peel-like Mrs.
Kensington.  Every time "Laugh-In"-style musical blackout segments
appeared between scenes, I thought about how much funnier AUSTIN POWERS
might have been as a pure period piece.  It's the character of Austin
Powers and the familiar plot elements from early James Bond films which
are most appealing about AUSTIN POWERS; there was no particular need to
put those elements in the 1990s.  But that's what we've got:  a comedy
which jettisons a great premise for a merely adequate one.  Myers alone
may be reason enough to watch AUSTIN POWERS if you are a fan of his "SNL"
glory days.  There will be plenty of chances in the film to flash back to
those days...and if you remember them at all, you know what a mixed
blessing that could be.

Author
Walter Frith
Canadian comedian Mike Myers is a genuine talent to be relished for his
tactful presentation of comedy both on television and in the movies.  His
humour is gleefully obtuse and sometimes aimed at the very essence of pop
culture and the way he tells a story is interesting not because of the
punchlines he delivers but because of the memories he sometimes invokes.  He
is barely recognizable in his latest film, 'Austin Powers: International Man
of Mystery'.
Myers plays a super duper British spy agent who is frozen in 1967 by science
using cryogenics and is thawed out in 1997 to face his mortal enemy, Dr.
Evil, in the exact same position.  To escape destruction in 1967, Evil used
cryogenics to freeze himself to escape justice.  The movie has a campy and
old fashioned plot of world destruction which literally recognizes its own
absurdity by reference.
Visual gags are multiple in this comical farce which isn't as funny as it
should be at times and has the look of a James Bond movie, t.v.'s classic
series 'Get Smart' and a Mel Brooks deadpan quality to it all rolled into
one.  There are even similarities to television's  'The Man From U.N.C.L.E.'
and 'Mission Impossible'.  There is an unusual amount of sexual references in
'Austin Powers' and that's unusual for a Mike Myers movie but I guess Myers
wanted to escape the trappings of becoming a repetitive comedian and decided
to branch out into more than one dimension of comedy.
Other members of the cast include Elizabeth Hurley, Mimi Rogers and Robert
Wagner.  'Austin Powers' will appeal to a wide audience but its likability
will be restricted to those open minded enough to accept strange occurances
and styles of off beat comedy done with a flair for the obvious.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So what do you get when you cryogenically freeze a blend of 60s
spy movies like James Bond and TV series like "The Avengers" with
slapstick comedy and unthaw the mixture today?  AUSTIN POWERS:
INTERNATIONAL MAN OF MYSTERY.
     Mike Myers, from the WAYNE'S WORLD series, plays the good Austin
Danger Powers as well as his nemesis Dr. Evil.  With never a subtle
moment, Myers's acting is always pushing the edge of the comedic
envelope.  Myers also wrote the script which relies on sight gags, like
his extra hairy chest, and puns for most of the humor.
     Austin, the best secret agent of the British during the
psychedelic 60s, chases Dr. Evil into the future when Dr. Evil gets
himself frozen and propelled into 1997 in a gigantic Big Boy statue.
Austin's sidekick in the past, a la Mrs. Peel from "The Avengers," is
Mrs. Kensington (Mimi Rogers), but in the future, her daughter, Ms.
Kensington (Elizabeth Hurley), becomes his partner.  Ms. Kensington
tells him to call her Vanessa, but he has trouble calling women
anything other than "baby."  Although Vanessa eventually warms up to
him, his constantly asking if she wants to "shag" is tremendously
off-putting to her.  ("Shall we shag now or shall we shag later?" he
drones.)
     When Dr. Evil returns in 1997 from the big chill (puns come
naturally after seeing this movie), he decides to threaten the world
with destruction unless it comes up with one million dollars.  Number
Two (Robert Wagner) tells him about inflation and how he needs to ask
for more, so Dr. Evil increases his demand to one hundred billion
dollars.  A large number of jokes surround Myers's two characters
coping with how the world has changed in thirty years.  ("Groovy.
Smashing. Yea, capitalism!" Austin cheers when he learns the West has
won the Cold War.)
     The best part of the picture is the costumes by Deena Appel.
Austin's outfits includes one with  blue striped, skin tight pants,
blue striped coat, a bright red polka dot shirt and a contrasting
ascot.  The women have big hairdos and miniskirt outfits with bold
colors of pink, lavender, lime green, and red.  Hello, 60s.  Equally
funny are the sets by Cynthia Kay Charette.  Austin's bed in his
private jet seems straight out of a Playboy photo shoot.  Circular with
a leopard skin bedspread, it rotates while a disco light shines on it.
Austin figures that it will be a big turn on for Vanessa, but she
thinks he's crazy.
     Although cleavage is prominently featured, the film does the James
Bond tease of scrupulously avoiding any actual nudity.  The two best
scenes in the film have Austin and Vanessa using fruit and other
devices as fig leaves for each other to "accidentally" shield key
pieces of their anatomy from the camera.  Also, like the Bond films,
there is a woman in a minor role with an X-rated name which refers to
the size of her private parts.
     Myers put a lot of energy into the film's details from the
beginning right down to the elaborate action sequence ending, which is
set to the music of "Secret Agent Man."  With all of his hard work, it
is a shame that the result is a highly imaginative, but surprisingly
unfunny movie.  Cute, certainly, but nothing more.  ROMY AND MICHELE'S
HIGH SCHOOL REUNION used a similar approach and was much funnier.  As
an actor, Myers should fire his writer self.
     As the ending credits went up, I realized that I had never
laughed.  A few smiles, but that was it.  "There's nothing so pathetic
as an aging hipster," Austin says in the film.  I couldn't have said it
better myself.
     AUSTIN POWERS: INTERNATIONAL MAN OF MYSTERY runs, thankfully, just
1:27.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual situations and profanity.  The film
would be fine for kids say 10 or 11 and up.  I cannot recommend
comedies without laughs, but I will give the film ** for the quality of
its production.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Mike Myers, Elizabeth Hurley, Michael York, Robert Wagner.
Screenplay: Mike Myers. Producers: Suzanne Todd, Demi Moore, Jennifer
Todd, Mike Myers. Director: Jay Roach.
In the 1960's Austin Powers (Mike Myers) International man of mystery is
as groovy as gravy, baby. Accompanied by Mrs Kensington (Mimi Rogers
ex-Cruise babe), one intense Bimbette who drapes leather well and knows
a judo chop or two (reminiscent of Ms Emma Peel of ‘The Avengers'). This
Shagadellic pair chase the evil villain Dr Evil (Myers again), who has
done 6 years of medical school and is a personification of all Bond
baddies. Before Powers and Kensington can bag the evil Dr, he escapes
into the future with his furry feline in a cryogenic time capsule of a
‘Big Boy'.
In the 1990's Dr Evil re-emerges from his ‘Big Boy' and so does ‘Danger
is my middle name' Powers, whose personal effects include the handy
penis enlarger (an exotic weapon). Mrs Kensington now retired, is
succeeded by daughter Miss Kensington (Elizabeth Hurley), who like her
mother knows a judo chop or two. They now battle Evil's new evils - the
pyschedellic Fembotic babes with bullet, booby-trapped breasts (out of
Dr Strangelove's books); Miss Alotta Fagina (who gives Pussy Galore a
run for her money), Number 2 (Robert ‘business man' Wagner), and Evil's
very own IVF test tube son, with whom he shares a ‘love me, hate you'
relationship.
So swing, shake and shag the years away - from sixties to nineties in
this absurd facade of the ridiculous. Myers is our for simple laughs and
sight gags. Of note is the ‘fruit-covering-bodily-sexual-organ' scenes
which is quite cleverly done. So if you don't mind putting your brain in
your back pocket for let's say 87 minutes, you will probably enjoy this
brainless excursion into the mysterious world of Austin Powers, and his
international group of clowns.

Author
Berge Garabedian
AUSTIN POWERS: INTERNATIONAL MAN OF MYSTERY
RATING: 7.5 / 10 --> Very good movie
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
A few leans years after ingratiating such popular sayings as "schwing" and
"party on" into our modern-day American lexicon, real-life Canuck Mike Myers
returns to the big screen with another original shagadelic tale of unhip hip
characters with unique styles, tastes and one-liners of their own.
PLOT:
Austin Powers, the international man of mystery and hipster extraordinaire,
cryogenically freezes himself for 30 years in order to follow his nemesis,
Dr. Evil, through his frozen path into the year 1997. In the future, both
men soon discover that the simpler times of the 60s has been replaced by the
rapid-paced lifestyles of the 90s.
CRITIQUE:
In the infamous words of Dr. Evil, with his pinky finger diabolically
strangling off his mouth, this movie is frickin' clever, man...no need to
throw anyone a bone here, man! It's got plenty of kitchy-retro style, a
groovy soundtrack, a handful of over-the-top but humorous characters, Mike
Myers, who plays both of his characters brilliantly, and a sexy Elizabeth
Hurley, purring her way through one of the most purposely overdone and
sexist scripts ever to hit the big screen. I personally didn't find any
particular scenes laugh out loud funny, but did appreciate almost all the
humor in this film, which placed its tongue deep inside the cheek of our
favorite James Bond spy flicks from that era.
Will everyone like it? Certainly not. This film will only appeal to those
swingers that are "in on the joke" and who could appreciate such low-brow
entertainment tactics as jokes featuring penis-enlargement pumps and a man
peeing for close to a minute...on-screen. All in all, I was taken in by this
film's utter originality, unique dialogue, smashing characters,
self-deprecating attitude and Mike Myers' superb performances as both Austin
Powers and Dr. Evil. But most of all, I was taken in by this film's
infectious enthusiasm, which should lasso in most open-minded lovers of
Myers' earlier forays into the World of Wayne. The rest of you could either
take it or shag it, baby! Now does that make you horny??
My favorite line came by the way of Austin Powers himself: "Do you like to
wash up a bit before? Personally, before I'm on the job I like to give me
undercarriage a bit of a "How's your father."
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This film contains two major cameos by actress Carrie Fisher, better known
to some as Princess Leia, and big goof Tom Arnold, better known to some as
the big goof. Other much smaller cameos include Will Ferrell (as Mustafa),
Cheri Oteri (as Flight attendant), Susanna Hoffs (ex-Bangle singer as Ming
Tea Member-note that she is married to the director of this film, Jay
Roach), Rob Lowe (as friend of Security Guard), Christian Slater (as Easily
Fooled Security Guard) and Matthew Sweet (as Ming Tea Member). Model/major
babe Cindy Margolis also plays one of the Fembots in this movie.
Mike Myers won two 1998 MTV Movie Awards for this film. One for the Best
Dance Sequence for "Some London Citizens", to which he dedicated his award
to his recently deceased friend Phil Hartman, and Best Villain, for his
portrayal of Dr. Evil.
One of the producers of this film is none other than the ex-wife of actor
Bruce Willis, and popular actress in her own right, Demi Moore.
In one sequence, a fashion photographer shoots '60s fashions, and the
clothes, which look like outlandish science-fiction fantasies, are in fact
identical to costumes worn during posing sessions in Michelangelo
Antonioni's 1966 film BLOW UP. The tuneful ring of Austin's picturephone is
the same as the hotline phone in the 1965 film OUR MAN FLINT.
Please note the obvious poke at the outrageous Bond girl name of Pussy
Galore, by the way of the femme fatale in this film called, Alotta Fagina.
Richie Cunningham, the name that Austin uses to introduce himself to Number
2, is actually Ron Howard's character name from the popular 60s-based TV
sitcom "Happy Days". Ron's brother, Clint Howard, also has a small part in
this film as Ritter, the radar operator.

Author
Rodney Mayton
        "Shagadellic!", "Groovy, Baby!" "Smashing!" adorn the 1/4 page ad
for this movie tabbed as "the #1 comedy in America" as of May 8th. Did we
attend the same movie?! At 87 minutes it seemed overlong, like a SNL skit
on steroids, and at any length it seemed unfunny. Yes, the sets and
costumes were an interesting exaggeration of 60s Pop frills, and yes, the
concept, dealing with a 60s secret agent/pop icon (played by Myers)
awakened from his cryogenic slumber to battle his arch enemy (Dr. Evil,
also played by Myers) in the present day, had a great deal of potential.
        Fun costumes and scenery and potential do not a movie make so lets
 throw in a hefty dose of bathroom humor. Don't get me wrong, I like a
good "bubbles in the bathtub joke" as much as the next person, but to have
this type of humor be the funniest thing about your movie is a waste of
yuor talent and my money. 
        But, the way things work these days in the movie business, all a
film has to do is call itself the funniest and people will believe it. I
do give this film 2 out of 5 stars because of the sets, costumes, and
sadly, unmet potential.  

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 11 September 1997 with Byron for $3 at the Cineplex Worldwide
Austin Powers proves that what is hilarious for $3 can be a rip off at
thrice the price. It is hard to know how much I would have liked it at
full price, but for $3, I had a rollicking good time! 
A lot of movies and TV shows are spoofed here; not just the obvious 60s
stuff like the 007 films, Get Smart, and the Avengers, but some newer
movies like Demolition Man and more obscure things that the
twentysomething set might not know at all. It's all h ere, from Dr. No's
cat to gyrating hips that can decimate the Fembots (I was working my mojo,
baaabeee!).
The plot is "fairly simple" as Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery
(that is what his card says) and his archnemesis Dr. Evil are
cryogenically frozen, fighting each other in both the "Swinging London" of
the 1960s and today's Las Vegas. (Both are played by the talented Mike
Myers).
What surprised and delighted me most was that rather than endulging in
constant "out of time" disparity jokes, there is a nice balance of
spoofery. Obviously, if you have not seen a lot of the silly/nutty movies
of the 1960s and 1970s, you will be missing a lot. There are not a lot of
people out there who are going to catch Laugh-In references that quickly,
you know.
My favorite scenes are those with Dr. Evil and his evil co-horts, as well
as Dr. Evil trying to work out a relationship with his artificially born
son Scott Evil (played by Seth Green, the little red-haired kid from Radio
Days). 
Most of the actors look like they're having a lot of fun. Mimi Rogers is
Mrs. Kensington; Elizabeth Hurley is her curvaceous spy daughter in 1997
who is politically correct, but not invulnerable to Austin's persistent
request: "Let's shag!" There are also lots of Go-Go Girls and Fembots (who
look a lot like the women who used to surround Dean Martin with martinis).
The biggest problem with Austin Powers is the insistence to hold a joke
and hit it repeatedly over our heads. A bad joke is funny sometimes;
telling all six of its variants literally all at once, is not. Mike Myers
is a very funny man. He should know better.
Overall, I had a lot of fun watching this movie. However, it was not the
all-out laff riot that the five morons in front me must have thought it
was. I guess they must've done lots of drugs before coming to the theatre
to have that much forced laughter.
Watch for my perennial favorite Carrie Fisher as a father-son therapist. 
-----------------------------------
Copyright (c) 1997, Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021, sethbook@panix.com.
More movie reviews with graphics can be seen at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html. 

Author
Chad Polenz
Austin Powers: International Man Of Mystery
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1997, PG-13, 87 minutes [1 hour, 27 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Mike Meyers (Austin Powers, Dr. Evil), Elizabeth Hurley (Vanessa
Kensington), Robert Wagner (Number Two), Fabiano Udenio (Alotta Fagina),
produced by Demi Moore, Mike Meyers, Jennifer and Suzanne Todd, written by
Mike Meyers, directed by M. Jay Roach.
It's hard to make a good spoof movie these days, probably because anything
can only be parodied once, if at all. Is it any surprise films like "Spy
Hard," and "High School High" have bombed? "Austin Powers" isn't just a bunch
of cliche parodies, but a strange, funny outlook and offbeat comedic style of
its writer and star Mike Meyers.
The film starts out in the campy tradition of any spoof movie by setting up
its premise quickly but doing so in a satirical manner. The setting is 1967
London where we meet Austin Powers (Meyers), an English spy who is just as
popular as the Beatles but seems more like Benny Hill. As women chase him he
starts to dance and everyone joins in, then he runs away while everyone else
must finish the song (once a crowd of people start to dance in synch they
can't stop - that would be against the rules of a musical!). At the same time
we meet Powers' arch nemesis Dr. Evil (Meyers again). Evil is your typical
cartoony villain: he sits at a round table with his cat and associates whom
he gets rid of just because he can. The fact his name is Dr. Evil shows you
how blatant the film is in its satirical nature. To cut to the chase, Evil
escapes by freezing and hiding himself to return 30 years later.
Okay, it's obvious the basic premise of the film is going to be a cartoony
60s-style spy movie set in the present day and therefore all the jokes will
be simply fish-out-of-water right? Technically, this is true, but the film
uses its typical elements an exploitative manner. We get the verbal and sight
gags you'd expect from a film like this, but what's different here is the
fact they don't just exist to make for quick, convenient jokes, instead, they
often become integral parts of scenes, dialogue, and even the general plot. 
Many things in movies like this exist only to provide for one joke, for
example, Dr. Evil's number two man is named Number Two (Wagner), but what's
so clever here is the use of this gag doesn't stop there, nor does it repeat
itself. The film makes full use of every possible gag, such as a hilarious
scene in a restroom which I cannot describe, but I will say one of Powers'
lines is, "Who does Number Two work for!?"
Of course what's a comedy and a spy movie without a standoffish female
sidekick who will later fall for the hero? Elizabeth Hurley co-stars as
Vanessa Kensington, Powers' partner who epitomizes that character. Between
scenes in which Austin tries to seduce Vanessa (always failing but always
making for jokes), the two try to find Dr. Evil as he holds the world
hostage.
There's so much comedy and so many jokes in this film it really would be an
injustice to list only a few examples. It's difficult to describe how all the
jokes connect and why they do so. There are times when certain gags start to
wear thin (the carefully choreographed nude scenes for example), but what
keeps them and the entire film from becoming a lowest-common-denominator/live
action cartoon is the witty layer of satire throughout. 
What gives "Austin Powers" its edge, originality and enjoyability is Meyers'
witty screenplay. It's nice to watch a comedy and not feel like you're being
pandered to.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Godawful "comedy" that's amazingly shabby and cut-rate, and rather
bereft of laughs.
I was having a bad week in my life when I saw AUSTIN POWERS:INTERNATIONAL
MAN OF MYSTERY. I desperately needed something to cheer me up, or at least
distract me so I could get a clear head. Get some perspective. Even dumb
movies can do that for me, sometimes.
I tried hard not to let my dejection affect my judgment, but I am certain
now that AUSTIN POWERS would have also sucked rocks through bamboo shoots on
the day I won the lottery. Michael Myers has taken a character that would
barely have supported a five-minute sketch on SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE and
stretched it to the length of a feature film, padding it out with toilet
jokes and the sort of
props-strategically-positioned-between-naked-actors-and-camera gags that
Benny Hill got tired of fifteen years ago.
The plot, what little there is of it: Back in the Swinging Mod Hep Sixties
(I don't think I'm doing a disservice to the movie's attempted early look
and feel by describing it that way), sexy British secret agent Austin Powers
tangled with his nemesis Dr. Evil. Evil launched himself into orbit and
cryogenically forze himself to return decades later, when Powers was out of
the picture. Powers also had himself frozen, and he wakes up to find the
Nineties a very hard time to deal with.
The basic gag, that of Powers' total inability to cope with the Nineties, is
not so much exhausted during the course of the movie as never even really
dealt with. The bulk of the movie is taken up with dumb jokes of several
basic rubrics: James Bond gags (of which this movie has no end, right down
to the silly character names), inept slapstick, toilet humor, and
strategically placed props... The movie's amazingly bereft of ideas, come to
think of it, with a couple of bright exceptions. One is Dr. Evil's son --
there is a sidesplitting scene where father and son go to an encounter
group, chaired by Carrie Fisher -- and the other is a throwaway gag where
Austin mimics various forms of transportation from behind a couch (it's a
visual gag -- hard to describe, and hard to recommend seeing the movie for).
A lot of Sixties kitsch has been resurrected and thrown on the screen for
this movie, but it's desperate rather than clever. Instead of skewering the
whole thing, it's a rather bloodless and unfunny tribute. Myers himself is
also desperate: he's given an idea to play, not a character. Plus, the
attempts to make the character work by giving him a relationship with
another sexy (albeit "Nineties") agent are a waste of time. I wanted to have
the movie end with him trying yet again to get it on with her, only to have
her deck him one. With a couple of exceptions, the movie misses all of its
own best moments.
The movie even looks cheesy, and not in a good way: I kept wondering if it
had been transferred down from Hi-Def video or something, so grainy was the
film stock in a good many scenes. The whole thing has the air of being done
on the cheap.
My definition of comedy is simply: Did it make me laugh? The few times that
I laughed in AUSTIN POWERS were completely offset by the time I spent
cringing and wanting out. The most damning thing I could say about the movie
is that Wayne and Garth would most likely have shoved it into Mike Tyson's
shorts and sent it sailing.

Author
Kevin Patterson
This review is being reposted due to formatting errors which caused some of
the text to be repeated in the original.
Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery  *** (out of four)
PG-13, 1997
Directed by Jay Roach. Written by Mike Myers.
Starring Mike Myers, Elizabeth Hurley.
Okay, so "Austin Powers" is not exactly a classic of modern cinema, but it
does provide some good laughs and a clever parody of James Bond-style spy
flicks. In fact, I would dare say that, while it seems a little unfocused at
times, it rates higher than  Tomorrow Never Dies, the newest Bond movie, for
simple entertainment. The script, written by Mike Myers, pits '60s secret
agent Austin Powers (Myers) against his arch-nemesis Dr. Evil (also Myers),
both of whom have been cryogenically frozen for the past 30 years and thus are
not up to date on developments such as the end of the Cold War and political correctness.
This fish-out-of-water premise could have easily grown tiresome, and indeed it
provides for what are by and large the weakest jokes. Fortunately, Myers adds
to this premise the fact that Austin Powers and Dr. Evil are not nearly as
competent as James Bond and his various adversaries. For example, in a chase
scene towards the end, Austin commandeers a large vehicle in trying to escape
Dr. Evil's fortress and proceeds to get it stuck in a narrow hallway. Dr.
Evil, meanwhile, is preoccupied with pathetically dumb attempts to relate to
his teenage son. His fortress isn't quite all it's cracked up to be either, as
some of the booby traps seem to be in need of repair.se the fact that Austin
Powers and Dr. Evil are not nearly as competent as James Bond and his various adversaries.
Some of the best scenes in the movie come when it extends the spoof by
allowing itself to be self-conscious. For example, after hijacking a nuclear
warhead and issuing their demands, Dr. Evil and his associates break into
typically campy sinister laughter. Instead of cutting away, director Jay Roach
lingers on the group as the laughter clearly begins to drag on, and finally
they are all left staring blankly at each other, not sure what is supposed to
come next. And when Dr. Evil captures Austin and Vanessa, he literally orders
them - and I am not making this up - to a "needlessly time-consuming and
easily escapable mode of execution." Three guesses whether they survive or
not, and the first two don't count.
Not all of the humor works; a running joke, in which Austin and/or Vanessa
seem to be about to appear nude but do not (due to camera angles or convenient
placement of props and furniture), not only recurs too many times for its own
good but also manages to drag on endlessly each time. And, as I said, most of
the fish-out-of-water jokes are only marginally funny (with a few exceptions);
by and large, it was much more amusing when, in the movie's opening scene, we
saw Austin and Dr. Evil *in* their original element as they confront each
other at the "Electric Psychedelic Swingers' Club."
As in Myers's work on "Saturday Night Live," there are just enough times where
the jokes fizzle to make "Austin Powers" somewhat less than overwhelming. But
it's good campy entertainment, and worth seeing for anyone who enjoys parodies
or even comedy in general.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
In 1967, Austin Powers, British secret agent, was the hottest thing to walk
the streets of England. His main enemy? Dr. Evil, a blatant spoof of Dr. No
(from the James Bond film of the same name). Dr. Evil narrowly escapes into a
space-bound cryogenic freezing capsule and is launched into space. Thirty
years later, Powers, whom himself was frozen in order to save the planet from
Dr. Evil should he ever reappear (which he has), is unfrozen and more of a
mockery of the decade he once held in the palm of his hand. Thus is the
simplified plot of AUSTIN POWERS: INTERNATIONAL MAN OF MYSTERY.
"Stupid" comedies are probably the most popular, especially among teenagers.
That is to say, movies that play to satire, parody, and general looniness.
The sad thing is that "stupid" comedies that actually possess intelligence
are rare. Films such as AIRPLANE!, TOP SECRET, BETTER OFF DEAD, THE NAKED
GUN, and even DUMB & DUMBER are good examples of "stupid" movies that are
well done and can actually garner a decent critique. Woody Allen, the Zucker
Brothers/Jim Abrahams team (although not so much after THE NAKED GUN), and
Mel Brooks are the more popular (and talented) examples. Such hits as TAKE
THE MONEY AND RUN and SLEEPER by Allen and BLAZING SADDLES, SPACEBALLS, and
YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN by Brooks are great movies that are well done, even for
being moronic.
AUSTIN POWERS cannot even closely come to being classified among these. It
cannot even come close to being classified among TOMMY BOY, BILLY MADISON,
HAPPY GILMORE, and even WAYNE'S WORLD, all of which were pretty good really.
It is better than BEVERLY HILLS NINJA however, but that's not too hard to
accomplish.
AUSTIN POWERS is an extremely crude and vulgar film. Sure, most of it is
enuendo and double entendres, but I still question if this movie shouldn't
have gotten an "R" rating. Even among the wild vulgarity and sex that is
prevelant in PG-13 films, AUSTIN POWERS manages to cry out in excess.
The fact of the matter is that AUSTIN POWERS is, for the most part, idiotic
and unfunny. Mike Meyers, who plays the lead character, also has a problem
with showing off. Some bits are obvious show off segments that have no
purpose in the story. It is also obvious that teenagers are going to make up
the bulk of those who see the film, so one must wonder if they'll even
recognize the 60's satire and James Bond parodies. Alas the cheap, cliched
teenage saving point . . . the aforementioned vulgarity.
AUSTIN POWERS will likely be hailed among some as hilarious, and it isn't
awful or unwatchable, but that doesn't make it a good movie. Two stars is
plenty for this lame, vulgar farce.

Author
Kelly Carlson
I've seen and received some mixed reviews of the latest movie
creation by Mike Myers, which also stars the gorgeous brit-beauty
Elizabeth Hurley. Myers plays two characters, Austin Powers,
International Man Of Mystery, and his arch-enemy Dr.Evil, both
hilarious... "beee-have!""
How anybody cannot think that this movie is not funny really confuses
me, and  should seek therapy for their jadedness.
Myers backdrops the retro stylings of  typical late 60's spy flicks,
computers with meaningless light flickerings, and all. 
The movie does, on occasion seem to rely on stupid bathroom humor, which
is not overdone, but it is the tempo of this movie that is truly
original. In  one scene,  the de-thawing of Austin Powers, after
spending some 20 years frozen in a cryogenic tank, comes a long-awaited
tinkle that never seems to stop,
as such, the laughs this movie produces.
The dance sequences, and Mike Myers' facial expressions will have you
laughing.
***1/2  (out of four).

Author
Cameron Shelley
By rights, Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery
shouldn't work nearly as well as it does. The very idea of
a James Bond spoof written and acted by Mike Myers
forbodes an old, one-note idea stretched further than it
will really go to fill out a long 90 minutes. The selection
of a '60s theme could have brought on a saccharine
appeal to baby-boomer nostalgia. The obvious
comparison is with a turn-of-the-decade Saturday Night
Live sketch, with a two-minute premise turned into a
ten-minute yawner. Say, wasn't there a SNL sketch (10
years ago or so) that featured a TV panel discussion show
of James Bond's arch nemeses on "How to kill Bond"?
("When you have Bond, just shoot him!")
But Myers has fashioned himself a winner with this one.
The plot, of course, is ludicrous. It begins in 1967, when
Austin Powers is a fashion photographer/secret agent
who's smashingly popular with the screaming girlie set -
despite his bad teeth. Austin's arch-nemesis, the
aptly-named Dr. Evil (that's Dr. Evil - he didn't spend six
years in evil medical school to be called Mr. Evil!) gets
sick of having his schemes foiled and places himself in
cryogenic suspension for thirty years, when he figures he
can make his dreams of world domination come true
without Austin's infernal interference. But British
Intelligence places Austin in suspension too, pending
Evil's return. In 1997 both are defrosted to meet again on
the field of international intrigue. But, naturally, the
world has changed a great deal in their absence.
Of course, all this has basically been done before, most
notably by Woody Allen in Sleeper, and Casino Royale,
as well as various Star Trek episodes. For that matter,
humor at the expense of outdated underground figures
goes back to the various take-offs of Key Largo done on
such sketch comedy shows as Wayne and Shuster before
Myers was born. Much of the comedy has obvious
antecedents as well. Joke names such as Basil Exposition
(who fills Powers in after his unfreezing) and Alotta
Fagina (who, uh, is also involved in warming Powers
up) are reminiscent of Hot Shots, while numerous
winking spoofs of Bond movie cliches (Evil tries to kill
Powers by lowering him into a pool of bad-tempered,
mutant sea bass - the proper sharks being too scarce in
the '90s - with an "unnecessarily slow dipping
mechanism") might have come out of Police Squad or
Get Smart.
Fortunately, though, Myers gives APIMM a life of its
own. Despite being caricatures come to life, both Powers
and Evil are brought to the screen with a lively but light
touch. Despite being seriously warped, both characters
muddle through the same silly problems as the rest of us
- albeit writ large sometimes. (This is where they clearly
differ from characters like Tom Baxter from Purple Rose
of Cairo.) When either character is displaying his absurd
side, we have more normal characters on screen to
observe reacting appropriately, e.g., Vanessa Kensington
and Scott Evil. Jokes are seldom pushed beyond their
limits, so the laughs are natural and not often forced.
And the jokes come from many sources: anachronisms,
movie and TV spoofs, in-jokes, sight-gags, as well as
broad physical comedy. Since they are not solely empty
slots in a Bond film parody, Powers and Evil take on all
these roles without difficulty. But even as Powers and
Evil become more human, Vanessa, as played gamely by
Elizabeth Hurley, becomes more like her
Moneypenny-ish mother as she inevitably falls for
Powers. The result is a pretty good balance of
opportunities for humor throughout the film.
APIMM is also a decent piece of film-making. In
particular, the music and costumes add a great deal to the
impact of the movie. Myers, as usual, does play to the
camera, but always to punctuate a scene and not simply
to beg for laughs. (Well, one or two of Power's "Yeah
baby!"s come over a bit forced.) Here, his tendency to
mugging for the audience stands him in good stead.
There are a handful of awkward moments when the
pacing lets down, but not enough to complain seriously
about. For the most part, APIMM delivers.
It is encouraging to see Mike Myers developing his
strengths as a comedian beyond the narrowly parodic
Wayne's World movies. In an era that has seen several
poor outings by SNL alumni, we can hope that another
Steve Martin is beginning to emerge.
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-4567 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/>
Dept: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/PHIL/cpshelle/philosophy.html>

Author
Eric C. Robinette
Starring Mike Myers, Elizabeth Hurley, Michael York, Robert Wagner, and
Mimi Rogers.
And the award for Resurrection of the Year goes to Mike Myers, who proves
he can still be funny even with a bad wig and teeth that make him look
like Martin Short.
When I first saw the ads for the movie, I thought Myers was going to be
stuck in former SNL cast member movie oblivion. Thankfully, Austin Powers
turned out to be a pleasant surprise because it works as both a
joke-a-minute satire, and a fish-out-of-water story.
Luckily, writer-star Myers still knows how to wear comic stupidity
proudly, and he wisely uses the "throw everything at the wall and see what
sticks" method in this story of a woman-crazl British sws of the 60n't go
ove ftoo well in this day and age.
It's all fairly thin stuff, but Myers clearly loves the mid-60s spy films
he's spoofing, which makes the comedy go a long way. It also helps that I
also love those films and got most of the jokes. Some of those films were
so grandiose and bloated, they beg to be comedy targets, and most of the
time, Myers, who also wrote, hits the bulls-eye.  His characterization of
Dr. Evil as a nervous nebbish who subscribes religiously to the Fallacy of
the Talking Killer and other villainous clichis is especially funny. The
standard gadgetry scene is targeted when a tube of toothpaste, a
toothbrush, and dental floss turn out to be...
Plastic explosive, wire, and a detonator? No-- a tube of toothpaste, a
toothbrush, and dental floss.
The biggest surprise for me was how well the fish-out-of water jokes
worked. Besides offering great sight gags, such as Powers trying to play a
CD on a turntable, the device gives the gags something to hang on, and
even gives the character some gravity. So help me, the relationship
between him and Elizabeth Hurley actually had a little feeling to it.
Hurley herself also proves to play a good straight-woman to Power's
antics, making an effective comic foil.
What helps most of all, though, is the sheer number of the jokes. Because
Myers cracks so many, even the lamer gags, such as the strategic placing
of phallic and globular objects in the "nude scene," are funny because of
his willingness to try anything for a laugh. 
It brings to mind the image of Myers as Dr. Evil, with me laying on a
table, with a laughing gas cannon aimed at my head.
"Do you expect me to rave about yo objects in the  nufeancly.
"No, Mr. Robinette of his willingness to try anything for a laugh. 
It brings to mind the image of Myers as Dr. Evil, with me laying on a
table, with a laughing gas cannon aimed at my head.
"Do you expect me to rave about your movie?" I ask defiantly.
"No, Mr. Robinette, I expect you to laugh," he responds.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I'd like to meet the executive who green-lighted this project 
and ask him that crucial word -- why? Mike Myers hasn't starred in a 
movie since 1993's SO I MARRIED AN AX-MURDERER, to which 
most people responded "So what?" Now he comes up with the brilliant 
idea to do a James Bond parody. Gee, and it's been almost a year since 
the last one, SPY HARD. That's two immediate strikes against AUSTIN 
POWERS and, enough lame jokes ensue that, in most ways, it's an 
even three strikes.
        Still, that immature part of me that used to love Myers on 
"Saturday Night Live" back in the early '90s has a hard time stifling 
laughter every once in awhile. Yes, this movie could have written 
itself, given its unoriginal premise and mediocre star. We've got the 
requisite scene in which Myers tries to play a compact disc on a record 
turntable and the one where he sees a masculine-looking woman and 
tries to pull her "wig" off to reveal she's a man, but it's her real hair. 
Stop my sides from splitting. He even recycles the "Wayne's World" 
bit where he turns a couch into a canoe, an elevator and an escalator. 
Oh yeah, Garth finally got pubes...
        The plot is as follows -- secret agent Austin Powers (Myers, 
naturally) was cryogenically frozen in 1967, when his adversary Dr. 
Evil (also played by Myers) also froze himself. Now it's 1997 and 
they're both thawed out. The world has advanced and left them in the 
swinging '60s, when a million dollars seemed like an exorbitant sum 
and free love was, well, free. However will they survive now that the 
world's gone on without them? It's THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE all 
over again. And, come on, even the James Bond movie GOLDENEYE 
had fun with the notion of the Bond ideal being outdated.
        Let's focus on Dr. Evil for a second. Myers experimented with 
multiple roles back in AX-MURDERER, and he's still no Peter Sellers. 
Here, he latches onto the Donald Pleasance version of Blofeld, 
complete with scar and cat, albeit a sickening-loooking hairless cat. 
There a few amusing moments when he tries to resume his '60s plans 
for world domination by cutting a hole in the ozone layer and again 
when he meets his angst-ridden teenage son, who of course spouts 
'90s cliches about parental relationships. In the end, Evil decides to go 
the age-old Bond route -- destruction via nuclear weapons.
        There's a supporting cast too. Evil henchpeople like Random 
Task (the Odd Job clone), Alotta Fagina and #2 (Robert Wagner -- 
what's he doing in this movie?!) mingle with an unexplained cameo by 
Tom Arnold. Hugh Grant's prettier half, Elizabeth Hurley is the 
archetypal Bond girl, an agent Powers works with and tries all his 
worn '60s come-on techniques on. All of this is auto-pilot humor that I 
sincerely hope Myers didn't spend more than a few weeks writing.
        Like any Myers movie, there are some funny moments mixed 
in with the pathetic ones. The entire subplot with with Dr. Evil and his 
son was inspired, from Evil proving he's hip by dancing the Macarena 
to sitting through group therapy with his son. Then there's probably 
the only original thing in the movie, when Powers is nude and a series 
of strategically-placed objects keep us from glimpsing his bits and 
pieces. When you go into a Mike Myers movie, the best you can hope 
for is a few scattered laughs. AUSTIN POWERS lives up to those 
lowered expectations.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    This silly, sloppy, psychedelic spy-movie spoof stars and was writ-
ten by Mike Myers, who plays both the title character and his arch-
nemesis, Dr. Evil.  Both have been reawakened from suspended animation,
to do battle in and begin adjusting to the nineties. (Powers has prob-
lems with political correctness, Baby, while Evil has to adjust his
megalomaniac musings to accommodate inflation, ozone depletion, and
Prince Charles' babe-o-matic ears.) The credits sequence is pretty
groovy, I'll give it that, but the rest of the movie contains no more
than, oh, twenty minutes of bankable hilarity.  The jokes are bad, the
timing worse, and only the occasional sequence stands out, such as Myers
walking around in the buff, with various objects in the frame concealing
his naughty bits.  (Okay, I'll admit it:  I also howled at a sequence
set in a public restroom, with Powers fending off an assassin's attack
and Tom Arnold in the next stall, thinking that he's hearing a struggle
of a different kind.) The character of Austin Powers is, for all pract-
ical purposes, another classic Mike Myers' creation, but damned if his
script has a clue what to do with him.

Author
Brian Koller
Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery (1997)
Jay Roach directed this silly spoof of mid-1960s
pop culture, but co-producer/screenwriter/lead actor
Mike Myers is clearly the man in charge.  He plays
the two key (and most outrageous) roles, and the
loose, gag-ridden script seems patterned after his
other great commercial success, "Wayne's World"
from 1992.
I can't say that I 'got' all the 1960s references.
>From "Goldfinger" we have Alotta Fagina (aka Pussy Galore)
and Random Task (aka Oddjob).  From "You Only Live Twice"
there's Dr. Evil (aka Blofeld) and his cat.  I'm sure
there are others, but I haven't seen the Matt Helm
films, and memories blur the escapist action spy movies
together anyway.
The story begins in 1967.  Austin Powers is a
goofy-looking ladies man and special agent, chasing
arch enemy and bad guy Dr. Evil.  Both roles are played
by hammy Mike Myers.  A plot contrivance has both men
cryogenetically frozen until 1997.  They discover that
the world, and culture, has changed; but they resume
their old rivalry and livestyles anyway.  Myers is
provided with love interest Elizabeth Hurley, who is
disgusted with him at first but of course soon comes
around.  Dr. Evil is introduced to his estranged son
Scotty (Seth Green) and inevitably hatches a scheme
that threatens to destroy the world.
Like most screwball comedies with thin plots, the
humor is hit and miss.  The best joke is a reference
to Lucky Charms cereal.  Dr. Evil and Scotty have
some silly arguments that are funny (the group therapy
scene, and a disagreement on the best method to kill
Austin Powers).
But the gags can fall flat as well: Austin's mincing
funny faces, faux chest hair, and references to his bad
teeth.  There is much bathroom humor, which panders
successfully to teen demographics who haven't seen
"Goldfinger".  One gag is especially flogged to death:
Austin and Hurley naked, with various inanimate objects
raised to substitute for body parts that would not be
shown on commercial TV.
Instead of seeing a mediocre satire about the mid-60s,
why not see a contemporary satire from the mid-60s?
"I Love You, Alice B. Toklas!" will fit the bill nicely,
and it stars Peter Sellers instead of a lesser imitation.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Jay Roach
Writer: Mike Myers
Starring: Mike Myers, Elizabeth Hurley, Michael York, Mimi Rogers, 
Robert Wagner, Seth Green, Charles Napier, Will Ferell, Tom Arnold, 
Carrie Fisher and...Burt Bacharach
When SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE was...you know, good, it starred a guy named 
Mike Myers who, along with such greats as Dana Carvey and Phil Hartman, 
made me bust a gut every Sunday morning (since I was always too tired at 
11:30 on Saturday so I would tape them and watch them before church...I 
was young).  Mike was my fave, though I always said Dana was because I 
was quite the little trendy lad back in the day.  But whenever Mike 
would do an Englishman (especially Mick Jagger), that was when the show 
was the absolute funniest, since his part was so well-rehearsed, so 
authentic and so educated.  
Of course, he was doing material written by someone else, but now, with 
his second big film on his own (the other being the 
nice-idea-but-not-too-good SO I MARRIED AND AXE MURDERER), he's the sole 
writer and main attraction (unless you consider Burt Bacharach a big 
financial attraction...).  With AUSTIN POWERS, he has created an 
original, non-SNL character: a mix between any 60s spy guy...complete 
with bad teeth, an awful wig, firghtening chest hair, big dork glasses, 
a male necklace and...a sweedish-made penis enlarger ("It's not my bag, 
baby!")
Myers not only does a kind of Fish-Out-Of-Water thing here (thank GOD he 
didn't play it up too much!), his full-length parody is one of the most 
intelligent comedies to come around since the days of early Mel Brooks. 
 The plot (somewhat irrelevant, but still good for good laughs for those 
of us who've seen too many Bond films): Austin has frozen himself for 30 
years since his nemesis, Dr. Evil (also Myers), has done the same thing 
to make sure taking over the world would not coincide with the 
sexual/hippie revolution.  He's thawed out and, along with his very 
attractive Emma Peel-esque agent, Vanessa Kensington (the wonderful 
Elizabeth Hurley), he tries to stop Dr. Evil from launching a nuclear 
bomb into the earth's core.  
Austin is a wonderful creation: a swinging ladies man who's a 
photographer by day, and a spy whenever his boss, Mr. Exposition (the I 
think thawed out as well, Michael York) calls him up.  He gets a major 
culture shock when he's thawed out ("As long as people are having 
premiscuous sex with multiple partners while at the same time 
experimenting with mind-expanding drugs, I'll be fine!" - don't quote 
me, I only saw it twice) but Myers choses not to dwell on it too much.  
His explorations with the culture shock on Dr. Evil are much better, 
since his initial plan is to make a false contreversy in the Royal 
Family about Charles having an affair forcing him to divorce and a plan 
to put a whole with "what we call 'a laser' into what we call 'the ozone 
layer' for...ONE MILLION DOLLARS!"  Hilarity ensues.
The film also has a plethora of 60s references, including: any Bond 
film, 60s Connery preferably; MAN FROM U.N.C.L.E.; BLOW UP, THE 
AVENGERS, GET SMART, A HARD DAY'S NIGHT and even a line from BEYOND THE 
VALLEY OF THE DOLLS (written by Roger Ebert - the line being, "This is 
my happening and it freaks me out!" - a great line I will use in 
everyday life henceforth).  Dr. Evil looks exactly like Donald 
Pleasance's Blofeld, equipped with his cat - Mr. Bigglesworth - who 
suffers a hilarious mishap in the beginning.  And to top that off, his 
henchmen consist of a woman who looks almost exactly like Lotta Lenya in 
FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE and a man named Random Task who is a dead ringer 
for Odd Job.  
Another plot dealing with Dr. Evil's son, Scott (Seth Green), who was 
made from his sperm which was frozen before he left, is not essential to 
the plot but gives it a cornicopia of jokes, especially where it winds 
the two in therapy since he hates him for not being there his entire 
life.
Also, look for multiple cameos by the likes of Tom Arnold, Carrie Fisher 
and even...(you knew it, it's anticlimactic) Burt Bacharach himself, 
singing his tunes.  I hear Christian Slater and Rob Lowe were in it too, 
but I have no clue who they were.  Guess I should see it again.
AUSTIN POWERS is a great film, good for multiple viewings and especially 
fun if you know what it's spoofing.  Comedy is hard but Mike Myers is 
now a Titan of modern comedy, thanks to the greatness of this film.  
Rush out to see it and stay groovy, baby!
