Title
Review for Mighty, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Bill Chambers
THE MIGHTY ** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers, wchamber@netcom.ca
(Like movies? Me too.
FILM FREAK CENTRAL
http://www.geocities.com/~billchambers/
Movie trivia, notes, reviews, DVD stuff, blah, blah, blah)
starring Elden Henson, Kieran Culkin, Sharon Stone, Gillian Anderson
screenplay by Charles Leavitt, based on the novel "Freak The Mighty" by
Rodman Philbrick
directed by Peter Chelsom
THE MIGHTY is about a friendship between two boy outcasts. The latter
suffers from Morquiro Syndrome, a
disease that stunts growth and can affect other parts of the body, such
as the ears, eyes, muscles, etc. Modern
medicine has extended the lifespan of a Morquiro victim to about sixty
years. Fortunately, science progresses much
faster than Hollywood, which probably explains why Ian Michael Smith, an
eleven-year-old brainiac enduring
Morquiro in real-life, was turned down for the role of "Freak The
Mighty" in favour of the more handsome Culkin.
(Of course, months later, Smith landed the part of Simon Birch in the
film of the same name, ironically a character
not explicitly afflicted with Morquiro Syndrome--Simon is a dwarf.*)
Max Kane (Henson) is a friendless, illiterate, overweight adolescent
living in his grandparents' basement (his
father is in prison, his mother dead). Then "Freak", aka Kevin, moves in
next door (Culkin) and turns Max's world
upside-down. As Max explains in voice-over, "Freak was the brain, and I
was the legs." They become one person,
in a sense, with Freak planted atop Max's ample shoulders; as a
makeshift giant, they take on all kinds of bullies,
instilled with a code of honour they picked up from a joint fascination
with medieval legends. All does not remain
rosy for this gruesome twosome, however, as the ghosts that haunt them
inch closer and closer. (Max is afraid of
his violent father's release/escape; Freak is, essentially, running away
from the grim reaper himself.)
With his moussed-hair and big glasses, Culkin as Freak looks like a
hunchbacked, teenaged vision of the kid from
Jerry Maguire. There are a few feeble attempts to make him look smaller
than he obviously is-high angle shots
and the like. Culkin's performance is less credible than his appearance
(ultimately, he looks more lazy than
handicapped): it's difficult to empathize with a character this cocksure
and smarmy. Particularly in THE MIGHTY's
early scenes, Culkin is possessed of an arrogance that had me cheering
for the (downright phony, zero-dimensional)
sadistic school thugs who knock him off his crutches. I'm not sure it's
the screenplay's fault, either-some may
argue Freak overcompensates in attitude because of his physical defects,
but this brand of smugness seems to run
in Kieran's family.
Speaking of overcompensating, Gillian Anderson-playing the
fright-wigged, white-trash, vaguely Southern wife of
Iggy (Meat Loaf (!))-gives the most embarrassing supporting performance
of the year in THE MIGHTY. She sooo
doesn't want to remind you of her X-file alter-ego Dana Scully-"I have
range, damn it!"-that she acts instead
like a man in drag doing Gloria Swanson doing Blanche Dubois of "A
Streetcar Named Desire." The film is barely
watchable when she's on screen. Sharon Stone, as Freak's quiet mother,
fares much, much better than Anderson,
though we never learn anything about her except that she loves her son
to pieces. (She also has the best hairdo in
town, say I.)
There is ONE reason to see THE MIGHTY, and its name is Elden Henson. He
is a newcomer to the big screen, and
I hope we see more of him, though I suspect this is the only lead he'll
play for quite some time. (Ignore the film's
order of credits-Henson is the star.) Hollywood, you see, is almost as
intolerant of heavy people as it is the
disabled (except on sitcoms and talk shows, where big women named Rosie
and Roseanne rule.) Max is so
believably naive that I'll cop to feeling a lump in my throat towards
the end of the picture; his purity of emotion is a
sad and poignant sight to behold. Henson shines through all the
unnecessary knight imagery, questionable plot
devices (a toboggan ride sequence is all-too-reminiscent of Home Alone's
slapstick), and story holes (the bullies
eventually disappear because...well, they just do). He even sweetly
sells the voice-over.
I realize THE MIGHTY might have been made for the "Choose Your Own
Adventure" crowd, in which case I could
conceivably forgive some of its more blatant characterizations. It will
no doubt encourage some kids to pick up a
pen and start writing stories (after all, the whole film is essentially
a storybook of Max's creation come to life),
which is always a good thing. Yet whatever the target audience, very
little of it works.
*Notice how both The Mighty poster and Simon Birch's newspaper campaign
showcase their disabled characters in
silhouette.

Author
Susan Granger
It's amazing how things come in pairs. Early this summer,
there was "Deep Impact" and "Armageddon," both about meteors headed
for earth. There's "Antz" with "A Bug's Life" to come. And now, after
"Simon Birch," there's yet another movie about a disabled youngster
and his friendship with a neighbor. Based on the novel "Freak the
Mighty" by Rodman Philbrick, the story unfolds through the eyes of
mopey Max (Elden Henson), a hulking kid who lives with his
grandparents ("Gram"Gena Rowlands & "Grim" Harry Dean Stanton). After
the trauma of his father murdering his mother, he has retreated into
his own private world. He rarely speaks, fails his seventh grade
classes repeatedly, and is bullied by tiny punks. Then, next door, a
single mother (Sharon Stone) and Kevin, her bright, inventive son
(Kieran Culkin, Macaulay's younger brother), move in. Kevin's legs are
in braces and his back is bent because he has Morquio's syndrome, a
degenerative condition that retards bone growth. "My father was a
magician," he explains. "He heard the words birth defect and he
disappeared."  Together, these two "misfits" battle local bullies and
their own inner demons by uniting to form "The Mighty," a towering,
heroic figure based on King Arthur's Knights of the Round
Table. Director Peter Chelsom ("Funny Bones") has fashioned a moving
drama with strong acting performances. My reservations about this film
revolve around its target audience. The bullies are terrifyingly
aggressive but it's the actions of an unrepentant ex-con that give the
film more dark menace than I'd recommend for the under-10 crowd,
despite the boys' symbiotic relationship. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "The Mighty" is a lively, imaginative 8. For older
children, this is an excellent family film.

Author
Matt Williams
The Mighty is a very good film, saddled with a very perplexing
advertising campaign. Based upon Rodman Philbrick's novel Freak the
Mighty, someone somewhere apparently objected to the word 'Freak', which
has been inexplicably jettisoned.  To follow that up, the ads have been
an odd hodgepodge of Sharon Stone and a bunch of medieval knights, and
while she does appear in a supporting part (as do the knights), this
hardly gives a clear idea of what the film is about:  friendship,
identity, and chivalry.
The Mighty is narrated by Max (Elden Henson), a giant of a kid, who's in
the seventh grade for the third time around.  Though bigger and stronger
than all the other kids, Max doesn't think too well, and is constantly
the object of ridicule.  It doesn't help matters that his father (James
Gandolfini) is imprisoned for murder, leaving Max to stay with his
grandparents (Gena Rowlands and Harry Dean Stanton).
The new kid next door isn't much better off.  Kevin (Kieran Culkin), is
a brilliant boy with Morquio's Syndrome...his bones have stopped
growing, but the rest of him hasn't.  Living alone with his mother
(Sharon Stone), Kevin has built a fascinating intellectual world in
which to live.  But he longs to do the things a normal kid could do.
Though at first Max and Kevin appear to be complete opposites, they're
actually quite complementary.  Max has the brawn, and Kevin has the
brains.  Working together, they make a team more powerful than the sum
of its parts.  Following the ideals of the legend of King Arthur, the
two friends envision themselves as knights bringing chivalry back into
an unchivalrous world.
Although this movie shares the theme of childhood friendship with the
recent  Simon Birch, The Mighty is able to delve for additional meaning
while managing to be just as touching.
The largest chunk of the credit has to go to the film's two leads.
Kieran Culkin has the seemingly showier role as Kevin, and, indeed, he
manages to express a depth of character that his elder brother Macaulay
never did.  However, he has the unfortunate benefit of working alongside
Elden Henson, who turns in a brilliant portrayal of Max.  Elden brings a
deep humanity to his role of the slow-witted giant.
Even though the protagonists are kids, one shouldn't assume that this is
strictly a kids movie (the rating is PG-13).  Although kids and teens
would identify with it (who hasn't felt like a freak at one point or
another), the messages are universal, and the story is fully enjoyable
for adults, too.
The film takes a few twists and turns, some surprising, and some not so.
However, wherever the film takes you, you'll be glad to go along for the
ride.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Mighty (1998)
Elden Henson, Kieran Culkin, Sharon Stone, Gena Rowlands, Harry Dean 
Stanton, Gillian Anderson, James Gandolfini, Meat Loaf, Joe Perrino. 
Screenplay by Charles Leavitt, based on the novel "Freak The Mighty" by 
Rodman Philbrick. Directed by Peter Chelsom. 106 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Both "Simon Birch" and "The Mighty" feature sweet tales of friendship 
between two boys. Both films are also quite flawed, albeit in different 
ways, and your tolerance of those flaws will likely depend on whether or 
not the central storyline strikes an emotional chord with you.
Like "Simon Birch," "The Mighty" deals with a pair of young male outcasts 
who bond together. Kevin Dillon (Kieran Culkin) is unusually small and 
can walk only with braces, the result of a progressive, degenerative 
disease called Morquio syndrome. The bright kid spends most of his time 
in the world of books and the imagination, where, unencumbered by his 
physical limitations, he can slay dragons and rescue damsels in distress 
as a knight in King Arthur's court. 
Maxwell Kane (Elden Henson) is a stocky, quiet and very lonely illiterate.
 The boy lives in his grandparents' basement, hiding from the cruel 
taunts of classmates and his own painful memories of one horrific night 
that tore his family apart. When Kevin (also known as "Freak") and his 
loving, fiercely protective mother (Sharon Stone) move in next door, 
everything changes. The 13-year-olds eventually become friends, each 
making up for the others limitations. With Kevin perched atop Max's 
shoulders, they become a powerful single unit. As Max puts it, "Freak was 
the brain, and I was the legs." Together, they venture forth confidently 
as a symbiotic knight in urban Cincinnati. 
Based on "Freak The Mighty," the beloved Rodman Philbrick novel, "The 
Mighty" is a solid, often moving story about the pain of being ostracized 
and the healing power of friendship. Unlike "Simon Birch," which used an 
overbearing score and contrived situations to emotionally bully the 
viewer, "The Mighty" avoids overt manipulation. The central storyline is 
strong enough to play without orchestration, although a subplot involving 
Max's dad and his miscreant friends is heavy-handed, to put it mildly.
With a creation like this, chemistry is everything and the producers of 
"The Mighty" made some interesting casting decisions. 21-year-old Elden 
Henson is perfect as 13-year-old Max, despite the startling age gap. He 
captures the tortured young man's bottled-up pain splendidly, projecting 
strong emotions with an economy of expression. Henson is so good that he 
nearly makes up for Kieran Culkin's deficits. 
Reportedly, "Simon Birch's" Ian Michael Smith, who has Morquio syndrome 
in real life, was turned down for the role of Kevin, and Culkin is simply 
too big to play the part. Beyond the physical incongruity, Culkin 
projects an extremely arrogant, smarmy air. While I empathized with the 
character, I didn't like him. Despite his distasteful smugness, though, 
there is an undeniable chemistry between the boys.
Sharon Stone is quite strong as Kevin's devoted mother, giving one of the 
best performances of her career, and Gena Rowlands and Harry Dean Stanton 
are solid, if underused, as Max's grandparents. Two other supporting 
performances must be noted. Meat Loaf plays Max's father and as an actor, 
he's a good singer. Finally, Gillian Anderson is embarrassingly bad as a 
drunken floozy, coming off like a bush-league version of Faye Dunaway in 
"Mommie Dearest." 
Had the filmmakers cast Ian Michael Smith as Kevin and given the heave-ho 
to some of the film's secondary elements (including Gillian Anderson), 
"The Mighty" would have been a much more satisfying production. The film 
still resonates as is, thanks to its universal themes and Elden Henson's 
fine work, but, like "Simon Birch," "The Mighty" ultimately plays as a 
charming portrait of friendship trapped in an unexceptional movie.

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
_Freak The Mighty_ (original title) received such a response at last
year's Cannes Film Festival, that our friends at Miramax picked this
film up on impulse.  And rightly so.  Like _The Spitfire Grill_ before
it, here is an honest tearjerker that contains breakthrough
performances, a good (if not quirky) cast, and some moments that I
declare "magical."
Then PR got its hands on the film.  Bad news.  It seems like every
decision made to promote _FTM_ has only furthered to draw people away.
Mistake No. 1:  Rename it _The Mighty_, which means absolutely,
positively... nothing.  (Mighty what? Mouse? Ducks? Aphrodite?)  Is it 
a superhero?  Is it a baseball player?  Is it an earthquake?
Mistake No. 2: Bill this as a Sharon Stone vehicle.  Sharon Stone, to
her credit, delivers a solid, if not Oscar worthy performance.  But it
is merely a supporting role.  She doesn't need to have her portrait
dominate the ads for this vehicle.  Astute moviegoers and Sharon Stone
voyeurs will not be impressed.
Mistake No. 3: Release it weeks after the better-hyped _Simon Birch_.
Personally, after I saw the previews for _Birch_, I became convinced
that I had seen more than my fair share of gawky adolescent buddy films
with screaming violins and public sermons that, apparently, the
Hollywood community is hearing for the first time.  All this delivered
by overly short, wretchingly cute know-it-alls plus grin.  Gary 
Coleman, anyone?
Mistake No. 4: Have its own previews usurped by a commercial
advertisement that has _nothing_ to do with the film.  If memory serves
me well, it's that movie-based ad where the kids are content watching
television while in a van, and the camera pulls back to see the van
driving through some breathtaking imagery of the Rocky Mountains.  Which
begs the question: why would the parents allow their kids to miss
awe-inspiring scenery for a _video_?
Why do I spend so much of this review panning Mirimax's PR campaign?
Because the film is good.  Really good.  And every misstep Mirimax makes
is lessoning the availability of this feature.  I traveled a great
distance to see it, only to find that the theater wasn't even
quarter-filled.
_The Mighty_ stars Elden Hensen and Kieran Culkin as the two misfits
that bond.  Kieran, younger brother of Macaulay, plays Kevin Dillon, a
cute, smart boy with Marquio's syndrome.  Hensen plays the hulking,
withdrawn Max Kane, who stayed behind in seventh grade twice.  Kevin
becomes Max's reading tutor, and introduces him to the legend of King
Arthur.  Their friendship blossoms.  They recognize that their strengths
in unison, more than make up for their deficiencies.  Max plops Kevin 
on his shoulders, and with the gift of imagination, they become
super-human.
What truly makes this film unique is its fondness for all things
Arthurian.  The knights of the round table, the quest for the grail, the
tales of Taliesin and Merlin, each story is filled with magic and
timeless wonder.  What director Peter Chelsom and writers Charles
Leavitt/Rodman Philbrick have accomplished is that monumental task of
bringing King Arthur to the slums of Cincinatti, without being cloying
or sentimental.
By using this element (and not overplaying this hand), it brings the
rest of the film into perspective.  Suddenly, those bullies at school
aren't nearly as terrifying.  Honorable deeds, such as returning a
woman's purse with money intact, are pursued with valor.  And when Max's
inner demons materialize in his room, both he and Kevin conjure up the
strength and ingenuity to be able to conquer them.
This all sounds cliched, but it is not.  Chelsom directs this film with
immense restraint, with every character being authentic.  Hensen, whose
character begins as brooding and silent, undergoes a transformation that
almost had me in tears.  Stone plays her limited screen time with the
resonance of Dee Wallace Stone.  Gena Rowlands redeems her dreadful
overacting in _Hope Floats_ with a quiet, effective persona.  Most
surprising of all is Gillian Anderson, barely recognizable from her
_X-files_ alter-ego, as a floozy played to the hilt for comic effect.
She's the only one allowed to overact, but it works.
If I have any reservations for the film, it is that the film does tread
somewhat familiar terrain (bullies at school, life-threatening illness,
fatherless homes), and that there were moments where Kieran Culkin is
just barely too cutesy for my taste.  Even the final showdown had
moments of creative implausibilities, but at least kids will like it.
That said, _The Mighty_ surprised me in how much I was drawn in, and how
effective the denouement was.  I was reminded of Stephen Lawhead's
Pendragon trilogy, or C. S. Lewis' Narnia series, and how those books
affected me growing up.  Hopefully, it would inspire new converts to 
the cult of reading, with the honesty and thrill that Macaulay Culkin's
_Pagemaster_ retreated from.

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE MIGHTY
(Miramax)
Starring:  Kieran Culkin, Elden Henson, Sharon Stone, Gena Rowlands, Harry
Dean Stanton, Gillian Anderson, James Gandolfini.
Screenplay:  Charles Leavitt, based on the novel _Freak the Mighty_ by
Rodman Philbrick.
Producers:  Jane Startz and Simon Fields.
Director:  Peter Chelsom.
MPAA Rating:  PG (mild profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  95 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The recent release SIMON BIRCH, based on a best-selling novel, told
the story of two boys who formed a close friendship.  Both outcasts in
their community, they shared many adventures, some humorous and some
serious.  The resulting film was mawkish and erratic, sacrificing strong
and consistent characterizations for cheap slapstick and even cheaper
melodrama.
     I love the cosmic symmetry that allows me to point out exactly what's
right about one film because of what went wrong in another.  THE MIGHTY is
also based on a best-selling novel, and also tells the story of two young
boys who form a close frienship.  Both outcasts in their community, they
share many adventures, some humorous and some serious.  Yet THE MIGHTY is
superior to SIMON BIRCH in almost every way.  It's a family film about
triumph over adversity that earns honest emotional response.
     Rodman Philbrick's popular young adult novel _Freak the Mighty_
inspired this tale of two Cincinnati middle-schoolers coping with
difficult circumstances.  Max Kane (Elden Henson) is an academically-
challenged giant of a lad, troubled by taunting classmates and a family
tragedy which has forced him to live with his grandparents (Gena Rowlands
and Harry Dean Stanton).  His new next-door neighbors are single mom
Gwendolyn Dillon (Sharon Stone) and her son Kevin (Kieran Culkin), a
sharp-witted genius afflicted with a crippling genetic disease.
Gradually, the two come to realize they have much to offer one another.
While Kevin tutors Max in reading and becomes his inspirational voice, Max
literally carries Kevin on his shoulders to become his legs.  Together,
they become a formidable force, a justice-seeking two-headed knight Kevin
dubs Freak the Mighty.
     You might expect THE MIGHTY to be just a glorified "Afterschool
Special," unless you knew the work of director Peter Chelsom.  The auteur
behind the eccentric gems HEAR MY SONG and FUNNY BONES gives the story a
fantastic flair, with images of the symbiotic duo crossing swords with
enemies in their flights of fancy.  Even the scenes clearly designed to
draw cheers, including a gym class basketball game, somehow seem too
surreal to be manipulative.  THE MIGHTY has more than its share of
messages, yet it rarely feels like a "message movie."  It has more than
its share of shifts in tone, yet it rarely feels inconsistent.
     Give credit both to Chelsom and to his two young leads, who deliver a
pair of superb performances.  Kieran Culkin (yes, _his_ younger brother)
finds the fine line between intelligent and obnoxious -- a line most young
actors trample into dust -- to make Kevin an appealing protagonist.  Elden
Henson, however, provides the film's real emotional core as the deeply
troubled Max.  There's not a false note to be found, from his early scenes
as surly introvert to his later fierce devotion to Kevin.  Culkin and
Henson share a casual chemistry even when they're exchanging deep
thoughts, preventing the flashing red "lesson" light to go on during their
scenes together.  Ably assisted by restrained, dignified supporting turns
from Stone, Rowlands and Stanton, Culkin and Henson create a solid
dramatic foundation.
     THE MIGHTY only gets clumsy when James Gandolfini shows up as Max's
bad-news father.  The sub-plot's darker tone, involving murder and
kidnapping, are challenging enough to fit into a family film without
Gandolfini playing the role as a leering monster.  That's aside from
Gillian Anderson's look-at-me-I'm-versatile turn as a good-hearted girl
from the wrong side of the tracks (or perhaps a Tennessee Williams play).
Yet even then Chelsom rallies to give us a potent climax without an ounce
of fat.  The power of the story, and its convincing bonds of friendship,
make teary-eyed actors and sweeping musical cues utterly unnecessary.
SIMON BIRCH's hystrionics bullied viewers into caring about two young
friends.  THE MIGHTY builds two characters worth caring about.

Author
Greg King
THE MIGHTY (M).  
(Miramax/Village Roadshow)
Director: Peter Chelsom
Stars: Sharon Stone, Gena Rowlands, Harry Dean Stanton, James Gandolfini, 
Gillian Anderson, Meatloaf, Keiran Culkin, Elden Henson, Joe Perrino,
Jennifer Lewis
Running time: 100 minutes.
This moving and ultimately uplifting tale explores the unusual
friendship that develops between two twelve year old outcasts.  The
Mighty is also an inspiring fable about the power of the imagination
and friendship to heal scars, both emotional and physical.  Based on
the book by Rodman Philbrick, The Mighty is also free of the
excessively saccharine and overtly manipulative narrative structure of
the recent Simon Birch.  While the two films share a number of themes,
The Mighty is by far the warmer and more broadly appealing film.
However, the later stages may prove a little too intense for younger
children.
Max (Elden Henson) lives with his grandparents (Gena Rowlands
and Harry Dean Stanton).  Because of his hulking size he is the object
of much fun at school.  His new next door neighbour is Gwen (Sharon
Stone), a single mother, and her crippled son Kevin (Keiran Culkin),
who suffers from a degenerative wasting disease.  Gwen has raised
Kevin alone ever since his father ran out on them as soon as the
doctor announced that the child was suffering from a genetic disorder.
Despite their initial mistrust of each other, Max and Kevin quickly
develop a strong friendship when they realise that they can each offer
the other something.
Kevin teaches Max to read and helps him appreciate the world
through the power of imagination.  Max is afraid that he will turn out
to be a vicious killer just like his father (James Gandolfini), but
Kevin calms his fears.  In return, Max provides Kevin with a pair of
legs and helps him travel around the city, taking in the sights and
enjoying activities that would normally be beyond his grasp.
Eventually their friendship opens up new worlds of possibility for
both of them, and together they take on the world like modern day
counterparts of King Arthur and his legendary knights of the round
table.
But events take a nasty turn when Max's father suddenly
reappears and takes his son away.  The crippled Kevin charges to the
rescue.  These scenes may prove a little too intense and scary for
some audiences.
British director Peter Chelsom (Funny Bones, etc) has a
feeling for the offbeat and the unusual, but he handles the material
with insight and compassion.  A former director of commercials he
brings a strong visual style to the movie without sacrificing the
emotional content of Charles Leavitt's screenplay.  He injects a sense
of realism into the movie through clever use of locations around
Toronto and Cincinnati.
Stone is impressive in a smaller role, and delivers one of her
better screen performances.  The film boasts strong supporting
performances from a truly scary Gandolfini, veterans Rowlands and
Stanton, and The X Files' Gillian Anderson, playing against type in a
more down beat role.  However, it is the solid and likeable
performances of Culkin and Henson that carry the film and provide its
emotional punch.  The pair, both of whom are also featured in the
recent She's All That, are enormously appealing, and deliver heartfelt
and natural performances.
This mighty film is much better than the recent Simon Birch,
as it explores how friendship and the power of the imagination help
our two off beat heroes transcend their harsh environment.  Its quaint
flights of fancy prove surprisingly effective!

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Nobody expects very much of Max Cane (Eldon Henson) the son of a
man in prison for murder.  Max himself is learning impaired and is
spending his third year in the seventh grade.  Nature has not been kind
to Max who is big, mean-looking, and rather ugly.  Kids in school call
him Killer Cane, (perhaps an allusion to the Buck Rogers character;
there are other science fiction allusions).  A local hoodlum gang, The
Dog House Boys, are not sure if they want to pick on him or if they
want him to join their ranks.  Max's life is somewhat less than
satisfying, living with his dour grandparents (Harry Dean Stanton and
Gena Rowlands) and getting the knocks he does at school.  Then a new
boy moves in next door.  This is Kevin Dillon (Kieron Culkin) with a
sadly twisted body and a genuine intellect.  Kevin lives with his
mother Gwen (Sharon Stone) and does "kid-intellectual things" like
reading and playing with scientific toys.  A birth defect has left
Kevin with a bent spine and an inability to walk without his crutches.
Neither boy is much good at making friends, but Kevin immediately sees
that Max is almost a perfect complement to himself. Where he is
strongest, Max is weakest; where he is weakest, Max is strongest.  But
Max has no interest in being friends with his bookish neighbor and
Kevin has to bribe him with money to act as his legs.
     Max is a poor reader and is given Kevin for a reading tutor.
Kevin has Max read Sir James Knowles's LEGENDS OF KING ARTHUR AND HIS
KNIGHTS and uses it to inspire Max to read like no professional teacher
has been able to.  Max carries Kevin on his shoulders and together they
become one person whom, after the style of King Arthur, they dub Freak
the Mighty.  Then time and again their frame their friendship in
Arthurian terms, as if they are a knight in quest of adventure.
Together each is able to face up to his personal problems and either
overcome them or accept them.  While the film travels a predictable
course, it is a credible one.
     This is director Peter Chelsom's third film and he seems to do
something entirely different each time.  His HEAR MY SONG was likable
nostalgic comedy set in London and Ireland.  His second film FUNNY
BONES was a very dark and strange look into the world of the stand-up
comic mostly taking place in bleak Liverpool.  Now he tells the story
about friendship set in South Cincinnati.  Eldon Henson is a good
choice for Max and is certainly not the appealing sort of young actor
one generally sees in film.  On the other hand Kieron Culkin is
obviously a Culkin but one who is not so saccharine as his brother
Macaulay.  Sharon Stone is making the transition from glamorous actress
to character player skillfully.  One sees little of her previous
sensationalist roles in her Gwen.  Here she does a forty-ish mother
with real strength.  Max's grandparents are supposed to be as humorless
as the people in "American Gothic," but they are played by Harry Dean
Stanton and Gena Rowlands.  The one problem in that casting is that
Harry Dean Stanton has a hard time looking humorless.  Even when he is
trying to be serious there is always a twinkle in his eye.
     THE MIGHTY is a Canadian production with a screenplay by Charles
Leavitt, based on the novel FREAK THE MIGHTY by Rodman Philbrick.  It
is broken into chapters, like a book, and narrated by Max.  The score
is melodic with a strong Irish influence that seems a little out of
place with non-Irish characters and the Ohio setting.  John De Borman's
camera seems to see Cincinnati as a city of hard steel bridges and
concrete, just over the hill from the boys' homes.
     This is really not simply a children's film but a family film and
one that adults can enjoy.  It had very good word of mouth at the
Toronto International Film Festival (though it was not one of the films
I saw there) and deservedly so.  I rate it a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and
a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
The after school specials that ABC television has produced in the past
are a good stepping stone for producing 'The Mighty'.  ABC has nothing
to do with this film but the makers of this one certainly look like they
watched a lot of them.  An intelligent, if somewhat overly sentimental
film, 'The Mighty' has some good performances from two young actors who
steal the show away from their adult colleagues but some of the writing
is a cross between corn ball and a lot of the dialogue and situations
are flippant.
Set in Cincinnati, Ohio, 'The Mighty' is the story of two boys and their
dysfunctional lives and how they become the best of friends.  Elden
Henson is an over sized seventh grader who refers to himself as Godzilla
and draws stares from the other children at school because of his size
and his homely features.  He is taunted by a gang of punks at school who
tease and harass him about his past and his father's imprisonment.
Henson's father (James Gandolfini) killed his mother in a domestic
dispute and is now serving time.  Henson lives with his maternal
grandparents (Gena Rowlands and Harry Dean Stanton) who care deeply for
the boy.
Henson gets a tutor at school (Kieran Culkin), a boy who is highly
intelligent at his level in life but he suffers from a disease that eats
away at his body slowly and he is supported by arm braces when walking.
The two meet awkwardly when Henson is blamed for an act of cruelty
against Culkin in the school gymnasium and has to serve detention for
it.  Later, the two of them become close friends and Henson serves as
Culkin's protector and is brought out of his shy shell after being
inspired from the stories of brave knights brought on by the fact that
Culkin also likes to draw references to medieval times and the sanctity
of knights when describing a situation or involving himself in it.
'The Mighty' is a good family film that has a good marketing strategy by
casting Sharon Stone as Culkin's mother.  The ordinary style the film
projects of everyday life in the surroundings of ordinary people are
quite admirable.  What I really thought was strange was how all the
adult characters in the film were under written.  I think it's a rather
cheap marketing trick to have popular stars like Sharon Stone and
Gillian Anderson in very under written roles.  Anderson plays a drunken
white trash individual living with her equally trashy boyfriend (Meat
Loaf).  Her character only appears in a couple of key scenes but
Anderson is an excellent actress capable of the most impressive
diversity.
Elden Henson and Kieran Culkin are terrific young actors but Henson
clearly steals the show as his character goes through a transformation
of soul searching and his life is clearly influenced for the better at
the teachings of a tutor who has much to teach him and makes his life
wholesome and determined to stay on the right track.  A lesson much of
today's youth needs badly.  Parents are encouraged to take their
children to see this film for a memorable experience that they will
remember fondly as they grow older
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
James Sanford
Now that the slick, sappy "Simon Birch" has almost run its course at the box
office there may not be a high desire among moviegoers to see "The Mighty,"
another story about misfit boys joining forces to survive. But it would be a
shame if this funny, warm-hearted film didn't find a sizable audience; it's
as captivating as "Simon" is contrived.
 When Hollywood attempts to portray the jinior-high years, it often opts for
a heavily sentimental approach in which everyone is cutely geeky,
daydreaming about their first kiss or trying to join a cool clique. The
realities of pre-adolescence -- particularly for those kids who, for one
reason or another, don't fit in -- are considerably less rosy.
 If, for example, you're Maxwell Kane (Elden Henson), the slow-witted son of
a convicted murderer, you might easily end up getting slammed regularly by
peers and adults alike. "Killer Kane, Killer Kane, has a son who's got no
brain," chant Max's classmates, while his gym teacher asks if he needs to
translate instructions into Neanderthal for Max to understand.
  Next door to Max lives Kevin Dillon (Kieran Culkin), a brilliant mind
trapped in a body crippled and twisted by Morquio's syndrome. His mother
(Sharon Stone) encourages Kevin to explore the world of books and science,
but she fears letting him explore the world itself. "She's afraid I'll get
trampled," Kevin tells Max. "Sometimes I think my mom would like me to stay
home with a tube down my throat."
 Separately, these two aren't making it. United, they're formidable. Kevin
shares his intellect with the almost illiterate Max, and Max provides the
physical prowess Kevin needs, or, as Max puts it, "he became my brain and I
became his feet."
 But before you write off "The Mighty" as a standard-issue sermonette about
sharing, take another look. Surrounding Kevin and Max is a circle of vivid
characters, exceptionally well-played by such actors as Harry Dean Stanton,
Gena Rowlands, James Gandolfini and, in the film's biggest surprise, an
unrecognizable Gillian Anderson as a tart with mall-hair.
 Daringly, director Peter Chelsom has infused the film with a kind of
magical realism that usually functions better on the printed page than it
does on the screen. Here, the technique not only works, it gives "The
Mighty" that extra flavor that sets it apart from other similar tales.
 In the eyes of Max and Kevin, Cincinnati is just Camelot in disguise, full
of damsels in distress, black-hearted villains and Holy Grails waiting to be
discovered. It sounds silly and precious, but Culkin and Henson are so
thoroughly convincing they rope us into the fantasy. Stone's performance as
a lonely woman living in awe of her child ("Congratulations, Mrs. Dillon: It
was a tough delivery, but you've given birth to a healthy seven-pound
dictionary," she jokes) is understated and true-to-life.
 Because of its pro-reading theme and its message about acceptance, "The
Mighty" will probably be a big attraction for teachers looking to take their
classes on a field-trip, and that's fine. But when pictures are made with as
much care and heart as this one was, they deserve to be seen by everyone.
Forget "Simon Birch": "The Mighty" is truly something special.
James Sanford

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films
 Director:  Peter Chelsom
 Writer:  Charles Leavitt, novel by Rodman Philbrick
 Cast: Sharon Stone, Kieran Culkin, Elden Henson, Gena
Rowlands, Harry Dean Stanton, Gillian Anderson, Meat Loaf,
James Gandolfini
   One of the lines in "The Mighty," if taken and analyzed
seriously, could actually subvert the entire film industry, as
well as theater and TV.  "Every word is a part of a picture,"
the 13-year-old Kevin Dillon (Kieran Culkin) teaches his co-
eval pupil Maxwell Kane (Elden Henson).  "You just connect
them together," he concludes.  In other words, why spend
time in a movie theater or your hard-earned money on
Broadway shows?  The stage is in your mind, where you can
produce, act, and direct in some of the most highly-charged
dramas ever made.  Try to tell this to the upcoming
generation, many of whom will be crowding the movie houses
to see the show helmed by Peter Chelsom based on a
screenplay by Charles Leavitt--which in turn comes from the
novel "Freak the Mighty" by Rodman Philbrick.  When they
emerge from the theater, they may talk the talk but will they
read the book?
   "The Mighty" is the story of a friendship involving two boys,
one instructing the other in the wonderful attributes of books,
the other providing the legs and the physical might to allow
him to continue doing so despite the threat of neighborhood
toughs.  If you've ever felt like an outsider, as one who
cannot enter the inner chambers of a clique or have even a
best friend, you may connect with this tale of a symbiotic
relationship of two lads, each providing something of what's
missing in the other.  Otherwise, though the film has already
received glowing praise as "one of the best family films of the
decade"(by critic James Berardinelli) and "a classic" (by the
New York Press reviewer Armond White), it's just passable 
fare.  "The Mighty" is the sort of story recommended for
junior-high book lists under the genre "handicapping
conditions" or of the "uplifting, you-can-do-anything-you-want" 
category.  It is well acted, particularly by Sharon Stone in the
role of the mother you wish you had, and Kieran Culkin as
boy small in stature, great in mind, and tragically ill-fated with
Morquios' syndrome--a progressive, degenerative disease
which has crippled him and rendered him unable to walk
without braces.  Elden Henson provides solid support as a
hefty guy who, like the dinosaurs of which his mentor speaks
has a brain the size of a walnut.  Both are the butt of jokes
from their mates in a Cincinnati junior high school, who are of
an age not particularly known for diplomacy or compassion.
   Filmed in Toronto and Cincinnati with brief episodes
coming straight from the imagination of the principals, "The
Mighty" opens on the hulking Max who has been left back in
seventh grade twice and is consequently picked on by the
smaller and younger kids in his class.  A gentle creature by
nature, he provokes the taunts of a school gang knows as the
doghouse boys, who are led by one Blade (Joe Perrino), a
kid who looks more like the newspaper boy next door than a
knife-wielding mugger.  So intolerant is Blade and his young
heathens that they stoop to tripping the crippled Kevin by
throwing a basketball at his legs.  The team of Kevin and
Max becomes inevitable, two against the world, and they
march through the neighborhood with Kevin riding on Max's
back as though they were Don Quixote and Rocinante. 
When Kevin is not firing up Max's imagination with tales of
King Arthur and regaling him with the vocabulary of medieval
days, he joins him in a series of feudal-style adventures,
rescuing one damsel in distress, recovering lost gold in a rat-
infested sewer, and avoiding their enemies by exploiting the
shelter of a muddy moat.
   With Harry Dean Stanton and Gena Rowlands as Max's
understanding grandparents and Sharon Stone as the
wonderfully supportive mother of the afflicted Kevin, "The
Mighty" evokes some sentiment but goes far off the track
when infusing a kidnapping scene involving Max's jailbird
father (James Gandolfini), who was incarcerated for killing
Kevin's mom.
   The sharpest dialogue is reserved for Kevin, whose
debilitating disease has forced him to spend a good deal of
his time in his imagination, using the legend of King Arthur as
his Bible.  Inevitably, of course, the tragedy which strikes one
of the boys will cause great pain in the other, who will keep
memory alive by becoming all he can be.  "The Mighty"
features good chemistry between its two unlikely principals,
but as a narrative it's an unexceptional buddy film.
