Title
Review for Nettoyage ŕ sec (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Strand Releasing
 Director:  Anne Fontaine
 Writer:  Anne Fontaine, Gilles Taurand
 Cast: Charles Berling, Miou-Miou, Stanislas Merhar, Mathilde
Seigner, Nanou Meister, Noe Pflieger, Michel Bompoil,
Christopher King, Gerard Blanc, Betty Petristy, Bobby Pacha,
Corinne Nejman, Therese Genin, Joelle Gregorie, Pascal Allio
   Someone once said that the division of people into
heterosexuals and homosexuals is an artificial one.  The 
reality, he concluded, is that people separate into two
categories: those who love and those who cannot.  If you're
one of the lucky persons in the former group, you could feel
attracted to either sex.  The theory is a provocative one,
running completely counter to "normal" thought throughout
the world.  Broad-minded people accept the reality and
validity of homosexuality but few people honestly believe that
we're all bisexual, pushed into making a choice by the
influence of bourgeois thinking.
   But the intriguing presumption gets a thorough workout in
Anne Fontaine's "Dry Cleaning," known in French as
"Nettoyage a Sec, a film which has already garnered major
international prizes: one at Venice for its screenplay, the
other, a Cesar, going to Stanislas Merhar as best new actor. 
Mr. Merhar fully deserves such consideration for a genuine
achievement, and the screenplay effectively deviates from a
theme that has been done to death: that of a drifter who
comes to town, causes trouble for a seemingly stable couple,
and then leaves (either on his own feet or in a box).  The
classic tale, Tay Garnett's 1946 "The Postman Always Rings
Twice," featured electrifying appearances by John Garfield
and Lana Turner, the former in the role of a layabout who
comes upon a diner run by Cecil Kellaway and Ms. Turner
and destroys their marriage.  In the more recent work, Robert
M. Young's 1996 "Caught," a homeless Irish drifter eludes
police by hiding in a fish store.  The owners, played by
Edward James Olmos and his wife by Maria Conchita Alonso,
take him in to work as an assistant.  Nick (Arie Verbeen)
accepts Joe (Olmos) as a father figure but becomes sexually
attracted to Joe's wife.
   "Dry Cleaning" is both more complex than these
predecessors and less so, less because the plotting is
simpler, involving fewer outsiders; more, because the
archetypal drifter becomes even more attracted to the father
figure than to the older man's wife.  Along with the creators of
"Postman" and "Caught," writer-director Fontaine realizes that
such a triangular arrangement can lead to no good.
   In Fontaine's film Jean-Marie Kunstler (Charles Berling)
and his wife Nicole (Miou-Miou), run a successful dry
cleaning store in a French provincial town not too far from
Paris.  Jean-Marie is a typical small-town bourgeois, the sort
of person who would not likely be cast in a commercial
American movie as an audience in the U.S. would refuse to
believe such an banal fellow could captivate a younger,
sexier guy.  His very profession serves as metaphor for his
character: Jean-Marie is obsessed with cleanliness, with
removing stains and ironing out creases.  This is not the sort
of person who gives in to irrational impulses.  While Nicole is
not content--she is fed up with cleaning other people's grime
and has not had a decent vacation in ages--she has settled
into her conventional, middle-class life and feels comfortable
with the people of the town. When one evening they come
upon a night club featuring a brother-sister transvestite act--
each performer dressing as the other gender--they are
stimulated as they had not been for years, invite the couple
to a hotel as a foursome, and later induce the young man,
Loic (Stanislas Merhar) to board with them in their home. 
Though Nicole gives in to her passion for the drifter, Jean-
Marie is reluctant to throw him out, though unaware of his
own unconscious desire for the handsome visitor.
   "Dry Cleaning" is talky, as French movies are wont to be,
but a powerful piece of debut acting by the pale but
charismatic Stanislas Merhar draws us into the family
troubles.  We empathize with all parties rather than to
condemn Nicole for her abandon or Loic for his seductions. 
The threesome seem doomed like characters in a Greek
tragedy to rush headlong into a sexually-driven catastrophe.
By successfully creating an original twist in the destructive-
outsider motif, director Anne Fontaine turns out an
engrossing melodrama.
