Title
Review for Bitter Sweet (1933)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Roger Mellor
A Review by Roger Mellor
Bitter Sweet (1933 Film)
Produced and Directed by Herbert Wilcox for British and Dominions
Noel Coward's musical weepie was first produced at Her Majesty's Theatre
London in 1929, and later in the same year New York (Ziegfield Theatre) with
Evelyn Laye. Set in Vienna, with a plot involving a poor musician, a lady
who, through poverty, becomes a dance hall hostess, an amorous count and a
fatal duel, it can been seen as Coward's tribute to the world of operetta,
its flashback structure providing an invocation to a past Viennese world.
It is, however, an incomplete version of the operetta, with over half the
score missing, with much filleting of the script and songs (check out the
recently recorded 2xCD set on TER records (CD TER -2 -1160)  to see just
what has been omitted, numbers such as: That wonderful melody/The call of
life/If you could only come with me/What is love?/The last dance/Life in the
morning/Ladies of the town/Bonne nuit merci/Ta-ra-ra-boom-de-ay/Kiss
me/Alas, the time is past/We all wear a green carnation/Zigeuner).
Unimaginatively directed by Herbert Wilcox, the film only really comes to
life in  the cafe
scenes, where I think one can attribute any visual flair [such as the
tracking shot on the bottle on
the waiter's tray at the lead in to ''Tokay''] to the cameraman, Freddie
Young (the same Freddie Young who went on to photograph ''Lawrence of
Arabia''  thirty years later), especially as Wilcox, coming from the a
business/distribution background, was renowned within the industry for an
almost complete lack of knowledge of the technicalities of film making (such
as where to place the camera......). It is said that many of his films were
actually " directed '' on the floor by his regular cameraman, Max Greene
(Mutz Greenbaum). After a well filmed opening scene set in 1930s [the
"modern'' tailpieces feature the contemporary dance music of Lew Stone and
his band]  there follows  a dully filmed static dialogue scene in  long
takes between Sarah and Carl.
The leading actresses are excellent in this film:both  Anna Neagle (as
Sarah, Marchioness of Shane [the Peggy Wood role] sings "Í'll See You again"
and the duet "Dear Little Cafe'') and Ivy St Helier [as Manon, La Crevette]
who gives a heart rending performance of Noel Coward's classic ''If Love
were all'' are superb.
The men are much weaker (and Fernand Graavey as Carl, the music teacher,
gives  a particularly
feeble performance). Hugh Williams makes an impression, however, in an
incisive cameo role in the prologue and epilogue scenes.
The main interest of this film is that it was made only four years after
first production, and so preserves a contemporary style of performance,
which is of great historical value. But if only Herbert Wilcox had taken the
entire West End cast into the film studio [although he would inevitably have
replaced Peggy Wood with his lifelong amour (and later wife) Anna Neagle)],
and filmed a musically complete version, perhaps with some judicious
trimming of some of the diaogue scenes, this film would have been priceless.
It is Ivy St. Hiller provides us with an indication of what might have been.
Still, it is a fascinating effort.
This film  of "Bitter Sweet" was very popular with audiences in 1933, and is
in many ways preferable to the MGM Hollwood version, which Noel Coward,
incidentally hated.
[Incidentally, the version viewed was distributed by Raymond Roehaeur, and
ran for about 80 minutes, even shorter than the running time in many
reference guides of 93 minutes].
