Title
Review for Being Human (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Joan Ellis
     BEING HUMAN shows us exactly what Robin Williams would be like in
a Valium trance.   It's not that he can't play a timid soul when
asked.  It's just such an awful waste.  Williams is a prodigious talent
with equal facility for comedy or pathos, but here he is playing a
weak, undefined character in an oddly uninteresting set of period
pieces.  So the question becomes just what is writer/director Bill
Forsyth trying to do and why is Robin Williams doing it?  It doesn't
seem like too long a reach to speculate that Williams was intrigued
with Forsyth's idea of tracing a human being being human through
several centuries.  The movie follows Hector as cave man, slave to a
noble Roman, Irishman, shipwrecked gentleman and, finally, contemporary
divorced husband/father.
     You hardly need to connect the dots to find the problem.  It's
very hard to film a popular American movie star as a cave man without
making him look silly.  The voice timbre, the accents, the look of this
movie are contemporary.  However words sounded in the cave culture,
they didn't sound like this.  The error is magnified by an American
narrator who makes flashy little comments about the passing parade and
destroys any possibility of period flavor.  A storyteller she isn't.
     In each of his five lives, Hector is Forsyth's vehicle for
exploring a few of history's driving forces:  courage, cowardice,
greed, love and food.  As coward, Hector falters in indecision as his
wife and children are stolen by invaders.  He runs from an escapee who
needs his help.  He reneges on a promised suicide pact with his noble
Roman and puts himself before his friends in heading for uncertain
rescue on an African beach.
     If he is a coward, he's also a follower.  He vacillates until
others lead him to decision--his cave wife, his master, his priest and
his new age daughter, who leads him through the supermarket, relieving
him of the need to make choices at the food bins.  The poor fellow is
always trying to escape some state of siege, trying to go home without
ever quite making it.  It's a relief to watch him pee silently and
without drama, which seems to work well in all centuries.
     This movie has water, water everywhere: the cave is by the ocean,
and so are the Romans, the Irish, the Portuguese and the Americans.
It's connective tissue, but we never understand the connection.  The
whole thing is less than a noble failure, more than a bad idea.   Bill
Forsyth's view of historical detail is so quirky that nothing works
either as straight drama or as lighthearted comment.  The ground
between the two is silliness, and that's a shame because the actors,
who play many roles each, are very good.  If you are intrigued by the
idea of how a person might pass through the centuries, you may want to
try ORLANDO.


Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Robin Williams, Kelly Hunter, John Turturro, 
           Anna Galiena, Vincent D'Onofrio, Hector Elizando, 
           Lorraine Bracco, Lindsay Crouse 
Director:  Bill Forsyth 
Producers:  Robert F. Colesberry and David Putnam 
Screenplay:  Bill Forsyth 
Music:  Michael Gibbs 
Released by Warner Brothers 
     Robin Williams is a prehistoric caveman named Hector who loses his 
wife and children to a group of seafaring marauders.  Robin Williams,  
again named Hector, is a slave to a tunic-wearing John Turturro during 
Roman times.  Hector is also a medieval wanderer who takes up with a 
beautful widow (Anna Galiena), a 16th-century Portuguese nobleman who is 
marooned on the African coast, and an angst-riddled modern day divorced 
father trying to get to know his kids. 
     All-in-all, Hector is a lot of people.  Too bad his overall story 
is essentially pointless.  Not only are the five different eras poorly 
connected, but the individual stories are dull and fragmented, crying out 
for a unification and closure that BEING HUMAN never supplies.  When it's 
all over, the most likely reaction will be "Who cares?" 
     Having one actor play five different characters through the mil- 
lennia would lead the viewer to expect a tale involving karma and fate.  
However, the links between the various Hectors are tenuous, and with the 
exception of the first and last episodes (where the main character loses, 
then finds, his children), the only connections are Williams, the sea, 
priests searching for the meaning of symbols, and an odd obsession with 
footgear. 
     Seeing Robin Williams' name on a theater marquee immediately 
creates expectations of a certain humor - even when a serious role is 
anticipated.  Unfortunately, in this case, the actor is kept strictly 
reigned in and the resultant comedy - what little of it there is - is 
muted and awkward.   
     Theresa Russell's flippant narrative is exceptionally annoying - a 
running series of trite comments that try to be both profound and witty, 
yet end up being neither.  I generally don't like voiceovers, but rarely 
have I found one this intrusive. 
     The modern-day segment is the most successful, chiefly because the 
characters are the easiest to identify with.  The caveman story, with 
Williams looking too much like the hermit from the beginning of MONTY 
PYTHON'S FLYING CIRCUS, is almost laughable with its monosyllabic 
conversations and difficult-to-fathom plot.  The other three parts fall 
in between, both in terms of time period and quality. 
     The cast is solid, giving it a game try even when the script verges 
on the embarrassing.  As a vehicle for Williams "the serious actor",  
BEING HUMAN is a dud.  While the excesses of TOYS are undesirable, giving  
a performer of Williams' temperament so little freedom quenches his fire. 
     For all of its existential posturing, BEING HUMAN ends up being a 
rather shallow motion picture.  As for the film's scope...well, the 
costumes are nice.  Unfortunately, we end up stuck in five places that 
aren't very interesting with characters we never get to know or care 
about.  Robin Williams may have gone from two personalities in MRS. 
DOUBTFIRE to five here, but the results prove the old saying that
sometimes less is more. 
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
