Title
Review for Gycklarnas afton (1953)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Gycklarnas afton" is from the early directing career
of Ingmar Bergman.  In the U.S., the film was shown in
theatres under the title "The Naked Night", and on
television with the title "Sawdust and Tinsel".
The film explores romantic relationships, reaching
a pessimistic conclusion.  There is little action
but many close-ups, and the major characters deserve
neither sympathy nor particular interest.
Ake Gronberg is the obese, depressive, middle-aged owner
of a struggling circus.  His lover is Harriet Andersson,
who is young and beautiful, but lower class.  His
estranged wife is Annika Tretow.  Gronberg attempts a
reconciliation with Tretow, while Andersson begins
a tawdry romance with self-assured, pallid actor
Hasse Ekman.
The film's biggest problem is with the characters.
Ekman is the least credible. He begins his courtship
with Andersson with begging, but soon reveals a
sadistic nature.  He quickly loses interest in her.
Andersson is an unlikely match for the unattractive,
unstable, abusive, and impoverished Gronberg.
Gronberg is jealous of Andersson, yet is anxious to
trade her in for his indifferent wife.
The point that Bergman is making is clear.  Love is
a mirage that vanishes before you can reach it,
and is driven by selfish motives such as lust, vanity,
and security.  Unfortunately, this pessimistic
evaluation is supported by characters who lack
sufficient credibility in their actions, and are
too loathsome for the viewer to develop an interest
in their fate.
While the film is mostly imagery and dialogue,
there is a brief action scene.  Gronberg and
Ekman have a fistfight, and these few minutes
are easily the film's best.  Even the gloomiest,
most relentless dramas need a change of pace.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
