Title
Review for Crimes and Misdemeanors (1989)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Two stories somewhat intertwined to
     make a single story of morel decisions and their consequences
     show up most of the popular dramatic media as being pallid
     morality plays.  These are clearly not morality plays.  They
     are realistic and at least one is very worth seeing.
     There are not many filmmakers who can make a film about moral
philosophy and get away with it--at least not a film with deeper thoughts
than that unjust acts are punishable by having Sly Stallone blow you up with
a hand grenade.  Woody Allen is one director who can make a film about
ethical dilemmas.  And he has the courage to treat them in a manner that is
realistic and non-Hollywoodish enough that some may feel that the story does
not work or is somehow incomplete.  CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS does not just
reject the popular ending, it is an indictment of the popular dramatic media
and the people who create it.
     CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS is really two stories only tangentially related
as far as the plot is concerned, though each in some way throws light on the
other.  One of the stories starts superficially as if it was inspired by
FATAL ATTRACTION. Successful opthalmologist Judah Rosenthal (played by
Martin Landau in his best role ever) has been having a two-year affair with
a neurotic stewardess (played by Anjelica Huston).  She now threatens to
ruin his career, frame him for embezzlement, and destroy his marriage if he
does not marry her.  His brother (played by Jerry Orbach) offers to arrange
to have the mistress murdered.  Judah has very strong moral principles, but
he also has a lot he can lose if the mistress is not stopped.
     The other story involves Cliff Stern (played by Woody Allen), an
unsuccessful documentary filmmaker whose dream and long-term goal is to make
a film about a philosophy professor with a very deep life-affirming
philosophy.  Instead he is commissioned to make a film about a very
successful television comedy producer who happens to be Stern's brother-in-
law.  The producer (played by a perfectly cast Alan Alda) is glib and
polished, makes pseudo-profound pronouncements on the nature of comedy, and
in general personifies just about everything that Stern despises.  The
situation is exacerbated by a love triangle with a television documentary
maker (played by Mia Farrow, who steadfastly refuses to let talent rub off
on her no matter how many times Allen casts her).  The irony is that Stern's
hero, Dr. Levy, seems to have ideas no more profound than those of the
television producers Stern hates, even if Levy does express them more
eloquently.
     Of the two stories by far the more meat is in the story of the
opthalmologist with the moral dilemma.  In that we see the ethical
philosophy illustrated.  The story of the filmmaker is more comedy and is
sure to be more of an audience pleaser, but it is also far less ambitious.
It is the spoonful of sugar that helps the medicine go down.
     There seem to be four ways to get a major role in a Woody Allen film.
You can be an established actor such as Claire Bloom.  You can be an under-
rated actor such as Landau, whose career took a nosedive with "Space: 1999"
and who until last year's TUCKER had been getting thankless roles not nearly
commensurate with his talent.  You can get a role if Allen wants to make a
point about you as an actor, which he seems to have done with Alan Alda.
Actually it is surprising that Alda accepted a role that is so much of a
put-down on Alda himself.  The fourth way to get into an Allen film is the
way Diane Keaton and Mia Farrow did and neither has really been an asset.
     This is probably one of Allen's better "serious" films and I give it a
+2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Randy Parker
   A new Woody Allen movie is usually a cause for celebration.  But in
recent years, the director's forays into straight drama and his absence
from the screen have been a cause for trepidation more than anything
else.  Happily, Allen fans everywhere can break out the champagne: CRIMES
AND MISDEMEANORS (his 19th film) is a gem!
   The movie is one of the few I've seen where the two main characters
don't even meet until the final scene.  CRIMES is composed of two almost
entirely unrelated story lines, and each has its own unique flavor.  The
weaker of the two involves Martin Landau as a philandering husband who
decides to call it quits with his mistress of two years (Angelica
Houston).  The problem is she won't accept his decision and threatens to
expose their affair.  Landau is faced with a moral crisis when his mafioso
brother suggests they solve his dilemma by liquidating the troublesome
mistress.  Landau doesn't think he is capable of such evil, but at the
same time he feels like he's backed into a corner.
   Straight drama has never been Allen's strength; just watch INTERIORS or
ANOTHER WOMAN and you'll know what I mean.  But surprisingly, the dramatic
story line in CRIMES is anything but impotent.  Landau, coming off his
Oscar-nominated performance in TUCKER, strikes gold again in CRIMES. 
Allen gives the actor a profound role, and Landau does it justice.  He
brings out the character's desperation, making him sympathetic in an odd
sort of way.
   Houston is a revelation as the neurotic lover.  I'll never understand
why her performance in PRIZZI9S HONOR received so much hoopla.  However,
there's no denying that Houston is simply phenomenal in CRIMES as a woman
grasping at straws, composed at one minute and a basket case at the next. 
Houston's performance is worthy of an Oscar.
   Allen juxtaposes the somber and humorless story of marital infidelity
with a comic tale of romantic angst.  And, thankfully, this half of CRIMES
AND MISDEMEANORS is vintage Woody Allen.  To borrow a line from a beer
commercial: it just doesn't get any better than this!  The icing on the
cake is Allen's participation in front of the camera as well as behind it.
   Allen plays a struggling documentary filmmaker who falls in love with a
TV-producer played by who else but Mia Farrow.  Somehow, after 10 films,
the on-screen chemistry between the real-life couple is as fresh and
magical as ever.  But Allen is not Farrow's only suitor in the film.  His
brother-in-law, a rich and powerful TV-executive played by Alan Alda, is
also courting her.  And once you mix in Allen's wife, sister, and niece,
you have a flood of characters--and I've only mentioned half of them.
   Fortunately, Allen has always been a master at juggling large ensemble
casts--for example, HANNAH AND HER SISTERS.  With CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS,
he once again demonstrates his knack for letting each cast-member shine no
matter how small the part.  Alda, always a welcome presence, is playing
against type in his role as the egomaniacal TV-sitcom creator.  He pulls
out all the stops in a tour de force performance.  Something about his
arrogance is irresistibly charming.
   As the strong-willed, sharp-tongued, and upwardly mobile TV-producer,
Mia Farrow is, as usual, both alluring and beguiling.  If you think Farrow
has been missing out in any way by appearing only in Allen's films,
consider the diversity of the characters she has been able to play. 
Farrow is convincing whether she is a shy, timid mental case (SEPTEMBER),
a loudmouth mob-girl (BROADWAY DANNY ROSE), or a no-nonsense, career woman
(CRIMES).
   And let's not forget Allen himself, who never fails to astonish me as
actor, let alone as a director.  His humor is still razor sharp and his
vulnerability touchingly poignant.  Even his smallest facial expressions
can send you into tears or into hysterical laughter depending on the
scene.  Allen is a joy to behold, whether he is schmoozing with his niece
or bickering with his wife and brother-in-law.
   Amidst all the talk about the performances, I've neglected to mention
how thematically rich the film is.  CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS is chock full
of existential quandaries about life, death, God, religion, morality, and
blowing off work to go to the movies.  At times, Allen goes too far and
hits you over the head with his philosophical conundrums.  In any case,
it's probably better if I leave these deeper issues to the English majors
and the Philosophers.
   I don't want to give the impression that CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS is
cold and analytical.  Yes, the film is deadly serious, but not at the
expense of fun.  Whenever the dramatic tension builds to a crescendo,
Allen cuts away for some comic relief.  The movie is overflowing with
hilarious one-liners and comic performances.
   CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS is truly a return to form for Allen.  The
effective fusion of comedy and drama makes the film one of his best to
date, and certainly one of 1989's finest.

Author
Marc D. Rossner
     I have seen the movie of the year and it is Woody Allen's CRIMES AND
MISDEMEANORS (previously it was HEATHERS followed by DO THE RIGHT THING, to
give an idea of where I'm coming from).
     CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS is quite unlike any Woody Allen movie that has
preceded it -- it combines highly dramatic, philosophical, and religious issues
while retaining some of the sarcastic humor that we would expect.  The plot
structure would suggest that the movie be retitled "Brothers and Sisters".
Although there is no "star" in this ensemble piece, the main plot elements and
issues revolve around opthamologist Judah Rosenthal, played by Martin Landau.
Judah's brother is Jack, a slimy underworld figure (Jerry Orbach), and his good
friend is Ben, a patient and a rabbi (Sam Waterston).  Ben has a brother named
Lester (Alan Alda), an unctuous TV sitcom mogul, and a sister who is married to
Clifford Stern, the Woody Allen character.  Cliff has his own sister who is
divorced with a teenage daughter that Cliff takes under his wing.  Not part of
these families but involved romantically with them are Dolores (Anjelica
Huston) and Hallie (Mia Farrow, of course in there somewhere).  This all sounds
very complicated but it is in fact quite easy to follow all these
relationships.
     The plot, not to give any spoilers, revolves around the enormous ethical
and religious dilemmas suffered by Judah (Landau).  These "crimes" are mirrored
by smaller crises in the life and work of Cliff (Woody), and also in the old
movies to which he is addicted.
     I found no flaw in the performances.  Alan Alda inherits what might be
considered the "Tony Roberts role" but he convinced me that his was better
suited for it than Roberts would be -- modifying his sleaziness and pomposity
with just the right amount of generosity to prevent him from being totally
detestable.  Martin Landau is low-key but extremely effective in getting the
audience's empathy (my only complaint is that it seemed unrealistic that the
character he portrayed would make some of the choices he did).  Sam Waterston
does a fine job in making  a "saintly" character sympathetic to the audience.
Woody is Woody (although looking much older now), and the other actors are all
excellent in smaller roles.
     Here then is a Woody Allen movie which brings the audience into the lives
of the characters and provokes much thought without being painfully
Bergman-esque.  +4 -- worth seeing again at premium prices.
Marc D. Rossner (att!speedy!marc  or   marc@speedy.att.com)
AT&T BL -- Red Hill

Author
Andrew Hicks
        In the vein of his earlier HANNAH AND HER SISTERS, 
Woody Allen's CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS covers the familiar 
territories of adultery and integrity and the spectrum of compromise 
between the two. The film centers around a doctor (Martin Landau) 
who has been carrying on an affair with Anjelica Huston (and won't 
Gomez be pissed?) but now wants to break it off. She's suddenly 
been acting obsessive, threatening to blackmail him with not only 
the news of his unfaithfulness but also the knowledge of Landau's 
embezzlement.
        A guy like this would never consider something so serious 
as murder, but when his Mafioso brother Jack (Jerry Orbach) tells 
Landau he could have her bumped off with one phone call -- one 
very lethal phone call. The only voice of reason is a rabbi patient 
of his (Sam Waterston), but would you listen to a man with curly 
sideburns? Neither would he, and soon Huston has made her last 
threat... and yes, Gomez is pissed.
        On a lighter note, Woody plays a documentary director 
(probably the only media occupation he hasn't portrayed yet... 
Coming soon: Woody the Gaffer!) who is so hard up for work 
that he agrees to do a biopic of producer-of-TV-trash Alan Alda 
(translation: Aaron Spelling), a man Woody completely abhors. 
In a movie where everyone is guilty of some crime or misdemeanor, 
Woody's character's transgression is a more symbolic murder of 
his artistic integrity.
        On location for the documetary, Woody meets one of his 
co-producers, omnipresent Allen movie favorite Mia Farrow, and 
falls in love with her. But he's in competition with Alda, who's 
committing a crime or misdemeanor of the heart by trying to add a 
Farrow notch to his bedpost through deception and seduction. 
Never mind that Alda has been using and losing twentyish women 
through the entire movie and is now after menopausal Farrow, she 
falls for him even though a woman with her character and strength 
should obviously be with Woody.
        All these characters are tied together through some sort 
of blood or marriage lines and by the end Landau is getting advice 
from Woody, which is about the point I'd say bite the bullet and 
pay a therapist two hundred bucks an hour. In CRIMES AND 
MISDEMEANORS, Allen explores meaningful life questions about 
how some people can get away with murder and virtue isn't always 
rewarded. He also shows how guilt can trip up an otherwise perfect 
crime all the while adding in his usual perfectly hilarious one-liners. 
One more great film from Woody Hitchcock.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!
