Title
Review for Est-ouest (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Sony Pictures Classics
 Director: Regis Wargnier
 Writer: Serguei Bodrov, Louis Gardel, Roustam Ibraguimbek,
Regis Wargnier
 Cast: Sandrine Bonnaire, Oleg Menshikov, Catherine
Deneuve, Sergei Bodrov Jr., Ruben Tupiero, Erwan
Baynaud, Grigori Manukov, Tatyana Dogileva, Bogdan
Stupka, Meglena Karalambova, Atanass Atanassov, Tania
Massalitinova
   Shortly after the American troops withdrew from Vietnam in
1975, those U.S. citizens who fled to Canada and Sweden to
dodge the draft were invited to return without threat of
punishment.  All was forgiven, and a new spirit of
brotherhood was to usher in.  Meanwhile, decades earlier, in
1946, Stalin announced that all Russians who fled his country
to the West during the tumultuous days of the Russian
Revolution were invited to come back to work for a the rebirth
of the New Man.
   Which group of temporary expatriates--the Americans or
the Russians--fared better?  You guessed right.  The
Americans might have been resented by some of their
neighbors for a while, but in a short time no one really
remembered who had fought in Vietnam and who had evaded
the call to arms.  The Russian government, by contrast, was
about as trustworthy of Saddam Hussein when that Iraqi
dictator invited his brother-in-law to return to Baghdad, at
which time Saddam had the poor man executed.  In the case
of Regis Wargnier's movie "East-West," which is based on a
true story, no sooner did Russians returning from France to
Odessa set foot on the soil of their beloved country than they
were virtually all either executed for their betrayal of the
homeland or sent to labor camps in remote areas.  A few
exceptions were made for people whose skills could be
useful.  
   "East-West" is the story of one Russian man living abroad
in France for years whose skills as a doctor would prove
useful to the Stalinist regime and who was therefore allowed
to live.  Shipped out to Kiev in the Ukraine together with his
wife--a French citizen who followed her husband out of a
sense of duty and devotion and not because of any affection
for a foreign state--the two learned the meaning of freedom
the hard way.   
   I wouldn't blame some critics for looking on East-West as a
political tract.  It is so anti-Russian, so virulently opposed to
the first Communist state, that it appears to have been written
and directed by right-wing diehards.  The realists among us
who are quite familiar with man's inhumanity to man know
that this is not true.  Those who lived thorough the forties and
those who did not but who are history buffs who kept up on
their reading are familiar with the horrendous state of affairs
in Russia since their glorious revolution of 1917.  We know
that Stalin may have killed even more people than Hitler,
some estimating that up to thirty million of his own people
were either executed outright or perished in labor camps,
many quite innocent of any crimes against the state.  The
motive?  Simply to keep the Soviet people terrorized.  The
informants--shown regularly through this tense film--are
based on true characters, folks who thought like the envious
Spaniards during that country's Inquisition, and who freely
phoned the authorities to denounce people they did not like,
accusing them of anti-state activities.  It's all here in "East-
West," which is France's entry to the Oscar competition and
which had its initial run at the Toronto Film Festival.
   Director Wargnier--whose 1992 film "Indochine" featured
Catherine Deneuve as a rich landowner who adopted a
Vietnamese girl and had to contend with the girl's spirit of
independence later on--is more obviously political this time
around.  The story, filmed largely in the Bulgarian capital of
Sophia with a local crew often suspicious of the French
production team, features the lovely Sandrine Bonnaire as
Marie and Oleg Menshikov as her naive husband, Alexie
Golovin.  Following Alexie unwillingly back to Russia in the
midst of Stalin's alleged pardon, she realizes her mistake
during her very first week as the couple are assigned to stay
in a cramped communal apartment with co-tenants which
include a drunk, a whore, and one sympathetic old woman
who used to be the landlady of the residence.  But physical
discomforts take second priority when Marie witnesses the
arrest of the elderly woman--whose only crime is that she
joined Marie in singing a French song and is thereby accused
of collaboration with the imperialists.  Desperate to leave and
return to France--something that authorities would never
permit--she eventually locks her husband out, takes up with
the dead woman's 17-year-old grandson Sacha (Sergei
Bodrov Jr.), and becomes enmeshed in an involved plan to
flee the country with the help of a wandering French theater
group headed by actress Gabrielle Develay (Catherine
Deneuve).
   This wonderfully acted drama, smartly scored (featuring
some concert songs by a Red-Army-Band sort of troupe), is
quite unlike American political thrillers.  You'll be disappointed
if you expect explosions, endless rounds of machine gun
firing, bold leaps across rising drawbridges, and hot erotic
scenes.  Only a single gunshot is fired, off screen, and the
only physical violence is that carried out by a zealous
government official (Grigori Manoukov) who beats Marie
senseless to force a confession.  
   The 1940s were the big, bad years for the Soviet Union
under Stalin's iron hand.  Wargnier is not necessarily
opposed to what is going on in Russia today but he sure as
heck is no Stalinist.  We needn't wonder that when World
War Two involved the Soviet Union with Germany in June
1941, many in the West were hopeful that these nations, both
with evil governments, would make caviar schnitzel of each
other.  "East-West" is an important film with actors that are
wholly committed to its seriousness, one which deserves to
be seen by anyone who still has fantasies that the Soviet
government ever practiced Communism the way Karl Marx
would have intended.
Not Rated.  Running Time: 120 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Naiveté can be dangerous to your health.  Signs with these words should
have been required on the entrance to the Soviet Union after the end of
World War II as many Russian expatriates fled the freedom of the West to
return to their motherland.  Ignoring the rumors that Stalin was no less
a mass murderer than Hitler, they entered a mad house run by a
tyrannical dictator who committed atrocities with abandon.
Once inside this insane asylum of a country, they were in a Catch-22
world.  Even inquiring about leaving caused you to be declared an enemy
of the state.  Such criminals were shot or sent to labor camps from
which they might never be seen again.  But not trying to leave was
almost as risky since anyone could denounce you at anytime for any
reason, causing the same result.
Into this hellhole in EAST-WEST (EST-OUEST), a Russian doctor, Alexei
Golovin (Oleg Menshikov from BURNT BY THE SUN), and his French wife,
Marie (Sandrine Bonnaire from THE CEREMONY), immigrate along with their
son.  No sooner have they arrived than their boat load of people are
divided into the young and old, with the old being promptly shot.  Marie
doesn't look long for this world after the local KGB operative arrests
her, explaining to Alexei that "90% of immigrants returning to Russia
are imperialist spies."
After Alexei convinces the KGB agent to release his wife, the family
goes to live a meager existence in an old house with 5 other families.
Thursday, they are told sternly, is the day that their family gets the
bathroom.  The house is a hotbed of rumors, denunciations and black
market goods.  Once there, the family squabbles begin.  Marie is sure
that she is willing to risk everything to escape, reasoning that "every
prison has a way out."  Her husband's beliefs, on the other hand, are
much more ambiguous -- perhaps because he's more practical, perhaps
because he isn't as brave or perhaps because he feels bound to his
homeland.
EAST-WEST is inspired by history, but not based on a true story.  As
directed by Régis Wargnier and written by Sergei Bodrov and Louis
Gardel, the film is populated with characters who ring just a few notes
shy of true.   The chemistry between Marie and Alexei never seems
genuine, and the writers have them casually sleeping around with
next-door neighbors and coworkers.
The plot device of the young, championship swimmer (Sergei Bodrov Jr.),
who has various schemes to swim his way to his freedom and Marie's,
never seems believable.  Certainly incidents like that happened, but
here it feels awkwardly grafted onto the story like sticking a cherry
limb onto an oak tree.
Too often murky and with too many characters, the film works best when
the director focuses attention firmly on the leads and their actions.
For a similar, much better film, see LUCIE AUBRAC.  In it, the acting
was stronger and the directing sharper.
"The only hope for humanity: Communism," Khrushchev proclaims in a
television address late in the picture.  One cannot but appreciate the
hardships that the people under Communism faced.  EAST-WEST does succeed
in reminding us of that.
EAST-WEST runs 2:01.  The film is in French and Russian with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but might be PG-13 for wartime violence and
would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
