Title
Review for Biloxi Blues (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, visit http://surf.to/joblo
This film was the second installment of Neil Simon's trilogy of plays
based on his own youth. In 1986, BRIGHTON BEACH MEMOIRS debuted as part
one, with Jonathan Silverman embracing the lead role of Eugene Morris
Jerome. BILOXI BLUES came out in 1988, with Matthew Broderick as the
lead, and three years later, the TV movie BROADWAY BOUND closed off the
triad, with Corey Parker as the protagonist. 
PLOT:
Story follows one Eugene Morris Jerome, an insecure, highly-observant
wannabee writer, and virgin, from New York, over his ten-week World War
II boot camp trial in Biloxi, Mississippi . Several divergent young
recruits highlight his group of trainees, as well as an abusive drill
sergeant who will stop at nothing to discipline this naďve set of
youths. Many rites of passages and lessons of life are entertained
during this unsure time of their lives. 
CRITIQUE:
Interesting, playful comedy covers most bases of youthful exuberance
and insecurity, offers a terrific performance by Christopher Walken as
the highly unstable drill sergeant, but ultimately does nothing to
reinvent the boot camp Army flic genre. This movie's strongest points
of consideration are its witty and well-skewered lines delivered via
the pen of writer extraordinaire, Neil Simon, and the fascinating
exhibition delivered by Christopher Walken, in one of his best roles of
his career.
Most of the characters in this film play caricatures of this period,
but as a whole, the gang worked on the platform on which they were
asked to perform, and many of their presentations were top-notch. Corey
Parker was particularly outstanding as the arrogant, outspoken, Jewish
recruit who delivered one of the most poignant and relevant lines for
me as a writer, "Once you start compromising your thoughts, you're a
candidate for mediocrity." Great line! 
The style of the film does not offer us much more than any other film
of its genre, and the soundtrack could also have used a giant boost,
but overall, the film does deliver many laughs, some decent
performances, and a pretty intense scene between Walken and Broderick
nearing its finish. Also, I have always been a fan of epilogues, so I
did enjoy this one as well, but will admit that it did turn out to be a
little too schmaltzy if you really think about it. But most of all, it
is the idiosyncratic and genuine performance by Christopher Walken that
solidified this movie for me. He delivered all of his lines with
extreme coolness and pinache, and drew out a perfect scene as the drunk
sergeant on the brink of sanity. If you liked him in TRUE ROMANCE
(9/10) and AT CLOSE RANGE (7.5/10), you'll love him in this wonderfully
unhinged achievement.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
The stage version of this film also saw Matthew Broderick playing
Eugene Morris Jerome (He also replayed the character in the stage
version of BRIGHTON BEACH MEMOIRS), Penelope Ann Miller as Eugene's
first love, Matt Mulhern as Eugene's sometime-nemesis Wykowski, and
Park Overall as the earthy, whiskey-voiced prostitute who teaches
Eugene a thing or two about a thing or two.
Corey Parker, the actor who portrays the part of Epstein in this film,
played the lead character in Neil Simon's third installment of the
series, BROADWAY BOUND, Eugene Morris Jerome (part played by Matthew
Broderick in this film.)
Jonathan Silverman, the actor who portrayed Eugene in the first
installment of the series, BRIGHTON BEACH MEMOIRS, also showed up in
the TV movie BROADWAY BOUND, as Stanley Jerome.
Christopher Walken's real name is Ronald Walken. He has been married to
Georgianne Walken since 1969.
During the same year as this film, Penelope Ann Miller also played
Winnie, PeeWee Herman's girlfriend, in BIG TOP PEE-WEE.
Neil Simon's full name is Marvin Neil Simon.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Matthew Broderick recreates his stage
     role as Eugene Jerome, who goes to boot camp in Mississippi.
     The film's greatest virtue is the portrayal of the troubled
     and enigmatic platoon sergeant.  It's greatest fault is that
     the enigma is side-stepped rather than solved.  Still, this
     is a credible view of a World War II army boot camp.  Rating:
     high +1.
     There are lots of comedies about life in the military.  There are films
like MR. ROBERTS, STALAG 17, BUCK PRIVATES, STRIPES, and PRIVATE BENJAMIN.
The first two may have been written by someone who actually had been in the
military.  Somehow the last three show very little sign that anyone in their
production knew or cared what army life was about.  STRIPES is a Bill Murray
comedy set in the Army as opposed to be an army comedy starring Bill Murray.
No problem.  Bill Murray has lots of fans and one setting for his comedy is
as good as another.  But I can see a MR. ROBERTS or a STALAG 17 over and
over.  Watching STRIPES once--while reading a magazine--was plenty for me.
Whoever wrote it had a really solid understanding of Bill Murray humor.  The
writer of MR. ROBERTS gave more of an impression of knowing the military.
Someone else who had been in the military and knew it was Neil Simon.  His
BILOXI BLUES is not shallow, is not stereotyped, and gives the feel that
much of it might have happened.
     BILOXI BLUES follows the boot camp experiences of Eugene Morris Jerome
(played by Matthew Broderick) and his interactions with his sergeant (played
by Christopher Walken) and the other men in his platoon, especially Arnold
Epstein, an intellectual, the barracks butt, and the only Jew in the platoon
apart from Jerome himself.  But the character who steals the show is the
sergeant.  His enigmatic and idiosyncratic ways of building discipline are
the core of the film and overhang nearly every scene.  His character is,
unfortunately, much too easily dismissed by the events of the climax of the
film, so we never really come to understand him.  The mystery of why he
chooses such odd and intriguing lessons of discipline is never adequately
explained.
     BILOXI BLUES is not a great military comedy, but it is probably the
best thing director Mike Nichols has done in quite a long time.  Neil Simon
adapted--and rumor has it, greatly modified--his own autobiographical play.
At least three actors repeat their stage roles.  Besides Broderick, Penelope
Ann Miller returns to the part of Jerome's first love and Matt Mulhern
repeats as Jerome's sometime-nemesis Wykowski.  But even in this modified
version one has the feeling that this film is based on something real, not
fabricated as a backdrop.  Rate it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
