Title
Review for Josie and the Pussycats (2001)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The good news is that Josie and the Pussycats isn't nearly as bad as fellow
comic-book-to-film duds Dudley Do-right or The Flintstones.  The bad news is
that the producers chose to target the pre-pubescent girl market instead of
the horny, single, thirty-something guy demographic.  We...I mean they are
the ones who made the show popular as they dreamed of marrying Josie and
having cute little cartoon babies with tails, so the film may seem like
somewhat of a betrayal to that particular sect.
Seriously.  In the Hanna-Barbera cartoon, the Pussycats wore leopard-skin
bodysuits, but they've been abandoned for more hip threads.  The cat ears
just aren't cute enough, although the low-cut tops kind of help.  Many
people don't realize the historical significance of the television show,
which, I think, was one of the first cartoons about a rock band to feature a
black character (the NAACP website doesn't keep track of stuff like that).
Although Valerie wasn't in the original comic book Pussycat lineup, she was
a trendsetter - a strong, smart black character added to the white mix some
25 years before prime-time network shows started doing the same.
The film, which is surprisingly funny, begins at an airport where the
world's hottest boy band is being mobbed by their squealing teenage fans as
they board their private jet.  DuJour (played by Seth Green, Alexander
Martin, Breckin Meyer and Donald Faison), which, I think, is French for
One-Hit Wonder, is managed by the sinister,
he'd-twirl-a-moustache-if-he-had-one record executive Wyatt Frame (Spy Kids'
Alan Cumming), who sees the boys are in their 14th minute of fame and
decides it's time to "replace" them with a newer, hipper band.
Enter The Pussycats, a struggling band from Riverdale (it was Midvale in the
comic, but who's counting) who perform to unenthusiastic bowlers at the
local alley.  Frame swoops in, signs the girls and takes them to the top of
the charts in just one week.  But the Pussycats don't realize Frame and his
equally diabolical boss, Fiona (Parker Posey, Best in Show), are inserting
subliminal messages into their songs.  The secret messages tell listeners,
among other things, that the Pussycats are the greatest band ever, that Diet
Coke is the new Pepsi One, and that Can't Hardy Wait was underrated (Harry
Elfont and Deborah Kaplan also wrote/directed that film).
The Pussycats are suspicious of their quick success but are easily
distracted by various things.  Drummer Melody Valentine (Tara Reid, Just
Visiting) is just too dumb to pay attention, bassist Valerie Brown (Rosario
Dawson, Down to You) is too concerned that she's not getting enough credit,
and Josie (Rachael Leigh Cook, Blow Dry) is too busy trying to get Alan M.
(Gabriel Mann, Outside Providence) to say that he loves her.
Josie is short on story but long on quick gags and inside jokes.  There's
the obligatory makeover scene once the girls get their record contract, and
it's as stylish as hell, thanks to Requiem For a Dream's cinematographer
Matthew Libatique.  There's a ton of pop culture references and appearances
from music movers and shakers like Serena Altschul, Reid's real-life
braintrust boyfriend Carson Daly, and a hysterical cameo from executive
producer Kenneth "Babyface" Adams.
The music is decent, with Letters to Cleo's Kay Hanley handling the lead
vocals while the three Pussycats provide the Linda McCartneyesque background
voices.  In the cartoon, Valerie played the tambourine, but effortlessly
switches to bass here.  She does well, looking as bored as a bass player
should.  The press notes make a big deal about the three women carefully
learning how to play their instruments to make the film look more real, but
I don't think I saw Reid hit the drums once.
Here's a quick thought about product placement in films, which is the most
evil thing this side of Scientology.  There's enough in Josie's first five
minutes to pay for it and two or three sequels, and that's just the tip of
the iceberg.  Films that make product placement integral to the plot (like
Mystery, Alaska) think they've found a way around being labeled as sellouts,
but their activity is completely shameful.  It would be just as easy to make
a picture with fictitious advertisers and salvage a few threads of integrity
(like Repo Man).  It's also odd to see a film about brainwashing, conformity
and product placement without any ads for The Gap.
1:38 - PG-13 for language and sensuality

Author
Steve Rhodes
JOSIE AND THE PUSSYCATS is SPICEWORLD but with -- are you ready for 
this? -- an actual plot.  It's about nothing less than a "conspiracy to 
brainwash the kids of America with pop music," specifically with 
subliminal messages.
A cute-as-a-button Rachael Leigh Cook (ANTITRUST) plays lead singer 
Josie McCoy of the Pussycats.  Rosario Dawson (HE GOT GAME) and Tara 
Reid (AMERICAN PIE) play Scary Spice and Baby Spice, oops, I mean 
Valerie Brown and Melody Valentine, the group's guitarist and drummer.  
Fiona (Parker Posey), the maniacal manager of MegaRecords, accurately 
calls the latter two, "Mopey and Dopey."  The group is based on a 
Hanna-Barbera cartoon series from the early 1970s, which was itself 
based on a 1963 Archie comic book.
As the story begins, a boy band, DuJour, is in a descent so rapid that 
they'll soon vanish, so their manager, Wyatt Frame (Alan Cumming, SPY 
KIDS) has to locate a new band pronto, or Fiona will have his head on a 
platter.  Once he literally runs into the Pussycats, he decides to make 
them overnight stars without even bothering to hear them sing.  
Rocketing to number one in their first week, their fame is like a sudden 
and unexpected tornado.
The movie, written and directed in a collaborative effort by Harry 
Elfont and Deborah Kaplan, who last gave us the miserable comedy CAN'T 
HARDLY WAIT, is full of fun hi-jinks and lots and lots of high energy 
music.  The songs are actually sung by Kay Handley of Letters to Cleo, 
but the three lead actresses sing back-up.
The funniest parts of the story are the product placement parodies.  
Everything in the girls' rooms from the wallpaper to the bedspreads is 
filled with corporate logos.  "We will turn the world into one gigantic 
TV commercial," Fiona brags.  Usually spectacular, Posey delivers a 
chillingly off-kilter performance as the weird, wacky woman CEO of 
MegaRecords.  With their subliminal messages, MegaRecords is able to 
turn the opinions of millions of young consumers on a dime, causing them 
to shell out cash like a broken slot machine.  Thinking thoughts like, 
"orange is the new pink" and "feathers are the new rhinestones," the 
teens have to go out and buy the latest fashion fad to replace perfectly 
good items that they already have.   
Eventually, of course, Josie rebels against being a "trend pimp" for 
Fiona, and begins to sing songs free of secret messages.  Even if the 
movie isn't exactly unforgettable, the same can't be said for the main 
song, "3 Small Words," which sticks in your brain like Super Glue.  You 
don't think that there really are some hidden messages in it, do you?  
Personally, I don't.  At any rate, I'm too busy right now to think about 
it.  I've got to buy some new Nikes so I can walk to McDonalds and get a 
Coca-Cola and a Big Mac.  After that there are 17 items of designer 
clothing at the mall that I just remembered that I absolutely have to 
buy before sunset.
JOSIE AND THE PUSSYCATS runs 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for language and 
sensuality and would be acceptable for kids around 7 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave it ***.  He said that it was funny and that 
he liked Josie and loved the music.  He remarked how much the film was 
like SPICEWORLD.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I've always felt that all film "critics" should at least be able to
appreciate the type of movie that they're watching before voicing their
opinion on it. I mean, is any 50-year old man's opinion of this film, which
is obviously geared towards teenage girls, really gonna matter to a 13-year
girl in the target audience? I highly doubt it. So what makes my opinion of
this film any better? (I'm a dude in my late 20s) Well, for starters, I was
sent a nasty little email by a "fan" a few weeks ago, who actually called me
a "teen girl" because I happened to rate GET OVER IT with a higher grade
than his apparent notions of "genius cinema" like HAPPINESS and BEFORE NIGHT
FALLS. Of course, I take every email seriously, so if I'm a "teen girl",
would I like this movie...if I was a teen girl, would I like this movie...if
I was a teen girl...? 
PLOT:
Based on the popular cartoon series from the Archie Comics, Josie and her
best friends Val and Melody have a musical group called "The Pussycats".
When an evil manager comes to Riverdale to find himself a new hot group, he
hooks up with the Pussycats and makes them one of the more popular bands in
the world within a few weeks. Of course, he's also slapping subliminal
messages into their songs so that the government could mold the minds of the
young, but what else is new, right? :)
CRITIQUE:
A cute, harmless little movie that will likely be enjoyed by both young boys
and girls, with catchy, bubblegum songs, many clever in-jokes, some lulls,
some misses but an overall sense of fun. This movie tries to do what
CHARLIE'S ANGELS did last year, with bright colors, energetic scenes, lotsa
style, lotsa winkie-wink moments...but for teens! Unfortunately, this movie
only semi-succeeds with too many jokes which try to be funny, but aren't, a
few corny "romance" moments and a way too obvious story line (I know, I
know...that's not why we see movies like this one, but still!). And a lot
like the latter film, this movie knows that it's there just for fun, milking
many a pop culture moment and even making the obvious "pussy" joke during
its opening credits (impressively daring!). There's also the whole TRL
sequence in which Tara Reid's character is going back and forth with Carson
Daly, which is quite hilarious (they are a real-life couple) and even more
fun is paid at the expense of the entire "boy band" phenomenon (go Seth!).
The movie is also quite self-referential, like the one spot in which one of
the characters is asked why she is tagging along with the band and she says,
"Because I was in the comic book".
But the funniest two characters in the whole movie are Melody (Tara Reid)
and the evil manager (Alan Cumming). They both stole every scene in which
they were present, and you couldn't help but enjoy Melody's complete
goofiness. Great performances from both actors! In fact, all three Pussycats
played their characters very well (although Rosario Dawson seemed quite
"big" compared to the others) and made you believe in them. I did however
think the character of Alan M. was completely miscast as a sensitive skinny
dude, as he's always been known as the jockey built guy in the comics (yup,
I still read Archie comics, boys and girls...it's pretty darn sad). But like
I said before, there were also way too many moments in which not much was
happening, or "funniness" was supposed to occur, but it just didn't gel
(like Parker Posey's character, who wasn't as humorous as you'd think). In
the end, the movie is basically just having a lot of fun with itself, so I
don't think anyone seeing it should take it too seriously either. Of course,
that doesn't mean that it's a "good" movie by any means, but if you're in
the mood for mindless, goofy, teen, bubbly fun, than you could do worse. I
guess what I'm saying is basically what Josie said near the end of the film
before her final song (allow me to paraphrase): "If you think it's cool,
great, and if you don't, that's fine, too. But decide on your own."
Did I just quote Josie in my review? Yipes...maybe they really did
subliminally slip some things into this movie 
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Almost Famous (8/10) - Austin Powers 2 (7/10) - Charlie's Angels (8/10) -
Coyote Ugly (6/10) - Detroit Rock City (8/10) - Disturbing Behavior (7/10) -
Fight Club (10/10) - Grease (8/10)

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Deborah Kaplan & Harry Elfont.
Cast: Rachael Leigh Cook, Tara Reid, Rosario Dawson, Alan Cumming, Parker 
Posey, Gabriel Mann, Missi Pyle, Paulo Costanzo, Breckin Meyer, Seth Green, 
Donald Faison, Carson Daly.
2001 - 98 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for mild profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, April 11, 2001.
"Josie and the Pussycats," writing-directing team Deborah Kaplan and Harry 
Elfont's (1998's "Can't Hardly Wait") big-screen ode to the '60s Archie comic 
and the short-lived '70s animated television show, is silly, fun, paper-thin, 
and cleverly satirical. It's not going to win any major awards (unless its 
catchy main tune, "3 Small Words," gets a much-deserved Oscar nomination come 
next year), and it doesn't quite hold up after close scrutiny, but it's 
entertaining while it lasts, which is probably what the movie's major goal 
was in the first place.
MegaRecords managing executive Wyatt Frame (Alan Cumming) and his diabolical 
boss and CEO of the company, Fiona (Parker Posey), have one goal, and one 
goal only: to hire a band and wickedly hide subliminal messages and product 
placements within their songs, brainwashing the youth of America. When DuJour 
(translation: "[soup] of the day"), MegaRecords' all-boy band of the moment, 
threatens to cause the company problems, they are quickly dispatched of. 
Fiona gives Wyatt just one day to find their "next big thing," which, by 
chance, comes in the form of three bubbly young women and aspiring musicians 
living in the peaceful town of Riverdale, who wish for nothing but to hit it 
big. Before long, Wyatt has signed The Pussycats (now known as "Josie and the 
Pussycats") to a scorching record deal, and in a week, have shot to the #1 
spot on the Billboard charts, with millions of obsessive fans around the 
world clamoring to see them perform in person. Little do starry-eyed Josie 
(Rachael Leigh Cook), densely sweet Melody (Tara Reid), and serious-minded 
Valerie (Rosario Dawson) know, their music is being used to send out mixed 
messages to those listening. 
Zippy and cute, "Josie and the Pussycats" does nothing but achieve at making 
a pitch-perfect version of the Archie comic from which it is based on. 
Everything from the bright color scheme to the fantastically off-beat 
premise, the film just oozes "comic." Luckily, there is a bit more going on 
underneath than just a direct interpretation of the source material. The cast 
has a blast with their respective roles, and the music by Josie and the 
Pussycats (lead vocals by Kay Hanley of Letters to Cleo, with backup by the 
actresses) is unpredictably--almost shockingly--good, so much so that they 
could truly-to-goodness pass for a talented real-life, all-girl, alt-rock 
group.
As Josie herself, Rachael Leigh Cook (2001's "Antitrust") shows charismatic 
promise with a front-and-center role that hasn't been equaled since her 1999 
hit, "She's All That." Tara Reid (2001's "Just Visiting") is easily the 
standout, with her Melody an absolutely endearing character who may be looked 
upon as a "ditzy blonde," but happily trudges through life always looking on 
the bright side. Reid springs Melody to life, as her character could actually 
act as a very positive role model for pre-teens and teenagers everywhere. 
Rosario Dawson (2000's "Down to You") is the weakest link of the three, but 
only because her character of Val isn't as memorable as the other two are. 
Dawson remains likable, nonetheless, and a perfectly respectable way to round 
out the trio of Pussies.
Alan Cumming, more or less replaying his character from the current "Spy 
Kids," and Parker Posey (2000's "Scream 3"), ham it up as the scheming 
villains who are hiding an added secret to themselves. Cumming is good in 
anything he's in, and Posey gets many laughs from her overtly evil, 
occasionally lisping, food-obsessed diva. In other supporting roles, Gabriel 
Mann (2000's "Cherry Falls"), as Josie's best friend and potential boyfriend, 
Alan M, is appropriately bland, as is Paulo Costanzo (2000's "Road Trip"), as 
the girls' novice agent. Meanwhile, Missi Pyle (1999's "Trick") is a comic 
delight as Costanzo's dedicated sister.
Although it is there to make a point, and does directly correlate with the 
plot, the over-the-top product placements present in "Josie and the 
Pussycats" do grow monotonous after a while. Not only do they sometimes 
distract, and detract, from the subject matter of the given scene, but they 
also feel artificial and antithetical. Sure, the movie deals with product 
placements being used as subliminal messages, but all of the companies 
(including McDonalds, Target, Tide, Colgate, MTV, Entertainment Tonight, 
Evian, Krispy Kreme, among literally hundreds of others) were sure to 
compensate the producers real well with the added promotion. In this case, 
less might have been more.
In an age of cynicism, "Josie and the Pussycats" is innocent, light-hearted, 
and charming. Perfect for children, as well as adults, the movie might not be 
free of flaws (actually, it is far from it, with an opening half-hour that 
has trouble finding its footing), but it is free of terribly risque or 
raunchy humor, which works in the film's favor. And Tara Reid's Melody 
Valentine most definitely gives us an idea of the zestful mindframe of the 
Pussycats with one of the movie's best lines: "If I could go back in time," 
she cheerily proclaims, "I would love to meet Snoopy."
 http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/DustinPutman.htm
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Christopher Null
Remember all those television-themed movies in the 90s, big-screen
versions of TV favorites that were devoid of any energy (The
Flintstones, The Beverly Hillbillies, The Little Rascals, Sgt. Bilko)? 
Well, forget that problem with Josie and the Pussycats.  This pop
culture comedy is just popping with giggles, laughs, rockin' tunes, a
smart script, and an infectious spirit.
If you're old enough to remember the Josie and the Pussycats cartoon
(from the Archie comics), but young enough to have actually watched it,
you'll dig this.  The plot is a kick -- a trio of peace-loving, friends
4-ever, rockin' chicks get hurled into the limelight as the next big
thing... only to realize they're just a corporate vessel carrying
subliminal messages that make teenagers part with their cash.
It's the same idea as last year's failed Adventures of Rocky and
Bullwinkle, but this is faster and sharper, with the sly flavor of an
Austin Powers or perhaps, a Wayne's World.  Director-writers Harry
Elfont and Deborah Kaplan create a pseudo-futuristic setting where
product placement is in every nook and cranny of life -- right down to
the McDonald's washcloth in the hotel that's shaped like an order of
fries.  Visual jokes like these come in piles, and if you blink, you
might miss some awfully good ones (quick magazine headline: Barrymore,
Diaz, & Liu to star as Pussycats!)
But let's not get carried away.  The story is often mighty thin, but in
a movie revolving around rock music, no problem: music video time! 
Sounds easy, and it probably is easy, but here it works.  The Pussycats
-- Rachael Leigh Cook, Tara Reid, and Rosario Dawson -- play around in
the montages with unparalleled adrenaline and happiness, and the songs
are flat-out great rock tunes (real lead vocals by Boston rock hottie
Kay Hanley).  The videos are edited with an MTV flair, but without
falling into parody.  Makes you wanna leap into the movie and jump
around.
A surprisingly plodding final act is saved by our two villains: music
moguls played by Alan Cumming and Parker Posey.  Both rip into their
roles, chewing up the dialogue and the scenery with an appropriate zest,
getting nearly all the laughs and looking like they're having a great
time, too.
Be aware, however, that some demographics are just not going to get
this.  If you know about today's boy bands, but are smart enough to
realize they're as processed as Hormel meats, this is for you.  If you
know the connection between Pussycat Tara Reid and MTV darling Carson
Daly, then this is really for you.
By the time the Pussycats save the day and reach rock stardom, it's
tough to wipe the grin off your face.  There's probably another show and
another adventure just around the corner.  Pussycats in Outer Space,
anyone?
Director: Harry Elfont, Deborah Kaplan
Producers: Tony DeRosa-Grund, Tracey E. Edmonds, Chuck Grimes, Marc E.
Platt
Writers: Harry Elfont, Deborah Kaplan
Starring: Rachael Leigh Cook, Tara Reid, Rosario Dawson, Parker Posey,
Alan Cumming, Gabriel Mann
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Laura Clifford
In a Riverdale, California of the future, three best friends, Josie McCoy
(Rachel Leigh Cook, "AntiTrust"), Valerie Brown (Rosario Dawson, "Kids")
and Melody Valentine (Tara Reid, "American Pie") are a band trying to
get their breakthrough gig in "Josie and the Pussycats."
The old 1960's Archie comic book and 1970's animated cartoon have been given
a very modern update by writer/director duo Deborah Kaplan and Harry Elfont
("Can't Hardly Wait").  Although the 'take-over-the-world via subliminal
brainwashing' plotline is trite and cause for brash product placement, the 
characters are fresh and fun enough to make for a sprightly entertainment.
The film begins by introducing us to reigning boy group Du Jour performing
on an airport runway to wildly appreciative fans.  Aboard their private plane,
heavily adorned with Target and Tide ads, petty squabbling among the group
has made evil manager Wyatt Frame (Alan Cumming, "Spy Kids") grow weary, so
he and the pilot parachute out leaving the group to their fate.  Wyatt
spots Josie and her pals outside a record shop and signs them up MegaRecords.
Meanwhile MegaRecords CEO Fiona (Parker Posey, "Best in Show") is demonstrating
to the FBI and representatives of foreign nations her high tech gizmo for 
putting subliminal messages like 'Orange is the new pink!' and 'Josie and the 
Pussycats are the best band in the world!' designed to control teenagers and 
their buying power into the pop music she sells.  Cleanup of bands who 
cotton onto her scheme and become dangerous are dealt with, she explains,
by the "Behind the Music" documentary she produces for VH1.
Wyatt wings the girls into a city coated with promotional neon and dominated
by Mcdonalds' golden arches where they begin a whirlwind week of photo
shoots, recording and video production that culminates with their single
at the top of the charts.  When the trio prove too tight for manipulation,
Wyatt brainwashes Josie into a meglomaniacal rock star and dispatches Valerie
and Melody to certain death at the hands of MTV's Carson Daly.
The cast is game if not all equally necessary.  Cook, Dawson and Reid all
learned to play their instruments and really look like a working pop group
(Kate Hanley of Letters to Cleo provides Josie's vocals).  Cook's perky
and resilient while Dawson projects intelligence and doubt.  Tara Reid's
the most delightful as a warm and bubbly ditz who fantasizes about realizing
such turns of phrase as 'I can't be everywhere at the same time.'  Alan
Cumming, who's not always prudent in choosing his roles, is a delight here
as the scheming Wyatt although Posey's camping doesn't show much inspiration.
Gabriel Mann ("Outside Providence") is charming as Alan M., Riverdale's sexiest
guy who Josie wants more than friendship from.  Alexander (Paulo Costanzo,
"Road Trip") and Alexandra (Missi Pyle, "Galaxy Quest") Cabot are around
because they were in the comic book, as Alexandra informs us in the film,
but add little to the overall mix.  The oddly uncreditted members of the
hilarious parody boy band Du Jour include Seth Green ("Austin Powers").
Technically, the film is first rate featuring trippy camera tricks by
Matthew Libatique ("Requiem for a Dream"), eye popping production design
from Jasna Stefanovich ("The Virgin Suicides") and Leesa Evans' ("American
Pie") wildly colorful costumes.  While the script's basic outline is lame,
it delivers some funny dialogue and pithy music industry observations (when 
Du Jour's plane is lost a TV newsman reports 'The record label didn't issue 
a statement, but they did issue a commerative box set which will go on sale 
tomorrow.')  Original songs produced by Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds could
all achieve radio play on their own merits.
"Josie and the Pussycats" is a surprisingly fun lark that should appeal to
the same audience that enjoyed last year's "Charlie's Angels."
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
