Title
Review for Demolition Man (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Marco Brambilla
Writers: Daniel Waters, Robert Reneau, and Peter M. Lenkow
Starring: Sylvester Stallone, Wesley Snipes, Sandra Bullock, Nigel
Hawthorne, Denis Leary, Bob Gunton, Benjamin Bratt, Glenn Shadix, Andre
Gregory, Rob Schneider, Dan Cortese
Being a fan of anything dystopian, and not being a fan of much
Stallonian kind of brings me to a big conflict in this film.  We get a
negative view of a futuristic utopian society, which is perfect except
that they aren't able to fight off anything bad, and they listen to
jingles from the 50s as music.  And then we get Stallone - all buff, and
all bad-ass, being tossed into utopia, just to give it a nice twist. 
This flick wants to be like a new wave version of "1984" and/or "Brave
New World," but kind of fails because of its new little clever twist.
The "Demolition Man" of the title is none other than Sly, a renegade cop
named John Spartan in the bad-ass world of L.A. 1997 (the designated
year for all apocalyptic sci-fi thrillers of the early 90s), who has an
obsession with catching uber-psycho criminal Simon Pheonix (the
Rodman-looking Wesley Snipes).  One night, he dives into a large
warehouse of his to catch him, but ends up prompting Phoenix to ignite
the entire warehouse, killing a bunch of innocent kidnapped people.  He,
and Phoenix, are sentenced to the new wave form of capitol punishment:
frozen and rehabilitated through computers.  So John strips down, we see
some stuff we don't want to see, and he's cryogenically (spelling?)
frozen.
Skip a couple decades, and the world of L.A. is now renamed, and has
been transformed into a utopian wonderworld, all run by the high
priest/fascist/big brother Cocteau (awesome brit actor Nigel Hawthorne),
who is aiming for a perfect society.  His only problem is a little
underground pest named Edgar Friendly (the typecasted Denis Leary), who
is trying to rebel against utopianism, and bring back the good old days
of high fat, nicotine, and open pornography.  So, being the smart guy he
is, he unfreezes Phoenix, and tries to get him to do away with Edgar. 
As I said, he's a smart guy.
After a bit of rampaging around town, the cops, lead by the stuck-up Bob
Gunton, decide to unfreeze Spartan, and have him go after Phoenix. 
Teaming up with the highly energized Lenina Huxley (Sandra Bullock,
before that whole "Speed" stuff), he goes after Phoenix, learns about
how stupid and inane the society is, and just gets to kick some villian
buttocks.
Now, let me say, the view of Utopia is nice and all, but it's not nearly
negative enough.  I chuckled at the idea of the jingles populating
"oldie" radio, as well as the whole non-touching policy, and the
no-swearing deal (which is broken not too long after Spartan and/or
Phoenix are unfrozen).  The bit about the "three seashells" deal was
classic, as well as the whole sex bit (which prompts a classic scene
where a giddy Bullock asks Sly if he wants to have sex with her).  Oh,
and the whole Lenina Huxley name was a nice little idea (Huxley being
the last name of Aldous, who wrote the great dystopian novel "Brave New
World," and Lenina being the name of one of the chief characters in it).
But.  There's nothing really negative to say about this Utopia, other
than that the only big restaurant franchise is Taco Bell (not a bad
thing, really).  The people who populate it seem to be happy, with a
couple exceptions.  I know I'd hate it, but all the film offers up is
how Lenina wants "some action," not sure in which context.  The
paralleism it wants to make with that of the Leary underground living
never quite works out, since it glorifies it by having Sly bask in it
all ("Oh! I'm eating a ratburger?  Not bad." - this is not a quote, but
something along the lines of what he says while down there).  Thus the
little trite solution at the end - "You guys get a little dirtier, and
you guys get a little cleaner, and somewhere in the middle is your
solution" - never really lifts the film off the ground.
In fact, the whole bit about the war between Phoenix and Sly is never
really that great.  Sure, the action scenes are fun to watch, and both
of them contribute a lot to the humor and overall fun of it all, but
they never mean anything.  If this is a dystopian satire, why does the
film just shoot it's way to its conclusion?  Then there's the bit about
how they obtain weaponry: just going to the museum, where there's a
plethora of guns, ammo, explosions, etc.  Why not just have them duke it
out weapon-less?  This could have led to an original film overall,
instead of this cheap little bit about them just fighting like in all
big budget action pics.
On a plus side, this film is marginally fun to watch.  The performances
of Sly and Snipes are funny, and they have some good chemistry
together.  Some.  Snipes does overpower Sly in that he has the cool-ass
villain role, and he takes it to its farthest limits, making him
likable.  And Sly actually does a good job with the comedy this time. 
Bullock, although garnering a Razzie nomination for this, has a lot of
energy in a role that requires her to be giddy a lot of the time.  Leary
gets to do a rant, so he's good and all that stuff.  And Nigel Hawthorne
rocks, standing out by giving undoubtedly the best performance in the
flick.  Then again, this guy's done Shakespeare, a feat that no one in
this film probably has done...well, maybe Rob Schneider or Dan
Cortese...
"Demoliton Man" isn't a bad flick.  In fact, it's rather pretty fun to
watch.  But it has failed idealism as a work of action dystopia - a
formula that COULD work if in the hands of someone else.  But Marco
Brambilla, who would go on to direct that Alicia crap-sterpiece "Excess
Baggage," just tries to please everyone, and thus fails.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jason John Seaver
     Combine KNIGHT RIDER 2000 and CROCODILE DUNDEE with a tiny bit of
BRAVE NEW WORLD, and the result will, for better or worse, be something
like Silver Pictures' new action comedy, DEMOLITION MAN.  In this case,
it manages to be better than several of its components, although the
writers have an unfortunate tendency to play it safe a little too
often.
     The movie opens in 1996 as LAPD sergeant John "Demolition Man"
Spartan heads into his final confrontation with Simon Phoenix, a
sociopathic criminal he's been trying to collar for two years.  Though
Phoenix is captured, the warehouse he was using as his headquarters is
completely destroyed, and more than twenty hostages are found dead in
the wreckage.  Both men are sentenced to cryo-prison, where they will
be placed in suspended animation, having rehabilitation work fed
directly into their minds.
     Thirty-six years later, Phoenix escapes when thawed out for a
parole hearing.  Within two hours he's killed seventeen people; a
development for which the San Angeles (much of LA was leveled by "the
big one of 2010," LA and several other cities have become the idyllic
San Angeles metroplex) Police Department, which hasn't had to deal with
a "Murder Death Kill" in twenty years, is woefully unprepared.
Luckily, the cop who brought Phoenix in last time is in cold
storage....
     The producers must be congratulated for going out on a limb here.
While people would have paid to see a movie that was little more than a
two-hour shootout between Stallone and Snipes, the movie has a
satirical bent.  It pokes fun at formulaic action movies--someone
actually comments on a one-liner thrown out in the middle of a fight,
and when Spartan gets angry at being regarded as some sort of
action-movie stereotype, the speaker simply switches him from the
"macho he-man" stereotype to the "brooding loner" ideal.  The dwindling
American attention span has been extrapolated to where fifteen-second
commercials are the most popular music.  The fear of intimacy being
created in the AIDS era has extended to the point where nobody ever
touches each other, not even to shake hands.  What some observers see
as a disturbing trend to sacrifice freedom for safety in America today
is pervasive.  The names "Spartan" and "Phoenix" actually seem to be
chosen with something in mind, and an "underground" movement is to be
taken literally.  Stallone and Snipes look like photographic negatives
of each other early on in the movie.
     However, many of the interesting questions that could be raised in
this movie are given lightweight treatment.  Spartan had a wife and
daughter, and though his spouse's death is one of the first things he
learns when being revived, he doesn't seem to react much.  Spartan
mentions a nightmare that lasted thirty years, and Phoenix had a
similar experience, but little is made out of it.  And though at least
some explanation is offered for the radical changes in society (better
than with most movies of this genre, most recently typified by
Fortress), it doesn't quite seem adequate.  And is the sterile
environment limited to San Angeles, or does it extend to all of
California/ the United States/North America/western civilization/the
world?  Also, it would seem that Spartan has more in common with
Phoenix than anyone else in this future, but little is done with this.
     The action is well-shot, and the special effects are pretty
seemless.  They even showed a metric temperature reading that didn't
say "degrees Kelvin," although the object in question was a 1 K without
any visible insulation.  The acting is tolerable.  Stallone, though
somewhat wooden, has learned a lot about playing the straight man from
his brief foray into comedy, and pulls off his lines here without
embarrassment, and actually managing to elicit quite a few laughs.
Wesley Snipes throws caution to the wind as Simon Phoenix with an
over-the-top portrayal of the insane criminal mastermind.  Bullock is
fairly poor, but it fits with the character she plays.  Hawthorne is
passable, and half of Denis Leary's four scenes are more or less
carried by material straight out of his stand-up routine (he even
starts pacing back and forth).  Rob Schnieder from Saturday Night Live
also shows up as a character who might have escaped from an SNL skit
about bureaucrats you want to punch out on sight.
     DEMOLITION MAN falls in the 7.0-7.5 range.  It's more clever than
the average action movie, but missed several opportunities.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Starring:  Sylvester Stallone, Wesley Snipes, Sandra Bullock, 
                Nigel Hawthorne, Denis Leary
     Director:  Marco Brambilla
     Producers:  Joel Silver, Michael Levy, and Howard Kazanjian
     Screenplay:  Daniel Walters, Robert Reneau, and Peter M. Lenkov
     Music:  Elliot Goldenthal
     Released by Warner Brothers
It's 1996 and Los Angeles has become a war zone.  The Hollywood sign is 
on fire, and the rest of the city is in worse shape.  Into this situation 
comes one of LA's most feared cops, John Spartan, the "demolition man" 
(Sylvester Stallone), an officer who will destroy a $7 million building 
to save one little girl's life.  His nemesis is sadistic psycho Simon 
Phoenix (Wesley Snipes) who kills for the joy of it.  In a seven-minute, 
action-filled prologue, Good Guy chases Bad Guy through a burning, 
exploding inferno.  Alas, however, even though our valiant hero captures 
his prey, he gets blamed for the deaths of innocent hostages, and, like 
the evil villain he pursued, is sentenced to many years in cryogenic 
captivity.  
Shift the scene to 2032.  Bad Guy has escaped and the peace-loving cops 
of the decade have released Good Guy prematurely from his sleep, because 
he's the only one who can stop the sudden spree of death and mayhem.  
Accompanied by his partner Love Interest (aka Lenina Huxley, played by 
Sandra Bullock), Good Guy again sets off in pursuit.  Many dead bodies, 
bruises, torn shirts, and explosions later, we in the audience start to 
feel that this film is going absolutely nowhere, and taking an awfully 
long time getting there.
Actually, it probably isn't as bad as all that, but the plot of this 
movie is too obviously just an idiotic framework upon which to hang the 
numerous action sequences that push DEMOLITION MAN forward.  Although 
essentially pointless and ultimately repetitious, these are occasionally 
entertaining.  The tedious part is when an attempt is made to create a 
story around the shoot-outs and explosions.
For something like this to work, suspension of disbelief is necessary, 
yet the movie makes no attempt to create a viable scenario whereby this 
can be achieved.  The world of 2032 is cartoon-like, with silly, stilted 
dialogue peppered with awkward-sounding slang (perhaps a linguist should 
have been consulted), and technological achievements that are better-
suited to one-hundred years beyond this time.  The brief history lesson 
we're given of the years between 1996 and 2032 tells a tale that is so 
ludicrous it's laughable.
Laughter is something that DEMOLITION MAN is good at generating but, as 
you can probably guess, most of the funniest bits are supposed to be 
serious.  Assuredly, the movie tries for a fair amount of comic relief, 
but those moments are mostly comprised of juvenile gags and one-liners.  
It's incidents like when Wesley Snipes gets whacked twice with a TV set 
and barely suffers a bruise that make up the real humor.
All-in-all, this is about as brainless as action films get.  There might 
have been some attempt to imitate elements of TOTAL RECALL, but most of 
this seems to have gotten lost someplace in the numerous re-writes.  
There's a subplot about Good Guy's lost daughter that also gets dropped.  
My pet theory is that she was supposed to be Sandra Bullock, but when the 
decision was made to create Love Interest, that part of the story got 
stripped away.  After all, it wouldn't do to have intimations of incest 
in a straightforward action flick.  All we need in a Stallone movie are 
fights and profanity.
Speaking of profanity, one of the few running gags that works (at least 
in the beginning - it gets annoying with repetition) is a "Big Brother" 
machine that fines people for incidents of swearing.  Also a source of 
mild amusement is the fascination of the people of 2032 with 20th century 
commercial jingles.  "I Wish I Was an Oscar Meyer Wiener" is a big hit. 
It's about as meaningless to talk about acting as characterization.  
Sylvester Stallone grunts and flexes his muscles.  Wesley Snipes grimaces 
and bares his pearly-whites (and what's the deal with that awful blonde 
hairdo?).  Sandra Bullock proves just how silly her dialogue is.  And 
Denis Leary is Denis Leary, doing his slick fast-talking routine and 
seeming completely out of place (you keep waiting for the multi-nicknamed 
Deion Sanders to show up).
Yes, this film is worse than CLIFFHANGER, Stallone's last venture into 
chaos.  And, while I'm not one to leap forward and extol the limitless 
virtues of TOTAL RECALL, that motion picture is a masterpiece in 
comparison to this one.  At least there, the future was believable.  
Here, it's a hopelessly cliched place where the explosions can 
conveniently be boosted by a few nifty (but not especially original) 
special effects.
In the end, that's all this film is:  flames, flying bullets, and special 
effects.  It could be worse, I suppose, but as long as people go into 
this film with their eyes open, there shouldn't be any surprises.  And if 
there's one lasting question to carry away from DEMOLITION MAN, it's how 
Arnold Schwarzenegger could become President of the United States, sixty-
first amendment notwithstanding.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Sylvester Stallone, Wesley Snipes, Sandra Bullock.
Screenplay:  Daniel Waters and Robert Reneau & Peter M. Lenkov.
Director:  Marco Brambilla.
     It would seem Sylvester Stallone has learned a lesson: give the
people what they want.  Sly wanted to expand into comedy, but he made
bad choices and audiences stayed away in droves.  So long STOP!  OR MY
MOM WILL SHOOT, hello CLIFFHANGER.  The response--$75 million plus
domestic grosses for CLIFFHANGER--was clear.  Now the second coming of
Sly the Action Hero brings us DEMOLITION MAN, and I expect it will do
similarly big business, despite the fact that it's a bloated
conglomeration of failed story elements and lead balloon punch lines.
     DEMOLITION MAN opens in 1996 in crime-torn Los Angeles.
Unorthodox cop John Spartan (Stallone) brings in psycho drug lord Simon
Phoenix (Wesley Snipes), but not before being held responsible for the
deaths of several hostages.  Both men are sentenced to cryonic
imprisonment, where they are to be "reprogrammed" to mend their ways.
Thirty-six years later, Los Angeles has merged with surrounding areas
to become San Angeles, a blissful metropolis with strict behavioral
regulations, free of virtually all crime.  Phoenix escapes during a
parole hearing, forcing a painfully unprepared police force to free
Spartan.  Teaming with an action-hungry female cop (Sandra Bullock),
Spartan sets out to recapture Phoenix.
     The main problem with DEMOLITION MAN is that I never bought its
underlying premise for a moment.  The screenplay makes virtually no
effort to explain how the authorities of the 21st century were able to
convince its mainstream populace to abandon sex, drinking, smoking and
profanity.  Even the idea that it was a radical response to a city
turned into a warzone cannot explain the single generation transition.
It's just a pax ex machina, and it doesn't work.  If that were not
enough, there is the further problem of a scattered storyline with too
many plot threads.  In addition to the basic adversarial conflict of
Spartan and Phoenix, theres an obligatory love interest, a conspiracy
headed by the respected architect of the peace (Nigel Hawthorne),
Spartan's fish-out-of-water culture clash with his futuristic pacifist
counterparts, and an underground movement (literally) led by comic
Denis Leary.  For an action film, DEMOLITION MAN never really gets up a
head of steam, spending far too much screen time on superfluous
subplots.
     The fact is, at times DEMOLITON MAN seems more intent on being a
satirical comedy than an adventure.  Many of the gags are based on the
requisite anachronisms, most notable a running string of malapropped
20th century cliches by Bullock which are true groaners.  We also get
references to Rambo (get it?) and the Schwarzenegger Presidential
Library which seem like they're expected to be funny just because
they're mentioned.  Denis Leary also gets a ranting bit straight out of
his stand-up routine for no apparent reason other than to give him
something to say.  There are times when the loopy sense of humor works,
such as the rather incongruous skill programmed into Spartan.  However,
for every one clever bit there are five hammered into the ground like
the gratingly repeated penalty buzzer every time a character swears.  I
actually began hoping for things to blow up; at least that was done
well.
     As for the acting, the less said the better.  Snipes has perverse
fun with Phoenix, but he's on screen far too little, and his character
is reduced to cocky one-liners.  Stallone is more personable than he's
been in years, but he too has no character to speak of.  Bullock does
have a character, just no recognizable talent.  Rob Schneider of
"Saturday Night Live" has a funny bit part, but that's about all for
bright spots.
     DEMOLITION MAN is bound to appeal to some on a very basic level;
there are great pyrotechnics, and the production design is impressive.
But I found it wanting even as macho entertainment.  Much of the action
is uninspired, annoyingly photographed or badly edited, and even that
action is too long in coming.  DEMOLITION MAN is like that old joke
about a bad restaurant:  the food is awful...  and such small
portions.
