Title
Review for Home Alone 2: Lost in New York (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chad Polenz
** (out of 4 = fair)
1992, PG, 120 minutes [2 hours]
[comedy]
starring: Macauly Culkin (Kevin MaCallister), Joe Pesci (Harry), Daniel Stern
(Marv), Brenda Fricker (The Pigeon Lady), written and produced by John
Hughes, directed by Chris Columbus.
The idea of a small boy somehow separated from his family at Christmas, and
then proceeding to befriend a misunderstood person, outsmart adults, and
torture criminals in a cartoonish style is an idea that can (and should) be
used once. "Home Alone 2: Lost In New York" is such a retread of the original
it is one of the most predictable films I've ever seen. This story tries a
too hard to be a lighthearted family movie and thus becomes very corny and
sappy.
The film basically starts out the same as the first one, with the house full
of people running all over the place, preparing for a family Christmas
vacation in Florida. We get a lot of the same jokes with Kevin (Culkin) being
dumped on and his mischievous antics, most of them provided by his Talkboy
tape recorder (one of the most blatant plugs I've ever seen). 
The funniest moment occurs near the beginning when Buzz, (Devin Ratray)
Kevin's oldest brother, embarrasses him during his solo at a Christmas
pageant, to which Kevin retaliates by punching him which causes a domino
effect knocking the entire 100-kid choir off the stage. Perhaps this is just
foreshadowing the jokes to come; lots of slapstick we've seen before that
don't often work.
Through a series of cartoony coincidences and cliches, Kevin ends up on the
wrong plane bound for New York City while the rest of the family heads to
Orlando. But he is even more clever this time and proceeds to check himself
into the Plaza Hotel.
Most of the film is plotless, it is just the adventures of Kevin alone in
New York with a lot of money (he had his father's wallet with him) and a wild
imagination. The problem is it's just too dumbed down, and that's saying
something compared to the original.
Those idiot criminals Harry and Marv (Pesci, Stern) are back, and proceed to
run into Kevin again (and again...). They are planning to rob a toy store,
and tell him all the details, which of course he captures on tape. In fact,
the Talkboy plays act as as an important source for plot and jokes. It allows
Kevin to constantly fool people, but I found it impossible to believe no one
realizes what they are hearing is a tape.
Of course there is the token scene where Kevin and his house of tricks (this
time his uncle's abandoned for renovation townhouse) nearly kill Harry and
Marv, but that's the entire premise of making and watching these films. I
found myself laughing, but only a little bit. After a while the slapstick
seemed just too painful and too fake to watch.
"Home Alone 2" doesn't work as a comedy, although I'm sure kids will like
it. From beginning to end it is filled with cliches and complete retreads of
all the jokes that worked in the original. Incredible coincidences and
outrageous slapstick comedy are devices that can only work once (if at all),
but Hollywood thrives on sequels. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "We did everything, we brought everything, there's nothing to
worry about" the father reassures the mother.  "Yeah, yeah you're
right," she replies, not completely convinced.  It's another Christmas
trip for the large McCallister family, and yes, they've managed to lose
Kevin again this year -- not that Kevin minds.
     "My family's in Florida, and I'm in New York," Kevin, our young
adventurer tells the audience as he raises his eyebrows.  Unsupervised,
Kevin is living the life of Riley in an enormous suite at Manhattan's
plush Plaza Hotel, thanks to his Dad's credit card.  Holed up in his
fancy digs, he orders everything, and I do mean everything, off of the
room service menu while he wiles away his time watching television.
("Do you know how the TV works, sir?" the unctuous bellman asked him
earlier while showing him the room.  "Are you kidding," Kevin shot
back.  "I'm 10-years-old.  Television is my life!")
     Welcome to 1992's HOME ALONE 2: LOST IN NEW YORK, the sequel to
1990's wildly popular HOME ALONE starring Macaulay Culkin as the
cherubic-looking but devilishly resourceful Kevin.
     The movie has two distinct parts.  In the first, Kevin lives a
dream life as a kid seemingly as wealthy as Donald Trump, who does a
nice cameo in the movie.  He even rents a white stretched limo to take
him to a toy store for shopping.  The limo is fully stocked, right down
to the hot cheese pizza.
     In a wonderful contrast to the picture postcard perfect, snow
encrusted New York with the city lights glistening, his family arrives
at their very cheap Miami motel to a torrential downpour.  New York
City can be a magically beautiful place, and this film shows it off to
maximum advantage.  Seeing the images in the movie is (almost) enough
to make New Yorkers cancel their winter trips to Florida and stay in
the city.
     Culkin gives a surprisingly subtle and self-assured performance.
He owns the show but shows none of the cockiness of child actors whose
success has gone to their heads.
     The second half of the movie is devoted to the battle between the
kid and the criminals, played again by Joe Pesci as Harry and Daniel
Stern as Marv, and is all too predictable and slapstick.  Although not
nearly as enjoyable as the sweet first part, it does deliver on some
nice childish humor.  After a while, however, the second part
degenerates into one repetitive bonk-on-the-head scene after another
and becomes increasingly tiring.
     "What can he do?," Marv tells Harry about their nemesis, Kevin.
"He's a kid.  Kids are helpless."  In the story's big showdown Kevin
booby traps his uncle's vacant apartment and proves again that he is
much smarter than these two dumb crooks.
     Award winning actress Brenda Frica appears in a touching role as
the Pigeon Lady in Central Park.  When Kevin dares to speak to her, no
one else ever does, they become instant friends.
     "What kind of idiots do you have working here?" Kevin's mother
asks at the hotel where he has been allowed to stay on his own.  "The
finest in New York," claims the front desk clerk.  This picture is one
of the better idiotic kids' movies, which, admittedly, is not exactly a
rousing recommendation.
     HOME ALONE 2: LOST IN NEW YORK runs too long at 2:00.  It is rated
PG for cartoonish violence.  The film would be fine for kids around 6
and up.
