Title
Review for Universal Soldier: The Return (1999)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Ross Anthony
"We'll have to blow them up and hope the pieces don't fight us."
Hi-tech military department resurrects soldiers killed in battle and
monitors them with brain implanted micro-chips. The soldiers are fierce,
hard to kill, and relatively emotionless. Nonetheless, the program's budget
gets cut which prompts the main computer to take over the Universal Soldier
squad and threaten anything biological that gets in its way. Jean Claude
plays an earlier model minus the chip. He's the only one who has the code
the computer needs to stay alive.
Like a theme park action show in which stunt-people run through a set of
pops and propane blasts into safety nets barely hidden behind facade walls,
"Universal Soldier: The Return" is mildly flashy to look at, but there is no
sense of real danger. The Soldiers themselves are like the little green
plastic guys I used to play with at age five. We expect a bit more from a
Hollywood action movie. In one scene four U-soldiers are shot up by what
seemed like a hundred SWAT guys. Somehow, not one of the four was hit in the
face. That's way too hokey for a Van Damme movie.
The script fails to take any real risks as well. Formula action flick, with
standard dialogue: "What's going on?" "They'll stop at nothing!" ... add
gratuitous expletives. The acting is right on par with my plastic green army
guys. Even Jean (whom I normally enjoy) was plastic.
I'm sorry to say, "Universal Soldier" seems to be a quickly made film, with
uninspired direction, no unique purpose, populated with safe stunts and lots
of shooting.
Starring Jean-Claude Van Damme, Michael Jai White, Kiana Tom, Bill Goldberg.
Directed by Mic Rogers. Written by William Malone, John Fasano.
Produced by Craig Baumgarten, Allen Shaprio and Van Damme at
Tri-Star/Baumgarten-Prophet/Indi-Prod/Long Road.
Rated R.
Grade..........................C
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
James Sanford
         Sometimes you can actually visualize precious minutes of your
life slipping away as you sit back and do nothing. You want to reach out
and grab those fleeting moments and pull them back, but you can't.
They're gone forever.
 Let's say, for example, you make the mistake of going to see
"Universal Solider: The Return," Jean-Claude Van Damme's latest feeble
attempt to resurrect his career. In addition to watching a thoroughly
lousy movie, you'll also be awarded the chance to lose an hour and a
half of your life you might otherwise spend on considerably more
pleasant endeavors, such as having your feet scraped by a podiatrist's
scapel, or taking a leisurely tour of a local toxic waste dump.
 Van Damme reportedly thinks this squalid sequel to 1992's
"Universal Soldier" (itself only a modest box office success) is going
to put him on the comeback trail. He's leading himself down the primrose
path.
 Misdirected by Mic Rodgers, "Return" manages to take a good
many sure-fire ingredients and combine them into an almost unwatchable
fiasco. Speaking of unwatchable, Van Damme, who's gotten more attention
lately for his seamy personal life than for his screen appearances,
looks prematurely aged and unsteady throughout the movie; obviously,
those recent scandals have taken a toll. His dialogue sounds even more
garbled than usual: As he's trying to evacuate a building under attack,
he reminds someone "diss ees nut uh kiss-miss puh-rad," and it might
take you several minutes to decipher what he's actually trying to say.
 Then again, most of the lines in "Return" are so ridiculous
you'll wish you couldn't understand them. The most absurd go to intrepid
TV reporter Erin Young (the uncharismatic Heidi Schanz), who tags along
with deathless tough guy Luc Deveraux (Van Damme) to cover what happens
when a supercomputer begins giving orders to the Universal Soldiers, the
elite secret army of recycled fighters of which Deveraux was once a
member.
 How dedicated is Erin to her work? So dedicated she assures
Deveraux "I'm not getting killed until I get my story in." So dedicated
she stands up to a bossy general who tries to shoo her away by reminding
him "you can't just throw the media around like we're cattle!". Yeah,
take that, you military fascists!
 The appalling script might be forgivable if the movie had any
creative action sequences or anything original to offer. But aside from
a bewildering scene in which Deveraux and Erin have to infiltrate a
strip joint to use the establishment's computer (!), fresh ideas are
hard to come by in "Return" and the fight choreography is laughably bad.
The big showdown between Deveraux and his nemesis S.E.T.H. (Michael Jai
White, of "Spawn") is confusingly photographed and surprisingly
unexciting, especially given the lengthy build-up to it, and having a
musclebound type make wisecracks after each brush with danger -- for
example, chuckling "I'm just warming up" when he's set on fire -- was a
whole lot funnier 15 years ago in "The Terminator."
 At least "Return" gets the soundtrack it deserves as each brawl
or chase is accompanied by anonymous heavy metal numbers, most of which
sound like somebody's little brother trying out his imitation of Eddie
Van Halen.
 The cherry on top of this rancid cake comes before the movie
even starts, as we're presented with an enormously unappealing trailer
for "Simon Sez," some kind of action flick starring Dennis Rodman (!!)
as some kind of hero who goes around pushing street punks up against
walls and growling "tell me what's going on, before I go Picasso on your
ass and rearrange your face." It's almost enough to make you want to
cry, "Hey! We're moviegoers! You can't just throw us around like we're
cattle!". James Sanford

Author
Steve Rhodes
UNIVERSAL SOLDIER: THE RETURN is about the power of recycling.
The villains are recycled dead soldiers called Unisols.  The movie
itself is a recycled version of the original as well as every action
picture you've ever seen.  Its idea of a talking, rogue computer who
seizes control is, of course, recycled from 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY.
The video-game level plot can be summarized as: Fight. Shoot. Kill.  The
compassionless violence has humans being slaughtered three at a clip.
The star of the film's mindless violence is Jean-Claude Van Damme as Luc
Deveraux, a haggard veteran who represents humanity's one chance when
the Unisols go on a killing spree.  Lead by the computer, S.E.T.H.,
these almost unstoppable fighting machines are ready to take over the
world.  Michael Jai White plays the human incarnation of S.E.T.H. (think
HAL but with a buff black body).  "The only way [to stop them] is to
blow them up and hope the pieces don't keep fighting us," Deveraux
explains.
The script by William Malone and John Fasano makes Deveraux a single dad
so that his daughter is available for some cheap child endangerment
scenes.  It also cleverly sends Deveraux to a club that serves up
topless dancers, phone sex and online pornography.  The reason?  He
needs to get Internet access in order to hack into S.E.T.H.  This lets
them throw in lots of naked breasts so that the movie can have
gratuitous nudity to go along with its gratuitous violence.
Heidi Schanz, trying her best to be Sandra Bullock, plays Erin, an
aggressive television reporter accidentally caught in the heat of the
battle.  She follows Deveraux around so that she can get an exclusive,
inside story.  Trying as hard as she can ("What is it with you boys and
your war toys?"), Erin never develops any genuine chemistry, positive or
negative, with Deveraux.
As bad as it gets, which is pretty awful, at least you can say this for
UNIVERSAL SOLDIER: THE RETURN: It isn't pretentious.  Why it was
released theatrically rather than going direct to late-night cable is
its only mystery.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Universal_Soldier:_The_Return_ (R) no stars (out of ****)
When one goes to a Jean-Claude Van Damme action movie, one doesn't
expect certain things they would from a typical film--for example, decent
acting, a strong storyline, interesting characters.  True to Van Damme
form, _Universal_Soldier:_The_Return_ boasts none of these qualities. 
The problem is, neither does it possess the one thing for which one would
watch a Van Damme vehicle in the first place: excitement.
_The_Return_ is, as can be gleaned by its title, the third sequel (the
Van Damme-less numbers 2 and 3 went straight to cable) to the Muscles
from Brussels's 1992 sci-fi thriller, created by overpaid uberhacks
Roland Emmerich and Dean Devlin.  That film was far from a
masterpiece--in fact, it was quite bad--but it did have its share of
diverting moments, not to mention a casting gimmick that proved to be the
film's biggest drawing card: pit against Van Damme as the baddie was
another lower-tier action star, Dolph Lundgren.
With Lundgren's character having been fed into a wood chipper at the end
of the first film, there really is no novelty left for _The_Return_.  All
that remains are the formica acting and still-below-average English
skills of Van Damme and the plot concept of having dead soldiers
reanimated into invincible supersoldiers.  The nothing plotline cooked up
by _The_Return_'s "writers" (I won't dignify their "work" by mentioning
their names) has the computer in charge of a new advanced brand of
UniSols, SETH (eventually played in human form by Michael Jai White, a
charismatic actor who at one point seemed to have a promising career),
going berserk and hence making his UniSols go on a killing spree.  The
only one who can stop them of course, is Van Damme's Luc Deveraux, one of
the original UniSols.
There is plenty of mayhem in _The_Return_; the film begins with an
extended jetski/boat chase, and numerous fights and shootouts follow. 
Sounds interesting, and, if anything all the wild goings-on keep the
viewer awake.  But since they are so conventionally, matter-of-factly
shot and staged by director Mic Rodgers, none of it was particularly
exciting; one generic set piece comes after another, ultimately blurring
into one unmemorable whole by the end of the film.
Perhaps Rodgers thought the mere presence of Van Damme would compensate,
or that of one of his co-stars--Bill Goldberg, of World Championship
Wrestling fame, who plays the evil Romeo.  While not at the level of
Lundgren's casting in the original, seeing Goldberg on the big screen
does hold some curious interest.  At least, that is, until it becomes
painfully (if unsurprisingly) evident that Goldberg can't act a lick, and
his one showcase scene, where he rips off his shirt for no apparent
reason and dispatches some foes using some wrestling maneuvers, just
makes his presence in the film even more ludicrous.
Van Damme has expressed his interest in making a break from the hard
action scene and going into more classy thriller territory, ŕ la
_The_Thomas_Crown_Affair_.  It's a ridiculous idea, but from Van Damme's
standpoint, it's understandable.  With the complete failure of
_Universal_Soldier:_The_Return_, it's obvious that the action route is
keeping him stranded in his career cul-de-sac, and he'd be stupid _not_
to look for an alternate way out.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Greg King
UNIVERSAL SOLDIER: THE RETURN (M).  
(Columbia Tristar)
Director: Mic Rodgers
Stars: Jean-Claude Van Damme, Michael Jai White, Bill Goldberg, Daniel 
Von Bargen, Kiana Tom, Justin Lazard.
Jean-Claude Van Damme reprises his character of Luc Devereaux,
the regenerated soldier, for this risible second sequel to 1992's
violent futuristic thriller Universal Soldier.  Van Damme was absent
from the dire 1998 sequel Universal Soldier II Brothers In Arms, in
which his character was played by another performer.  That film
disappeared straight to video in this country.  Van Damme's return
doesn't necessarily herald an improvement in quality, but it does
ensure that Universal Soldier: The Return gains a brief cinema release
before disappearing into the same video wilderness that has claimed
most of his recent lacklustre efforts.
With the end of the Cold War, the military is drastically
reducing its budget.  The first cutbacks affect the futuristic unisol
project, in which dead soldiers are regenerated and turned into
virtually indestructible cyborgs.  But SETH, the super-intelligent
computer responsible for much of the unisol project, rebels against
the government's plans, and seizes control of the soldiers.  SETH
manages to assume human form (martial arts star Michael Jai White) and
lead his invincible troops as they take over the top secret complex
that houses the unisol project.  As a stand-off develops between the
regular army and the cyborgs it falls to Devereaux to try and stop
SETH's plans.
Mic Rodgers, a former stunt co-ordinator who has worked on
films including Titanic and Lethal Weapon 4, makes his directorial
debut here.  He handles the action and pyrotechnics effectively
enough, but he lacks the flair and visual style of original creators
Roland Emmerich and Dean Devlin.
Universal Soldier The Return lacks the energy and
spectacularly staged action sequences of the original.  This highly
unlikely scenario uses the original provocative theme purely as an
excuse for lots of testosterone-fuelled action, loud explosions,
gratuitous mayhem, formulaic and mindless carnage.  Whereas the
original managed to pit Van Damme against fellow action star Dolph
Lundgren, the best this dire sequel can do is pit our uncharismatic
muscle bound hero against Bill Goldberg, the popular wrestler, whose
woeful, one-dimensional performance takes the craft of screen acting
to a new low.
Universal Soldier The Return is a far cry from Van Damme's
superior action thrillers like Time Cop and Sudden Death, and further
demonstrates just how far his career has fallen.  The scene in which
his character complains that he doesn't want to be stereotyped
resonates with an unintentional irony.
This is one return that is both unnecessary and unwelcome.    

Author
Athan Bezaitis
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/bf06d466fd88595b8825685900752b2a?OpenDocument
Jean-Claude's best days are behind him.  Way behind him.  The former
martial arts champion is now graying at the temples, and he still hasn't
improved on his English accent.  Of course, his acting skills -- in the
traditional sense of dialogue and mannerisms -- have never given us
sufficient reason to watch his movies, but when his physical
capabilities start to deteriorate, you know he's in trouble.
So what do you do when your star loses his signature appeal?  UNIVERSAL
SOLDIER: THE RETURN attempts to turn him into a sort of James Bond,
allowing him to rely on high tech stunts and clever intuition rather
than pure power.  The problem is that nobody wants Van Damme when we've
already got Arnold, Pierce Brosnan, and even Sly Stallone as kings of
the one-liner action flicks.  So the formula is set: a limited budget, a
fallible star, and Goldberg, the WCW wrestler, as your ominous villain.
The result is a predictably lackluster flick.
RETURN is the story of SETH, the uncontrollable mainframe computer, who
has ordered the practically invincible UNISOL soldiers on a wild killing
spree.  Can Jean-Claude stop them? You'll have to rent it to find out
for yourself, but I'll tell you that Jean-Claude only does his famous
reverse aerial roundhouse kick to the face once.
If you're looking for a few cool fight scenes or some cheeseball special
effects for a mind numbing evening then check it out.  Otherwise, you'd
be better off with some of JC's other combat movies like KICKBOXER or
BLOOD SPORT.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
When critics are banned from a movie in advance of its
opening, you know there's a problem - in this case, more than
one. Back in 1992, "Universal Soldier" introduced hunky Jean-Claude
Van Damme as Luc Deveraux, a Unisol, the recycled corpse of a soldier
killed in Vietnam whose military motto is "Dying to Serve."  At the
story's end, Luc was just beginning to perceive human feelings and
comprehend emotions. In this sequel, he's developed into a "normal"
human being - a bit stronger with bigger muscles and certainly a
better fighter. Now, Luc's a widower with a pre-teen daughter (Karis
Paige Bryant). He serves as a technical expert on a new government
project preparing a stronger breed of soldier that is more
sophisticated, agile, and intelligent. All goes well until the
soldiers' supercomputer, in the human form of Michael Jai White,
develops a maniacal mind of its own. Then it's the Self-Evolving
Thought Helix (acronym SETH) against Luc, whose only allies are Heidi
Schanz, a tough-as-nails TV reporter, and Kiana Tom (ESPN fitness
guru) as his training buddy. So what happens when the Muscles from
Brussels faces off against an entire army of Unisols programmed to
kill, kill, kill? Guess. Pow! Bam! Jab! Zap! Some of the plot
absurdities include a pit stop at a sleazy strip club, the only place
where they can find an Internet connection to access a secret
code. Directed by Mic Rodgers, a former stunt coordinator,
Jean-Claude's acting technique has not improved noticeably, nor has
his enunciation. At one point, he cautions his cohorts not to "peas
damoff" - which translates to "piss them off," but it takes a few
moments to comprehend. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Universal Soldier: The Return" is a action-packed, homicidal 3 -
aimed at diehard kickboxing fans.

Author
Tim Chandler
Directed by: Mic Rodgers
Written by: William Malone & John Fasano
Starring: Jean-Claude Van Damme, Michael Jai White, Heidi Schanz, Bill
Goldberg
Produced by: Craig Baumgarten, Allen Shapiro, Jean-Claude Van Damme
Ex-Universal Soldier Luc has to battle a group of newer-model engineered
fighters gone bad.
    Jean-Claude Van Damme has a one-liner early on in Universal Soldier:
The Return, his latest attempt to remain relevant, that sums up this
entire movie; he says "Been there, done that." No film critic could
possibly sum up Van Damme's recent film choices any better. While other
ageing action stars have wisely moved into other film genres
(Schwarzenegger makes as many family comedies as he does action films),
Van Damme stubbornly persists in sticking with what used to work for
him: martial arts and guns. This unwillingness or perhaps inability to
move into new genres has caused Van Damme to enter the straight to video
world, with Legionnaire never seeing the inside of a multiplex. He joins
fellow martial artist/action star Steven Seagal as they watch their film
careers rapidly fizzle away.
    Universal Soldier: The Return is truly poor. The plot is a complete
copy of several action films from this decade, specifically Terminator
2: Judgement Day and the similarly named Soldier. Soldier's Kurt Russell
was an older model super-soldier sent off to retirement when
circumstances forced him to battle his successors, for the good of a
planet; Schwarzenegger's Terminator in T2 tried to save John Connor from
a newer model killing machine, the T-1000; and Jean-Claude, a former
Universal Soldier, has to save the planet from the rampage of a group
of, you guessed it, newer model Soldiers. Considering the poor box
office performance of Soldier, it's amazing that this project was ever
given the go-ahead.
    Luc Devereaux (Van Damme) was the sole remaining Universal Soldier
(or Unisol for short), until he was returned to a normal, if muscular,
human form. In this sequel (technically the fourth film in the series,
following two straight-to-video duds that were ignored here plot-wise),
Luc is now a human trainer/consultant of sorts for the UNISOL program.
Working with Dylan Cotner (Xander Berkeley, who interestingly also
appeared in T2), the UNISOL program has engineered a tougher, fiercer
fighting force with the help of super-computer SETH. Unfortunately, upon
hearing that the program has been axed by the government, SETH takes
control of his soldiers, killing everyone in the building except for
Luc, his partner Maggie, his daughter Hillary and Erin, a reporter
trapped inside. The rest of the film involves Luc trying to keep them
all alive, while beating up a group of near-indestructible soldiers,
most notably Romeo (popular wrestler Goldberg). There are lots of
fights, gun battles, lame plot developments and a noticeable lack of
plausibility.
    There are so many clichés in this film that it is almost painful to
watch. Luc gets saddled with the task of saving Erin the reporter early
on, and in the course of a single night, they go from bickering to
falling for each other, to kissing. Erin is a pathetically-written
character; people are getting brutally gunned down all around her, and
yet, not only does this not seem to frighten her, but she finds time to
remind Luc that she "isn't leaving without her story". Whatever. Other
laughable moments include a) Luc going to a strip club to get internet
access (what?) and b) a group of Rangers, who after having been given
good advice (Luc tells them that their weapons are useless, and shows
them a specific gun which should work better), choose to go into battle
with their useless weapons anyway (guess who wins the battle?). Not one
single scene in Universal Soldier: The Return has any originality to it.
    When fuelled by Don Davis' loud, driving music score, the film's
many fights become almost passable, but mostly are full of the same ol'
Jean-Claude moves. Director Mic Rodgers (a former stunt co-ordinator)
keeps the action coming at a rapid pace, with only a few token serious
moments to be found. His past work is evident in the many moments when
characters are thrown through windows, tossed off of buildings or sent
flying through the air thanks to an explosion. If only Jean-Claude
weren't getting so old and slow compared to younger martial arts film
actors like Jet Li, Rodgers could probably have made a decent action
film.
    To place the blame squarely at Van Damme's feet, however, is an
injustice. I'm not sure that anyone, not even Robert DeNiro or Edward
Norton, could make writers William Malone and John Fasano's script sound
good. One particularly painful scene is when Erin asks Luc how he is so
sure that the aforementioned strip club will have internet access. He
cringes, looks down and mutters "uh...uhm... they all do, I saw it on 60
Minutes. eh he he he" The script's and indeed the entire film's only
saving grace is Goldberg. He chews up every scene he is in, obviously
enjoying his role immensely. He even gives the film a few laughs, as he
mutters things like "I really don't like that guy" every time he fails
to kill Luc. Sadly, his presence is not enough to turn Universal
Soldier: The Return into anything better than a below-average action
film that truly deserves to have joined its fellow sequels by going
straight-to-video.
email Tim Chandler at timbit@canada.com
and check out my other reviews at The Bottom Line
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html
