Title
Review for Crooklyn (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Alfre Woodard, Delroy Lindo, Zelda Harris, 
           Carlton Williams, David Patrick Kelly 
Director:  Spike Lee 
Producer:  Spike Lee 
Screenplay:  Joie Susannah Lee, Cinque Lee, and Spike Lee 
Music:  Terence Blanchard 
Released by Universal Pictures 
     From MALCOLM X to CROOKLYN, Spike Lee has moved from heavy, epic 
drama to something significantly more lighthearted.  As with his previous 
film, this one places us into a time capsule, although the destination 
is much closer to the present.  Instead of drifting back to the first 
half of this century, we're only going to 1973, a year when afros and 
bellbottoms were in fashion; when the Knicks won the basketball 
championship; and when there were enough pop tunes to fill a 
soundtrack. 
     Told from the point-of-view of 10-year old Troy Carmichael (Zelda 
Harris), CROOKLYN is the story of how one family struggles to survive 
and stay together.  With Troy's musician dad Woody (Delroy Lindo) busy 
in the basement composing, the full burden of running the family - and 
bringing home the money - falls on Troy's mom, Carolyn (Alfre 
Woodard).  This inevitably leads to tension between the two adults, 
and when one particularly nasty fight explodes, Woody is out the door.   
     Producer/director Spike Lee has woven a wonderfully rich drama that 
has one major stumbling block.  Two-thirds of the way through the 
movie, Troy goes south to visit a hyper-religious aunt.  To emphasize 
how distorted the little girl's perception of this vacation is, Lee 
shoots this portion of the movie with an anamorphic lens, causing 
everything to seem elongated.  While that's fine for short sequences, 
in this case it goes on for too long, becoming an annoying trick that 
nearly undermines the entire film.   
     Aside from this twenty-minute detour, there aren't many flaws in 
CROOKLYN.  All but the most comic of urban violence has been removed, 
and we're left with a somewhat-idealized view of an early-70s 
Brooklyn.  Lee is as talented as any director is capturing a time, and 
some of the early scenes perfectly recall the mood of the era.  The 
pop soundtrack may be a little too obvious, but it gets the job done. 
     As usual, Lee has assembled an excellent cast.  Alfre Woodard and 
Delroy Lindo do tremendous jobs.  David Patrick Kelly (who is also 
currently featured in THE CROW) provides a little comic relief as the 
white next-door neighbor who annoys just about everyone.  Then there's 
Zelda Harris, whose fine, unaffected performance is the glue that 
holds the picture together. 
     CROOKLYN comes to the screen with an upbeat tone and a lot of heart.  
The world of a child - especially one pushed all-too-soon into 
adulthood - is never easy, and this film captures the facets of Troy's 
odyssey.  If Lee errs with his "Southern vacation" scenes, he recovers 
to create an ending that is both touching and hopeful.  Beneath the 
surface of this deceptively simple motion picture lurks a singularly 
keen insight. 
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 

Author
Joan Ellis
"Crooklyn" is a startling departure for Spike Lee. His
earlier work has been a primal scream that forces us, from
whatever perspective we inhabit, to recognize the rage around us.
He has explored the problems of class, race, and gender while
shooting from all angles at persistent myths and stereotypes.  
This movie is a breather, a moment of reprieve and reflection for
a front-line warrior. With his brother and sister he has made a
collective reminiscence that is surprisingly gentle for a man who
has his finger on the pulse of contemporary anger. 
In Crooklyn, children invent variations on the games of
urban childhood, which fit the confines of the stoops that are
the boundaries of their lives. They rag each other mercilessly,
but they are safe. There is no violence on Spike Lee's block.  
They may be safe, but they are not quiet. The movie is a
mad, marvelous verbal war, an uninterrupted battle of comic
insults, and it starts with a grandiloquent verbal explosion. 
Carolyn Carmichael (Alfre Woodard) commands her five children to
have the kitchen spotless by bedtime. When she returns at four
a.m. to sloth and slop, she routs every last one of them out of
bed in the middle of the night, lines them up against the wall,
and delivers her lecture. She's Patton at Bastogne, spewing
bombast at her children, who are corporals in this mom's army. 
Getting the troops to eat right is a lost cause. The dinner
table establishes the rhythm for the entire movie: 
conversational combat without pause. The trouble always starts
with a minor clash and escalates to the full boil perfect pitch
of the Carmichaels' dialogue. This family argues to a rap
rhythm. Insult is the language of love.
Dad is a blues musician in eclipse. Unnoticed in the shadow
of rock, he is sure the sun will shine on his music again, but he
feels very sorry for himself as he waits. Cradling his
children's heads in his huge, gentle hands, Woody (Delroy Lindo)
gives them love as their anchor. Meanwhile, Mom carries the load
and gradually begins to buckle under the weight of it. As Woody
and Carolyn, Delroy Lindo and Alfre Woodard are a deeply touching
pair. Woodard may be the only actress around who can look
stunning full-time as a mother of five and make it seem real.  
On the downside, the movie is overlong because it lacks focus. 
Lee is a provocateur, not a storyteller. Once he has painted the
culture of his family and their block, he has no place to go. In
a burst of self-indulgent temper, he sends Troy, the eldest
daughter, off to visit relatives in an appallingly sterile
version of southern suburbia. Slap, slap, Suburbia, take that.
This movie is about the author's nostalgia, and Spike Lee's
nostalgia turns everything shimmery right. It's his childhood,
and don't let anybody mess with how he remembers it. On most
counts, his memory is our reward.  


Author
Michael J. Legeros
Written by Joie Susannah Lee, Cinque Lee, and Spike Lee
Cast Alfre Woodard, Delory Lindo, Zelda Harris, and a large supporting 
cast including Spike & Joie Lee, Frances Foster, and Vondie Curtis-
Hall
"They talk funny down there."
     - Zelda Harris, who's ten-year-old character has returned from an 
       extended visit "down south."
     Spike Lee goes back to Brooklyn in CROOKLYN, an amusing, 
fictionalized look at the filmmaker's family life in the 1970's. No 
controversy here, just a sprawling comedy/drama that's filled with 
moldy oldies, freaky fashions, and, surprise!, clean city streets.
     Meet the Carmichaels. Carolyn (Alfre Woodard) is the high-strung 
mother who teaches school to pay the bills so her husband, Woody 
(Delory Lindo), can work at reviving his stalled career as a jazz 
musician. Mom's on the edge and can barely keep her (five) kids under 
wraps; they scream and shout about everything from watching SOUL TRAIN 
to eating ice-cream.
     For the Carmichaels, life on "the stoop" has both good days and 
bad. One day they're bickering with their bizarre next-door neighbor 
(David Patrick Kelly), the next they're all crying 'cause Daddy's left 
home. But CROOKLYN, like youth, is relatively upbeat and, with one 
exception, nothing terrible ever befalls the family. Even after an 
experiment in shoplifting by oldest child and only girl Troy (played 
by Zelda Harris, who is the *real* find in the film).
     In fact, the biggest threat on the block is a pair of airplane-
glue sniffers!  Wow, what a difference a double-decade makes.
     Well-intentioned it is, well-written it ain't. CROOKLYN is a 
narrative train-wreck that splits the focus in too many directions. 
Mom and dad and the kids and the neighbors and the merchants all 
compete for story time and, simply, there's too much going on to know 
on what's really going on.
     (My vote for Most Glaring Non-sequitur is David Patrick Kelly, 
who has a split-second *second* role as a TV preacher with a wife 
who's wearing just a tad too much makeup. Sound familiar? :)
     But Spike's skills as a director are always fresh and CROOKLYN is 
certainly a good watch.  That is, with the exception of his choice to 
change the film's aspect ratio during a family visit "down south." But 
the joke's on Lee-- his portrayal of The-South-as-a-another-planet is 
*already* disorienting.
     Oddly, CROOKLYN doesn't do extremes. Lee keeps a tight reign on 
both dour drama and high hilarity. The tears are few and the laughs 
are lazy. He doesn't skimp on the music, though, and CROOKLYN features 
over three *dozen* period pieces that are available, as the credits 
conveniently note, on a two-volume soundtrack set.
     Lest we forget the errs of our ways, credit the design 
departments for filling this 70's Offend-A-Thon with orange walls and 
platform shoes and more afros than you can shake a pick at. May we 
never paint furniture olive again.
