Title
Review for Rudy (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Ever since he was young boy, Rudy (Sean Astin) wanted to play football 
for the Fighting Irish of Notre Dame.  There are a few obstacles to this 
ambition, however - namely a lack of athletic ability and grades too poor 
to allow him admission to any college.  But Rudy's heart is bigger than 
his common sense and, against the advice of his father (Ned Beatty), he 
makes the bus trip to South Bend in search of his dream.  Once there, he 
begins the struggle against seemingly-impossible odds with the help of a 
kindly priest (Robert Prosky) and a gruff-but-good-hearted groundskeeper 
(Charles S. Dutton).
RUDY is intended to be a triumphant and inspirational motion picture, and 
it successfully attains those aims.  Critics of the film will undoubtedly 
point out that there are instances when it wallows in sentimentality, but 
it's difficult to substantiate the charge knowing how much of this film 
is true-to-life.  This version of Rudy's story is very close to how 
things really happened.  It's a case when life, not Hollywood, wrote the 
plotline.  The ending is not embellished to satisfy the masses; films of 
the 1975 game exist to prove that this is exactly how things transpired.
Of course, there is still a little manipulation involved, but most of it 
is low-key and skillful.  A conscious attempt has been made to avoid an 
overkill of the "feel good" spirit, but the message is clear:  if you put 
your whole heart and mind to something, there is nothing that can't be 
accomplished.  While this theme might ring hollow in a work of fiction, 
it has a strong resonance here.
The ending of RUDY is a victory for one person, and for all those in the 
audience that come to care about him, but it doesn't fall into the same 
category as the cliched finales of dozens of other sports films.  Here, 
triumph is measured on a different, more personal level, where winning 
and losing - and even scoring - no longer matter.  This is truly an 
occasion when playing the game is enough.
As exhilarating as the film is, it isn't without problems.  The most 
obvious is the choppiness of the story.  Especially in the middle 
segments, RUDY does a lot of jumping around.  I realize that there's a 
lot to show and tell in this movie, and that condensation was necessary, 
but the manner in which this was done lacks finesse.
The performances of Sean Astin and Charles S. Dutton are noteworthy.  
Dutton has an incredible on-screen presence, and his portrayal of Rudy's 
unofficial mentor invests this role with more than might typically be 
expected from it.  Astin, a relatively fresh face, has all the tenacity 
necessary to play the title character.  Producer Cary Woods praised 
Astin, saying that he became Rudy, right down to taking some painful 
shots during the football sequences.
Director David Anspaugh and writer Angelo Pizzo, who collaborated on 
HOOSIERS (considered by many to be among the best "small" American sports 
movies), have constructed RUDY using many of the techniques that worked 
best in that earlier film.  The same "feel" is present, and the ending is 
as guaranteed to send sprits soaring, whether you're a lover of football 
or not.
It would have been easy to turn Rudy's story into a soppy, overly-
sentimental journey, but the film makers have avoided too much melodrama.  
Keeping the performances and direction low-key are obviously a part of 
that, as was having the real Rudy on the set every day so that the story 
remained true to what really happened.  The cheers in the audience at the 
end were genuine, and this is one of the rare times when I will admit to 
cracking a smile as the credits began to roll. 
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Sean Astin, Ned Beatty, Charles S. Dutton.
Screenplay:  Angelo Pizzo.
Director:  David Anspaugh.
     Here's where I get to come off like the callous, cold-hearted
critic that I am.  The subject is RUDY, the new fact-based story of a
would-be college football player.  RUDY is uplifting; RUDY is
inspirational.  It's feel-good Hollywood entertainment in all its
glory.  It's also just not all that interesting.  RUDY is too diffuse,
takes too long to get where it's going, and skimps on what should be
its climax.
     RUDY is the true story of Daniel "Rudy" Ruettiger (Sean Astin), a
working-class Indiana youth who dreams of playing football for his
beloved Notre Dame.  The two main obstacles:  he's too small, and his
grades aren't good enough to get him in.  Instead, Rudy joins his
father (Ned Beatty) and brothers working at a steel mill for four
years, until a pivotal event motivates him to give Notre Dame his best
shot.  He's set up at a community college near Notre Dame by a helpful
priest (Robert Prosky) to earn the necessary grades, and spends all of
his free time helping out Fortune (Charles S. Dutton), the head
groundskeeper of Notre Dame Stadium.  The next two years become a race
to get admitted to Notre Dame and make the team before his eligibility
runs out.
     RUDY's primary structural flaw is that its script tries to cover
too much time and too many different (and tangential) aspects of Rudy
Ruettiger's story.  The body of the film covers eight years, and
involves several "time passes" montages, making it hard for the
establishment of any narrative momentum.  It also drifts into an
unnecessary subplot involving Rudy's friendship with his socially inept
tutor, a choice which seems all the more ill-conceived when compared to
the time spent establishing why Rudy is so tenacious in the pursuit of
his dream.  However, I was most frustrated by what seemed to be an
indecision on the part of screenwriter Angelo Pizzo and director David
Anspaugh as to where the triumph in Rudy's story lies.  A series of
individual victories begins with Rudy's inevitable acceptance to Notre
Dame, each of which could have been a testimony to an indomitable
spirit.  But at a certain point, Rudy stopped seeming determined and
started seeming obsessed.  I was glad for Fortune's lecture regarding
why Rudy should consider himself a success, but by the end I had lost
some necessary sympathy for Rudy.
     This is not the fault of Sean Astin.  He's quite good at bringing
across Rudy's earnest determination, and looks the perfect part with
his solid but undersized body.  Unfortunately, I don't think the script
gives him a firm enough grasp of Rudy's character.  The brief sequence
showing Rudy as a child doesn't do it, nor do the confrontations with
his family which seem intended to do so.  Indeed, most of the
characters suffer from such an overly broad stroke.  Charles S.
Dutton's Fortune is a bit too cliche as a gruff mentor, as is Beatty as
the father with low expectations.  Prosky gets a couple of nice scenes,
but there's not much freshness to his character either.  This is a
script with too many lines like, "If I don't do this now, I won't be
any good for you, or me, or anyone," and, "Not a day goes by that I
don't regret it."  It's the "one from Column A, one from Column B"
school of sports film screenwriting.
     To its credit, RUDY does a great job with the atmosphere of Notre
Dame and Notre Dame football; in fact, the South Bend campus becomes a
character more carefully developed than most of the humans.  The Golden
Dome, the stadium locker room, the mosaic known as Touchdown Jesus are
all photographed with an eye to the mystique that is Fighting Irish
football.  However, with such effective buildup, I was disappointed
with the handling of the final game sequence.  Things happened far too
fast, and an important shot involving Rudy's last play is just badly
directed.
     It's too bad.  RUDY has a great deal of energy and an interesting,
improbably heroic story to tell.  It's a moderately entertaining film,
with a message and content appropriate for the whole family.  What it
lacks is focus.
