Title
Review for Alvarez & Cruz (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
Since this is making the fest circuit right now and already getting a
very nice audience and critical response, it's likely that Alvarez and
Cruz will be coming to a theatre near you some father's day in the
not-too-distant future.  And, if you have that special relationship with
your father that says "Dad, you're an asshole," then Alvarez and Cruz
might just be the art-house indie to watch with your folks provided
you're a truly bitter person.
Taking on a subject not touched in cinema all too often -- that of
complete antipathy between father and son where it is the father who is
portrayed in a negative light, Alvarez and Cruz will most likely be
regarded as an exceptionally brave film to be such a slap in the face of
the nuclear family (which it is).  In fact, Alvarez and Cruz spits at so
many of our nicely held illusions of Hollywood happiness that it will
probably become yet another film that gets a distributor, gets a theatre
release for about three weeks, and then goes to that dusty video shelf
of fest-circuit also-rans.
All of which will be the viewing public's loss.
Why will Alvarez and Cruz most likely face this fate?  It is a
well-acted, well-scripted, and well-directed film with the right blend
of humor and seriousness.  It has enough recognizable faces to be
bankable, but it also has a son who would rather not see his father
before he dies and a father who rapes his son's girlfriend (different
pairs, just in case you were wondering).
In the film, Alvarez (Alex D'Lerma) and Cruz (Vince Lozano) are a pair
of Hispanic conmen/carjackers.  They hijack cars, sweet-talk women, have
a heart of Gold, and quote The Godfather left and right.  If the story
were to go the way you might think, I'd just dub the film Alvarez and
Cruz: Up in Smoke and start my tirade on racial stereotyping.  But the
two quickly fill out as characters, and we discover that they are drawn
together by similar life experiences.  Both have deadbeat dads, both
have had girlfriend trouble, and both are trying to get somewhere past
the life of being a suburbanized hired gun.
Alvarez father (Bert Rosario) manages actors, including Alvarez (with no
attempt to actually help his career), and Cruz's father is facing the
possibility of quadruple bypass.  At Alvarez's father's birthday party,
Alvarez is proposed to by Benita (Nicola Siexas), his girlfriend, and
when he rejects the proposal he is dumped.  Two days later, Benita goes
to audition for Alvarez the older, where she is raped.  Now Alvarez must
deal with whether or not he will seek revenge against his own father,
and what lengths to which he will go in such a pursuit.
Looking over my plot description, you'll have to take my word for it
that this film neither is not a shoot-'em-up action flick, nor any of
the other melodramatic ludicrous genre types that such a plot could
carry itself into.  It is, instead, a finely crafted character drama
that moves at a boisterous pace.  Although the title currently reads
Alvarez and Cruz, it should probably be just Alvarez.  Cruz's ambitions
are vague and his conflict with his father is far less compelling and
serious than his partner's.  Benita is similarly developed.  Both of
these characters have more than one dimension, but Alvarez and his
father are the only people in the movie with any real depth to them. 
Still, these are items that could be fixed with a slice here and there
on the celluloid, and Alvarez and Cruz's run on the fest circuit is far
from over.
At the end of the day, Alvarez and Cruz is definitely worth making your
way to a festival so you can watch it, just in case it doesn't come to a
theatre near you, and it's worth making sure you locate it on tape after
Alvarez and Cruz's release.  Just be warned no matter where you see it:
do not take your parents with you.
Director: Vince Lozano, Alex D'Lerma, Paul Mangetti
Producer: Vince Lozano, Alex D'Lerma
Writer: Vince Lozano, Alex D'Lerma
Starring: Vince Lozano, Alex D'Lerma, Bert Rosario, Nicola Siexas
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
