Title
Review for Monty Python's The Meaning of Life (1983)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        THE MEANING OF LIFE stands in this reviewer's opinion 
as the best of the three Python films, a collection of sketches tracing 
the journey and meaning behind this life we all lead. Pythonites 
John Cleese, Graham Chapman, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle, Terry 
Jones and Michael Palin once again play multiple roles, male 
and female, beginning with a birth sequence and continuing 
into a family with at least fifty children.
        We find out why they have fifty children during an 
elaborate production number detailing the Catholic view of sperm 
as sacred. (Isn't it though?) We also find out what else Catholics 
hold sacred in the next sequence, with Father Cleese teaching a 
class all about sex. He goes far beyond the biological details the 
rest of us were subjected to in high school, favoring instead a 
demonstration with his wife. In the grand tradition of school, 
though, even this doesn't interest the kids, who continue staring 
into space, passing notes and falling asleep while Cleese gets it 
on with his wife... For those of you who still harbor any doubt, 
this movie is rated R.
        We continue through the journey with sequences handling 
the meaning of war, middle age and later death itself, in which the 
Grim Reaper claims the lives of six dinner party guests and takes 
them to heaven. Apparently, we will all be subjected to an eternity 
of lounge singers doing production numbers about Christmas. 
(Before the Monty Python troop told us differently, this scenario 
was known as hell.) Then there's the most memorable portion of 
the film, where the world's fattest man comes to dine and regurgitate 
in a restaurant. How fondly I remember the day we filmed that 
scene.
        Preceding the movie itself is a short film about a small, 
family-run accounting firm that's been taken over by faceless 
bureaucrats. But they're taking it back, by force. Though this piece 
doesn't star any of the Python troupe, it definitely fits in with the 
rest of THE MEANING OF LIFE, and is later reprised in the feature 
presentation itself. As with LIFE OF BRIAN, this movie isn't for the 
easily-offended, but for those of us with strong stomachs (and I've 
definitely exercised mine enough over the years), it's mostly a very 
funny movie. Sure, it has its misses too, but so does any work 
attempting comedy. This review, for example...
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!
