Title
Review for Patriot Games (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Richard John Rauser
     Some films seem to fall into the hard-to-define category because
they have no idea what they want to be, or, even worse, they want to be
something they aren't.  PATRIOT GAMES is a shining example of this
dilemma: it is a techno-movie that wants to be an exciting action flick,
but fails miserably.  It fails for two main reasons: (1) Jack Ryan, the
character and (2) the problem of action vs. analysis.
     To start with Jack Ryan, let's be brutally honest.  This character
is boring.  He is uninspired.  He is bland.  He is dull as dishwater.
He is an analyst.   Yes, a CIA analyst, but don't let the "CIA" part
fool you, folks.  An analyst is an analyst whether they work for the CIA
or the Postal Service.  The result is that Jack Ryan is comfortable
behind a desk, clutching a pen, not crouching behind a desk, aiming a
gun.  The boring-as-hell Jack Ryan was a great character in The Hunt for
Red October, because that film was not an action film, nor did it
pretend to be.  It demanded an analyst and Jack was a good one.  PATRIOT
GAMES, by contrast, will not work as anything *but* an action film.
Unfortunately, Jack Ryan is as far from an action hero as can be
imagined.  Yes, he does hold a  gun a couple of times in the movie.  It
looks almost laughable.  The bulk of his time he spends behind a desk or
in a gloomy computer room, wearing a drab suit.   
     Here's the problem: even though this is a realistic portrayal of
CIA analysis, and even though Jack Ryan is a good character for what he
does, there is nothing exciting about watching Harrison Ford analyse
satellite photographs.  This film is, in a word, bland.  It isn't
exactly boring, but it continually kept building up for a large climax,
but then refused to give us a climax.  To use a sexual metaphor, the
film suffers from premature ejaculation.  
     There are terrorists, and they have guns, and yes, they even shoot
them (a couple of times).  But I wanted to see Jack Ryan fight the
terrorists with his own gun, shooting, ducking, running, jumping, and
saving his wife and child, as the previews for this film have so
deceptively implied.  
     This brings me to my second point about PATRIOT GAMES' failure as a
movie: the problem of action versus analysis.  If you are like me, you
went (or will go) to PATRIOT GAMES expecting action.  Not brainless,
laughable, cartoon-style action like in Lethal Weapon 3, but
intelligent, solid, well portrayed action a la Die Hard or The Living
Daylights.  But this is simply not the case.  PATRIOT GAMES is *not* an
action movie.  It is as simple as that.  There are a few action scenes
scattered throughout the film, but they are over almost as soon as they
have done (as I said before, premature ejaculation).And what little
action we see isn't very exciting or nerve-wracking.  We never get time
to experience these emotions.
     So PATRIOT GAMES fails in terms of action, for the simple reason
that there is very little of it and what little we do see is over far
too quickly.  So how about analysis?  Oh, we get plenty of that.  A
typical scene from PATRIOT GAMES is Harrison behind  a desk, brooding
over photographs... Harrison looking into a hospital room,
brooding... Harrison at home, brooding... then cut to the IRA headquarters
and see the main villain also brooding....
     That is the main reason PATRIOT GAMES fails.  The type of movie it
sets itself out to be demands action to make it work.  And anyone who
has seen a PATRIOT GAMES preview will agree that the marketing people
tried (and succeeded greatly) to make this film appear to be a
fast-paced techno-action thriller.  Sorry.  It's a slow-paced
techno...film.  
     Any movie in which the IRA targets a CIA analyst for revenge HAS to
be action filled to work.  This movie has very little action, and what
action it does have is handled all wrong.  And, to make things even more
hopeless, the main character is an antithesis of action.
     The Hunt for Red October was also a techno-analysis film, but it is
a  fantastic film because it doesn't *want* to be an action film, and
doesn't *try* to be.  PATRIOT GAMES wants and tries to be an action
flick, but doesn't even come close.
     Perhaps it's my fault.  After all, I went to the theater expecting
to see Harrison Ford in his own Die Hard.  Nope.  What I saw was
Harrison Ford in his own, dull version of The Hunt for Red October...a
boring version of a great, entertaining movie.
     On a scale of one to ten, I have decided that PATRIOT GAMES
deserves 6 1/2.  Some elements of the plot are mildly interesting, and
the acting is quite good.  But I'm sorry, this film just doesn't
succeed.  You can have a great techno-analysis film, or a great action
film, but not both.  PATRIOT GAMES is certainly not action, and I doubt
if techno fans will think it's even a great techno-film.  
     On the other hand, PATRIOT GAMES is a fairly close adaptation of
the book, so if you enjoy being bored by Tom Clancy's overly-long,
bloated novels, then PATRIOT GAMES will probably suit you fine.

Author
Frank Maloney
     PATRIOT GAMES is a film directed by Philip Noyce and written by
W. Peter Illif and Donald Stewart, from the novel by Tom Clancy.  It
stars Harrison Ford, Anne Archer, Patrick Bergin, with Edward Fox, Thora
Birch, Sean Bean, James Earl Jones, Samuel Jackson, and Richard Harris.
Rated R, due to violence and profanity.
     PATRIOT GAMES is cinematic sequel to THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.  The
continuing character of Jack Ryan is taken up this time by Harrison
Ford, who is now on the verge of owning what may well turn out to be the
three most popular trilogic heroes in movie history (such as it
is)--Han Solo, Indiana Jones, and now Jack Ryan.  Certainly, Ford
banishes all memory of Alec Baldwin's assay of the character in the
earlier Ryan movie.  Harrison's Ryan is supremely sensible, tightly
controlling both his anger with the terrorists who are threatening his
family and with the cold techno-killer bureaucracy of the CIA, to which
he returns.  There is a defining scene well into the latter part of the
movie of a remote-control kill that shows Ryan ambiguously reacting to
the impersonal horror and video-gamesmanship of high-tech mayhem.  It is
with this scene that PATRIOT GAMES marks itself off from the
run-of-the-mill political thriller.
     While Harrison Ford seems to have been a inspired choice to take
over the Ryan role, much of the credit for the film's excellences must
go to Philip Noyce, the Australian director who devastated so many of us
with his DEAD CALM (1989).  Last year's BLIND FURY may have represented
an unfortunate detour, but Noyce is back on track with PATRIOT GAMES.  I
particularly appreciated the little shticks he did with Thora Birch, the
Ryans' charmingly precocious daughter.  Her attempts to get the
attention of the guard at Buckingham Palace, her connoisseur's
expression of appreciation at his professionalism, her knowing little
smile in the heat of the last scenes, added charm and humanity to the
inherent coldness of a techno-thriller, as well as giving the little
girl a real personality and making more than a doll out of her
character.  It was especially the skill with which Noyce exploits the
mounting tension that is his speciality, his gift, as well as his
attention to both strategic detail (the film crew was allowed limited
access to the CIA facilities) and to the human dimensions.
     (By the way, who's seen Noyce's earlier Australian films,
NEWSFRONT, HEATWAVE, or ECHOES OF PARADISE?  I haven't, and they all
sound most intriguing.)
     Ford gets some humorous back up from his CIA colleagues Samuel
Jackson and James Earl Jones (the only RED OCTOBER alumnus to return);
Edward Fox is fine as the endangered royal with the common touch,
probably better than the House of Windsor deserves.  Anne Archer largely
reprieves her role as the worried mother from FATAL ATTRACTION, but
still elicits our sympathy and support; if only the Ryans weren't quite
such a perfect family, but still Archer knows what she's about and does
it sensibly and admirably.  Her scene involving a car phone busy at the
worst possible time is a fine moment in the history of suspense.
     The greatest weakness amongst the characterizations and in the plot
is found with the IRA characters.  We have Richard Harris in a small but
important role as the Sinn Fein bagman in the U.S.  who is trying to
dissociate the IRA from the current baddies without betraying his
patriotic loyalties to all Irish.  This is pretty complex stuff and the
film seems to assume that we will understand what's what here without
having to explore any of it on screen.  Then there are the bad guys who
break away from the IRA and in the process make that group look like so
many incompetent blunderers.  Patrick Bergin is a leader, a warrior, a
man with a vision, but we never get an inkling of what's really
motivating him or how he does those murderous miracles of his.  There is
certainly no attempt to understand the motivations or mind set of a
terrorist.  Sean Bean as the loose cannon is simply a monster.
     Composer James Horner needs a good talking to about his score which
seems to have been copied from ALIENS.
     PATRIOT GAMES opens no new territory in either story telling or
movie making, but it does leave us hanging at the end most pleasantly
and domestically on the end of a sequel hook.  I'm sure we will want to
come back for more of this kind of intelligence, suspense, humanity,
humor, and economy.

Author
Brian Koller
"Patriot Games" has a lot of action and high-powered stars, but
the usual problems of unlikely plot and character development
turn this would-be thriller into a disappointment.
The film stars Harrison Ford as Jack Ryan, a tourist in
England who interferes with a IRA terrorist act.  The terrorist
escapes imprisonment and keeps coming after Ford and his
family.  Meanwhile, Ford returns to work for the CIA to fight
the IRA renegades.
Ford's wife is played by Anne Archer.  They have a preteen
daughter Sally.  Ford is the perfect father and husband,
Archer the perfect wife and mother, and Sally is the perfect
daughter.  Even their professions stretch belief, as Ford
is both a former Marine Lieutenant and CIA operative,
and Archer is a surgeon who wears heavy eye makeup while
performing operations.
While touring England, Ford happens upon terrorists attacking
a car with Royal family members.  Unarmed Ford tackles and
kills one of them, while the other is taken prisoner.  The
prisoner is notorious IRA terrorist Sean Miller.  Ford
testifies against Miller in a trial that apparently takes
place very shortly and soon thereafter.  Ford returns to the
states, but Miller escapes.  Forgetting his cause, he
becomes obsessed with getting revenge on Ford and his family.
This obsession increasing loses credibility almost as
much as Ford's heroic actions protecting himself and family.
The finale has Ford chased by Miller in speedboats
(fortunate to the plot that wife and daughter has been
already rescued, and that there are two speedboats waiting
at the shore to be taken).  Miller is a trained terrorist
who has a machine gun, while Ford only has his wits.
All I can say is that IRA hitmen need plenty more target
practice.
This adaptation of a Tom Clancy novel has something in common
with another adaptation, "The Hunt for Red October".
James Earl Jones plays a top U.S. agent in both films,
essentially the same character, and even delivers a similar
line in both films to the hero: "Have you slept any lately?"
"Patriot Games" tries to create tension with the constant
placing of Ford and his family in jeopardy, but the
certainty of a happy ending and the shallowness of the
villian characters causes only mild annoyance.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
PATRIOT GAMES: "prequel" to THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER; based on the novel
by Tom Clancy (which I have not read).
Plot/kick-off:        The kickoff was one of the most exciting parts of the movie to
me, so I'll skip it and just say Jack Ryan and his family become the
targets of an IRA splinter group of terrorists.  He enlists the aid of
the CIA for protection.
Characters/acting: very different from THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.
Harrison Ford plays Ryan believably and with charm.  Anne Archer looks
beautifully vulnerable, but what with her similar roles in *Narrow
Margin* and *Fatal Attraction*, I could have used a new face or or maybe
more attention in the script for her jep role.  Patrick Bergen is
competent as the leader of the terrorists; I liked the actress who
played his terrorist girlfriend but didn't think her disguise made much
sense.  James Earle Jones was the only actor also in THE HUNT FOR RED
OCTOBER.
Cinematography/FX: A couple of good chase scenes; I thought the most
unique scene in the movie was the live satellite observation.
Score/Sound: didn't much notice, though I thought the music was familiar
(not from THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER; from some other movie/score).
Violence: Lots of bullets flying and some hitting; a few bloody faces;
not a lot of gore compared with many recent action movies
Skin/situations: one scene with a couple in bed, male nude mostly
covered by mostly-undressed female; not long or graphic
Analysis: decent thriller, no major flaws, but a bit predictable.  I
would have cut out most of the scenes from the terrorists' viewpoints,
and perhaps put in more of the analysis work that Ryan and the CIA must
have done.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  RED OCTOBER fans may be a little
     disappointed at this surprisingly humdrum and downbeat
     political thriller.  This is more like a watchable police
     procedural and generates just about as much excitement.  This
     film does not generate the excitement of the previous Clancy
     film, but does generate at least a very low interest in what
     happens next.  Rating: high +1.
     A Tom Clancy novel lies somewhere between a James Bond thriller and a
textbook on American defense and intelligence systems.  Clancy gives a lot
of technical details but makes it enjoyable by putting it into the context
of a good spy story.  Technophiles may be a bit disappointed by the
technical content of the film PATRIOT GAMES.  We do see a bit of how the CIA
operates, but it is much less the thrust of the film than it is in THE HUNT
FOR RED OCTOBER.  Harrison Ford plays Jack Ryan as older, more bitter and
introspective, and certainly less exuberant than Alec Baldwin played him in
THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.
     The story--which curiously begins much slower in Peter Iliff and Donald
Stewart's screenplay than it does in the original novel--starts with Jack
Ryan foiling an attack by Irish terrorists in London.  In the screenplay's
one concrete improvement on the novel, the victim of the attack was only a
distant member of the Royal Family and so spares us the indignity of having
the Queen of England fawning all over Jack Ryan.  In both stories, however,
the terrorists decide they now have a vendetta against Ryan personally and
are quite willing to punish the whole Ryan family.  Jack uses the facilities
of the CIA to protect his family and end the career of the particularly
faction of Irish terrorists.
     It is no secret at this point that Tom Clancy was less than totally
pleased with the screen treatment of his novel.  He legally had his name
removed from the film, and only in the last week or so before the release
agreed to have it put back.  The advertising I saw does not mention his name
at all and simply says "From the best-selling novel."  In fact, as film
adaptations go, the film is reasonably faithful to the novel, though some
fair-sized liberties were taken.  About midway into the film Ryan makes one
of his famous deductions and concludes something that in the novel Ryan was
told in a briefing very early.  Worth noting is one interesting touch in the
film--intentional or not.  In British spy films the Americans are allies, of
course, but very often characterized as boorish cowboys.  In this film, the
Americans are cleancut and bright, but interrogating the terrorists are two
of the most greasy-looking, weasely Britons they could cast in the role.
Touche'!
     PATRIOT GAMES is directed by Philip Noyce, who also directed an
exceptionally good thriller, DEAD CALM.  The music by James Horner is
notable: he makes extensive use of two pieces of music by other composers.
He uses the "Gayne Ballet Suite" by Khatchaturian, previously used in the
jogging sequences of 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY to give the emotion of the tedium
of space flight.  More interesting is that Horner used the end credit song
from the film HARRY'S GAME for the end title music here.  (And if you want
to see a *really* good thriller about the tensions in Northern Ireland, see
if you can find the rest of HARRY'S GAME someplace.)
     PATRIOT GAMES caps off this Irish Spring, joining THE PLAYBOYS and FAR
AND AWAY.  It is not the thriller Clancy fans wanted; it may not even be a
good adaptation of the book.  But there are moments when it does show some
taste and style.  I give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
