Title
Review for Good Son, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
John Walker
In Brief: I think your response to THE GOOD SON will depend
     on your response to the question of evil.  I found the
     film excellent--and disturbing.  I was uncomfortable
     throughout.  It focuses on one thing--evil--and
     tries to look at it on its own terms, barring any easy
     ways out.
     Most of our profs would have said that evil is *really* ignorance,
or bad reasoning, or blindness, or unchecked emotionalism, or the
result of a bad environment, a terrible childhood, some traumatic
event, etc., etc., etc.  If you think that, then THE GOOD SON might be
a nice little thriller for you, but maybe a little too low-key, too
bland.  If, further, you think that it's preposterous that a *kid*
could really be *evil*, then the film will be still harder to take.
     But what if evil is a real moral stance, a live threat in human
affairs?  What if it is, or can be, a *decision*?  What if it's
something that can never be completely removed by education or
compassion or prosperity, etc., etc., etc.?  (Which is what some of our
old-line Thomist and Calvinist profs warned us.)  To the extent you
think that--or at least can enter into the mindset--then THE GOOD
SON will be a disturbing analysis of evil.  Even if it shows its origin
in the genre of the thriller, its main action will be a confrontation
with genuine evil in an apparently cheerful, appealing kid.
     Uh, guess which side of the question I'm on?  Guess which profs I
sided with?
     You probably already know the story, but I'll give a quick
sketch.  Mark (Elija Wood) is a kid of around twelve; the movie begins
with the death of his mother.  Because his father has to be out of the
country for two weeks, Mark will spend the time (the winter break) in
Maine, with his Uncle (Wallace--Daniel Hugh Kelly), aunt (Susan--Wendy
Crewson), and two cousins, the younger Connie (Quinn Culkin), and her
brother Henry (Macaulay Culkin), who's Mark's age.
     "Logically," the structure of the story is Mark's growing
awareness of Henry's evil, and Mark's attempt to fight Henry and
protect or warn the others.  Dramatically, the story is of *our*
looking at Henry--becoming aware of his intentions *before* Mark
does.  Henry's actions will start out as apparently just mischievous,
increase in malice, and move to the film's climax.
     Let it be noted that the photography is splendid.  The film starts
in the desert and moves to "Rock Harbor, Maine"--actually a composite
of Cape Ann, Mass., and some Lake Superior.  We see a picture-perfect
New England seacoast winter--the church spires, the town, the sea,
the woods, the works.  And all of that beautifully bright, chilly world
outside is a counterpoint to the darker and essentially colder world
inside Henry.
     But for those of you who want a nice, stereotypical thriller
against that backdrop, well, sorry.  Forget the body count.  Forget the
airborne body parts.  Forget the gallons of blood.  Forget the twisted,
shrieking villain.  You ain't gonna get 'em.
     The film shows its heritage.  There are contrivances; there are
some stretchings of probability; but they strike me as kept to a
minimum.
     Henry is *not* the newest Son of Satan.  He's not a demented
killing machine.  His actions are not superhuman; they're the sort of
things that are relatively within the talents of a bright, adept
twelve-year-old.  But a twelve-year-old who reached a *policy decision*
some time ago: conscience, morality, other people's rights--such
limits *aren't for him*.
     One wonders whether the family library had copies of THE WILL TO
POWER and BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL--although Henry states his point of
view in language both simpler and more attractive than I at least
*remember* Nietzsche using.
     Having just reported what I think is a great verbal summation of a
point of view, I can't ignore the fact that Culkin's performance in
that scene adds another element.  He puts a slightly plaintive,
pleading note into the last words.  His performance opens the door to
an inherent Nietzschean contradiction--that Henry is *lonely*, that
he wants a *friend*, a partner--that he needs someone else, like
himself, who is "free."  (Lacking that, he needs an *adversary*.)
     And throughout, Culkin is able to make Henry "real."  Tolkien and
Lewis, among others, have grappled with the problem of how a *writer*
can make genuine evil be something more than a cardboard devil, all
horns and snarling.  Culkin, as an *actor*, strikes me as having done a
remarkably good job of showing evil that's real.
     Ordinarily, we'd expect to know how someone got this way.  We'd
expect something like a tortured past; that way, we'd have a certain
sympathy for a villain when he showed us elements of the past.  But the
structure of THE GOOD SON leaves aside any "easy" explanation.  (It
doesn't absolutely preclude some such possibility, but it's only the
barest possibility.  See "Comment requiring a spoiler," at the very
end.)
     Culkin is operating within the strictures of a role that precludes
using sympathy as a method of making the evil real.  Instead, now he
gives us a slightly plaintive note, now he shows the petulance of evil,
and usually he projects a clear-eyed self control that shows that this
is a decision he's reached, and he's following through on it.  It's
evil unalloyed by extenuating circumstances, but a nuanced evil--an
emotionally layered evil.
     In some respects, I'm afraid that Wood may have the hardest task
in this film: It's tough having to hold your own on stage against
Mephistopholes!  The structure of the role requires Mark to wise up
only after *we* have been clued in.  It requires him to be suckered
into unwise attacks against the bad guy.  In most such tales, this sort
of role would come off as that of a stooge, a patsy.  (Yes, a "mark.")
     But the age of the protagonists allows THE GOOD SON to transcend
its genre.  Mark is a *kid*!  He behaves in a perfectly reasonable,
mature way *for a kid*.  When Henry is setting him up for a fall, it's
not reasonable to expect a 12-year-old to think, "Hmm, I've read
'Sitting in the Catbird Seat'!  I'd better approach this cautiously!"
     Just as Henry's evil is within the scope of a kid's skills, so
Mark's mistakes are within the scope of a kid's inexperience.
     Wood's strength in this role is directness and
straightforwardness.  Where Henry is "in control," Mark is honest and
open.  Yes, he has a tendency to Wounded Innocence.  And I think the
director (Joseph Ruben) cultivates it too carefully: the turned-around
cap helps frame the face into just a bit *too much* wide-eyed
innocence.  Wood can do the job without photographic underscoring.
     Most of the things I remember about Wood's performance are where
he just lays something on the line.  In fact, two of his most effective
lines are just two words each.
     To Henry's plea not to be afraid to fly, he replies simply,
"You're *sick*."
     And if Culkin gets to state Nietzsche in the best way possible,
Wood gets to pose the traditional question and reply.  He asks the
question of Dr. Davenport, a therapist he's been seeing.
     Where Culkin's performance opened up a view to what it's like to
*be* evil, Wood opens up a view to what it's like to *deal* with evil.
He delivers the lines with a certain nervousness, but ultimately with a
plain facing of facts: courage without bravado.  He gives those last
two words the simple finality they need--as well as a certain rueful
humor.
     I've heard a number criticisms of THE GOOD SON.  I'd like to
consider the ones that I think carry weight.
     1. That the adults were jerks: Culkin talks to them in a way that
they should have recognized as obvious lying.
     2. That Mark learns of Henry's evil too quickly.  It would have
been better if there had been more time, more development so that Mark
would have been closer to being sucked in.
     There have been other criticisms, of course, chief among them that
THE GOOD SON is just not very thrilling.  I'll note that in the
continuity-checking, technicality-hunting atmosphere of the Net, *no
one* has mentioned a couple of glitches that should certainly have
leapt out at them--*unless* the story itself was holding their
attention!  (I only noticed them on a return trip.)
     But perhaps Net people just haven't see it yet; so, back to the
three criticisms.
     1. Is Culkin obviously lying?  I noticed something like this,
too.  Which seems odd--because for Culkin of all people it would have
been almost effortless to turn on the innocence, the puzzlement.  He
could have said "Gee, Mark's behaving funny," and sound *really*
worried.  Instead, he's cool and collected.  Part of this may be the
thriller genre: don't confuse the audience by making the villain *too*
effective.
     But interestingly, we hardly ever see Henry interacting *as a kid*
with adults.  The closest is at the very end.  (Yes, there's also a
talk between Henry and Dr. Davenport, but we see only a fragment of
it.)
     In what we *see*, the adults are wrapped up in some problem, so
Henry doesn't really need to put on his kid show.  More importantly,
*Mark* is almost always on the scene.  And in that case, Henry's
remarks are really addressed to *Mark*, not the adults.
     Intellectually, I would have preferred a few flashes of Henry
putting on "utter innocence," but I think it was a judgement shot
whether to allow that.
     (Noticing that Henry in some sense really speaks only to Mark most
of the time, I also noticed that there aren't any walk-ons in THE GOOD
SON.  There are extras for a few scenes, and crowd voices, but none of
the usual gas-station attendants or store clerks who have speaking
roles.  No neighbors, and *no other kids*.  No one speaks except the
family and Dr. Davenport.  This is a strictly bounded universe.)
     2. More development?  Intellectually, this, too, would have been
something attractive.  But as I thought about it, it raised a lot of
major problems.  How would Henry tempt Mark if adults were around all
the time?  Even if it were an enormously subtle, drawn-out process,
Mark would always be able to go them to express his concerns.  For such
a scenario, you need either *adult* protagonists or kids isolated from
parents or similar figures.  This would be a whole 'nuther picture, not
just an improved, deepened version.
     Keeping kids as protagonists, as the lone actors, my suspicion is
that a film would have to be really towering in order to succeed.
You'd be in the realm of almost pure myth.  I can't really complain
when people shy away from a heroic challenge.  Even if it were
genuinely great, I doubt that modern audiences could swallow it.  I
suspect that for many viewers accepting the reality of evil is a case
of the willing suspension of disbelief.  Doing the whole nine yards
with kids would be too much.
     3. Is it immoral?  Well, first off, it *is* rated R.  And the
"violence and language" rationale is ridiculous.  The violence is
trivial compared to many other flicks; and the *one* four-letter word,
while effective, could easily have been cut.  It's almost as if it was
thrown in to guarantee the R rating because the producers (Ruben, and
Mary Anne Page) had decided that the film *deserved* it.  And it
does--not for the usual reasons, but simply because the theme of evil
*is* mature.  This is a picture *about* kids, not *for* them!
     But the morality discussion comes down to a debate that nobody but
those old-line Calvinists and Thomists really take seriously.  *Should
we do theater at all?*  (Calvinists, no; Thomists, yes, but they
recognize it as a real question.)  Because if we do theater, then we
can't avoid portraying evil.  And to be effective, the portrayal must
render evil attractive to some extent.
     Ruben was reported as saying that he would not have done this film
unless he could get Culkin.  And I think he was probably right.  Yes,
lots of folks on the Net gag at the very thought of Saint Kevin of
Winnetka.  But he is one of the few actors who is appealing enough to
most audience members that they would have to recognize (on some level)
that evil, too, can be attractive.  That *we* might find Henry's choice
to be a possibility for *us*.
     In a thriller, there's always the danger that such questions will
be engaged for mere amusement.  In the present day, it's most likely
that people won't be able to take evil seriously.  Pondering the idea
of evil, I could go even further and wonder whether, for the producers
and the screenwriter (Ian McEwan), the story was merely an empty
intellectual exercise and profit opportunity.  (Also, for Culkin, a
tactically necessary attempt to break out of typecasting.)
     Even conceding the worst, however, the work they created stands on
its own.
     Within a moral framework, it is a task of theater to deal with
evil in such a way that we, the audience, can see that it *is* a
temptation *and* that it's still *evil*.
     Yes, many in the audience will miss the point because, at some
level, they can't recognize the existence of evil.  They'll hunt for
something that fits within the tidier boundaries of psychoanalysis,
say.
     But for those who are willing to look at it, the film must let
them see the attractiveness of evil and still be disturbed by it.
End of basic review--short spoiler follows.
     It was interesting to me that some people have tried to find
reasons why Henry might have been *driven* into evil, rather than just
having *chosen* it.  The big question, of course, is whether he killed
his little brother.  Some have suggested that the trauma of the
brother's *accidental* death was enough to push Henry over the edge.
(But the effect could be the same even if Henry had killed him on an
impulse.  Overwhelmed by the act, the home-made Nietzscheanism would
have been an after-the-fact rationalization.)
     As regards the facts, Henry does not explicitly admit killing his
brother.  But why else would he be concerned that he would be "put
away"?  Leaving open a slight possibility of "trauma," all the evidence
on screen still points to Henry's having killed his brother, and having
*chosen* to do so.
     As regards the motivation, when I hear people offering reasons, I
don't think they've really confronted Mark's question:

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Macaulay Culkin, Elijah Wood, Wendy Crewson, David Morse, 
           Daniel Hugh Kelly, Quinn Culkin
Director:  Joseph Ruben
Producers:  Mary Anne Page and Joseph Ruben
Screenplay:  Ian McEwan
Music:  Elmer Bernstein
Released by Twentieth Century Fox
     The death of his mother has been hard on Mark (Elijah Wood).  In
fact, as she lay on her deathbed, he promised her that he wouldn't let
her die--a promise that he couldn't keep.  Now, only a short time
after the tragedy, Mark's father (David Morse) has to jet off to Tokyo
to close a business deal, and Mark must spend his winter break with the
family of his uncle Wallace (Daniel Hugh Kelly).  While at first the
prospect of two weeks in Maine is less than enticing, Mark loses much
of his reticence once he meets the people he'll be staying with, taking
an instant liking to his aunt Susan (Wendy Crewson), cousin Connie
(Quinn Culkin), and especially cousin Henry (Macaulay Culkin).
However, after an enjoyable first few days spent mostly in the company
of Henry, Mark comes to learn that his cousin has a dark and violent
streak that is becoming increasingly more twisted, and that it's only a
matter of time before someone dies--if they haven't already.
     The producers took a big chance in casting the youthful star of
HOME ALONE as the demonic child in THE GOOD SON.  Would Macaulay Culkin
fill the bill?  Could he fulfill the promise of his multi-million
dollar contract and turn in a sinister performance as a truly evil
twelve-year old masquerading as an angel?  The answer, in a word, is
no.
     Casting actors against type is always a risky proposition.  When
it works, the dividends are often huge, but when it fails, the movie
usually goes under.  Such is the case with THE GOOD SON.  Few are less
likely to play a conscienceless, nasty-minded boy than the lively
Culkin, and when he tries, he does a horrendous job.  Henry comes
across as a one-dimensional, boring kid who has nothing better to do
with his time than shoot bolts at animals, smoke cigarettes, cause
ten-car pileups, and tell damaging lies about people who annoy him.
     Elijah Wood, who did a solid job in Disney's newest ADVENTURES OF
HUCK FINN, is better than Culkin--but not by much.  There's something
not right about Mark.  He comes across more like a written character
than a real child, and Wood is unable to bridge the gap.  A few of
Mark's scenes ring true, but at least as many are overly-melodramatic
and acted with a distinct lack of inspiration.
     The plot itself is rather unimpressive, telling the story of a
psychotic pre-teen.  There are a number of fascinating psychological
issues that could have been exploited, but were left untouched in favor
of presenting a straightforward thriller.  For example, we get precious
little motivation for Henry's actions.  There are a couple of
throw-away lines that explain one incident, but say little about
everything else.
     The movie makes a few futile attempts to use Mark's guilt about
his mother's death as a plot device, but it keeps getting in the way of
the overall story.  Part of the problem may be that the guilt and grief
are never well-presented, and it's difficult to understand why Mark
comes to believe that his aunt is somehow the reincarnation of his
mother, whose dying words to him were that she would be with him
forever.  If anything, this element makes THE GOOD SON even less
believable than it already is.
     The ending of the movie is actually clever, which is a surprise
given the routine conclusions to so many thrillers, but those few good
minutes do not save the movie.  It's far more difficult for a bad
motion picture to be redeemed by a strong last scene than it is for a
good film to be ruined by a dumb finale.
     I'm a little surprised and disappointed that director Joseph Ruben
has turned out such a lackluster production (although this isn't his
first miss--witness SLEEPING WITH THE ENEMY, a pedestrian movie if
there ever was one).  Ruben, whose 1987 sleeper THE STEPFATHER was one
of the decade's best thrillers, has, in THE GOOD SON, ignored
everything that made that earlier film work:  a tight script, excellent
atmosphere, and solid characterization.
     From the red-clay backdrops of Nevada to the frosty winterscapes
of New England, THE GOOD SON is beautifully photographed (by
cinematographer John Lindley), but that's one of its few positive
points.  Not many people enjoy going to the movies just to see pretty
nature scenes, but that's just about the only reason for taking a trip
to the theaters for THE GOOD SON.  Those expecting a good scare would
do better to look elsewhere.  At best, this is strictly cable fare.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I have a confession to make which may compromise my integrity as a
reviewer (if that isn't an oxymoron):  I wanted THE GOOD SON to be
horrible.  *Really* horrible.  I've grown so tired of Macaulay Culkin's
yelping mug and the highly-publicized power grabs by his manager-dad,
that I wanted him to be wholly responsible for a colossal failure.
Well, THE GOOD SON isn't horrible; it's merely mediocre, which may be
worse.  At least a truly awful thriller can provoke campy laughs.  All
THE GOOD SON provoked in me was boredom.
     THE GOOD SON is the story of Mark (Elijah Wood), a young boy who
has just lost his mother to cancer and is guilt-ridden because he
promised her he wouldn't let her die.  When his father (David Morse) is
forced to leave the country on business soon after Mom's death, Mark is
taken across country to stay with his Uncle Wallace (Daniel Hugh Kelly)
and Aunt Susan (Wendy Crewson) in New England.  There Mark soon becomes
fast friends with their son, his cousin Henry (Macaulay Culkin).  All
seems well until Henry begins to pull some rather destructive pranks.
As Mark becomes more and more frightened of Henry, Henry becomes more
and more malevolent, until Mark begins to fear that Henry's
directionless mayhem might be turned on his own family.
     I had very little problem with the basic premises of THE GOOD
SON.  I could accept that a child might be pushed over the edge into
pathological behavior by a trauma (the drowning of Henry's infant
brother); I could accept that parents still in shock over the death of
one child might be completely unwilling to believe that one of their
other children is a creep, even in the face of evidence.  The problems
with THE GOOD SON are almost entirely in the execution.  The film waits
far too long, nearly a third of its running time, before introducing us
to Henry, setting up Mark's guilt and showing off desert scenery.  By
then, it's so late in the game that Henry has to get too crazy too
soon.  There's no time for the menace to build slowly, or for the early
pranks to be tame enough so that Mark could get a bit caught up in them
himself.  Ian McEwan's script seemed to need another draft and earlier
plot points.
     The performances are also a big problem.  Elijah Wood is fine, a
good young actor forced to spend most of this film making his eyes as
wide as possible.  His relatives, however, don't fare as well.  I said
that I accepted the idea of oblivious parents in shock, but Wendy
Crewson and Daniel Hugh Kelly don't play Susan and Wallace as shocked.
We're never specifically told how long it has been since the death of
the other son, and that would have helped.  As it is, Wallace seems
perfectly recovered, while Susan appears simply melancholy, striking
Bronte-esque poses on a seaside promontory.  Consequently, they come
off as ridiculously stupid.  This is also parly the fault of a
performance by Culkin lacking in subtlety.  Instead of the
straightforward tone of a true sociopath, Culkin adopts the wide-eyed,
solemn, sing-song style any parent would instantly recognize as a child
lying.  It's even harder to believe he's able to convince a family
therapist.  To give him his due, he does a decent job of playing the
devilish prankster; that is, after all, what he was in the HOME ALONE
movies.  It's homicidal that he hasn't quite mastered.
     If there's one surprising culprit in THE GOOD SON's failings, it's
director Joseph Ruben.  After THE STEPFATHER and SLEEPING WITH THE
ENEMY, you'd think he'd have the "psychotic extended family" thing down
cold.  But THE GOOD SON goes everywhere you expect it to go, exactly
when you expect it.  It's a competent but cut-and-paste directing job,
providing the minimum recommended allowance of suspense.  I never
groaned out loud, but I never felt any real tension, either.
     THE GOOD SON is not a complete failure.  It's the kind of thriller
where you might jump once, then wonder why you fell for *that* old
bit.  And as reluctant as I am to admit it, Culkin shows that he might
be more than a one-trick pony given a little seasoning.  It just might
be a good idea if his next trick is something original.
