Title
Review for Young Frankenstein (1974)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Chris Casino
Cast: Gene Wilder (Dr. Fredrick Frankenstein), Peter Boyle (The
Monster), Marty Feldman (Igor), Madeline Kahn (Elizabeth),
Teri Garr (Inga), Cloris Leachman (Frau Bleaucher), Gene Hackman
(Blind man)
Crew: Director: Mel Brooks, Story/Screenplay: Gene Wilder/Mel
Brooks, Producer: Michael Gruskoff, Cinematography: 
Gerald Hirschfield, Music: John Morris.
Gene Wilder and Mel Brooks were nominated for the best screenplay
Oscar for this film in 1974. What puzzles me is, what they
possibly had that won, and did it measure up to this?
Probably not, as this loving parody of the old Universal
Frankensteins, is not only one of the funniest films
I've ever seen in my life, but if it had been made
forty years earlier, it just might've scared the
living hell out of people.
Wilder (who came up with the concept and fits the mad scientist
role like a charm) plays Dr. Fredrick Frankenstein (that's
Frahnk-on-steen!), a supposedly humble college professor
who is ashamed of what his Granddaddy, Victor, did to
his family name. Nonetheless, Herr Faulkstein, a visitor
to his class from his grandfather's village, comes
to him telling him he inheirted great-granddaddy's
estate. He also inherits Feldman's riotous hunchbacked 
Igor ("What hump?"), who insists that his name is "Eye-Gore",
and Teri Garr's sultry Inga, whom he seduces in spite
of having a somewhat snobbish finacee, Elizabeth (Kahn,
a riot as always). Also aiding him is Cloris Leachman's
caretaker Frau Bleaucher, who makes horses scream like
hell!
Together, they create the usual Monster, and as usual,
despite Freddy's good intentions, Igor screws up and he
becomes a creature who scares everyone, even though he
only wants love.
This is the correct way to do a parody. As hilarious
as this is, if the jokes had been edited out, this
could easily pass as a regular Frankenstein film,
and that's wise. It has an excellent script by Wilder
and Brooks (that got robbed at the Oscars, robbed I tell you!)
fine B&W cinematography, great direction by Brooks, who
proves he can be a fine filmmaker as well as joker
when he wants to be here (despite his standard sexual
puns, which are toned down a bit here), as
well as fine performances by all, particularly
Wilder's mad doctor, Feldman's hunchback (who must've ad-libbed
most of his side-splitting performance), and Boyle's Monster, 
who charms the hell out of the viewer.
Two particular highlights are the blind man sequence with
Gene Hackman, and the Puttin' On The Ritz routine.
I've heard this was ripped off fourteen years later
by a film called Frankenstein General Hospital,
which I have not seen. It's supposed to be the worst
Frankenstein film ever made, and by turning this
film into a color/lab scenes in B&W, low budget
movie set in a hospital, I can see why. It's been
referred to as the poor man's Young Frankenstein. I haven't
seen this film, but I would still advise you:
Accept no cheap imitations. When you try to copy
a movie this good, you will fail. Of course the
filmmakers of Frankenstein General Hospital
failed miserably, however that's their problem.

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Gene Wilder, Marty Feldman, Madeline Kahn, Peter
Boyle and Teri Garr
Directed and Co-Written by Mel Brooks
OSCAR Nominations: Best Script, Sound
An affectionate parody of the classic movies Frankenstein
(1931) and Bride of Frankenstein (1935). Wilder plays Dr.
Victor Frankenstein's grandson, Frederick Frankenstein, a teacher
of brain surgery, who calls his grandfathers work 'doo-doo' and
insists that his second name is pronouced as 'Fronk-en-steen.'
However, Frederick recieves his grandfathers will, which states
that Fredrick should recieve his castle in Translyvania. Frederick
moves there, discovers a book called 'How I Did It' by Victor
Frankenstein (which includes dialogue from the oringinal film) and
soon Fredrick is obssessed with creating another monster, played
by Peter Boyle.
Mel Brooks and Gene Wilder, who wrote the script, deliver a
good selection of gags, and a large dose of nostalgia. Much of the
lab equipment seen in the film, was donated by Kenneth
Strickfaden, the creator of the lab equipment in the oringinal
Frankenstein. The film is filmed in black and white, and uses
many old time linking devices. Even the frame ratio was done in
old style, of 1:85. And when Frederick, his butler Igor (Feldman)
and his assistant Inga (played by Garr) first enter the lab, Colin
Clive (the professor in Frankenstein) can be heard shouting out
the instructions to bring the monster to life. All of these elements
combined, plus superb shadow and lighting effects, bring a spot-on
representation of the classic Universal Studio's monster movies of
the 1930's.
So, Brooks may have managed to get the atmosphere and feel
right, but has he got enough gags in the picture to carry it along?
The answer, luckily, is 'Yes' The picture has far more laughs than
Brook's Blazing Saddles (1972) and The Producers (1968),
mainly due to the cast. Gene Wilder, Marty Feldman (particulary
good, especially with his eyes), Teri Garr and Peter Boyle
(hillarous as the monster, especially when he does a routine of
'Putting on the Ritz') are all excellent, and the minor characters are
great aswell. Kenneth Mars is fun as a police cheif, and Gene
Hackman is superb as a blind hermit (spoofing the famed blind
man sequence from Bride of Frankenstein) Of course, it's not
just the actors that are great, the writing is usually excellent also,
with some great references to the oringinal films, and some funny
asides to the camera by the fish eyed Marty Feldman.
With some great old style horror music composed by John Morris,
superb black & white cinematography by Gerald Hirschfield, and
the above mentioned acting, writing and atmosphere, Young
Frankenstein is probably the best Mel Brooks film. Sadly,
Brooks seem to lose his way after this excellent comedy, churning
out dismal fare such as Spaceballs (1987), Life Stinks (1991),
and the awful Dracula: Dead and Loving It (1995). Young
Frankenstein, then, comes highly recommended, as a reminder of
how great Mel Brooks (and Gene Wilder) were.

Author
Chris Casino
Cast: Gene Wilder (Dr. Fredrick Frankenstein), Peter Boyle (The
Monster), Marty Feldman (Igor), Madeline Kahn (Elizabeth),
Teri Garr (Inga), Cloris Leachman (Frau Blucher),
Kenneth Mars (Inspector Kemp), Gene Hackman (Blind man).
Written by Gene Wilder & Mel Brooks, Directed by Mel Brooks,
produced by Michael Gruskoff, Cinematography by
Gerald Hirschfield, Music by John Morris.
This film, penned by Wilder and Brooks based upon a concept
Wilder came up with, was nominated for a Best Screenplay
Oscar in 1974. What puzzles me is what could've possibly
won over it, because it's easily one of the funniest
movies ever made, and it's also genuinely good because
it could just as easily have been released as a straight
horror film.
This loving parody of the old Universal Frankenstein pictures,
using beautiful black and white photography and a chilling
Universal-style music score by John Morris (Brooks' usual
music man) stars Gene Wilder as Dr. Fredrick Frankenstein (sorry,
Fronk-on-steen, as he prefers it in the film, and says
repeatedly), who inherits his grandfather, Victor's castle,
which he is ashamed of, as well as his assistants
Igor the usual hunchback (a hilarious Feldman), and
busty Inga (Garr). He decides to create his own
Monster (Boyle) in an attempt to clear the family name,
but as usual, the hunchback steals the wrong brain
from the laboratory, and the Monster goes on a menacing
spree throughout the countryside, much to the charign
of the villagers and the one armed, peculiar voiced
Inspector Kemp (Mars, in a funny takeoff on Lionel Atwill
from SON OF FRANKENSTEIN).
This film is an excellent example of the fact that Mel Brooks
and Gene Wilder can make a really good parody that is faithful
to the genre if they like it well enough, which they obviously
did in this case. Mel Brooks directs with the style
of James Whale, and as I say, he could've just as easily
edited out the jokes, despite his usual sexual puns,
which, thankfully, are toned down here--and I'm sure
Wilder is to thank for that--, and it really is
in the style of the old movies.
Not only that, but we also have the excellent performances
from each and every one of the cast members (and thankfully,
Brooks does not appear like he usually does). Particularly
good are Wilder's mad doctor, Boyle's Monster, and Feldman's
riotous hunchback. I'm not forgetting about Kahn as
Elizabeth or Leachman as Frau Blucher (EEEHHEEEHEEEHEEEHEEHEE! 
Sorry, couldn't resist), though.
1. Tie: Puttin' on the Ritz routine/blind man part
2. Feldman and Wilder's banter.
3. Scene where Wilder attempts to reach out to the
Monster.
4. The fact that the Monster isn't as dumb as he looks (see
the movie, you'll know what I mean).
This was ripped off fourteen years later by a low budget
film called FRANKENSTEIN GENERAL HOSPITAL.
I haven't seen this film, but I'm told it
is the worst Frankenstein film ever made, and if it rips
off this film as much as I've heard, I can see
why. Except no cheap imitations, people. It's
foolish to try to think you're going to make
a good movie just by going and ripping this
movie off. This is too good. You try that,
you'll fail. I garauntee you that.
