Title
Review for Nine Months (1995)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Melissa Martin
     I will truly expect every professional critic to absolutely hate
this movie.  It makes no pretenses for being anything but a stupid,
childish, predictable, cliche comedy.  The film is awful on that
level.
     This is a great comedy, more in the tradition of DUMB & DUMBER
than something oh, say, cleverer, like CLUELESS.  I laughed like a
fool from some stupid physical comedy, cartoon-style gags and some
really corny jokes.  The script is unquestionably cheesy and cheap, but
it's hilarious ... which is all that really counts.
     Hugh Grant, who I thought was horrible in FOUR WEDDINGS AND A
FUNERAL (actually, a friend and I didn't even finish the film, we
thought it was pretty awful) and I never liked previously anyway, turns
on the English boy charm like a firehose.  I walked into the theatre
with a slight loathing for him, and by the middle of the movie I wanted
to have his child.  :-)  He is absolutely hilarious and has an obvious
knack for corny comedy.  He even managed to switch gears and carry
something more emotional ... during the middle of the film, at one of
the fleeting moments of seriousness, I almost cried (seriously) because
of the look in his eyes.
     Julianne Moore is a goddess given actress form.  With her
strangely stunning, delicate average-girl appearance and high-quality
acting, we get a character to put our heart into, unlike the childish
Samuel (Grant).  She carries her performance through well and is a
pleasure just to look at.
     Unfortunately, Moore and Grant do *not* make a cute couple.  There
are no sparks nor chemistry between the two characters, which is
unfortunate considering the appeal of the two.
     I never liked Tom Arnold either, and so was surprised that I didn't
sit back and wish he was not in the entire movie.  In fact, he was
rather enjoyable.
     Joan Cusack is lovely as Arnold's also-pregnant wife (which was a
sad plot attempt, a little too much like a coincidence).
     Robin Williams, as is natural for the man, is side-splitting funny
and a darned fun ride.  It is unfortunate that he got so little time :
I would have preferred him to take the place of both Cusack's and
Arnold's characters.
     The most unfortunate thing about this film is somewhat in the vein
of ACE VENTURA : PET DETECTIVE, it has been billed as a kind of
semi-family movie.  I saw a huge number of obviously under-13 kids (I'm
thirteen, I should know) get tickets and go in, when it was very
clearly stated 'PG-13.'  What particularly saddened me was that one
sweet ol' grandma had taken two children, about seven and ten, to the
film.  There is a *lot* of sexually explicit and lewd writing here.  It
is very funny at times, but completely inappropriate for anyone under
my age (especially with parents, which is what we tend to call
"unbelievably embarrassing").  There is also one prelude-to-a-sex-scene,
where Julianne Moore gets to participate in a rather demeaning
strip-tease.
     I can't really write much about this film, because there isn't
much to write about.  To sum it up, NINE MONTHS is a very funny but
purposely stupid film.  Not exactly the kind of
"don't-miss-comedy-of-the-year," but easily merits a few good laughs if
you have nothing else better to see.
     Of course, the best films of the year remain POCAHONTAS and APOLLO
13.  If you haven't seen those yet, you've missed a hell of a show.
     WATERWORLD comes out this week.  Can't wait to review it for the
reading public.  :-)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     NINE MONTHS tells the story of a man and a woman who are
celebrating their fifth anniversary of living together.  As is so
popular today, the couple is living together without being married and
hence are being subsidized by those of us foolish enough to admit to
our government that we are.
     A child psychologist, Samuel (Hugh Grant) and a ballet teacher,
Rebecca (Julianne Moore) are the unmarried, childless couple.  Samuel
is head over heels in love with Rebecca and feels that they are living
in a state of bliss that is "dangerously close to perfection".  Rebecca
asks him if he "wants more".  He thinks she means food, but she means
kids.  As luck would have it, her birth control proves to be "three per
cent bloody ineffective".
     Upon learning of the coming baby, Samuel panics, but Rebecca turns
joyous.  Samuel, in a running series of sight gags, keeps visualizing
her as a praying mantis coming after him since he is told that the
female praying mantis eats her male after a successful mating.
Although crude, this reoccurring scene manages to be funny every time.
     Their human gynecologist (Robin Williams) is a recently immigrated
Russian animal gynecologist, and Rebecca is his first human patient.
Williams is hilarious.  He mispronounces every term possible and
manages to keep the audience in stitches with every joke.
     The director of the movie, Chris Columbus, has done many good
movies, but my personal favorites of his are MRS. DOUBTFIRE and
ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING.  In NINE MONTHS, I am sad to report, he
delivers a highly uneven movie.  Sometimes the jokes work and other
times, they are quite tedious.
     The script, also by Chris Columbus, is based on a French movie of
the same name.  Columbus's script oscillated between great humor and
mean spiritedness.  The worst example being when two of the men
starting using a baseball bat to violently beat a man in a Barney type
costume.
     The script did shine in parts.  The ride to the hospital being the
best.  It was fresh, fast paced, and enormously funny.  For an inside
joke, watch what is on the movie marquee when they race past it in one
of the scenes.  Finally, if you see the picture, stay through the
credits, and you will get to see the baby pictures of all of the stars.
     Several of the characters were so obnoxious that every time they
were on the screen you wanted to stare at your feet.  The entire Dwyer
family was in that category.  Marty Dwyer was played by Tom Arnold at
his absolute worst, and Gail Dwyer was acted by Joan Cusack who gave a
miserable performance.  The Dwyer children could be poster kids for
Planned Parenthood.  Finally, Jeff Goldblum, playing a relative of the
Dwyer's, was at best watchable.
     In addition to the excellent acting of Williams, I thought Grant
and Moore were both quite good and believable.  Everyone knows Grant's
work, but people may not be familiar with Moore's.  She was at her best
as Yelena in VANYA ON 42ND STREET - a don't miss movie in my book.
     NINE MONTHS runs 1:43.  The scenes not involving the Dwyer family
were well paced.  All traces of the Dwyer family should have been
obliterated.  I give a mild thumbs up to NINE MONTHS nevertheless.  The
two lead characters plus Williams were worth going to see.  I award the
movie ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
neekorz@iquest.com (roncreel)
     Hugh Grant and Julianne Moore passed up CONGO to do NINE MONTHS,
and that was a good move, because CONGO could have halted Grant's
career and possibly destroyed Moore's.  Instead they decided to do
Chris (MRS. DOUBTFIRE) Columbus's mildly entertaining comedy about a
husband who impregnates his girlfriend of five years and then decides he
doesn't really want the baby--but she does.  When he misses an
ultrasound appointment, Moore decides to raise the baby herself, and
moves in with friends of hers.  Well, guess what, this is just when
Hugh decides he wants the baby.  She won't talk to him, but when he
visits her in the hospital after a minor incident and explains his
situation to her, she takes him back just like that, and they marry
Then the birth occurs, and on a wild ride to the hospital, a bit of
real life irony occurs, when a sleazy waitress Grant almost slept with
but didn't has to ride with them to the hospital because she cut her
hand.  But Hugh couldn't resist that type of sleazy woman in real
life!  Despite some funny moments, especially the scenes with Robin
Williams, who plays an immigrant doctor who's first delivery is Grant
and Moore's (too bad no other character could be this humorous), this
is just an average comedy.  But some strong supporting performances
will help this one out (Jeff Goldblum and Tom Arnold are delightful).
This movie will be a mild box office success though, unless Hugh
Grant's womanizing will halt it.  Rating: C+

Author
Alex Fung
Starring Hugh Grant [Samuel Faulkner], Julianne Moore [Rebecca Taylor],
     Tom Arnold [Marty Dwyer], Joan Cusack [Gail Dwyer],
     Jeff Goldblum [Sean], Robin Williams [Dr. Kosevich]
Screenplay by Chris Columbus, based on the film NEUF MOIS by
     Patrick Braoude
Produced by Mark Radcliffe, Michael Barnathan, Chris Columbus,
     Anne Francois
Directed by Chris Columbus
Music by Hans Zimmer
Rated PG [Parental Guidence suggested] in Ontario for profanity,
   comedic violence and mature themes
     From the first ten minutes of the film NINE MONTHS, it becomes
fairly obvious what is the theme, and the storyline of the film is a
foregone conclusion.  Now, that's not necessarily a bad thing; surprise
has not usually been an essential element of recent romantic comedies,
and a clever, witty script can salvage even the most formulaic
plotlines.  Unfortunately, such a script was not to be found for this
film.
     The central character of NINE MONTHS is Samuel Faulkner, as played
by Hugh Grant.  At the outset of the film, Samuel is celebrating a
five-year relationship with girlfriend Rebecca Taylor (Julianne Moore)
with a beach picnic.  With the blatant revelation that Samuel seems
oblivious to Rebecca's longful stares at little children frolicking on
the beachside or her inferences to marriage, the audience can sit back
comfortably and foresee the character arc driving the film.
     Of course, Rebecca turns out to be pregnant, a concept which
horrifies Samuel to no end--this is reinforced by the contrived
introduction of the Dwyer couple, Marty and Gail (Tom Arnold and Joan
Cusack), whose three young daughters perpetually terrorize Samuel, and
by the advice of his best friend, Sean (Jeff Goldblum), a struggling
artist who conveniently happens to be Gail's brother.  Samuel's fears
are not alleviated when they end up with a first-time obstetrician (on
humans, anyway), Dr. Kosevich (Robin Williams), a Russian recently
emigrated to San Francisco.
     With such a cliched setup, the plotline and resolution of the film
becomes fairly obvious, and NINE MONTHS desperately requires something
to set it apart from other romantic comedies.  Unfortunately, it lacks
the sharp, tight script which could have made it more than just a
conventional Hollywood romantic comedy.  The dialogue is not
particularly clever, and the comedy is erratic.  There is a fair amount
of physical comedy, some of which borders upon sitcom quality, and the
film tends to weave between an attempt to honestly portray its
characters, and ridiculous caricatures not at all congruous in the
film.
     However, this is not to say that NINE MONTHS does not have its
merits.  The film certainly has the warm fuzzy feeling which permeates
from all of director Chris Columbus' biggest commercial hits (HOME
ALONE, MRS. DOUBTFIRE), and this is sure to appeal to a mass market
audience.  Columbus is effective in manipulating the audience during
the obligatory moving scenes throughout NINE MONTHS, and the pacing of
the movie is very well done.
     NINE MONTHS has a strong cast, none of which are utilized to their
fullest potential.  Hugh Grant, in his first American film lead role,
shows only flashes of the screen presence which made him a star in
1994's FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, and which have carried him through
such varied roles over the years as in IMPROMPTU, SIRENS, THE LAIR OF
THE WHITE WORM, and THE ENGLISHMAN WHO WENT UP A HILL BUT CAME DOWN A
MOUNTAIN.  He is still able to carry the film, but this is not his best
work.  Julianne Moore is an excellent actress, and her role in NINE
MONTHS is certainly her highest-profile one to date; she's had
supporting roles in such blockbusters as THE FUGITIVE and THE HAND THAT
ROCKS THE CRADLE, but this one may increase her public awareness.
Moore is primarily a dramatic actress (with some of her outstanding
work including performances in SHORT CUTS, VANYA ON 42ND STREET, and
SAFE) and in NINE MONTHS she makes an understated but successful jump
into comedy.  Joan Cusack is a fabulous actress, and is wasted in this
film; she has no more than a handful of significant scenes in NINE
MONTHS.  Tom Arnold surprised many with his work in TRUE LIES as the
sidekick, and his role in this movie is similar in many ways - he
portrays an annoying but likably overbearing character.  However,
Arnold is not nearly as successful in this attempt; he fails to make
the Marty character any more than superficially likable (though the
annoying part of the character is all-too effective).  Jeff Goldblum is
good in a small role, and Robin Williams is charismatic (if over the
top) as the inept but eager Russian doctor.  (And if anyone can go over
the top and still remain effective, it's Robin Williams.)
     NINE MONTHS succeeds at becoming a light Hollywood
romantic-comedy, and fails to become anything beyond or better than
that.  It does generate superficial charm, but fails to exploit the
abilities of its cast.  On my four-star scale, I give NINE MONTHS
two-and-a-half stars.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995 
U.S. Availability: wide release 7/12/95 
Running Length: 1:42 
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Mature themes, profanity, sexual innuendo) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1 
Cast: Hugh Grant, Julianne Moore, Tom Arnold, Joan Cusack, 
      Jeff Goldblum, Robin Williams 
Director: Chris Columbus 
Producers: Michael Barnathan, Chris Columbus, Anne Francois, 
           and Mark Radcliffe 
Screenplay: Chris Columbus 
Cinematography: Donald McAlpine 
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox 
     With HOME ALONE and MRS. DOUBTFIRE, director Chris Columbus has 
shown an aptitude for rescuing reasonably mediocre films by infusing 
them with doses of high-energy humor.  If not for certain hilarious 
sequences, neither of those movies would have climbed above the usual 
continuum of forgettable comedies.  Now, adapting from a French 
screenplay (NEUF MOIS), Columbus has chosen to helm this exploration of 
the ups and downs of pregnancy. 
     For the most part, "unspectacular" is an apt description for NINE 
MONTHS.  The motion picture has a pedestrian script that attempts, with 
only limited success, to wed a romantic comedy with a one-hundred minute 
exhortation on the joys of having a family.  Bursts of hilarity -- and 
there are three worth mentioning -- save NINE MONTHS from wearing out 
its welcome.  One of the more obvious problems with the film is that it 
takes a few feeble stabs at drama, something this sort of movie is not 
well-suited for. 
     Hugh Grant plays Dr. Samuel Faulkner, a child psychiatrist who, 
paradoxically, is afraid of kids.  His live-in lover of five years, 
Rebecca (Julianne Moore), is beginning to realize that something is 
missing from her life.  It's not until she discovers she's pregnant that 
she realizes her maternal instincts have been in overdrive.  
Unfortunately, Samuel doesn't share Rebecca's excitement about impending 
parenthood, and spends so much time bemoaning the loss of his perfect 
lifestyle that his distraught girlfriend moves out.  Refusing to see 
Samuel, she lodges with a pregnant friend (Joan Cusack) and her boorish 
husband (Tom Arnold).   
     Despite limited screen time, the real star of NINE MONTHS is Robin 
Williams.  Playing an obstetrician from Russia who has never delivered a 
human baby and seems more adept at malapropisms than diagnoses, the lead 
from MRS. DOUBTFIRE shows that he and director Columbus have formed an 
excellent rapport.  With his mastery of physical comedy, Williams is 
right at home in the midst of this hit-and-miss farce. 
     Grant, with his "aw shucks" manner and bumbling cuteness, was very 
good in both FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL and THE ENGLISHMAN WHO WENT UP 
A HILL..., but seems a little out of his element in this, his first big 
budget, Hollywood movie. Grant's undeniable strength lies in his 
subtlety, and that's not a quality Columbus films are renowned for.  
There are times when the actor is charming and charismatic, but those 
instances are mixed with scenes where he seems lost. 
     Julianne Moore, on the other hand, continues to display great 
range.  Although there's nothing spectacular about the role of Rebecca, 
this part, taken in conjunction with her appearances in SHORT CUTS and 
SAFE, is indicative of the breadth of the actress' ability.  On the 
other hand, following a reasonably strong turnout as Arnold 
Schwarzenegger's sidekick in TRUE LIES, Tom Arnold gives an uneven 
performance.  On those occasions when he's not funny, he tends to be 
just plain irritating. 
     Three sequences in NINE MONTHS are guaranteed to get huge laughs.  
The first involves a toy store fracas between the two male leads and a 
green dinosaur ("Arnie") with a penchant for profanity.  The second is 
madcap drive to the hospital in which Samuel manages to injure just 
about everyone who gets in his way.  Then there's the delivery room, 
where the birth becomes almost incidental.  Sprinkled around these 
payoff scenes are smaller chuckles, but, on the whole, the comic tone is 
uneven.  Those expecting to spend one-hundred minutes rolling in the 
aisles will probably be disappointed, but, if nothing else, this film 
offers a light summer option for anyone whose palates has not acquired a 
taste for action. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Jer Fairall
(1995) *** (out of *****)
Starring Hugh Grant, Julianne Moore, tom Arnold, Joan Cussak, Robin
Williams, Jeff Goldblum
Directed By Chris Columbus
     "Nine Months" is one of those movies that isn't worth going to the
touble of paying a babysitter, getting cleaned up and going out to the
theater to see but is just fine when viewed on a small screen with smaller
expectations. 
     Hugh Grant playes the polite, somewhat snotty boyfriend of Julianne
Moore who at the beginning of the film is starting to think about having a
child. Grant objects, of course, and then flips out when he later finds
out that his girlfriend is pregnant. During this strife, Grant and Moore
are befriended by another expecting couple played by Tom Arnold and Joan
Cusak. Arnold is an overbearing boor who manages to make life even more
miserable for the distraught Grant.
     Grant is incredibly nervous about his impending fatherhood which
leads to complications in his relationship with Moore. Things are made
even more hectic when their doctor turns up sick and and they end up with
his new assistant,  who is working on his first human pregnancy after
being a vetrenarian in Russia. The doctor is played with usual energy by
Robin Williams whose mispronunciation of the word "thesarus" provides the
movies single biggest laugh.
     "Nine Months" was directed by Chris Columbus whose previous credits
include "Home Alone" "Mrs. Doubtfire" and "Adventures in Babysitting." He
doesn't take very many chances in this film particularly with the casting.
Everyone in the film is playing their usual type of character. Grant is
really doing the same thing here that he did in the overrated "Four
Weddings and a Funeral" and even in a much darker film like Roman
Polanski's "Bitter Moon" which is that he is always both nervous and
charming. Tom Arnold is also doing pretty much here what he did in 1994's
"True Lies" and on television as Arnie in "Roseanne" and in his own funny
but short lived sitcom "The Jackie Thomas Show." And the rest of the cast,
including Joan Cussak and Jeff Goldblum, also give us just what we would
expect from them as well.
     "Nine Months" fails when it goes for scenes of really broad slapstick
like the overplayed scene in the delivery room when both Moore and Cussak
just happen to both end up in the same room. And I could have really done
without the extended sequence in a toy store where Arnold gets into a
fight with an insipid Barney the dinosaur clone. Yet "Nine Months" is not
without it's charms especially when seen from your sofa.

Author
Christopher Null
     NINE MONTHS has all the makings of an incredible disaster.  First,
its star (Hugh Grant) is arrested for lewd conduct.  Second, it's a
remake of a French film (NEUF MOIS), always a huge negative.  Finally,
it's a comedy decidedly for adults which is directed by the infantile
Chris Columbus, the man who brought us the HOME ALONE franchise and
MRS. DOUBTFIRE.
     Imagine my shock; NINE MONTHS is pretty good.  The success of the
film is due *entirely* to the radiant presence of Julianne Moore as
Rebecca, a woman who finds herself unintentionally pregnant and with no
clue as to what to do.  Grant plays Samuel, the world's most neurotic
boyfriend, who has to "grow up" and come to grips with the fact that
his convertible has no room for a baby seat.
     Rounding out the cast are Tom Arnold and Joan Cusack, a pair of
obnoxious breeders that serve as foils for the cathartic Samuel.  Robin
Williams plays a bumbling, Russian obstetrician who seems to be
learning about pregnancy at the same time as Rebecca.  You don't have
to look far beyond the last three actors' names to figure out what goes
on when they're on the screen:  raw, unfiltered, and often
unnecessarily vulgar, comedy.
     NINE MONTHS hits the metaphor pretty hard ... never missing a moment
to tell us just how great the pregnancy-childbirth experience is, and
Samuel is constantly rebuked for his beliefs that the world is
overpopulated and (more importantly) that he will be incapable of being
a good father.  The result is a pretty heavy-handed "message" movie
that will not stop beating its theme into the viewer.
     It drags a bit at times, and the film never becomes really
engrossing, but whenever Moore is on screen, none of that seems to
matter.  The emotion and power she puts into her performance make every
second of the film worth watching, if only to get to Julianne's next
scene.  It might not be the best way to make a film work, but in this
day and age I'll take just about anything.
     NINE MONTHS is a film with a huge identity crisis.  Columbus
obviously couldn't give up slapstick (i.e., HOME ALONE), filling what
could have been a touching romance with antics that are entirely out of
place here.  Again, this is *not* a kids' movie, as the mother of the
child who sat behind me at the screening can attest to (when he asked
what a particularly explicit piece of anatomy was).
     Incidentally, I had the fortune to see this film with a woman who
happens to be currently pregnant.  She loved the film ("double thumbs
up") and was pretty impressed with the realism given to Rebecca's
experience.  As she put it, only the constant puking was missing.

Author
Joan Ellis
     NINE MONTHS is certainly the longest pregnancy I have ever
experienced.  It is a very silly movie.  Whether it is also funny will
depend on you.
     Pregnant Becca (Julianne Moore) is stranded in the current
stereotype of the young woman who lives with a man she loves in an
arrangement that includes hard work and fun, but not marriage or, God
forbid, children.  Why would the "he" of this movie want responsibility
or commitment when the woman of his dreams is already in his bed, and a
red Porsche and San Francisco Bay are immediately outside the window of
his perfect apartment?
     When Becca decides her clock is ticking, she has a tough
conversion on her hands in the person of her lover, Samuel, who is
played--dare I say the words--by Hugh Grant.  For one hour and
forty-two minutes we watch Hugh pout, growl, and overact.  It would be
nice to think he is trying to lift the movie upward, but it is remotely
possible that he thinks the audience just can't get enough of him.  So
overdone is his mugging that the pregnant woman becomes the movie's
brightest spot.  Actress Julianne Moore is a very appealing actress and
has all the right reactions to the ludicrous chaos that surrounds her.
     On their first visit to the delivering O.B., Becca and Samuel run
smack into Dr.  Kosevich (Robin Williams), a newly arrived Russian
veterinarian who has recently decided to switch his specialty to
babies.  Williams causes a lot of spontaneous laughter with his
malapropisms.  He calls for "Anastasia" to anesthetize and discusses
Becca's "Volvo" with gentle discretion.
     Williams is very funny here, but he carries the rest of the cast
straight into the familiar spectacle of Americans falling from farce to
slapstick whenever they try a British specialty.  The whole silly thing
dissolves finally into a hospital scene full of enough fuzzy love to
please Newt and the whole of America's heartland.  This might have been
a romantic comedy or a zany farce, but no one made the choice, so we
have a little of everything and a whole lot of nothing.
     And then there's the "incident."  Although there can't be many
Americans who would be shocked by a celebrity indulging in one-stop
shopping, it may not be what people most want from the charming,
awkward bumbler they had come to love in FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL.
The box office will tell whether the laughter that rocks the theater at
the sight of his face is derisive or affectionate.  It hardly matters;
the movie is still a bust.
     Let's not blame the whole thing on Hugh Grant.  Writer/director
Chris Columbus has the distinction of creating three of the most
intolerable movies ever made: MRS. DOUBTFIRE and those violent assaults
on sensibility, the HOME ALONEs.  NINE MONTHS is not as excruciatingly
bad as the others.  Let's assume Columbus is in a lull.


Author
Andrew Hicks
        That's exactly how long the movie felt to me. There weren't 
even nine laughs in NINE MONTHS. It's a terrible mess of a movie 
starring a terrible mess of a man, Mr. Hugh Grant, a huge dork. It's 
not the whole oral-sex/prostitution thing (referring to Grant, not me) 
that bugs me, it's the fact that Grant is annoying. Not just Adam 
Sandler-annoying, we're talking Jim Carrey-annoying. 
        Since when do eye flutters and nervous smiles pass for 
acting? But, on the other hand, since when do really bad slapstick (a 
fistfight in the delivery room culminating in Grant's head in Joan 
Cusack's lap--a scene he paid $60 to have included in the movie) and 
obscene double entendres (Robin Williams, the obstetrician, tells 
Grant's pregnant girlfriend she has "a big pussy," referring of course to 
the size of the cat hairs on her coat, but nonetheless, Grant paid $60 to 
have the exchange included in the movie) pass for comedy?
        NINE MONTHS is a predictable cookie-cutter movie with no 
originality in humor or plot. Hugh Grant plays a successful child 
psychiatrist. Why a child psychologist? So the scriptwriters could 
inject the following unfunny exchange:
        GRANT (flutters eyelashes, offers a nervous smile, then 
responds in his annoying English accent and I-think-I-actually-have-
talent attitude): Could you possibly elaborate on that?
        More like a Hugh asshole, but that's beside the point, which 
is: NINE MONTHS includes too many needlessly stupid jokes that get 
laughs from the ten year olds in the audience while everyone else 
shakes his or her head in disbelief. 
        So, anyway, Grant finds out his girlfriend is pregnant and 
does his usual reaction (fluttered eyelashes, nervous smiles). This 
paves the way for every possible pregnancy/child birth gag in the book, 
especially since Grant's equally annoying friend's wife is also 
pregnant. The annoying friend is played by Tom Arnold, who provides 
most of the cacophonous slapstick, none of which is funny, such as a 
scene where Arnold beats up a costumed "Arnie the Dinosaur" (you 
draw your own parallels on that one) in a toy store.
        The only interesting character in the movie is played by Jeff 
Goldblum, who should have hid himself away somewhere after the 
dreadful HIDEAWAY, as an artist with a fear of (and simultaneous 
longing for) commitment. Not even Robin Williams, who plays a 
Russian doctor who has recently decided to switch from veterinary 
medicine to obstetrics, has much humor. His is a one-joke character--
the old foreign-guy-who-mispronounces-English stereotype (did 
someone say Yakov Smirnov? That's my favorite vodka, by the way), 
hence the line "Now it's time to take a look at your Volvo," another 
nasty but unamusing joke, except this one goes right over the ten year 
olds' heads, while the adults simultaneously groan.
        NINE MONTHS is a complete failure, low on laughs and 
intelligence and high on loud, unfunny slapstick, failed jokes and 
other uninspired lunacy. Hugh Grant's Sunset Boulevard arrest 
(please, no caught-with-his-pants-down jokes) may bring more people 
into the theaters, but they certainly won't leave with a smile on their 
faces, not after 90 minutes of Grant's nervous smiles. Everything in 
the movie is so forced, so unauthentic that anyone with an I.Q. over 80 
(sorry, Hugh) will know they wasted their money on an unfulfilled 
desire. But at least they didn't spend 60 bucks for it.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
