Title
Review for Cut (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
Scream meets The Blair Witch Project?  
The first film from Michael Gudinski's newly formed Mushroom
Pictures, Cut is a lightweight and terribly cheesy Australian attempt
to produce a slick horror/comedy in the same vein as Scream.  It works
beautifully - up to a point!
A group of film students attempt to complete work on Hot
Blooded, a notorious horror film that was never finished after the
original director was murdered twelve years earlier.  Previous
attempts to complete this seemingly cursed horror masterpiece have
been quickly abandoned when key players have been brutally murdered.
Undeterred by the film's reputation, an eager young aspiring director
(Jessica Napier, from Black Rock, etc) assembles her small crew and
sets out to complete the film.  She even lures the original star
(Molly Ringwald) to return to Australia to reprise her role and face
up to her fears.  But once again a mysterious masked psycho begins his
bloody work, butchering the attractive young cast and crew in
spectacular and sometimes comical fashion.
Although not as cinema literate nor as clever as Scream and
its ilk, Cut is an enjoyable enough parody of the teen slasher genre,
and features plenty of grisly deaths.  Admittedly, Cut is derivative
and formulaic stuff, but it does have a healthy sense of irreverence
that allows it to poke fun at its familiar clichés.  The influence
of everything from Halloween through to more recent slasher flicks is
obvious in the staging of the film.
First time director Kimble Rendall (from The Hoodoo Gurus)
maintains a reasonably fast pace throughout, and lays on the gore
pretty thickly.  However, the dialogue is quite trite, and some of the
performances leave a lot to be desired.  There are also some appalling
continuity gaffes - in one scene a woman is impaled, face down, on a
garden tap, but in the very next scene she is seen lying face up!
The casting of Ringwald, '80's cinema icon and veteran of John
Hughes' teen comedies, as a has-been starlet anxious to resurrect her
stalled career, should have provided first time script writer Dave
Warner (from '80's band The Suburbs) with plenty of clever in-jokes,
but he has let the opportunity pass.  Kylie Minogue plays a small
cameo in the film, but, like Drew Barrymore in the original Scream, is
despatched within the first ten minutes.
On the positive side, Cut has gone into profit already, even
before it has been released, purely on the strength of overseas
pre-sales.  While this may not mean much to the average film goer, it
at least ensures that Mushroom Pictures will continue to produce
entertaining and unashamedly commercial films for some time yet.  God
knows, the local industry needs more purely entertaining films like
this rather than the sort of pretentious, well made and earnest art
house fare that is critically acclaimed but shunned by paying
audiences.
