Title
Review for Tales from the Hood (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Maoist Internationalist Movement
     TALES FROM THE HOOD is much better than your average Hollywood
flick.  It skillfully co-opts the trademarks of the goofier horror
movies--action, violence, gore and humor--to make some harsh political
points against patriarchy and national oppression.  More so than in
1995 Amerikkka, the oppressors tend to get what's coming to them, just
as they will in real life in the long run.  The audiences' cheers for
vengeance are one sign that life will imitate art in this regard.  By
using the horror medium, Cundieff is able to keep his audience's
attention and avoid being accused of being "preachy" as are more sober
political directors.
     TALES FROM THE HOOD is composed of four stories, each with a
strong component of reality.  What could make for better horror than
the real-life monsters created by imperialism, capitalism and
patriarchy? In the first story, a nasty, dope-pushing pig earns his
vengeance by killing a progressive community activist.  Happily, the
Uncle Tom pig is not spared.
     The monster in the second story is an abusive patriarch.  Cundieff
deals well with gender, particularly by the inclusion of several strong
women characters.
     The third story centers on a fascist cracker politician named Duke
Metzger.  Once again, the bad guy gets his, as does his Uncle Tom
advisor.  The protagonists here are symbols of slavery who call for
reparations--or else.
     The last story brings it all home to the young audience TALES FROM
THE HOOD is made for.  Cundieff makes it clear that these stories add
up to genocide, and that fratricidal gang violence is part of this big
problem.  This bit suffers from a line of dialogue that seems out of
place in this otherwise excellent movie.  The awkward line says that
the government funded a genuine anti-fratricide program, suggesting
that the government behind genocide has its sweet side.
     Overall though, TALES FROM THE HOOD is a great film in that it
advances a lot of heavy--and correct--political points, while staying
faithful to the traditions of a playful genre.
     MIM Notes is not copyrighted.  Please credit MIM when
redistributing or referring to this material.
MIM Distributors, PO Box 3576, Ann Arbor MI 48106-3576.
E-mail: mim@nyxfer.blythe.org.
