Title
Review for M (1931)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Fritz Lang
Writers: Paul Falkenberg, Adolf Jansen, Fritz Lang, Karl Vash, and Thea von
Harbou
Starring: Peter Lorre, Gustaf Gründgens, Ellen Widmann, Inge Landgut, Theo
Lingen, Otto Wernicke, Frank Stein, Theodor Loos, Georg John
Fritz Lang's "M" is one of the great philosophical films, primarily because
its anger and message are not bogged down in pretentious overtones with
crush the story of the film, rendering it almost unwatchable a second time.
 It's a film where the meanings and anger of the film are not fully
comprehended in one single showing because it raises so many questions
about crime, punsihment, and authority.  But what's really amazing is how
it's first and foremost a gripping story about a murderer and the pursuit
of him, and then its philosophical.  What a concept.
"M" is all about a man named Hans Beckert (Peter Lorre, in the role that
made him internationally famous) who is an infamous child killer who the
police have been after for months, as his acts have been serial.  The first
10 minutes of the film introduces him as the public sees him: he woos a
little girl on her way home from school with candy and balloons, and then
we see an intensely creepy montage of the girl's ball rolling in the grass,
and the balloon he bought for her stuck in electric wires.  This whole
segment is intercutted with the girl's mom waiting at home for her to
arrive, and growing more and more worried as the time passes.  And we get
the saddening, scary shot of the woman's cry for her daughter being echoed
in an empty room.
The film immeadiatly launches into a kind of documentary on what the police
are doing to track him down, including night raids on criminal spots where
they think the killer may be, and propaganda for kids to learn not to talk
to any strangers.  The public is furious that the police haven't caught
him, and some even begin doing their own investigated work, albeit less
successful or deft as the police.  There's a scene towards the end that
perfectly sums up what this film is about: an old man is seen innocently
talking to a child, and before he knows it, a mob of people have formed
around him, and begin attacking him, saying that he's the infamous
murderer.  Of course, the man isn't the murderer, but it shows what people
become when they are angry and want to take their vengeance out on someone
without proof.
We also discover that the other really pissed off people in this matter are
the local mafiasos, who meet to discuss how they too will try and track
them down.  In one of the best parallel action sequences I've ever seen,
Lang shows the mafiasos discussing their plans as well as the police's
plans, and both seem eerily similar (even though they're marginally
different).  And soon the criminal underground, the police, and the general
public all seem to be the same.
The film also shows us Hans, who, in one brief shot, looks at himself in
the mirror and makes a nasty face like the monster the people believe him
to be.  The opening scenes of him show him as such, as we see him primarily
in shadow, and eerily whistling Grief's "In the Hall of the Mountain King"
over and over again until it becomes his signature tune.  The fact is we
never really see him up close, only in the form of shadows, and when we do,
he's not this monster he's made out to be.  It would be cheap if he was
such a monster, but the film shows Hans to be a man with a really sick
impulse, one that he cannot control, and one that is driving him insane. 
Peter Lorre's portrayal of Hans is not as a horrible creature, but as a
frightened human being.
The one scene that perfectly sums up who Hans really is and how he feels to
be himself is a pivotal scene where a man has discovered that he's the
killer and tries to place a marker on his back so that he can be found more
easily.  So the man sketches an "M" on his hand, trips into Hans as he
walks by him, and places the "M" on his back shoulder.  A couple seconds
later, Hans looks back into a mirror behind him and notices the "M."  His
entire face looses color and from this point on the film becomes a
merciless rush of fear and paranoia.
Hans has very little time in the film, but in one final scene, he is
captured and brought before a council of citizens and criminals (no police)
who have gone out of their way to get him for themselves and before the
police do.  There, he's placed on trial with the mafia don as the
prosecuting attorney, and a defense counsel man who basically says there's
not much he can do for him.  Here, a frightened Hans looks death right in
the face of all the people who hate him, and tries to desperately plea for
his life.  "I cannot help what I do!" he shouts out, but the people can't
get out of their mind what they see when they read the headlines,
announcing that he's killed another child.
"M" is angry about so many things in society, namely the way that people
refuse to see past what they hear about, and the way that people decide
other peoples' fates.  The trial scene is quickly exposed as a simple form
of revenge by a bunch of pissed off people, as well as some who are also
hypocrites.  How ironic is it for a criminal who has killed dozens of
people in his life to sentence a man to death for murder?  And who is to
say that another man must die because of what he has done and for what he
is?
Hans is seen as a murderer, but no one appears to want to help this man. 
They just want to kill him.  Society often wants to easily rid themselves
of people who don't fit in with them, who cause a roucous in the waves of
society, and that's what this film is about.  People refuse to look
underneath Hans and see a man who needs psychiatric help; they just see a
man who has killed a bunch of kids.  They block out Hans' desperate cries
for help, and refuse to understand him.  This film asks us to understand
people who commit crimes against society, for after all they are human
beings.
"M" was restored last year after being released on video in a murky,
screwed-up version filled with bad sub-titles and unwatchable scenes.  This
new version really clears things up and allows us to see what Lang wanted
us to see.  The film was a major innovative film when it came out, as it
was one of the first "talkies," and uses its sound so carefully and
effectively that its a wonder that anyone was able to be impressed with it
by viewing the older version.
When Fritz Lang made this, he was speaking out about his homeland, Germany,
and the atrocities they were having at the time (as well as in the time
when he made "Metropolis").  But this film actually goes beyond that.  It's
a universal story because things like this still happen today, when one
person is seen as the one to die for everyone's anger.  Hans Beckert was
based on a real person, but this person is a regular in history, and this
film doesn't intend to make him out to be a monster, but really a person
who just has some really major problems.
What's amazing about Fritz Lang's storytelling is how he doesn't let his
message become overbearing or pretentious.  "M" is an intensely watchable
film, one that holds the audience's attention, and in the process, stirs
them up, and makes them think about what is occurring.  A lesser director
would have made this a blatant satire, but Lang lets the story tell itself
and the meaning to come out through it, much like he did with "Metropolis."
 Lang is angry, but he's also doesn't to be condescending about it.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Alex Bryson
Dir: Fritz Lang
Starring: Peter Lorre, Gustaf Grundgens, Otto Wernicke, Theodor Loos
[Before I start I should point out that I'm not absolutely sure which
version I am commenting on - I suspect it was the recent Munich
version]
In a seedy 1930s city Peter Lorre's child murderer picks off his
victims by offering them balloons and candy. The authorities are
powerless to stop him, and tension, mistrust and suspicion amongst the
citizens are bubbling to the surface. Criminal gangs, threatened by
the increased police presence determine that they will hunt down the
perpetrator, whilst Otto Wernicke's homicide inspector follows up his
own leads.
A mother waits in her apartment for her daughter to return from school
but she never arrives. A little girl's ball bounces into view and
stops. Her balloon is shown fluttering tangled against power lines.
Lang conveys the essence of the horror of a subject familiar today,
but what makes this a truly important film is the philosophical
content: is Lorre's Hans Beckert a monster to be destroyed like an
animal, or is the situation more complex: is a compulsive child
murderer more or less culpable than a ruthless mafia boss who is free
to do otherwise? Should we think in terms of treatment? Is he
deserving of sympathy, or is he beneath contempt? Where does the
legitimacy of punishment come from?
All power in the city is shown as corrupt and decadent: the well-fed
homicide squad, the well dressed gangsters become one in their hunt
for the killer. This moral equivalence is emphasised by a particularly
effective sequence where the discussions of the two groups are
intercut, Lang seemingly not impressed by the police. In scenes like
this Lang evokes a grim and jaded image of a decaying and ineffectual
system, and the panic ruling the place. In the film he shows no love
for his home, and indeed left soon afterwards.
The killer is revealed early on, and with his wide eyes and child-like
face seems grotesque but not the ultimate embodiment of evil. Beckert
is a man who probably plays marbles with children when he is not
abducting them, one character remarks. As he is tracked down and
finally cornered his fear is palpable, making him the victim too of
his terrible impulses.
In genre terms this is probably a police procedural, though it is also
a gangster film. There is surprisingly little suspense as the net of
criminals closes on Beckert: instead the more effective and truly
shocking section of the film is the question of what the kangaroo
court will do to him. I won't reveal the ending here, and I suppose I
should point out that the ending will differ according to the version
you see. There is no satisfactory conclusion however, in keeping with
its subject-matter.
In many ways "M" is startlingly modern: Lang's direction would not
feel out of place today, and the situation is not an alien one either.
The terms of the debate are still the same, as the script he wrote
with Thea von Harbou shows. All the familiar positions are laid out:
the feelings of a city terrorised by the child-murderer (if Beckert is
handed over to the police he will plead insanity, be placed in an
asylum and possibly escape to kill again). A woman shouts that he
cannot know how it feels to lose a child. The acting defence counsel
argues that he is not responsible for his actions, and not even the
state should be allowed to kill him. Gustaf Grundgens' underworld boss
wants him "eliminated", since he has admitted that his behaviour is
compulsive. The criminal fraternity sees a wide distinction between
themselves and this "monster", though Schraenker has killed three men
at least. Someone else says that, "Ill people are treated by doctors
and not executioners". 
By the end the issue is as unclear as ever, but Lang has succeeded in
making us ask some unsettling questions. "M" is a disturbing film, as
it was intended to be, but it also has great artistic qualities. If it
were released today it would shock just as much, if not more, than
when originally released. This is one of the most incredible films to
have emerged out of inter-war Germany, and if you get the all too rare
opportunity to see the movie take it.

Author
Brian Koller
Fritz Lang's first sound film was "M", a crime
drama that also made Peter Lorre a star.  The film
was made in Germany shortly before the Nazis
came to full power.  Both Lang and Lorre had
Jewish family connections, and would soon emigrate
to America where their respective careers would
continue successfully.
The story has Lorre playing a pathetic, tormented
murderer of little girls.  As the list of his
victims grow, Berlin falls into a state of panic.
Citizens begin accusing each other of being the
child killer.  In their frustrated search for the
murderer, the police crack down heavily on criminal
activity.  Organized crime figures decide that they
must find the killer themselves, to return to
business as usual.  Soon, both the cops and the
crooks are closing in on Lorre.
Lang takes pains to show the similarities between
the police captains and the crimelords.  Both meet
seperately to decide how to stop the killer, and
Lang switches back and forth between the two meetings.
While the two groups may have different methods, the
end result is the same: Lorre is to be identified,
captured, tried, and executed.
Lorre was well cast as the killer.  His nasal voice
and unsettling manner and appearance played to
stereotypes of what a child killer would be like.
Once he becomes hunted, his wide eyes and furtive
behavior express fear and desperation.  Once in
Hollywood, he would overcome this early stereotype
in a series of Mr. Moto films, and was later best
known for his supporting roles in "The Maltese Falcon"
and "Casablanca".
Hollywood would remake "M" in 1951, using none of
the original crew or cast.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz

M (director: Fritz Lang; screenwriters: Thea von Harbou/Paul
Falkenberg/Adolf Janesen, Karl Vash; cinematographer: Fritz Arno Wagner;
cast: Peter Lorre (Franz Becker), Otto Wernicke (Inspector Lohmann),
Gustaf Grundgens (Schranker), Ellen Widman (Mme. Becker), Inge Landgut
(Elsie Beckmann), Theodor Loos (Police Commissioner), Theo Lingen
(Bauernfaenger), Georg John (Blind Beggar), Franz Stein (Minister),
Friedrich Gnaß (Burglar), Paul Kemp (Pickpocket), Karl Platen
(Nightwatchmen), Ernst Stahl-Nachbaur (Chief of Police), 1931- Ger)
Fritz Lang was a leading German filmmaker by 1931 before the Nazi regime
got full control of the country. In 1933, when they did get full
control, he emigrated to America, worrying that he might become out of
favor with the Nazis due to having Jewish relations and would also be
reduced to making propaganda films if he stayed. He left behind his
pro-Nazi wife Thea von Harbou--the screenwriter of all his films in the
'20s and '30s, including "M." In this film, about a child-murderer, his
first talkie, it was made with surprisingly the highest sound quality,
which is quite an achievement if you keep in mind how this was his first
experience with that new medium. The film was at first called Murderers
Among Us and because of that title, he was denied permission to use a
film studio, that is, until he changed the title to "M" (the initial
standing for murderer) when he discovered that the Nazis had taken the
original title to refer to them.
In the following articles, one in the Los Angeles Herald Express, 12
August 1947 & the other an article by Lang: Why I am interested in
Murder. New York, 1947, Lang stated why he has such an avid interest in
murder: "Gradually, and at times reluctantly, I have come to the
conclusion that every human mind harbors a latent compulsion to murder."
He goes on to state: "I have tried to approach the murderer
imaginatively to show him as a human being possessed of some demon that
has driven him beyond the ordinary borderlines of human behavior, and
not the least part of whose tragedy is that by murder he never resolves
his conflicts."
You can chalk "M" up as a lasting masterpiece, created with a passion
for detail and a successful transitional film from the silents to the
talkies, taking into its mise en scene the best of both those worlds. At
its best, "M" emulates the accomplishments found in all the great works
of poetry. It is still the greatest of all the serial killer films made,
even if it is mistakeningly considered by some, now, as merely a museum
piece. All you have to do is compare the depth of its storytelling with
the greatest films of that genre, a genre that Lang's film spawned, such
as Psycho and The Silence of the Lambs. Lang's thriller has the
advantage of not only understanding the psycho's motivations but
encompassing how an entire society was drawn into the murder, as most of
the film revolves around the search for the killer. And, when you
compare it to a slick thriller, like the recent American Psycho, it is
not difficult to see how shallow that one is in comparison.
This thriller was based on a real-life manhunt in Dusseldorf for a
serial child-murderer, Peter Kurten. The film is subversive in many
ways; it expresses Lang's many long-held opinions on why the murderer
can't help doing what he does and how society has become debased. It
also explores the responsibility a mother has to watch her own children,
the pros and cons of capital punishment, and, he also aims to point out
what goes beyond the scope of human interest and emotions, as he wanted
to make a statement relating the murders to the unequal distribution of
wealth. He shows how the rich have more free time to look after their
children because they have the financial resources, while the poor must
constantly be busy working. He, thereby, purposefully, opens and closes
the film, with the children playing unsupervised games in their
working-class neighborhoods.
The big German city is aghast at the number of little girls reported
murdered in the newspaper, as Lang's camera sweeps the different city
sections, with different wide-angled shots and shots from his signature
overhead sweeps (something he used first, despite Orson Welles taking so
many bows for this kind of shot and never acknowledging that Lang did it
first), and his long close-ups, as each group is shown with their own
reaction to the events.
The little girls play outside in their yard and sing songs about the
bogeyman who will come and take them away. Their mothers react with
pained expressions on their faces, while they are busy scrubbing
clothes. The police, under the leadership of the corpulent Inspector
Lohmann (Otto Wernicke), complain that they have no clues to help them,
that the public is not helping them by giving them false leads, which is
wearing the police down, as they are pressured to be working
around-the-clock to catch the culprit. The underworld is upset that the
police are cracking down on their illegal establishments by repeated
raids, arresting them at will, and thereby putting a big dent into their
business. They are particularly upset that the police should think that
it is one of them who is committing this low-life crime. Under the
leadership of a renown gangster, Schranker (Gustaf Grundgens), the
various gangs get together with the beggars' organization called in to
help. They plan to capture the killer and take care of him with their
own method of justice. What is noteworthy to observe, is how Lang draws
parallels between the police investigation and the underworld's. The
police take fingerprints from a letter the killer wrote the newspaper,
they have a psychologist profile the killer as someone who is a
pathological sex pervert, and they note the type of pencil he used, the
brand of cigarettes he smoked, and the type of wood table he used to
write on. While, the underworld has everyone in their organization
become their eyes and ears, as they put someone on every block to watch
for the killer.
The murderer, Franz Becker (Peter Lorre), is first heard telling the
girl he is about to kill, what a beautiful ball she has and then asking
the little girl her name. His face is not seen, it is only seen that he
is wearing a fedora, as a cute little girl, Elsie Beckmann (Inge
Landgut), tells him her name, as she is bouncing a brightly colored ball
off a post that has an announcement for a 10,000 marks reward for
information about the killer. He lures the innocent girl away by buying
her candy and a balloon from a blind vender (Georg John), as the vender
will recognize him later by his distinguishable whistle taken from a few
bars of Grieg's "In the Hall of the Mountain King." This tune will
become the ominous leitmotif throughout the film. Since Lorre couldn't
whistle, it was Lang's whistling that was used. Her death will first be
telegraphed to the viewer by her balloon blowing in the wind, as it is
stuck on the telegraph wires, and with her mother's sad expression, as
she stares at her empty chair by the dining table that has her plate and
silverware on it.
Panic reaches across the city anew with the discovery of Elsie
Beckmann's death, with citizens accusing others of being the killer for
illogical reasons, of petty criminals being picked up for minor offenses
who challenge the police by saying:'Better catch the child
murderer.'Because of the murders, people are willing to go to any
extreme to blame someone for the crime, even if they have no proof, as
an innocent man is attacked by a mob after just talking to a little
girl. It is evident that Lang saw here the festering wounds Nazism would
later on fully exploit to its own advantages, in a society that was
already decadent and had lost its sense of responsibility. He sensed
they were looking for law and order and would even readily accept the
Nazi dictatorship that limited their freedom, just because they wanted a
change.
The police and the underworld begin to close in on the killer using
their different styles of tracking him down, but what remains striking,
is how similar they are in character, as Lang shows how each of them
meet to handle the problem -- with Schranker, representing the
underworld, the equal of Lohmann, who represents the police.
The earthy Lohmann, being a stickler for details, finds spelling errors
in the newspaper note the killer sent, indicating the killer is not
well-educated. He also gets a list of all the mental patients released
in the past few years and has his men check them out. One of his men
goes to Becker's apartment and will bring back evidence of Ariston
cigarettes the same brand found by the crime scene and he will later on
show that the killer wrote the note on the windowsill of Becker's
apartment. The police will have a stakeout in that apartment, waiting
for the killer's return.
Meanwhile, the blind balloon vender recognizes the whistle of the
killer's, as he is again luring a little girl with his friendly ways. He
has his helper follow him and too make the tail easier, a large 'M'
chalk mark is placed on the shoulder of the killer's coat by the young
helper as he bumps into the killer. The whole scene with the beggars in
pursuit of the killer, was reminiscent of the leftist Bertold Brecht's
"The Three Penny Opera,"as all the beggars signal each other with
whistles and chase the killer into an office building. Later in the
night, the underworld criminals overtake the two watchmen and eventually
find the killer in the attic, after taking the whole building apart in
their search.
What gives this film its power, is how the entire city is analyzed by
how they react to the crime. When the underworld corners Lorre, trapping
him like an animal, the audience watches him scurry around for dear life
in the office building, and when they capture and take him to an
abandoned warehouse, they give him a mock trial in a dark dungeonlike
basement, just the right atmosphere to bring the film to a climax. With
the criminal element getting to him first, the question seriously
becomes what is the proper punishment for such a misfit, as the
criminals, an unofficial jury of his peers, respond the way 'the man in
the street' would, that it is better off for society if he were dead.
The answer for Lang, is that the people themselves must decide in a
court of law what kind of punishment is warranted. The only thing Lang
does with his objective camera, is try to understand the killer, not
sympathize with him. For this stance, he even earned praised from the
Nazis through their propaganda minister, Goebbels, who called the film
"fantastic, free of phony humanitarian sentiments."
Inspector Lohmann grills a burglar caught in the office building, who
won't say what he was doing there, until the inspector tricks him, by
telling him he will be charged for murdering the watchman. He then tells
the police that the underworld was there to get the killer and where
they took him to trial. Lang, by having the law come in on the
underworld's mock trial and impede it, further asks what is true justice
for a murderer, the most serious crime one can commit in this life!
The film is expeditious in its stark treatment of the innocuous Lorre,
who does not stand out from the crowd and is physically a small and
fragile man. He defends himself to his fellow jurors, by basically
borrowing Jesus' words: "Who is without sin to cast aspersions on
another." As he cries out that he can't help himself, as the criminals
look at him intently, while some are jeering at his pleas, appalled to
hear him use the same excuses many of them have used. He finally screams
out, getting the pity of a few, "I have no control over my urges. I want
to escape from myself, but it is impossible." Facing a certain lynching,
the police come in, supposedly, to get him a trial where he will either
be executed or sent away to a mental institution. But, as noted by the
mourning mothers of the victims, his punishment can't bring back their
little girls (this version was eliminated from the later showings of the
film).
Peter Lorre became a recognized star as a result of this film and
deservedly so, even though his speaking part was minimal and came only
toward the end of the film, when he movingly confesses how evil sits
inside him. His image in the film fits a description the public could
readily identify from now on as that of a child-killer, of a creepy man
and a loner, unable to function in society, who lures children by
pretending to be their nice uncle to buy them candy. Lorre, being
Jewish, fled Germany for America in the early thirties, and was typecast
for this kind of role his entire Hollywood career as a result of this
film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Lipson
M: A warning against totalitarianism?
  Fritz Lang's M was made in 1931, in a Germany witnessing the rapid
growth of the Nazi party. When I first saw the movie, I took it to be
an ominous foreshadowing of the dangers of a totalitarian state, where
mob violence against undesirables is rampant and the authorities
ruthlessly put the supposed good of society over people's individual
freedoms. The incredibly bleak view of Berlin which Fritz Lang depicts
in the movie could let me see it no other way.  It was clear, at least
at first glance, that the audience was to react with disgust at the
oppressive tactics the police employ to catch the child murderer,
measures that make the city of Berlin a most unpleasant place to
live. I thought the movie perhaps may even have reflected Lang's
horror at the Nazi party--a disgust reflected in 1933 when, after
Goebbels offered to make him head of the German film industry, he
chose to flee the country instead.
  But my certainty of this interpretation as an accurate meaning of
the film began to change somewhat on second viewing. My earlier
attitude was in part shaped by my perception that the police's
high-handed and dictatorial tactics to investigate the murders were
getting nowhere, and that their obsessive search of one particular
house was barking up the wrong tree. But on second viewing, I changed
my mind and began to believe that the house they had under close
surveillance was in fact that of the killer (Peter Lorre). A check of
the Internet Movie Database character names confirmed that. Now,
suddenly, my original views of M as a warning against totalitarianism
came into question; after all, one could make the claim from the movie
that the police's oppressive tactics were effective and ultimately for
the good of society.
  My uncertainty as to M's meaning was heightened when I started to
think more of the creative forces behind the movie. Clearly, its
director Lang (whose mother was Jewish) held strongly anti-Nazi
views. But the screenplay of M was co-written by Lang's wife Thea von
Harbou, who herself was (or would become) a dedicated Nazi and would
divorce Lang over the matter. Thus, the question was raised in my mind
over whether it would be legitimate to believe a Nazi would have
written a story with anti-totalitarian overtones, as I had first
though M was.
  Maybe then the answer to my question ultimately has to do with the
different roles of the director and the screenwriter. Von Harbou may
well not have intended her original screenplay to reflect negatively
on the tactics of Nazism; thus, she portrayed the repressive methods
of the police as ultimately effective. But in handing in the
screenplay, she turned over control of the final direction of the
movie to the director; M as we have it now thus reflects Lang's, not
von Harbou's, ultimate vision. And by Lang's claustrophobic directing
and heavy use of shadows, he may have in fact intended to undercut the
message of the screenplay and make Berlin of the 1930's in fact to
seem ominously sinister and oppressive. For this reason, my initial
impression of the movie may have been correct: no matter what minor
points may cast the impression otherwise, Lang had succeeded--via the
overall tone and message of the movie--to make M a warning against the
totalitarianism into which Germany was threatening to descend.

Author
John Smyth
Fritz Lang's M (1931) tells the story of a child killer who 
is terrorising a small German city. The film opens with a group 
of children playing and singing a nursery rhyme, the lyrics of 
which tell of a man in black who will take children who are 
naughty and chop them up. As they play, they bounce a ball 
against a street lamp, on which there is a Wanted poster, for 
the killer.
The next scene is in a fairground - a man buys a balloon for a 
small girl while whistling a jaunty tune. Meanwhile, her mother 
is busy preparing dinner for her return. Soon, the balloon is 
seen tangled in overhead power-lines - the child is the latest 
victim of the killer, while, at home, her mother becomes more 
and more frantic.
The latest killing causes outrage - parents are afraid to let 
their children go to school and even the most innocuous gestures 
by men towards children lead to suspicion and accusations. The 
police are under pressure - the city council, the press and the 
public are screaming for results.
The police inspector Lohmann (Otto Wernicke) in charge of the 
Investigation is a clever man, and he is methodical in his 
methods of detection. The killer is Franz Becker (Peter Lorre), 
who has been sending letters to the press and the police manage 
to track down his apartment. However, the police are not the only 
people looking for the killer - the criminal underworld has offered 
their own reward for his capture. This is not because of 
philanthropy - the police searches have caused so much interference 
to their activities, they decide that it is better for them if 
they catch the killer.
Lang's superb film contrasts the gentle, almost child-like manner 
of the killer, as he gradually gains the trust of his victims, 
with the frantic nature of the police and criminal investigations. 
When Becker attempts to lure another child away, he is patient 
and meticulous. He is a charming fellow, and he easily seduces 
his latest target, plying the young girl with cakes and bringing 
her to a funfair. 
The pace of the chase is far more frantic. Though the police 
quickly discover the identity of the killer, it is the criminals 
who find the killer first. Becker is betrayed by his trademark 
tune. He buys a balloon from the same vendor as he had done when 
he murdered his previous victim. The vendor is blind but remembers
the tune (Edvard Grieg's Peer Gynt Suite 1 Op. 46, "In the Hall 
of the Mountain King") and sends a young helper to follow Becker. 
The boy chalks the letter 'M' on his hand and, walking past 
Becker, pats him on the shoulder, leaving the 'M' imprinted on 
the back of his coat. In a delicious irony, the child with him 
(his prospective victim) notices the smudge on his coat, and 
tries to wipe it off. Becker realises that he has been marked, 
and attempts to escape. He is now in a dilemma - both the police 
and the criminal underworld hunt him. As night falls, he takes 
refuge in an office building. The criminals surround the 
building, seize him and hold their own mock trial.
Lang's movie constantly jolts our expectations - the criminal 
boss who organises the hunt for the killer is a sharply dressed 
and well-organised man. In contrast, Lohmann (the police 
inspector) is sloppily dressed, drinks and smokes too much, and 
exhibits the characteristics normally associated with a movie 
villain. He is, however, a clever detective, and his methodical 
approach, and his ingenious interrogation techniques lead him to 
both Becker's apartment and to the office building where the 
criminals are hunting Becker.
What is most impressive about M is how relevant and modern the 
film appears. The depiction of the hard-pressed police and also 
Lorre's portrayal of a baby-faced killer have not been surpassed 
by filmmakers since. There isn't a superfluous frame in the 
movie - Lang cuts between the hunt for the killer, and the 
killer's own hunt for his next victim to build the tension 
unbearably towards an exciting and fascinating climax. Several 
scenes stand out - the mother of a murdered child busying 
herself preparing her daughter's dinner. Every time a child 
arrives in the apartment block, she rushes out to see if it is 
her daughter. Each time, she grows a little more worried. We, 
the audience, know the child is never coming back, which makes
the mother's anxiety even more poignant. Another outstanding 
scene is when the criminals are hunting for Becker in the office 
building. The alarm has been sounded, so the criminals have only 
a limited amount of time in which to search for Becker - of 
course, Becker does not know this. He cowers like a caged rat, 
in a storage locker, hoping the criminals will not find him.
Again, Lang skilfully manipulates the audience - we want justice, 
but do we want it to occur at the hands of the criminals 
(amongst whom are killers and other undesirables) or at the 
hands of the upright and resourceful police inspector? His use 
of music is also skilful - we need only hear the tune to know 
that the killer is active and another child is in mortal danger. 
It's hard to believe that this was Lang's first 'talkie' - he was 
already well known for his silent classic, Metropolis (1926).
It is interesting to compare M to movies released in the United 
States around the same time. Both The Public Enemy (1931) and 
Little Caesar (1930)featured strong criminal personalities 
(breakthrough roles for James Cagney and Edward G. Robinson 
respectively). However, both films were studies of misused 
power. Though both Cesare 'Little Caesar' Bandello (Robinson) 
and Tom Powers (Cagney) were both capable of murder and 
viciousness, they were evil in a conventional sense. Two 
classic horror movies were also released at that time - 
Frankenstein (1931) and Dracula (1931). Both movies featured 
a monster, and scared audiences but in each case, the monster 
conformed to conventional mythology - it looked terribly scary 
and had an inhuman conception. The power of M derives from the 
fact that the monster had a human, almost angelic face, but 
his crimes were beyond comprehension.
Though most reviews of M describe Lorre as the main star, 
it is really an ensemble performance. Lorre's performance 
is outstanding - his portrayal of the truly multidimensional - 
his inability to see himself as anything other than a victim 
makes him seem even more evil. His terror at the prospect of 
receiving summary justice from the criminals is palpable. Lorre 
seems far heavier, even chubby, in this role than he would for 
later roles in Hollywood, such as The Maltese Falcon (1941) 
and Casablanca (1942).
The original title for M was The Murderer among Us, but it 
was changed in case the Nazi party inferred a reference to 
them. In fact, the story was based on a real-life murderer, 
but since M featured a dark parody of law and order (when 
the criminals hold their own 'trial' of Becker) and examined 
the power of mob-rule, it may have caused discomfort amongst 
the followers of the Nazi party. One could argue, with the 
benefit of hindsight that the portrayal of 'unspeakable evil 
with an ordinary face' in M could be seen as an allegory of 
the Nazis during World War 2, but it is unlikely that Lang 
intended such a comparison. In fact, Hitler and other high-level 
members of the Nazi party were fans of Lang's work. They wanted 
Lang to make propaganda films, but Lang escaped to America, 
fearing the consequences of having Jewish relations. Lorre, 
who was Jewish, also left for America during the Thirties.
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com
