Title
Review for Father of the Bride (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Mix two parts wedding-planning comedy,
     two parts sweet sentiment, and one part slapstick comedy, and
     you get a sugary, light holiday confection.  Steve Martin
     gives away his daughter and a lot of money at the same time.
     An enjoyable family film.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
     Steve Martin, who showed us the hopes and fears of being a father of
younger children in PARENTHOOD is continuing on that theme with an older
daughter in his update of 1950's FATHER OF THE BRIDE.  He has inherited
Spencer Tracy's philosophizing but little of Tracy's dignity.  This is a
film that pulls in at least three different directions at once as if it just
was not sure what it wanted to be when it grew up.  It tries first and
foremost to be a touching sentimental story of a father coming to terms with
the loss to another man of a daughter whom he loves very much.  At the same
time it wants to be a sort of MR. BLANDINGS BUILDS HIS DREAM HOUSE for
weddings--a film about a simple man discovering how complex and expensive it
is today to put together a wedding.  Then Steve Martin's roots are in
physical and slapstick comedy, so this comedy pulls in that direction also.
The film simply does not work as all three and the physical comedy is
certainly what should have been cut.
     The story is simple enough to be called trite.  George Banks (played by
Steve Martin) talking to the camera tells about his daughter's wedding which
has just taken place and about the five months since his daughter (played by
Kimberly Williams) returned from Rome and announced she had fallen in love
and intended to get married.  Martin reacts with anger and with distrust of
his daughter's choice (played by George Newbern).  We follow the parents to
their first meeting with their daughter's future in-laws.  George turns this
meeting into an embarrassment big enough to last a lifetime.
     Then there are the wedding arrangements themselves.  All arrangements
are made through the services of Franck (played by Martin Short), a somewhat
swishy European with an impenetrable accent.  (I rather hope this film does
not get shown in China.  The average Chinese does not earn enough in eight
months to pay the per-guest cost of this wedding.)  There are hassles over
cost; there is the obligatory lovers' tiff.  There are wedding preparations.
Then the wedding begins and the film loses almost all of its humor and turns
to sentiment so thick you can cut it with a knife.
     Between FATHER OF THE BRIDE and BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, it seems that
Disney is banking very heavily on sentiment this Christmas-time.  But the
characters in FATHER OF THE BRIDE are cartoonish and two-dimensional.  The
real humanity is in the characters in BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  Steve Martin
and Diane Keaton make a likable married couple in the live-action film, but
they do not have much human complexity.  Kimberly Williams, as their
daughter, is certainly attractive and is as sensual playing basketball as
Nastassia Kinski is dancing.  But this Christmas film is like a chocolate
Easter egg.  It is sugary sweet around the outside and very light because it
is really hollow.  It is worth seeing once.  I rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Frank Maloney
     FATHER OF THE BRIDE is a film directed by Charles Shyer.  It stars
Steve Martin, Diane Keaton, Kimberly Williams, with Martin Short.
     FATHER OF THE BRIDE is a remake of the 1950 classic of the same
name; the original, in turn based on a novel by Edward Streeter, and
directed by Vincente Minnelli, starred Spencer Tracy, Joan Bennett, and
Elizabeth Taylor, with Don Taylor as the groom.  The new film uses many
of the same scenes and even the original dialog (written by Frances
Goodrich and Albert Hackett).  The new one has a lot of laughs and good,
old-fashioned tears, but it doesn't quite work as well as the Spencer
Tracy version.
     For one thing, Steve Martin is no Spencer Tracy, or is that stating
the obvious?  Instead of bumbling warmth and endearing yet manly
clumsiness, we get treated to 45 or 60 minutes of THE JERK as Martin
tries not to deal with the prospect of his daughter getting married.
Martin's having a major cheap attack and maybe some sublimated sexual
jealousy.  I like Martin, but warm he ain't.
     For another, the two principal women characters are non-entities.
Joan Bennett provided wisdom, humor, and a guiding hand to that wedding
41 years ago.  Diane Keaton grins, smirks, and smiles mostly.  She has
one scene where she rather gently asserts herself, but mostly she comes
off as a money-spending machine.  Supposedly, she has her own career,
but the film is so uninterested in her as to never actually tell us what
that career might be.  (Bennett was the driving force behind the big
blow-out in the original--because she had missed out on a big wedding
for herself and was seizing a second chance through her daughter; Keaton
is mostly along for the ride.)
     Kimberly Williams, the bride to be, will never win in a blind
comparison with post-ingenue Elizabeth Taylor.  Taylor's bride wanted to
elope.  Williams' bride wants a $1200 wedding cake.  She's not a bad
sort, but she's not exactly the modern woman the film wants us to
believe she is.  She's going to be a great architect, she doesn't want
veal at the reception dinner (she's heard something), she calls the
wedding off for no better reason than Taylor called hers off.  On the
other hand, her one-on-one basketball is one of the best scenes in the
movie and we do have some reason to think there's more to her than a
well-thumbed copy of BRIDE'S MAGAZINE.  
     Martin Short plays the flamboyant wedding coordinator, playing  it
as an offensive cliche with an incomprehensible and obviously synthetic
accent.  His assistant is played by an actor whose name may be
W. D. Wong (apologies to all of Mr. Wong's fans if I've bolixed his
initials) with better grace and more authenticity.  The only good thing
about Short's performance, which is blown up beyond all reason to
accommodate his presence in the movie, is that Martin's reactions are
markedly less homophobic as the wedding plans proceed and Martin becomes
reconciled to hosting the most tasteless wedding ever seen in San
Marino, California.
     And really, this where the new movie most seriously fails us.
Upper middle class family spends $200,000 for daughter's wedding ($250
per person, over 500 guests) and no one feels anything is out of
proportion.  The groom's parents live in "real" mansion and offer to
help out, but no one offers to put the brakes on the Wedding from Hell
in the name of anything like common decency, only in the name of not 
wanting to have a wedding in the first place.  
     And there is, appropriately, a product placement for Spode.
     The best things about this new FATHER OF THE BRIDE are the love and
family feelings.  Ultimately, this is, after all, a tear-jerker.  We are
allowed to cry at weddings.  And we do.  All around me couples, moms and
dads, dates, were cuddling through the last sequence, people were
sniffling happily, and folks were feeling fine.  The next best thing is
Martin is pretty funny and does some of his great physical shtick.
     However, I cannot recommend it to you for more than cheap matinee
prices.  
     You might want to hunt the video of the Spencer Tracy version, too.
It is still a very watchable film with legendary stars and a great
director.
