Title
Review for Mind Games (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
Starring Brian Krause, Maria Ford, Soleil Moon Frye, Richard Paul, Raina
Paris
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 When I review a movie that I have seen the beginning of (and turned off)
three times, it's normally not a good sign.  It tells me that I'm too
obsessed with film to not watch a terrible movie to completion.  It also
says that the movie was terrible beyond belief.
 Mind Games, as the tile implies, deals with a horrendous set of implausible
mind games that would be nearly impossible to do.  Like almost every mystery
put out now, it contains more sex than mystery, and thus the movie, which
was already thin, has less girth than a bulimic.  It follows psychology
professor Matt Jarvis, who becomes the victim of a series of incidents
stemming from a relationship with a student at his last college (that
ultimately resulted in her suicide).  At a new college, he is nearly forced
into signing a paper stating that he will not date his students (even though
its already against the bylaws), becomes the subject of the obsessive desire
of one of his students, and ultimately ends up trying to salvage his job due
to a series of screw ups.
 All the while he is being visited by what he believes is the ghost of his
former lover.
 All right, first of all, this should tell you that Mind Games is a complete
patch work of a film.  It steals from Fatal Attraction, from dozens of
horror-mysteries, and from about every other erotic thriller ever written.
Yet, unlike the erotic thrillers that Mind Games steals from, Mind Games is
not very erotic at all.  You see, for a movie to be at all erotic, it has to
have some tension to it, some pace.  Mind Games has neither.
 Mind Games, a highly commercial film that failed to recognize that the
secret to making a movie sexy isn't just having sex and nudity in it,
decides that it should instead pour on the plot.  And it does.
 Of course, the plot that it pours on isn't original plot at all.  Its stole
n plot.  The plot twists are predictable.  The actions of the character make
you feel as if you are watching an American style soap opera with French
censors in charge.  In fact, with a little bit of editing, Mind Games could
end up as an episode of "Days of Our Lives" and hardly anyone would notice.
 The performances in this movie are atrocious.  Each member of the cast acts
as if they just graduated with a degree in theatre from a community college.
All of the women in the movie have obviously had plastic surgery.
 The small grace that Mind Games has is that it does have some bits of
conversation that sound authentic.  All of the scenes dealing with sex and
morality seem completely contrived, yet there is a single sequence of the
film between a psychologist and a writer that is pure gold.  It is whenever
those two characters are together that the writer seems to be able to pull
his dialogue off, as if he didn't truly know his other characters.
 Mind Games isn't a movie I'm going to particularly discourage you from.  I
don't really need to.  Unless you're awake late at night and watching
Showtime or The Movie Channel, you'll never see it.  You might find it at
your video store, but there wouldn't be much worth in going to search for
it.  After all, with a movie like Mind Games, why would you want to?
