Title
Review for Lenny Bruce: Swear to Tell the Truth (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
LENNY BRUCE: SWEAR TO TELL THE TRUTH (TV) (director/writer: Robert
Weide; cast: Robert De Niro (narrator), Steve Allen, Honey Bruce, Kitty
Bruce, Lenny Bruce, Martin Garbus, Nat Hentoff, Paul Krassner, Sally
Marr, 1998)
This documentary, taking 12-years to complete, is a moving tribute to a
biting satirical comedian who became an American icon and
self-destructed after blasting his way to success through the myriad
nightclub venues on the left and right coasts of America in the
1950s-and-mid-1960s. What seems apparent, is that there was a vendetta
to get him by law enforcement people across the country and that he was
unfairly treated. He was labeled as a "sick comic," which turned out to
be both good and bad for him. He had a wide audience that was ready for
him, but he also made many enemies, those with small minds, who hated
him with a passion for so openly ridiculing many of their "sacred cows",
and they made it a point to get him through the courts.
His story begins in Long Island, N.Y., raised primarily by his divorced
mother, Sally Marr (She died in 1997), who was a free spirit, working as
a bartender, housecleaner, and dance instructor. She brought Lenny up to
be guilt-free and independent, and to be a not-so nice Jewish boy, even
taking him to strip shows when he was a teenager. While at the beauty
parlor, she is interviewed for the film, filling us in with a more
complete look at Lenny, as she provided anecdotes, snapshots and home
films of him and recalled how he was a quiet child who could have fits
of melancholy, but was a happy-go-lucky person most of the time.
After joining the navy during WW11 and getting discharged under a mutual
agreement, the showbiz bug bit him, and he honed a safe but eccentric
comedy act, mainly doing impersonations of stars like Bogart. In the
early '50s, he got his big break on the Arthur Godfrey show and pleased
Arthur with his clean act. From this TV show came bookings to clubs
across the country. Soon he got married to a stripper named Honey, which
resulted, reluctantly for him, in a child (Kitty) born in 1955. By this
time, Lenny was undergoing a transformation, hanging out with the band,
working in burlesque houses where dirty jokes were the norm, and getting
into booze and drugs, which were common recreational pleasures for some
of the performers in these places.
In the dives and strip joints he liked to work at, he changed his act
nightly, making it topical and dirty. He also made what he calls a Z-
film with his wife and friends, a funny low-budget crime film that
showed he basically was like the other comics, willing to do anything
for a laugh.
Now living in Los Angeles, he was also experimenting with harder drugs,
such as speed, cocaine and heroin, and got involved in some free sex
scenes in his house gatherings. All this helped make his marriage come
apart. Honey thinks he fully dedicated himself to his work after she
walked out on him, just so he could show her what a mistake she made. He
wanted her to see him become a big star and regret that she left him. As
his act started to tackle subjects that were not common material for
humorists in the late-1950's; such as, taking on organized religion,
talking dirty, and making comedy about sexual obsessions, racism, drugs
and the lack of American culture, he became both popular and
controversial. This prevented him from appearing on TV, at a time when
that was the place to get the most recognition. There is a rare TV clip
from an unaired Steve Allen show, where he tries to clean up his act for
the TV audience, keeping obscenities out of his cutting edge jokes.
It is easy to say now, after viewing this intimate portrayal of him,
that he was someone who was way ahead of his time and fearless in
sticking up for what he believed in. And that, even though, he had the
comedian mentality of just going after the laugh, he was still able to
develop into being something more than your typical comedian.
Unfortunately, he couldn't control the demons inside and outside of
himself, and succumbed to the growing pain that was driving him to make
wrong-headed decisions in his short-life span.
The interviews with Honey, his friends, his lawyer (Garbus) and
outspoken mother, all say that he was someone who was deteriorating
rapidly as he fought the court system during the last two years of his
life. His battle with the courts is a heartbreaking story of injustice.
It became his obsession in life and caused this once slick hipster to
sadly be seen losing his cool demeanor. It started with a false arrest
in Philadelphia (1964) for taking amphetamines, which he had a
legitimate prescription for. Robert De Niro, the narrator, believes that
when Lenny exposed a bribe to drop the charges, naming the judge
involved, that is when police departments around the country repeatedly
arrested him on obscenity charges and Lenny became a marked man. Lenny
felt, "It's become chic to arrest me.'' This was the beginning of the
end for him, as clubs were closed down that booked him and he just
couldn't get gigs anymore, and ultimately he became a broken man who
sadly pleaded with a judge: "I so desperately want your respect. Please
don't lock up these words." His final blow came in NYC, at the Cafe Au
Go Go, when Frank Hogan, the district attorney, charged him with
violating an ancient law on the books about obscene language. He was
convicted of this misdemeanor and sentenced to 4- months jail time and a
thousand dollar fine. This ruling was reversed by a higher court, but it
came too late for Lenny. He died in 1966, at age 40, from an overdose of
heroin.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Brundage
Lenny Bruce: Swear to tell the Truth (1998, NR)
Written, Directed, and Produced by Robert B. Weide
 Having proved his ability to handle writing and producing narrative film
with Mother Night, Robert Weide and the crew of WhyADuck productions take on
a much more difficult medium with Lenny Bruce: Swear to tell the Truth.  The
documentary, highly easy to do badly, can be just as emotional touching,
just as engaging as the narrative film.  The majority of them, obviously,
are not.  A very select few are able to touch you like the narrative film
can, are able to pull you in and make you experience them.
 I have seen probably fifty documentaries in my time.  I have reviewed four
of them.  Only two of the documentaries I have ever seen have been able to
engage me like Lenny Bruce: Swear to tell the Truth did.
 Lenny Bruce: Swear to tell the Truth tells of social satirist and comedian
Lenny Bruce, who, in the process of exercising his own personal demons,
offended just about everyone and made a good half of us laugh during the
1960s.  All right, I wasn't even alive in the 1960s, but he still was
capable of making me laugh even after his death.
 We've probably heard his name mentioned.  We may even know a few of his
bits.
 Lenny's humor, as the documentary illustrates, was often marked towards the
Catholic church. It took on issues that America simply did not want to talk
about and stuck them right out in the open.  He became a marked man,
offending the wrong people and getting arrested in nearly every city in
America for obscenity or drug charges.  However, he stuck to his guns about
opposing the hypocrisy in everyday life, something which we now admire in
comedians such as John Leguizamo (from Freak: "Dad, why don't you just quit
drinking? Because I'm not a quitter") and Chris Rock (from Bigger and
Blacker: "Old black men didn't have to deal with that I can't get a cab
shit.  He was the cab.").  It was a position that cost him his career, his
fortune, and, eventually, his life.
 Sparsely narrated by Robert DeNiro and composed mostly of archival footage,
you are given the feeling that you are not as much watching a documentary as
watching a story unfoldthe exact goal of good documentaries.
 The film is short, bittersweet, and to the point.  It is reminiscent of
Julian Schnabel's first and only film, Basquiat, which paints a similar
portrait of the lives of Andy Warhol and Jean Michael Basquait, both pop
artists who died tragically.  It also reminds me personally of my friend
Ronald G. Shafer's documentary Donald Hall and Jane Kenyon: "Keeping you
Safe Beside Me", about the tragic death of poet Jane Kenyon.
 The lesson to be learned from this would be simply that, occasionally, true
life is better than fiction.  The truth is better than what we concoct.
And, if shown properly, it can bring you to the point of tears in a way all
the more powerful because of its truth.
