Title
Review for Journal du séducteur, Le (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
France, 1995
U.S. Release Date: beginning 5/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:35
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Sexual themes, profanity, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Chiara Mastroianni, Melvil Poupaud, Hubert Saint-Macary,=20
      Serge Merlin, Mathieu Amalric, Daniele Dubroux, Jean-Pierre Leaud,=20
      Micheline Presle
Director: Daniele Dubroux=20
Producer: Paulo Branco=20
Screenplay: Daniele Dubroux
Cinematography: Laurent Machuel=20
Music: Jean-Marie Senia=20
U.S. Distributor: Leisure Time Features
In French with subtitles
     Upon hearing that DIARY OF A SEDUCER was based on a book by noted=20
thinker Soren Kierkegaard, I wondered if I, not being a student of=20
philosophy (and not having read DIARY OF A SEDUCER), might be at a=20
disadvantage.  As it turns out, while writer/director Daniele Dubroux=20
toys with some of Kierkegaard's ideas, this is basically a quirky,=20
lighthearted comedy that isn't remotely interested in deep thought. =20
     The film is structured in an atypical fashion, and it's virtually=20
impossible to predict at the beginning where it's likely to end up. In=20
fact, what opens as a fairly straightforward comedy about the failed=20
exploits of an inept seducer turns into something dark and offbeat, with=20
more than a slight element of magic thrown into the mix.  DIARY OF A=20
SEDUCER is presented in a non-chronological fashion that makes it a=20
little confusing to determine the relationship of certain scenes to=20
others.  In fact, there are times when the movie seems more like a=20
series of loosely-connected episodes strung together than a feature with=20
a central narrative.  The "umbrella story" that binds DIARY's diverse=20
elements is not the film's strongest aspect.
     The central figure is Claire (Chiara Mastroianni), a college=20
student who one day brings home a down-on-his-luck young man named=20
Sebastien (Mathieu Amalric).  Sebastien tells Claire a sad story about=20
being gay and misunderstood, but his real goal is to seduce her.  When=20
his unsubtle attempts to sleep with her fail, he turns his attentions to=20
Claire's mother, Anne (Dubroux), who is both less gullible and more=20
willing than her daughter.
     Initially, it seems that the Claire/Sebastien/Anne triangle is=20
going to provide DIARY's main storyline.  Ultimately, however, it proves=20
to be little more than a minor comic subplot.  The primary narrative=20
involves a magical copy of Kierkegaard's DIARY OF A SEDUCER, which casts=20
a love spell on anyone who reads it.  That person becomes obsessed by=20
the one who gave them the book to read.  So, when a thoughtful, reserved=20
young man named Gregoire (Melvil Poupaud) presents Claire with the=20
volume, she ends up in his thrall.
     Dubroux has populated her film with a wild assortment of oddball=20
characters.  In fact, no one in this film is "normal" by traditional=20
standards.  There's an eccentric party host who waves a gun at his=20
guests, a strange scientist who keeps decaying oxtails in his apartment,=20
and an psychiatrist who ruins his marriage by calmly telling his wife=20
that he's obsessing over a patient.  Even Gregoire, who initially seems=20
almost ordinary, is hiding a startling secret, and it's not just that he=20
shares his residence with an agoraphobic grandmother.=20
     One of the picture's strongest assets is the performance of leading=20
lady Chiara Mastroianni (MA SAISON PREFERE), the daughter of Catherine=20
Deneuve and late actor Marcello Mastroianni.  Talented, attractive, and=20
charming, Mastroianni does much of her acting (and reacting) with facial=20
expressions, some of which are priceless.  Many of the other cast=20
members, including veteran French actor Jean-Pierre Leaud, the=20
delightfully bumbling Mathieu Amalric, and Dubroux herself, perform on=20
an equally high level.  The lone exception is Melvil Poupaud, whose=20
Gregoire is supposed to come across as mysterious and brooding (he is=20
referred to one at least one occasion as "Hamlet"), but instead seems=20
ineffectual.
     I appreciate DIARY OF A SEDUCER for its energy and humor (this is a=20
rare French film that delivers laughs without resorting to the stupidity=20
of movies like THE VISITORS).  There are things here that don't work =96=20
the entire magic book plot strand is poorly developed and ineffectively=20
resolved (the payoff, such as it is, doesn't live up to expectations). =20
But the movie holds the viewer's interest, and, though the final=20
destination reached by DIARY OF A SEDUCER may be something of a=20
disappointment, the journey undertaken to arrive there is enjoyable=20
enough to provide adequate compensation for any eventual shortcomings.
Copyright 1997 James Berardinelli=20
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DIARY OF A SEDUCER (director: Daniele Dubroux; cast: Chiara
Mastroianni(Claire), Melvil Poupaud (Gregoire Moreau), Hubert
Saint-Macary (Hubert Markus), Mathieu Amalric(Sebastien), Daniele
Dubroux (Anne), Jean-Pierre Leaud (Hugo), Micheline Presle (Diane),
Serge Merlin (scientist), 1995-Fr.)
The movie is very loosely adapted from Soren Kierkegaard's early
treatise on beauty, infatuation and the power of intellectual
persuasion. An old copy of the Danish philosopher's work is passed from
person to person to act as a love potion, as it turns those who possess
it into becoming irrational romantics.
The film is a romantic comedy, with the trappings for a detective story
thrown in for good measure, as murder somehow gets into the story, with
the help of all the vulnerable and oddball characters who are involved
in the romantic shenanigans going on. But the explicit sex is kept to
the minimum; instead, it uses the need to find romance as a form of
irony to point out the thin line that separates love from madness. The
film is very brutal on psychoanalysts and their pet theories. It
pretends to be supportive of philosophy and its intrinsic intellectual
powers that society has very little value for, but does not move the
film in that direction. Instead, it opts for light comedy.
Gregoire Moreau (Melvil Poupaud) is a philosophy student who looks a lot
like the young Greenwich Village Bob Dylan looked ...his diabolical aim
is to score girls, and the Diary is the perfect prop for him to do this.
We pick up the tale, when he lays his trap for Claire (Chiara
Mastroianni), a college student, who is undergoing  psychoanalysis. All
the characters in this story have some problem with understanding who
they are and what are the boundaries for their behavior. So, even if the
story tends to be implausible, it still makes sense in a nonsense sort
of way, as Claire, soon after reading the Diary, drops the virginal and
sexually ambivalent suitor Sebastien (Mathieu Amalric), who has somehow
managed to move in with her and her single mother, Anne (Daniele), who
happens to be a doctor. The chemistry is much better between Sebastien
and Anne, a match that no one can possibly believe should be taking
place, but is funny to watch as the opinionated and pushy Sebastien
operates his inane charm on the sophisticated and attractive older
woman, until she nearly makes a complete fool of herself. He does this
without having read the Diary, but is working on his own diary, which
Anne reads and is insulted but somewhat flattered by, reading the
immaturity of his statements about her that he wrote in the diary, of
how he would like to conquer her since her daughter has rejected him.
Hugo (Jean-Pierre Leaud) who seems to be reduced to playing small parts
as  weirdoes in recent films, I'm thinking of films like IRMA VEP, is
smashing in his role as the former professor of Gregoire who has gone
mad after reading the Diary, waxing on at a party about his love for the
stand-offish Diane (Micheline), who is the agoraphobic, former actress
grandmother of Gregoire. At his party, which he invited thirty guests,
he manages only to lure Claire and a late arrival and two musicians
playing music from India, who all leave after seeing how bizarre Hugo
is, waving a gun, talking about suicide if he can't have Diane, and
ranting like a lunatic.
The main focus of the story is about the developing relationship between
the nice girl Claire and the stealth, quiet-spoken Gregoire. Claire,
dependent on her all-knowing shrink, Hubert (Hubert), for answers,
naturally she tells him about the Diary, Gregoire, and the corpse she
found in the refrigerator of his apartment. The shrink reads the Diary
and falls madly in love with Claire, losing hold of himself and
endangering his marriage, this is in contrast to his previously superior
rational couch-side manner he had when doing a therapy session. He is
now in need of a shrink, himself.
With all these characters and precarious situations abounding, the movie
still had a flatness to it, though, admittedly, in some spots the
craziness of the characters was hilarious. The flatness is derived from
some spark that is missing from the film. As for me, I wasn't taken with
the main character, Gregoire, and therefore, had little interest in his
strange love affair and his affixation with magic. The story itself was
weakened by its not being developed further. It seemed to be thrown
together as if it were a series of comedy skits. The film did have a
good sense of tongue-in-cheek humor, keeping it lighthearted. But for a
film about a book a great philosopher wrote, not to be thoughtful, is in
my humble opinion, only an example of a filmmaker trying so hard to be
devilish but succeeding only in becoming vulgar in a Philistine way.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Seth Bookey
The Seducer's Diary/Le Journal du Seducteur
France, 1995; French with English subtitles
There is always a point in a movie where you sort of know
"it's downhill from here," and this movie is full of them. For
me it was when various organs were pulled out of a corpse. For Tony it was
seeing the hickey on Claire's (Chiara Mastroianni) neck in her analyst's
office. If you were to judge Paris by the characters in this movie, you
would assume the whole city was stark raving mad. Almost everyone seems
to have a problem, a crazed look, or something to hide. These are often
interesting elements in good movies; here is is more annoying than anything
else. The only really funny, well-written moment is when the analyst (Hubert
Saint-Macary), completely distracted by the book Claire has left with him,
blows off a new client by succinctly summarizing that life is rather pointless,
and that in time he will get over being lovelorn and find someone else.
The movie is well filmed and finds isolated parts of Paris
that accentuate the creepiness of most of the characters. The entire diegetic
time of the film is the visit to Rue Mazarin by analyst Hubert with his
doctor; Hubert is trying to remember something that has happened to him;
the entire movie then is a flashback that explains how he got into this
state,but in a very roundabout way. Hubert turns out to be the least of
the story. There is Gregoire, who seduces Claire and others by giving them
a copy of Kierkegaard's "Diary of a Seducer." Then there is slacker
Sebastian, who cons his way into Claire's house so he can sleep on their
couch, and eventually wants to con his way into her mother's (Anne, played
by the film's director, Daniele Dubroux) bed. There are various other characters
weaving in and out of the intermingled and uninteresting plots--Robert,
the creepy neighbor of Gregoire; Diane, the crazed grandmother of Gregoire;
Hugo, the suicidal gun-toting professor (a wasted cameo by Jean-Pierre Leaud,
famous for his portrayal of Antoine Doinel in several Truffaut movies).
Sometimes directors are successful in creating psychological thrillers where
you are taken through a labyrinthian storyline that has a great payoff,
like House of Games, or Hitchcock's Stage Fright;
but Daniele Dubroux, whose credits and accomplishments are not as numerous
as those more famous directors, is still going to have to prove herself.
