Title
Review for Surviving the Game (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by Ernest Dickerson 
Written by Eric Bernt
Cast Ice-T, Rutger Hauer, Gary Busey, Charles S. Dutton, F. Murray Abraham,
     and John C. McGinley
MPAA Rating "R" (presumably for graphic violence and graphic language)
Running Time 100 minutes
     SURVIVING THE GAME stars Ice-T as a homeless man, hand-picked to
play yet another variation on THE MOST DANGEROUS GAME.  They hunt, he
runs, and it was all done better last summer in HARD TARGET.  Honestly,
the most exciting thing about this "action" film is its level of
political incorrectness.
     The notion of wealthy hunters hunting homeless people is in
questionable taste to begin with and SURVIVING THE GAME is clearly
intended for action-fans only.  But even the appeal of teaming of
hulking heavies Rutger Hauer and Gary Busey (who play two of the
hunters) with violate rapper/actor Ice-T fades fast in the
less-than-capable hands of director Dickerson.
     Ernest Dickerson (known, among other things, for his impressive
work with Spike Lee) is *not* an action director.  Every fight scene is
a blur and every chase has zero zest.  He's fine with scenery and
set-ups, but he can't choreograph worth a damn.
     As scripted by Eric Bernt, SURVIVING THE GAME is less testosterone
than talk.  Gab gab gab go the character who spend the first
action-less hour speaking only in cliches.  Ice-T to Rutger Hauer:
"Never underestimate a man who has nothing to lose."  Sure, legs get
blown off and crotches get kicked, but, again, the action is so muddy
that every fight looks like the last one.
     Also, the script never explains just *how* the hunters hunt.  One
character makes a comment about a trail that "Stevie Wonder could
follow." Unfortunately, neither the script nor the visuals relate what
an "obvious" trail looks like.
     The only cast member with charisma is Rutger Hauer. (No surprise
there.) He plays an outdoors outfitter who is responsible for hiring
the hunted.
     F. Murray Abraham is, inexplicably, still working after starring
in both LAST ACTION HERO and BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES and his
presence--as a father taking his son "hunting"--amounts to even less
than what he added to those turkeys.  Gary Busey plays Chief Scenery
Chewer and his best bit is a monologue that sounds like warmed
leftovers from John Milius.
     Ice-T wears a wig with dreadlocks and acts like himself.
