Title
Review for Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory (1971)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Joshua Tyler
When you're a kid, candy is a dream: a fluffy white cloud of chocolate
joy.  For adults, candy is poison, a fat filled brick of love handles,
pimples, and excessive flatulants.  But, Willy Wonka, despite being a
film about sugar-tooth delights, brings joy to adult and child alike.
Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory stars Gene Wilder as Wonka
himself, in an 70's adaptation of the popular children's book, Charlie
and the Chocolate Factory.  Willy Wonka tells the story of a
poverty-stricken boy on a fantastic voyage through the magical candy
factories of the Willy Wonka Candy Company.  A strange and fantastic
place, filled with dancing midget Oompa Loompas and chocolates with
powers far beyond those of common Hershey bars.
Here, as he does in Young Frankenstein, Wilder makes his mark as an
amazing character actor, specializing in the disturbing and wildly
wonderful secrets of the world.  With Wilder's Wonka as a guide, the
Chocolate Factory comes to life as an amazing fantasyland, a place where
anything, any dream... or any nightmare can come true.  But there are
lessons to be learned in a place where your fondest wish can be your
greatest downfall.
The Gobstoppers may be sugar coated, but the movie is not.  Willy Wonka
deals with child issues such as greediness, selfishness, and vanity in
harshly adult ways.  Death could be the punishment for an adult sweet
tooth, so kiddies beware!  But Wonka never strays too far down the path
of realism, maintaining childlike innocence throughout Wonka's wacky
world.
Unlike other films, which seem to indulge the bad parenting and me-first
behavior of modern society, Wonka dives in like a sugared-up Barney Fife
and nips it in the bud.  The unexpected is key, and each moment of the
film brings something you are unlikely to ever see anywhere else.
Yes, at times the cheesiness is thick.  And even though it may seem a
little hokey to watch Charlie fly through the air in a glass elevator,
somehow, Wonka manages to make even these most absurd scenes
exhilarating.
Much like Hook or The Goonies, Willy Wonka is bound to drag the child
inside of all of us out, lured by the scent of gum drops and Everlasting
Gobstoppers.
Director: Mel Stuart
Producer: Stan Margulies, David L. Wolper
Writer: Roald Dahl
Starring: Gene Wilder, Jack Albertson, Peter Ostrum, Roy Kinnear, Julie
Dawn Cole, Leonard Stone, Denise Nickerson
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
