Title
Review for Innocence (2000)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   At age thirty, more cells perish than get reborn, or so the
biologists say.  Luckily, though, passion does not have to
die, though you'd work hard to convince some people of that.  So
if at age 60, 70, 80 and beyond you head for the sexual exits,
you'd be guilty of premature evacuation.  How do we know?  Paul
Cox tells us so, in fact he doesn't tell us, he shows us and oh,
my, how well he does this in his signature restrained manner.  In
his film "Innocence," he deals with a love between a man and
woman each about 70 years of age--not a paternal or avuncular
kind of love, not the so-called deep and platonic type, but real,
adolescent-style hunger and fulfillment.  Since the chances are
good that most of us will reach the age of 70--which, however
unappealing this may be to some of us sure beats the alternative-
-"Innocence" speaks to us all.  We're curious.  What's sex going
to be like then?
   That's not all.  "Innocence" is inviting as well because, admit
it: you're wondering about your first love, and maybe
your second or third as well.  How is they doing now?  Happily
married?  Miserable and single?  Creative and celebrated or
nonentities and invisible?  Even now in the Internet age, I'll bet
most of us know nothing about the people we dated ten, twenty,
thirty years ago but the memories persist and we're downright
curious, aren't we?
   Andreas (Charles Tingwell), a 69-year-old living in Adelaide,
South Australia, sure is.  He has a grown, caring daughter, but
his wife died at an early age leaving him a lonely man who learns
that the woman with him he had a passionate affair fifty years
ago in Belgium is now living in the same city as he.  He writes her
a letter and she, Claire (Julia Blake), agrees to meet him although 
she is living with her husband of many decades, John (Terry Norris). 
When they meet, do they go for tea and quietly chat about the
good old days?  They do that, but more important they realize
that the spark has not died and that during the November of their
lives they embark on an affair as though they were still twenty
years old in postwar Antwerp.  Deciding she is too old to lie, she
tells all to her husband, accusing him of paying little attention to
her and for (get this) not making love even once in the last twenty
years.  (Sounds like the fantasy that sons and daughters have of
their aging parents.)
   "Innocence" deals with the reaction that the people have to the 
relationship of these two, well, sexagenarians.  How does John
react?  What does Andreas's long-term housekeeper do when
she runs into her employer just as he and his woman friend come
down their stairs in their robes?  "Innocence" is that rare movie
that is about something different, something scarcely tackled
in the same way by the film industry, mostly ignored by
Hollywood whose idea of romantic sixty-ish people stretches all
the way from Robert Redford to Warren Beatty.  Most of us will
probably empathize with Claire, a woman whose marriage has
dried up and who realizes that love becomes that much deeper
when there are not many years left.  I'm not so sure I'd go along
with her view about being "too old to lie."  What's that supposed
to mean?  I'm thinking of the meanspirited lovers in Jean-Charles
Tacchella's 1975 movie "Cousin, Cousine," in which the
characters played by Marie-Christine Barrault and Victor Lanoux,
married to others, decide to go beyond the kissing stage but do
so right in the home of the husband.  
   The way Paul Cox stimulates our thinking about this and other
matters is part of what makes this a resourceful film, one which
racked up prizes at film festivals all over the place--Taormina,
Toronto, Vlissengen, Montreal, Saint-Tropez among other
locations.  I don't think I'd go as far as my online colleague in
Australia, Andrew Howe, who in reviewing the movie on
December 13, 2000 called it "without reservation...a wonderful
film...leavened with warmth, compassion..." even quipping that
this film will change your life.  But it deserves an A for sincerity,
for a refusal to sell out to Hollywood's affinity for young, bosomy
and large-lipped women.  Its performances are all as authentic
as any director would want them to be.  Tony Clark does a fine
job behind the lens capturing flashbacks to the salad days of
the principals, proving what Tim Burton ("Planet of the Apes") 
knew all along.  Time travel is possible: you can be twenty once again.
Not Rated.  Running time: 94 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
Young love, it's a subject drenched with nostalgia and sentimentality, but 
what about old love? Can a relationship flourish if its participants are 73? 
Yes, and no
It has been nearly fifty years since Andreas (Tingwell) and Claire (Blake) 
had their love affair in post-war Belgium. Since then, Claire has married 
John (Norris), and Andreas's spouse has passed on. Andreas, still feeling 
what he believes is love, writes a letter to Claire after the half century 
they spent apart. He wants to see her again, and while she is reluctant at 
first, she too cannot deny the passion that lingers between her and Andreas. 
Claire's marriage to John, of course, complicates matters. 
While Innocence has played the festival circuit as a quietly affecting drama, 
it is actually a long-drawn-out, slow comedic tragedy that is always in 
danger of falling apart. The film teeters at its beginning, where Andreas, 
for seemingly no particular reason, writes a letter to his old love. This 
happens over the opening credits, accompanied by images of the couple in 
their early years. Everything was the way it should be back then. Director 
Paul Cox chooses to intercut random shots of the young Andreas and Claire 
together throughout the film. This happens until he eventually gave me the 
feeling that these people were trying to relive their teenage years, rather 
than share a contemporary, yet old-fashioned relationship. Claire remarks at 
least five times, "Don't act that way. It's like I'm seventeen again." All 
three main characters over-analyze their situations to obscene standards, and 
use lots of big words. It is, indeed, like watching an episode of Dawson's 
Creek with much, much older actors. More unnecessary scenes and dialogue pile 
up as it goes on. This should have been much tighter.
Cox should be thankful for his actors. They save the entire movie and nearly 
make the whole thing believable and enjoyable. Charles Tingwell, Julia Blake, 
and Terry Norris all give excellent performances. There is a sense of truth 
in their work that evades the rest of the picture. Innocence is, like The 
Straight Story, a reminder that there are many aged actors overflowing with 
talent that aren't getting any work in Hollywood today. Congratulations are 
also in order for Tony Clark, the film's cinematographer. 
Age might play a big factor in whether or not you enjoy Innocence. The film 
will certainly appeal to an older demographic, who will probably appreciate 
it more than I did. Innocence doesn't lose all innocence completely, but 
there wasn't enough here for me.
See more of my reviews at http://homestead.com/cinemaparadise/mainpage.html

Author
Laura Clifford
Five decades ago, Andreas (Charles Tingwell) and Claire (Julia Blake)
shared a passionate romance in Belgium, following World War II, then went
their separate ways. Now, a half-century later, they discover that they
live in the same Australian city and it soon becomes evident that their
love of so long ago has not faded. Although Andreas is a widower, Claire is
still married and is torn between her loyalty to husband John (Terry
Norris) and the passion she feels for her former lover in "Innocence."
When widower Andreas (Charles 'Bud' Tingwell, "The Castle") discovers his 
first love resides in the same Australian city, he writes Claire (Julia
Blake, "Hotel de Love") a sentimental letter, begging for a meeting.  Claire,
married for forty-five years to John (Terry Norris, husband of costar Julia 
Blake), guiltily meets Andreas for dinner, but states that while it was nice 
seeing him, there's no reason to stir up old feelings.  But Andreas persists 
in pitching woo and Claire finds herself falling in love again in "Innocence."
Writer/director Paul Cox, who explored middle-aged romance in "Lonely Hearts"
and dying with dignity in "A Woman's Tale," combines those themes in this
septuagenarian love story.  Claire, whose marriage has been sexless for
twenty years, initially opts for keeping the current peace.  When Andreas
is asked to be present at the disinterment of his wife's grave, he asks
Claire to come for moral support.  She's so moved by his distress and his
appeal to stay the night with him, that she decides to celebrate life.
Claire also decides that she's too old to lie.
John, a man who hasn't voiced his true feelings in decades, is dumbstruck
by his wife's confession of infidelity.  He calls in their son David 
(Robert Menzies), a doctor, hoping for a physical or mental analysis that 
will explain things.  He tries to physically restrain Claire from going out, 
then tries to woo her back.  His delighted surprise at hearing her tell an 
off-color joke is both touching in the depth of feeling Norris brings to the 
scene and telling in how little he really knows the woman he's spent most of 
his life with.  Norris gives a powerful and layered performance.
The film belongs to Julia Blake, however, a truly beautiful woman who
glows in her rediscovered love.  Blake conveys the heartbreak of breaking
another's heart while simultaneously expressing the joy of living to the
fullest.  Tingwell makes Andreas the more Bohemian, worldly choice next
to the staid John, but his performance has just a touch of self congratulation
about it.  Claire tells Andreas, whose strict father came between them all
those years ago, that she doesn't think he fought hard enough for her then
and Tingwell's portray of Andreas keeps him slightly suspect the second
time around.  
Cox has written some beautiful dialogue, from reflections on the definition
of a memory to Andreas' humorous baiting of a hospital chaplain, although he
occasionally meanders into overt melodrama.  Reflections are featured visually
throughout the film as well, from flashbacks of the young lovers seen in the 
windows of a passing train to Claire's peering into a mirror (where her
younger self dissolves into her present).  Overall, however, the film has the 
look of a British TV production.
"Innocence" stumbles occasionally, but it's refreshing to see senior citizens
treated as sexual beings with needs and desires and the ability to light
up a room with their presence.  You may never see your grandparents in quite
the same light again.

Author
Steve Rhodes
INNOCENCE is a rarely told tale of seniors in love that is written and directed
with a graceful delicateness by Paul Cox.  Starring three veteran Australian
actors, Julia Blake (MY BRILLIANT CAREER), Charles 'Bud' Tingwell (THE DISH) and
Terry Norris, the film is superbly and touchingly acted.  Although they may be
in their waning years, the movie's seventyish characters demonstrate a palpable
zest for the essence of life and love.  The sometimes surprising story is
wonderfully moving without being overly sentimental and completely honest while
avoiding cheap theatrics.  
The film opens about fifty years in the past as innocent and carefree young
lovers Claire and Andreas are bicycling down an Australian country road. 
Utterly in love, they stop to kiss and caress.  Kristien Van Pellicom, who looks
like a young Rachel Griffiths, plays this younger Claire and Kenny Aernouts
plays the younger Andreas.  Shot with an oversatured look, these flashback
images are a cross between someone's memories and an old home movie.  In a film
that has so much is right about it that it's hard to list everything, it should
be pointed out that the casting of these two is quite perfect.  They look
remarkably like younger versions of the actors who play their characters fifty
years later.
We quickly cut to the present when most of the story is set.  Although they
haven't seen each other in almost half a century, Claire (Blake) accepts
Andreas's (Tingwell) offer to come and visit him.  Andreas's wife died thirty
years ago, but Claire has been married to John (Norris) for 45 years now. 
(Actually, 44 years, 3 months and a few odd days as Claire will remind John
later in one of her few fits of anger.)  Besides spouses, Claire and Andreas
have children and grandchildren.  Nevertheless, their love for each other has
remained constant even if dormant all of these years.
Once they see each other again, their lives are forever changed.  Like sleeper
spies, they are roused to action and begin an affair.  You may well wonder what
an affair among seniors is like.  Certainly, the cinema gives us little guidance
as to what we should expect.  Affairs in movies rarely occur with anyone older
than middle age.
In a film that takes several unpredictable turns, one of the most unusual ones
occurs when the ever honest Claire confesses to her husband what is going on. 
His initial reaction isn't what you'd expect.  Since the story focuses on the
love that Claire and Andreas have for each other, it would be easy to have John
be either unimportant or some kind of cliché.  Instead, Terry Norris infuses his
character with a mixture of hopelessness, confusion and resoluteness.  In his
best scene, John tries without success to explain his feelings to Claire.  "I'm
old," he tells her with overwhelming sadness.  "I'm tired.  I suddenly realized
that my whole life"  His thought process trails off then, and he is so lost
that he is unable to finish his sentence.
"You know what matters in life?" Andreas asks his daughter.  "Love.  Everything
else is rubbish."  This is a perfect sentiment for our times.
INNOCENCE runs 1:34.  It is not rated but would be R for sexual situations and
nudity and would be acceptable for teenagers.
The film opens in very limited release in the United States on October 26, 2001.
 In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Pete Croatto
The most amazing thing about Paul Cox's Innocence is how unlike a movie
it is.  I mean that as the highest compliment.  If most studios were to
profile an elderly couple who rekindle a 40-year-old romance, I'd want
to run and hide.  The sex scenes would be handled as a farce, producers
would shed 20 years off the characters' ages (so Susan Sarandon and
Harrison Ford could star) and true love would shine through any obstacle
without explanation and consequence.
Along with a charming romantic story, the Australian/Belgian Innocence
shows how an increasing sense of mortality combined with revisiting the
past while being entrenched in the present can make something that seems
so right seem downright questionable.
The romance gets started when former musician Andreas (Charles "Bud"
Tingwell), learns that his true love, Claire (Julia Blake), lives
nearby.  They decide to catch up on old times, but soon find themselves
in a reinvigorating affair.  Complicating matters is Andreas' frail
health, and Claire's longtime husband (Terry Norris), who can't
understand why he's suddenly become obsolete.
In my mind, the movie is less about the relationship between Andreas and
Claire, than the feelings of everyone involved.  John, Claire's husband,
endlessly questions what he did wrong.  Claire initially insists she's a
grown-up, but admittedly behaves like a child, a prospect that thrills
and disappoints her.  Andreas, an agnostic, begins to question his fate,
a message Cox delivers in a memorable dream sequence.
Cox litters the movie with flashbacks, including the repeated vision of
a roaring train.  It's a reminder of Andreas and Claire's past love (as
young lovers, they met by train), but as it recurs, we get the feeling
that the past and the present have clashed.  A pall is cast on the whole
affair.
A master of the understated, Cox strings together a series of memorable
moments.  In Andreas' dream sequence, amidst the roar of the train and
conversations, we get the whole picture of Andreas and Claire's love. 
We also get glimpses into John and Claire's relationship.  During a
silent candlelit dinner shortly afterward, Claire admits to John about
her indiscretion, telling more than any monologue could.  All that's
heard is the scraping of forks against plates.
The characters are unlike anything I've seen -- they're people.  So many
times, movies and especially television portray senior citizens as
gratingly spunky.  Or they're reduced to comedic buffoons.  Ordinary
people with a pile of emotions, Claire and Andreas aren't sure what the
next step is.  They do want to be happy, which consists of an entirely
different set of conditions than what they've known throughout their
adult lives.  Bravo to Cox, who wrote the script, for not making John a
monster, so that Claire's affair is automatically justified.  Norris is
so effective as John that he makes Andreas and Claire's love difficult
to accept.  We feel for him.  He's a decent man.  Sure, he may have
become complacent, but he never expected this, especially now.
With so much presented to the audience, it's only expected that the
material gets a little drawn out and repetitive, which it does. 
However, in bringing up tough questions and not offering easy answers,
Cox displays a skill and élan isn't likely to be surpassed by anyone
anytime soon.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "INNOCENCE" (Fireworks Pictures/Cinemavault
Releasing)
     An adult love story is unusual - a poignant, engaging, romantically
poetic one is unique. And that describes "Innocence, " Australian
writer/director Paul Cox's tale of love rediscovered. Charles Tingwell ("The
Dish") and Julia Blake ("Travelling North") play Andreas and Claire, ill-fated
teenage lovers who were separated in post-W.W.II Belgium when his father
disapproved of their relationship. Now a retired music teacher and church
organist, a widower with a grown daughter, Andreas proposes a date for lunch in
a letter to Claire, who has endured an emotionally sterile marriage and has a
grown son. When they meet, memories come flooding back as they discover feelings
that have been dormant for 50 years. Tenderly, the elderly couple embark on a
gentle but intense affair, transcending time and place. Declaring they're too
old to lie, they don't attempt to hide. In fact, Claire recklessly tells her
puzzled husband (Terry Norris) whose incredulity soon erupts into jealousy,
followed by desperation. 
     Adeptly avoiding schmaltz and sentimentality, Paul Cox so cleverly
interweaves the tempestuous affair with flashbacks to their carefree, youthful
ardor that it's tempting to forgive his cloying aphorisms ("Too much love is as
bad as no love at all.") and inept editing. The obviously experienced and
intelligent cast is excellent, performing even the most intimate scenes of
reawakened sexuality with understated dignity and discretion. And Cox explains
the title as having the opportunity to explore your first love again. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Innocence" is a warm, compassionate, insightful
8, proving that love and passion are ageless. As Cox puts it, "This film is a
sanctuary - hopefully it will restore a bit of humanity to the cinema."

Author
Robin Clifford
Five decades ago, Andreas (Charles Tingwell) and Claire (Julia Blake)
shared a passionate romance in Belgium, following World War II, then went
their separate ways. Now, a half-century later, they discover that they
live in the same Australian city and it soon becomes evident that their
love of so long ago has not faded. Although Andreas is a widower, Claire is
married and is torn between her loyalty to husband John (Terry Norris) and
the passion she still feels for her former lover in "Innocence."
Director Paul Cox is known for his artistic portrayals of life, such as
that of a lonely, aging voyeur in "A Man of Flowers" and a woman dying with
dignity in "A Woman's Tale." With "Innocence" the helmer/writer takes a
radically different filmic path with a subject matter - a long parted
couple, now aged, and their rekindled passion - that is not the kind of
thing one gets from Hollywood. With its theme of senior love, it is the
kind of thing that the internationally acclaimed filmmaker would explore,
though, and he is moderately successful in his effort. High marks go to Cox
for having the gonads to depict life during the twilight years where love
and passion are still real.
Using ample, even overused, flashbacks shot with a handheld camera and
exhibiting a grainy garishness, we see Claire (Kristine Van Pellicom) and
Andreas (Kenny Aernouts), 50-years younger, walking hand in hand,
frolicking around Belgium and making mad, passionate love. (Truth be told,
the flashbacks are the biggest problem with the film, taking up too much
time showing a young couple almost void of any real personality.) This sets
the stage for what will happen many years later to the young lovers after
they are, seemingly, parted forever.
We come to the present and meet septuagenarian Andreas, whose wife died
some 30 years ago and, since that time, he has reminisced about his first
love, Claire. When he learns that she lives nearby, he writes to her,
almost begging to see her again. Although Claire is married now, old
feelings flood back and she agrees to meet with her old flame. Their
passions are rekindled and Claire must make a choice between her
long-standing marriage and her newly re-sparked relationship with Andreas.
This study in elderly romance is handled with dignity as Cox shifts between
the modern-day love affair of Claire and Andreas and the long ago, though
not forgotten, involvement when the two were so much younger (but,
definitely, not more impassioned). The story segues between the quiet,
loving romance of the elder couple and the more energetic ardor when they
were young. The present-day interlude, as the couple beds down together
after half a century apart, is handled with sensitivity as the camera
lingers over their quiet loving that still has the fire (though a bit more
slowly generated) of their younger years..
Cox kicks it up a notch as he throws Claire's marriage into the mixture
with she and husband John coping with their side of this aging love
triangle. Married for over 40 years ("44 years, 3 months and 6 days,"
Claire informs John), there has not been a physical relationship between
them for two decades. When she drops the news of her newly awakened desires
for Andreas, John, at first, simply doesn't believe it, then, as the
reality sinks in, is angered, hurt and confused. Claire decides to accept
the consequences of her action and a tense truce is arrived at, but not
before John sends his physician son David (Robert Menzies ) to find out
what's wrong. Meanwhile, the widowed Andreas confides his feelings to his
incredulous daughter, Monique (Marta Dusseldorp), and garners her support.
Julia Blake takes charismatic hold of the screen as the still beautiful
Claire. The actress is the one in charge here as Claire is the one who
makes the decisions concerning her life and those of Andreas and John.
Blake has regal good looks and comes across as attractive and a convincing
object of desire for both of her men. Blake's real-life husband Norris
gives a solid tragic/comic performance as movie husband, John, who is torn
between maintaining the failing status quo of his marriage and the desire
to keep his wife, no matter what the cost. Charles Tingwell (one of the
heroes in the wonderful Aussie comedy, "The Castle") is two dimensional, at
best, and acts mainly as the catalyst for the changes that are to be
visited on the three senior citizens. The limited supporting cast helps to
give some depth to the background, but the focus is on the three principles
throughout the film.
There is a staginess to the proceedings that gives the film a static,
TV-like look that is more suited to the small screen. If an actress of a
lesser caliber than Blake were the focus of the film, I'd say that it
should go directly to television. Her performance, though, is worth the
price of theater admission. The subject matter is so fresh and untrammeled
it begs to draw in more mature audiences to this sweet, melancholy story of
love at the end of life, though I doubt that you'll see it at the local
multiplex. "Innocence" travels ground that is rarely seen on the screen and
is handle with sensitive care. I give it a B.
For more Reeeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
