Title
Review for Train de vie (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
David N. Butterworth
        In "Life is Beautiful," a concentration camp victim pretends the
horror is all an elaborate game (and the winner gets a tank!).  In "Jakob
the Liar," a Polish Jew pretends that a hidden radio broadcasts encouraging
news from the front line.  And in the latest go-round, the French film
"Train of Life" ("Train de Vie"), an entire village pretends to be deported
by train.
        That's a lot of comic situations borne out of unmitigated hardship
and a lot to ask of audiences.
        "Latest" is, perhaps, not strictly accurate in terms of "Train of
Life"'s chronology since Radu Mihaileanu's film was conceived prior to
either of those aforementioned features.  In fact, Roberto Benigni was
actually offered the lead role of Shlomo in the film but he turned it down
before going on to write, direct, and star in the similarly-themed "Life is
Beautiful," a maneuver which caused much controversy at the time.
        In some ways that short-lived controversy is all but irrelevant
given how vastly different these two films are ("Jakob the Liar," a
derivative, schmaltzy cross between "Schindler's List" and "Good Morning,
Vietnam," is hereafter dropped from the discussion).  "Life is Beautiful"
is a comic masterpiece that successfully transcends its difficult subject
matter by Benigni's brilliant ability to find laughter in the most
harrowing of circumstances.  "Train of Life" is an often amusing parody
that more closely resembles "Hogan's Heroes" than it does the film which
garnered Benigni an OscarŽ for last year's Best Foreign Language Film.
        "Train of Life" follows the fortunes of the inhabitants of an
Eastern European shtetl who, after learning that the Nazis are at hand,
come up with the brilliant idea of deporting themselves before the führer's
advancing troops can do the honors.  The individual who dreams up this
outrageous scheme, that of buying a train, bit by bit, and dressing up some
select villagers as German soldiers to make it look authentic, is none
other than Shlomo, the village idiot.  "After all, deporting ourselves
isn't exactly normal," observes one of the elders when Shlomo's credentials
are called into question.
        This all works very well in the broad sense (think: French farce),
especially when those playing the Nazis get a little too into their
characters, but it's not nearly as poignant or sophisticated as it tries to
be.  Except, that is, for the film's final shot, an image so potent it
effectively silences all the levity that has preceded it.
        Lionel Abilanski, who plays Shlomo, is oddly peripheral (village
idiots don't exactly foster empathy, unless they're played by Jim Carrey I
suppose), but a fine French actor with the unlikely name of Rufus gets
exceptional mileage out of his character of Mordechai, the person entrusted
by the community's rabbis to lead their people to "the Promised Land,"
another metaphor which is handled somewhat heavily.
        Daft and daffy, "Train of Life" rumbles down the track with much
silliness and a lot of cute scenes to its credit.  Compared to "Life is
Beautiful," however, Radu Mihaileanu's film has a long way to go.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Steve Rhodes
Gosh, wasn't the Holocaust a hoot?  Welcome back to a revisionist
yesteryear at the movies as, once again, we see how funny those old
Nazis were.  The idea of turning one of the most horrific tragedies of
mankind into a comedy is an idea that has, at best, a highly limited
appeal.
LIFE IS BEAUTIFUL, it would be argued by most although this reviewer
still has some reservations, carried off making Jewish concentration
camps funny.  JAKOB THE LIAR, Robin Williams's recent piece of schmaltz,
was an unqualified disaster using a similar theme.
Writer/director Radu Mihaileanu's TRAIN OF LIFE (TRAIN DE VIE) falls
somewhere between the previous two films in quality.  It is neither as
spectacularly pretty as the former nor as spectacularly awful as the
latter.
Set in the summer of 1941, the story begins in at a remote Jewish
community, deep within an Eastern European forest.  Being told by the
village fool, Shlomo (Lionel Abelanski), that the Nazis are coming to
take them all away, the villagers take his advice on how to escape.
Half of them will dress up as Nazi soldiers and escort the other half on
a train ride all the way to Palestine.
As the villagers sing and dance to zany music, they seem to be having
the times of their lives.  Humor comes in the form of people who faint
from fright and other slapstick retreads.
Sometimes, although rarely, the laughter comes from the dialog.  We
learn, for example, that all one need do to speak proper German is talk
Yiddish but leave off the fun parts.  A subplot has a renegade group of
Communist Jews pondering what good Communists should do.  ("The party
forbids free love without a healthy dose of ideology," one man says as
he happily allows himself to be seduced by a cigar-smoking gypsy woman.)
As the story turns more serious in the second half, it is more
successful.  The only completely satisfying scenes in the picture,
however, are the aerial shots from on high as the train cuts across lush
fields of grain, accompanied by sweeping orchestral music.
Like Chauncy Gardner (Peter Sellers) in BEING THERE, the fool utters the
most profound statements for the others to ponder.  "God exists," Shlomo
tells the villagers.  "God exists, but ask yourselves the real question.
Does man exist?"  Thinking about conundrums like these will help pass
the time during the movie's many slow spots.
TRAIN OF LIFE runs 1:43.  The film is in French and some German, both
with English subtitles.  It is rated R for some sexuality and nudity,
including full frontal nudity of girls and women.  The film would be
fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   There's an old saying that if you put ten people of the
Jewish faith in a room and set them loose to discuss any
topic (law, religion, politics, you-name-it), you'll get eleven
opinions.  Contrary to the view of anti-Semites who haven't
the foggiest notion of this 5700-year-old culture, there is no
one Jewish ideology.  Even when the chips are down--as we
see in this movie directed by a man whose father spent time
as a captive in a work camp--the potential victims continue
arguing throughout about the proper method of escape from
the oppressors.  Yet underneath the surface, the people of
Radu Mihaileanu's film, "Train of Life," feel a keen simpatico
for one another, a fellowship that transcends their ideological
and practical variations.  If Mihaileanu's movie portrays the
Jews in the tradition of storytellers Sholom Aleichem and
Isaac Bashevis Singer as dolts, dunces and misguided
prophets, this is his wholly positive intention.  After all,
weren't the Nazis the ones who had a vision of a perfect
society, of all men and women thinking the same, acting 
identically, and bearing no flaws?  To any contemplative
person, such an order would be a nightmare. Think about
that.
   "Train of Life," an English-subtitled movie which features
French speaking actors performing in rural Romania, is told
from the point of view of an acknowledged fool, Shlomo
(played by the noted French actor Lionel Abelanski). 
Shlomo's tale is mythical, a fable, a fairy story of a part with
that large group of folklore designed to help make life
bearable for a people subjected to persecution for thousands
of years.  The story opens two years into World War II in a
shtetl, or village, inhabited by Jews--and by Christians who
appear not ill-disposed toward them but are instead
dependent on their business.  When Shlomo gets word that
Germans have invaded a nearby hamlet and are deporting
the Jews to camps, he races to tell the rabbi who at first is
disbelieving but who quickly senses the truth of the situation. 
The inhabitants get together to debate methods of escape
and though the group are varied and include a Communist
and a romantic pair who are envied by at least two would-be
suitors, the rabbi and council of wise men agree on a bold
plan.  They acquire a used train which they paint in bright
colors, assign half the males to dress in Nazi uniforms to play
the enemy, and all board pretending that they are a band of
Jews headed to the camps. In reality they are to proceed
through Rumania, to Russia, and ultimately to Palestine.
   One of the oddest road movies to hit the screen in ages,
"Train of Life" follows the band of hardy innocents as they run
into an assortment of adventures.  Each adventure could well
have been the basis of tragedy, but proceeding throughout in
a comic tone, Mihaileanu turns each exploit into a farcical
event.  Chief among these is a Hogan's Heroes specimen. 
When one of the travelers, a tailor, is captured by real Nazis,
Mordechai (Rufus), who is dressed as a high German officer,
heads directly into the German-occupied headquarters to talk
his way into getting the prisoner back, hinting to the
hauptsturmfurher (Robert Borremans) that the latter might be
suspected of having friendly feelings toward the captive.  How
he gets this commandant to supply the entire train with a
groaning board of food is worth the price of admission in
itself.
   "Train of Life," which beat "Shakespeare in Love" and
"Central Station" for the Italian Academy Award for best
foreign language film, is infused by its filmmaker with a great
deal of warmth for the Jewish victims of the Holocaust in
Rumania.  Amid the self-deprecatory humor, the fights, the
ideological squabbles, we are impressed by the tenacity of
the People of the Book who emerge from  abuse and tyranny 
using humor as their principal weapon of survival
against unspeakable acts of humiliation.  Fascist ideology is
shown as the humbug that it is when the stiff Germans are
contrasted with the imperfect, life-affirming people, who in
moments of greatest danger can dance wildly to the foot-
stomping beats of Klezmer music.  Though Robert Benigni,
originally offered the role of Shlomo the Fool, had to turn
down the proposal because of other commitments, one could
not have hoped for a more moving and joyous cast than the
one assembled here, a cast which allegedly included 8,000
Rumanians who served as extras.  
   "Train of Life" is not the first comic take on the Holocaust--
one which is not about to be unanimously accepted as kosher
by those who feel that the Shoah must be treated with utter
solemnity.  But if the Yiddish proverb is valid, "A gelechter
hertmen veiter vi a gevain," or, "Laughter is heard further
than weeping," "Train of Life" is all the more likely to help
keep the memory of the Holocaust alive.
