Title
Review for Fear (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This howler of a thriller stars the Artist Formerly Known as Marky
Mark as a young psycho who seduces and later terrorizes a 16-year-old
high-schooler (Reese Witherspoon).  She's a nice girl from a nice family
who learns too much too late about her seemingly sane boyfriend.  Good
afternoon, Mrs. Cleaver.  With better casting, director James Foley
(GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS) might've had something here.  He picked a good
pair for the parents-- Amy Brenneman (HEAT) and the always reliable
William Petersen-- and that's about as far as he got.  Ms. Witherspoon
has no screen presence to speak of, while Underwear Boy is a hollow
creeper, at best.  (And he looks a good ten-years older than his
character!  Oh, how we could've ended things early if Dad had just
spoken up and said "for Christsake, Nicole, he looks like he's thirty!")
Completing the terrible triumvirate is Alyssa Milano, wildly overacting
as Nichole's slut girlfriend (a.k.a. the Bad Influence).  Yes, they're
unwatchable, but the story is so mercifully straight-forward that you
may find yourself getting caught up in the camp.  A surprisingly
engaging ending also keeps the film from collapsing on itself.  If
there's a single redeeming feature to speak of, it's that the story is a
virtual primer for teenage girls on how to identify a predator.  Of
course, they *could* just listen to their dads... 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mark Wahlberg, Reese Witherspoon, William Peterson, Amy Brenneman, 
      Alyssa Milano, Christopher Gray
Director: James Foley
Producers: Brian Grazer and Ric Kidney
Screenplay: Christopher Crowe
Cinematography: Thomas Kloss
Music: Carter Burwell
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE.  UNLAWFUL ENTRY.  SINGLE WHITE 
FEMALE.  You know the genre and the players.  They all follow pretty 
much the same formula:  introduce the villain as a really nice person, 
let them into the home, then reveal their true, psychopathic nature.  
The latest member of this not-too-exclusive club is James Foley's FEAR, 
a kinetic, visually dazzling thriller that's actually a notch above many 
of its predecessors -- albeit only a small notch.
     Why is FEAR better?  Several considerations spring to mind.  First, 
an attempt is made to develop all of the significant characters, and 
there are occasions when they step outside the cliched molds that so 
often confine men and women in thrillers.  Secondly, unlike in THE HAND 
THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE, where the villain was actually the most 
interesting character, here, the protagonists grab our attention and 
sympathy far better than the bad guy.  Finally, director James Foley 
(GLENGARRY GLENN ROSS) sets up the scenario well, although, inevitably, 
things devolve into death and mayhem.
     Reese Witherspoon (THE MAN IN THE MOON, A FAR OFF PLACE) plays 16-
year old Nicole Walker, the product of a broken family.  After living 
with her mother for most of her life, she has recently come to Seattle 
to stay with her father, Steve (William Peterson), his second wife, 
Laura (Amy Brenneman), and Laura's young son, Toby (Christopher Gray).  
Things in the Walker household aren't all sunny, but this isn't a 
particularly dysfunctional family, either -- the tensions are mostly 
believable.
     One night, Nicole and her best friend, Margo (Alyssa Milano), are 
at a rave.  There, Nicole meets the gentle, handsome David McCall (Mark 
Wahlberg).  He speaks sweet nothings, doesn't pressure her into sex, and 
does all the right things.  Nicole falls head-over-heels for him, and, 
when he meets her family, only Steve is unsettled.  That is, until David 
starts showing flashes of his genuine, brutal personality, and Nicole 
comes home from school with a black eye.
     Mark Wahlberg (RENAISSANCE MAN), who, in another incarnation, went 
by the moniker of "Marky Mark", acquits himself well as the teenage 
Travis Bickle.  It's not a great performance, but it's adequate for the 
film's purposes.  Reese Witherspoon manages a tantalizing blend of 
sensuality and innocence -- the same qualities that have made Alicia 
Silverstone so popular.  Alyssa Milano, who took the unusual step from 
TV sitcoms to soft porn direct-to-video flicks, is a little overwrought, 
but not too bad.  William Peterson and Amy Brenneman are fine in their 
parental roles.
     Don't expect any surprises from FEAR.  It's not that kind of 
thriller.  But its visceral appeal is enhanced by Thomas Kloss' 
energetic camerawork.  The film also isn't as exploitative as many 
similar movies -- there's some eroticism, but no gratuitous nudity or 
exceptionally graphic violence (unless you count the grisly fate of a 
pet).  This certainly isn't a great film -- or even a particularly good 
one -- but it will appeal to a certain audience.  As predictable, 
formulaic thrillers go, FEAR at least has a few things going for it.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Hollywood loves to remake popular shows.  When it is too soon to
do a remake, it likes to take a recent movie and reconstitute it with
slightly different ingredients.  In director James Foley's FEAR, not to
be confused with Gregory Hoblit's excellent PRIMAL FEAR, writers
Christopher Crowe and James Foley take FATAL ATTRACTION and repackage
it with teenager lovers rather than adults and hope for an instant hit.
     The romantic obsession part works marginally well, but the film's
commentary on teenagers and their relationships with their parents is
insightful and worth hearing.  The huge downfall in the picture, is
that the writers run out of ideas, so they transform the last thirty
minutes of the film into a bad, tasteless, and frightening horror
flick.  Most horror pictures you can ignore because they are so hokey
and unbelievable, but the tolerably good first part of the film sets
you up to care about the people in FEAR so the ending is much more
disturbing that any unrealistic blood and gore film would be.
     As the film starts, beautiful 16-year old Nicole Walker (Reese
Witherspoon) is leaving for school.  Her dad, Steve (William Peterson
from TO LIVE AND DIE IN LA and MANHUNTER), is concerned about her
wearing a short miniskirt, a revealing low-cut top, and four gallons of
make-up, but she tells him that it is none of his business.  Thanks to
peer pressure, she, her friend Margo Masse (Alyssa Milano), and others
cut school go to a bar.  While at the bar, Nicole sees a mysterious,
but All-American looking older boy named David McCall (Mark Wahlberg).
She sees him again that night at a rave.  He is hanging out with some
Hell's Angels rejects which should have been a give-away.
     When Nicole sees David's Corvair she remarks, "Isn't this the car
they stopped making because it blows up or something?"  In a response
that telegraphs his later actions, David's responds, "Guess that's why
I got it."  Her friend Margo, on the other hand, thinks Nicole should
just go sleep with David since he has a good body and so tells her, "Do
yourself a favor and don't think so much.  It gives you premature
wrinkles."  The film does a good job of showing what can happen to a
girl devoid of morals like Margo.  Later when Nicole abandons Margo,
she cries in an effective scene, "Please Nicole don't do this.  I need
you.  You're my only friend."  After hating this character, the
audience suddenly realizes how lost she is and begins to empathize with
her dilemma.
     Nicole, lives with her dad, her stepmom, Laura (Amy Brenneman),
and her younger stepbrother, Toby (Christopher Gray).  The father is an
architect, and although overworked, is devoted to his kids, and thinks
David is bad news.  He is either an overprotective father to be
despised or one who is naturally concerned about his daughter at a
vulnerable time in her life.  The audience is provided with both views.
Laura thinks he should lighten up and tells him, "What's the big deal?"
Steve replies, "The big deal is the guy is crap, and girl is my
daughter."  Nicole doesn't trust her parents much and believes that
"Everybody says one thing and does another."
     One of main ingredients of the film is the massive musical
overscoring by Carter Burwell.  The film reminds you of those cars that
drive down your street with zillion watt amps that rattle your prized
china so that you think it will all break.  The sound is so loud you
almost need ear plugs and turning it down would not have been possible
since other parts of the film are quite soft.  Moreover, the music is
so overly dramatic in parts as to be ridiculous.
     FEAR runs 1:40.  The film is correctly rated R for gory and
frightening violence, animal mutilation, crack smoking, some bad
language, a little sex, but no nudity.  The horrific images are enough
to give you nightmares for a week.  On the good side, I must be honest
that the movie does feature a genuinely erotic roller coaster ride.
Given the threatening level of violence against teens and their parents
I would recommend that no teenagers see this film although with the
teen heartthrob stars in it, I am sure they will.  There were certainly
a lot of them in the audience.  Based on the first part of the film I
was leaning toward a mild thumbs up for what the movie said about the
problems of teens and of relationships with their parents, but after
the ending, I can not recommend it to anyone, and I wish I had never
ever seen it.  Disturbing.  For the good first part, I am giving it
overall a * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Berge Garabedian
A thriller set in modern day Seattle, that marked Marky Mark's
migration from the "Good Vibrations" and "Calvin Klein undie ad" guy,
to Mark Wahlberg, thespian-at-large, and a mighty good one at that. 
PLOT:
Boy (Wahlberg) meets girl (Witherspoon). Boy likes girl. Girl likes
boy. Boy and girl begin dating. Parents of girl aren't crazy about the
boy. Girl steps to boy's defense. Family problems occur. Girl learns
more about the boy. Boy goes nuts. Fun ensues.
CRITIQUE:
Ever wonder what would happen if your better half turned out to be
someone other than the person that you had come to cherish and love?
Well, if you ever have, then this film is definitely for you. It isn't
the most original premise in the world, but it is handled pretty well
here, and pretty quickly for that matter (a speedy 90 minutes). I think
one of the main reasons this film worked for me is the groundbreaking
performance by Mark Wahlberg (of BOOGIE NIGHTS infamy (7.5/10). He
completely captured all the goodness, and badness, of the main
character of this film, and always kept me wanting to see more and more
of him (his performance scored him a solid nomination from his core
target audience, as "best villain" at the 1997 MTV Movie Awards).
The soundtrack is also very effective in this setting, and of course,
the slutty performance by Alyssa Milano is something we could all
indulge in (look for the nice bikini and butt shots...if you're into
that kind of thing, that is :). I didn't much care for the father/David
relationship which seemed to be a little too contrived, but for the
most part, I was really into this movie. Then again, daddy dearest did
have one of the coolest lines in the movie when his wife is asking him
what the "big deal" was about his daughter dating David. His reply:
"The big deal is that the guy gives me the creeps, and the girl is my
daughter."
All in all, the movie kicked some fun ass, mindless as it was, and
effectively demonstrated every parent's worst nightmare. Mind you, I
still can't tell if Reese Witherspoon is good looking or a douchebag,
but hey, life goes on. And on a personal note, we finally decided to
add some Taco meat onto our nacho fiesta of usual, and let me tell you
all...it was a flaming success !! Another firm recommendation by Joe
Schmoe!
Little Known Facts:  
Director James Foley was the man responsible for the critically
acclaimed GLENGARRY GLENROSS (8/10) back in 1992, AT CLOSE RANGE
(7.5/10) in 1986, and even directed an episode of TWIN PEAKS in 1990.
Mark Wahlberg stands 5"9, is born in Massachusetts, dropped out of
highschool (later got his GED), and was convicted of several minor
felonies before starting his career as the lead singer of Marky Mark
and the Funky Bunch. His brother is Donnie Wahlberg of New Kids on the
Block fame. He is also testing the waters on the acting front.


Author
Andrew Hicks
        This is every fatal attraction thriller you've ever seen, only 
a few years earlier. Created with non-discriminating teens in mind, 
FEAR is an inane, laughably bad movie with little originality, even 
in casting. 1993's THE CRUSH starred a then-unknown Alicia 
Silverstone, this one stars the beautiful and precocious Reese 
Witherspoon, who is a cross between Silverstone and Candace 
Cameron from "Full House." This time, the psycho villain role goes 
not to the leading lady but to "Marky" Mark Wahlberg. And you 
wondered if there was any redeeming value in FEAR...
        Reese's life is typical -- superficial shopping and school 
work. She spends a lot of her time arguing with her father. When 
she shouts in the opening scene that she has "to ask permission to 
breathe" and storms out of the room, Dad replies sarcastically, 
"Does this count as quality time?" No, and it definitely doesn't 
count as quality writing. This exchange establishes early on two 
vital components of the movie -- horrendous dialogue and bad 
acting.
        Who better to contribute to the bad acting than B-movie 
queen Alyssa Milano? She plays Reese's best friend, already skilled 
in the ways of sex with no-good older men. Alyssa's philosophy on 
relationships is, "It's power." Reese replies, "It's nuts," to Alyssa's 
response, "It doesn't feel good to be wanted?" None of us have any 
idea what she's talking about; after all, she hasn't been wanted since 
"Who's the Boss?" went off the air.
        Reese soon meets Marky Mark at the local teen nightclub, 
his opening line to her being, "Hey... you're not dancing." She could 
have sent him packing with the response, "You're not charting," but 
she instead revels in his advances because it's power, and it feels 
good to be wanted. She talks and kisses him until two in the 
morning, by which time her step-mom is yelling at her and she's 
shooting back sarcastic responses. Dad's out of town on a business 
trip, but Marky Mark's ready to charm him and the rest of the family 
(including the dog) when he gets back. It's such a good vibration, it's 
such a sweet sensation...
        Alyssa is also ready to charm Dad when he gets back, with 
some of the most ridiculous double entendres in movie history. She 
asks him to come to a carnival with her, saying, "You could ride the 
bumper cars... You could do that thing where you throw the ball at 
something and maybe win me a stuffed animal." Luckily, that 
subplot never goes anywhere, but what is immediately established 
is Dad's mistrust of Marky Mark. He can't put his finger on what he 
doesn't like about Mark (he's just so... marky) until he finds a used 
condom wrapper in his daughter's bedroom.
        Yes, Mark is hot for Reese's peanut butter cups, and takes 
her virginity during another of Dad's business trips. (That guy's got 
to find a new job!) The PG sex scenes in this R-rated movie are teen 
love at its finest, as a remake of the Rolling Stones' "Wild Horses" 
plays and this sexy dialogue exchange takes place.
        The honeymoon is soon over, though, as Marky Mark 
shows his violent streak and threatens various members of the 
family. FEAR seems at least twice as long as it is, the various plot 
twists and developments apparent to most audience members a 
mile away until. There's not much good about FEAR, especially 
since every other made-for-video movie nowadays features this 
plot with a lot more sex thrown in. This movie should have never 
even made it to theaters. Just ship it directly to Cinemax and save 
us some time.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!
