Title
Review for McHale's Navy (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Chuck Dowling
McHale's Navy (1997) **1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Tom Arnold, Dean Stockwell,
Tim Curry, Bruce Campbell, Ernest Borgnine, David Alan Grier, French
Stewart, Debra Messing, Tommy Chong. Written By: Peter Crabbe. Directed By:
Brian Spicer. Running Time: 108 minutes.
Darn it all, I like Tom Arnold. While I agree that he's much better as a
supporting character ("True Lies", "Nine Months"), unlike the rest of
America I think he can be a competent lead as well ("Big Bully", "The
Stupids"). He stars as Quinton McHale in "McHale's Navy", and while it's
certainly not great, it's not all the bad either. Most of the time, it's
just frustrating.
"McHale's Navy" is the latest Hollywood remake of classic TV show. McHale is
retired from the navy and spends his days in the Carribbean, trying to
concoct any scheme possible to make money. On the flip side, he also coaches
a little league baseball team. His old crew, your stereotypical bunch of
losers and misfits (honestly, how do people like this even make it INTO the
military?) suddenly find themselves with a new commanding officer
(Stockwell), who is your stereotypical uptight, by-the-book, always looking
to get ahead in any way possible military authority.
Elsewhere in those islands, terrorists (led by a too silly Tim Curry) are
hatching some sort of evil scheme to rule the world. Curry's character is
constantly referred to as the second most deadly terrorist in the world,
making you think that maybe the world's MOST deadly terrorist may show up
soon, but alas, he doesn't. Everything is standard from that point on.
Two things keep this film from being good. First is the basic plot. Why does
this need to be yet another slightly comical world domination story? The
original series lasted for years with plots I'm sure were more like "A
private misplaces McHale's laundry." Just a simple story with some good
laughs would have been just fine. Second is the script. At times the script
was so frustrating that I wanted to just pummel the writer. The movie's
flowing along, light-hearted, breezy, ready for comedy. One or two jokes
blow by, which were amusing, and then we get smacked in the face with some
absolutely absurd sightgag or situation that is so mindnumbingly UNFUNNY
that we forget the mild amusement from seconds before. Notice that both of
these problems are the fault of the writing, not of the actors.
The supporting cast, for the most part, fares well. Stockwell for some
reason seems to be doing an impression of Johnny Carson's Art Fern
character, which may be how the character talked in the TV series, but it
seems out of place here considering the character he plays. Tommy Chong, in
a very brief role, is ok, but I've been hearing him in interviews blasting
former comedy partner Cheech Marin for "selling out". Well what do you call
your role here Mr. Chong? Most puzzling though is Bruce Campbell. Clearly
he's the most talented man in the cast as every scene he's in is just a bit
better than the others. But he's eighth or ninth billing and given
absolutely nothing to do. When will someone realize that Bruce Campbell is a
very interesting actor with a distinctive personality which sets him apart
from just any regular actor? Either Campbell is completely happy with
working only bit parts in small movies, he has the worst agent in the world,
or he's unbelievably difficult to work with.
"McHale's Navy" had potential, but it just took itself too seriously. If it
had just had a simple plot without the silly villain or overbearing
commanding officer, it may have been much better. I still like Tom Arnold,
and this film's lack of success is certainly not his fault. [PG]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Brian Koller
"McHale's Navy" is transparently a screen adaptation of the 
mid-1960s U.S. television show, but it has more in common
with the "Police Academy" movie series of the 1980s.
It attempts to be a comedy, but does not succeed.
Nothing is funny, nothing works, and lots of things blow
up.  Too bad the producer's house was not among them.
"McHale's Navy" stars Tom Arnold, whose character is despised
by the Navy brass, but beloved by the common sailor.  He is
a profiteer who somehow gets caught up with fighting "the
second best terrorist in the world" (Tim Curry).  To prove
how bad he is, Curry kills several people for no obvious reason.
These deaths are supposed to be funny.
I do have something nice to say.  The tropical locale where
this film was shot looks like a terrific place to take a
vacation.
Ernest Borgnine has a cameo, and serves as a dubious link
to the old television show, which was much better and knew
enough not to involve world terrorists in situation comedy
plots.  Many talented actors are wasted on this hopeless 
project.  I will do them a favor and not mention them.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
McHALE'S NAVY
(Universal)
Starring:  Tom Arnold, Tim Curry, David Alan Grier, Dean Stockwell, Debra
Messing, Bruce Campbell, Brian Haley, French Stewart.
Screenplay:  Peter Crabbe.
Producers:  Sid, Bill and Jon Scheinberg.
Director:  Bryan Spicer.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, adult themes)
     Here's the good news:  Tom Arnold may never, _ever_ be allowed to
make a movie again after McHALE'S NAVY.  Here's the bad news:  everything
else.  McHALE follows SGT. BILKO and DOWN PERISCOPE as the best arguments
yet for military down-sizing, trotting out the same tired cliches --
unorthodox heroes, inept commanding officers, officious little weasels
getting trampled by the zany crew -- which haven't been funny
since...well, ever.  Arnold plays Quinton McHale, the lovable oaf of a
retired naval officer who bootlegs, but also donates to hospitals and poor
kids, so we know he's really a stand-up guy; Tim Curry plays his
arch-enemy, who bares his teeth so much that his dentist should get a
screen credit.  Curry wants to do something-or-other involving a military
satellite, and it's up to McHale's crew to prevent it, or at least wander 
around for a while getting into trouble until the something-or-other
doesn't happen.  If you last the whole 105 minutes, you will experience a
few explosions, a bar fight, the visage of Ernest Borgnine looking as
though it were already preserved in formaldehyde, kids in peril, pigs
in peril, and the criminal waste of Bruce Campbell's eccentric talents.
You should also get some sort of pension; you may be having flashbacks of
this one for years.
FOLLOW ME HOME
(New Millenia)
Starring:  Benjamin Bratt, Jesse Borrego, Steve Reevis, Calvin Levels,
Alfre Woodard.
Screenplay:  Peter Bratt.
Producers:  Alan Renshaw, Irene Romero, Peter Bratt, Benjamin Bratt.
Director:  Peter Bratt.
MPAA Rating:  Not Rated (could be R for profanity, violence, drug use and
adult themes)
     There's just no way around it:  FOLLOW ME HOME is a really, really,
really, really -- there just aren't enough "reallys" to do it justice --
bizarre film experience.  The story concerns four mural artists -- Tudee
(Jesse Borrego), Abel (Benjamin Bratt), Freddy (Steve Reevis) and Kaz
(Calvin Revels) -- who set out from California on a guerrilla mission to
paint a mural on the White House depicting the history of people of color
in America.  Along the way, they pick up a woman (Alfre Woodard) with a
secret, and encounter a group of history enthusiasts with a desire to
return to a very white version of America.  It's not entirely appropriate
to think of FOLLOW ME HOME as a failed experiment, because it's not
exactly a failure.  There are some impressive performances, particularly
by Benjamin Bratt as the wild and troubled Abel, and writer/director Peter
Bratt constantly keeps the audience off-balance with a surreal, dream-like
atmosphere and characters who are never as predictable as you think they
might be.  But FOLLOW ME HOME is ambitious to a fault, attempting to
tackle every racial, ethnic and gender stereotype in existence in one
film.  The result is a film which has as its only focus the fact that it
is iconoclastic, 200 years of history given a whirlwind revisionist spin
in 102 minutes.  When the climax involves a group chant of The Sugar Hill
Gang's "Rapper's Delight," it's hard not to wonder if Bratt has been
spinning so hard that he's gotten too dizzy to recognize absurdity.
FOLLOW ME HOME is an admirable project, sometimes intriguing but just as
deeply confused and fragmented as the America Peter Bratt is trying to
portray.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 4/18/97 (wide)
Running Length: 1:48
MPAA Classification: PG (Mild language, double entendres, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Tom Arnold, Tim Curry, David Alan Grier, Debra Messing, 
      Ernest Borgnine, Dean Stockwell, Bruce Campbell, Tommy Chong
Director: Bryan Spicer
Producers: Bill Sheinberg, Jonathan Sheinberg, and Sid Sheinberg
Screenplay: Peter Crabbe
Cinematography: Buzz Feitshans IV
Music: Dennis McCarthy
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     Following the travesty that was 1996's ill-fated attempt to update 
SGT. BILKO, I was prepared to state that I couldn't imagine a worse TV 
retread.  However, what my mind could not conceive, Hollywood has 
produced.  In fact, MCHALE'S NAVY isn't just worse -- it's fifteen 
minutes longer, which means that not only do viewers have to defend 
against yet another assault of truly uninspired content, but they have 
to endure fifteen percent more of it.
     One of the central questions about MCHALE'S NAVY is why anyone 
would want to make a movie out of this particular '60s show.  I suppose 
it was mildly diverting in its first incarnation, but of all the TV 
programs to resurrect, this wouldn't be near the top of most peoples' 
lists.  Lt. Commander Quinton McHale isn't the kind of figure people 
recall with great fondness when looking back on old sit-coms.  And, 
considering how poorly THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES and SGT. BILKO performed 
at the box office, one could be forgiven for assuming that Hollywood has 
gotten the message that America's passion for nostalgia only goes so 
far.
     MCHALE'S NAVY, as realized by director Bryan Spicer and 
screenwriter Peter Crabbe, is suitable only for movie-goers who have 
undergone frontal lobotomies.  The dearth of intelligence makes this 
film as painful to sit through as any of 1997's other worst offenders, 
and I wonder why more people didn't walk out of the screening I 
attended.  Had I not been reviewing the film, I would have headed for 
the exit about a half hour into the movie.
     Bellowing at the top of his voice in the vain hope that no one will 
notice that he can't act, Tom Arnold portrays McHale with all the 
delicacy of the proverbial bull in a china shop.  McHale is supposed to 
be likable, but, the way Arnold plays him, everyone in the audience is 
praying that someone will shoot him, drown him, or do something to him 
that would be unacceptable in a PG-rated movie.
     McHale is retired from the Navy these days and is spending his time 
as a smuggler, layabout, and little league coach.  His old crew, a bunch 
of unshaven slobs, lazy bums, and dimwits, suddenly find themselves 
under the heel of a new boss, Captain Wallace Binghampton (Dean 
Stockwell, sounding suspiciously like Bugs Bunny), who arrives at the 
Caribbean base with every intention of cleaning things up.  Alongside 
him is his no-nonsense aide, Lt. Penelope Carpenter (Debra Messing), who 
is both pretty and pretty uninteresting.
     Meanwhile, trouble is brewing on the small island paradise.  The 
second most dangerous terrorist in the world, Major Vladikov (Tim Curry, 
slipping further back towards the campy muck from which his career was 
born), arrives with the intention of throwing the world into chaos, 
making a lot of money for himself, and evening an old score with McHale.  
When Washington learns of Vladikov's presence, a top Navy Admiral 
(Ernest Borgnine, the original TV Quinton McHale) orders Binghampton to 
get McHale back into the service, regardless of the cost.  From that 
point on, it's all by the book as McHale re-enlists, reunites his crew, 
and goes to war with Vladikov.
     MCHALE'S NAVY wouldn't be so bad if it was remotely funny, but, by 
the last reel, I was so starved for amusement that I was considering 
sneaking into a showing of LIAR LIAR next door.  This is inept film 
making.  Even fans of the TV show, once their curiosity has worn off 
about how the new group of actors play their old favorites, won't find 
much to appreciate about a motion picture that needs to fill the screen 
with pyrotechnics to camouflage the lack of material.  MCHALE'S NAVY 
deserves to be sunk so deeply that no one will ever think of dredging it 
up again.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
