Title
Review for Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy, A (1982)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        After the critically-trashed STARDUST MEMORIES, 
Woody Allen made a movie that's not too much better. A 
MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S SEX COMEDY is a departure from 
the usual nihilistic, depressing comedy Woody produces, a 
whimsical period-piece comedy that has Woody's character 
an optimistic believer in the spirit world and, even more unlikely, 
married. Woody and his wife, Mary Steenburgen (who would 
move on to a man with an even bigger bald spot), are greeting 
two pairs of guests to their country home for a weekend of 
various forms of lust and fornication.
        Aging college professor Jose Ferrer is engaged to Mia 
Farrow (in her first of fourteen consecutive Allen films), while 
promiscuous dentist Tony Roberts has brought horny nurse 
Julie Hagerty (who worked this movie into her schedule between 
AIRPLANE! and AIRPLANE II: THE SEQUEL). Three couples in 
all, but naturally none of the men are particularly interested in their 
respective lovers. Woody wants Mia, Jose wants Julie and Tony 
has already bagged Mary.
        All three of the men are after Mia -- Jose because he's 
marrying her, Woody because he regrets not sleeping with her years 
ago when he had the chance and Tony because he falls in love with 
her at first sight. Meanwhile, Jose tries to talk Julie into being his 
last fling before his marriage to Mia and Mary tries to reignite the 
passion into her marriage with Woody. Although sex-obsessed, 
the movie never leaves the realm of the PG-rated, which makes 
sense because it's rated PG.
        A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S SEX COMEDY moves a lot 
more slowly than the average Allen feature and is a lot less funny 
than usual because the Woody character is toned down from a 
cynical bastard to a spiritist inventor. Scenes where he's on the 
flying bicycle and especially the ending make the movie more 
absurd than funny, and aside from the basic premise of the movie, 
there's not much plot, just people trying to flirt and set up secret 
meetings that invariably backfire, and backfire is pretty much 
what this movie does after the first hour or so.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!
