Title
Review for Interiors (1978)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Right after Woody Allen made the best movie of his career, 
ANNIE HALL, he made the worst movie of his career. INTERIORS 
is not only the first Allen movie Woody didn't star in, it's also the 
first to focus completely on drama. Woody himself said there were 
no "intentional" laughs in INTERIORS, even though there are a 
few unintentionally-funny moments in this heavy-handed Ingmar 
Bergman ripoff that has at least one-third lingering silent shots of 
either nature or its actors staring off into space, probably wondering 
what the hell they were doing in such a stupid movie.
        INTERIORS centers around a dysfunctional family, from 
the mentally-ill mother who falls apart (and eventually commits 
suicide by walking into the ocean) when her husband announces 
he's leaving her to the three neurotic sisters, none of whom 
(interestingly enough) is named Hannah. There's Joey (Marybeth 
Hurt, who looks like Velma from "Scooby Doo" with blond hair), 
the moody artist who just isn't talented, Renata (Diane Keaton), 
the poet who is talented but whose husband isn't, and Flynn 
(Kristen Griffith), the actress who is successful but shallow.
        Woody tries to balance everyone's problems by having 
the characters argue their existence away. Joey is mad at Dad for 
leaving and yells at Renata for not spending enough time with 
Mom, while Renata spouts the Woody speech about her work 
being meaningless because she can't buy immortality with art and 
her husband is ready to jump on top of Flynn, who resents the 
other sisters for having substance in their lives. By the time Dad 
brings his vibrant, shallow fiance home, the tensions are finally 
ready to explode.
        Then we get the long suicide scene and the final scene 
where the sisters stare out into the ocean in another Bergman ripoff. 
The ending of INTERIORS is just like the rest of the movie -- long, 
pointless, resolving nothing and silent. Forgoing the usual jazz 
soundtrack, Woody permeates INTERIORS with dead silence a lot 
of the time, when the other characters are arguing their heads off. 
It seems artistic, as do many of the labored camera shots from the 
movie, but underneath there's nothing of substance.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!
