Title
Review for Cat on a Hot Tin Roof (1958)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" was originally a
successful play by Tennessee Williams, who had
earlier created a sensation with "A Streetcar
Named Desire".  For the film adaptation,
some changes had to be made to get past Hollywood
censors, and to prevent Paul Newman from
playing a character with homosexual overtones.
Newman plays Brick, a former football hero who
has become an angry alcoholic.  His wife is
Maggie (Elizabeth Taylor), an aggressive Southern
belle whose frequent attempts to seduce Brick
are always rebuffed.  They are visiting the
mansion of Brick's father Big Daddy (Burl Ives),
a wealthy, domineering man who has terminal
cancer.  Brick's grasping brother Gooper (Jack
Carson) is also at the mansion, along with his
pregnant, obnoxious wife Mae (Madeleine Sherwood)
and their bratty little kids.
Although one would imagine that Big Daddy's
estate would go to his wife Ida (Judith Anderson)
upon his death, the plot has the brothers'
families battling for the estate.  Big Daddy
despises Gooper and his family, but is also
unwilling to cede everything to his other son,
whom along with his marriage is deeply troubled.
Also, the terminal nature of Big Daddy's illness
has not been disclosed to him, and both he and
his wife are in denial.
The story provides the frame for a script loaded
with impassioned speeches and vicious arguments;
the final outcome amazingly creating a happy ending
with Newman's personal demons apparently cured.
While never boring, the intense drama is sometimes
overblown.  Newman constantly drinks but, except
for the opening scene, is never drunk.  It is also
difficult to believe Taylor's faith in her
embittered husband, and that she would repeatedly
throw her gorgeous self at him despite his rejection.
The film achieved strong commercial and critical
success despite its excesses.  It was nominated
for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture,
Best Actor (Newman), Best Actress (Taylor), Best
Director (Richard Brooks), Best Adapted Screenplay
(Brooks and James Poe), and Best Color Cinematography
(William Daniels).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Mattias Thuresson
Cast: Paul Newman, Elizabeth Taylor, Burl Ives, Jack Carson
Paul Newman was one of best actors of the 1950s.
Elizath Taylor was one of the best actresses during
the 1950s. So what can you expect from a film from
this decade where they both appear? No disappointments,
they both give their best here.
There's also something very appealing with the way
how the works of Tennessee Williams has turned out
on the big scren. The Glass Menagerie, A Streetcar
Named Desire, Baby Doll, Sweet Bird of Youth and
Night of the Iguana have all become good movies.
The most memorable performance is by Burl Ives
as dying Big Daddy himself. Surprisingly, Ives
was not even 50 years old but looks as old as 70.
He plays the big, blunt hardworking plantation-
owner who has worked all his life to get some-
where. But despited that he has only contempt
for his wife Ida, for his well-behaving son
Gooper and Gooper's fertile wife. His other son,
Brick, is an ex-football star who has turned to
drinking. The future is not all bad, since Dr.
Baugh's examination has shown that Big Daddy's
cancer is not terminal.
The controversy takes place between Maggie and
Brick on the one hand and Gooper and his wife Mae
on the other. Mae use her children (the 'no-neck
monsters' to use Maggie's words) to suck up Big
Daddy and to show him which couple is the most
suitable to inherit the plantation. But he can't
stand their cynical attention and interest in his
health. But Maggie too is eager to get her hands
on the plantation.
Brick, a drinker with a broken leg, has also contempt.
Most of all for his wife Maggie, but also for all the
greed the inheritants-to-be show, waiting for Big Daddy
to die. As it turns out, Dr. Baugh hasn't told them
the truth. The cancer is terminal after all.
Jack Carson seem to be an underestimated actor. He
appeared in a lot of comedies or musicals but after
having seen him both in this one and A Star is Born
I understand that he had dramatic talent that perhaps
wasn't always appreciated.
Five Academy Award Nominations include Best Actor (Newman),
Best Actress (Taylor), Best Adapted Screenplay, Best
Cinematography and Best Director.
