Title
Review for Total Eclipse (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Christopher Null
     Picture this:  A movie about two 19th century French poets.  How
does that sound?  It sounds like a bad idea because it *is* a bad
idea.
     It's a worse idea than the talent in this picture would probably
care to admit to.  Leonardo DiCaprio stars in yet another
true-story-about-poets movie this year, following up his excellent
portrayal of teenage wacko Jim Carroll in THE BASKETBALL DIARIES with
one of even more wacko teenager Arthur Rimbaud in TOTAL ECLIPSE.  David
Thewlis (NAKED) is Paul Verlaine, a slightly older poet who becomes
entranced with Rimbaud, who returns his affections with little more
than scorn and physical abuse.  Verlaine in turn passes this abuse on
to his pregnant wife, Mathilde (Romane Bohringer).
     Verlaine tries to get inside Rimbaud's skin, ostensibly to make
himself a better poet, and the film spends inordinate amounts of time
following their misadventures:  Verlaine and Rimbaud crash a party;
Verlaine and Rimbaud frolic in a field; Verlaine and Rimbaud frolic on
the street; Verlaine and Rimbaud frolic on a beach.  Are you still
awake?
     Rimbaud ends up converting Verlaine from a mild-mannered gentleman
into a certifiable nut bar.  And for some reason, they keep stabbing
and shooting each other when they aren't drinking absinthe to excess.
In the end, the movie is a nearly unwatchable look at a couple of
people who we don't understand any better by the time the film is
over.  In other words:  a complete waste of time.
     It wouldn't have been so bad if there was a speck of likeability
in any of these characters, but they are so disgusting and crass, I
just wanted to leave the theater halfway through.  But I didn't.
Instead, I stuck it out to see if some big payoff awaited me for wading
through the 110 minutes of boredom, but alas there was none.  I was
afraid the movie was never going to end with its drawn-out, weepy,
melodramatic finale.  Boo hoo.
     Director Agnieszka Holland has a bad habit of making either really
good movies (EUROPA, EUROPA) or really bad ones (OLIVIER, OLIVIER).
TOTAL ECLIPSE is her worst, with the stylistic direction earning the
film its 1/2 star.  That's being generous.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
France-United Kingdom, 1995
U.S. Availability: 11/3/95 (limited)
Running Length: 1:50
MPAA Classification: R (Nudity, sex, violence, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, David Thewlis, Romane Bohringer,
      Dominique Blanc
Director: Agnieszka Holland
Producer: Jean-Pierre Ramsay Levi
Screenplay: Christopher Hampton based on his play
Cinematography: Yorgos Arvantis
Music: Jan A. P. Kaczmarek
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features
     The lives of tortured artists have always made for fascinating film
fare.  From AMADEUS to MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE, dramatic re-
creations of the often-frenzied, always-tormented lives of "great" men
and women have captivated audiences.  Since genius is often synonymous
with self-destruction, it should come as no surprise that director
Agnieszka Holland's presentation of the relationship between two 19th
century poets is overflowing with grimness, grief, and anger.  Yet, even
though we never feel much sympathy for either Arthur Rimbaud (Leonardo
DiCaprio) or Paul Verlaine (David Thewlis), the material is nevertheless
strangely compelling.
     TOTAL ECLIPSE opens in 1871 as established poet Verlaine invites
the wild 16-year old Rimbaud to live with him.  The youth, who possesses
a keen intellect but little regard for conventional etiquette, astounds
his host while simultaneously horrifying Verlaine's young, pregnant
wife, Mathilde (Romane Bohringer).  Soon, with his promises of intense
experiences and new insights into life, Rimbaud seduces Verlaine from
his family.  The two men, now sexual partners as well as friends, bounce
from Paris to Brussels to London, arguing about the existence of love
and whether indeed "the only unbearable thing is that nothing is
unbearable."
     The story related in TOTAL ECLIPSE is ambitious.  What transpired
between Verlaine and Rimbaud more than one-hundred years ago has
influenced poetry since, but has never been dramatized for the screen
until now.  The relationship is complex, encompassing just about every
emotion from love to hate--a profoundly unhealthy attraction that
poisons not only the lives of the two principals, but that of everyone
who has contact with them.  What befalls the Verlaines' marriage is only
the first tragedy.
     As scripted by Christopher Hampton (DANGEROUS LIAISONS,
CARRINGTON), the presentation of Verlaine and Rimbaud's story is
erratic.  At times, it's absorbing--almost hypnotic--but those
stretches don't last.  There are other sequences when the film becomes
ponderous and pretentious, and where over-the-top acting blunts dramatic
impact.  The narrative also has a tendency to jump from year-to-year and
place-to-place.  As far as the characters are concerned, they're
interesting only when they're together.  During the overlong denouement,
when the poets are separated, the proceedings become a little dull.
     The performances by the two leads are as uneven as the story
itself.  DiCaprio (THE BASKETBALL DIARIES) and Thewlis (NAKED) both have
moments when they truly shine--the latter as a pathetic man questing
for something to re-ignite his inspiration and the former as a cruel,
torn youth who sees human society as a hypocritical, ugly place.  On the
other hand, each also has scenes where they overact the material
(imagine them crawling around barking like dogs).  Cesar-winning French
actress Romane Bohringer (SAVAGE NIGHTS) is a model of solid, consistent
acting, making the most of limited screen time.
     Despite its flaws, TOTAL ECLIPSE is the kind of movie that stirs
thoughts and ruminations about the nature of genius, the true meaning of
art, and the unfailing capacity of great people to destroy themselves
and others.  Holland has not matched the success of two of her previous
films--EUROPA EUROPA and OLIVIER OLIVIER--but this picture is still
a respectable examination of a fascinating historical relationship.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TOTAL ECLIPSE (director: Agnieszka Holland; screenwriter: Christopher
Hampton ; cinematographer: Georges Arvanitis; editor: Isabelle Lorente;
cast: Leonardo DiCaprio (Arthur Rimbaud), David Thewlis (Paul Verlaine),
Romane Bohringer (Mathilde Maute), Dominique Blanc (Isabelle Rimbaud),
Nita Klein (Rimbaud's Mother); Runtime: 110; New Line Cinema;
1995-France / UK / Belgium)
A disappointing biography about the homosexual relationship of two
famous 19th century French poets. The film managed to remove all the
poetry from the poets and instead  concentrated on their abrasive
personalities. The result is merely an academic exercise, leaving an
emotional vacuum that it couldn't build on to show them as the poets
they were. On paper, this shouldn't have been so terrible -- it had a
talented director in Agnieszka Holland ("The Secret Garden"), a proven
screenwriter in Christopher Hampton (Dangerous Liaisons), and a capable
cast. But the film was done in by its inept script, the unappealing way
the film was directed, and the miscasting of Leonardo DiCaprio as
Rimbaud. I found his performance to be the most risible one in the film,
with him acting more like a teenage brat than a young genius, spouting
obsenities without giving a hint that a true poet lies behind that
facade. He, especially, looked bad because David Thewlis as Paul
Verlaine looked so good despite the turgid dialogue that was thrust upon
him and how thin a character he was forced to be. But when the two of
them were together, it looked like a mismatch. Leonardo's Rimbaud only
made the young poet look petulant and crude, yet we know from Rimbaud's
poetry, that he must have had something going for him because his poetry
was awe inspiring.
The film opens in post-revolutionary France in 1871, the 16-year-old
Rimbaud has sent the established Symbolist poet Verlaine a letter with
his poems. He accepts Verlaine's praises and invitation to be a house
guest in his splendid Paris home, and Rimbaud leaves his sullen farm in
rural Charleville. Once there, Rimbaud is disappointed in the
bourgeoisie household, has an immediate conflict with Verlaine's busty
18-year-old wife Mathilde (Romane), and finds to his regret that the
drunken Verlaine loves his rich wife for her body and that he lives off
her family's money, even though he has nothing else in common with her.
When Verlaine states, "Poets can learn from one another," Rimbaud
replies in a haughty tone, "Only if they're bad poets." He will continue
to treat the older poet like dirt for the rest of their relationship.
Verlaine proves to be weak-willed, beating his wife regularly, and plays
just as despicable a character as Rimbaud. When Mathilde's father kicks
Rimbaud out of the house, Verlaine finds him in a rooming house and the
two become lovers.
It's a real downer to watch this story unfold into a series of obnoxious
behavior patterns on the part of the two poets, which leads them to
traveling together and Mathilde asking for a divorce. In Brussels,
Verlaine gets arrested for sodomy and spends two years in jail. While
Rimbaud becomes angered at the literary world and never writes another
poem after he becomes 19. He instead goes to North Africa and becomes an
adventurer and a gun-runner, and after ten years there, comes home with
a tumor on his knee and dies a changed man at the age of 37. The
hopeless relationship between the two is what the picture covers in
detail and that was not very satisfying. The film ends on a
whimper...with Verlaine talking with Rimbaud's sister about her brother
and the poems of his he still possesses, which the sister wants
destroyed so as not to embarrass the family or ruin the name of her
deceased brother if published. This film was especially annoying because
Rimbaud's poems are filled with a visionary tenseness that are not even
approached in this film, as the film only manages to skim the surface of
the lives of these poets and completely ignores the value of their
poetry. I have no idea what the filmmaker was trying to say in this
film, but whatever it was, it just didn't work. It certainly didn't
bring any light into understanding what Rimbaud meant to modern poetry
and why he earned the reputation as the so-called father of modern
poetry.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
