Title
Review for Meet Wally Sparks (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I have to give this to MEET WALLY SPARKS:  if you've ever seen Rodney
Dangerfield before, you're going to get exactly what you expect, and if
you've never seen Rodney Dangerfield before, you have no business being in
the theater.  Dangerfield isn't an actor; he isn't even a personality.  He
is a persona, a leering 70-year-old adolescent who has parlayed not
getting any respect into a career most entertainers would envy.  The irony
in the Dangerfield persona is that he has in fact gained respect, or at
least appreciation, from a generation of young comedians.  MEET WALLY
SPARKS turns out not to be simply a vehicle for Dangerfield to do his
schtick, but a great big tribute in his honor, a dopey but almost reverent
celebration of Rodney at his Rodney-est.
     Dangerfield plays Wally Sparks, the host of a tabloid talk show which
has developed a reputation for being the sleaziest example of a sleazy
genre.  When one advertiser too many pulls out of Wally's show, the
network's president (Burt Reynolds) threatens to give Wally the ax.  Wally
and his producer Sandy (Debi Mazar) plead for a chance to clean the show
up, and it is with that goal in mind that they head to Atlanta for a
chance to meet with conservative Georgia governor Floyd Preston (David
Ogden Stiers) at a fund-raiser for the governor's Senate campaign.  When
Wally is injured in an incident at the party, he feigns being unable to
walk so that he can televise from the governor's mansion and try to get an
interview with the governor.  While the governor and his wife (Cindy
Williams) try to maintain order, Wally turns the house upside down, even
as he helps bring the governor's poll numbers up.
     MEET WALLY SPARKS is an extremely busy movie, which is not the same
as saying that a lot happens.  Even the most die-hard Dangerfield fan must
admit that a little bit of Rodney goes a long way, and the script seems
almost desperate to provide sub-plots which will allow the star to take a
breather.  There is a tangent involving an attempt to blackmail the
governor, a tangent involving a network toadie (Eamonn Roche) who wants
to sink Wally, a romance between Wally's son (Michael Weatherly) and the
governor's daughter (Lisa Thornhill), and sentimental musings about being
a good father on the part of both Wally and the governor.  There really
isn't any point to any of it, except to pad the running time, and at 106
minutes it certainly feels padded.  When it all wraps up -- with a
wedding, no less -- there are going to be a lot of numb buttocks in the
theater.
     I'm not really sure why the even bothered with a plot at all, since
it's all about Rodney.  The 25 minutes which take place at the governor's
fund-raiser set the tone, as Wally wanders through high society like an
even more lecherous Groucho Marx, a walking punch line in search of a
straight line to a gag about sexual potency, sexual frequency, sexual
organs or just good old-fashioned sex.  It is so obvious Rodney's world
that it is almost a shock when anyone else gets a joke (the pratfalls to
which Stiers, Roche and others are subjected notwithstanding).  The rest
of the cast is around to set 'em up, then get out of the way while Rodney
knocks 'em down.
     Or at least taps them over.  There are a couple of genuinely funny
bits in MEET WALLY SPARKS -- in one, Wally inadvertently breaks the
genitalia off a male nude statue, then does a very bad job of hiding it in
his pocket -- but this isn't a film built around comedic creativity.  On
the contrary, it is a tribute to comedic venerability, like a Henny
Youngman performance with half the audience providing the obvious and
familiar double entendre before Rodney can.  The film is so self-aware on
that point that Wally's son gets one scene in which _he_ anticipates the
joke and mouths the punch line.  It's all terribly dumb and predictable,
but it doesn't matter to anyone involved because this is less a Rodney
Dangerfield film than "Rodney Dangerfield: This Is Your Life," with a host
of guest stars turning up to honor the star:  Jay Leno, Roseanne, Tim
Allen, Bob Saget.  Tony Danza and Michael Bolton even turn up to do
Dangerfield impressions, and if you think you've seen it all, you haven't
until you've seen Michael Bolton do Dangerfield.  MEET WALLY SPARKS is
likely to be a snooze to anyone who is not arriving similarly to worship
at the altar of Rodney.  It is a strange experience watching a movie where
everyone in the film, perhaps hoping for Dangerfield's personal
benediction of "Hey, kid, you're all right," seems more interested in
entertaining the star than in entertaining the audience.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 1/31/97 (wide)
Running Length: 1:45
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, sexual situations, nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Theater: Magic @ Hadley, 1/31/97, 4:15 pm
Cast: Rodney Dangerfield, David Ogden Stiers, Debi Mazar, Mark Taylor, 
      Cindy Williams, Lisa Thornhill, Michael Weatherly, Burt Reynolds
Director: Peter Baldwin
Producer: Leslie Greif
Screenplay: Rodney Dangerfield and Harry Basil 
Cinematography: Richard H. Kline
Music: Michel Colombier
U.S. Distributor: Trimark Pictures
     Despite his immense popularity on stage, Rodney Dangerfield doesn't 
have a sterling reputation as a motion picture lead.  With the exception 
of BACK TO SCHOOL, a delightfully dumb 1986 comedy, every movie to 
feature Dangerfield prominently (CADDYSHACK, EASY MONEY, LADYBUGS) has 
been a dud.  MEET WALLY SPARKS, a lame, late-January film dumped into a 
sluggish market, may well finish the aging comic's screen career.  
There's nothing in this movie that warrants the price of a video rental, 
much less a trip to a theater.
     Generally, about the best one can hope for from a Dangerfield movie 
is a cliched storyline filled with crude-but-humorous gags and one-
liners.  That is, after all, basically what BACK TO SCHOOL delivered, 
and it worked on that basis.  MEET WALLY SPARKS never comes close, 
because there's hardly a laugh to be found from start to finish.  It 
amazes me that Dangerfield, who in the past has been able to make the 
simple act of walking into a room funny, has turned out such a dreadful 
motion picture.  MEET WALLY SPARKS is easily among the ten worst 
comedies I've seen in the past two years.  
     It's hard to put a finger on why Dangerfield isn't funny here.  He 
certainly doesn't seem to have invested his character, tabloid talkshow 
host Wally Sparks, with much vitality.  The sex jokes, even when you 
can't see them coming, are old and tired, as if we've heard them a few 
times too many.  This shtick is worn-out; it might still work in comedy 
clubs, but any spontaneity is lost on screen.  And, unfortunately, the 
one or two potentially-amusing moments have been shown to death in the 
previews, so their comic effect is ruined.  Even Dangerfield's intention 
of lampooning the current generation of talk shows isn't successful.  In 
spite of numerous cameos (by the likes of Geraldo, Morton Downey Jr., 
Jerry Springer, Bob Saget, Roseanne, Michael Bolton, Ron Jeremy, Tony 
Danza, Tim Allen, Jay Leno, and others), MEET WALLY SPARKS is too absurd 
to retain any sense of verisimilitude.  Without that quality, there's 
little chance for satire to be effective.   Yet probably the worst thing 
about WALLY SPARKS is its failed attempts to inject character 
development and human interest into a one-dimensional story.  By aiming 
for pathos, this movie comes across as pathetic.  
     The sole bright spot is the opening montage, which compares THE 
WALLY SPARKS SHOW to its moderate TV competitors (GERALDO, OPRAH, etc.) 
by means of quick edits.  Once the credits have concluded, however, it's 
all downhill -- fast.  The film's premise involves Wally toning down his 
show to stem the tide of deserting sponsors.  The network president 
(Burt Reynolds) gives him one week to clean up his act, or he's off the 
air.  The show's producer, a no-nonsense woman named Sandy (Debi Mazar), 
decides that Wally's best chance at respectability is to get his 
longtime opponent, conservative Governor Preston of Georgia (David Ogden 
Stiers), as a guest. Complications ensue when the talkshow host is 
injured at one of Preston's parties.  And, as if that wasn't enough, 
Sparks becomes an unwitting player in a scheme to blackmail the 
governor.
     Enduring MEET WALLY SPARKS is akin to watching a multi-car pileup, 
as each successive failure leads to a bigger thud.  By the end of the 
movie, I didn't know whether to feel angry at being subjected to such a 
loathsome experience, or saddened and embarrassed for Dangerfield and 
the others involved.  By his own admission, Rodney's not a happy person, 
and the public and critical response to MEET WALLY SPARKS isn't likely 
to bring much sunshine into his life.  This is truly a movie that 
doesn't deserve any respect.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Walter Frith
     The outrageous antics of comedian Rodney Dangerfield are seen in such
hilarious films as 'Caddyshack' (1980), 'Easy Money' (1983) and 'Back to
School' (1986).  'Back to School' is probably the funniest and most likable
of these films but Dangerfield (who is 75) has lost his way pretty much with
'Meet Wally Sparks'.  
     Rodney portrays an unorthodox tabloid talk show host who becomes mixed
up in one wild situation with a southern governor and his family who are
extremely conservative.  Dangerfield's son becomes romantically involved with
the governor's daughter and a television executive's assistant who's trying
to have Rodney fired is in tow and gets exactly what he deserves.  Throw in a
political sex scandal and a head butting feud with Dangerfield's television
boss (Burt Reynolds) and you have the makings for a trivial and desperate
comedy of enormously bad proportions.
     Someone should have told Dangerfield (who co-wrote the picture) that
less is sometimes more and that good comedy doesn't necessarily include
throwing in everything but the kitchen sink in order to make people laugh and
the film degrades not only itself but the audience.  Furthermore the film is
bogged down with Dangerfield's one liners that are growing tiresome.  It's
slapstick humour is both juvenile and self defeating.  Given the limited
release this film had, I suspect that it may have been considered at some
point as a direct to video release.
     Dangerfield's fans will be pleased but others may feel that even though
we somehow know what to expect going in, we don't expect the humour to hammer
us over the head like a baseball bat.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Meet Wally Sparks (1997) NO STARS out of ***** - Cast: Rodney Dangerfield,
Debi Mazar, Cindy Williams, Burt Reynolds, David Ogden Stiers, Alan Rachins.
Written by: Harry Basil and Rodney Dangerfield. Directed by: Peter Baldwin.
Running Time: 105 minutes.
With pointless cameos by: Tim Allen, Richard Bey, Michael Bolton, Tony
Danza, Lesley-Anne Down, Morton Downey Jr., Karen Duffy, Gilbert Gottfried,
John Henson, Ron Jeremy, Rikki Lake, Jay Leno, "Stuttering" John Melendez,
Sally Jesse Raphael, Michael Rooker, Bob Saget, Julia Sweeney.
You know that pain you get in your throat when you eat ice cream too fast?
There's nothing you can do, you just have to sit there and wait for it to go
away? Well take that pain, multiply it by 100, and you still wouldn't know
the agony that is "Meet Wally Sparks".
Rodney Dangerfield is talk show host Wally Sparks, although he's basically
just Rodney Dangerfield. After the network threatens to cancel his show, he
sets out to keep it on the air, and somehow ends up living in the house of
the governor of Georgia (Stiers). Countless penis jokes and other crude
sexual humor follows.
The film is remotely interesting for the first 30 minutes or so, only
because of the numerous cameos. But those soon stop and nightmarish agony
begins. Of all the players, only Burt Reynolds (as a network executive)
fares well. Unfortunately, his role is brief. I'm almost convinced now that
Dangerfield's entertaining 1986 film "Back to School" was a complete fluke.  [R]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.
