Title
Review for Bound (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ted Prigge
Writers/Directors: Andy and Larry Wachowski
Starring: Gina Gershon, Jennifer Tilly, Joe Pantoliano, John P. Ryan,
Christopher Meloni, Richard C. Sarafian
Lately, the sub-genre of film noir has been coming back in a big way. 
With "L.A. Confidential" being dubbed one of the best films of the year,
we're seeing a 90s version of a once-dead group of films which delighted
in presenting a world full of harsh, selfish, amoral people, all out to
screw eachother over more than an episode of "Melrose Place."  With
"Bound," we get the perfect epitome of the new wave film noir.  It's a
stylish, politically incorrect, and deliciously nasty tale of greed,
trust, betrayal, and good old fashioned lesbianism.  WOO-HOO!
The big news for this film was that it was a film noir dealing with a
pair of LESBIANS who decide to rip off the mob.  As you can tell, the
main hook seems to be that the two protagonists are two female
LESBIANS.  But, this flick is more than that.  Yes, I was already there
when I found out that this flick featured a "steamy lesbian sex scene." 
But yeah, I could get that on Cinemax on any late night of the week...if
I HAD Cinemax.  But, this film surrounds that with a well-developed
plot, characters we like and/or care about in some fashion, and an
amazing directorial style which makes this film dripping with mood and
pure, unadulterated tension.  Even the lesbo sex scene is well-directed.
The film, as I said, tells about two lesbians, and we see them when they
first meet.  Corky (Gina Gershon, fresh off of "Showgirls," where she
played a bisexual stripper who makes out with Elizabeth Berkley - I
haven't seen it) is a butch crook who has just gotten out of prison, and
is doing a job for a mafia friend which requires her to...paint an
apartment.  When she gets on the elevator, she finds herself on it with
a mafiaso guy (Joe Pontaliano) and his cute moll (Jennifer Tilly).  The
two chicks trade flirtatious looks, and we find out that Corky is going
to be working in the apartment adjacent to that of the mafiaso and his
moll.
The film takes us through their courtship, which is funny and
intriguing.  Corky and her (name is Violet) meet a couple times before
one day Corky gets a call to fetch an earring out of Violet's sink. 
Before you can say "foreplay," the two are making out on the floor, and
soon engaging in some good old sex.  Some problems come up where they
begin to loose trust in eachother, but it becomes known that Violet's
man (name is Caesar) is holding two million in stolen money in their
apartment.  The two begin plotting an ingenius scheme which would not
only help them get rich together, but also get away clean with Caesar
blame.
This is only the first 20 minutes or so, by the way.  We are soon tossed
into a world of Hitchcockian tension.  Each step along the way gets more
and more frightening, and soon we are gripping the arms of our chairs. 
Why do we do this?  Well, the direction is fantastic, and we realize we
actually care about these characters.  In a typical or even good
thriller, the characters are half-interesting, more characateur, and we
only care about them because they are deemed "protagonist."  But here,
the directors make us care about these characters.  Hence, we're more
into it.
The direction is the real highlight of the film cinematically (we all
know what the real highlight is otherwise, though, eh?).  The Wachowski
brothers find interesting things for the camera to do in every single
shot.  Whether it's showing a close-up of blood squishing through the
carpet as someone steps on it, or if it's a wonderfully cool zipping
tracking shot of information going from one telephone cord to another,
the cinematography is always interesting, and highly snubbed at this
year's Oscars.  Look at the art direction in this film, and tell me you
don't already feel tense.
Also, instead of going for some cheap-ass Valerie Solonas message that
guys are jerks, and women should stick together to the bitter end, this
film aims for just a fun twist on the subgenre (as well as some more
fans from Howard Stern listeners).  It doesn't take up a lot of the film
(thank god), but just adds some more fun to the film, by letting us see
Gina and Jennifer show true chemistry.
The only complaint I have is that Jennifer Tilly's voice is annoying,
but I will say that it's less in this film than in others.  Not sure why
either.  If you've never heard it, it's very squeaky and high-pitched (a
friend said she would rather view it dubbed in another language, just so
they didn't have to listen to it).  But nevertheless Tilly is an
excellent actress, and so is Gershon.  The two have fantastic chemistry,
and make for two of the most memorable two leads in film noir.
Many thrillers are cheap, redundant, and sometimes even boring.  "Bound"
is the complete opposite.  From the moment that they're past the point
of no return, we're in a web of pure and utter tension.  Not many
thrillers can do this, and hold it without any peaks and valleys, but
the Wachowski brothers can, and can do it in spades.  And if you're not
already sold, just remember: it has lesbians.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
