Title
Review for Ariel (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A deeply cynical and yet gaspingly funny movie about going so far
down on the food chain that you come out on the top again.
ARIEL, by the longtime Finnish director Aki Kaurismaki, is not quite like
anything I've ever seen. That's good, because in a world where movies are
becoming increasingly noisy, interchangeable and dull, seeing something like
ARIEL is like drinking Evian after a twenty-year diet of flat Pepsi.
Turo Pajala, a skinny-faced actor who has this way of almost daring us to
care about him, plays Taisto Kasurinen, a coal miner whose job has just
evaorated. Finland is switching from coal to nuclear power, and so his job
has come rather abruptly to an end. His drinking buddy gives him the keys to
his Cadillac (worth its weight in gold in that country), then backs up into
the men's room and puts a bullet into his head. Taisto's reaction is more or
less worrying about where the hell he's going to park the damned thing.
Everything in life is an imposition, and the movie walks us through that
frame of mind, one fuck-up at a time.
Taisto gets screwed about sixty percent of the time. He drives south to look
for a job and gets mugged; he can't get anything together. His life takes a
turn for the better when he meets a meter maid and her young son, and the
three of them form something like a family, but even then Taisto has
trouble. Eventually, he hatches a scheme to steal tons of money and split
for the States, and he manages to get away with it -- sort of -- but by that
time the movie has already made itself clear: No matter what you do, you get
shafted somehow.
What's amazing about the movie is that as bitter and cynical as it is, it's
also a pleasure to watch unfold. Nothing in the movie is dictated by idiotic
Hollywod plotting standards -- we're not in this to find out if the heist
goes off as planned (they spill the cash on the sidewalk, for God's sake!),
but rather what we learn about human behavior along the way. Kaurismaki
understands how people really talk to each other, and how they pretend to
listen -- the conversations in this movie are unleavened with sitcom
pseudo-speak, and are not interested in the slick stratagems of go-getters.
They just want to get through the day without having the sky fall on their
head. What Taisto slowly figures out, it seems, is that he's hardly alone in
getting screwed, even though it sure feels like it.
ARIEL, then, is about people who have their head bowed down by life. They're
not interested in saving the day, or even seizing it. They are trying to
bail out of the whole damn cycle, because it's done nothing but take
advantage of them. Kaurismaki is the only moviemaker I know who's willing to
take people like that and make them his characters -- and on that basis
alone, I intend to find as many of his movies as I can.
