Title
Review for Shopping for Fangs (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Phil (Radmar Jao) has a hairy problem.  His beard is growing so
rapidly that he has to shave every hour.  He recently met the author of
a non-fiction book on lycanthropy, also referred to in the movie as
werewolfism, and Phil now believes that his problem is that he has
become a werewolf.  Using enough chains and handcuffs to be a hit at a
sadomasochists convention, he ties himself in at night lest his urges
overcome him.
     And Phil is just one of the many quirky characters that inhabit
SHOPPING FOR FANGS.
     Made on a pittance, the film features an almost exclusively
Asian-American cast.  As directed by Quentin Lee and Justin Lin, the
movie is so amateurishly bad that it could almost be a parody of indie
films.
     Jeanne Chin plays Katherine, a meek and soft-spoken wife, who
worries that her husband is unhappy with her because she is not giving
him enough sex.  We know this through the endless scenes of her
confessing her sins, real and imagined, to her therapist.  As her
husband, Jim, Clint Jung plays a muscle man with a macho crudeness.
     The picture is filled with stereotypes.  There's a mysterious,
loud-mouthed waitress with a big, platinum blonde wig who brags to
everyone she meets that she's a lesbian.  She spends most of the movie
putting the moves on her favorite customer, a gay guy.  And the lone
white with a major role, the author on werewolfism, has wildly unkempt,
orangey blonde, curly hair.
     From its opening scene of an attempted rape at knifepoint to its
easy to guess ending twist, the script rarely has anything to offer.
The story is so minimally developed that it feels almost like the
actors were ad-libbing.  One can only hope that the directors' next
film will have some substance and some credible acting.
     SHOPPING FOR FANGS runs 1:30.  It is rated R for sex, violence,
and profanity and would be fine for older teenagers.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Margin Films
 Director:  Quentin Lee, Justin Lin
 Writer: Dan Alvarado, Quentin Lee, Justin Lin
 Cast:  Radman Jao, Jeanne Chin, Clint Jung, Lela Lee, John
Cho, Peggy Ahn, Scott Eberlein, Daniel Twyman, Jennifer
Hengstenberg, Dana Pan
   Who am I?  That's the sort of question usually associated
with the self-absorbed Westerner, the angst-ridden, existential
query that North Americans and Europeans often confront in
their twenties and then again when go through mid-life crises. 
While it's not clear that folks in the vast Asian continent are as
troubled by this, the thoroughly assimilated Asian-Americans
in the world of directors Quentin Lee and Justin Lin certainly
are.  If you're looking for a firm answer to the question, you
may be bemused to find out that you're probably not just one
person but several personalities in one body, displaying a
bold front in one area, a shy demeanor in another.  "Shopping
for Fangs," a no- budget, Asian-American picture by the new
Asian-American-owned Margin Films, looks like a B-film with
its awkward editing, its obviously faked fight scenes and its
often scruffy look. Meant to be taken metaphorically, its
actions are involving on their own, realistic level, though some
in the audience may not appreciate the gender-bending in a
story that is part Quentin-Tarantino sendup of violence, part
"Polyester," with a segment of Alfred Hitchcock, a wedge of
Wes Craven, and a nod to Robert Altman.  The actors are
primarily Asian-American, a mixture of ethnic groups from
across the Asian continent.  This is certainly not the first
movie featuring characters who are not who you think they
are--or who they believe themselves to be--but the creative
team responsible for it puts a fresh spin on the story lines to
provide absorbing entertainment in Lee and Lin's growing
repertory of works for the screen.
   Plotted like Altman's "Short Cuts" as a mosaic of unhappy
California lives and shot in that state's San Gabriel Valley,
"Shopping for Fangs" includes a tapestry of characters who
seem unconnected at first but whose lives cross at
fateful moments in the drama.  Phil (Radman Jao) is a
passive accountant/shipping clerk, a lonely and frustrated little
guy in his twenties who becomes alarmingly aggressive
shortly after discovering abnormal growths of hair on his face,
later on his chest, and finally on top of his head.  He develops
a craving for meat, loading his cart in a humongous
supermarket with various cuts of flesh, but in less lycanthropic
times he is at the mercy of his sharp-talking sister.  Seeking
medical help for his hirsute condition, he is advised by his
female doctor to find an outlet for his repressed energies--and
she does not mean hustling on the treadmill.  An even more
interesting character is Katherine (Jeanne Chin), a Vietnam
refugee who is so contained that she talks like Carol White
(Julianne Moore) in the movie "Safe."  Despite her withdrawn
personality, she is actively pursued by mail and answering
machine by flamboyant lesbian waitress, Trinh, who wears a
vast blond wig and sunglasses day and night and who has a
way of dealing with rapists and muggers.  When Trinh is not
fighting crime she is befriending a lonely gay man in her
coffee shop, Clarance (John Cho), a Singaporean who was
just dumped by his Taiwanese boy friend.   The movie
introduces the incredibly handsome Clint Jung as Jim,
Katherine's frustrated husband, who is Phil's boss at work but
who cannot get close to his wife at home.    
   At this point in their careers, Lee and Lin do not have the
finesse to smoothly blend their disparate characters together. 
Their meetings toward the conclusion of the story appear
contrived, but considering the obviously infinitesimal budget
and brief shooting time that they are allotted, they have put
together an arresting yarn with a single twist, a blockbuster
that will have you saying, "Why didn't I think of that?"  Some
of the actor in the uneven cast are sharper than others, such
as Daniel Twyman in the role of Dr. Suleri, who is acting as
Katherine's psychotherapist and Jeanne Chin as the aloof and
beautiful Katherine; others seem at times ready to burst out
laughing as though they were performing in a home movie as
a lark.  "Shopping for Fangs" was performed at festivals in
Toronto, Seattle, Vancouver, Singapore, San Francisco and
Chicago primarily as segmented Asian jamborees.  With a
better budget, Lee and Lin can be expected to do more
polished works in the near future.  Rated R.  Running time: 90
minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998
