Title
Review for Lamerica (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     LAMERICA is a bleak picture about modern day Albania, which is an
oxymoron.  The Albania shown in this film, which I have no reason to
believe is inaccurate, is a dreary place of abject poverty - sort of
the antithesis of a vacation haven.  Shows about measurable conditions
can be interesting and rewarding.  Consider TAXI DRIVER, TO LIVE,
GERMINAL, BRAZIL, and STALINGRAD among others.  LAMERICA's purpose, on
the other hand, seems to be to shock us with the poverty while weaving
an opaque tale.
     The show starts promisingly with great old newsreel footage of the
Italians taking over impoverished Albania in the 1930s.  They merged
the countries for the duration of the war.
     The film then switches to 1991 in Albania when the chains of
Communism are finally broken.  This means that foreigners are free to
come in and bring their money, but since most of the same corrupt
politicians are in power, Albanian buses are stopped at the borders to
prevent Albanians from leaving.  The show has a plethora of scenes of
the staring masses either charging for food donations like animals of
sitting around staring at the strange foreigners with morbid
fascination.
     Into this land of despair comes two Italian con men named Fiore
(Michele Placido) and his assistant Gino (Enrico Lo Verso who was
excellent in FARINELLI).  Their specialty is taking money from the
Italian government ostensibly for relief work for building factories in
third world countries.  They skim most of the money off of the top and
use the rest to buy a little equipment for the factories.
     Their last company was in Nigeria where their specialty was not
building televisions sets.  They never even built one, but they
couldn't be held accountable if those Nigerians did not prove to be
successful television set factory workers.
     In Albania they go looking for an anti-Communist hero to appoint
as the titular head of their shell company.  They search in an
ex-prison that has been turned into an old age home.  The old age homes
are dark and worse than most concentration camp pictures I have seen.
The people all have a quarter of an inch of caked on dirt, they walk
like zombies from a low budget horror picture, and many have missing
limbs.  The con men find a senile, 80 year old named Spiro Tozai,
a.k.a. Michele Talarico (Carmelo Di Mazzarelli), who says he is 20, and
they make him the chairman of their firm.  The film is by director
Gianni Amelio, who did the unusual STOLEN CHILDREN, and the influence
from that film shows in the old age home scene.
     The script by Gianni Amelio, Andrea Porporati, and Alessandro
Sermoneta is overly earnest and not very memorable, but it does have
one good line I remember.  When Gino is at the big hotel in Albania, he
tells his Albanian contact Selimi (Piro Milkani) that he is going to
take a shower.  Selimi gives him that not-in-this-country-you-don't
look, and explains, "Sorry.  No water today.  Today holiday.  Maybe
tomorrow."
     The rest of the show focuses in on Gino chasing Spiro as he tries
to escape to Italy.  The other part of the plot is that Spiro has a
fairly easy to guess secret which Gino finds out about.  The show can
be quite mean spirited as young kids, about age 7, steal Spiro's shoes
and then put him in a hut where they try to torture and asphyxiate him
with torches and smoke.  They do not manage to kill him, but they come
close. I was not impressed with any of the acting, but Carmelo Di
Mazzarelli's performance was the most obscure and least effective of
the bunch.
     LAMERICA runs way too long at 1:55.  It is in Italian and some
Albanian, all with English subtitles.  The film is not rated.  Given
some of the strong images and the adult themes, it would probably get
an R, but perhaps it could qualify for a PG-13.  It would be fine for
any teenager.  This is the sort of art house film with which many
critics and art house patrons resonate.  To me, however, it is nothing
more than a chronology of poverty without a compelling script.  I know
the writers and director wanted me to feel sorry for the Albanians.  I
do.  More than that, I see little purpose in the film.  You can
overpraise a bad artistic film and no one will care, but dislike an
earnest one like this, and people are up in arms over the critic's
"stupidity."  I once gave a mediocre review to BURNT BY THE SUN, and I
think half the Russians in the world wrote me unflattering letters.
Finally, I give the film * 1/2 for its seriousness.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

LAMERICA (director/writer: Gianni Amelio; screenwriters: Alessandro
Sermoneta/Andrea Porporati; cinematographer: Luca Bigazzi; cast: Enrico
Lo Verso (Gino), Carmelo Di Mazzarelli (Michele, "chairman"), Michele
Placido (Fiore), 1994-It)
"I'm Italian, don't you understand?" So go the utterings to deaf
Albanian police ears, of Gino (Enrico), a brash, young con man from
Italy, who came to Albania to be an assistant to another con man, the
more experienced, Fiore (Placido), and has now gotten himself mired in
the hopelessness of this country, clinging to his superior Italian
birthright in the face of failing to pull off his scam, and is left
abandoned in Albania. They came to this impoverished country to run a
scam shoe company, to make someone who is inept and has no relatives be
the dummy "chairman" (Carmelo) of their bogus company, with their hope
to get the Italian government to give them a grant, which they almost
always do for those who fought the Communist regime. The con men would
then take the grant money and skip town, never even making one pair of
shoes.
Amelio's film is a political one, with a black comedic edge to it, as it
traces the tragic recent history of Albania, studying the dehumanizing
effect bad governments have on its people. In its opening credits, it
uses actual newsreel footage of Il Duce's arrival in 1939, Albania, as
it shows his conquest of the country. When WW11 ended, the Soviet
Communist regime supported the local dictatorship and the country
remained isolated, with its vast problems of poverty unknown to most of
the world; that is, until 1991, when a supposedly "new" democratic
regime took over and opened up the country for the world to see. Italy
was flooded with a wave of Albanian immigrants, looking to that country
to fulfill its utopian dreams because of its material and cultural
strength, but Italy could not handle the onslaught of so many people,
and would not let anymore immigrants in. What remains for these people
is a pipe dream of escaping to Italy, as they are stuck where they are.
The new regime is just as bad as all the other regimes; it is actually
made up of most of the leaders from the past, who only change the name
of their ruling party.
This is a rather slow-moving film, that is chocked full of themes and
universal messages the director feels impelled to get across. Whether it
is worthwhile or not to have a film be so politically motivated that it
fails to be entertaining, is up to you to decide. The political aims
seem necessary to see and understand for the viewer, the reward comes in
images that stick with you long after viewing the film. Therefore, this
becomes a special film, not necessarily a better film, but one that is
made beneficial for those who are interested enough to stick with this
film's slow pace and all the political explorations that are needed to
show how corrupt and decaying Albania really is and how cherished the
human spirit is, sometimes able to survive on the barest evidence of
hope.
Amelio (Open Doors, Stolen Children) has so much political ground to
cover that the film becomes overwhelmed with the misery of its
exploration and suffers because of it. Problems such as immigration,
poverty, corruption, cultural decadence, ignorance, hate, greed, and a
generation influenced by Italian television are just too complicated and
heavy to handle without sacrificing something in the process. What is
sacrificed, is that, though I liked what I saw, I did not feel
passionately about it. It was a cold but intellectually sound effort.
The character of Gino is examined most closely and he becomes the
messenger for the director's viewpoint, as he is trapped in the bleak
Albanian countryside trying to make his scam work. His car tires are
stolen, along with his passport (identity), clothes (appearance) and the
arrogance he had when he first came. His handpicked "chairman" turns out
to be an Italian army deserter from 1939 and not an Albanian
anti-Communist. The "chairman" has tried to stop time, thinking he is
still 20-years-old, living as if nothing took place the last 50-years
since he has been in prison. He forms a very strange relationship with
the Italian, both skeptical of him and later on thinking of him as a
fellow traveler, who is abused by the world situation. The heart of the
film lies in the change that overcomes Gino. This nightmarish episode in
his life is certainly profound and deadly. He can never be the same
again. By the final scene, he is stripped of his worldly possessions,
ragged and tired looking, looking somewhat like an Albanian refuge. And
that is the success of this film. We are forced into seeing the poverty
that exists there, and even if we don't like to be put in that position,
there is nothing that we can do about it. There are just no answers, and
the film is left without a happy ending, only a few images of hope. This
is seen, when a little girl in a remote Albanian village, freely dances
and dreams of a better life somewhere else than in the barren land she
was born in.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Enrico Lo Verso, Carmelo Di Mazzarelli, Michele Placido
Director: Gianni Amelio
Producers: Mario and Vittorio Cecchi Gori
Screenplay: Gianni Amelio, Andrea Porporati, and Alessandro Sermoneta
Cinematography: Luca Bigazzi
Music: Franco Piersanti
U.S. Distributor: Undetermined
In Italian with subtitles
     LAMERICA, which had its United States debut at the 1995 New York
Film Festival, is a deceptively simple modern-day story steeped in
history, national identity, and other quintessential issues of the
"human experience."  Written and directed by acclaimed Italian film
maker Gianni Amelio (OPEN DOORS, STOLEN CHILDREN), this motion picture
is a must-see for cinema purists, art film lovers, and those who enjoy
thinking their way through a movie.  LAMERICA is definitely not for
those on a quest for escapist fare--they'll be asleep before the end
of the second reel.  This production is paced slower than a tortoise.
     To understand the film, which takes place in 1991 Albania, a little
history is necessary.  In 1939, as documented by black-and-white news
reel footage shown during LAMERICA's opening credits, Mussolini invaded
and occupied Albania.  Following World War II, a Soviet-supported
Socialist dictatorship came into power, and nearly all communications
with the tiny Balkan nation were cut off.  No one was aware of the
staggering level of poverty that persisted until 1991, when the
government was overthrown, the borders were opened, and 40,000 Albanians
fled to Italy.  The immigrant crush was like the European influx into
the United States earlier in the century, with Italy being viewed by the
Albanians as "their America" (hence the title, with the absent
apostrophe in "L'America" intended to represent the semi-literacy of the
Albanians).
     Once Albania converted to democracy, some of the first foreign
investors came from Italy, and many of their proposals were thinly-
veiled con games.  LAMERICA opens by introducing two such swindlers,
Fiore (Michele Placido) and his assistant Gino (Enrico Lo Verso, last
seen in FARINELLI), who claim to be in the shoe-making industry.  They
choose a random homeless man who has suffered in a Socialist jail for
fifty years as their company's chairman (corporations fronted by anti-
Communist heroes are guaranteed government support).  All they need is a
"straw man" without relatives, so that once the deals are set and the
financial aid comes in, they can take the money and run.  But problems
arise when their chosen chairman turns out not to be an Albanian native,
but an Italian World War II deserter who was captured after the end of
the war and thrown into prison.
     In terms of the issues it addresses, LAMERICA is an exceptionally
rich film., and as much a dark comedy as a straight drama.  The story
follows Gino's attempts to track his "chairman" after the old man
escapes from confinement in a rest home.  During this journey, we are
given an eye-opening look at the raging poverty in Albania, and exposed
to how the men and women cope with it.  As time passes, Gino is
gradually stripped of his material possessions and, eventually, he
learns how little value money has in outlying villages.  With no car,
clothes, cash, or passport, Gino is forced to look inside himself and
rely on the generosity of others to survive.  In the process, he learns
how a little girl can dance with abandon in the midst of a wasteland of
want (that scene is perhaps the most lasting image offered by LAMERICA).
     The "chairman", Michele Talarico (Carmello Di Mazzarelli) by name,
was born in Sicily some seventy years ago, but his identity is now
obscured by the passage of time.  His papers say he's Albanian, but he
calls Italy his home.  He has blocked out the fifty years spent in
jail, so he believes that he's only twenty, and holds to this fiction
no matter what evidence is presented to the contrary.  As the film
progresses, Gino--a young, brash, ignorant Italian at the
outset--gradually loses his own sense of national identity until he's
as much an Albanian as the hundreds around him, including Talarico.
Italian, Albanian, or something else--in the trenches of life, at the
most basic level of humanity, nationality has no meaning.  When it
comes to survival, who cares about politics?
     The dynamic between Gino and Talarico is perhaps the most
fascinating element of LAMERICA.  The younger man starts out as the old
man's keeper, but, when circumstances bond them together as equal
castoffs of life, the relationship develops into that of a son and
father.  In this, the film recalls Amelio's STOLEN CHILDREN (about two
orphaned children cared for by a young soldier).  The presence of Enrico
Lo Verso, who had the lead role in that film, emphasizes thematic
similarities.
     There is still other ground covered by LAMERICA, as it goes beyond
its cornerstone themes to address such diverse topics as the influence
of television, the dehumanizing power of greed, and the difficulties of
immigration control.  From start to finish, this film is crowded with
thought-provoking issues, each highlighted by one or more vignettes.
The downside to such a wealth of intellectual material is that
characters occasionally become subservient to themes.  Amelio's leads
aren't the easiest to identify with emotionally, and there are times
when they become nebulous as the script grapples with universal
concepts.
     LAMERICA certainly isn't for everyone.  In fact, the "average"
movie-goer will likely find this to be a dull two hours.  For those in
search of a deeper film experience, however, LAMERICA is a welcome
arrival.  The more you consider what's in Amelio's latest picture, the
more impressed you become by the film's scope.  LAMERICA is the kind of
story that stays with a viewer long after the theater has emptied, and
whose impact is magnified by thought and discussion afterward.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
