Title
Review for Antz (1998)
Number of Reviews
38

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
I wanted to review these two films together, because of all the
similarly-themed movie pairings of the last two years (volcanos,
asteroids, and Morquito's syndrome-afflicted pre-teens), this pairing
held the most intrigue for me.  When Katzenberg left Disney for
DreamWorks, no doubt a synopsis in development stayed with him--a
quirky, insignificant ant saves the colony and gets the girl due to his
peculiar strengths, which were earlier mocked at.
Both films are flighty and predictable, made significant due to the
tremendous advances in computer animation since _Toy Story_, and due to
the politics behind the scenes.  Has Disney been beaten at its own game?
With Katzenberg at the helm, _Antz_ is the strongest contender yet for
the popular animation throne (until, of course, DreamWorks' _Prince of
Egypt_).
What follows is a detailed analysis of the two films.
_Story_
Antz: It begins on a psychiatrists' couch, as Z (Woody Allen) complains
about being insignificant.  Within time, he would be smitten by Princess
Bala (Sharon Stone), who is heir to the throne.  Due to circumstances
beyond his control, he inadvertantly saves the colony from the
double-crossing of General Mandible (Gene Hackman).
Bugs: A colony is threatened by a gang of grasshoppers, led by the
menacing Hopper (Kevin Spacey, perfectly cast).  Flik (David Foley)
offers to round up a posse of gifted fighter bugs to stand up to the
gang.  Unknown to him, the posse he finds are _really_ cowardly circus
bugs from a low-rent flea circus.  Guess who wins.
_Characters_
Antz: Besides the humanish life-like ants, we are treated to wasps, dung
beetles, Starship-trooper type termites, and a rollercoaster ride with a
worm and an apple.  Further, we have a human (presumably a kid) although
we don't really see too much of him.
Bugs: The Disneyfied ants are color-coded by sex.  Further, we are
treated to butterflies, praying mantis, black widow spider, a tough male
ladybug, and many others.  Also, a beautiful red and yellow bird, whose
mannerisms are dead-on, and whose terrifying stance runs counter to its
beauty.  No humans.
_Humor_
Antz: Its jokes have enough innuendos to warrant an older audience.
(Woody Allen isn't really kiddie fare anyway).
Bugs: Far more slapstick--demonstrated visually with a stickbug and a
slap.  The amount of groaner jokes are much higher too (as if you need
to know that).  The end credits, if you wait patiently, attempt to make
up for the groaners.
_Visual Style_
Antz: The ants in the former film are a starkly orange color, with heads
that resemble oh-so-slightly that of the actors themselves (Jennifer
Lopez, Sylvester Stallone, and Danny Glover are the most recognizable).
The face of the Z is strikingly (but not so coincidentally) similar to
that of E.T.
Bugs: Far brighter, but also more generic.  The bugs are distinguished
by their colors.  Eyes are much bigger and chirpier. It appears that
they were designed as if they could be sold as plush dolls.
_The Moral Of the Story_
Antz: Celebrates individuality over conformity.  But is it just me, or
is there something moronic about a mass movement of characters
celebrating individuality?
Bugs: If you don't succeed, try, try again.  You've probably never heard
of this theme before.
_Summary_:
Both films are of good quality, and are suitable for most family
viewing.  Of the two, I like _Antz_ better, because its' visuals had
more style than _Bugs_, and it's jokes didn't fail as often.  Watching
me groan from another Bugs' "joke", my girlfriend told me that for all
the "humor" she's been subjected to, I've gotten what I deserved.

Author
Christopher Null
     Every ant has his day.  At least, that's what Woody Allen would
have you think, in this twisted animated version of ANNIE HALL meets
BRAZIL.  Starting with a moody grass-scape of what turns out to be a
quiet corner of Central Park, voiced-over by Allen's `Z', a hapless
worker ant who feels the weight of the colony--so to speak--on his back,
ANTZ tracks a lot like any Allen flick.
     In fact, if it wasn't for all the forumla-driven bad guys, perilous
situations, and narrow escapes, ANTZ would be *exactly* like any other
Allen film.  But this is animation, and that means kid-pleasing effects
must plaster the screen.  Sadly, this hurts the story to the point where
ANTZ will quickly get lost in the shuffle of animated films coming out
over the next year, despite its unique touches.  To make matters worse,
some of the more gruesome scenes, including an ant-termite battle that
would leave Private Ryan wetting himself, are decidedly not for
children.
     Don't get me wrong, I thoroughly enjoyed the movie.  And if the
humdrum trailer for A BUG'S LIFE is any indication, ANTZ is going to be
the best we'll see out of computer animation for awhile, at least until
TOY STORY 2.  But, to paraphrase Z himself, a boy-meets-girl,
boy-loses-girl, boy-changes-underlying-social-structure movie... just
isn't that original.  Even if it is about ants.
     More story, less silly antics.  Maybe then I'll be inclined to put
down my can of Raid....
Director: Eric Darnell, Lawrence Guterman
Producer: Brad Lewis, Aron Warner, Patty Wooton
Writer: Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz, Paul Weitz
Starring: Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Gene Hackman, Sylvester Stallone,
Christopher Walken
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  /
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Brian Koller
"Antz" provides proof that Hollywood takes animated
films seriously.  DreamWorks sunk 65 million dollars
into this project, much of which must have gone to
the impressive cast providing the voices: Woody Allen,
Gene Hackman, Jennifer Lopez, Sylvester Stallone,
Christopher Walken, Sharon Stone, Danny Glover,
Anne Bancroft, and Saturday Night Live alumni Dan Aykroyd
and Jane Curtin.
The results are pretty good.  While "Antz" is not the
great film that "Toy Story" was, it is thoroughly
enjoyable.  The animation is satisfying, the characters
are interesting, there are many funny moments, and
even some suspense.
The story begins with worker ant Z-4195 (Allen)
questioning his role in the ant universe.  Seemingly
fated to a life of mundane toil, his only friends
are hulking soldier ant Weaver (Stallone) and
lady co-worker Azteca (Lopez).  Z falls for Princess
Bala (Stone), who is the daughter of the queen (Bancroft).
In an attempt to meet Bala, Z cons Weaver into trading
places.  The ants declare war on a neighbor termite
colony, and Z is forced into battle.  At least he
makes a new friend in Barbatus (Glover).  The war
with the termites is part of an evil plan by general
Mandible (Hackman) to wipe out the colony.  Mandible's
right hand man (or is it, right legged ant?) is brooding
Cutter (Walken).
The best supporting characters are a snobbish wasp
couple (Aykroyd and Curtin).  They provide a great
comic relief, but unfortunately do not see much
screen time.  The characters of Z and Weaver are
very familiar to students of Allen and Stallone,
and when the action slows, it is fun to look for
the actors' personalities in their dialogue.
The animation, although very good, is not quite up to
the level of "Toy Story".  The backgrounds become
redundant in color and texture, but the foreground
action is well done.
The great weakness to the story is Mandible's genocidal
plans.  If he wants to abduct Bala and begin a new
colony, he can do it without destroying the existing
colony.  One philosophic question that "Antz" doesn't
address: does every cartoon needs a villian?
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: October 2, 1998
The Voices of: Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Gene Hackman, Sylvester
Stallone, Christopher Walken, Danny Glover, Dan Aykroyd, Anne Bancroft,
Jennifer Lopez
Directed by: Eric Darnell, Lawrence Guterman
Distributed by: DreamWorks Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG (mild language, menacing action) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/antz.htm
Over the past two years, DreamWorks SKG has shown a remarkable ability
to insert themselves into mainstream film production. They've had a hand
in some of the more successful projects of recent memory, including DEEP
IMPACT and SAVING PRIVATE RYAN. However, a lot of their films - PRIVATE
RYAN as possibly the only exception - have found themselves lacking in
drive and inspiration. DreamWorks has yet to come up with defining
characteristics as a film studio, and it shows in their latest feature,
ANTZ. Both impressive and plain at the same time, ANTZ was an inventive
movie that was made without gusto. 
The impressiveness comes from the computer-generated images involved.
The movie runs ninety minutes in length, and all but forty seconds of
this is entirely dependent on computer imaging. The CGIs are remarkably
well-crafted, and though they only fall apart in select situations (the
brief involvement of a human being), they are a benchmark standard. It
will be interesting to see how later-this-year's A BUG'S LIFE compares
in scope and execution to the flawlessness of the imaging in ANTZ.
Certain aspects of insect life are also flawlessly integrated into the
movie as well, and it almost looks real (such as the entire scene on the
picnic blanket). The insects are given human characteristics and
personalities, but not to the extreme like some of the primitive Disney
animations. Everything in ANTZ is well-designed in the technical
respect. 
The cast behind the eye-candy is impressive as well: Woody Allen does he
voice of the lead ant, and is backed by love-interest Sharon Stone, best
friend Sylvester Stallone, nemeses Gene Hackman and Christopher Walken,
unlikely acquaintance Danny Glover, and colony queen Anne Bancroft. Most
of these A-listers lend suitable voice support, and in some instances,
it's more enjoyable to hear them talk without watching them. Stallone,
for example, gives voice to a comic rendition of himself, and the
performance is lively whereas watching Stallone himself would most
likely be a dreary affair. Allen is the best overall, however, and his
neurosis becomes part of his character, the ant named Z. Z questions his
totalitarian society to the point of depression, and Allen reflects this
well. 
Eventually, Z meets up with colony princess Bala (Stone), and the two
hit it off until colony guards break the encounter up. Z convinces his
friend Weaver (Stallone) to switch places with him - Z is a worker and
Weaver is a soldier - so he can have access to the royal chamber. The
secret is blown, then, and in a hasty exit, Z grabs Bala and leaves the
anthill. The two make a fantastic journey but return to find that the
evil General Mandible (Hackman) has usurped the colony and is preparing
to kill all of the workers off. It's in the plot that the movie is
bogged down, for it follows a formula of animation so closely that it's
easy to predict what's ahead. Granted, a family movie will not contain a
complex plot, but there are relatively few twists to make watching it
completely worthwhile; the adult humor involved is not enough to pick
things up. For the computer imaging and the cast of voices, however,
it's still worthwhile, and you may find this one to be more than meets
the eye.

Author
Bill Chambers
ztarring the voicez of Woody Allen, Zharon Ztone, Gene Hackman,
Zylvezter Ztallone
zcreenplay by Todd Alcott and Chris Weitz
directed by Eric Darnell and Tim Johnzon
Darnell, Johnson, Dan Aykroyd, Jane Curtin, Danny Glover, Jennifer
Lopez, and Christopher Walken file into the sweaty, crowded Tudor Room
of Toronto's Four Seasons to discuss the Dreamworks/PDI production
ANTZ, a computer-generated movie that took two-and-a-half years to
complete. ANTZ will beat the not dissimilar Disney/Pixar project A
Bug's Life to screens by a month-that's why Jeffrey Katzenberg-Michael
Eisner's spurned (business) lover, and the K in Dreamworks SKG-is
there, tucked between some cameras and journalists:
he's gloating. Should he be? 
This is the first time this partial cast has been together; most of
their dialogue was recorded separately. All were cast on the basis of
their reputations. Said Darnell: "No auditions for these guys." A
discussion of the liberties afforded by voice acting goes something
like this: 
     Walken: "The animators kind of duplicate your body language." 
     Aykroyd (who plays a wasp): "They got the length of my stinger
too short." (Laughs.)
Woody Allen was cast very early on, which meant "we could really write
for him and stage for him," said Darnell. Perhaps it's no surprise
that Woody Allen's performance' is the best thing about ANTZ; the
movie begins with his character, "Z", kvetching on a psychiatrist's
couch about such insect dilemmas as being the middle child of
two-and-a-half-million siblings. Z knows there is something more to
life than burrowing through dirt tunnels. It's Deconstructing Harry
for the lunchbox set. 
Z, a worker ant, embarks on a journal of self-discovery: having fallen
in love with an ant princess (Stone), Z disguises himself as a soldier
at war, just to see her again. (Huh?) Thanks in large part to his
cowardice, Z is the only survivor of the Starship Troopers-like
termite battle that transpires. Lionized by his peers, Z's true
identity is discovered by the mean general (Hackman); Z subsequently
takes the princess hostage and heads for the hills. Together, Z and
his reluctant guest search for the mythical "Insectopia", with
pursuers not far behind. 
ANTZ' biggest problem is its lack of focus: one minute it's about a
war, the next about Insectopia, the next about the general's dastardly
plot against the entire ant colony. Z is looking for something
"better", and without giving too much away, he basically finds it
halfway through the film...yet the proceedings continue. Hackman's
villain is uninspired and, frankly, two-dimensional, like some reject
from Dreamworks' other military-themed cartoon Small Soldiers. The
whole film is a bit too mean-spirited, also. (With the words like
"damn" and "hell" liberally tossed around by the ANTZ characters, I
should be pleased as punch-it's the lack of humour with which these
curses are delivered that I found startling.) Also, even in
animated-insect form, the romance that blossoms between Woody
and Sharon is highly suspect. 
What about the look of the film? Some scenes in ANTZ are gorgeous,
like the tidal wave, or the establishing scenes of the colony. Others
play out in dull shot-reverse-shot, like the non-interactive sequences
of a CD-ROM game. I wasn't keen on Z's appearance-while other ants
resembled their human counterparts (Walken and Glover especially), PDI
has toiled to make Z look as un-Woody as possible. The result is an
aesthetically unappealing creation that might feel physically
mismatched with any actor's voice. (And why is it the characters are
expressionistic while the backgrounds are super-realistic?) 
When confronted about the competing A Bug's Life at the ANTZ press
conference, Aykroyd did some of the talking: "Different story. Lotta
heart in this one." Lotta? No. Some? Sure. Ultimately, it is difficult
to mine warmth from a story about an ant colony; worse, the only real
guffaws come from Allen doing Allen. (Cheap, cheap laughs.) ANTZ feels
computer-generated in every way.

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Woody Allen, Sharon Stone and Gene Hackman
Directed By Eric Darnell and Lawrence Guterman
Running Time: 1 hour 42 minutes.
Dreamworks latest picture, after Small Soldiers, is another children's flick.
And again, like Small Soldiers, most of the gags will probably go right
over your kids head. Woody Allen plays 'Z', a neurotic worker ant in a
massive ant colony. By a chance encounter, he meets and falls in love with
Princess Bala (voiced by Stone.) They split company, but Allen wants to meet
her again, so he convinces a soldier ant voiced by Sylvester Stallone to
swap places with him, so he has a better chance of meeting the princess
again. However, he manages to get both himself and the princess in a variety
of adventures in the outside world.
Like Toy Story (1995), Antz is completely computer generated by a company
called PDI, and looks brilliant. The graphics are superb, witty and easy on
the eye. There are literally hundreds of details in every scene. Although
the ants look like they are made out of wood, they move and act perfectly.
The voices behind the ants are excellent also. Woody Allen makes Z
completely hilarious, and although his angst may seem slightly out of place
in this movie, it's toned down from his previous work (although he somehow
manages to get erotic fantasies into the script.) Stallone is also good, and
the teamwork between Allen and Stallone is great, playing each other off
perfectly. Gene Hackman and Christopher Walken as the evil Soldier leaders
bring an edge to the movie, and Dan Ackroyd, John Mahoney, Jennifer Lopez
(as Stallone's lady) and Danny Glover (good as an ill-fated soldier ant) all
play a part in bringing to life the characters. The only weak link is Sharon
Stone, who seems to give no effort to her performance. Being a major
character in the film, this is slightly annoying to adults, although
children will probably not care.
The film is directed well, although it is much easier to direct on computer
when you have full control of what happening. The battle scenes are
excellent, the romantic scenes are well handled and not too sickly, and the
comedy is well done aswell. It's hard for a Woody Allen film not to be funny
however (apart from Scenes From A Mall.) Also, the wild visuals always make
sure that the film is a delight to watch. Although the script is
occasionally cliched, and there's the occasionally slow bit, Antz will
probably not be sending you to sleep.
The main flaw with the film, though, is that it's a little too adult for
kids, but a tiny bit childish for adults. Woody Allen's comedy is really not
for young ones, but the look and feel of the film is certainly aimed for
children. There's also a smattering of bad language in there for no apparent
reason, and Z talking about erotic fantasies is clearly out of place in this
movie. Generally, however, Antz is an unexpected delight. A Bug's Life, the
new film from Toy Story creators Pixar, has quite a bit too live up to.
Worth a look.
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!
"You know, for kids"- Norville Barnes

Author
Steve Kong
There is a splintering in the animation world: animated movies for kids
with subtleties to keep the adults' attention and animated movies for
adults with subtleties for kids. Antz falls into the latter category from
the get-go. As Antz opens we meet an ant named Z (voiced by Woody Allen.)
The movie starts off with Z explaining to his psychiatrist ant that he
feels he's not getting enough attention. It is not easy being the middle
child in a family of five million.
In an ant colony there are two primary groups of ants, worker ants and
warrior ants. Worker ants mindlessly slave away at their jobs - primarily
digging and earth-moving, while warrior ants are constantly preparing to
protect the colony against outside threats. Also in the colony is a Queen
ant (Anne Bancroft), a Princess ant Bala (Sharon Stone), and two military
leader ants, General Mandible (Gene Hackman) and Colonel Cutter
(Christopher Walken).
Z is a plain worker ant. His day consists of moving earth during the day,
going to a bar for some recuperation, sleeping, and then getting up to move
earth again. Z is different from all the other ants. He's a free thinker,
an ant who wants to be different.
Princess Bala is of the same type as Z. She wonders about what the other
ants do all day. She also wants to have some fun. Her life is not as great
as it may sound, being princess and all. She is engaged to marry the
militaristic-at-mind and maniacal General Mandible. After marriage, she is
expected to give birth to millions of ants. Bala wants to experience her
own life before taking on the life put together by her mother. So, one
night Bala sneaks out to the bar where Z and the other ants go to hang out.
As luck has it for Z, Bala chooses to dance with him. He is instantly
attracted to Bala, though he doesn't know that she's a princess. They have
one exciting dance, where Z helps plant the seed of individualism into
Bala's mind. Unlike the other ants that are dancing in-sync, Z and Bala
break free and dance as they want. Afterwards, Bala is in a rush to leave,
but not before Z finds out who she really is.
Z, knowing that he has no chance of meeting Princess Bala again, hatches a
hairbrained idea to try to meet her again. The warrior ants are going on a
parade for the Queen, General Mandible, and the Princess the following day.
Z wants to be there. Z arranges to switch places with his best friend, a
warrior ant, Weaver (Sylvester Stallone) so that he can march and maybe get
to see Bala again.
What Z doesn't know is that the warriors are being sent into battle to
fight invading termites, who are larger than ants and spit acid from their
foreheads. The battle that ensues is a computer-generated and ant-populated
version of Saving Private Ryan's opening battle sequence. This battle
sequence is quite intense.
Z returns as a war hero, but it is discovered that he is only a worker and
he kidnaps Bala during his escape. The two get lost and decide to search
for Insectopia, a place where ants don't have to work and food is lying out
in the open.
Antz is one part social commentary, one part romance, and one part comedy.
These parts fall into place perfectly and make Antz a wonderful animated
movie. The script by Todd Alcot and Chris Weitz tackles all three parts
well. Antz, as a mirror of our society, shows that most of us go to work,
come home to rest, sleep and then go into the same cycle the next day. Antz
is a microscopic view of a macroscopic world. We're all just like the
worker ants, repeating the cycle of a day over and over again. Z is the
perfect and subtle hero of the film, showing us that we don't have to be
the way we are. We can be free spirits and do what we like.
As for the voice acting, there's no way that the film could go wrong when
you look at the impressive list of talent: Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Gene
Hackman, Sylvester Stallone, Jennifer Lopez, Christopher Walken, Danny
Glover, Dan Aykroyd, Jane Curtin, Anne Brancroft, and John Mahoney. The two
leads, Allen and Stone, do a wonderful job with their parts. Hackman brings
back memories of his performance in Crimson Tide with his performance as
General Mandible. Everyone else is just fantastic.
The big question on most people's minds is how good is the computer
animation? And the follow-up question is how well does it compare to Toy
Story? To answer the first question: the computer animation is fabulous.
And the answer to the second question: I wouldn't say that the animation is
better than Toy Story, but I wouldn't say that it's worse than Toy Story.
The quality of the animation shows that the people on this project have put
a lot of work into it. This shows quite easily in the long wide shots of
the ant colony where we can see, literally, millions of ants moving at the
same time. The animation also has a wow-moment during the ant-termite
battle. Kudos to Pacific Data Images for putting together such a beautiful
movie.
To me, the ants, though all of them different looking, all look like E.T.
with four legs and two arms. This is ironic since Antz is being distributed
and was produced by DreamWorks SKG - a company with Steven Speilberg as one
of the heads.
The music was unexpected for me. I walked in thinking that Antz was a
Disney-style animated movie and therefore would have lots of sing-along
songs. To my surprise Antz was neither a Disney-style animated movie or did
it have lots of sing-along songs. There were songs in the film, but these
songs were taken from popular culture. The score for the film, by Harry
Gregson-Williams (The Replacement Killers) and John Powell (Face/Off), fits
the film like a glove.
One recommendation is that parents not take too young of children to see
Antz. I recommend this for two reasons: First, though it is animated, the
film's aim is more at adults than children. The story line is dense and the
plot is complicated. Second, there are some intense moments in the film
that will startle children. The ant-termite battle is intense with images
of ants being melted by termite acid - the battle would be terrifying to
younger children. There is also a moment where a human takes a magnifying
glass and starts burning ants. This is shown in graphic detail - ants being
burned to a crisp. For older children the film should be fine and serves as
a teaching experience.
Antz is a great microscopic view of our society. Don't Miss Antz in the
theatres. This big film about small insects needs to be seen on the big
screen.
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 visit the hard boiled movie page.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
One ant living among millions of others doesn't feel right in just following
orders and not thinking for himself all day, and attempts to find more
meaning in his monotonous, everyday humdrum existence.
CRITIQUE:
Competent, adult computer-animated feature from DreamWorks, manages to draw
some great one-liners from star Woody Allen, a few chuckles here and there,
and a semi-interesting story line, but nothing too outstanding. It was also
fun in respect to all of the big names that had voice parts in this film,
but somehow the movie didn't blow me away overall. The special effects were
good, but nothing spectacular, the characters were interesting, but not
fully engaging, and the lack of songs made it feel as though it was missing
a certain "je-ne-sais-quoi". Woody Allen was essentially portraying his
standard, neurotic role that he does in all of his films (he must've
ad-libbed some of his lines) and was damn funny, but it might not be so fun
for people who don't care for his typical, whiny character. Also, I don't
see kids appreciating most of the adult humor laced through this film. The
cute homages to other films like PULP FICTION (7.5/10) and RAMBO (When the
Stallone ant is being interrogated) was also nice, but overall, the movie is
just a passable good time, with some laughs, a lot of big star voices, and a
short running time (about one hour and twenty minutes).
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Woody Allen recorded his part as "Z" in only 5 days.


Author
Homer Yen
It's tough to be an ant.  Laboring constantly can be a real drag,
especially when you have to lift ten times your weight.  Your career
path ultimately leads you to that of a 'soil relocation engineer.' 
And it's really tough being the middle child of five million.  "What
about my individual needs," asks Z (voiced by Woody Allen).  Sorry,
but like all other ants, you're insignificant.  Z is determined to
find his true place.  He knows that he's not destined to be a worker
who lives his life moving the earth.  But his quest will forever move
the colony in whole new direction.  
"ANTZ" is a cute and astonishing visual piece of work that shows how
Z, with the help of some very unlikely allies, rises from a sea of
anonymity and uses his fame to revolutionize the colony.  In a chance
meeting, he encounters Princess Bala (voiced by Sharon Stone) who
inspires him to act freely and to buck the system.  He relies on his
long-time friend Weaver (voiced by Sylvester Stallone) to help him
pursue his fantasy of uniting with the untouchable Princess.  He is
moved by a heroic warrior ant (voiced by Danny Glover) that encourages
him to think for himself.  And he is curious to know what lies outside
the colony and is determined to find a fabled place called Insectopia
where complete freedom awaits.  However, his new-found desire for
independence causes a stir within the colony and arouses the ire of
General Mandible (voiced by Gene Hackman).  Mandible is plotting
something nefarious, but Z's influence and popularity threatens his
success.
For the most part, I enjoyed this movie, but mostly because of the
terrific animation. The creators waste no time trying to impress us
with the visuals and show us a very modern and thriving
metropolis-like colony bustling with activity.  Other impressive
sequences involve Z trying to hold on to dear life when he hitches a
ride on the shoelaces of someone's sneaker.  and an incredible epic
battle pitting the ants versus enemy termites.   The story surrounding
megalomaniacal Mandible and his plan was more interesting, however,
than Z's quest to find himself.  Partially it was because I became
increasingly annoyed with Z's Woody Allen-esque banter, which amounted
to a lot of self-doubting and mumbling.  But this is a story that is
fun to watch and brimming with clever ideas about ants and what they
can do.  If you can spare an hour-and-a-half of your time, march on
over and check out this picnic of a film.


Author
Luke Buckmaster
Starring the voices of: Wood Allen, Sharon Stone, Sylvester Stallone,
Jennifer Lopez, Gene Hackman, Dan Aykroyd, Anne Bancroft, Danny Glover,
John Mahoney
Directors: Eric Darnell and Tim Johnson
Screenplay: Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz and Paul Weitz
Australian theatrical release date: October 29
In a country of millions, it's easy to feel insignificant.  In a colony
of billions, it's even easier.
The animation gurus from Dreamworks, including Tim Johnson - who
transformed Homer Simpson into 3D - have taken the standards of computer
generation up a few notches with Antz.  They zoom in and out, and up and
around the huge world of these tiny creatures, giving amazing detail to
items as ordinary as a soft drink can.
Z (voice of Woody Allen) feels that he has had a less than satisfying
childhood - receiving minimal attention from his mother, since he is the
middle child in a family of five million.  Living and working in a
colony which follows strict routine, Z struggles to find his own self
amongst a society that discourages individualism.  Quite a complex theme
to explore in a family film, really, but that just makes it all the
better.
Antz never fails to keep a consistently high level of entertainment,
with the obvious visuals but, less obviously, some fabulous dialogue
that both adults and children can get a lot out of.  Woody Allen was an
absolutely perfect choice for his role, giving Z a lovable and quirky
tone, sounding exactly right on every occasion. Sharon Stone plays
Princess Bala, Z's love interest who is predictably disgusted by him at
first. Meanwhile, Sylvester Stallone also sounds perfect as Z's macho
buddy, with a good heart.
As we all know, there has to be a bad guy; this time it's General
Mandible (Gene Hackman), a power crazed evil ant who hatches a plot to
kill all the workers and start a new colony.  I would have liked to see
Custer developed a little more since he's so fun to watch, but then
again, so is everyone.
The three screenwriters and two directors have made the tale a heroic
one, but not before examining Z's nervous mind.  Once we have a good
idea of what makes him tick, Z's adventures begin and the film starts to
unwind its carefully executed climax.  Which, in every sense of the
word, is terrifically exciting and certainly a benchmark in atmospheric
animated sequences.
The quality of viewing in Antz is rich and illustrious, bringing to life
a whole new world of huge proportions.  Not so much a storm in a tea
cup, but perhaps an epic from an ant.  And if it does become that - an
epic - it would be one of the more justified successes of recent years,
with strong human values and an inspirational story line.  In short,
Antz contains everything that makes an excellent film excellent and,
whilst it doesn't completely blow you away, it's probably the best
family movie so far this year (it's only contender being Mouse Hunt).
I at least speak for myself when I say that I definitely wouldn't mind a
break from Sliding Paltrows, rampaging lizards and frowning Bruce
Willis'.  Z can beat the pants off all of 'em.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
Bob Bloom

 Antz (1998) 4 stars out of 4. Featuring voices of Woody Allen, Sharon
Stone, Sylvester Stallone, Gene Hackman and Chirstopher Walken.
 Antz is a witty, entertaining story about conformity vs. individuality,
the worth of the individual vs. the welfare of the whole and, of course,
true love.
 Oh, it's also about ants. And after seeing this computer-animated feature,
you'll hesitate before trying to crush another one again.
 Featuring an all-star cast of vocal talent, including Woody Allen, Sharon
Stone, Anne Bancroft, Gene Hackman, Sylvester Stallone, Dan Aykroyd, Danny
Glover and Christopher Walken, to name just a few, the story will capture
the interest of young and old viewers.
 And the story is strong enough that you quickly accept that these are
computer-created creatures and get totally involved in their insect lives
and dreams.
 Allen is Z, a worker ant who is tired of being like all the other workers.
He tells his shrink that he "feels insignificant," to which the
psychologist (voiced by director-actor Paul Mazursky) congratulates him on
making a breakthrough. "You are insignificant," he explains to Z.
 At a workers' bar, Z meets Princess Bala, who is slumming away from the
palace. They dance, creating their own steps, thus breaking away from the
others who are marching in step.
 To see her again, the smitten Z trades places with Weaver (Stallone), a
soldier ant. After a dress parade, the soldiers are sent by the mad Gen.
Mandible (Hackman) to make war on the termites.
 Z is the only survivor and is declared a hero.
 Later, Z and Bala share many adventures and thwart Mandible's wild scheme
to begin a new colony.
 It's all fairy tale-like, but in a sense rather adult.
 The script, by Todd Alcott and Chris and Paul Weitz, is droll and quirky,
filled with many zingers and one-liners. The writing, especially that of
Allen's Z, feels as if the writers watched most of Allen's films to get his
vocal cadence and rhythms. In a sense, when Allen speaks, it almost sounds
as if he wrote his own lines.
 What makes Antz successful is that the performers take their roles
seriously. Hackman sounds like a demented Patton, while Walken brings his
usual creepy persona to his role as the general's aide.
 Even Stallone has some fun as the soldier ant, who trades places with Z so
he can meet some female workers.
 Antz is a rewarding experience. It will enchant the children and rivet
their attention. Adults will appreciate the movie's technique and humor.
 It is truly a film for the entire family and a portend of the road the new
Dreamworks studio is creating.
 With this, Steven Spielberg's Saving Private Ryan, and the upcoming Prince
of Egypt, Dreamworks will be a Hollywood innovator.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Steve Rhodes
As you were enjoying your last Woody Allen movie, did you sit there
thinking that his angst-filled, raunchy brand of humor would be perfect
for all ages if his language was just cleaned up a bit and he was made
into a cartoon character?  If so, then you are part of the target
audience for ANTZ, since that is exactly what Dreamworks has created.
Who else might possibly be members of the target audience is the big
question.  In our packed screening, the kids fidgeted, laughing only at
the cuss words, the adults enjoyed a few tidbits tossed their way, but,
overall, it was one of the deadest early screenings for a major motion
picture that I've ever attended.  Personally, I sat there in stone
silent disbelief, wondering what the studio thought they were doing.
Take Pixar's marvelously innovative TOY STORY, drain off most of the
humor and darken the film's look and tone, and, voila, you have
Dreamworks's ANTZ.
The film opens with Woody Allen, as the voice of a worker ant named Z,
who is on a psychiatrist's couch.  "When you're a middle child in a
family of 5,000,000, " he starts his baring his soul.  Z, the film's
hero, is a non-conformist who ends up inciting trouble in the ranks.
Ants aren't used to thinking for themselves as Z advocates, but his
advice eventually saves the day for the colony.
Among the star-studded cast are Gene Hackman as the megalomaniac General
Mandible and Sharon Stone as Z's girlfriend, Princess Bala.
The dreadfully dull script, full of droll but laughless humor, is by
Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz and Paul Weitz.  The talky script has few
memorable lines.  ("Why don't we just influence their political process
with campaign contributions?" Z argues, in of the few good lines, as a
better approach than a war with the termites.)  Woody's voice is
emotive, but the rest of the voices came across as flat and
uninteresting.
Like Pixar's TOY STORY, the film is created with computer generated
images, but few of those in ANTZ are impressive.  A scene with a water
drop and another at a picnic show off the new medium at its best, but
the rest of the work remains fairly pedestrian.  The eyes of the
characters, for example, look like glass eyes, and the film is usually
so dimly lit that it frequently looks murky.
Although the target audience is questionable, certainly a lot of kids
will to flock to see the movie.  Given this, why can't they be served up
something more involving than a few mild obscenities to tickle their
funny bones?  Why do we have characters who talk about "erotic
fantasies" and who tell others to "bite me!"  The images, like the
body-parts-everywhere, massacre scene, lifted straight out of STARSHIP
TROOPERS, and the vicious termites with their menacing teeth, will
likely scare the younger viewers.
Having taken such little advantage of the technology, the mystery is why
Dreamworks didn't just use traditional animation.  And the other mystery
surrounds Dreamworks next animated movie, THE PRINCE OF EGYPT.  If they
were unable to fashion a compelling motion picture out of such a
promising story, how successful are they going to be in translating a
biblical epic to animation?
ANTZ runs 1:20.  It is rated PG for profanity and frightening images and
would be acceptable for kids around 6 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 9, gave the film ***.  He said his favorite parts
were when they said "come hell and high water" and "damn good."  But
when pressed at the time, he was unable to identify anything else he
liked.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) If you think Disney animated features have been getting
stale lately, give ANTZ a try. ANTZ is the first animated feature put
out by DreamWorks SKG, (not affiliated with Disney). As such, it has
more freedom to target an audience older than 6. It is hipper and
funnier than anything Disney has put out for years.
Woody Allen provides the voice of Z, our hero. Z doesn't fit in with the
crowd and wants to find a way to express his individuality. Not an easy
task when you're an ant.
Z is sulking in the saloon when Princess Bala (Sharon Stone) shows up,
slumming with her palace friends. Bala asks Z to dance with her, and he
accepts. While the entire bar dances together in lock-step, Z starts to
dance to his own drummer, and even convinces Bala to cut loose with him.
But it's not long before Bala has to return to the palace. 
The dance was enough to energize Z, and he takes the first opportunity
he can to trade places with his soldier-ant friend Weaver (Sylvester
Stallone). As a soldier, he will get to parade in front of the royal
family and see princess Bala again.
The switch goes well until the soldiers are sent out on a suicide
mission against the termites. Luckily for Z, his cowardice makes him
hide during the massacre (in a battle scene eerily reminiscent of last
year's STARSHIP TROOPERS). The lone survivor, Z returns to the colony,
where he is hailed as a war hero, and is given entree to the royal
court. After being exposed as a worker ant, Z ends up accidentally
kidnaping the princess and escaping the colony.
Since he can't return, he starts walking, half hoping the rumors of a
far-off "Insectopia" are true. Even if they're not, as long as he and
Bala are together, Z will be happy. But General Mandible (Gene Hackman)
wants Bala back in the colony and he wants Z destroyed....
ANTZ has two very simple things going for it: the animation and the
writing. Both are far enough above average to make this movie very
entertaining.
The animation is all computer generated. We've seen that before in
Disney's TOY STORY. What we haven't seen before is the uncanny depth
rendered on film for this movie. The CG ants look as though they were
filmed and not printed.
The ant colony in this film is full of earthy colors and lifelike
textures that are much more subdued than the garish, shiny, plastic
surfaces of TOY STORY. It's a more subtle, mature use of CG, and it's
the next step in CG evolution.
The writing, too, has matured compared to Disney's latest cartoons. When
I say the writing is better, I don't mean the story line. If you squint
your eyes so the specific details are blurred, you might mistake ANTZ
for last year's HERCULES. Both have your basic hero on your basic quest.
Both have a fairly superficial love interest and chummy, amusing
sidekicks..
When I say the writing is good, I mean that screenwriters Todd Alcott
and Chris and Paul Weitz, working within the genre of the animated
feature, have added personality and edge. (Credit also those who cast
Woody Allen in the lead role.)
Allen is allowed a one or two minute rant at the film's opening that
made me laugh out loud. He rambles on about his usual New York neuroses,
only this time he's an ant. He's allowed to stumble over his words or
get flustered, and the animation keeps up with his verbal quirks.
Instead of a bland, vanilla hero, we get one with a little flavor to
him.
Allen's lines are inevitably laced with bug-related puns, just as in
HERCULES there were mythological puns. But the Antz puns, tailor-made
for Woody Allen, work on more than one level. They are funny not so much
because they're puns, but because they're things Allen would say if he
were an ant (like when he credits his psychologist for putting him in
touch with his inner maggot). Allen has a surprisingly large number of
these lines, and most of them work.  
ANTZ is not an earthshaking movie, but it is fun. The animation,
writing, and casting are all above average, and the time (all 82
minutes) flies by. There wasn't a scene that dragged, which is quite an
accomplishment.
And hey, if you're a fellow Disney cynic, you can revel in a cartoon
unmarred by schmaltzy love ballads, white-bread heroes, and
source-mangling storylines!
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Alex Iosjpe
Directed by: Eric Darnell and Lawrence Guterman
Written by: Todd Alcott and Chris Weitz
Cast: Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Sylvester Stallone, Danny Glover,
Christopher Walken, Jennifer Lopez, Dan Aykroyd, Anne Bancroft
Also Known As: Ants (1997) (USA: working title)
MPAA: Rated PG for mild language and menacing
action.
Runtime: USA:87 / Japan:83 / Netherlands:80 /
Spain:79
Country: USA
Language: English
Color: Color (Technicolor)
Sound Mix: DTS / Dolby Digital / SDDS
Certification: USA:PG / Belgium:KT / Brazil:Livre
/ Finland:K-8 / France:U / Germany:6 / Italy:T / Australia:PG / Portugal:M/6
/ Spain:T / Sweden:7 / Switzerland:7 (canton of
Geneva) / Switzerland:7 (canton of Vaud) / Netherlands:AL (Meekijken
Gewenst)
RATING: 10/10 - ALTERNATIVE RATING: A
There was a time when Disney was completely out of reach. It was insane to
even think about competing with this colossal giant of entertainment. That
time has passed. Disney is now struggling to keep up with the new talents,
that are frequently emerging.
Dream Works SKG moved away from the traditional and familiar, and created
they recent feature: "Antz" . The result is beyond every expectation. "Antz"
is not only visually stimulating, but plays at a higher intellectual level
and has some spectacular vocal performances, that when combined create a
vision that is greater than Disney in every aspect.
"Antz" is not the kind of film that you would expect from Disney and other
companies that try to copy their way of work. It is an animated satire for
grown-ups. While children will only see the obvious aspects: love,
adventure, courage, loneliness, betrayal; a more mature audience will enjoy
how it plays with totalitarism, hippies and the social classes (the ant
society is divided in three classes, reminding about the Indian casts:
workers, soldiers and the royal family; it's interesting to see how all
classes envy eachother's way of life).
In an anthill with millions of inhabitants, Z 4195 (Woody Allen) is a worker
ant. As the film opens he is lying on a therepist's leaf complaining about
the social order and his difficult childhood. Feeling insignificant in a
conformity system, he accidentally meets beautiful Princess Bala (Sharon
Stone), who has a similar problem on the other end of the social scale.
Engaged with her mother's "loyal subject" General Mandible, whom she doesn't
love, and with a dull life awaiting her in the future. In order to meet Bala
again, Z switches sides with his soldier friend Weaver (Sylvester Stalone).
By this he proves that it is possible to confront the system. That it builds
on fear, but beyond that - nothing more. That the ants do have a choice to
live their own life how they want and that it is possible to not follow
orders all the time. And when Z returns home as a war hero, he becomes a
living legend to the "whole insect race". By this he unwillingly crosses the
sinister plans of ambitious General Mandible , who wants to divide the ant
society into a superior, strong race (soldiers) and "the week elements" (the
workers, that ironically are the strength of the ant colony). But Z and
Bala, both unaware of the dangerous situation, try to leave the oppressive
system by heading for Insectopia, a place where you can be your own ant and
where food paves the streets.
Most of all, it's a story about individualism and the courage to be
different. It's a search for a better world, where the most important part
is freedom. But it has also several dark themes, such as racism and
communism. The totalitarian society displayed in "Antz" is cold and
unfriendly. Here individualism is a sin and a step away from this ideology
leads to punishment.
It is important to realize that "Antz" is not just a cartoon about a
neurotic ant, but also a hint on our way of life.The first thing you see is
skyscrapers and then by glare of the sunlight they are suddenly transformed
into high grass. It's a brilliant satire, that is about ourselves - our
believes and thoughts about our way of life and the surrounding environment.
Two fly-hippies sit around an open fire in the woods, discussing the meaning
of life:- "..Have you ever thought about this huge universe, that is so big,
we don't even know it excists.." - "..Wow..man..that is so deep!" This
brilliantly directed scene questions our own place in this "huge universe".
Maybewe are crawling under someone's shoe, and we don't even know it.
Both visually and intellectually "Antz" is a feast. PGI's beautiful computer
generated animation and Harry Gregson-Williams's energetic musical score
create a spectacular atmosphere. And some of Hollywood's greatest actors are
responsible for incredible vocal preformances: Woody Allen, Sharon Stone,
Sylvester Stalone, Danny Glover, Jennifer Lopez, Gene Hackman, Christopher
Walken and Dan Aykroyd.
"Antz" is a beautiful "Titanic"-kind of story, about the impossible love
between a simple worker and a princess. However because of its serious plot
and paralells, "Antz" may seem more appealing to adults than children. When
you watch Disney-films, everything is black and white - he is bad and he is
good. Here, the story is much deeper and sophisticated, where you have to
draw some difficult parallels to get the essence. The language is also
ruffer, than in most kiddy cartoons.
Dream Works has created a milestone in animation.
Summary inspired by Julian Reischl {julian.reischl@stud.uni-muenchen.de}
Copyright  (C) 1998 by Alex Ioshpe

Author
Mark O'Hara
>From the first scenes of the cavern where the ants carry on their busy 
lives, we see that Antz is a movie full of action and ideas.  Too 
cerebral for young children, it has a pace and a charm that will attract 
everyone else.  The film spends much of its 77 minutes looking at the 
worth of the individual and his place in society.  
One indicator of popular culture in Antz is the struggle of the 
individual.  Z, voiced by Woody Allen, plays the worker ant in analysis 
- just one item of Allen's schtick carried over into this, his first 
appearance in animation.  Despite his small stature and relative 
shyness, Z carries through with actions that demonstrate his beliefs.  
>From refusing to stomp mindlessly in a massive line dance, to leaving 
the colony at one point, Z proves himself the ultimate democratic 
insect.  Viewers surely enjoy rooting for the underdog, and Z serves 
well in the role of an inconsequential creature acquiring a voice.  The 
only trouble is that we have to keep our disbelief suspended throughout 
the non-stop anthropomorphism:  isn't it natural for ants to work as a 
collective, for the good of the colony?
Class is another theme explored in Antz.  Along with pulling for the 
weak, we also obsess over royalty - and this plot allows for a real 
queen (Anne Bancroft) and her daughter Princess Bala (Sharon Stone).  
The only plot better than the triumph of an underdog occurs when the 
underdog pursues the heart of a princess.  Z is irresistible when he 
schemes to meet Bala a second time, and stumbles into trouble with the 
princess' fiancé, the square-jawed Mandible (Gene Hackman) and his 
henchman.  Though outrageous, Z's plight is everyman's:  a peasant 
worker aspiring to a higher station - soldier - and what's worse, daring 
to dance with the daughter of the colony's birth-mother.  We love seeing 
it stuck to the powerful and arrogant.
Aside from the university, Hollywood is a staunch promoter of 
correctness.  In Antz, Dreamworks SKG has succeeded in portraying a 
rather pluralistic society;  according to this story, no one should be 
able to say, "All ants look the same."  (We can transfer this sentiment 
to a political context, and see that we are being taught gentle lessons 
in tolerance.)  In any case, directors Eric Darnell and Lawrence 
Guterman adopted techniques from conventional animation, and used much 
of the actor's personality and appearance in the cartoon image.  These 
representations are delightful, as in the case of Christopher Walken's 
long face to match the suave and menacing voice of Colonel Cutter.  
Sylvester Stallone delivers a smart self-parody as Weaver, a huge 
soldier ant with a smallish head but a thorax like a Vick's cough drop.  
So these ants really look nothing like each other, and the animation 
imitates the differences of real life - whether in body type or racial 
features or philosophical views.  Finally, we observe other species of 
insects, including a reunion of Jane Curtin and Dan Ackroyd, as a pair 
of snobby yellow jackets.
Layering conflict upon conflict, the film suggests that we like old and 
busy plots;  here old does not mean stale, as the movie wraps the plot 
in new paper.  Heavy-duty digitized animation is clearly another ware we 
pay our money for.  Antz is just as well-plotted and -animated as Toy 
Story but not as nice to look at.  Its duller earth-tones fit its 
serious themes, though, and the mood is lightened by humor and by 
occasional ventures outside the colony to a land known as "Insectopia."  
Antz mirrors our society in the way it promotes the value and dignity of 
each person.  In an increasingly technological world, viewers like to 
see positive portrayals of common people and of their roles.  Love 
stories and laughs don't hurt, either.


Author
James Brundage
Directed by Eric Darnell, Laurence Guterman, and Tim Johnson
Written by Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz, and Paul Weitz
With the voices of: Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Gene Hackman, Sylverster
Stallone, Christopher Walken, Danny Glover, Dan Aykroyd, Jane Curtin, Anne
Bancroft, Jennifer Lopez, John Mahoney
Some movies just aren't what you suspected. They surprise you, go against
their promos so much that you hate those boys on Madison Avenue (even more
than I already do). One example is Antz, a movie that is advertised as a
family fun adventure but turns out to be a social satire.
Take the first few seconds. Immature humor? An ant's tiny fart here or
there? No. Instead we find out that Woody Allen still has his shrink, even
as an ant. It's one of those movies with an adult audience and a child's
rating. In fact, even the eight-year-olds didn't laugh at the dry humor
encased in this anthill of gold.
I liked it, though. I mean, how many times do you get an intelligent movie
that animated?
How often does Gene Hackman play a villain astride Christopher Walken
playing a hero.
When does Sylvester Stallone say his lines right, Sharon Stone not look like
she's about to kill you with an ice pick, and Woody Allen  wait, he's still
nuts. But anyway, it was a change. And I guess I have one saying about
movies that I hold dear: Change is good.

Author
Boyd Petrie
Starring the vocal talents of: Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Sylvester Stallone,
Gene Hackman, Christopher Walkin, Dan Aykroyd, Jane Curtin, Anne Bancroft, and
Danny Glover.
Most people fit into two different categories: you either love Woody Allen, or
you hate his guts.  My family, for the most part, hates him and his movies.  I
think he's very funny, but his shtick has gotten forced and contrived over the
years.  So maybe taking his body away was the best decision any producer could
have thought of.  Unrestrained by physical boundaries, Allen's humor comes
shining through.  Those who had problems with his physical appearance will be
able to join the rest of us in laughing at Allen's intelligent observations of
life.  Those who had problems with his verbal comedy may want to skip this one.
In 1995, a film was introduced to audiences which sparked their imaginations and
showed them something they'd never seen before.  TOY STORY used state-of-the-art
computer technology and presented a world of toys who would come alive when no
humans were present.  Many critics will call that a better film, but I believe
they only say that because it was a completely original motion picture.  ANTZ,
however, has upped the ante considerably.  Disney's A BUG'S LIFE isn't due out
for another two months, and DreamWorks seems to have received the better end of
the deal.  By beating Disney out, they have satisfied the audience's thirst for
computer-animated films.  But don't let that fool you: Disney is definitely not
scared.
In the past two years, competitions have broken out between studios.  In 1997,
it was the volcano duel.  In my opinion, DANTE'S PEAK came out way ahead of its
predecessor, both in time and in quality.  VOLCANO had an original premise, but
destroyed that with some very ridiculous situations.  In 1998, there are twice
as many competing films.  First was the comet competition, and ARMAGEDDON blew
away it's cheesily dramatic competitor DEEP IMPACT.  But now, it's even more
interesting, as one beloved studio (Disney) goes up against the newcomer
(DreamWorks).  Who will prevail?  Time will tell, but I'm sure that Mr. Mouse
has nothing to fear.
This may sound like I didn't like ANTZ; on the contrary, I'd put it up there
with TOY STORY.  But due to it's PG rating, many parents may be put off by some
of the dialogue which shouldn't appear in Disney's version.  Some of the
dialogue in ANTZ pushes the envelope for a family-oriented film.  Sexual
innuendoes and profanity pop up occasionally, which makes DreamWorks' animated
feature geared more for an adult crowd.  The humor is also written especially
for adults, though many kids were laughing in the theater I attended.  This is
the type of film that should be made for families more often: entertaining for
kids AND entertaining for parents.
ANTZ begins with a hilarious monologue which seems a meld between Woody Allen's
shtick and Franz Kafka's METAMORPHOSIS, the short story of a man who wakes up to
discover himself as a bug.  Z (Allen) is a troubled ant, believing he was not
made to be a worker.  "When you're the middle child in a family of five
million..." he comments about his neglected childhood.  One night, Z is sitting
in a bar with his friend Weaver (Sylvester Stallone), discussing his pathetic
place in life.  In walks Princess Bala (Sharon Stone), whom no one recognizes
without a crown.  Bala asks Z is he would like to dance, and they engage in a
PULP FICTION-esque dance while everyone else is following the leader.  After
discovering that she is the princess, Z falls in love, but there's a problem:
Bala is getting married to General Mandible (Gene Hackman), a ruthless leader
who merely wants to control a better and stronger colony.  In order to do that,
he must eliminate not only the Queen (Anne Bancroft), but the weakest of the
colony, namely the worker ants.  But to get rid of the Queen, he needs to get
rid of the loyal army ants who would be willing to die for her.
He and Colonel Cutter (Christopher Walkin) come up with a plan to send the loyal
ants off to battle, where they will surely be killed.  The Queen is reluctant at
first, but decides it is best for the colony.  Meanwhile, Z wants to meet Bala
again, and he asks Weaver, an army ant, to switch places with him.  So Z gets
sent off to battle, but he manages to survive the slaughter by the termites.
The battle sequence is absolutely stunning, though you may have flashbacks to
STARSHIP TROOPERS, which contained a very similar sequence.  However, ANTZ and
that 1997 film were both in production around the same time, so the similarities
are merely coincidence.
The second half of the film revolves around Z's kidnapping of Bala, and their
search for a mythical place called Insectopia.  There, an ant can be his own
boss and have all the food he wants.  The adventures Z and Bala get into are
surprisingly high in tension, especially one involving a magnifying glass.
Looming over the targets like the spaceships from INDEPENDENCE DAY (in fact, I'm
just going to assume that the producers referenced ID4 intentionally).  The ants
look up in awe, and then a beam of fire blasts into the ground.  Visually, it's
an exciting rush of adrenaline.  But don't be fooled... little kids shouldn't
see this, as they may just try and copy it.  After seeing ANTZ, I vowed never to
intentionally step on an ant again.  Hopefully, children will learn that killing
ants is rather cruel.
As an animated film, ANTZ is probably the best you will find to date.  Visually,
it's as stunning as WHAT DREAMS MAY COME.  The best aspect of animation is the
fact that the characters aren't limited by gravity.  They can take ridiculous
situations and make them seem plausible.  One great moment involves a mass of
worker ants bunching up to form a wrecking ball.  The animation is so perfect
that you can virtually see every single ant on the ball.  However, the most
exhilarating scene involves Bala getting stuck to the bottom of a young boy's
shoe.  It's truly a great example of film making at its finest.  With computer
technology, the animators have carefully made the ants' faces look similar to
the actors providing the voices.  The best example would have to be Barbatus
(Danny Glover).  At one point, you can even see the pores on his face (although,
I doubt ants have pores... do they?).  Barbatus also has a touching but rather
gruesome scene as he has his final words with Z without a body.  Young kids may
be disturbed by the site of a dismembered head, but a good deal of humor is
derived (more appropriate for adults, of course).  Disney's A BUG'S LIFE looks
good, but I don't know if they will be able to best DreamWorks' newest animated
feature in terms of animation.  If not, then DreamWorks will have done something
no other studio could do: go head to head with the big Mouse, and knock him down
(yes, Anastasia was good, but not nearly as good as even the worst of Disney).
Vocal talent is always essential to an animated feature, and ANTZ has one of the
best line-ups seen since TOY STORY.  In fact, it far exceeds that one.  Woody
Allen has always been funny, but here he transcends most of what he's done in
the past few years.  Without a body, his comic timing is the most noticeable
thing.  In fact, I'm pretty sure that the writers let him improvise a lot of his
lines.  Sharon Stone as Bala shows off some of her comic ability, though for the
most part, Stone works best as a dramatic actress.  Sylvester Stallone (teamed
up with Stone once again) is beginning to solidify his statement that he wants
to be an actor, not a typecast action star.  After a snub at the Oscars last
year, Stallone is proving himself as the serious (or comedic, as illustrated
here) actor that he is.  Gene Hackman is superb as the gruff-talking General,
almost doing another take on his CRIMSON TIDE persona.  Christopher Walkin is
probably more noticed by his voice, and so many people will remember him from
such hits as BATMAN RETURNS.  Anne Bancroft has a minimal role, but she's
effective nonetheless.  Danny Glover has a small role, but he does a very, very
good job.  Dan Aykroyd and Jane Curtin also lend their voices as two lovesick,
Euro-trash bees--both are very unrecognizable, especially Aykroyd.  Jennifer
Lopez plays a worker ant who falls in love with Weaver, although most people
won't recognize her voice either.  Many people will recognize Grant Shaud's
voice as the foreman.  He played Miles on the TV show MURPHY BROWN.  This is
definitely a huge cast with some high-profile names, and it will definitely help
it's grosses.  Of course, you can probably tell where a lot of the $60 million
budget went to, also.
Directors Eric Darnell and Lawrence Guterman are relative newcomers (though
Guterman did direct a 1994 feature, HEADLESS!).  But both show an incredible
talent for this type of a picture.  Tense at times, and very funny throughout,
the two hold this film together like professionals.  The screenplay by Todd
Alcott and Chris Weitz is quite simple in plot, but it contains a lot of
subtlety that makes the film more suitable for adults.  Kids will delight in the
animation, while parents can laugh heartily at the humor.  Most of it will go
over young children's heads.  Does that mean you shouldn't take kids to see it?
Not at all.  They will have a lot of fun watching this one.  What is great is
the themes that are given to us.  Part social commentary, part romance story,
and part moral drama, ANTZ gives everyone something to talk about, whether it be
the animation, or the discussions of individualism and community.  Thankfully,
it's not subtle in either aspects.
ANTZ is rated PG for mild language and some intense action.  Sometimes the
language can be pushing the limits for a family movie, but the violence is what
should keep kids at home.  The battle scene has ants melting in acid, and bugs
being speared to death.  And the magnifying scene shows an ant disintegrate in
the beam of sunlight.  But other than that (and some sexual innuendos), it's a
perfect choice for some wholesome fun at the theaters.  I doubt many children
will understand the sexual innuendos unless they are old enough, but it's still
advisable to leave really young children at home.  Have I confused you enough?
If you do take your kids, I recommend seeing the film with them, because more
than likely, you'll enjoy it the most.

Author
Ryan Davis
        Films that are animated sometimes get a bum rap. Mainly because people
assume that just because they're cartoons, these films are just kids stuff.
Dreamwork Entertainment's new computer animated film "Antz" definitely isn't
just kids stuff, or at least it tries it's hardest not to be.
        Antz's plot is simple enough; a worker ant, nicknamed Z(whose full name
is Z-4195), is tired of his life of forced labor and longs for freedom.
Troubled by ideas of a heaven-like place called "insect-topia" and his totally
by chance dance with Princess Bala(princess of the colony) in a bar; Z becomes
even more unhappy with his station in life.  In an endeavor to meet with
Princess Bala again, Z persuades his soldier friend, Weaver, into temporarily
switching jobs with him. Soon after while Z is attending a military assembly,
his squad is unexpectedly sent to war and Z has no choice, but to fight with
them.
        Z doesn't do much fighting, so he manages to be the only ant too
survive the battle, and goes home a war hero. While being introduced to the
Queen Ant, Z accidentally kidnaps the princess and inadvertently escapes the
ant colony with her. Now both Z & Bala are trapped outside the colony, and
they begin their journey for the mythical "insect-topia".
        Unfortunately for Z, the kidnapping of the princess has ruined the
evil scheme of the Hitler-like ant, General Mandible and his cunning comrade,
Colonel Cutter. The General is not going to see his plan ruined and is going
to do all he can to find Z, and get back the princess.
        The strongest point of the film are the vocal performances. Woody
Allen is just great as Z, he really does an impressive job. Tons of other big
names turn in good performances in their respective roles: Sharon
Stone(Bala), Sylvester Stallone(Weaver), and Gene Hackman(General Mandible). 
Another strong point are the one liners that add much needed fun to Antz.
        When you get right down to it, Antz is an Animal Farm clone. Z is
fighting a battle for individualism in a totalitarian society. While all this
may be well and good, Antz is making a point that no one objects to. There was
no need to make a nineties version of Animal Farm and the filmmakers got so
busy attempting to add symbolism, they forgot about how weak the actual story
was. So what you end up with is an interesting attempt at satire, some clever
dialog, good voices,  neat animation, and an unfortunately sparse story to
bring it all together.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
STARRING (the voices of): Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Dan
Ackroyd, Sylvester Stallone, Gene Hackman, Danny Glover, Anne
Bancroft
DIRECTORS: Eric Darnell, Lawrence Guterman, Tim Johnson
WRITERS: Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz, Paul Weitz
RATED: PG
RELEASED: 1998
   "Handling dirt is not my idea of a rewarding career,"
laments Z, the tiny, unwitting hero of Dreamworks' remarkable
animated odyssey, Antz. His frustration is understandable, for
he lives in a rigid society that eschews individuality.  All
ants are expected to march, walk, think, and even dance in
exactly the same fashion-- not good news for someone like Z,
who longs for fun and love, even if it means reducing
productivity.
   The colony's social pecking order is well established; at
birth, all ants are sorted into one of two groups: "workers,"
who construct tunnels, or "soldiers," who defend the colony
against predators. Although society has deemed him a worker, Z
(voiced by Woody Allen) could more aptly be called a dreamer;
his mind wanders constantly, and his co-workers consider him a
clumsy weakling who can lift a "mere" ten times his body
weight.
   Z's luck changes when he meets a fascinating gal named Bala
(Sharon Stone) at the colony's saloon. They have fun together,
but she's way out of his league: not only isn't she a worker,
she's royalty-- the daughter of the Queen (Anne Bancroft)
herself! But even so, the lovestruck Z can't forget her. He
convinces his best friend, a soldier ant named Weaver
(Sylvester Stallone), to switch places with him for one day,
which will hopefully give Z the chance to speak with her again.
It's a sound plan, but unexpected complications creep in when
the soldiers are suddenly ordered to defend the colony against
a possible termite invasion. Z, woefully unprepared for battle,
suggests alternatives to combat ("Can't we just influence their
political maneuvers via campaign contributions?"), but to his
chagrin the confrontation is unavoidable.
   Antz is a thoroughly involving film, filled to the brim with
lovingly constructed visuals and a number of clever plot
twists; the summary I gave in the preceding paragraphs reveals
only a very small portion of the storyline. If it contained
nothing more than entertaining visuals and humorous characters,
the story would be perfectly acceptable.  But the creators
didn't rest on their laurels; surprisingly, Antz sneaks a fair
amount of social commentary into its frames. It's not hard to
recognize ourselves and modern society in the film, which is
perhaps the reason the tale works so well: we all know people
who act like the various inhabitants of the ant hill.
   The intelligence of the screenplay was one of the biggest
(and nicest) surprises for me; in addition to the predictable
(though admittedly well done) gags involving magnifying glasses
and picnics, Antz depicts a level of religious satire uncommon
in what's ostensibly a kid's movie.  How?
   While watching the film, it occurred to me that Z is
essentially playing the role of a Christ figure: he becomes a
teacher to the masses and is denounced by naysayers ("Does Z
really care about us? Then where is he?"). In the finale, Z's
selflessness saves the other ants, although he "dies" in the
process... only to return from the dead. Hmm. I guess it's
possible the filmmakers didn't intend any of these scenes to
have religious overtones, but they seemed pretty obvious to me.
Social satire also appears: the film's biggest laugh comes when
an insightful worker ant experiences a revelation: "The workers
control the means of production!"
   The final shot of Antz borders on brilliant: the "camera"
lifts up out of the ant hill and pulls further and further
back, until we see that all the grand sights and visuals that
have taken place over the course of the story occurred only a
few yards from each other. The message is clear: perception is
everything, and even big problems don't seem so insurmountable
after you get some distance from them. It's a message we'd all
do well to remember.
Copyright (c)1998 by Joe Barlow. This review may not be
reproduced without the written consent of the author.
E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film: http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
David E. Smith
Antz (1998) - voices of Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Sylvester Stallone,
Gene Hackman, Christopher Walken
   "Antz" is the Secret roll-on of movies - strong enough for an adult,
   but pH balanced for kids. It's full of computer-generated eye candy,
   obviously targeted toward the "buy me a bunch of toys" set, but the
   humor (and occasional mild profanity) are meant for their parents.
   Neurotic New Yorker Woody Allen provides the voice of Z, a neurotic
   worker ant. Unhappy with his lot in life, his world is shattered when
   the lovely Princess Bala (Sharon Stone) goes slumming in a bar where
   worker ants go after a hard day of digging. Predictably, Z falls madly
   in love, but the best scheme he can think of to see her again is to
   switch places with a soldier ant for a day.
   Then General Mandible (Gene Hackman) declares war, in an elaborate
   plot to overthrow the caste system and assassinate the queen ant (Anne
   Bancroft). Thrown into the goriest massacre this side of "Saving
   Private Ryan," Z eventually sets on a quest for the mythical
   Insectopia, all to win Bala's heart.
   "Antz" is just "your basic boy meets girl, boy likes girl, boy changes
   underlying social structure" movie, according to Z. And that's just
   the kind of humor many children won't understand. Fortunately,
   screenwriters Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz and Paul Weitz realize who
   their audience is. Liberated from his body, Allen's one-of-a-kind
   anxiety seems fresher than ever.
   Working within the limitations of computer-generated insects, the
   characters are wonderfully expressive. They all look pretty much the
   same, except the good-natured soldier ant voiced by Sylvester Stallone
   - for better or worse, he looks like Stallone. And the supporting cast
   is a veritable Hollywood "Who's Who" - Christopher Walken, Dan Akroyd,
   Jane Curtin and Jennifer Lopez all lend their voices to "Antz," with
   each lending his or her distinctive character to the characters.
   The visual effects are little short of stunning. Imagine thousands of
   ants combining to form a giant wrecking ball, or storming across a
   field to combat the termite menace. The effects carry well for the big
   to the small - you can almost see the actor's facial expressions on
   the computer-generated bugs.
   "Antz" might not be the most appropriate movie for the children that
   its ads are trying to suck in. But if you go with your family, you can
   have some interesting discussions on "Community vs. Individuality" and
   a lot of good laughs.

Author
Fox Davidson
  Their little, smart, and hard working.  They have many of the characteristics
of humans.  They're...Ugly!  I watched this movie expecting cute, wide-eyed
Disney-esque ants on the screen.  Instead, I got vomit-colored, big-mouthed,
dwarf-mutant ants running amoke.  Not only that, they happened to have the same
voices as major Hollywood stars, including Woody Allen and Sharon Stone. 
Someone save me from a sequel!
  The film begins with Z (Allen) tired of being a worker all his life for the
colony he lives at.  The colony is run by a King and Queen, and their princess
daughter, Bala (Stone).  The first 10 minutes or so of Antz is Z moaning and
groaning over how pathetic he is and that he was never able to lift more than
ten times his own body weight.  Oh brother.  If I wanted to listen to Woody
Allen complain, I would have rented Hannah and Her Sisters (one of Allen's
lesser films).
  Z learns of a place in the outside world known as Insectopia, a land where
all insects can run free.  Z wants to go, but not before trading places with
his buddy (voice supplie by Sly Stallone), who is a cadat in an military-type
army, ready to go to war with a bunch of alien-looking termits.
  One day, Z and Bala are accidentally brought to the outside world, where Z
insists they search for Insectopia, but Bala wants to go home.  This is a
perfect setup for the Hollywood man-and-women trapped on a desert island,
fighting all the time senario.  You know what I mean.  We just saw it with
Harrison Ford and Anne Heche in Six Days, Seven Nights.  Except, this time, it
features to talking ants with the voices of Allen and Stone.  
  I was very disappointed with Antz.  I heard some good words of the movie,
but, sadly, I don't think I'll be passing any of those said words along to my
friends. DreamWorks' turn into the all computer animation territory dominated
by the superior Toy Story is a second-rate voiced, written episode worthy of a
slot in the WB Saturday morning kid scetch.
  The DVD of Antz is very nice.  The picture is lush and brimming with
beautiful colors.  Special features are a trailer.  

Author
Scott Renshaw
ANTZ
(DreamWorks)
Voices:  Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Gene Hackman, Sylvester Stallone,
Jennifer Lopez, Christopher Walken, Anne Bancroft.
Screenplay:  Todd Alcott and Chris Weitz & Paul Weitz.
Producers:  Brad Lewis, Aron Warner and Patty Wooton.
Directors:  Eric Darnell and Tim Johnson.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, violent situations)
Running Time:  83 minutes.
     So DreamWorks' ANTZ gets to be first out of the gate in the
Computer-Animated Insect Sweepstakes, beating Disney/Pixar's A BUG'S LIFE
to the screen by a good two months.  The folks at DreamWorks probably felt
that meant they could set the standard and avoid comparisons, but that's
not entirely true.  Disney's 1995 TOY STORY became the first, best
standard-bearer, a wonderfully witty adventure which established that no
amount of visual virtuosity could push aside the power of a great script.
There was little doubt that three years of technological innovation would
make ANTZ more spectacular to look at.  The question was whether these
anthropomorphized insects would be asked to carry a story that felt like
twenty times their body weight.
     It looks like the film-makers behind ANTZ learned the right lessons
from TOY STORY.  ANTZ may not be in TOY STORY's league when it comes to
charm and ingenuity, but it's a clever and appealing piece of work in its
own right.  The oddly spelled title actually refers to the story's
protagonist, a lowly and unfulfilled worker ant called Z (Woody Allen).
Trapped in the ant colony's rigid caste system, Z longs to find his own
destiny, which might even include romancing the unapproachable Princess
Bala (Sharon Stone).  In order to catch Bala's eye, Z switches places with
his soldier ant pal Weaver (Sylvester Stallone), unwittingly setting off a
social revolution.  Even more unwittingly, he discovers that head soldier
General Mandible (Gene Hackman) has sinister plans for the colony.
     The goofy socio-political overtones of Z's struggle for individuality
are good for a few chuckles, though it's not entirely clear from one
moment to the next what the "message" is.  Sometimes it's a treatise on
the triumph of personal will over stultifying conformity (nowhere more
humorously than in a bar scene where line dancing becomes metaphorical
fascism).  At other times, the needs of the many are shown to outweigh the
needs of the few.  And that's not the only place where the story feels
less than cohesive.  Sub-plots abound, many of which fill time without
moving the story anywhere.  The ideas for individual scenes play much more
effectively in the moment than they do upon reflection, where they don't
feel completely unified.
     Then again, it's hard not to be caught up in the moment while
watching ANTZ.  The visuals are nothing short of spectacular, in terms of
both scale and individual detail.  When thousands of ants form a wrecking
ball or a column to serve a unified purpose, thousands of individual limbs
and antennae waving, the effect is dazzling.  There are also some
effectively creepy images of a war between ants and acid-spewing termites
(the kind which might spook youngsters).  Perhaps even more breath-taking
are the facial expressions created for the characters.  The movements and
reactions are so complete that every ant becomes real on the screen.  With
so much attention lavished on giving the characters personality, ANTZ
never feels merely showy, as impressive as it is from start to finish.
     Not that the animators were solely responsible for giving the
characters personality.  ANTZ boasts an impressive cast of voice talent,
from Hackman as the eugenically-inclined dictator-in-waiting to 
Christopher Walken as he morally ambivalent henchman, from Stallone deftly
playing good-natured lug to Dan Aykroyd and Jane Curtin as a pair of
WASP-ish wasps named Chip and Muffy.  But the star of the show is Woody
Allen, bringing his inimitable, anxiety-ridden nebbishness to Z.  Some of
his lines are pure vintage Woody (on whether he "laughs in the face of
Death":  "Actually, I generally...make sarcastic remarks behind Death's
back"), which makes it even more of an incongruous pleasure thinking of
him as a romantic action hero.  His voice performance is one of several
reasons ANTZ is plenty of fun, if often in an inside-jokey, over the head
of kids kind of way.  As a story it's uneven, but it still satisfies; it
may not be TOY STORY, but few things are.  And it has succeeded at setting
a reasonably high bar for the next computer-generated bug film to jump
over with all six legs.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "ANTZ" (DreamWorks: SKG)
 "Antz" is only the second fully computer-animated feature
ever to be produced; "Toy Story" was the first. And the clever imagery
of "Antz" is awesome! The entire film is presented from an ant's
prospective. The story revolves around a neurotic worker ant (Woody
Allen) who as "the middle child in a family of five million" suffers
from feelings of insignificance. "But you are insignificant," his
therapist tells him. Nevertheless, he falls in love with a beautiful
princess (Sharon Stone) who asks him to dance in a bar one night when
she sneaks away from the Queen (Anne Bancroft) and flaunts the social
caste system. Eager to see her again, he enlists the help of his best
friend, a soldier ant (Sylvester Stallone), and - thanks to an amazing
twist of fate - foils her fiance, the ambitious, maniacal General
Mandible (Gene Hackman), and his military henchman (Christopher
Walken) who secretly plan to destroy the ant colony. En route to
becoming a hero, he builds a philosophical revolution and social
rebellion on the final words of a fallen comrade: "Don't follow orders
all your life!"  The intelligent screenplay by Todd Alcott, Chris
Weitz and Paul Weitz revolves around an individual asserting himself
against overwhelming conformity, a theme that will probably be too
adult for very young children in the audience. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Antz" is an amusing, inventive 8.  Like "Deep
Impact" and "Armageddon," which had the same meteor-careening
towards-earth concept, "Antz" and "A Bug's Life," due for release in a
few weeks, share the same insect-oriented story line. Which will
emerge with the bigger box-office gross? Who knows?

Author
Alex Ioshpe
RATING: 10/10 - ALTERNATIVE RATING: A
There was a time when Disney was completely out of reach. It was insane to
even think about competing with this colossal giant of entertainment. That
time has passed. Disney is now struggling to keep up with the new talents,
that are frequently emerging.
Dream Works SKG moved away from the traditional and familiar, and created
they recent feature: "Antz" . The result is beyond every expectation. "Antz"
is not only visually stimulating, but plays at a higher intellectual level
and has some spectacular vocal performances, that when combined create a
vision that is greater than Disney in every aspect.
"Antz" is not the kind of film that you would expect from Disney and other
companies that try to copy their way of work. It is an animated satire for
grown-ups. While children will only see the obvious aspects: love,
adventure, courage, loneliness, betrayal; a more mature audience will enjoy
how it plays with totalitarism, hippies and the social classes (the ant
society is divided in three classes, reminding about the Indian casts:
workers, soldiers and the royal family; it's interesting to see how all
classes envy eachother's way of life).
In an anthill with millions of inhabitants, Z 4195 (Woody Allen) is a worker
ant. As the film opens he is lying on a therepist's leaf complaining about
the social order and his difficult childhood. Feeling insignificant in a
conformity system, he accidentally meets beautiful Princess Bala (Sharon
Stone), who has a similar problem on the other end of the social scale.
Engaged with her mother's "loyal subject" General Mandible, whom she doesn't
love, and with a dull life awaiting her in the future. In order to meet Bala
again, Z switches sides with his soldier friend Weaver (Sylvester Stalone).
By this he proves that it is possible to confront the system. That it builds
on fear, but beyond that - nothing more. That the ants do have a choice to
live their own life how they want and that it is possible to not follow
orders all the time. And when Z returns home as a war hero, he becomes a
living legend to the "whole insect race". By this he unwillingly crosses the
sinister plans of ambitious General Mandible , who wants to divide the ant
society into a superior, strong race (soldiers) and "the week elements" (the
workers, that ironically are the strength of the ant colony). But Z and
Bala, both unaware of the dangerous situation, try to leave the oppressive
system by heading for Insectopia, a place where you can be your own ant and
where food paves the streets.
Most of all, it's a story about individualism and the courage to be
different. It's a search for a better world, where the most important part
is freedom. But it has also several dark themes, such as racism and
communism. The totalitarian society displayed in "Antz" is cold and
unfriendly. Here individualism is a sin and a step away from this ideology
leads to punishment.
It is important to realize that "Antz" is not just a cartoon about a
neurotic ant, but also a hint on our way of life.The first thing you see is
skyscrapers and then by glare of the sunlight they are suddenly transformed
into high grass. It's a brilliant satire, that is about ourselves - our
believes and thoughts about our way of life and the surrounding environment.
Two fly-hippies sit around an open fire in the woods, discussing the meaning
of life:- "..Have you ever thought about this huge universe, that is so big,
we don't even know it excists.." - "..Wow..man..that is so deep!" This
brilliantly directed scene questions our own place in this "huge universe".
Maybewe are crawling under someone's shoe, and we don't even know it.
Both visually and intellectually "Antz" is a feast. PGI's beautiful computer
generated animation and Harry Gregson-Williams's energetic musical score
create a spectacular atmosphere. And some of Hollywood's greatest actors are
responsible for incredible vocal preformances: Woody Allen, Sharon Stone,
Sylvester Stalone, Danny Glover, Jennifer Lopez, Gene Hackman, Christopher
Walken and Dan Aykroyd.
"Antz" is a beautiful "Titanic"-kind of story, about the impossible love
between a simple worker and a princess. However because of its serious plot
and paralells, "Antz" may seem more appealing to adults than children. When
you watch Disney-films, everything is black and white - he is bad and he is
good. Here, the story is much deeper and sophisticated, where you have to
draw some difficult parallels to get the essence. The language is also
ruffer, than in most kiddy cartoons.
Dream Works has created a milestone in animation.
Summary inspired by Julian Reischl {julian.reischl@stud.uni-muenchen.de}
Copyright  (C) 1998 by Alex Ioshpe

Author
John Sylva
Antz is the first animated effort form Dreamworks Pictures. It comes with
promise, and delivers extraordinarily. Featuring the voices of Woody Allen,
Sharon Stone, Jennifer Lopez, Sly Stallone, and Danny Glover, Antz becomes one
of the most visually beautiful, compelling films of the year. Being completely
computer animated, Antz's animation seems unbelievably real, as the movement of
characters is particularly smooth.  Ants that walk and talk may seem like a
stretch, but after viewing this film, you'll think it's a reality.  Watching
Antz, you are put into the mind of a creature much smaller than yourself, and
you see how scary being an ant might really be.  Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz, and
Paul Weitz have put together a screenplay so clever, you wonder why garbage
like A Night At The Roxbury ever makes it to theaters.
Antz tells the moving story of Z, voiced by Woody Allen, a nice, rather shy
working ant and his journey to find freedom.  Z is your typical ant, rather
scrawny, and a hard worker, who hangs out with Weaver (voiced by Sylvester
Stallone), a mighty, well known and respected ant.  Z thinks his ordinary ant
life is going nowhere, until he meets Bala (voiced by Sharon Stone), the
charming princess of the ant colony.  The first real groundbreaking sequence in
Antz is between Z and Bala, as they tango away late at night at an ant bar. 
After a few obstacles, the two end up on a journey to find the land of
Insectopia, which is believed to be, metaphorically speaking, ant Heaven. 
Along their journey, they encounter wicked insects, menacing children, and much
more, which all provide for vast, beautiful scenery, animated to perfection.
Like the 1995 adventure from Disney, Toy Story, Antz is a meaningful film that
will open your eyes to the other beings alive in this world.  Unlike Toy Story
though, Antz features some adult humor that may be out of the league for many
children, who are the primary targets here.  Antz is an epic that children and
adults alike can enjoy together.
The Bottom Line: Funny, beautiful, and well-written.  The best animated film of
1998.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: The story is okay in a Disney sort of way, but the star
is the state-of-the-art computer animation in this film that shows life
in an insect colony from the Dreamworks.  The mass scenes are
impressive and the individual ants are expressive.  Voices include
Woody Allen, Sylvester Stallone, and Gene Hackman.  Rating: 7 (0 to
10), low +2 (-4 to +4)
   - Voices also include Sharon Stone, Christopher Walken, Danny
     Glover, Dan Aykroyd, and Anne Bancroft.  Part of the game is in
     recognizing the voices.
   - Story involves a worker ant who does not want to be one of a sea
     of ants, he wants to be an individual.  Masquerading as a soldier
     ant he sees war first hand.  Meanwhile the general of the soldier
     ants is making plans to massacre the whole nest and go off to
     found his own colony.
   - Do not believe any entomology you see represented here.  Most is
     wrong.  I believe male ants basically fertilize the queen and die.
     The termites don't look like real termites.  They look less like
     real termites than the ants look like ants.
   - There is some irony in the ants all deciding en masse that they
     are individuals.
   - In some ways this is STARSHIP TROOPERS as seen from the other
     side.
   - Most of the animation sequences seem more complex than TOY STORY,
     though the story is not really as good perhaps. This could spark a
     race for most complex scenes.  There is a tremendous amount
     happening in some of these scenes as a sea of ants, each
     individually animated, swarm onto the enemy.  Pixar and Disney may
     have to look to their laurels.
   - Could be frightening for younger children.

Author
Matthew Dalton
I walked into the theater knowing what I was getting into.  A cartoon about
talking ants.  But, I was forced into it.  What else were you suppost to take
an 8-year old to?  I am sorry to say I ever joined forces with that 8-year old
on that unfaithful day.
I was right.  I hated every minute of Antz, a film from the animation
department of DreamWorks, a newly developed studio headed by Steven Spielberg, 
who have put out such wonderful films as Saving Private Ryan and Deep Impact. 
But, you can't win 'em all, right?
With the voices of Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Sly Stallon and Gene Hackman
completely wasted, a film like Antz must pay.
The story is a yawner, the voices, especially Stone, are dead, and the
production values (i.e. the drawings, whatever) are poorly executed.  Toy Story
(1996), a Disney film, did it much better.
Jaw-droppingly bad, Antz is now the No. 1 film, in my book, to be awarded zero
stars (on a scale of 1 to 5).  Its runner's up include the awful Tetsuo: The
Iron Man and Crater Lake Monster.
Please, spare humanity Antz II, for the love of God!

Author
Pierce Dalton
 Its a stupid little movie that trys to be clever and sophisticated, yet trys a
bit too hard.
 With the voices of Woody Allen, Gene Hackman, Jennifer Lopez, Sylvester
Stallone, and Sharon Stone, this computer-animated yak-fest (think Toy Story
[1996] filled with used merchandising) is one for the ant-eaters.
 The main story is the independence of a worker named Z (Allen).  He wants more
to life than just digging away underground for the colony.  When he finds out
about ``Insectopia," a mythical place where all insects can run free, Z, along
with his colony's princess (Stone), journey out into the world to find a
meaning for life.
 About 15 minutes into the picture, I began to wonder what the point of the
film was.  Halfway through, I still didn't have an answer.
 Antz is a mindless mess of poor writing and even poorer voice-overs.  Allen is
nonchalant, while I would have guessed, if I hadn't seen her in The Mighty and
Basic Instinct, Stone can't act, even in a cartoon.
 This film is one for the bugs: unfunny and extremely dull.
 Hey, A Bug's Life may have a good time doing Antz in.

Author
Tim Voon
ANTZ (DreamWorks) Voices: Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Gene Hackman,
Sylvester Stallone, Jennifer Lopez, Christopher Walken, Anne Bancroft.
Screenplay: Todd Alcott and Chris Weitz & Paul Weitz.
Producers: Brad Lewis, Aron Warner and Patty Wooton.
Directors: Eric Darnell and Tim Johnson
In what is undoubtedly one of the funniest insect movies to date (there
haven't been that many, one other comes to mind - MICROCOSMOS, was
unintentionally funny) we are presented with a rare product of clever
devices. DreamWorks has used the miracle of computer generated graphics
to bring across a heart warming story of how being an individual is
integral to being a part of society. Using the neurosis of a very Woody
Allen character, we are charmed with something that Disney would have
been proud to present to the public.
This movie is littered with an impressive profile of Hollywood actors.
You will know who they are, even if you don't recognise their voice.
Stallone plays another caring, sensitive big guy role that brought him
critical acclaim in COPLAND - pulls out his droll voice for Weaver' the
ant who gets hurt for a friend. I'm not sure whether Sharon Stone will
ever come close to royalty, but she gets her chance as Bala', the ant
princess with an attitude. Gene Hackman thrives when it comes to guys
you love to hate and General Mandible' is no exception. Whilst
Chritopher Walken does something less typical and allows his conscience
to take a turn for the better in the end. There are many more fame
names, but the movie really belongs to Z-4195 (Woody Allen). His
character comes across like something the comedian would have written
about himself, and was undoubtedly written with him in mind.
This is a commendable effort containing computer generated graphics,
adult and kiddy humour, mixed in with relevant social issues. A very
entertaining, innovative enterprise from the DreamWorks team.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Antz (1998)
Voices of  Woody Allen, Dan Aykroyd, Anne Bancroft, Jane Curtin, Danny 
Glover, Gene Hackman, Jennifer Lopez, John Mahoney, Paul Mazursky, Grant 
Shaud, Sylvester Stallone, Sharon Stone, Christopher Walken. Music by 
Harry Gregson-Williams and John Powell. Screenplay by Todd Alcott, Chris 
Weitz and Paul Weitz. Directed by Eric Darnell and Tim Johnson (with 
additional sequences directed by Lawrence Guterman). 83 minutes.
Rated PG, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
It's just "your basic boy meets girl, boy likes girl, boy changes 
underlying social structure" tale, according to Z (Woody Allen), the 
rebellious hero of "Antz," a sophisticated, fun and fast paced computer-
generated feature about life from the insects' point of view. Rush-
released by DreamWorks to reach audiences ahead of Disney's similarly 
themed CGI feature "A Bug's Life," "Antz" clearly learned a valuable 
lesson from the delightful 1995 Disney smash "Toy Story"; that dazzling 
computer graphics are just eye candy unless supported by good acting and 
a solid script.  
"Antz" follows the adventures of Z-4195, a neurotic worker ant who longs 
to assert his individuality. At the conclusion of a counseling session he 
moans "I feel so insignificant" only to have his therapist (Paul 
Mazursky) congratulate him, exclaiming, "you've had a breakthrough. You 
ARE insignificant!" 
Everything changes one fateful night, when spunky Princess Bala (Sharon 
Stone) violates the colony's caste system and goes slumming at a worker 
bar, where she ends up dancing in the arms of an enraptured Z. Determined 
to see her again, Z convinces his best friend, soldier ant Weaver 
(Sylvester Stallone), to change places with him for one day, so that he 
can march past the royalty in a military parade. Unbeknownst to Z, the 
parade troops are slated to lead an assault against an army of termites. 
In short order, Z becomes a hero to the colony, until his lowly status is 
revealed and he ends up fleeing to the outside world, with a furious Bala 
by his side and her fiancée, the treacherous General Mandible (Gene 
Hackman) ordering him caught and killed. As Z desperately tries to avoid 
death, the General inches closer to fulfilling his secret agenda; a 
military coup d'état that will destroy most of the colony.
The computer graphics in "Antz" are imaginative and remarkably detailed. 
While the oddly angular design of the insects' bodies is less than 
attractive, the body movements are credible and the facial expressions 
extremely convincing. The background designs are well-done, particularly 
in outdoor scenes set in Insectopia, the legendary bug paradise. 
Incidentally, watch those scenes for what is quite possibly the most 
blatant product placement of all time.
Wisely, the dialogue in "Antz" is aimed at least as much towards grown-
ups as it is for children. For example, Z suggests that, as an 
alternative to war with the termites, the colony might try "influencing 
their political process with campaign contributions." His struggle for 
individuality in a world of absolute conformity leads to some 
entertaining, if unrealized, socio-political subplots.
The film's cast is impressive, to say the least. Dan Ackroyd and Jane 
Curtain provide laughs as Chip and Muffy, a condescending but well-
intentioned pair of wasps (in both senses of the word). Christopher 
Walken is suitably menacing as Colonel Cutter, and Gene Hackman gives a 
commanding performance as the evil General Mandible. As Z's best friend 
Weaver, Sylvester Stallone is an endearing lug and Sharon Stone does 
solid work as the privileged, but spirited Princess Bala.  
Of course, this is Woody Allen's show, and he immediately trots out the 
patented neurotic shtick on which he built a career. Despite working with 
sharp one-liners, his initial delivery struck me as just more of the same 
old Allen whining. Viewers less familiar with his work may find his 
entire performance fresh, but I felt he was a bit tiresome in the movie's 
early scenes. Luckily, he brightens his voice work as the film progresses,
 becoming much more likable midway through the story.
Writers toss around phrases like "fun for the whole family" far too 
casually, but "Antz" really is a film that should appeal to all ages. 
There are a few battle scenes that may prove too intense for very young 
or sensitive children, so cover their eyes if need be, and prepare to 
actually have fun at a movie with your kids, courtesy of "Antz." And if 
you're a grown-up without children, head for the theater tout-de-suite.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Dreamworks
 Director: Eric Darnell, Tim Johnson 
 Writer:  Todd Alcot, Chris Weitz and Paul Weitz
 Cast: Voices of Woody Allen, Dan Aykroyd, Anne Bancroft,
Jane Curtin, Danny Glover, Gene Hackman, Jennifer Lopez,
Sharon Stone, Christopher Walken
   Bill Clinton has made mea maxima culpas the de rigueur du
jour, so I think I'd better 'fess up too and maybe get my own
four and one-half minutes of fame.  Back in the Jurassic Age
when I was living in the Borough Park section of Brooklyn, I
was best friends with this kid, Herbie, whose dad owned the
local dry cleaning store.  Herbie's pop had a back yard full of
creatures small and little, and he introduced me, still an
innocent lad of seven, to the mysteries of the native ant
colonies.  Having explained their patterns of work and battle,
he proceeded to pour cleaning fluid on them and, while I am
now indeed sorry for what I'd done, I joined him and whiled
away many an otherwise dreary day in that activity until we
discovered the more adult joys of comic books.  Did I say
sorry?  Make that utter contrition.  I've seen the movie "Antz"
and only now realize that these creatures are human just like
us, only a little smaller.  Like the rest of us, they've got bad
guys, too, fellas that deserve a shot of Herbie's magic potion
to prevent far more treacherous perils.  I speak particularly of
some of the leaders--no, not the queen, she's OK--but the
generals.  At least the general in the movie, who is a the
biggest, baddest critter in the tunnel.  He's the dude that
favors ethnic cleansing...no, on second thought, he's not for
putting down ants of another colony who are of a different
clan, but for wiping out most of his own kind, those of a
different class; namely, the workers.  He wants to start a
brave new world of Aryan ants.
   "Antz" is a thoroughly imaginative and delightful 83 minutes
of pixar animation with a more riveting plot than that boasted
by "The Toy Story," made by a competing studio.  As a
parable with strong Twentieth Century resonance, it's a
chilling tale involving warnings of massive extermination and
ideological warfare, but given its romantic input it leaves us
with the feeling that love can conquer all.  Sporting the voices
of some of Hollywood's super-stars, this non-stop-action show
featuring beings who thankfully look only a bit like ants will
capture the regard of adults and leave the little guys in the
audience admiring the graphics but wondering what the heck
their parents, guardians, and big brothers and sisters are
snickering about. In other words "Antz" is not one of the
movies "made for kids but with something for the grown-ups"
but a film targeted at the mature with pretty pixars thrown in
for the kiddies.  To avoid the dreaded "G" rating, scripters
Todd Alcot, Chris Weitz and Paul Weitz throw in one and one-
third naughty words each: "damn," "hell," "crap," and "anus."
   The story opens with ant Z (Woody Allen) on the couch,
whining--as one familiar celebrity is known to do--about his
worthlessness.  "I feel insignificant," he moans, throwing up
his arms."  "You've made a big breakthrough," exalts the
therapist."  "I have?" replies Z.  "Yes," the doctor responds,
"You ARE insignificant."  
   The biggest problem in this movie is that only two other
one-liners top that one.  One zinger occurs when the general
asks for time to debrief one of his privates, to which the
soldier replies, "Please, general not a first date."  The other is
a sign that appears on the ground after the soldier ants and
soldier termites wipe one another out, leaving only one ant
survivor: "One to nothing--we win!"  Yet there is much to
admire in the dialogue and certainly a lot to revere in the bold
illustrations that hit us from the entirely computer-generated
software.  What's groovy about the story line is the very many
contemporary references it has to today's world, particularly to
some of the great ideologies of the century.  One is the
danger of the military-industrial complex, as General Mandible
(Gene Hackman) pushes the worker ants to produce a great
tunnel with signs surrounding the tunnel complex like "Nothing
satisfies like work" (not a bad slogan in itself, but chilling
when you think about that infamous sign of the 1940s, "Arbeit
Macht Frei").  While driving the workers forward he cheers his
great army, telling the soldiers that they may consider
themselves quite a step above the workers in class and
importance.  (Then again, so did Plato way back then.)  But
Z, the formerly insignificant worker who becomes a celebrated
revolutionary, challenges the millions in his colony below
Central Park to think for themselves and to stop blindly
following orders, making "Antz" the most subversive movie of
the year.  Thank goodness the seven-year-old in the theater
seats won't have a clue about the dialogue.  What would
happen if they gave Z a chance and refused to comply with
everything their mommies and daddies want them (for their
own good, of course) to do?
   The romantic element is provided by the lovely Princess
Bala (Sharon Stone), daughter of the Queen (Anne Bancroft),
who falls in love with Z while slumming in a workers' bar and
reluctantly follows him to the perfect village known as
Insectopia.  It would reveal nothing that this land of peace and
love is none other than New York's own Central Park, and
when Z and Bala emerge from the tunnel like Plato's cave
dwellers abandoning their underground shadows, they know
they've arrived at the center of the world.
   One of the great scenes involves the legs of a human being
which unwittingly trample on both Z and Bala, who are saved
from extinction by the wide spaces in the running shoes.  We
get to see what it's like from an ant's eye view by watching
the legs slowly rise and fall like choppers taking off and
setting their cargo down with a thump.  
   It's difficult to tire of Woody Allen's celebrated, self-
depracating dialogue, though he has one annoying habit that
makes you think he's improvising.  Woody routinely says that
most irritating of all throat-clearers, "ya know" about two
dozen times, a custom he vexatiously practiced in the recent
documentary about his European tour with a band of
musicians, "Full-Tilt Boogie."  But this is a minor cavil.  When
Princess Bala, in the throes of love with Z, tells him "You're
not like anyone else," let's hope that the kids will take this
guidance to heart and halt the millennium-old custom of
mindless conformity.  But this is too much to hope for.  After
all, with the coming of the new millennium (to paraphrase
Senator Bulworth), we're not even close to insectopia.

Author
David Sunga
Directed by: Eric Darnell and Tim Johnson
Written by: Todd Alcot, Chris Weitz, Paul Weitz
Starring: Voices of Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Gene Hackman
Ingredients: Animated ants, bored worker ant seeking more to life
Synopsis: 
In an animated underground ant colony consisting of millions of ants,
all of the ants are workaholic conformists except two individualistic
ants. One is General Mandible (voice of Gene Hackman), a military
megalomaniac who secretly plots to destroy the ant colony and create a
master race. He plans to take advantage of the conformist ants by
getting them to unwittingly carry out his orders.
The other individual is the humble Z, a likable, scrawny, nerdy worker
ant (voice of Woody Allen), who decides that there must be more to life
than fulfilling a prescribed role. Z secretly wishes for free choice,
and rails against conformism in his loquacious monologues. 
A series of adventures ensues when Z falls in love with the Princess
Bala (voice Sharon Stone), and the two find themselves outside the
colony in search of a paradise called Insectopia. Later, Z and Bala must
thwart General Mandible's plot to destroy the colony. The moral of the
story is that unthinkingly accepting authority could turn you into
somebody else's pawn, unless you learn to think for yourself.
Opinion:
One of the fun things about watching animated movies is trying to guess
the voice behind the character. ANTZ features the recognizable voices of
Woody Allen (nerdy ant), Sharon Stone (princess ant), Sylvester Stallone
(buffed middle class soldier ant), Gene Hackman (megalomaniac general
ant), and Christopher Walken (flying ant). If you're good at this sort
of thing, see if you can spot Dan Aykroyd or Jennifer Lopez.
The good news is that ANTZ is an animated movie that adults can watch.
The computer effects are superb and there is no shortage of sardonic wit
or cultural references. The bad news is that ANTZ is not a kids movie
since the Woody Allen-style social commentary isn't intelligible for
young children. If forced to sit through it, they get antsy. 
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Eric Darnell, Lawrence Guterman, Tim Johnson
Cast:  Woody Allen, Dan Aykroyd, Anne Bancroft, Jane Curtin, Danny
Glover, Gene Hackman, Jennifer Lopez, John Mahoney, Paul Mazursky, Grant
Shaud, Sylvester Stallone, Sharon Stone, Meryl Streep, Christopher
Walken
Screenplay:  Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz, Paul Weitz
Producers:  Brad Lewis, Aron Warner, Patty Wooton
Runtime:  77 min.
US Distribution:  DreamWorks
Rated G  
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
I've never been big on animation, and I'm not sure why.  I've seen some
good animated films (many of which are Japanese, and have interesting
stories in addition to great animation), but I find that my response to
most animated films is the same -- it's interesting at first, and then
my attention begins to dwindle.  I figured that this would not be the
case with Antz, because it has super-ultra-high-tech computer animation,
and also because it has a great assortment of celebrity voices and a
witty script.  In addition, the film clocks in under 90 minutes, and so
it hardly has time to get boring.  
But, for all of its wit and skill, Antz really just reminds me of how
self-centered the human race is:  this is not a story about ants, but a
story about a bunch of miniature humans reacting to an ant-like
existence.  I have an entomologist friend who said the film's science is
well in-place, but that doesn't make me feel better about the fact that
we're not watching ants.  I know, I know, I could go on and on about the
fact that ants don't speak English (puhleez), and that they don't walk
upright on four of their six legs, and so forth.  I'm not so interested
in these little details as I am in the big picture -- I think the film
is a clever cop-out.  It would have been really interesting if the ants
had been more realistically expressed.
Well, I realize I'm subjecting myself to the possibility of getting
labeled as a "lame" critic, because I doubt that anyone out there will
have a similar opinion of Antz.  Don't get me wrong -- it's an enjoyable
film, and often very funny.  Woody Allen voices the main character, a
worker ant named Z.  Z is Woody Allen -- he looks and acts the same way
Allen acts in all of his films.  Z is upset that he's insignificant in
the scheme of his colony, but one day meaning is injected into his life
when he meets Princess Bala (Sharon Stone).  She's engaged to General
Mandible (Gene Hackman), and this greatly upsets Z.  
However, his friend Weaver (Sylvester Stallone) tells him that he can
meet her if he pretends to be in the army.  So, Z takes Weaver's place,
and accidentally ends up in a war with a bunch of termites.  By a stroke
of luck, he's the only survivor, and returns to the colony a hero. 
Soon, however, Mandible realizes that Z is a fake, and Z impulsively
kidnaps the Princess and they head outside, in search of Insectopia,
where ants can live without the constraints of colony life always
keeping them oppressed.  Soon, Z becomes a symbol for liberation in the
ant colony.
If that sounds like a lot of plot for an 80-minute film, you're not
mistaken.  That's one of the nice things about Antz, though -- it never
dwells on anything long enough to deteriorate into mindless boredom or
kiddy-pleasing madness.  In fact, the film is aimed equally at kids and
adults, so parents taking their children to this film won't be left in
the dust (actually, there are a few jokes that will whiz right past the
kids' ears).  On this level, however, there are issues that bother me
about Antz.  First of all, the language is not G-material (several of
the "lesser" expletives, including "bitch" and "crap," pop up
frequently).  In addition, the violence is rather extreme:  the battle
with the termites is disturbingly similar to scenes in Starship
Troopers.  
But I can't deny the film's wry charm, thanks to the array of familiar
voices and a clever script by Todd Alcott and Chris & Paul Weitz.  There
are some terrific cameos, such as a wonderful scene with a couple of
European wasps (voiced by Dan Aykroyd and Jane Curtin).  The film gets
off to a slow start, but everything that happens outside the colony is
very well-done, both in script and in animation.  In the main roles,
Allen is likable as Z, while Stone has fun giving her Princess a little
bit of sass.  Hackman is perfect for the domineering and evil general,
while Christopher Walken is on-hand as the General's right-hand man.  
I'm quite aware that most readers are likely to dub me as a very silly
guy after reading this review, perhaps as the "impossible" critic who
wouldn't have liked the film regardless of the circumstances.  After
all, I liked the film pretty well, and I'm not denying that it's
well-made and overall a worthwhile investment for pocket change.  But it
left me feeling dissatisfied.  I'm not sure what I was expecting, but I
was hoping for something that kind of broke away from the expected
little-humans-pretending-to-be-animals cliche.  If this concept doesn't
bother you the way it bothers me, add a full star to my rating and
kindly resist the urge to send me flaming hate mail.

Author
Matt Williams
In what seems to be the most unusual film trend of late, two studios are
offering competing computer-animated-bug films.  The first one out of
the gate is Antz, the first animated film from Dreamworks SKG.  Although
not up to the high standards of Toy Story, it poses a strong challenge
to this Thanksgiving's A Bug's Life.
Antz follows the life of a single ant, Z (Woody Allen), who is
dissatisfied with colony life.  As with many animated heroes, he yearns
for something different...he wants to be an individual, instead of part
of the collective.
He spots his chance when he meets the beautiful Princess Bala (Sharon
Stone), who is "slumming it" with the worker ants to get a taste of life
before her impending marriage to the ruthless General Mandible (Gene
Hackman). Although their meeting is brief, Z believes they've formed a
connection, and now has a goal for his dreams.
He enlists the aid of his soldier friend Weaver (Sylvester Stallone) in
an effort to meet her again.  However, when things don't go as planned,
Z finds himself the target of Mandible's wrath.
This is only the second fully computer-animated film, but somehow the
sense of awe and wonder that was present in Toy Story is missing.  The
water animation here is very realistic, but overall the animation fails
to be impressive.
None of the characters are particularly charming by themselves. It's the
voices that truly bring them to life, and Antz has attracted a
first-rate cast for the job.  In addition to the voices credited above,
the film features the talents of Christopher Walken, Danny Glover, Anne
Bancroft, Jennifer Lopez, Dan Aykroyd and Jane Curtin. The vocal
performances are all top-notch, and truly bring a spark of life to the
film.
There's plenty of humor here...but most of it is likely to sail
completely over the heads of children.  Socio-political commentary is
rare in animation, but it seems to fit in well here.
Humorous and enjoyable, Antz is able to overcome its limitations and is
a rather good cartoon.  Younger children might not understand many of
the jokes, and might be frightened by some of the battle scenes...but
older kids and adults will have a jolly good time.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
STARRING:  (the voices of) Woody Allen, Sharon Stone,
                Dan Ackroyd, Sylvester Stallone, Gene
                Hackman, Danny Glover, Anne Bancroft
DIRECTORS: Eric Darnell, Lawrence Guterman, Tim Johnson
WRITERS:   Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz, Paul Weitz
RATED:     PG
RELEASED:  1998
        "Handling dirt is not my idea of a rewarding career,"
laments Z, the unwitting hero of Dreamworks' remarkable
animated odyssey, "Antz."  His frustration is understandable,
for he lives in a rigid society that eschews individuality.
All ants are expected to march, walk, think, and even dance
in exactly the same fashion-- not good news for someone like
Z, who longs for fun and love, even if it means reducing
productivity.
        The colony's social pecking order is well-established;
at birth, all ants are sorted into one of two groups: "workers"
(who construct tunnels) or "soldiers" (who defend the colony
against predators).  Although society has deemed him a worker,
Z (voiced by Woody Allen) could more aptly be called a dreamer;
his mind wanders constantly, and his co-workers consider him a
clumsy weakling who can lift a "mere" ten times his body weight.
        Z's luck changes when he meets a fascinating gal named
Bala (Sharon Stone) at the colony's watering hole.  They have
fun together, but she's way out of his league: not only isn't
she a worker, she's royalty-- the daughter of the Queen (Anne
Bancroft) herself!  But even so, the lovestruck Z can't forget
her.  He convinces his best friend, a soldier ant named Weaver
(Sylvester Stallone), to switch places with him for one day,
hopefully giving Z the chance to speak with her again.  It's a
sound plan, but unexpected complications creep in when the
soldiers are suddenly ordered to defend the colony against a
possible termite invasion.  Z, woefully unprepared for battle,
suggests alternatives to combat ("Can't we just influence their
political maneuvers via campaign contributions?"), but to his
chagrin the confrontation is unavoidable.
        "Antz" is a thoroughly involving film, filled to the
brim with lovingly constructed visuals and a number of clever plot
twists; the summary I gave in the preceding paragraphs reveals only
a very small portion of the storyline.  If it contained nothing more
than entertaining visuals and humorous characters, the story would
be perfectly acceptable.  But the creators didn't rest on their
laurels; surprisingly, "Antz" sneaks a fair amount of social
commentary
into its frames.  It's not hard to recognize ourselves and modern
society
in the film, which is perhaps the reason the tale works so well: we
all know people who act like the various inhabitants of the ant hill.
        The intelligence of the screenplay was one of the biggest
(and nicest) surprises for me; in addition to the predictable
(though admittedly well-done) gags involving magnifying glasses
and picnics, "Antz" depicts a level of religious satire uncommon
in what's obstensibly a kid's movie.  How?  (SPOILER WARNING!)  While
watching the film, it occurred to me that Z is essentially playing
the role of a Christ figure: he becomes a teacher to the masses and is
denounced by naysayers ("Does Z really care about us?  Then where is
he?").  In the finale, Z's selflessness saves the other ants, although
he "dies" in the process... only to return from the dead.  Hmm.  I
guess it's possible the filmmakers didn't intend any of these scenes
to have religious overtones, but they seemed pretty obvious to me.
Social satire also appears: the film's biggest laugh came when an
insightful worker ant announces, "The workers control the means of
production!"
        The final shot of "Antz" borders on brilliant: the "camera"
lifts up out of the ant hill and pulls further and further back...
until we see that all the grand sights and visuals that have taken
place over the course of the story happened only a few yards from
each other.  The message is clear: perception is everything, and
even big problems don't seem so insurmountable after you get some
distance from them.  It's a message we'd all do well to remember.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing
list.  Or, you can subscribe directly from my web page.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Characteristic of 1995's 'Toy Story', 'Antz', in my opinion is just as
good if not better.  It has all the classic makings of an animated
formula film which is ideal for somewhat older children, say those above
the age of 8 and isn't really suitable for very young children.  What I
enjoyed so much about the film was the abundance of rich detail brought
to every frame of this film which captures the everyday life in an ant
colony with humour, intrigue and an innocuous style of story telling.
Woody Allen is Z, the film's nerdy little protagonist, and the first
time we see Z, he's on a therapist's couch.  How appropriate.
Especially when we see Woody in his other films, sometimes playing a
neurotic in therapy as the character he voices here is.  Z is a
"worker".  At birth, an ant is judged by the colony as either a "worker"
or a "soldier".  The queen of the colony, voiced by Anne Bancroft, has a
beautiful (to an ant) daughter, the Princess Bala, voiced by Sharon
Stone.  The princess is engaged to the leader of the soldier's colony,
echoed by Gene Hackman as a cleverly created villain, giving 'Antz' the
strength it needs whereas 'Toy Story' lacked a villain you could really
latch onto for exciting leverage.
After finding out that the only way he can score with the Princess, whom
he is very fond of and whom he met one night at the ant nightclub of
sorts, Z changes places with his best friend, yo'ed!!! by Sylvester
Stallone, who is a soldier.  The adventure of being a soldier leads Z
into battle where the ants will battle the dreaded termites, a species
much larger and superior in weaponry, both natural and otherwise.  This
is the most impressive aspect of the film's entertainment value,
comparable in animated detail to the ballroom dance between Belle and
the beast in 1991's 'Beauty and the Beast' and the famous stampede scene
in 1994's 'The Lion King'.  As the lone survivor of the battle, Z and
the Princess leave together and the two of them are pursued by the
entire military branch of the ant colony.  Their adventure takes them
outside the colony into the human world where they come across the most
natural place you would expect to find an ant, a picnic location!
'Antz' is from the DreamWorks studio, the company started by Steven
Spielberg, Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen.  The company has done a
good job diversifying its subject matter since its inception last year
with 'The Peacemaker'.  The studio's apparent attempt at both adult and
family entertainment is quickly being met with praise by critics in and
out of the Hollywood circle.
'Antz' is directed by Eric Darnell and Tim Johnson and is written by
Todd Alcot, Chris Weitz and Paul Weitz and while this collaboration
seems like a few too many cooks spoiling the brew, the film has a
cohesive structure and at a running time of just 83 minutes, it's ending
is clever, fitting in perfectly with the vision Woody Allen has in a
constant theme that usually runs within his film.
Other celebrity voices in this ingenious mixture of technology include
Christopher Walken, Danny Glover, Jennifer Lopez, Dan Aykroyd and Jane
Curtin and Aykroyd's voice is the one hardest to nail down for
recognition.  See if you can catch it.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Ted Prigge
Directors: Eric Darnell, Lawrence Gutterman, and Tim Johnson
Writers: Chris Weitz and Paul Weitz
Starring: Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Gene Hackman, Sylvester Stallone,
Christopher Walken, Meryl Streep, Jennifer Lopez, Grant Shaud, Dan Aykroyd,
Jane Curtin, John Mahoney, Anne Bancroft, Danny Glover, Paul Mazursky
"Antz" is the second feature film that utlizes the technique of
coputer-generated animation, following the wildly sucessful "Toy Story." 
The technique works wonders, as things look more high tech and more is
allowed to be done, but that really wasn't the reason why "Toy Story" was
excellent.  It was excellent because the characters were nicely-realized,
and the story that they went through was surprisingly intelligent.  It was
as if "Toy Story" was a big breath of fresh air in the world of animation,
not only technically but also content-wise.
"Antz" is obviously not going to be as much of a success as "Toy Story"
because it follows in the trend rather than begin it, but it does take one
thing in particular further: the characters in "Toy Story" were slightly
neurotic, with their own nice quirks and idiosyncrasies, which made them
likable and gave the film a nice edge that few cartoons posess.  The lead
character in "Antz" is an ant named Z, who is voiced appropriately and
perhaps brilliantly by none other than Woody Allen, the chairman of the
neurotic union of actors.
Even though it is the presence of Allen that really takes this over the top
into a very entertaining movie, "Antz" is a very enjoyable film to begin
with, probably because it's not the typical animated fare.  In fact, "Antz"
hardly qualifies as the kind of film that is directly aimed at children -
it's designed to marvel children with a simple story and cartoon
characters, but it's real audience is the adolescents and adult crowds,
perhaps the "Simpsons" crowd, or at least anyone who's ever read Orwell or
Huxley before.
"Antz" deals with an ant colony where the inhabitants are chosen at birth
to be either soldiers, workers, or royalty.  The protagonist of the film is
Z, a nebbish worker ant who's introduction takes place in none other than
the room of his local analyst.  Z toils all day in the mines, like most of
the ants, but yearns for something better, like a chance for personal
growth.  There is a rumor of a place called "Insectopia," where insects of
all nations and creeds are free to hang out and do insect-things, but this
rumor comes from the mouth of a delusional drunk ant, so there's very
little chance that Z will ever find his salvation...or something like that.
The plot of this film deals with Z's meeting with the Princess of the ants,
Bala (Sharon Stone), who escapes one night from her housing to hang out at
the ant club, where she hits on Z and ends up dancing with him, leaving him
just as he was really starting to like her.  So Z manages to get himself
into the army, thanks to his soldier ant friend, Weaver (Sylvester
Stallone), and after a deadly battle with termites, finds he is the hero of
the ants, and soon starts and adventure outside the ant colony with Bala to
find Insectopia, thanks to a little bit of convenient clutziness.
The whole idea sounds a bit like and bit not like typical American animated
fare.  The story is simple, with a required love story, and even some
conflict dealing with a conspiracy brought on by the evil General Mandible
(Gene Hackman) to destroy the Queen (Meryl Streep) and all of the wimpy
worker ants pops up.  And some of the film's humor is definitely very
universal, like Z's constant whining and status as the film's anchor and
comic relief in the midst of melodramatic characters and storylines. 
However, the film finds its true humor in subjects that few children will
really understand, like communism and totalitarianism.
The film's true audience is therefore the teenage/adult crowd, who will
find much more humor in it than the children who will find many of the
jokes shooting right over their heads.  Like this summer's lessser "Small
Soldiers," "Antz" doesn't aspire to be as much a hit with kids as it does
with those who know their history lessons and who have read their novels
for college classes.  This is good and bad for this film, as it was for
"Small Soldiers."  While the jokes are clever, they never really expand
into real rational thinking.  This is more of a parody of socialism and its
good and bad points than it is a real thought-out satire, as if the film
were really afraid to go full blown and become as intelligent and
philosophical as an episode of "The Simpsons," the best show currently on
TV, and with good reason.
Nevertheless, "Antz" is extremely entertaining, mostly because the script,
although a little too short (bringing the film to about an hour and 20
minutes, more or less), is sharp and witty, and the story really works. 
Strangely enough, the casting of Woody Allen, one of the most despised men
working in film these days, works wonderfully, and Z is a highly likable
character.  Perhaps it's because Z doesn't resemble the aging filmmaker at
all.  He's short, doesn't wear glasses, and appears totally fragile.  And
his lines are so hysterical and so nicely delivered that it's almost
impossible to imagine this film without a character like him.
Is this a Woody Allen animated film, though?  Not really, though it's
pretty close.  His dialogue sounds so Woody-esque that it'd be a shock if I
learned he didn't write most of his lines.  This is familiar territory for
him, what with his political rebellion in comedies like "Bananas" and
"Sleeper."  Not to mention the entire cast wreaks of old school Woody
actors, as if this was a giant in-joke reunion.  Sharon Stone, you may
remember, blew Woody the kiss from a train in "Stardust Memories."  Gene
Hackman starred in his "Another Woman."  Sylvester Stallone played one of
the subway thugs in "Bananas."  Christopher Walken (who plays one of
Hackman's goons, and to hilarity) gave a hilarious monologue in his
Oscar-Winning "Annie Hall."  And Meryl Streep played his second ex-wife in
"Manhattan," for which she reportedly vowed she'd never work with him
again.  Glad she kept that promise.
What's nice is this film would probably have worked with someone else in
the lead.  It has a really nice, joking tone to it that never takes itself
too seriously, and the rest of the cast is nicely killer, with some real
hilarity due to a great performance by Sylvester Stallone, who's not afraid
to mock his earlier career.  Nice to see that some people in Hollywood
don't take themselves seriously.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Michael Dequina
It's still another two months before DreamWorks launches its assault on
the current state of feature animation with the much-ballyhooed (and
equally as anticipated) _The_Prince_of_Egypt_, but in the meantime, the
crew at SKG has found another way to hit Disney where it hurts--in the
field of computer animation.  With the witty and wise _Antz_, DreamWorks
and PDI has given the Mouse and Pixar's upcoming _A_Bug's_Life_ a tough act
to follow.
The "z" in _Antz_ stands for Z (voice of Woody Allen), a lowly worker ant
who for once wants to do something for his individual needs rather than
those of the colony.  He gets a taste of something different when Princess
Bala (Sharon Stone), reluctantly betrothed to megalomaniacal General
Mandible (Gene Hackman) and bored with her sheltered life in general,
sneaks out and joins the commoners for one night, meeting Z at a bar (where
"aphid beers" are served).  Bala's ruse is soon discovered, but not before
Z has fallen head over heels in love.  Determined to break from his class
and win Bala's love in return, Z comes up with a scheme that, if anything,
will win Bala's attention.  Alas, he gets a lot more than he bargained for.
Like Disney's trailblazing _Toy_Story_, _Antz_ has a smart script that
will keep adults equally as entertained, if not more, as the young 'uns.
The screenplay by Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz, and Paul Weitz is a most
unlikely--and often hilarious--Communist allegory, with the oppressed
workers encouraged to "work for the good of the colony" and even forced to
dance the same way at the same time each day; Z's scheme inspires the
masses to revolt.  But beyond the social satire, a lot of the script's
creativity lies in its placing the audience in the ants' shoes, seeing
familiar things from the insects' eyes.  For example, simple trash can
brimming with litter is "Insectopia," a paradise of food and other delights
for all insects; and a single water droplet can spell a horrible death by
drowning.
The material really comes to life in the hands of the actors and the
animators at PDI.  The character of Z would be unthinkable without the
voice of Allen; freed from his physical form, his tired neurotic New Yorker
schtick is given a freshness.  The rest of the actors are also well-cast:
Sylvester Stallone is perfect fit for Z's musclehead soldier friend,
Weaver; Stone lends Princess Bala sexiness and spunk, as does Jennifer
Lopez to Z's worker friend Azteca; Hackman makes Mandible a hissable
villain; and Christopher Walken is an ideal foil as his right-hand ant,
Colonel Cutter.  Though the actors give the ants most of personality, the
animators fill in the blanks, coming up with a look for the ants that is at
once humanized (their faces are wonderfully expressive) yet distinctly
insect-like.  The artwork is consistently first rate, if a bit limited in
the big picture; most of the action takes place in the ant colony, which
means repeated use the same dingy dirt tunnel backgrounds.  However, some
visually dazzling scenes, such as a rather harrowing combat sequence
involving some menacing termites, more than compensate.
In recent months, many studios have tried to take a bite out of Disney's
stranglehold on the feature animation market--and failed.  If the
delightful _Antz_ is any indication of what is in the pipeline of
DreamWorks' traditional animation division, it may not be such a small
world after all.  (opens October 2)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
