Title
Review for Night and the City (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     About the best thing you can say about Harry Fabian (as played by
Robert DeNiro) is that he has a lot of energy and ambition.  Harry is a
high-powered promoter of sleazy schemes.  In spite of Harry's surface
likability and ever-endearing demeanor, even Harry's closest friends cannot
or should not trust Harry anywhere near money.  Harry is a lawyer who has
become so well known for his ambulance -chasing that he has to supplement
his income by any other scheme he can put together.  His latest scheme is to
promote a night of local boxers fighting each other, but the scheme is
elaborate and the financing shady.  And Fabian will use whomever he has to
in order to make himself a big fight promoter for one night and at the same
time gall "Boom Boom" Grossman (played by Alan King), a well known local
fight promoter.
     Jessica Lange stars as Helen, who owns a bar with her husband
Phil(played by Cliff Gorman), but who is also fooling around with Fabian.
The supporting cast includes Jack Warden and Eli Wallach.  But the main show
is the frenetic Harry Fabian, who is almost never off-camera and seems to
live at 10% greater speed than the rest of us.  He has to so that in the
middle of one scheme he can get involved with another one, like selling
probably-stolen VCRs.  "Sell these for $400, keep $200," his friend Gupta
tells him, and Harry is off on a second scheme.
     The dialogue in Richard Price's screenplay is fast and often funny in a
bitter, ironic way.  Harry's various inter-connected schemes build a sort of
"Mission Impossible" house-of-cards plan where the impossible mission is to
make this cheap hustler into a success.  Irwin Winkler's direction and Tak
Fujimoto's photography pick up the grunginess and oppressiveness of the New
York City streets with the immediacy of hand-held Steadicam.  Popular songs
from the 1950s and 1960s run a commentary on the action of the film, as when
Fabian runs a scam to the tune of "The Great Pretender."
     In spite of a lack of likable characters, NIGHT AND THE CITY shows us
the life of the underbelly and a few interesting machinations.  I gave it a
high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
