Title
Review for Series 7: The Contenders (2001)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
I don't know about you, but when I hear politicians railing against 
violence in movies, I'm never sure exactly what movies they are talking 
about.  Any example that I can think of never seems to be quite to the 
level that they are complaining about.  Well, I think I've found an 
example in SERIES 7, which is something akin to a PULP FICTION version 
of the television series "Survivor." 
"The Contenders," consisting of five people chosen at random as well as 
the previous champion, are forced to fight to the death as they battle 
everywhere from homes to malls.  All the while, camera crews record 
their every movement.  The TV show's tag line is: "The only prize is the 
prize that counts: your life." Since this is the seventh version of "The 
Contenders," it is referred to as "Series 7." The movie feels like a 
television series in which the commercials have been removed.  You can 
tell where the station breaks for the commercials are supposed to be 
inserted.  
The movie's web site (www.series7movie.com), like the one for BLAIR 
WITCH (www.blairwitch.com), makes it appear that SERIES 7 is real.  It 
even provides a place for you to bid on one of the guns supposedly used 
in the series by reigning champion Dawn Lagarto (Brooke Smith), who has 
10 kills in 2 tours so far.  You can also sign up to be on the series.  
I suspect that many who visit this site will be repulsed as it could be 
argued that it does appear to glorify violence.  There is also a link on 
it to another fictional television show ("A Sniper in the Red Army") and 
to other sites including one all in Russian about guns.  You can also 
find handy links to apparently real sites about suicide prevention and 
about mortuaries.  Then again, they purposely make it hard to tell what 
is real and what isn't.
The six contestants for "Series 7," include Dawn, who is eight months 
pregnant.  To show you what a rotter she is, her sister says that Dawn 
wouldn't even agree to shave her armpits for her sister's wedding.  
Connie (Marylouise Burke) is an older ER nurse who doesn't approve of 
Dawn's loose morals.  Connie, who turns into a pretty cold blooded 
killer, isn't all sweetness and light herself.  Jeff (Glenn Fitzgerald) 
is a 33-year-old artist dying of testicular cancer, who keeps 
threatening to kill himself before the other contenders kill him first.  
Lindsay (Merritt Wever) is a teenager whose boyfriend bought her a 
spiffy bulletproof vest for her tour.  Lindsay's parents are very 
supportive of their daughter and make sure that she never leaves home 
without her guns.  And there are a couple of other contestants.
Although the program feels real, the contestants' actions do not.  They 
are the world's worst hiders.  They eat and walk in front of windows in 
clear view of passersby.  Even Dawn, the supposed best of the bunch, 
sits in obvious view in her car in front of the houses of the other 
contestants.  Not bothering to aim, she holds her gun nonchalantly and 
fires like a kid playing a cowboy with a toy pistol.
The show's premise is intriguing and parts are done well, but the 
repetitive nature of the format and the lack of convincing behavior by 
the actors turn what could have been a fascinating film into a 
sleep-inducing one.  There were several cute parts, of which one of my 
favorites was the show's "sudden death overtime" period, in which these 
words were taken literally.  This much you have to give the movie -- it 
never pulls its punches, it is quite unusual and it consistently sticks 
to its format.  You may not like the results, but you have to admire its 
courage.  Still, this is the sort of movie that will have some people in 
outrage.
SERIES 7 runs 1:25.  It is rated R for strong violent content and 
language and would be acceptable for college students.
The film opens in limited release in the United States on Friday, 
January 26.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Lock and Load: Daniel Minahan Broadcasts Series 7
A feature story by Jeremiah Kipp - Copyright Š 2001 filmcritic.com
Series 7 may be the antidote for anyone disturbed by the onslaught of
reality TV shows, spearheaded by Survivor and The Real World.  As an
assault on cultural indifference, this new feature co-produced by the
fearless Christine Vachon and her company, Killer Films (Safe, Kids,
Boys Don't Cry), pits six contenders against each other on a nightmarish
syndicated game show.  The object: Kill or be killed until only one
survivor remains.
Writer/Director Daniel Minahan (co-writer of Mary Harron's I Shot Andy
Warhol) took great pains not to play it as science fiction, making the
film feel "like the world we live in, but taken to the point of
absurdity.  The more vague I kept it, the creepier it would be."  We
caught up with Minahan on the afternoon before Series 7 opens wide to
theaters everywhere (March 16, 2001) after a successful limited release
in metropolitan art-houses.  Will audiences respond to the laser sharp
accuracy of this pitch-black comedy, or will Series 7 strike too close
to home?
You could have gone in many different directions with the title.  How
did you choose Series 7?
I wanted something that sounded sexy and mysterious, that would suggest
that this show had been around for a while, and that had a number in
it.  So my editor, Malcolm Jamieson, came up with Series 7, and I
thought it was great.
I thought your cast found the right stylized note.  Could you describe
the rehearsal process?
We experimented a lot.  First, we watched shows and tried imitating TV
stuff.  We tried improvisation, but that kinda seemed like just, well,
actors improvising.  Finally, the breakthrough came when - it sounds
really obvious, but when Brooke (Smith) called me after watching tapes I
had given her of The Real World or some show.  And she said, "These
people are just acting."  The idea was that people on these shows play
the part they think they're supposed to play.  Oh, she's the Bitch. 
He's the Uptight Born-Again Christian.  As it turns out, all I needed to
do was remind people that there was a camera in the room, and that it
would be a character in Series 7.  That naturally gave the performances
the self-consciousness that I wanted.
I also concentrated on paring down the dialogue.  I took out a lot of
exposition that felt more like a film than a documentary or TV show.  We
would play out a scene and I'd say, "Well, this is something I could
handle in voice-over, this is something the show would explain."  I
tried to make it as colloquial as possible.
Was there any struggle with your actors feeling exploited by this
material?
Yeah, it became especially interesting during the interviews [used
throughout the film].  The best way was interviewing the actors in
character.  The scenes were scripted, but I found they seemed contrived
when we shot them that way.  So I said, "Tell me in your own words."  I
would press them to get the response and cover the material that I
wanted.  It was like I was the producer of this horrible TV show that
was torturing these poor people.  Connie (the killer nurse, played by
Marylouise Burke) seems to be the villain of the piece, but it's really
the producers of the show.
Did this make you feel self-conscious?
Well, it was weird.  Brooke would become very defiant and I'd be, like,
"Are you mad at me?" (laughs)
It made me really happy to see Brooke Smith in the lead role.  She's got
to be one of the best-kept secrets in the industry...
How early was she brought into the project?
Very early.  I wrote the script in 1995 and sent it to Brooke in '96. 
We workshopped Series 7 together in the Sundance Directors Lab.  Most of
my experience had been on documentaries, so it became important to
really work on the more emotional scenes, like the reunion of Dawn
(Smith) and Jeff (Glenn Fitzgerald).  My experience with Brooke was a
high learning curve for me - and I love the whole collaborative process
of working with actors.  It's amazing to me what they can do.
Is it true that the name Dawn Legarto (Brooke's character) was based on
a childhood friend of yours?
Yeah, it was the girl who lived two doors down from me in Danbury, CT.
She hasn't seen Series 7 yet, no, but she's been following it.  I
contacted her and asked her if we could use the name, letting her know
the character was not based on her in any way.  And she thought it was
hilarious!  Like, "Yeah!"  Besides, she's not actually called Dawn
Legarto anymore.  She got married, so she's safe.
And as far as we could tell, she's the only Dawn Legarto.  It's a very
unusual name - it means "lizard" in Portuguese.
Could you describe the process of shooting Series 7?  How did your
background producing tabloid newsmagazine shows for Fox contribute to
the "look" of the film?
Well, that had a lot to do with it.  My Director of Photography [Randy
Drummond] and I set out specific rules for ourselves: How we should
shoot everything, what kind of lighting setups we should use and when. 
Our whole approach was to run the scenes in their entirety, allowing
room to "discover" things with the camera during long takes.  We didn't
want to break it down into coverage as found in a normal movie.  Through
doing this, we would end up blocking the scenes in an organic way.
The trick was getting the actors not to play to the camera, since they
were supposed to be untrained.  I would say, "No, don't turn your face
toward the lens.  Just walk down the street.  We'll do the work.  Don't
worry about it."  We were loosening it up a little, gaining their
trust.  In most film acting, the performer colors it all in, pretending
the camera's not there.  In our approach, it's about letting it be
present and keeping it real.
You had a tight production schedule, but you also worked with a really
small crew.  Did that help?
We tried to keep it as intimate as possible.  I didn't want a huge
production apparatus because (a) I wanted to move quickly, and (b) I
wanted this to feel more like a documentary, which I was more familiar
with.  I think people felt like it was a quiet set, not a big, chaotic,
paramilitary machine.
You have these great teaser commercials peppered throughout -
They were indicated in the script, but we decided to add more.  After we
had a cut of the film where the story was in shape and it was working,
we brought in this TV promo producer named Jason Bowers.  He packaged
the whole thing for us (as he would for a real TV show) and re-arranged
it into a three-episode marathon.  It was really interesting to work
with him as he finessed what would ultimately become our "frame." 
Without the promos, it was just a weird, existential documentary - a
lugubrious meditation on Reality TV.  (laughs)  Yeah, before pushing it
more and more toward tabloid, it was a real downer.
Was your hometown of Danbury, Connecticut receptive to Series 7 being
shot there?
We had to notify the police because we were using firearms, but they
were very cooperative.  We were also very low-key.  I knew I didn't want
that sort of "Local Boy Done Good" news story.  If anyone got hold of
this script, it would have been very easy to misrepresent: "Oh my God -
what is this?  Shut 'em down!"
During production, we borrowed locations from the people of Danbury,
which you can do approximately once before people realize their house
will be completely trashed.
It's amazing that they actually let you stage domestic combat scenes in
their living rooms!
Yeah, I know!  It's nuts! (laughs) I would never let a film crew into my
apartment!
Connie's house was actually my mother's best friend's condo.  Her house
was so full of antique collections that I would tell everyone, "Take
your shoes off!  No drinking in the house - use coasters!  Don't get any
blood on the floor!"  And, of course, this is the house that gets
completely boarded up.  Brooke has to come and tear all the plywood
down, then she's stalking through the house and kicking open the doors. 
After the first take I told her, "Brooke - y'know, take it easy!  This
is my aunt's house!"
She said, "Omigod, I thought the art department brought all this!" and I
was like, "NO!"
What is your response to the idea that satirizing a TV show is
redundant?  Is it possible to be too retro (i.e., a satire of a satire)?
I think when people say that, they want to feel "smarter" than Series 7
- which, as a movie, really brings you down to its own level.  Anybody
who wants to feel that way will probably have that reaction.  It's like
watching professional wrestling: You've got to go with it, you've got to
play along.  That's part of the fun.
When I created Series 7, I was thinking of shows like Cops and The Real
World.  Now, I don't think there's anything satirical about these
shows.  Maybe people who get stoned before watching them might think
they're satiresbut that's a little bit too complicated for me!
(laughs)  I do think I would watch these shows and find something funny
about them, but I don't even see Survivor as a satire.  Nothing Swiftian
there - it's just corny!
You mentioned that Series 7 is also a commentary on the media's power to
invade privacy.  Obviously, the world you present is a satire, but what
are your concerns for the future of privacy rights?
To me, invasion of privacy is a form of violence.  I'm very ambivalent
about it.  Having produced this stuff, I know the power of bringing a
camera into somebody's house.  People will do almost anything you ask
when you're there with a camera crew.  Now, it would be puritanical of
me to point a finger and say, "This is a bad thing," because people are
complicit with it.  But I do hope Series 7 points out that antisocial
aspect - the brutality of these shows.
My friend was troubled by Series 7.  He thought the audiences were
laughing at the characters.
I don't know - I found the characters to be very sympathetic and
endearing.  I mean, they're brutalized by this TV show, but there are
several moments where the truth slips out.  The humor points out the
hypocrisy of what is being presented as "reality."  I don't think people
with cancer are funny, but if I can pinpoint how these people are
exploited, the presentation can be ironic.
What do you think causes people to become desensitized to violence?
I don't think people are really desensitized to violence.  If they are
(to real violence, as opposed to cinematic or make-believe violence), it
has to do with the fact that the most popular form of entertainment
right now is following O.J. Simpson or Woody Allen - taking real
people's lives and presenting them as a form of entertainment.  This
blurs the boundaries of public and private life.
Yeah.  The next thing on my plate is a psychological thriller, but one
of the things I'm pitching in the upcoming weeks is Series 8 as a
limited TV series (3 episodes).  I think it would be a blast to see on
TV.
Cable, definitely.  You know, "too hot for TV!"
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Given the extent to which the television industry--
particularly its enhancements by cable and video recording
equipment--has cut into potential theater box office receipts,
it's only natural that the studios would strike back by
parodying the shows that have distracted us from the big
screen.  Game shows have been a popular genre for satire,
and no film has done a better job of mocking their corruption
than Robert Redford's 1994 "Quiz Show," which focused on
the scandals of the 1950s programs particularly the then
fascinating $64,000 question--in which answers were given to
the contestants beforehand.  Daniel Minahan's derisive view
of both game shows and, in a larger sense, the growing
violence within American society, is by contrast adolescent,
literal-minded and virtually humorless, spotlighting a mostly
unattractive cast of people who are so unsympathetic and
banal that we in the theater audience have a difficult time
caring about them a whit.  The entire production seems to
have been conceived, directed and performed by a group of
college kids knocking out a project that they believe could get
them into NYU film school rather than invented by the fellow
who co-wrote the far more engrossing "I Shot Andy Warhol."  
   Spoofing the current trend toward reality programs as well
as game shows, "Series 7" is a 24/7 TV marathon in which
six contestants are chosen by random from a smiling lottery-
type woman gazing closely watching the spinning balls.  The
aim of each contestant is to outsmart the other six not in the
ability to guess the identify of the country's ninth vice
president by the competence in killing the others before they
can nullify him or her.  The last gladiator standing is the
winner, who gets to compete in the next marathon.  The
prize, other than permission to live and continue firing rifles
and pistols, is not reported.
  The current champion, the very pregnant Dawn (Brooke
Smith), is pitted against a religious nurse, Connie (Marylouise
Burke); Tony (Michael Kaycheck), an overweight man with
family difficulties; Lindsay (Merritt Wever), an eighteen-year-
old who is encouraged throughout her mission by her parents
(one of which is played by New York's own Donna Hanover);
Jeff (Glenn Fitzgerald), Jeff (Glenn Fitzgerald), a young man
dying of testicular cancer; and Franklin (Richard Venture), a
chap who gets little development, who uses a metal cane to
kill rather than a gun.  The gimmick in this story is that
neither Dawn nor the now-married and dying Jeff can bear to
pull the trigger on each other since they were lovers back in
high school in the small Connecticut town in which the action
takes place.
   As killing follows legalized murder, I couldn't help thinking
not so much of the reality exhibitions or quiz shows that are
being set up for parody but of Jules Feiffer's far more
sophisticated and witty play which was adapted for the screen
thirty years ago by Alan Arkin, "Little Murders."  That black
comedy about life in nightmarish New York City evokes a
frightful ambiance which has citizens gunning down their
fellows at random for no particular reason--an intense,
devilishly amusing foreshadowing of the chaos enveloping
parts of the world as gangs become the invisible government
of prosperous urban areas.  Notwithstanding the modest
budget of "Series 7," the film could have been saved by a
greater lyricism in the writing, but though the scripting is said
to be tight, the action appears improvised with Mr. Minahan
seeming all too often to settle for a first cut of each scene.
Rated R.  Running time: 85 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
The title Series 7 stands for the seventh season of the highest-rated
reality based show on television, The Contenders.  Set a few years from
now, the program rules are laid out with unsparing precision: Six
average, everyday citizens are chosen via random lottery to mercilessly
kill one another.  This will continue until one survivor remains.  Sound
familiar?  When historians chart the downfall of human empathy, they
will see that we were only one step away from moral paralysis in our
increasing apathy to Survivor, Temptation Island, and The Real World. 
Here we are, now entertain us.
This satire couldn't be more cutting edge.  Former tabloid TV producer
Daniel Minahan (and co-screenwriter of I Shot Andy Warhol) takes dead
aim on glib, pre-packaged network formulas for success.  A terse
narrator (Will Arnett) offers mock-sympathetic encouragement for the
contestants as well as in-depth play-by-play ring coverage.  Opponents
are given screen time for weepy confessions to their assigned guerrilla
cameramen, dispassionately filming their fight or flight confrontations
on hand-held digital video.
Our odds-on favorite is the lethal, eight-months-pregnant Dawn (Brooke
Smith), a returning champion with 10 confirmed kills under her belt.  If
she makes it through one final season, she'll be granted her well-earned
freedom.  Marching through the eroded suburbia of her hometown (Newbury,
Connecticut), there's no confusing her for a helpless female.  This
pistol-packing mama will do anything to save her unborn child, eyes
glazed over with steel acceptance.
In the grim opening footage lifted from a previous season, the camera
follows Dawn as she barges into a 7-Eleven to pop a few caps into an
unsuspecting victim.  The expressive, open-faced Smith has always been
one of cinema's best-kept secrets, most memorable as the senator's
daughter at the bottom of Buffalo Bill's well in The Silence of the
Lambs.  Here, she displays a vigilance that kicks Series 7 into
overdrive.
The programmers throw a sensational tabloid curveball by placing Dawn's
perpetually glum high school sweetheart among her opponents.  But almost
all of the dramatic contrivances (this one being the most obvious) can
be written off as part of the television structure-induced malaise. 
It's doubtful they'll be apparent in the visual onslaught of
information.
Revealing a taste for showmanship, the now-married Jeff (Glenn
Fitzgerald) has unorthodox plans for their televised reunion.  Rotting
away from testicular cancer, Jeff literally doesn't have the balls for
this contest.  Minahan shows admirable restraint in not exploiting this
obvious gag.  Jeff asks that Dawn painlessly remove him from the game
with an overdose of sleeping pills.  Easier said than done, especially
when it's the only man she ever loved -- and what if he suddenly
rediscovers his lust for life?  This morbid coupling is even granted an
appropriate theme song, Joy Division's "Love Will Tear Us Apart
(Again)."
Though Dawn and Jeff are given the center spotlight, there's no telling
when their number is gonna be up.  The same can be said for their
colorful opponents, a perfectly cast ensemble of "Joe Average" deviants:
Franklin (Richard Venture), a half-crazed conspiracy theorist; Tony
(Michael Kaycheck), a hulking brute who practices intimidating
shadowboxing techniques; Connie (Marylouise Burke), a brittle emergency
room nurse; and Lindsay (Merritt Weaver), a bright eyed, attractive
17-year old virgin.
Place your bets, but be forewarned: They may not die in the order you'd
expect.  Whether prowling through dimly lit houses or playing
hide-and-seek in an airy shopping mall, mundane locations become bloody
battlegrounds at the drop of a hat.  There's a queasy adrenaline rush in
this hastily staged domestic combat, with tension increased by the
digital photographers covering the scene.  What happens when they step
into the line of fire?
Minahan doesn't play this potentially lurid material as camp, opting
instead for the howlingly funny pseudo-documentary approach of Rob
Reiner's This Is Spinal Tap.  By playing it straight, he's able to take
blistering potshots at media carnage (including an obligatory freeway
chase with echoes of O.J. Simpson) without losing his edge.  When a
contender is taken out, it's not done for giggles like Oliver Stone's
naďve Natural Born Killers, but viewed with the ironic detachment of
video surveillance.  There are no formalities -- once the kill is
confirmed, it's on to the next kill with maddening proclivity.
Series 7 is too self-conscious to be defined as naturalism, but there's
something freakishly accurate in the mannered affectations of these
media-savvy contestants.  Even Dawn's gaze keeps flickering to the lens
of the camera, seeking artificial validation.  Constantly reciting
dialogue lifted from a bad episode of Geraldo Rivera, their emotional
codes of conduct have been gleaned from daytime talk shows.  To even
say, "I love you," during a tearful embrace feels like art imitating
life imitating 90210.  Daniel Minahan welcomes us to the bleak dead-end
of our cultural void -- if it's seen through the camera, it's no longer
real life.
Director: Daniel Minahan
Producers: Jason Kliot, Joana Vicente, Christine Vachon, Katie Roumel
Writer: Daniel Minahan
Starring: Brooke Smith, Glenn Fitzgerald, Marylouise Burke, Richard
Venture, Michael Kaycheck, Merritt Weaver, Donna Hanover
http://www.series7movie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
