Title
Review for Passed Away (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     One of the film industry's more common tactics is the warmedy-bait-
and-switch.  Well, that's what I call it anyway.  The idea is that you take
a comedy "with heart" (as they say in THE PLAYER) and promote it as if it
were a wild screwball comedy.  Warm human values just do not hack it at the
box office.  And with at least two cast members in common with last year's
hilarious OSCAR, the advertising could well have been intended to give the
impression that PASSED AWAY was cut from the same cloth.  It wasn't, but it
is quite a pleasant film on its own.  In spirit, PASSED AWAY is much more
like ONCE AROUND.
     The basic plot is simple enough.  Jack Warden plays Jack Scanlon, the
patriarch of a large Irish family.  His four children are grown and leading
entangled lives of their own.  As the film opens, Jack has just recovered
from a heart attack and is helping his oldest son Johnny (played by Bob
Hoskins) through a mid-life crisis.  Then Jack dies suddenly and Johnny
finds himself the new head of a rather eccentric household and at the same
time is responsible for arranging for his father's wake and funeral.  Johnny
has a house full of family ranging from very human to just this side of
totally wacky.  And one more mourner shows up: Cassie Slocombe (played by
Nancy Travis, who looks a lot like Julia Roberts).  Jack always had a
wandering eye and often other parts wandered as well.  Johnny himself is
attracted to Cassie and suddenly Johnny knows what he wants to do with his
mid-life crisis.
     Charlie Peters, previously a screenwriter with such dubious credits as
PATERNITY and THREE MEN AND A LITTLE LADY, this time directs his own
screenplay and gets a killer cast, including Hoskins, Warden, Blair Brown,
William Petersen, Tim Curry, Peter Riegert, and Maureen Stapleton.  All he
really needed for this film about the dignity of being a regular person in
America was a score by Georges Delerue.  Richard Gibbs's music just does not
quite hit the right spot.  I give PASSED AWAY a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
