Title
Review for Trees Lounge (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Nick Schaden
        Steve Buscemi.   The name instantly brings breathtaking scenes from 
"Fargo" and "Reservoir Dogs", always playing the same kind of fast
talking style that I've come to love.    Admittedly, if it weren't for
this talented actor I doubt I would have ever rented "Trees Lounge",
mainly due to the somewhat offbeat plot that the movie appeared to
contain.   However, I went out on a limb and gave the movie a shot - I'm
very pleased I did.
        "Trees Lounge" follows the life of Tommy (Steve Buscemi) in his day to
day life.   As we learn, Tommy doesn't have stable employment, has
broken up long ago with his girlfriend and much of the rest of his
family.   Most of his time is spent drinking in the rotting Trees
Lounge, a burned out bar mostly filled with other
"losers" like Tommy.   Interestingly enough, while the plot has a few
twists and turns, it stays very simple, just showing us the slow
downward spiral that Tommy has fallen into.
        No, while many of you out there have the image of "Leaving Las Vegas"
in your head, this is not that kind of movie.   Director Steve Buscemi
(his first time in the director's seat) throws plenty of straight and
black humor in the mix.   Scenes with Tommy's father having a heart
attack or watching Buscemi driving an ice cream truck are portrayed
wonderfully and add to plenty of laughs.    It's almost as though
Buscemi wants us to cry and laugh at Tommy's burned out character
simultaneously.   That, in a sense, is what made me like "Trees Lounge"
so much.   The plot is very original, and while slow (a problem at
times) the movie draws the viewer in.   I don't think I've ever cared
more about some burned out man's life as I did about Buscemi's
character.
        To boot, Buscemi does a wonderful job in fulfilling his role.   The
final scene of the movie comes distinctly to mind.   If you watch Tommy
closely, you can see him really pondering his life's direction.   Will
he just give up all hope and continue in self-pity and loathing until
death?   Or, will he pick up the pieces of his life and start anew? 
Either way, it's a thought provoking question that stayed in my mind.
        Overall, while the plot gets a little too slow and ambiguous at times,
it's very original and captivating.   Check "Trees Lounge" out, it's a
winner.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 10/11/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:35
MPAA Classification: R (Language, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Steve Buscemi, Mark Boone Junior, Carol Kane, Chloe Sevigny,
      Elizabeth Bracco, Anthony LaPaglia, Danny Baldwin, Eszter Balint,
      Debi Mazar
Director: Steve Buscemi
Producers: Brad Wyman and Chris Hanley
Screenplay: Steve Buscemi
Cinematography: Lisa Rinzler
Music: Evan Lurie
U.S. Distributor: Orion Pictures Classics
     I like Steve Buscemi.  I really do, which is why it's such an
disagreeable task to write a review that condemns his directorial debut
as a waste of film.  I'm not talking about a good idea gone awry, I'm
referring to something that's rotten to the core.  If I hadn't been
preparing to write a review, I would have walked out on this one.  It's
a pointless, lackluster, unpleasant character study of a bunch of
pointless, lackluster, unpleasant people who sit around a bar all day. 
Imagine CHEERS with all the comedy and life drained away and you'll have
an idea what TREES LOUNGE is like.
     Buscemi has starred for some of the best young talent in
independent cinema: Quentin Tarantino (RESERVOIR DOGS), the Coen
Brothers (FARGO), and Tom DiCillo (LIVING IN OBLIVION).  Apparently, he
wasn't paying attention to their methods of direction, however, because
nothing appears to have rubbed off.  TREES LOUNGE, despite its nods to
John Cassavetes, is stillborn.  I find it somewhat astonishing that
Buscemi managed to round up such a respectable cast (which includes
cameos by the likes of Michael Imperioli, Seymour Cassel, and Samuel L.
Jackson) and secure a distributor. 
     Supporters of this film will undoubtedly claim that it's an
examination of a middle-aged man going nowhere -- a portrait of the
wasted life of a rootless individual.  I can't argue with that, but I'm
not sure what the point is of putting the audience through such a
shallow and tiresome account.  It's not interesting.  It's not
entertaining. There are some attempts at humor, but, for the most part,
they don't work.  It's one thing to have a slow moving story with a
compelling character.  It's quite another to have the situation that
exists here:  a nonexistent plot about a man who means nothing to us.
     We meet Tommy (Buscemi) in a suburban New York City bar called
Trees Lounge, watch him hit on the bartender (Carol Kane), and see him
pal it up with another regular (Mark Boone Junior).  A little later, he
goes and stands outside the garage where he used to work as a mechanic. 
His  former boss, Rob (Anthony LaPaglia), accosts him, and the two
almost come to blows before Tommy's pregnant ex-girlfriend (Elizabeth
Bracco), who is Rob's current squeeze, breaks it up.  So Tommy goes back
to the bar, tries to snort some cocaine (it's a running gag that
something always comes up to prevent him from doing the drug), fails in
an attempt to pick up a girl, then ends up in bed alone.  And so it
goes=85
     For a few minutes, just past the midpoint, the movie turns
interesting.  Tommy becomes romantically involved with his ex-
girlfriend's seventeen year old niece, Debbie (Chloe Sevigny, from
KIDS).  She's the only worthwhile character in this whole mess, but her
predictable relationship with Tommy is never well-developed, and we're
left wondering whether they slept together or just "made out like a
couple of teenagers".  The resolution of this situation, like almost
everything else in TREES LOUNGE, is dissatisfying.  Debbie's father runs
after Tommy with a baseball bat.  If you want to see a thoughtful
examination of an older man/young girl relationship, check out Dennis
Hopper and Amy Locane in CARRIED AWAY.  That film shows how clumsily
Buscemi handles similar material.
     There's more that I could say about TREES LOUNGE, but my words
would be nasty and repetitious, so why bother?  As it is, I've wasted
more time and ink on the movie than it's worth.  I hate to be so
negative, but better luck next time, Steve.  This one's a real dud.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The TREES LOUNGE is populated with all of the locals from a
working class district in one of the Boroughs of New York.  Everyone
shows up at one time or another, but the regulars are the alcoholics,
albeit never regarded as such in the show even if one of them does drop
dead.
     Prolific second fiddle actor Steve Buscemi takes his first turn as
a writer and director in this fictional tale inspired by his life.  Not
autobiographical exactly, but realistic.  He says in the press kit that
he was inspired by the films of John Cassavetes whose "films weren't
heavy on plot; any story that was told was done through characters and
relationships."
     Steve Buscemi plays Tommy, a charter member of the Trees Lounge
drinking establishment.  His lost his job as a mechanic when he
"borrowed" money from the garage and spent it gambling.  Since he is a
terrible mechanic, this is no big loss to the community.
     Of the other regulars at the bar, perhaps the best is
quintessential boozer Bill (Bronson Dudley).  He is a sullen and
grizzled old man who rarely speaks and keeps a stack of bills in front
of him to make sure his glass is constantly full.  Think of him as the
mirror image of Nicolas Cage's happy inebriate in LEAVING LAS VEGAS,
but they both face the same destiny.
     Actually, TREES LOUNGE is not about alcoholism or drug abuse, of
which there is a lot of smoking and snorting, but about the camaraderie
of the lounge's entourage much like that of the Brooklyn smoke shop in
wonderful film SMOKE.  Since Buscemi has been in forty films, he seems
to have a lot of famous acting friends - most of whom show up with some
part in the film.  These include, but are not limited to: Anthony
LaPaglia, Carol Kane, Debi Mazar, Samuel L. Jackson, Seymour Cassel,
and Mimi Rogers.
     Although this is an ensemble cast, the show works or not depending
on how well you like Buscemi's acting.  Buscemi has a unique style as
evidenced in ESCAPE FROM L. A. and FARGO.  For me his best, and only
completely satisfying picture, was FARGO where he played a vicious but
incompetent killer and lowlife.  In TREES LOUNGE he certainly looks the
part, down to bad teeth, thinning hair, and clothes right off the rack
from Goodwill.
     There is no narrative drive in TREES LOUNGE, but rather a stream
of little incidents.  In one scene Tommy engages Crystal (Debi Mazar)
in a drinking contest to see if can get to take her home to bed.  He
resorts to tricks to win, but loses in the end when she passes out.
     When his old Uncle Al (Seymour Cassel) dies behind the wheel of
his ice cream truck, Tommy finally finds a job.  Tommy takes his
seventeen year old girlfriend Debbie (Chloe Sevigny from KIDS) and
drives around selling Good Humor ice cream to the local kids.  Good
humor, of course, being an antonym for Tommy's mood.
     Another bar regular, Mike (Mark Boone Jr.), has a full-time job
running a trucking business, but as his wife Marie (Eszter Balint)
says, "You don't go to work every day.  You go to a bar every day."
     Some of the best scenes in the show are pure ad lib.  In one,
Tommy does a snippet of a Munchkin imitation from THE WIZARD OF OZ to
impress his girlfriend.  In a reoccurring sequence, a small boy keeps
trying, without much luck, to get the ice cream truck to stop and take
his dollar.
     Some small touches are worth noting.  I liked the way they drank a
lowbrow brew like Pabst Blue Ribbon.  I also thought the clothes by
Mari-An Ceo were suitably tacky without being ridiculous.  My favorite
line comes after Rob's (Anthony LaPaglia) wife Theresa (Elizabeth
Bracco) gives birth.  Tommy comments on her baby, "He's a little old
man.  Can't you take some of the wrinkles out?  You've given birth to
Mr. Magoo."
     All of this having been said, there is little compelling in the
picture.  The characters although quirky are unsympathetically drawn.
Yes, I spent almost a couple of hours with these people, but why did I
pay them a visit?
     TREES LOUNGE runs 1:39.  It is rated R for strong language, a
little violence, and heavy drinking and drug abuse.  There is no sex or
nudity.  I do not think this film is inappropriate for kids other than
perhaps older and mature teenagers.  I know of no reason to see the
movie so I give it a thumbs down and award it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Vince Deehan
Written and Directed by Steve Buscemi. Cast :  Steve Buscemi, Chloe Sevigny,
Anthony LaPaglia, Elizabeth Bracco, Mark Boone Junior,  Seymour Cassel, 
Carol Kane, Bronson Dudley.
UK Release Date: Feb 14 1997.
TREES LOUNGE is the entertaining directorial debut from one of the most 
enjoyable actors around, Steve Buscemi.  Whether he is playing the bellboy 
Chet ( "Chet!") from BARTON FINK or the hitman in THINGS TO DO IN 
DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD, Busecmi is always a joy to watch.
He commands attention whenever he's on the screen and  I have never 
seen him  give a bad performance yet.  He has worked with a huge array of 
talented directors including the Coen Brothers, Robert Altman, Jim Jarmusch and 
Quentin Tarantino and I am delighted to say that he has shown with this film 
that he has plenty of directorial talent himself.
In TREES LOUNGE Buscemi plays the lead role of Tommy, a 30-something car 
mechanic who has been fired  for "borrowing" (as Tommy puts it) 
money from his boss and neglecting to return it.  His boss Rob  (Anthony 
LaPaglia) is now married to Tommy's ex-girlfriend Theresa  (Elizabeth Bracco) 
who is now pregnant with a child who may or may not be Tommy's.  Tommy spends
most days standing outside his former workplace which irritates Rob greatly.  
Rob stole Theresa from Tommy which perhaps explains why Tommy is keen to 
irritate Rob !
Spending time standing outside Rob's garage is, however, merely a pleasant 
diversion for Tommy's main preoccupation which is propping up the counter in 
his favourite bar Trees Lounge, named presumably because of the 
single, sad looking tree which sits just outside.  The bar itself is not 
particularly attractive and would be unlikely to attract any passing trade. 
It would appear to be only used by a select few regulars who , like Tommy, 
spend many hours there each day drinking their lives away and generally 
feeling sorry for themselves.  
We see Tommy walking the streets in search of work as a mechanic.  He gives 
the impression that he couldn't care less whether he got work or not.  He knows 
full well that his old boss Rob would not be able to provide him with a 
glowing reference but he nonetheless  tries to get work.  When Tommy's Uncle Al 
(Seymour Cassel)  has a heart attack and dies at the wheel of his ice cream 
van, he is offered the chance to take over the job, which he does.  Tommy knows
that he is hardly suited to the job but he gives it a shot.  While on the 
round Debbie (Chloe Sevigny), the seventeen year old niece of his ex-girlfriend,
joins him one day and they strike up a friendship which soon leads to a 
romance.  Needless to say, when Debbie's father Jerry (Daniel Baldwin) finds 
out, he is none too pleased.
We also meet another regular of the bar, called Mike (Mark Boone Junior).  
Mike owns a removals firm but is having marital problems and has taken to 
spending his current vacation  sitting in the bar all day drinking, and taking 
drugs in the bathroom.
In TREES LOUNGE Steve Buscemi treats all the characters with obvious 
affection despite their shortcomings.  The character of Mike is particularly 
interesting since he obviously has a lot going for him: his own company, his 
own house and a wife and child; but despite this he prefers to retreat from 
his responsibilities and wallow in self-pity in the  bar all day.  We don't  
really get to understand Mike's actions nor any of the other characters, but 
this isn't really a fault.  I don't think Steve Buscemi set out to create a 
deep character study but rather he has created a lot of characters whose 
behaviour we have to take at face value.   Why, for instance, does the old man 
at the bar, Bill, spend his entire day  (or so it seems) drinking , before 
been carried paralytic into his small bedsit above the bar.  What has happened 
in his life that has gotten him into this state ?  We don't get to find out.  
We just have to imagine it for ourselves. 
The acting from the whole cast (including brief cameos by Samuel L. Jackson 
and Mimi Rogers) is of a high standard throughout. Buscemi 
himself is  as wonderful as ever, but special mention should go to Chloe 
Sevigny (KIDS) who handles the potentially tricky role as the teenage Debbie 
with ample style and grace.  She never comes across as precocious for one 
minute which would be the pitfall for a less talented young actress.  
TREES LOUNGE is a wonderful directorial debut from one of America's most 
likeable and interesting character actors and I hope that we will see more 
from him.

Author
Christopher Null
     Get this tagline for TREES LOUNGE:  "A story about one man's
search... for who knows what."  That could describe quite well
writer/director/star Steve Buscemi during his creation of this film, a
quirky and melodramatic tragicomedy about... who knows what.
     Buscemi plays Tommy, a regular guy in Long Island whose life is
basically a series of alcoholic binges, sprinkled with failed love
affairs, cheap drugs, and terminal unemployment.  A parade of supporting
characters (all played by Buscemi's personal friends) run in and out of
his life, and everyone tries to make some sense of it all.
     The Trees Lounge is the unfortunately-named bar where Tommy spends
virtually all of his time.  It's the kind of joint where a guy can walk
into one night and come back out 20 years later, wondering where his
life went.  It's the kind of place you can almost smell -- or maybe that
was just the movie theater's goo-encrusted floor.
     I get the feeling that TREES LOUNGE is the movie that all
filmmakers are secretly dying to make -- a personal portrait of simple
life, nothing but depression all the way.  The reason this kind of movie
doesn't get made more often is because (1) no studio in their right mind
would let someone do such a thing [case in point: TREES LOUNGE is being
released by the only-recently-out-of-bankruptcy Orion Pictures], and (2)
when you get down to brass tacks, not many people *really* want to make
a movie about someone that's more pathetic than they are.
     Still, I've got to admire Buscemi for doing it anyway.  Buscemi has
complained in interviews about having trouble writing the script for
TREES LOUNGE, and it shows, but at least he doesn't let the self-pity
get too thick, applying liberal doses of comedy to counter the tragic
underscore of the film.  Overall, he ends up with a picture that isn't
half bad, but which just doesn't make for a light matinee and
*certainly* isn't "fun for the whole family."
     As a director, Buscemi isn't awful, but he isn't great.  As far as
his casting choices, they're fine, except for his breaking of the
cardinal rule that Daniel Baldwin should never be allowed to be in a
movie.  Chloe Sevigny (KIDS) is a fun Lolita, and minor roles like
Bronson Dudley's eternal barfly are a scream, and they really show
Buscemi's knack for comedy.  Let's hope he explores this a little more
in his next offering.
     P.S.  Be sure to watch for the cameo by the faux-Reservoir Dogs
(it's in the first five minutes).
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit The Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Paul Miller
Trees Lounge is the directoral debut from one of my favorite actors,
Steve Buscemi.  He gave memorable performences in In the Soup, Fargo,
and Reservoir Dogs.  Now he tries his hand at writing, directing and
acting all in the same flick.
The movie starts out awfully slow with Tommy(Buscemi) hanging around a
local bar the "Trees Lounge" and him pestering his brother.  It's
obvious he a loser. But as he says "It's better I'm a loser and know I
am, then being a loser and not thinking I am."  Well put. 
The story starts to take off when his uncle dies, and Tommy, not having
a job, decides to drive an ice cream truck.  Well, the movie starts to
pick up with him finding a love interest in a 17 year old girl named
Debbie (Chloe Sevigny) and...
I liked this movie alot even though it did not reach my expectation. 
After you've seen him in Fargo and Reservoir Dogs, you know he is
capable of a better performence.  I think his brother, Michael, did an
excellent job for his debut performence.
Mr. Buscemi is off to a good career as a director!

Author
Scott Renshaw
Director:  Steve Buscemi.
Screenplay:  Steve Buscemi
Director of Photography:  Lisa Rinzler.
Producers:  Brad Wyman, Chris Hanley.
Editor:  Kate Williams.
Music:  Evan Lurie.
Starring:  Steve Buscemi, Mark Boone Junior, Chloe Sevigny, Eszter Balint,
Michael Buscemi, Anthony LaPaglia, Elizabeth Bracco, Daniel Baldwin.
Director:  Alan Taylor.
Screenplay:  David Epstein.
Director of Photography:  John Thomas.
Producer:  Uberto Pasolini.
Editor:  David Leonard.
Music:  Rachel Portman.
Starring:  Vincent Gallo, William Forsythe, Adam Trese, Lisa Gay Hamilton,
Bridgit Ryan, Kim Dickens, Gareth Williams.
     When two films as thematically similar as TREES LOUNGE and
PALOOKAVILLE appear virtually on top of one another, you have to take a
look around at the society which inspired them.  Americans have always
rooted for underdogs, but usually they like their underdogs to come out on
top.  What do we make of a pair of movies, both set in the Tri-State area,
which turn mere economic survival as an act of heroism?  TREES LOUNGE and
PALOOKAVILLE may be responses to an urban America where desperation is de
rigeur, but both films struggle to make black comedy out of bleak tragedy,
largely because they take our sympathies for granted.
     TREES LOUNGE, which marks the writing and directing debut of Steve
Buscemi, finds the erstwhile supporting actor playing the lead role of
Tommy Basilio, a man who has lost his job as a mechanic, his long-time
girlfriend Theresa (Elizabeth Bracco) and his way in the world.
Unemployed and unmotivated, Tommy spends his days and nights drowning his
sorrows at the Trees Lounge, a run-down watering hole where the other
regulars are almost as bad off as he is.  Among them is Mike (Mark Boone
Junior), who escapes from his apparently successful business and family at
the Trees, and Bill (Bronson Dudley), a lost soul who keeps his cash on
the bar to keep the drinks coming.  When Tommy finally gets a job
opportunity driving the ice cream truck left behind by his deceased uncle,
he is distracted by Debbie (KIDS' Chloe Sevigny), Theresa's 17-year-old
niece who is looking for an escape of her own.
     There is a detached verisimilitude to the people and situations in
TREES LOUNGE -- the indulgent bartender (Carol Kane); the barroom
conversations where strangers become best friends or lovers in the space
of a few hours -- which keeps it just interesting enough to earn the
benefit of the doubt for a while.  Buscemi gives his characters full
histories, and peppers the film with quirky moments like the repeatedly
thwarted efforts of one young boy to buy ice cream, yet the payoffs are
rather unsatisfying.  TREES LOUNGE cruises along, building up atmosphere
like a film in search of a Tom Waits soundtrack, but when it is all said
and done you might wonder what Buscemi wanted us to make of his cast of
not-so-beautiful losers.  Although he manages to get you interested in
what _might_ happen to them, he is not as successful at getting you to
care about what _does_ happen to them.
     That's more than you can say about the palookas in PALOOKAVILLE.  The
story involves three best friends -- Russ (Vincent Gallo), Sid (William
Forsythe) and Jerry (Adam Trese) -- all of whom are facing tough economic
times.  Russ is living at home with his mother, sister and brother-in-law;
Jerry has a child and a wife (Lisa Gay Hamilton) who is about to lose her
job at a supermarket; Sid and his dogs face eviction at any moment.
Together they decide that all they need to get back on their feet is a
"momentary shift in lifestyle"...more specifically, one big robbery.
While they plan for that big score, they struggle with relationships and
with half-hearted attempts to make legitimate money.
     PALOOKAVILLE was inspired by a collection of short stories (by
Italian writer Italo Calvino), and it feels every bit of it.  Director
Alan Taylor flits back and forth between episodes like Sid's budding
romance with a clerk at a used furs store (Bridgit Ryan) and the friends'
failed effort at starting a shuttle service for elderly shoppers, but he
never manages to unify them.  There is a real lack of narrative momentum
in PALOOKAVILLE, as stories bob and weave around the characters, giving
them just enough personality (Jerry's sweet tooth, Sid's soft spot for
dogs) to make it evident that they needed more.  Kim Dickens has a few
nice moments as Russ's young girlfriend, but our three protagonists are
never quite as sympathetic as they are pathetic.
     I suppose that is what makes PALOOKAVILLE even more disappointing
than TREES LOUNGE:  writer David Epstein seems to assume that we will feel
for his characters simply because they are in financial trouble.  There
are moments in PALOOKAVILLE when its serious turns make it clear that
there is a Statement About Desperate Times lurking beneath the attempts at
gallows humor, yet there is little effort to show that the predicaments of
Jerry, Sid and Russ are beyond their control.  In TREES LOUNGE, Tommy at
least comes to an understanding that he is partly responsible for his own
troubles, and that his preferred cure for those troubles may be even
worse; as sluggish as it may be, it does take Tommy on a journey of 
growth.  PALOOKAVILLE makes the mistake of asking us to identify with
three men who don't even seem to be trying, who surrender at any sign of
difficulty.  Yes, it's rough out there, as both TREES LOUNGE and
PALOOKAVILLE do an adequate job of presenting, but most of us already know
that.  Social consciousness still requires a story, and characters with a
motivation to make themselves -- and not just their bank accounts --
better.

Author
Dave Cowen
Tommy (Steve Buscemi) lives directly over the Trees Lounge, a local
bar like any other local bar.  He shares the counter with Bill
(Bronson Dudley), an old timer who keeps a pile of bills on the
bar to keep the drinks coming.  When he's not drinking, he's 
stalking Rob (Anthony LaPaglia) who stole Tommy's girlfriend 
Theresa (Elizabeth Bracco) after Tommy stole 1500 dollars of his
money.  Tommy's a mechanic with a car that doesn't run, so his job 
prospects are pretty slim.  Ultimately, he gets a job working as 
a Good Humor man after his Uncle Al (Seymour Cassel) who used to
drive the truck dies.  As he runs his route, Theresa's 17 year old
niece Debbie (Chloe Sevigny) hops on board to smoke and run the 
route with him, and as they grow closer, Tommy's life starts falling
apart.
The scenes between Tommy and Chloe have a genuine chemistry: a 
mascara-drenched Sevigny plays her lolita-esque part just right,
Buscemi's Tommy can be genuinely funny in a resigned and awkward 
way, and the scenes between those two are by far the best in the film.
Unfortunately, the film jumps from focusing on Tommy to the 
relationships between Rob and Theresa, Theresa's sister and her 
husband, and a relationship between bar regular Mike and his wife 
Marie.  These scenes are handled with all the wit and care of a 
sitcom, and the acting and writing in these scenes are sub-par at 
best.  The  movie only seems interesting or even genuine when 
Tommy and Chloe are on the screen, and that's just a quarter of 
the film.  
Strangely, the final shot of the film is one of the best I've 
seen -- a slow motion shot of Buscemi's face slowly and subtly 
contorting into expressions of confusion, derision and contempt -- 
a shot which unfortunately belies the nature of the rest of the
film.  TREES LOUNGE doesn't seem to know whether it wants to be
bleak or a comedy.  Most of the time it's a rather conventional and
uninteresting comedy.  Buscemi's film would have been much better off 
should he had settled on bleak.
-- 
signed: ESCHATFISCHE, david     h t t p : / /w w w . f i s c h e . c o m
(esch@fische.com) ------------------------------------------------------

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Steve Buscemi's excellent directorial debut, mapping the territory
of a career drinker whose life has gone off the rails. Wry and intelligent,
and not more than a little sad.
The first time we see Tommy, he's zonked in a booth at closing time in the
bar that he lives above. The barmaid gives him a kick -- hard enough to wake
him up, not hard enough to actually hurt the guy. We somehow sense they have
done this before. Tommy (an excellent Steve Buscemi) is a career drinker, a
man whose life has turned bit by bit into applied research on the effects of
inebriation. Only natural since everything else in his life has failed him.
Anyone who thinks barflys are romantic, somehow, need to meet a few.
Tommy, like many career drinkers, is determined not to let himself be blamed
for anything. Sure enough, the next day, he's scoping out his former boss
and girlfriend. Sure he embezzled from the guy and blew the wad in Atlantic
City, but he made his girl dump him and then married her, the bastard! And
the more we watch Tommy, the more we despair of him ever really shifting out
of neutral and doing anything genuine with his life.
All of this may make TREES LOUNGE sound impossibly depressing. It's not.
Buscemi, as director and screenwriter, has found just the right tone for
this story -- a kind of wryness, a deadpan humor that's not without a little
sadness. Another director would film this kind of material as all-out
melodrama, with D.T.s and hysterics and God knows what else. Buscemi has
apparently lived through a good deal of what he puts on the screen, and so
keeps everything on a firmly realistic level. He knows what fits and what
doesn't.
I love movies like this. They take a gallery of sharply defined characters
and let them be themselves, instead of dropping them into a stupid prefab
plot. There is a plot in the movie, but it comes as a natural outgrowth of
what the characters do, not as a way of forcing something to happen. Mike
Leigh is another director who has this kind of approach; his NAKED worked in
roughly the same way, but was far less forgiving. TREES LOUNGE is more
careful and sad than bitter, but is still good at showing us why some people
just never seem to get a toehold.
Tommy solves his problem of a job by driving an ice cream truck, taking the
route that belonged to a beloved relative (just before he dropped dead of a
heart attack). He meets a precocious young girl named Debbie (Chloe Sevigny,
also in KIDS), and they seem to hit it off well, but Tommy is
pathologically incapable of accepting any responsibility.
We've known people like Tommy. God knows I have, and that's the key to the
movie's success. Tommy's answer to life is to get another drink -- not even
as a kind of oblivion, the way one of his septuagenarian bar buddies does
throughout the movie, but just as a way of finding a familiar piece of
terrain. He's more at home with the bottle than he is with another human
being, and he's not alone -- there are other denizens of the Trees who are
no less screwed-up, but that doesn't mean Tommy has a support structure or
anything. In the end, it's just him and his bottle of beer and bourbon.
Again. And it's his own damn fault.
