Title
Review for Hard to Kill (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg A. Hooten
REVIEW OF STEVEN SEGAL'S NEW MOVIE _HARD TO KILL_
     I had some serious problems with this whole movie.  It took so much
suspension of disbelief that I could not really escape the fact that this is a
repeat of all poor cop movies that I have seen before.  In fact, the repeats
were so poorly done, that many of the lines that were supposed to have strong
impact, or loving tenderness made the audience laugh.  
     The fight scenes were good, but the same as the last movie (ABOVE THE
LAW), probably more stilted then the last, and had really nothing more
spectacular than the last movie.  There are actually fewer Aikido scenes,  and
very similar moves (identical) as the previous, and he is so wheedling and
condescending to his opponents (they probably don't deserve better) that he
shows no humility or fear at all.  Makes him out to be a superman with no
chance on not getting out of the problem.  
     The story line is not original (as none really are any more) and has
nothing new to say about either the characters or the art in which we are
wanting to see.  The training sequences (always one of my favorites) were
hackneyed and unoriginal with cliched or unbelievable sections throughout.  
     The dialog was slack, unoriginal, and unimaginative.
     The violence level was up there, with many people being broken and beaten
throughout.  And that is only on his part, there is further violence that gets
him in this state of rage.  I guess Joe Bob Briggs would call this a several
galloner or something.  
     Kelly Le Brock, who has had several vivacious and sexy roles in the past,
is neither in this.  It seems as if she forgot how to act in the intervening
years.  It felt like she was there simply because she is Steven Segal's real
life wife.  She does nothing for the role, being neither sexy or intelligent,
or better, a combination of both.  
     Steven Segal is not very sexy or intelligent in his role either.  He is an
aikido master, he is good looking, and moves very fine, but has no range as an
actor.  There is never any change in his expression to rage, pain (except
physical) or happiness.  He goes in, gets the job done, and doesn't care who
loves or cares about him.  Very cold.
     Now, before people get to me about this coldness, there are ways to make a
movie with all this limited emotion and make it real, but you must show us the
psychological build up of it all, none of this was clear.  No inner workings,
no glimpse of himself, except once, and it was good, but stood out so much
because of the quality of the rest of the movie.  
