Title
Review for Wolf (1994)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Ralph Benner
     The most visually striking sequence to grace a Mike Nichols movie
thus far is the opening one for WOLF. A wink to THE SHINING, Jack
Nicholson is driving his car through snowy mountainous terrain; the
long shots are tenebrous, a little Germanic and foreboding -- a setting
as Xmas card from Lon Chaney, Jr. It's so moody and enveloping, and
augmented by (finally!) some real movie music by Ennio Morricone, that,
based on his other pictures, you wonder if Nichols had anything to do
with it. The zoom & swirl of Haskell Wexler's work in WHO'S AFRAID OF
VIRGINIA WOOLF? the one exception, Nichols' movies are
functional-looking -- just enough of whatever it takes to make them
pass as movies. That's why some of us dread going to a Nichols movie;
we're paying to see what is basically TV monitor. And WOLF
unfortunately becomes television too -- the office sets, Michelle
Pfeiffer's guest house digs and the conclusion make you cringe from
their lack of appeal and ingenuity. However, because of the opening,
and because Nicholson's darting eyes and brows are being utilized most
fittingly, WOLF maintains a hold.
     The little boy-caught-withkie-jar kind of acting that Nicholson
relies on has a limited charm; when the part can soak up his
"immaturity," like in THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, he's disarming -- he
makes us smile when we know he hasn't earned it. We give in because
he's our idea of a capricious satyr. He can also be damned awful when
he tips the degenerate scales: his whacked out Johnny Carson stuff in
THE SHINING is memorable precisely because he lost control. (In his
defense, he gave the material what it deserved; Kubrick, though, tried
to layer it as an intellectostrata it couldn't support.) In WOLF, as
one, he's got carte blanche built in to literally chew things up but,
minus the last thirty minutes, he reins himself in; for the first hour
or so, his metamorphosis is comicly subtle and engaging: this actor's
born to sniff out the scent of booze and sex, to use his mouth to undo
the clothing of his mate, to growl. It seems natural for Nicholson to
have his carnal senses intensified -- and appreciated: says his wife
(Kate Nelligan) on the answering machine, "You animal." Though the
credits don't acknowledge Chaney's THE WOLF MAN, scripters Jim Harrison
and Wesley Strick update it in a way that perhaps unconsciously borrows
from Diane Keaton's BABY BOOM.  In that one Keaton's a high priestess
in Executiveland who gets the temporary shaft in a conspiracy led by
(if memory serves) James Spader.  Spader indeed plays conspirator in
WOLF, conniving to take over Nicholson's senior editor position when
money bags Christopher Plummer buys out the publishing firm. And, like
Keaton, Nicholson seeks revenge.  He warns Spader, "I'm going to get
you," and there's no doubt that he will. It's a pleasure to watch
Nicholson plotting this way -- he's using his innate likability, his
common sense, his rarely used gift of calm -- and even more pleasurable
is that he's not loaded down with obscenities.  The regret is that
Nichols and the writers decided to forego Nicholson's "normal state"
and opt for a goofy climax and final that betray him, and Michelle
Pfeiffer too. You really want him back in the office, snarling at
management to protect his stable of writers. At least between full
moons.
     With the kind of talent gathered here to make junk food from the
recipe of a horror classic, audiences have the right to believe the
chefs would bring something new to the dish. What's the point of a
remake if they don't? WOLF doesn't add much to mix except two super
stars.  Maybe Nichols, who isn't the top choice for a project like
this, thought Nicholson and Pfeiffer would be enough; bordering on the
offensive is that he relied on them to gloss over what he, out of
laziness, didn't make clever. When the climax comes about, we're
stupefied by Pfeiffer's utterances: she's covering up the series of
events that don't need to be covered up. All the pieces fall into place
and yet we're asked to accept that the cops will continue to hunt down
the innocent. The writers dismiss the canine blood and the amulet --
the former sufficient evidence against the killer, the latter a
sufficient controller of behavior. The climax and ending cheat us out
of the sophisticated wrap we all deserve: it's a criminal waste to have
stars of this magnitude in this day and age surrendering to the call of
the wild. My idea of the perfect ending for WOLF: Nicholson and
Pfeiffer get hitched, and at the reception, Pfeiffer's daddy Plummer
bestows his generosity: "I've got my jet ready to take you on the
honeymoon of your dreams." The next shot: the beauty & the beast arrive
at a resort called Chaney's. The closing shot: Jack puts an amulet
around Michelle's neck and, flashing his incorrigible, wicked smile,
says, "You're gonna need this."

Author
Steve Rhodes
     WOLF is an excellent movie directed by Mike Nichols.  It is not a
horror show although there are some pretty gruesome images.  It is not
a love story although there is some major heat between the two
attractive stars, Jack Nicholson and Michelle Pfeiffer.  It is not a
story about big business although that is the underlying subtext of the
entire plot.  What is it then? I think it is a character study of two
people's relationship somewhat with each other, but more with life.
     In the very first scene in the movie, Jack is bitten by a wolf and
his troubles and joys begin.  His senses, especially smelling and
hearing, become superhuman.  Early on too, he realizes what a lousy
marriage he has and how great Pfeiffer is and could be.  He is married
to Kate Nelligan, who was so wonderful in EYE OF THE NEEDLE, and his
marriage is not working.
     At the office Jack is a senior editor for a publishing house which
is being taken over by a ruthless billionaire (Christopher Plummer).
Jack may or may not lose his job in the process to his own protege,
James Spader (whose best role was in SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE).
     The acting of a young slimeball by Spader is right on the mark.
Plummer plays his usual bad guy, nothing special.  Nelligan has a not
very well written role as the wife but does a plausible job.  The star
of the show for me was Pfeiffer.  She seems to get younger and more
beautiful in every movie she is in.
     Jack plays the wolf role to the hilt, BUT regardless of how smart
it was to cast him in the title role, thus adding tens of millions of
dollars to the box office take, I had trouble seeing a fat older man as
a wolf.  Maybe if they made him up to look a bit younger and he had
lost 20 pounds, I could have believed it was him leaping so high and
far.  Don't get me wrong, I liked him in it, and he did his best, still
I think the role was badly miscast.
     WOLF runs 2:03.  It gets an R rating for blood and gore.
Teenagers will should be able to see it and will probably like it.  I
rate it *** (almost gave it more), and I recommend it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Amanda Tuttle
Starring: Jack Nicholson, Michelle Pfeiffer, Kate Nelligan,
          James Spader, and Christopher Plummer
Directed by: Mike Nichols
     Okay, anybody ever see I WAS A TEENAGE WEREWOLF?  How about AN
AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON?  Horror fan staples, right? Well, if you
thought those special effects were cheesy, or just not up to Hollywood
par, you might want to wait until WOLF comes out on video.  However, if
you're a die-hard Jack fan (as I am) don't wait ...  *perfect* casting
with Jack as publishing house editor-in-chief dealing with human wolves
in the concrete jungle.  Says something about civilization, although at
times, I felt it said it just a little too loud to be profound.  The
evil but dashing James Spader fulfills the "bad guy" role pretty well,
although his bad guy is like Alex Keaton from FAMILY TIES without the
Nixon worship.  Michelle is beautiful as ever, although the plot seemed
to find her switching from a "naughty-poor-little-rich-girl" character,
to a sentimental and confused "you're-the-first-good-man-I've-ever-known"
weeper.  Hmmmmmm ....
     However, overall, the movie was more comedy and a bit of suspense
than any *real* horror.  There were no real murder scenes, although
there's a bit of gore under the fingernails of the plot, and the action
is riveting, but those scenes were few and far between.  As for the
actual cinematography, some of the shots were interesting (see Jack
jump. see Jack pounce.), but the slow-motion sequences are a bit too
exaggerated (translated: cheesy) for my taste.  The music was a bit too
melodramatic at times, and some of the lighting was ... shall we
say ... cliche??  The special effects were also a little tame compared to
most "metamorph" films and was sort of disappointing.  But overall, it
was fun to watch, and the effect was one of a human in an animal city
who finds the better part of his nature coming out in the
"beast" ... deja vu?  Yeah, but slightly different angles and even a
little sad at times, although most of it is great humor.  Watch for a
great scene in the men's restroom with Jack and James.
     The great thing about this movie is that there's actually some
(gasp!) character development that made it very fulfilling to watch, in
the sense that you could feel for Jack's character from almost the very
beginning.  A movie for romantics, for people who like thrillers and
dry humor, for people who love Jack, but *not* for people who are
expecting a nice Fangoria treat.  Don't believe the
trailers ... sorry ....
P.S.  In case you've heard the rumors and are wondering about them, there
      is *no* computer animation with the wolves.  They used puppets, 
      though, and I think real footage of wolves superimposed ....

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  6/17/94 
Running Length:  2:05 
Rated:  R (Violence, language, mature themes, sexual situations) 
Starring:  Jack Nicholson, Michelle Pfeiffer, James Spader,
           Kate Nelligan, Richard Jenkins, Christopher Plummer 
Director:  Mike Nichols 
Producer:  Douglas Wick 
Screenplay:  Jim Harrison and Wesley Strick 
Cinematography:  Giuseppe Rotunno 
Music:  Ennio Morricone 
Released by Columbia Pictures 
     As the saying goes, "everything old is new again."  In the Fall of
1992, there was Francis Ford Coppola's version of DRACULA.  This
November, that will be joined by Kenneth Branagh's take on
FRANKENSTEIN.  And, in between, we have the Mike Nichols/Jack Nicholson
collaboration on the legend of THE WOLF MAN.  Less a remake than a new
exploration of lycanthropy, WOLF nevertheless recalls the days of
black-and-white horror films, when names like Bela Lugosi, Boris
Karloff, and Lon Chaney, Jr. topped marquees with the promise of chills
and shudders.
     For the most part, however, WOLF's strengths are in entirely
different areas than its most obvious inspiration, 1941's THE WOLF
MAN.  While both movies boast an excellent, almost-palpable sense of
atmosphere, and share some necessary plot elements, there the
similarities end.  This film brings the mythology into the nineties,
complete with corporate power struggles, cheating wives, and an
attempted mugging in Central Park.
     All WOLF demands of its audience is that they accept the idea that
a man bitten by a wolf can be mystically turned into that animal.  The
film is directed with sufficient flair by Mike Nichols, and acted ably
enough by its cast, to make this suspension of belief a facile task.
The problems surrounding the movie have nothing to do with its
premise.
     The picture opens with Will Randall (Jack Nicholson), the chief
editor at a New York City publishing office, driving down a snowy
Vermont road, using his sleeve to wipe away condensation on the front
window.  Suddenly, there's a shape ahead and his car slams into a
wolf.  When he gets out to investigate, he is bitten, and the infection
begins to have its sinister effects.
     The first changes are apparent in the sudden acuity of his sensory
perceptions and a marked shift in personality.  No longer a meek,
easygoing man, Will becomes decidedly "wolfish" in fighting for his job
when billionaire Raymond Alden (Christopher Plummer) takes over the
publishing firm and threatens to replace him with the weasel-like
sycophant Stewart Swinton (James Spader).  Will also gains a measure of
courage when it comes to dealing with members of the opposite sex, as
is displayed in his interactions with Alden's daughter Laura (Michelle
Pfeiffer).
     The office politics, and how Will's new "identity" affect his
dealings with his boss, co-workers, and clients, are masterfully
handled by Nichols, whose edge of satire is sharpened to its keenest.
The director might have been advised to spend more time in this
setting, because when his film moves outdoors, and the transformation
becomes literal, WOLF finds itself sputtering.
     As tremendous as the character interaction is, the "horror"
sequences, which feature rather routine transformations (courtesy of
makeup virtuoso Rick Baker), are flat.  Monster movies are supposed to
frighten the audience; this one fails utterly in that arena.  It's odd
to say that Nicholson isn't scary, but that's mainly because he plays
his character with a touch of subtlety that courts, and wins, the
audience's sympathy.
     The last half of WOLF is a disappointment.  The corporate
wrangling dissolves into the background as other, less-enjoyable
subplots take center stage.  Will's cautious relationship with Laura
(which includes inspired dialogue about what she wants in a man)
suddenly--and irrationally--turns passionately romantic, complete
with dumb lines like "I love you more than I've ever loved anyone
else."  And action and silly fangs are given too much prominence in an
unnecessary and misplaced climactic battle.
     The acting, both by the leads and the supporters, is solid.
Nicholson's restrained performance makes Will Randall believable and,
although somewhat underused, Michelle Pfeiffer still creates a
reasonably-balanced personality for Laura.  James Spader's Stewart
calls to mind another member of the animal kingdom--the rat.  Kate
Nelligan, Richard Jenkins, and Eileen Atkins all do fine jobs in small
roles, and Christopher Plummer's corporate tycoon is a delight to
behold.
     Ironically, it's the werewolf part of WOLF that's the least
successful.  Lacking the style and panache of the better elements of
the film, the scenes of Nicholson prowling on all-fours somehow fail to
impress.  Nichols successfully punctures the jugular when he focuses on
predators in suits; his efforts are less accurate when WOLF's attention
shifts to those with hair on their palms.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Jeff Pidgeon
        "Wolf" is the first film I can recommend unconditionally that's been
released this summer.  It's got a great script with a fair number of memorable
lines.  The performances are uniformly strong, and Michelle in paticular plays
one of the most interesting characters I've ever seen her do.  Jack is as 
nasty as he needs to be, but the rest of the time he delivers a subtle, con-
trolled performance.  Mike Nichols directs the whole thing with his usual re-
straint, but with more visual flair than you might expect.  By playing the fant
sy element down and working with well-written characters and situations, he
manages to ground what would ordinarily be an out-and-out ridiculous plot.
The plot turns are set up well in advance, but I didn't see them coming (ex-
cept for perhaps the last one, and it didn't bother me).  Morricone's score is
moody and supports the film well in general, even if it isn't totally compel-
ling on its own.  This isn't a paticularly scary film (it slow pacing and short
climax may irritate some), but it is compelling and suspenseful.  Rick Baker's
makeup is well-executed, though it may be disappointing to those expecting
another "American Werewolf" or "Howling" high-water mark in effects work.  Low
key is definately the idea here, which I think works just fine considering 
what was needed.  Kudos go also to James Spader who may take the "Slimy Shit 
of the Millenium" award away from the Company fella in "Aliens".  The blood
level is fairly high, but not anything that anyone who's seen "Bram Stoker's
Dracula" can't handle.  The sex scenes are quite low key as is the rest of the
film.  It definately makes you sit up and notice when the action gets going.
An extra bonus is the trailer for the Coppola/Branaugh "Frankenstein"...similar
to "Dracula" in its visual voluptuousness and sexual emphasis.  Not quite as
capital-G Gothic or as capital-D Designed, though.  Still, very cool looking
and shows promise.  Can't wait for November 4th...or was it September?  I for-
get.  Anyway, check out "Wolf".  As the saying goes, you'll be glad you did.

Author
James J. DiBenedetto
Directed By: Mike Nichols
Starring: Jack Nicholson, Michelle Pfeiffer, James Spader
     It's not the best werewolf movie ever made.  It's not the best
movie of the year.  It's not even the best movie I've seen this week.
But WOLF is an intelligent and entertaining film, well worth seeing.
     The plot is a relatively straightforward one: Will Randall is
driving home from Vermont when he hits an animal.  He gets out to
investigate, examining his victim by the light of the (naturally) full
moon.  And guess what?  It's not, as Will (Jack Nicholson) probably
suspected, a dog, but a wolf.  And, as Will probably didn't suspect,
it's still alive, which it demonstrates by biting Will on the hand.
The next morning, Will goes into work, and into a situation to which
being bitten by a wolf might be preferable.  He's being squeezed out in
a corporate takeover, with his job being handed to his "protege,"
Stuart (James Spader).  This unhappy transition is confirmed that
evening, at a party given by the unpalatable billionaire Mr. Alden.
After receiving his news, Will gets another shock - something's
happening to him, and in the midst of his surprise and pain, he meets
the lovely Laura Alden (Michelle Pfeiffer).
     From there, things are somewhat predictable, and I don't want to
spoil the movie for anyone, so I'll leave the synopsis at that.  As for
commentary, it's an intelligent film.  The dialogue is very smart and
witty, and, if one can accept the premise of werewolves, the plot holds
together pretty well.  It's also a beautiful film--Manhattan has
rarely looked better on film--the overhead shots of the city at night
are simply breathtaking.  And as for the acting, Jack's in top form, as
is Michelle Pfeiffer.
     All in all, I'd recommend this film pretty highly....
--
Dr. James J. DiBenedetto - SUNY Buffalo School of Law Class of 1994
jjd@ubunix.buffalo.edu or jjd3@po.cwru.edu

Author
Dragan Antulov
The author of this review is supposed to worship, or at
least respect Mike Nichols as one of the great American
filmmakers, but he can't. Although I never saw anything
particularly wrong in Mike Nichols' films - they all had
interesting stories, good cast etc. - I still have
impression of watching them being equal to the watching
paint dry. So, when even when he tried to make something
different with WOLF, his 1994 horror film, I greeted that
effort without any sort of enthusiasm.
The protagonist of this film is Will Randall (played by Jack
Nicholson), publishing executive from New York who is
currently experiencing plenty of disappointments in his
life. His firm is taken over by business tycoon Raymond
Alden (played by Christopher Plummer) who degrades Randall
and brings Stewart Swinton (played by James Spader),
treacherous yuppie and Randall's former friend to his old
position. To make things even worse, Randall's wife
Charlotte (played by Kate Nelligan) is having an affair.
However, few days before this all happened, Randall was
bitten by a wolf on the isolated country road. Since that
event he notices changes in his metabolism and life patterns
- he sleeps all day and is awake all night, his senses are
better, but the most significant change is willingness to
stand up against his enemies. He becomes even more aware of
this change when he meets Alden's daughter Laura (played by
Michelle Pfeiffer) and begins an affair with her.
Some of the best roles in Jack Nicholson's career were those
of men whose willingness to break the rules or succumb to
irrational urges made them look satanic compared to "normal"
people. So, the role of book editor who is slowly turning
into werewolf was perfect for Nicholson and he plays it with
gusto. Michelle Pfeiffer as his partner is also great and
visually more appealing than in many other movies. The cast
in this film is truly up to task, and Indian actor Om Puri
makes quite an impression in the small episodic role of
lycantropy expert. Nichols puts a lot of effort into
production design and other details, trying to make the
story about lycathropy in New York publishing circles as
realistic as possible, using the classic horror scenario as
the basis for interesting, thought-provoking drama about
inter-office politics, midlife crisis and eternal struggle
between civilisation and irrational urges in individual
humans.
Unfortunately, all those elements go down the drain when
Nichols decides to wrap the story up with cheap horror
cliches and even cheaper murder subplots. The ending is not
the only problem of the film; Nichols, as usual, has
problems with proper pace of the film. Slow-motion shots of
Nicholson as werewolf are overlong, and Ennio Morricone's
score is again quite irritating. So, like in many similar
cases, my skepticism about Mike Nichols' film was justified.
WOLF could be recommended only to those who truly enjoy
Nicholson's acting, even when the rest of the film isn't
quite worthy of his talent.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
John Oswalt
          Capsule review:  A rather standard werewolf story set in
     modern-day New York: excellently cast, and very well done,
     despite the rather weak ending which leaves you saying, "is
     that all?" Jack Nicholson turns in his best performance since
     ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST.  Rating: low +2 (-4 to +4)
     It has been quite a while since Jack Nicholson took the lead in a
major film.  Except for 1990's THE TWO JAKES (which he also directed,
and which bombed), he hasn't carried a movie since PRIZZI'S HONOR.  In
WOLF, he is perfectly cast, and performs well.  He's a bit older, and
slightly toned down, but still has plenty of opportunity to flash us
his patented sardonic grins.  I would rank this performance right up
there with the best of his career, in movies which solidified his
reputation, such as EASY RIDER and FIVE EASY PIECES.
     Jack plays a major publishing-house editor who gets bitten by a
wolf while returning from a business trip to Vermont.  He then begins
changing.  At first, the changes are all positive.  He can see without
his glasses, his bald spot fills in with hair, he can smell and hear
better.  He feels better and has renewed sexual vigor.  He's more
aggressive in attacking the problems he has on the job, and in his
personal life.
     But at night, he loses control and turns into a wolf, and does
awful things which torment him when he is more himself, during the
day.
     Michelle Pfeiffer, never lovelier, plays the love interest, the
grown-up former rebellious X-Generation daughter of the billionaire who
buys Jack's publishing house.  She plays her part very well, but is not
given enough to do.  WOLF is very much Jack Nicholson's movie.
     James Spader is excellent as the main bad guy, the junior executive
who covets Jack's job as senior editor.  His role is reminiscent of Dickens'
Uriah Heep: forever claiming how humble he is, but secretly scheming to take
over.
     I was looking forward to a new score from Ennio Morricone, best
known for his music for THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE UGLY, and the other
Clint Eastwood-Sergio Leone spaghetti westerns.  The music here is
hardly noticeable.  Perhaps that is good, since it blends in and serves
its purpose.
     Om Puri, the rickshaw wallah in Roland Jaffe's CITY OF JOY, has a
small part as an old scholar whom Jack seeks out when he searches for
help in understanding his new powers and predicament.  Puri has made
more than a hundred movies in India, but we have seen very little of
him in the West.  I hope this changes, because he is a fine actor.
     There is some sex and some violence, but it is not particularly
graphic.  The movie is rated R, but I can't see why.  I think PG-13
would be more appropriate.
     Science fiction fans will recognize a wall full of Tor books in
one scene.  Tom Doherty and Tor Books received a thanks in the credits
for this.
     The main failing of the movie is the ending.  It doesn't have the
courage to take the situation to its logical conclusion, and instead
cops out by ending with something which is supposed to be a surprise,
and leaving the main plot question--what happens to Jack--up in the
air.
     But overall, it's quite effective.  All the supporting parts,
including several I didn't mention, are well done.   Mike Nichols does
a solid job of directing.  This is not a special effects movie, but the
effects that there are are believable.  In my opinion, WOLF is the best
release of the summer season so far.  I rate it a low +2 on the Mark
Leeper -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Chong Yu
10. THE FLINTSTONES
     Too much hype, but not enough originality.  Although reusing jokes
from the original cartoon may bring back nostalgic memories in some,
they are still the same repetitive jokes, fresh and original decades
ago, but not today.  Not a complete waste however.  Reminiscent of
Jurassic Park.  Slick presentation (especially Rick Moranis), but
didn't leave time for a real screenplay.
9. CITY SLICKERS 2
     Comparisons to the first are inevitable, but can stand alone.
While the first concentrated on the ineptitude of the vacationers well,
this was not as successful.  But still a lighthearted comedy worth
watching as long as you don't seriously try to enjoy it.  The corny
ending was nearly a let down, but created a possibility for a sequel
with a nice little final scene.
8. THE CLIENT
     Tommy Lee Jones just is not the intelligent law official he was in
THE FUGITIVE, working too much off his reputation from the previous
movie.  Although acting overall was excellent, the implausibility of
three sides in a two-sided conflict often gets in the way.
7. WOLF
     Hailed as another Jack Nicholson triumph.  Although he does put
forth a polished performance, he does not have the same bite of earlier
roles such as Joker in BATMAN.  Poor special effects, but otherwise
superbly done, except for the climactic battle scene.
6. THE CROW
     Violent.  Nihilistic.  Destructive.  Rides on the death of its
star with almost a suicidal urgency.  Nearly flawless, save for the
discovery of hero's "weakness."  Although avoided the glorification of
drugs present in the original comic, it also missed out on the almost
heroic angst of Funboy's death.
5. THE LION KING
     Amidst the accusations of plagiarism and racism, manages to prove
that cartoons (a.k.a. animation) can succeed even with darker themes
(i.e., death).  However, it is still more a showcase of art, animation,
and (to a lesser degree) musical score, than of true direction and
story telling.
4. SPEED
     Solid entertainment.  Worth the hype.  With such a narrow concept,
manages to fill it with an intelligent plotline--a success in
itself--while still keeping the pace fast and exhilarating.
3. WHEN A MAN LOVES A WOMAN
     Too bad it opened too early to be remembered for the Academy
Awards.  Outstanding performances by all three stars.  On the surface
it may seem like a family broken apart by one woman's alcoholism, but
look deeper and you may see something else.  Worth watching again
(especially if you are single now and married later).
2. TRUE LIES
     Arnold Schwarzenegger has finally succeeded in comedy...  almost.
Tom Arnold (of all people) stole the show.  Combines all the best of
great action and great comedic films.  After the slump of THE LAST
ACTION HERO, Schwarzenegger has reproven himself.  Amazing (and
obviously expensive) specal effects, marred only by unfortunate
stereotyping of the Arabic people.
1. FORREST GUMP
     Of all the films thus far this year, deserves Best Picture.
Lighthearted, serious, hilarious, and tragic--uplifting.  A minor
epic.  One of the few films where uncanny special effects blend almost
seamlessly into the scenes.  Excellent cinematography.  Rewrites
history, literally--takes a healthy suspension of disbelief.
Oscar-calibre performance by Tom Hanks despite a few slips.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Jack Nicholson "marks his territory" here with a good 
(if not a little too subdued) thriller/horror film about a businessman 
who finds his life changing after being bitten by a wolf. Soon he 
has telescopic vision, super hearing, hightened smell and the sex 
drive of an 18-year-old (don't even think it--I'm only 17). There's 
another little side-effect of his newfound wolfdom: Every night he 
sneakes out of bed and rips someone's throat out with his teeth, 
only to forget about it by morning (ah yes, the old "sleep-killing" 
alibi -- OJ's latest defense). [Note: this review written in early 1995. 
I'm now 18 and O.J. walks free.]
        Nicholson's rival, in business and in bed, is a fellow 
employee who gets Nicholson's job as senior editor at a publishing 
company, and also gets the job done at home with Nicholson's wife, 
if you know what I mean. This doesn't make the ol' wolf too happy 
and, when his wife is discovered in Central Park, throat missing, 
you know who the Feds point the finger at--Charles Grodin's dog 
Beethoven. Ah yes, the old canine-framed-for-murder alibi (OJ's 
next defense), which leaves Nicholson free to cavort freely 
(because, you know, he's free) with the boss' daughter, the 
lovely Michelle Pfeiffer (with the not-so-lovely last name). 
Who would have thought, a wolf and a cat? Ain't that 
weird?
        Nicholson reveals his "hairy" problem to Pfeiffer who, as 
you'd expect, doesn't take him seriously for a second (a problem I 
know all too well. What, you think that's a joke? I'm serious, no one 
takes me seriously. Okay, that was a joke, but at least I'm trying to 
be serious about this no one taking me seriously issue. And yes, I 
do realize how seriously stupid this routine is, but I'm trying to show 
I'm not all fun and games... I'm also unfunny games. What does that 
mean? I seriously don't know). She soon changes her mind, though, 
when Nicholson brings her a dead rabbit in his mouth for 
Valentine's Day.
        Sure, WOLF is a little strange and is the victim of a stupid 
ending, but Nicholson and Pfeiffer make such a cute couple. Who 
would have thought, the Joker and Catwoman finally together? I 
was wondering when she'd dump that no-good Riddler.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The Frankenstein monster and the vampire each owe their popularity to a
single novel that captured the public's imagination.  Werewolves are much
more a product of the cinema, however.  The closest there comes to being a
classic werewolf novel that impacted cinema is Guy Endore's WEREWOLF OF
PARIS of 1933.  The first well-remembered werewolf film was 1935's WEREWOLF
OF LONDON.  That and THE WOLFMAN (1941) really were what captured the
public's interest in human-animal shape-shifters.  Since that time there
have probably been only four films that did anything really interesting with
the concept.  Those would be (the flawed but original) WOLFEN (1981),THE
HOWLING (1981), the under-rated CAT PEOPLE (1982), and THE COMPANY OF WOLVES
(1984)--odd that they should all be in the space of four years.  Most other
shape-shifter films followed the same rules with minor variations and said
little new about the condition of being a shape-shifter.  Generally you find
someone bitten by a werewolf, usually someone who is unable to express his
rage, who gets an outlet by turning into an animal and letting rage be
channeled in brutal ways.  Unlike vampires, werewolves usually detest their
condition, but they are powerless to control it.  The condition easily
applies itself to a metaphor for severe mental problems much as vampirism is
often a metaphor for drug addiction.
     Right down this centerline of interpretation with almost no spin on the
ball is WOLF.  Jack Nicholson plays Will Randall, an editor for a leading
publisher who looks for literary merit rather than books that will make a
fast buck.  When his publishing house is taken over by a corporate magnate,
Raymond Alden (played by Christopher Plummer), Randall finds himself being
replaced and given the choice of a bad job or none at all.  The old Will was
a softie who would have stood by and taken it.  However, after being bitten
by a wolf on a back Vermont road, Will feel unexplainedly invigorated and
ready to put up a fight.  What follows is an almost by-the-numbers
amalgamation of elements of WEREWOLF OF LONDON and THE WOLFMAN.  This could
almost be titled THE WOLFMAN OF MANHATTAN.
     This is one film that really could have benefited by being done in
black and white.  Director Mike Nichols occasionally manages an atmospheric
scene, but he is no Paul Schrader and Nichols probably would not have had
the clout to insist on black and white or highly muted colors even if he
wanted to use them.  (Perhaps he could have used a werewolf bite himself!)
He also makes the irritating mistake of showing Wolfman Will's superhuman
leaps in slow motion where they look totally unbelievable.  (With Nichols
directing, listen for a voice cameo by his wife, Elaine May.)
     WOLF features sound in THX, the screen's new abbreviation for "too darn
loud."  The werewolf makeup was the creation the talented Rick Baker, though
here the effect is a bit understated.  Wolf-Nicholson looks like a
Dickensian thug with an underbite.  Nichols probably could have chosen more
elaborate special effects but for once a director did not feel the need to
have elaborate special effects up-staging the actors.  However, perhaps
better effects were needed for animatronic wolves, which do not look
realistic.
     Nicholson is a rather obvious choice for a werewolf since he always
seems to be barely keeping his animal side in check.  Nevertheless as the
book editor with a heart who is always looking out for the interest of his
staff, he is less than totally convincing.  Michelle Pfeiffer is on-hand as
an heiress and a woman who runs (around) with the wolves.  James Spader,
Kate Nelligan, and Christopher Plummer co-star and each give a reasonable
performance.
