Title
Review for Jurassic Park III (2001)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Annette Cardwell
While the first Jurassic Park was mediocre and the second film
god-awful, Jurassic Park III finally gets the formula right.  These
movies were never meant to be science heavy or overly sentimental; they
should've been what #3 is -- an amusement park thrill ride packed
wall-to-wall with dinosaurs and more dinosaurs, clocking in at less than
90 minutes with as little dialogue and subplot as possible.  Plus, big
bonus -- no Jeff Goldblum!
Instead of Goldblum, JP3 brings back Sam Neill as the slightly grizzled
Dr. Alan Grant who seems happy to put his terrifying up-close dino
experiences behind him.  Grant and his new protégé Billy (Alessandro
Nivola) are once again looking for funding for their research, and are
coaxed into accompanying a new wealthy benefactor -- Paul Kirby (William
H. Macy) and his wife Amanda (Téa Leoni) -- on a fly-over of the second
Jurassic island, Isla Sorna.  But things turn ugly when the Kirbys
announce they plan to land on the island to search for their 14-year-old
son Eric (Trevor Morgan) who was conveniently lost there while
paragliding.  When the group ends up crash landing in the jungle, the
movie becomes a race to see who will get off the island and who will
become lunch.  (Sounds like a cool idea for the next Survivor.)
While dialogue has never been these films' strongest suit, JP3 remedies
this by having less of it.  Regardless, the writers behind this
screenplay-of-fewer-words are pretty impressive: Alexander Payne and Jim
Taylor are the minds behind Citizen Ruth and Election.  It comes off as
a bit like how a dumb movie turns out when it's penned by smart people
(like a Wayne's World) -- lots of action peppered with throw-away
goofball lines like, "They weren't making dinosaurs; they were playing
God."
As evidenced by dialogue like that, JP3 doesn't take itself too
seriously, which is perhaps its saving grace; and it pulls no punches
when taking potshots at the other two movies.  For example, when Grant
finds Eric (or, rather, after Eric rescues Grant), Eric tells the
scientist, "I've read both your books.  I liked the first one better
than the second."  Also, the so-called millionaire Kirby turns out to be
a plumber.  So much for a repeat of John Hammond.
Above all, JP3 packs in more dinosaurs per square inch than any other JP
film before it.  This time, big, angry reptiles are coming out of the
sky and water as well as land, and the filmmakers even introduce a dino
to rival the T. Rex, a massive monster called Spinosaur (that's right,
dino-fighting).  And, of course, the raptors are back, and now they can
communicate with each other (don't ask, evolution's a bitch).  Most
importantly, none of the humans try to fight the dinosaurs themselves,
so we won't be seeing any unbelievable scenes of kids knocking out
velociraptors with a few gymnastics kicks.
Efficiently crammed with lots of thrills, Jurassic Park III may come off
as a little bit like a big-budget B-movie, but you're not likely to have
a better time at a blockbuster this summer.  It's just loud,
smash-and-crash monster movie fun at its finest.
Director: Joe Johnston
Producer: Steven Spielberg
Writer: Peter Buchman, Alexander Payne, Jim Taylor
Starring: Sam Neill, William H. Macy, Téa Leoni, Alessandro Nivola,
Trevor Morgan, Michael Jeter, John Diehl, Bruce A. Young
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Sam Neill, William H. Macy, Tea Leoni,
Alessandro Nivola, Trevor Morgan, Michael Jeter, John
Diehl. Directed by Joe Johnston. Rated PG-13.
Jurassic Park III is shameless populist entertainment,
short, breezy, well-made and unpretentious. It's the
epitome of the cliche that is the "popcorn movie."
Free of the scientific and ethical mumbo-jumbo that
polluted the first two installments in the series,
director Joe Johnston, with a prodigious technical
skill that rivals Spielberg's, simply turns on the
dinosaur machine and gives the audience what they
expect from a Jurassic Park movie: a hell of a ride.
Plot and dialogue are likewise formalities Johnston
feels free to dispense with, and for once, it's fine
with me. The movie's skeleton is this: paleontologist
Alan Grant (Sam Neill), the only character returning
from the previous films, is recruited by Mr. and Mrs.
Kirby (William H. Macy and Tea Leoni, uh,
respectively), to be their guide as they fly over Isla
Sorna, the island where genetically engineered
dinosaurs roam free. Grant is extremely reluctant to
do this, as he has been extremely critical of the
experiments that brought the specimens into existence.
So imagine his shock when the Kirbys, who have an
ulterior, if not malevolent, motive, land on the
island without consulting him, leaving them to fend
for themselves in a confined space with huge,
unexpectedly intelligent lizards running around.
Then, with nothing standing in its way, the movie
takes off. The dinosaurs look awesome, with the
special effects team employing a new method of mixing
animatronic reptiles with CGI ones. When a giant
lizard chases the characters, the sight is genuinely
frightening; for the first time, the dinosaurs
actually look gargantuan. Like Spielberg, Johnston
also knows what to do with them; too many movie
special effects just sit there on the screen,
expecting us to be awed by their mere existence. These
dinosaurs do everything we'd expect an actual dinosaur
to do, and there is even a jar of T-Rex urine that
makes an appearance.
Perhaps the most remarkable thing about Jurassic Park
III is its running time of less than 90 minutes. A lot
of directors feel that when they are given a lavish
budget, they must make a long movie to justify it (see
The Mummy Returns), and a lot of them wind up feeling
tortuous. Johnston realizes the film's breezy,
thrill-park-ride nature and works accordingly. There
isn't a word, moment or shot wasted; this is the most
stringently utalitarian movie I have ever seen.
The credits roll just about when we would expect the
third act to begin. Though I was having a great time,
this was okay by me. I like suprise endings no matter
the nature of their surprise; others I've talked to
have felt slighted at the lack of a de facto climax,
but their complaints sounded fairly moronic (sorry,
guys). At least you can't call the movie repetitive.
I'm grateful for movies that truly want to entertain,
rather than drown the audience with special effects
and marketing gimmicks. The phrase "popcorn movie"
seems to apply to everything that's not considered an
"art movie," but there's an art to popcorn movies as
well. It is clear, despite the film's simplicity, that
a great deal of work and thought went into all of the
aspects of Jurassic Park III, and not just into the
special effects. Artistry can be found in the
unlikeliest places. 

Author
Homer Yen
"JP III" is like "Alien" for toddlers.  In that sci-fi
thriller, audiences saw oozing aliens on a space
station stalking and munching doomed victims running
amuck.  So, if you've seen that one, you kind of know
what to expect in terms of thrills and chills
(although there's much less gore here). This film
takes place on a deserted island instead of a
spaceship.  And instead of oozing aliens, the hapless
victims try to survive several imposing prehistoric
carnivores.
Dinosaurs are the main draw of this film.  There are
plenty of them, and they are all magnificently
conceived using state-of-the art digital technology. 
We were first introduced to these behemoths eight
years ago when the first "JP" was released.  We were
instantly mesmerized at the effects back then.  And in
the third installment, you'll see that you have not
outgrown its novelty (even if you've seen that
dinosaur special that recently aired on Discovery).  
Among the impressive dinosaur population are
velociraptors that are eerily more vicious and cunning
than you had previously remembered.  There is also a
hungry 44-foot spinosaurus, a more temperamental
predator than the T-Rex that looks forward to a meal
of screaming humans.  But most incredible are the
pteranodons, flying predators (that remind me of those
aliens from "Pitch Black") with talons and grabbing
power that can pick up a Cadillac.  
These magnificent creatures, however, are more
wondrous than any of the human characters are.  
The cast includes Sam Neill, who survived the first
JP.  He returns as a devoted paleontologist who works
feverishly on velociraptor research, forwarding the
bold notion that they were even more intelligent than
primates.  They could've been the dominant species if
not for the great cataclysm.  Of course, these wild
ideas do little for his ability to raise the needed
funds to continue his research while scientists wonder
why he would rather study fossils instead of real
dinosaurs on those islands.  That's because, as he
says, "those creatures are genetically engineered, and
nothing on Earth or in heaven could get me on that
island."
However, an ambitious businessman (William H. Macy)
and his estranged wife (Tea Leoni) convince him
otherwise after promising to make a huge donation for
a guided air tour of one of those islands.  Of course,
the couple have a hidden (but not nefarious) agenda. 
With hidden agendas come bad luck.  And their airplane
crash-lands on the desolate island.  "You know," says
our stoic paleontologist, "we probably won't get off
this island alive."  Indeed some of them don't,
although like in those alien movies, the first to go
are the anonymous extras.  
There are some exciting and even impressive sequences
as everyone tries to avoid being eaten by all manner
of prehistoric monsters.  However, this film's heart
can't stack up to the first two JPs.  This one lacks
the human element that made its predecessors a bit
weightier.  This is primarily a search and rescue
flick with the element of family unity added in. 
Missing is that sense of majesty or the uneasy feeling
that arose when man tampered recklessly with nature. 
What we get is Sam Neill oozing with moral
indignation, Tea Leoni impersonating Kate Capshaw (the
scream queen from Indiana Jones and the Temple of
Doom), and William H. Macy providing goofy comic
relief.  Here, the dinosaurs are truly the more
evolved species.

Author
Walter Chaw
JURASSIC PARK III
** (out of four)
starring Sam Neill, William H. Macy, Téa Leoni, Alessandro Nivola
screenplay by Peter Buchman and Alexander Payne & Jim Taylor
directed by Joe Johnston
-a review by Walter Chaw | walter@filmfreakcentral.net
***For more film, DVD and books about movie reviews, plus annual coverage 
of The Toronto International Film Festival, visit _Film Freak Central_ - 
http://filmfreakcentral.net | Now with search engine***
_Jurassic Park III_ is completely critic proof, a smirking cash machine 
with its amplifiers turned to "11." That it happens to be an amazingly 
tight little film (every single element of its first half predicts a 
correlative in the second) doesn't excuse its bratty attitude. If _Jurassic 
Park III_ were the insolent snot-nosed little punk it most resembles, it'd 
be turning out its lower lip whilst jutting an insouciant chin at potential 
critics and naysayers: "Go ahead," the pipsqueak would say, "hit me with 
your best shot."
The action sequences are occasionally gripping, although for the brevity of 
the film (a scant 85 minutes dripping wet), there's a surprising amount of 
downtime. And while there are twice as many visual effects in _Jurassic 
Park III_ as there were in the first two films combined, they come in 
showcase clusters. To a one, they are either paced so oddly that they point 
more to a potential greatness than any kind of real thrill (a fitfully 
entertaining pteronodon attack), are unforgivably truncated (a neat battle 
between a tyrannosaurus and a spinosaurus), or just disappoint outright 
(the egregious misuse of the "primate-smart" velociraptors)--and that's 
when you can see what's happening through the hyper-cuts and murky 
cinematography.
What should have been a breathless breakneck pursuit/escape sequence 
involving a whole pack of raptors resolves itself with an extended 
stand-off situation in which humans and lizards engage in a limp-wristed 
staring contest, and the ending is so vein-poppingly ludicrous that I have, 
in my time, imagined more plausible rescues in the sandbox with my army men 
("and then here comes the spaceship--ptchoo! ptchoo!"). The denouement, 
and, frankly, the rest of the film, is so ridiculous, in fact, that 
something troubling occurred to me: _Jurassic Park III_ is making fun of my 
having looked forward to it.
Dr. Alan Grant (Sam Neill) is on a dig when a rich couple, Paul and Amanda 
Kirby (William H. Macy and Téa Leoni), offers his foundation a massive sum 
of money to accompany them on a flyover of Isla Sorna, the beastie-infested 
island from the second Jurassic Park film. Predictably, the plane crashes, 
a resourceful Spielbergian child is introduced, and Dr. Grant is forced to 
guide a bunch of greenhorns across dino-ridden wilderness.
_Jurassic Park III_ doesn't work very well because it thinks it's smarter 
than it is--sort of a postmodern _Scream_-type thing with mildly sarcastic 
attempts at turning the el blando Dr. Grant into a slacker version of 
Indiana Jones. As written by Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor, the pair 
behind the scathing _Citizen Ruth_ and _Election_, there is not a line in 
_Jurassic Park III_ free of dramatic irony, campy foreshadowing, and Gen-X 
wry. It's John Kennedy Toole writing about stupid people running around in 
a literal primordial forest; Infinite Jest if Infinite Jest were about 
smart dinosaurs. By the eighth or ninth time a character stops another 
character and whispers, "wait...listen...you hear that?" one either nods 
wisely, secure that the attempts by Payne and Taylor to mock the _Jurassic 
Park_ monster formula do not, in fact, include mocking you, or one furrows 
his brow, wondering if it's a good idea for a film's screenwriters to 
actually be contemptuous of the project for which they are writing. Knowing 
genre and subverting it is a good idea if it's done with affection 
(_Mimic_), but an exceedingly bad one if it's done with snarky derision 
(_Lake Placid_).
_Jurassic Park III_ would have been a fine movie had bitter wisenheimers 
like Payne and Taylor not been involved in the dialogue; their contempt is 
an unwelcome dash of self-knowledge in an environment where Herculean feats 
of disbelief suspension are the only refuge. Watching the _Jurassic Park_ 
films is a great deal of fun when you do it with developmentally arrested 
simpletons like Steven Spielberg and John Williams. It's a good deal less 
fun with jerks who insist on reminding you that no matter how many times 
someone warns not to, someone in jungle peril flicks will always use a 
bullhorn to yell out their location every few minutes.
For as much as I like dinosaurs and giant robots killing and eating (not 
necessarily in that order) a bunch of idiots, I don't enjoy watching this 
Darwinian buffet as told by people who not only don't share my joy in the 
occasional teeth and cheese-fest, but whom are dedicated to explaining to 
me just exactly why the formula for these things is so stupid.
See, guys, I know it's stupid--what Payne and Taylor don't seem to realize 
is that it's possible to be too smart for your own good and to 
underestimate the Jurassic Park audience. For as smooth as their brand of 
snippy scorn is for abortion politics and the election system, it tastes a 
little sour in what amounts to a glorified )_Godzilla_ movie.
Š Film Freak Central (http://filmfreakcentral.net/). This review may not be 
reprinted, in whole or in part, without the express consent of its author.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "JURASSIC PARK III" (Universal Pictures)
  This third installment continues the story of a paleontologist, Dr.
Alan Grant (Sam Neill) who, eight years ago, accepted an invitation from InGen
industrialist John Hammond to preview a new tourist attraction featuring
genetically engineered dinosaurs on an island near Costa Rica. After barely
escaping from that nightmare, he vowed never to return - but he didn't count on
his research money becoming extinct. So when a wealthy adventurer (William H.
Macy) and his ex-wife (Tea Leoni) offer to fund his new theory on Velociraptor
intelligence if he will accompany them on an aerial tour of Isla Sorna, a new
InGen site that has become both a dinosaur breeding ground and a magnet for
thrill-seekers, he agrees to go, bringing his gung-ho protégé (Alessandro
Nivola). But when their plane unexpectedly lands, he discovers that the couple's
14 year-old son (Trevor Morgan) is lost in the dense jungle in a para-gliding
accident. Meanwhile, they must fight for survival while under attack by
rampaging reptiles, particularly the massive, menacing Spinosaurus that briefly
battles with a Tyrannosaurus Rex, the flock of flying Pteranodons and, of
course, the wily Velociraptors. Dr. Grant's still a crusty curmudgeon but the
brutal behemoths are the stars and that's reflected in the direction by Joe
Johnston, who first collaborated with Steven Spielberg on "Raiders of the Lost
Ark," and screenplay by Peter Buchman, Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor, based on
Michael Crichton's characters. While this is a predictable, by-the-numbers film
with a ridiculous climax, CGI fans will relish the 140 visual effects, as
compared with 54 in the original and 78 in "The Lost World." On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Jurassic Park III" is a scaly, scary 6. It's formulaic
but fun, a third-generation thrill-ride.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
    CAPSULE: A short punchy action sequel to the two dinosaur 
    films made by Steven Spielberg.  Joe Johnston directs a 
    straightforward story of an excursion back to the island of the 
    dinosaurs.  It lets us see some new dinosaurs (is that an 
    oxymoron?) and gives us a nice and generally reasonably 
    written adventure.  The film is neither ambitious nor 
    pretentious.  I had a good time.  Rating: 7 (0 to 10), low +2 
    (-4 to +4) 
Here goes my credibility.  This is a film on which I expect to be 
in a minority.  I liked the third JURASSIC PARK film.  I even 
liked the second JURASSIC PARK film.  In a lot of ways JURASSIC 
PARK: THE LOST WORLD was a creative three-way braiding together of 
Michael Crichton's novel THE LOST WORLD, Arthur Conan Doyle's 
novel THE LOST WORLD, and the classic silent film version of the 
Doyle.  JP2 was an adventure, as Doyle said, "for the boy who's 
half man or the man who's half boy."  That is what all the 
JURASSIC PARK films are.  Expecting them to give the viewer 
insights into the human condition is like expecting your car to 
vacuum your house.  The classic adventure films like GUNGA DIN or 
KING SOLOMON'S MINES had under-written characters also. 
JURASSIC PARK III is an all out adventure on an island inhabited 
by dinosaurs.  The characters are a little more complex than they 
at first appear to be, and even that is a little more complex than 
I was expecting.  Some of the characters who start out looking 
stupid and useless prove to be neither as the film proceeds.  That 
degree of complexity combined with those very realistic looking 
dinosaur effects is just about as much as I require.  I feel I got 
my money's worth. 
The story opens with Eric (played by Trevor Morgan) and friend 
parasailing near the forbidden island of Isla Sorna off Costa 
Rica. This was the research island where the dinosaurs were 
created for the now defunct Jurassic Park.  They hope, no doubt, 
to get a look at the island's dinosaurs from a safe height.  The 
height is safe, but driving the boat in the water is not.  The two 
soon find themselves in trouble and have to ditch their parasail 
onto the island where they do indeed get a better look at the 
dinosaurs than they had intended. 
Flash to the United States and someone is offering to fund 
paleontologist Alan Grant (Sam Neill) in his research if he will 
go and fly over Isla Sorna and act as a guide.  He has said that 
no force on earth or heaven could get him back near real 
dinosaurs.  But again money convinces him to drop what he is doing 
and go.  Doing the convincing is a wealthy and eccentric couple 
(William H. Macy and Tea Leoni) who has been just about everywhere 
else in the world and wants the adventure of seeing real 
dinosaurs.  They too plan to see the island from a safe height 
Grant is relieved to learn.  He will fly over this island at a 
safe altitude just this once.  Right.  Guess what happens next? 
JP3 probably functions better as a sequel than JP2.  First it has 
Alan Grant and Ellie Sattler (Laura Dern) back rather than the 
much less appealing Ian Malcolm.  Sattler has a much smaller part 
in JP3, but is still present to tie this story to the first.  
Curiously each film seems to arrange to have a signature scene 
with characters holding on to some large metal object that is 
about to fall some great distance. 
One thing that does not quite fit with the earlier films is just 
as Grant discovers that raptors may be able to talk to each other, 
suddenly they seem to be doing it all the time.  They did not 
appear to be conversing in the previous films.  Of course, these 
raptors look a little different also, so perhaps they are a 
different related species.  Not only are they more intelligent 
than in the past films, they are also more sympathetic.  In this 
story they are not just killing machines, they have reasonable 
motives for what they do beyond nutrition.  This time around they 
may be a little too anthropomorphized. 
Each new film in the series introduces us to some new dinosaurs, 
of course.  In this film a major threat is from a spinosaurus, not 
as common or as popularly known as a Tyrannosaurus, but larger and 
presumably more nasty.  It has a crocodile's head and the body 
that looks like a dimetrodon walking upright. 
Perhaps as an economy measure or just to create a mood the visual 
effects team frequently obscures our view of the dinosaurs.  
Sometimes they just move too fast to see.  Occasionally darkness 
or fog obscures our vision.  A few times we get unconvincing matte 
shot, particularly of the laboratory.  But there is less money on 
the screen in terms of dinosaur effects than in the two previous 
films.  The musical score by Don Davis borrows heavily from John 
Williams's score for the first film.  Joe Johnston, who directs, 
already has to his credit two very good films I recommend THE 
ROCKETEER and OCTOBER SKY.  A team including Alexander Payne and 
Jim Taylor known for ELECTION writes the screenplay.  The film 
they have made is a long way from great cinema, but it still is 
fun.  If you get a thrill from seeing what look very much like 
live dinosaurs alive today, the film is for you.  I rate it a 7 on 
the 0 to 10 scale and a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale. 

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Joe Johnston. Screenplay by Peter Buchman, Alexander Payne,
and Jim Taylor, based on characters created by Michael Crichton. Starring
Sam Neill, William H Macy, Tea Leoni. Running time: 94 minutes. Rated AA
by the MFCB. Reviewed on August 15th, 2001.
Synopsis: Original "Jurassic Park" survivor Alan Grant (Neill) is tricked 
by Paul and Amanda Kirby (Macy and Leoni) into leading an expedition to an 
island overrun by dinosaur, to rescue their stranded son. Grant's team is 
picked off one by one as they encounter dinosaurs both new and familiar, 
and Grant grows to realise that some breeds are more intelligent than he 
previously thought.
Review: There is one reason why "Jurassic Park III" is better than its 
immediate predecessor, "The Lost World: Jurassic Park". The latter wasted 
129 minutes of my life; the former, only 94. The first "Park" was a 
marvellous film, full of awe-inspiring sights, interesting characters, and 
genuine thrills. Its two successors have been pale imitations, amounting 
to hundred-million-dollar B-grade horror movies. At least this third entry 
realises it; whereas "The Lost World" tried to justify its existence with 
a ludicrous and overextended plot, "Jurassic Park III" simply sticks its 
characters on an island with a bunch of dinosaurs and lets the mayhem 
begin. There is a desperate sense of deja vu presiding over this movie; 
the computer-animated dinos are no longer novel or exciting, and even the 
first-time presence of aerial lizards scarcely improves the situation. 
Remember that wondrous first trolley ride through the Park in the original 
movie? Nothing in this rehash even comes close. Add in execrable dialogue 
from screenwriters Buchman, Payne and Taylor, and phoned-in performances 
by the normally capable Macy and Leoni, and it is difficult to recommend 
the film to anyone but dino enthusiasts. At least Neill makes some effort 
to retain the dignity of his character, and there is much less gore than 
in "The Lost World", making this installment more suitable for children.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Michael Dequina
_Jurassic_Park_III_ (PG-13) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
        For an installment of one of the most lucrative screen franchises in
history, _Jurassic_Park_III_ arrives on screens with a curious lack of hype, at
least compared to some other so-called "blockbusters" this summer.  Sure,
_Jurassic_Park_ and _The_Lost_World:_Jurassic_Park_ director Steven Spielberg
now only gets an executive producer credit this time around, and the
less-marquee-friendly Joe Johnston handles the helming chores here.  The bottom
line, however, is that the film is another go-round of a formula that has proven
wildly successful more than once: humans + island + dinosaurs.  Could it be that
Universal knows something that we don't, anticipating that moviegoers have tired
of prehistoric predators?  Whether or not that may be true before _JPIII_'s
release, it could very well be the case after audiences see this  installment,
easily the least satisfying of the series.
        Before it goes terribly wrong, however, _Jurassic_Park_III_ actually
gets a number of things right.  The reintroduction to Sam Neill's Dr. Alan
Grant, who was absent in _The_Lost_World_, is handled quite briskly by Johnston
and the writing crew (the three scribes receiving screen credit are Peter
Buchman, Alexander Payne, and Jim Taylor--the latter two best known for their
Oscar-nominated _Election_ work), as is the basic plot thread stringing together
the dino scenes.  Ex-spouses Paul and Amanda Kirby (William H. Macy and Téa
Leoni) convince Dr. Grant  to accompany them on a flight over dino-populated
Isla Sorna.  Of course, such a foolish trip goes awry when a plane crash leaves
them stranded and alone to fend for themselves against the usual suspects--the
velociraptor, the mighty T-rex--and some newcomers to the _Jurassic_ mythos:
notably, the winged, meat-eating pteranodon and the more-ferocious-than-T-rex
spinosaurus.
        To Johnston's credit, _JPIII_ moves at a snappier pace than the previous
two films; the streamlined plot allows for a steady stream of dino set pieces
with minimal interruption.  Unfortunately, the attempts to build character and
drama during the non-action interludes are predictable and uninvolving.  Paul
and Amanda grow closer while searching for their son Eric (Trevor Morgan), who
is lost on the island; a key "twist" involving Grant's younger associate Billy
Brennan (Alessandro Nivola) can be seen coming a mile away.  Certainly not
helping the credibility of the drama is the truly wretched performance of Leoni,
who accomplishes the seemingly impossible feat of out-overacting the first
film's Laura Dern (who makes a return cameo).  The big dramatic showcase for
Leoni is a bring-down-the-house moment in the worst way; it goes down as one of
the comic highlights (or lowlights, depending on how you look at it) of the
cinema year.
        Thank goodness a dinosaur pops in at frequent enough intervals to get
Leoni and everyone else to shut up and simply start running for their lives. 
Johnston stages a couple of standout action sequences, particularly the first
spinosaurus scene, involving the wrecked fuselage of the plane; and a set piece
involving a nest of hungry pteranodons.  Effective action sequences such as
these appear to build the film toward a grand finish--one that never comes.  Say
what one will about _The_Lost_World_  and its rather controversial third act
twist, one cannot say that the film didn't build up to a big payoff.  The same
cannot be said of _JPIII_, which reportedly began filming without an ending in
place--and does that fact ever show.  Not only is the wrap-up an anticlimax of
mammoth proportions, it then devolves into overdone and downright ridiculous
hokum.
        _Jurassic_Park_III_ is a reasonable enough thrill ride for a good
portion of its shockingly lean 90-minute run time (as opposed to the
two-hour-plus sizes of the Spielberg installments), but like any thrill ride,
it's ultimately only as good as the feeling it leaves the audience--and the
rather startling way in which the film deflates is enough to ensure that for
most viewers, this third trip will be the least charming.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Robin Clifford
Steven Spielberg has relinquished the directing reins of his successful
dino franchise and gives Joe Johnston ("Jumanji") a chance to play with the
big boys in "Jurassic Park III."
A friend described "JP3," for me, without seeing it: Adventurers (with Dr.
Grant (Sam Neill) in tow) arrive clandestinely on Monster Island - it's
called Isla Sorna, here. They meet a big, mean dinosaur - introducing the
new kid, the Spinosaurus - have some of their number eaten, then run away.
They see big, cuddly dinos, are chased again by another meanie, and run
away. They make their way to "the compound," where more mean dinos try to
eat them. Get chased, run away, get chased, run away, get chased, run away.
My friend was dead on describing this cookie cutter effort from start to
finish. Now, that's scarier than the monsters.
The neat thing about the first "Jurassic Park" flick was the fresh,
never-before-seen prehistoric world created by Michael Crichton and put up
on the big screen by Spielberg. It was exciting to see T-Rex for the first
time or chew your nails as the raptors hunted down the youngsters. Sure
there was a lot of hokum with the kids being the heroes, saving the adults
from being eaten, but, we could get over the Spielbergian clichés and have
a good time. This brave new cinema world was visited again, sadly, with the
mishmash that was "Jurassic Park 2: The Lost World." A cross between the
original, "The Road Warrior" and "Godzilla," the second outing just
rehashed the new technology, poked some fun at itself and monster movies,
but was pretty routine, and sometimes boring, with its "more is better"
attitude.
This third (and undoubtedly not the last if this makes money) in the series
uses formula, rather than originality, to convey its conventional
man-against-monster yarn. The newness has worn off the franchise and it is
now more of the same. What caused us to wow and wonder in 1993 has become
commonplace in 2001. The F/X developed nearly a decade ago have been
improved and made even more seamless, but there is not the quantum leap
that Spielberg and company made with the debut of the original "Jurassic
Park."
The story - the first of the franchise not adapted from a Michael Crichton
book - doesn't try to invent anything new as it tells its tale of man
against nature, albeit a nature artificially designed by man. The team of
writers - Peter Buchman, Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor - provides an
action/adventure yarn that is exactly as my friend described it to me.
There are no surprises and few logical ties to the original. For example,
in "JP1" there were no Spinosaurases or flying Pteranodons, but, a few
years later, they have miraculously evolved from nothing. A T-Rex is going
to make little T-Rexes, not Spinos. It is insulting to the fans of the
franchise to be talked down to by the filmmakers. Don't they realize that
fans notice these details? Some of us do have an attention span longer than
15 minutes, we should tell them.
I hope Sam Neill gets a good paycheck for this outing. The actor goes
through the motions as Dr. Alan Grant and is left to mouth such lines as
"Nobody move!" And that is about it for this veteran thesp. William H. Macy
and Tea Leoni, as the divorced couple looking for their lost child on
Monster Island (that's the basis for the "GP3" story), are adequate.
Handsome Alessandro Nivola is conflicted (or constipated, it's hard to
tell) as Dr.G's assistant. There is, of course, a kid - Trevor Morgan - as
the focus of the search and, yes, he's smarter than the adults. The rest of
the cast members, including Michael Jeter, are simply items on the dino
lunch menu. Laura Dern reprises her role as Dr. Ellie Sattler and, with
about 10 seconds of screen time, saves the day, long-distance.
Technically, as one would expect in a film with Steven Spielberg as an
executive producer, this is a high-tech wonder of CGI and animatronics. The
glitter has worn off since T-Rex first thumped his foot down, but the
craftsmanship given to putting life into these prehistoric creatures should
be lauded. The mechanical F/X, like a Spino attack on the adventurers
trapped inside the wrecked fuselage of their plane, are first rate.
Production design, by Ed Verreaux, does a fine job creating the lush jungle
and dangerous compound sets for the monsters to play in.
Maybe it's time for the "Jurassic Park" park franchise to join hands with
Toho and Godzilla. I can picture it now. The dinosaurs have taken over the
United States and its up to Godzilla, Mothra, Rodan and the rest of the
boys from Japan, to save the world and kick some Jurassic butt. I'd go to
see it. In the meantime, I give "Jurassic Park III" a C+.

Author
Steve Rhodes
After the wildly popular but cheesy THE LOST WORLD: JURASSIC PARK, moviegoers
have been wondering whether JURASSIC PARK III, this time directed by Joe
Johnston (OCTOBER SKY and JUMANJI), would follow the usual movie rule whereby
each sequel is another drop in quality from its predecessor.  Well, I'm here to
report that JURASSIC PARK III is a rule breaker, a smartly written and funny
popcorn flick that is a lot of fun.  It isn't as needlessly gory as LOST WORLD,
so it should appeal to younger ages, and the screenwriters, first-timer Peter
Buchman and the CITIZEN RUTH and ELECTION team of Alexander Payne and Jim
Taylor, pack plenty of goodies for older viewers as well.  And the monsters, I
mean dinosaurs, are more realistic than ever, including some new flying
dinosaurs.
This time the trip to dino island is chartered by a pair of super wealthy
adventurers, Paul and Amanda Kirby, played with their usual blend of intelligent
vulnerability by William H. Macy and Téa Leoni.  Along with some soldier of
fortune types, the Kirbys also bring aboard two paleontologists, Dr. Alan Grant
(Sam Neill) and Billy Brennan (Alessandro Nivola).  Early on we hear Alan claim,
"no force on earth could get me on that island," which means, of course, that
he'll soon be island-bound.  Trevor Morgan plays the Kirby's resourceful and
strong-willed son, Eric.  (Morgan's dinosaur credentials go way back to his
first starring role in BARNEY'S GREAT ADVENTURE.)
Of course, the plane will crash, leaving the occupants stranded.  As always, the
audience gets to play the game of guess which guy first has "lunch" written on
his forehead.  The corollary is guessing who will survive to the end, which is
typically easy since you are usually safe figuring out the salary of the stars
and then reasoning that the studios will want to get the most bang for their
buck.
Alan tries his best to take charge.  But, when he orders "Nobody move a muscle,"
at the sign of the first large carnivorous dinosaur, everybody runs like crazy
anyway.  Later he sticks to simpler instructions, like, "Run!"  The new gimmick
this time is that they've found that the raptors can communicate with each other
and that their brains are quite advanced.  This means that eluding them proves
extra tricky.  The script lets the humans find just enough tools of various
kinds to make it.  Ingenuity is at a premium and the survivors evidence both
courage and brains.
The best part of the movie may be the length.  Just when you are completely
satisfied and before you ever have a chance to get tired and start checking your
watch, the movie concludes quickly and efficiently.  And it ends without any
doubt as to whether the studio wants to call an end to the JURASSIC PARK
franchise.  (Like that was ever in doubt!)
JURASSIC PARK III runs a fast 1:32.  It is rated PG-13 for intense sci-fi terror
and violence and would be acceptable for kids around 8 and up, depending on how
well they handle monster violence.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave it ****.  He said it was much better and not as
blood thirsty as LOST WORLD.  He thought the plot was cool and the graphics were
great.  His friend Sam, age 12, also gave it ****.  He liked the way it related
back to the original in story, style and music.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Wednesday July 18, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Joe Johnston. 
Cast: Sam Neill, William H. Macy, Tea Leoni, Trevor Morgan, Alessandro 
Nivola, Laura Dern, Michael Jeter, John Diehl, Bruce A. Nash. 
2001 - 92 minutes 
Rated PG-13 (for violence and mild profanity). 
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, July 19, 2001. 
With Steven Spielberg stepping down to getting merely an "executive producer" 
credit, director Joe Johnston's "Jurassic Park III" could unquestionably have 
been an irrelevant, needless second sequel to one of the biggest money-making 
franchises of all time. With all of its possible story options told out in 
the first two pictures, could there really be more to do with the premise 
aside from hack together pieces from the predecessors and construct them into 
a new, cohesive whole? Quite the contrary, as "Jurassic Park III" turns out 
to be a new kind of breed of dinosaur--a little long in the tooth, but with 
just enough life to resurrect not only the series, but the genre of big, 
summer action-adventure movies. 
If 1993's "Jurassic Park" was a groundbreaking achievement, both in modern 
special effects and marvelous, cliffhanging storytelling, and 1997's "The 
Lost World: Jurassic Park" was a joyless, boring misfire with none of the 
magic that made the original so memorable, then "Jurassic Park III" stands as 
infinitely better than the second film, but not quite up to par with the 
first. Still, it's an entertaining and tightly-wound suspense yarn that, 
clocking in at 92 minutes, is over a half-hour shorter than the previous 
"Jurassic" excursions. This running time difference works as a definite 
asset, as the story and break-neck action sequences get going almost right 
away, bypassing the dreary, seemingly endless exposition that made "The Lost 
World" almost a chore to endure. 
Triumphantly reprising his role from the first movie, Sam Neill stars as Dr. 
Alan Grant, a paleontologist who, seven years after his unforgettable 
experiences at Jurassic Park, still must field questions about what he went 
through and saw. A proposition comes his way in the form of Paul (William H. 
Macy) and Amanda Kirby (Tea Leoni), a wealthy, married couple who wish to fly 
over Isla Sorna and take in the glorious sights of the dinosaur-infested Site 
B. Following a generous paycheck that leads Dr. Grant; his young, wide-eyed 
assistant, Billy Brennan (Alessandro Nivola); and three other crew members, 
to accompany the Kirby's on their "harmless" trip, their real motives emerge. 
The Kirby's, it seems, are a middle-class, divorced couple who have every 
intention of landing the plane on Isla Sorna to begin searching for their 
14-year-old son, Eric (Trevor Morgan), whose paraglide crashed there eight 
weeks earlier. When their airplane crashes on the island, however, they find 
themselves stranded without any way of calling for help, in a land of 
dinosaurs that would happily eat them for lunch. 
With little more than a brief fifteen-minute introduction to the characters 
and plot, "Jurassic Park III" jumps to the chase, literally and figuratively. 
The next hour is an almost non-stop parade of snazzy, state-of-the-art visual 
effects that make the creatures look more realistic and elaborate than ever, 
and fast-moving, breathtaking action set pieces that don't hardly let up to 
allow you to breathe. One such sequence, set on a creaky jawbridge that the 
potential victims have no idea is located inside a giant birdcage with 
flying, carnivorous Pteranodons, jauntily milks the tension for all its 
worth. 
Also working to the film's advantage is the intoxicating sense of wonder that 
the dinosaurs are depicted with--a trait that made the original so special, 
and one that was utterly absent from the followup. This assured, smart 
decision allows to give the film an unexpected depth that it otherwise might 
not have had in such a quick-paced narrative. The music, by Don Davis, 
powerfully recaptures the lush score that John Williams perfected in the 
original. And the screenplay, by Peter Buchman, Alexander Payne (1999's 
"Election"), and Jim Taylor, is crisply well-written. 
With so many dinosaur chases, the character interaction is effective, 
workmanlike, and kept to a minimum. Sam Neill proves again what a 
mesmerizing, underrated actor he is, and why he is better suited for the 
"hero" role than the slightly nerdy Jeff Goldblum was in "The Lost World." 
Making the debut appearances in the series, William H. Macy (2000's "State 
and Main") and Tea Leoni (2000's "The Family Man") are just the type of 
strong character actors that give their roles the added nuances needed to 
avoid cliches. In only a few scenes, we are able to believe that Paul and 
Amanda Kirby are divorcees who still, in one way or the other, love each 
other very much. Laura Dern (2000's "Dr. T and the Women") also makes a 
refreshing appearance, albeit a fairly small one, as Ellie Sadler, her 
character from the original. Dern is such a likable presence, and does such a 
good job here with not much screen time, that it's a shame she couldn't have 
been right alongside Neill throughout. One thing is for sure: their chemistry 
together is undeniable. 
"Jurassic Park III" is so thrilling a motion picture that its ending, 
unfortunately, comes out feeling anticlimactic. A final run-in with their 
meat-eating adversaries seems missing, as if the makers couldn't wait for the 
film to come to a close. The disappointing conclusion aside, "Jurassic Park 
III" is a welcome return to the style and startling execution that made the 
1993 picture such a success. With a final image that hints at a possible 
fourth "Jurassic" adventure, the thought of such, it turns out, doesn't seem 
like such a bad idea after all. 
  - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman 
    http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman 
* GET READY FOR FRIDAY! THE GRAND OPENING OF MY BRAND-NEW MOVIE REVIEW 
WEBSITE...THEMOVIEBOY.COM !!! * 

Author
David N. Butterworth
        As Dr. Ian Malcolm so succinctly put it in "The Lost World: Jurassic Park"
(the second go-round of the trilogy-to-date ... and there's absolutely no
reason why they should call it quits with this one), "Oooh!  Ahhh!  That's
how it always starts.  Then later there's running and screaming."
        There's a lot of running and screaming in "Jurassic Park III."  What there
isn't is the afore-referenced Dr. Malcolm (a sorely-missed Jeff Goldblum,
who perked up the first two installments no end with his Chaos theorizing,
cool attire, and utterly sarcastic humor) and the sure hand of Steven
Spielberg who, perhaps wisely, has abdicated directorial duties to
"Jumanji" man Joe Johnston.
        For the third time running (and running, and screaming) the dinosaurs
alone are worth the price of admission--this time we get big nasty
spinosaurs with long snouts and huge finned backs, flying pteranodons with
vicious little babies, club-tailed ankylosaurs, noble brachiosaurs,
galloping herds of nanosaurs and, of course, a lot more razor sharp
velociraptors (although this time out *communicative* ones that can
vocalize better than their human prey).  Each time out the huge reptiles
get more and more convincing as technological advances bring them closer
into contact with the prix-fix beauzeaus that either wittingly or
unwittingly stumble onto their Isla Sorna.
        There seems to be some unwritten rule that future chapters of Michael
Crichton's dino-saga must feature cast-offs from a P.T. Anderson picture.
In 1997 it was Julianne Moore; in "Jurassic Park III" it's the turn of
William H. Macy (who, in the film's scariest realization, is the spitting
image of Homer Simpson's good neighbor Ned Flanders).  Moore is "replaced"
by Téa Leoni, naturally enough, which at first consideration seems to be a
sound casting decision ... until you witness Ms. Leoni trying to out act
the special effects.  Sam Neill is back as paleontologist Dr. Alan Grant as
is Laura Dern in a brief bit as Dr. Ellie Sattler; she does the only smart
thing and stays the heck off the island.
        The plot?  "Good dinosaurs, bad people."  OK, the real plot: Mr. and Mrs.
Kirby (Macy and Leoni) con Dr. Grant into helping them find their son Eric
(Trevor Morgan), who has accidentally parasailed onto a Costa Rican island
teeming with large, hungry carnivores.
        The "Jurassic Park" franchise will always be worth seeing for Stan
Winston's mesmerizing creature effects (if you like that sort of thing I
suppose--I almost hated "America's Sweethearts" and would have were it not
for the lovely Julia Roberts and her genuinely fetching smile, so I guess
it's all a matter of taste).  But if it's dumb humans crashing through the
undergrowth you're after, rent a Rambo movie instead.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Jerry Saravia
The ads proclaim that this is not just another a walk in the park. Indeed, it is
in fact a well-travelled path through the same damn park. Do not expect the
filmmakers of this latest snooze to know what it means to entertain the
audience. One, twice, maybe. The third time is not the charm. The diamond should
be cut ever so delicately so that it can still sparkle. Here, it is more like a
piece of charcoal. 
Let's consider the premise, if you wish to call it that of this latest sequel. A
kid is left alone in a Costa Rican island known as Site B or, to Jurassic fans,
Isla Sorna. Dr. Grant (Sam Neill), a survivor of the original "Jurassic" film,
is persuaded by a rich businessman, Paul Kirby (William H. Macy) and his wife,
Amanda (Tea Leoni), to go on a tour of the island, which happens to be infested
with dinosaurs. This is no ordinary tour since it turns out that the kid who is
HOME ALONE IN ISLA SORNA happens to be related to the Kirbys. Now Grant must
confront those sneaky velociraptors and other dangerous breeds of dinosaurs but
since he has field experience, he should have no problem. Only the Kirbys and
the other members of the tour (including Michael Jeter in a brief role who
brings some inkling of humor) are what Jeff Goldblum's Dr. Malcolm in "The Lost
World" referred to as "fruitcakes." 
That brief premise is a basic concept that can be described as a pitch to a
Hollywood studio executive. It is not the basis for a movie. It is just an
idea...but what else is there? Not much except countless scenes of dinosaur
carnage, loud Dolby-ized roars, hums and thumps, Tea Leoni overexemplifying her
screams and that is it. Some brief mention of genetic engineering holds some
interest but hardly enough since it is barely mentioned again. 
Joe Johnston ("The Rocketeer") takes over the directing chair but you, sir, are
no Steven Spielberg. Spielberg knew how much to show on screen and when to aim
for some brief over-the-top thrills. He also had the gift for imbuing us with
giddiness and a sense of wonder whenever a dinosaur popped up on screen.
Johnston, however, overdirects to the hilt as if he was back in "Jumanji"
terrain and he has a less than capable editor at the helm (where is Michael Kahn
when you need him?) Thus, the film feels disconnected and fruitless in the
second half as it shows a dinosaur attack, one-dimensional characters bickering,
another attack, more bickering, etc. In the last half-hour, the movie seems to
have one too many climaxes and never exactly arrives at a conclusion. Monotony
sets in early and it becomes a chore to sit through the movie, even at a
seemingly painless 90 minute running time. 
The first two "Jurassic Parks" were mindless monster movies to be sure but they
at least had a central theme and some sense of purpose. The first film was about
the danger of meddling with nature and packaging something unique to the masses
- it was a modern-day "Frankenstein" tale. The second film had a more ecological
theme, and an understanding of how animals nurture and care for their young.
This movie (not based on any novel by Michael Crichton) is about nothing. There
is no theme, no sense of purpose and little in the way of ingenuity except to
show how life-threatening it is to be trapped in an island of untamed dinosaurs.
Why are we back at Isla Sorna, the same island from the last picture? Why not
take the dinosaurs to New York City to be exhibited only to then run rampant
around the city? A more modern approach to "King Kong" would have ended the
series with a bang rather than a whimper. And why leave Laura Dern hanging in a
thankless cameo?
"Jurassic Park III" has one or two scary sequences that recall the thrill and
intensity of the first film. It is also modest fun for a while seeing William H.
Macy maintain a straight face throughout. Still, other actors are left to appear
as gaping idiots, particularly Leoni who grates the nerves and Sam Neill, who
seems to be coasting by with nary a trace of the humor or pathos he brought to
the original. In short, this is a soulless, joyless movie bereft of
three-dimensional characters or a strong, compelling story or theme.  It is
decidedly no walk in the park. 
Footnote: *SPOILER* Sam Neill and Laura Dern turn out to be divorced this time
out, though she has kids and is remarried. At the end of the first film, they
were happily married. What happened to them since? It could have provided some
illumination on Neill's Dr. Grant character at least. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, complaints or general comments at Faust668@aol.com
or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
Steven Spielberg is one of the few directors that can produce real movie 
magic on screen. Consider the magic wand he waved in such classics as 
"Raiders of the Lost Ark", "E.T.", "Jaws" and "Close Encounters of the Third 
Kind." "Jurassic Park" is no exception and though it is no classic by any 
means, it is a thrill-happy, terrifically exciting action picture bringing 
back Spielberg's whiz-bang intensity that the otherwise middling "Always" and 
the overblown "Hook" lacked. 
Based loosely on Michael Crichton's novel, "Jurassic Park" focuses on a group 
of scientists (Sam Neill, Jeff Goldblum and Laura Dern) visiting a 
fantastical park in a South American island populated by live-breathing 
dinosaurs, including a vicious Tyrannosaurus Rex, quick-tempered, meat-eating 
velociraptors, and cuddly Brontosaurus specimens. According to John Hammond 
(Richard Attenborough), the owner of the park, the dinosaurs were genetically 
engineered by dinosaur blood found in mosquitoes, which were preserved in 
amber! Essentially, Hammond is like Frankenstein, bringing back dinosaurs 
from the dead!
"Jurassic Park" is a thrill ride from start to finish. Spielberg and writers 
Michael Crichton and David Koepp are not interested in character development 
- they simply know that audiences are too interested in seeing dinosaurs. You 
have to remember that the year 1993 was a revolutionary year for cinema - the 
term CGI was born. This  meant that creating believable creatures and 
landscapes with the use of computer-generated images was a true possibility. 
Thus, this film was the first to ever show the most realistic dinosaurs ever 
seen in film history and that was the draw for audiences. Today, CGI seems 
like an afterthought but back then, it was an astounding achievement. 
Spielberg uses CGI to his advantage. There are two exceptional Spielberg 
sequences: one is a scary, horrifying sequence in which the T-Rex attacks two 
kids trapped in a car, and the other is when the velociraptors trap the same 
kids in a kitchen. There are lots of dino chomping scenes but then there are 
some purely amazing moments that evoke a sense of wonder and joy. The first 
glimpse of a dinosaur is the brontosaurus as it tries to reach a tree branch 
- Spielberg shoots the scene from a low-angle so that we get the feeling we 
are witnessing a majestic, prehistoric creature too grand and mysterious for 
our eye level. The T-Rex itself is astounding, and the impressive soundtrack 
(recorded in DTS, digital sound, for the first time ever) enhances the 
credibility and realism of these creatures. 
So much talk about the dinos, what about the humans? Well, they recede in the 
background because any movie with creatures, especially dinos, will steal 
scenes from others, no holds barred. Still, this is a helluva good cast. 
Attenborough is appropriately and equally gleeful and stubborn as the 
gullible owner, unaware of what he has created. Sam Neill, an actor I 
dislike, gives a pleasing performance as Dr. Grant who seems to have a 
dislike for children. Laura Dern is wasted as Grant's wife, capable of much 
more than screaming fits. The actor who upstages them all is Jeff Goldblum as 
Ian Malcolm, a chaos theorist and mathematician who wears funny sunglasses 
and a rock n'roll leather jacket - he seems to have stepped out of "American 
Graffiti." His one-liners and his ridicule of this dangerous theme park bring 
a level of irony that Spielberg could have carried further than he does. 
As a story, "Jurassic Park" lacks much thrust or significance, though it can 
be construed as a modern-day Frankenstein tale where the act of creating 
rests solely on whether something should be created, particularly when you 
meddle with nature. The characters are thin but they remain watchable 
personalities (including Samuel L. Jackson in a small role as a computer 
expert and Wayne Knight as another computer expert who decides to steal some 
specimens). But for undeniable thrills and escapist entertainment, nothing 
can beat Spielberg's exciting dinos and kinetic action sequences. As Pauline 
Kael once remarked, Spielberg doesn't just thrill you, he spooks you with 
giddiness and exhilaration. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Universal Pictures/Amblin Entertainment
 Director: Joe Johnston
 Writer:  Peter Buchman, Alexander Payne, Jim Taylor, based on
Michael Crichton's characters
 Cast: Sam Neill, William H. Macy, Tea Leoni, Alessandro Nivola,
Trevor Morgan, Michael Jeter, John Diehl, Bruce A. Young
   In Julien Temple's movie "Pandaemonium" which opened one
week before "Jurassic Park III," much is made of Samuel Taylor
Coleridge's great poem "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner," whose
moral appears near the conclusion stanza, "He prayeth best, who
loveth best/All things both great and small."  Well, now, Sam
Coleridge would probably need to do a lot of praying had he
landed on the island of Isla Soma (near Costa Rica) but he'd have
a difficult time loving any of the creatures there, most of whom
would be out to make a shepherd's pie out of the poet.  Coleridge
would be confronted not only by the massive Spinosaurus, which
could hunt on land and water, but if he kept his nose to the
ground while taking care to avoid them, he might still be lifted high
into the air by the flying Pteranodons.  Though Coleridge lived
during the Eighteenth Century, which would be considered
ancient history by most teens today, the age of dinosaurs would
be just about as ancient to him as it is to us in the twenty-first. 
Dinosaurs lived 65 million years ago (that's, what, 650,000
centuries ago?) but thanks to modern scientific, technology, they
have been recreated by a company called Igen and, like the
Frankenstein monster have overwhelmed their creators and taken
over the island.
   "Jurassic Park III" finds Steven Spielberg in the executive
producer's chair this time around with "Jumanji"'s Joe Johnston at
the helm, directing a screenplay by Peter Buchman, Alexander
Payne and Jim Taylor based on Michael Crichton's characters.
While the story is in no way in the same league as the season
other sci-fi pic, Spielberg and Kubrick's "A.I." the special effects,
the sound, and the presence of two superlative actors make "JP3"
well worth visiting.  Filmed on the Hawaiian islands of Oahu,
Molokai and Kauai over a period ten months with much of the
action taking place in Universal's studios, "Jurassic Park III" offers
an assortment of thrills, though nothing particularly new, with
some delightful shtick from William H. Macy in the role of the
klutzy would-be financier Paul Kirby. Kirby and his estranged wife
Amanda (Tea Leoni) need to visit the island to find their fourteen-
year-old son, Eric (Trevor Morgan), who disappeared after being
marooned while on a para-sailing expedition with his mother's boy
friend.  Conning ace paleontologist Dr. Alan Grant (Sam Neill)
with an offer of big bucks for his research, he gets the scientist
and his associate, Billy Brennan (Alessandro Nivola) to fly with
him to the island on the pretext that he and his wife are taking an
expensive and exciting vacation.
   "JP3" brings back Sam Neill and Laura Dern from their 1993
roles in the original and most celebrated "Jurassic Park," a film
dealing with a billionaire's amusement park populated with living
dinosaurs.  The concept is pretty much the same this time, with
the island in effect serving as an amusement part, given the detail
that the block of jungle was used artificially to create creatures
large and small, but the chills are short of hair-raising--perhaps
because by now we've become accustomed to the usual interplay
of human meets Spinosaurus.  We know well ahead of the actors
which guys are going to die and which are going to survive
(spoiler: the black guy does NOT die first), and we can guess the
future of the estranged couple whose hormones are racing during
the entire time they bolt from the creatures.  (We can also be sure
that they'll probably break up again after a few weeks together in
the less exciting environs of their small, mid-western town.)
   Though William H. Macy, who has turned in spectacular
performances as one of David Mamet's favorites in plays like
"Oleanna" and TV works like "The Water Engine," is not as quirky
as Jeff Goldblum--who performed in the role of a mathematician in
the first "JP"--he provides more than enough comic relief while
Tea Leoni as his wife provides enough screams to compete with
John Williams and Don Davis's intrusive music.  As with "Final
Fantasy," the story's not the thing: in this case, a dollar to your
favorite charity if you can guess which creatures are from Stan
Winston's live action dinosaurs (one of which actually weighs
24,000 pounds) and which are from Jim Mitchell's special effects.
Oh yes, in the final scene quite a few Pteranodons take flight
from the island--and you know what that means.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 91 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Bob Bloom
JURASSIC PARK III (2001) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Sam Neill, William H.
Macy, Tea Leoni, Michael Jeter, Trevor Morgan, John Diehl and Laura Dern.
Written by Peter Buchman, Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor. Directed by John
Johnston. Approx. 96 minutes. Rated PG-13. 
By Bob Bloom 
Journal and Courier, Lafayette, IN.
Four things come to mind while mulling over Jurassic Park III: 
 1. The running time: The film flashes by in about 95 minutes. 
 2. The film is fast: It is mostly non-stop chase and run from beginning to end.
 3. The dinosaurs are phenomenal: The computer generated or mechanical creatures
are so life-like, you can almost buy into the illusion that they are real. 
 4. Universal knows how to milk monster/horror franchises. This is the studio
that took Dracula, Frankentstein, the Mummy, the Wolf Man and their related
brides, sons, ghosts and daughters and ultimately made them straight ghouls for
Abbott and Costello. 
Thankfully, the studio does not sink to that level with Jurassic Park III.
Despite its B-movie trappings, this adventure thriller exhibits some wit and
style. 
And it also is savvy enough to realize its audience. While the movie is brutal,
the violence is neither very graphic nor gratuitous. It may scare the little
ones, but the teen-age audience for which it is aimed will appreciate the
man-eating chomping that runs through the film. 
Back from the original cast is Sam Neill as Dr. Alan Grant, who is lured to Isla
Sorna  the backup island featured in Jurassic Park: The Lost World  under the
pretense of leading an aerial tour for a wealthy adventurer (William H. Macy)
and his wife (Tea Leoni). 
In reality, the couple  who are divorced  are searching for their son who
disappeared with his stepfather while parasailing near the island. However, the
expedition's plane crashes on the island, and the race is on. 
This Joe Johnston-directed feature seems to sprint through most of its plot
points and explanations, leaving many open-ended questions concerning the film's
editing. 
For example, at the outset, the team  which includes veteran character actors
Michael Jeter and John Diehl  hired by Macy's Paul Kirby makes a big display of
showing off a lot of big firepower. But then that arsenal is lost when the plane
goes down and one of the dinosaurs  plays kick-the-can with the ship's hull. 
It feels as if to achieve its running time, a lot of what was shot was left on
the cutting room floor. 
The relationship between Macy's Kirby and his ex-wife, Amanda, also is murky.
Supposedly divorced because he was not a risk-taker and she was, the couple -
though united to search for their lost son - do not display the emotional
turmoil that would normally exist between estranged ex-spouses. 
While the action is first-rate, the character motivation and creation seem
sloppy. Neill's Grant, for example, goes through the film as a grouchy
curmudgeon, scolding everyone to keep quiet so as not to attract the attention
of the behemoths. He constantly corrects his companions about the dinosaurs,
calling them merely amusement park attractions, and not considering them the
real McCoy because they were genetically engineered. 
But most of these complaints are offset by the film's visuals and sly sense of
humor. There's a nod to Disney's Peter Pan, for example, as the stranded humans
are alerted to the approach of a gigantic carnivore by the sound of a cellphone
it swallowed along with the person holding it. (How they retrieve the phone is
one of the film's grosser points that will amuse those enamored by scatological
humor.) 
The party does find the Kirbys' missing son, who has managed to keep himself
alive on the island for two months. This self-sufficient lad (Trevor Morgan)
explains to Grant how he used T-Rex urine to ward off other predators. When
asked by Grant how he got the specimen, the young man says, "You don't want to
know," a line that allows the audience to conjure up all kinds of imaginative
scenario. 
If only the movie itself had risen to that level. 
With the exception of an impressive giant aviary, Jurassic Park III has a rather
claustrophobic affect. It lacks scope and mostly looks as if the entire venture
was filmed on a soundstage. 
Jurassic Park III lacks the awe and spectacle of the original, and that is
mostly because audiences have become jaded and blasé about the special effects
used to create the various animals. 
Otherwise, the movie is an entertaining romp, a no-brainer fun time for dinosaur
aficionados. 
Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He can
be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Other reviews by Bloom can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on
golafayette. 
Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database
site: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom 

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The press notes for Jurassic Park 3 proudly trumpet the fact that there are
as many new dinosaurs in the new sequel as there were in the first two films
combined. While that may sound impressive, it simply means that the
filmmakers are concerned only with giving viewers more of the same instead
of trying something new.  I guess you could say they're sticking to the old
"If it ain't broke, don't fix it" adage, considering the first film was, at
the time, the highest-grossing picture ever and its first sequel still holds
the record for the biggest opening weekend in history.
But bigger budgets and projected box-office grosses don't stop JP3 from
being a by-the-numbers action flick with a decent cast and impressive
special effects.  A drop-off in quality from the first to the second was
noticeable, as it is from the second to the third, but it probably has much
more to do with the fact that it's the only film not based on a Michael
Crichton novel, rather than Steven Spielberg's move from the director's
chair to an executive-producing credit.
Sam Neill (The Dish) reprises his role as Dr. Alan Grant, a dinosaur expert
who believes raptors are much smarter than anyone had previously thought,
and even believes the creatures are capable of speech (apparently, this guy
has never heard an interview with Dell Curry).  With funding for his
research project running short, Grant reluctantly accepts a strange offer
from a rich, thrill-seeking couple (William H. Macy, State and Main, and Téa
Leoni, The Family Man) that wants to fly over Isla Sorna and have Mr.
Dinosaur point things out to them.
Guess what?  Things go horribly wrong.  Members of the group are shed like
so many layers of clothing (following the Brother Rule, of course) and,
before long, JP3 starts with the running and the screaming and the, "Oh,
God, it hurts."  Anybody else tired of seeing characters picked off in
reverse order of their popularity?  In no way do I recognize Deep Blue Sea
as an example of a good action film, but it was pretty damn surprising when
Sammy Jackson got swallowed up by that shark.  Don't look for any surprises
here.
Grant, his assistant Billy (Alessandro Nivola, Time Code), and the Kirbys
are repeatedly split up into various groups, creeping around the island like
the Scooby gang before meeting one last time for what appears to be a Cape
Fear spoof.  Sure, they've got two new dinosaurs after them - the flying
Pteranodon and swimming Spinosaurus - but we know everyone crucial to a
possible Jurassic Park 4 will make it off the island with most of their
limbs intact.
JP3 is so heavy on action that it didn't really need dialogue.  Thankfully,
Grant never utters typical sequel lines, such as anything that came out of
Brendan Fraser's mouth in The Mummy Returns or Danny Glover's in any of the
Lethal Weapon sequels.  Give that credit to Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor
(Election), who polished the script by debut scribe Peter Buchman.
JP3 was directed by October Sky's Joe Johnston, who is no stranger to
high-tech films which feature giant creatures (he also helmed the
animal-laden Jumanji).  While the film is technically seamless and a great
way to blow 90 minutes, its complete lack of story greatly diminishes the
effects of JP3's amazing visuals.  Maybe we're spoiled by the technology of
the 21st century, but humans running away from dinosaurs isn't nearly as
entertaining as it was in the '90s.
1:31 - PG-13 for intense sci-fi terror and violence

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Jurassic Park III (2001)
Sam Neill, William H. Macy, Tea Leoni, Alessandro Nivola, Trevor Morgan,
Michael Jeter, John Diehl, Bruce A. Young. Written by Peter Buchman,
Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor, based on characters created by Michael
Crichton. Directed by Joe Johnston. 92 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
I loved virtually every minute of the first "Jurassic Park," including
the parts other people hated. The slow build-up to the arrival on the
island  loved it. The awestruck paleontologists gaping at dinosaurs
with the Official Steven Spielberg Look of Wonder  loved it. The
animated mascot explaining the cloning process  loved it. I admit the
scene where the little boy gets zapped off the top of an ultra
high-voltage electric fence and recovers almost instantly was a bit
much, and the ending was flat, but the magic and majesty of the
production more than made up for the flaws.
Like many fans, I was disappointed with "The Lost World: Jurassic Park."
The T-Rex assault at cliff's edge was incredible, but the overall dark
tone was draining and I hated the Godzilla-Lite finale. Which brings us
to "JP3." Memories of the original had me juiced for big dino-fun, while
thoughts of the sequel kept my expectations sufficiently low. I was
ready.
Joe Johnston takes the directorial rein from Spielberg and `Jurassic
Park III' starts off great, with the welcome return of Sam Neill as
grouchy Dr. Alan Grant (Laura Dern even pops up briefly as retired
paleobotanist Ellie Sattler). Decked out in an Indiana Jones hat, Neill
sets the tone for what looks to be a smart, solid story, giving an
assured performance. But once the cast lands on Isla Sorna, the
mysterious second island that appeared out of nowhere in "The Lost
World," the action ratchets up while the intelligence goes down. The
bulk of the 92 minutes consists of people running from a wide variety of
dinosaurs until all of the sudden everything wraps up quickly and
neatly in a cop-out ending.
I still had fun, though. To put it in thrill ride terminology, "Jurassic
Park" felt like an entire tour of the world's best amusement park
condensed into two hours, "The Lost World" felt like a trip on a big,
creaky wooden roller coaster and "JP3" feels like a spin on a smooth
steel coaster without inversions. At no point does any scene in the film
approach the tension of the T-Rex or raptor attacks from the other
movies, but the production moves fast enough to provide some breezy
pleasure.
Here's the set-up. In the eight years since the original debacle in
Jurassic Park, funding for dinosaur research has grown scarce, forcing
men like Dr. Grant to plead for money before unsympathetic ears. Enter
husband and wife adventurers Paul (William H. Macy) and Amanda (Tea
Leoni) Kirby, offering a blank check if Grant will serve as tour guide
for an aerial pass over Isla Sorna. Grudgingly, he accepts, bringing his
protégé Billy Brennan (Alessandro Nivola) along to see the big lizards.
But wait, it's all bullshit! The Kirbys are actually a middle class
divorced couple searching for their 14-year-old son Eric (Trevor
Morgan), who disappeared on the island while vacationing with Amanda's
boyfriend. The distraught parents shanghai Grant believing that his
knowledge of the dinosaur habitat will allow him to navigate the land
and rescue the boy, forgetting that Grant wasn't in the sequel and thus
never visited Isla Sorna.
That oversight is merely the first dopey trickle in what becomes a
torrential downpour of stupidity. Freshly stranded in predator-central,
Amanda immediately starts calling her son's name over a megaphone. When
a T-Rex faces the group and Grant firmly states, "Don't move a muscle,"
everyone else in the expedition runs like hell. Billy, a trainee of Dr.
Grant, steals some eggs from the fiercely protective raptors.
Incidentally, you'll be happy to know that, while the human IQs plummet,
the raptors just keep getting smarter, now displaying the ability to
verbally communicate with each other. Maybe they should have written the
script.
Luckily, the dim-witted Homo sapiens have other gifts. For example,
Billy can take a damaged parachute and turn it into a fully functioning
parasail, all while being chased by blood thirsty animals. And all the
strandees have some sort of internal radar enabling them to find lost
colleagues on the vast isle as if they were two or three aisles away at
the local Wal-Mart.
A word on the visuals. The special effects here are the weakest in the
series. Things look good for the most part, but too often the computer
graphics are obvious and the animatronic critters look like puppets. And
I won't even start on the chintzy matte paintings or the lame
blue-screen work during the early parasailing shots.
Yet I still had fun. Despite the idiotic people, the absurd level of
coincidence, the spotty special effects and the lazy ending, I still
liked "Jurassic Park III." Maybe I was just in the mood for silly, fast
paced summer fun. Or maybe my IQ is dropping too.

Author
Laura Clifford
Dr. Alan Grant (Sam Neill, "Jurassic Park") is becoming disillusioned.  
Paleontology is no longer the sexy science it once was since the Ingen 
Corporation cloned his subject matter.  His lectures bring people 
interested in his adventures on Isla Nubla rather than his research and 
funding dollars are drying up.  When the Kirbys (William H. Macy, "Fargo"; 
Tea Leoni, "The Family Man") ask him to be their guide for an anniversary 
flyover of Isla Sorna (the notorious Site B of "The Lost World") he's 
disdainful, but once they wave their checkbook, he reconsiders.  However 
the Kirbys haven't given Dr. Grant their real agenda in "Jurassic Park III."
Of course, we, the audience, have been tipped off, given that the film begins
by showing us Eric (Trevor Morgan, "The Patriot"), a young boy, and Ben (Mark 
Harelik, "Election") going for a paragliding adventure off that same island
that goes awry (and looks like cheesy rear projection).  Grant's established
back home with a new right hand man, Billy Brennan (Alessandro Nivola, "Love's
Labour's Lost") on site at a dig in Montana sorely lacking funds.  He also
pays a visit to old flame Dr. Ellie Sattler (Laura Dern, "Jurassic Park"), now
married to another with a young son who calls Grant 'the dinosaur man'
apparently for the sole purpose of dredging her up again for the film's poorly 
imagined finale.
Grant takes Billy along on the Kirbys trip, which is really an illegal gambit
to save their son, that young paraglider.  The couple aren't millionaires,
making Grant's check bogus, and they're separated as well (Eric was with
Amanda's new boyfriend, not that that makes much sense), meaning we're in
for some gooey family dynamics while waiting for the dino dining.  The Kirbys
hired hands (and obvious bait) are a threesome led by Mr. Udesky (Michael
Jeter,
"The Gift").  (Didn't anyone consider that casting Michael Jeter and William
H. Macy together and not having them be related was a little odd?)
As directed by Joe Johnston ("October Sky," "Jumanji") (Spielberg only produced
this one) from a risible script by Peter Buchman and the "Election" team of
Alexander Payne & Jim Taylor, "Jurassic Park III" is nothing more than a
quickie monster flick with a couple of new dinos (a Spinosauraus, which goes
head to head with the T-Rex, and Pteranodons).  The plot, as it were, is
a series of coincidences combined with extreme leaps of faith and a
trifecta of stupid cell phone tricks.  The effects are no longer
new, and, as shot by television cinematographer Shelly Johnson, rather
murky looking at times.  Film Editing by Robert Dalva ("October Sky") was
presumably done by machete, to keep this down to a 90 minute run time.  I
know of no other reason to explain the ridiculous ending which features the
survivors confronting a pack of raptors, then being saved by the most
ludicrous of logic jumps within a few minutes.  'Original' music by
Don Davis just repeats John Williams' original themes.
While Neill and young Morgan attempt to inject some humor and humanity
into the proceedings, the rest of the cast are plodding unexceptional.
"Jurassic Park III" will probably provide some quick entertainment for those
who go into it knowing what to expect, the same crowd who maybe liked "The
Lost World:  Jurassic Park."
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
