Title
Review for Secret Garden, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Jon A Webb
     Although I have not read it, I understand the children's book THE
SECRET GARDEN to be a cloying, precious story of a young girl's
restoring herself and her crippled cousin through a secret, magical
garden she restores.  I expected this film to be a particularly
effective adaptation of this book to the screen, because of its
direction (by Agnieszka Holland, who did EUROPA, EUROPA and OLIVIER,
OLIVIER) and its production (from Francis Ford Coppola's studios,
Zoetrope)--as well as because of the preview, which presents the film
from this point of view.
     But instead, this film is the sort that comes along every only
every ten years or so; true, competent, professional cinematic art.
Uniquely, to my knowledge, Holland has achieved this level of art in a
movie that can be appreciated by anyone, from a child to an adult.  It
is a remarkable accomplishment, which I think puts Holland on the level
as the finest directors.
     She does this by interpreting the novel in a very realistic and
child-oriented way. Children see the world very differently from
adults, and not at all in the sweet and precious way we like to think;
they believe in magic, not always the good kind (e.g., LORD OF THE
FLIES), and for them young animals are not only cute, but also models
and symbols of growth and fecundity.
     Holland incorporates many references to the young girl's emerging
sexuality without ever seeming heavy-handed or obvious about it. It is
not accidental that the accident that sends her back to England occurs
just after she has physically expressed her anger towards her parents,
seen them kissing, and hidden under the bed. But from the girl's point
of view these are real events, not symbols, and that is how Holland
presents them to us.
     Most of all, this is a really good movie. You will want to meet
these people, to see the garden.
     I don't remember the names of any of the actors or actresses,
except for Maggie Smith, who plays the evil governess of the
household.  But I especially liked the girl's maid, the girl, and the
young boy who helped her with the garden.  The maid, in particular,
stands out; I hope to see her again soon.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Kate Maberly, Heydon Prowse, Andrew Knott, Maggie Smith, 
           John Lynch
Director:  Agnieszka Holland
Producers  Fred Fuchs, Fred Roos, and Tom Luddy
Screenplay:  Caroline Thompson based on the novel by Frances Hodgson 
             Burnett
Music:  Zbigniew Preisner
Released by Warner Brothers
     Orphaned in India, where her transplanted English parents lived
before falling victim to an earthquake, Mary Lennox (Kate Maberly)
comes to the cold, aloof household of her uncle, the widower of her
mother's twin sister.  There she is viewed as nothing short of a
meddlesome nuisance by the housekeeper, Mrs. Medlock (Maggie Smith),
and is ordered to stay in her room until told to come out.  Mary
doesn't obey, of course, and in her explorations discovers the room of
her sickly cousin Colin (Heydon Prowse), from whom she is intentionally
being kept.  Outside, she finds something even more wondrous:  the
secret garden of her late aunt.  With the help of Dickon (Andrew
Knott), a local boy who can talk with animals, Mary sets to work
reclaiming the garden from the weeds and brambles that had overrun it.
     THE SECRET GARDEN has at least two things going for it:
remarkable acting and mesmerizing cinematography (by Roger Deakins).
Even without much of a story, this film could stand alone on those two
qualities.  It's amazing to find a child, especially one as young as
Kate Maberly (who, at the age of ten, has already been in numerous BBC
TV productions), capable of carrying a film.  And Maberly isn't all
sugar-and-spice.  Her Mary has plenty of bitterness, disdain, and
arrogance to make her virtually unbearable at times.
     Maggie Smith, always the consummate professional, is excellent as
the nasty housekeeper.  Mrs. Medlock isn't all bad, however, even
though her few moments of humanity could hardly be called
heartwarming.  Her real motives, while frequently pursued in the most
misguided and warped of methods, are nevertheless good and true.  Her
dislike of Mary comes as much from a perception of the danger that the
young girl could present to Colin Craven as from the sudden injection
of randomness into a previously well-ordered existence.
     THE SECRET GARDEN is based on Frances Hodgson Burnett's 1911
novel, and director Agnieszka Holland (recently at the helm for EUROPA,
EUROPA and OLIVIER, OLIVIER) has taken care that the screenplay follow
the book.  Ms. Holland is an avowed fan of the story, having read it
over and over again as a child.  The care and effort she poured into
this, her first Hollywood effort, is proof enough of that.  She has
created a picture that is magical for viewers of all ages.
     The story is essentially about the redemption of two damaged
children.  Mary, while hale of body, is an emotional cripple.  She grew
up unloved in a household where her selfish parents handed her off to
the servants.  Colin is neither physically nor emotionally whole.  His
father, never having recovered from the death of his wife, rarely
visits Colin in the sickroom, leaving the boy's care to the implacable
and unaffectionate Mrs. Medlock.
     The secret garden is a place of rare and wondrous beauty, and it
becomes the emotional balm that heals all wounds, both physical and
psychological.  There, Mary learns how to feel and Colin how to walk.
These two form a fast friendship both with each other and with Dickon,
the younger brother of one of Mrs. Medlock's maids.
     THE SECRET GARDEN combines drama, fantasy, and a little bit of
light Gothic horror (the old house with its strange noises) into a
satisfying mix.  The film is a visual feast, from the eerie insides of
Misselthwaite Manor to the time-lapse photography of blooming flowers.
Zbigniew Preisner's score adds to the atmosphere without ever becoming
obvious or intrusive.
     I'm not sure how some younger viewers will react to this film.
Most of them will miss the subtle nuances that Agnieszka Holland brings
to the screen (which are aimed at adults), but the story, centering as
it does around children, will be enough to captivate many.  Obviously,
THE SECRET GARDEN is not an action film, and those weaned on that genre
are likely to find this production stale.  Nevertheless, it is an
excellent family film for those willing to immerse themselves in its
leisurely pace--the picture proceeds just fast enough to keep the
audience's attention while exhibiting a great attention to detail.  THE
SECRET GARDEN has something to offer everyone, and that's a rarity
among movies these days.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  THE SECRET GARDEN is an artistically
     perfect rendering of a horribly cloying Edwardian children's
     story.  The Transcendentalist view of the perfection of
     nature sops right through and saturates this story.  It tells
     how one little girl is able to redeem three people's lives
     through the magic of a wonderful garden full of bunnies and
     lambs and foxes all playing together.  The film is supremely
     crafted but for someone else's taste.  Rating: low +1 (-4 to
     +4).  An artistic +2; an entertainment -1.
     When it comes to film, I have no guilty pleasures.  A common game among
film fans is to say what films are bad, but that they enjoy anyway.  I just
do not accept the concept that a film is bad but I like it in spite of its
obvious faults.  If I like a film, it really is a good film, to my mind.  I
may be one of the few people who enjoys a film such as LIFEFORCE or EXORCIST
II, but to me that is just because others simply do not appreciate that
these really are films with positive qualities.  On the other hand, I do
accept that there are good films I just cannot appreciate.  I recognize
quality but I still cannot bring myself to like this wonderful piece of art.
Ingmar Bergman is probably a really good filmmaker and I admit it, but THE
SEVENTH SEAL is his only film that I find enjoyable, and then only if I am
in the right mood.  CHARIOTS OF FIRE is very well made, but it does nothing
at all for me.  THE SECRET GARDEN is a beautiful and near-flawless
adaptation of a gawd-awful Edwardian children's story that would have done
better to remain in a dusty box in the attic.
     Kate Maberly plays Mary Lennox, a ten-year-old born in India around the
turn of the century.  She hates India and she hates her parents.  When an
earthquake kills her parents she is sent back to England to find more things
to hate.  She goes to live in her uncle's mansion which seems larger than
Yankee Stadium and somehow feels dead wherever you go.  Of her uncle there
is little sign.  He mourns for the death of his wife, a twin to Mary's
mother.  The mansion is ruled over my Mrs. Medlock (played by Maggie Smith),
who has no use for little Mary.  Mary is more or less expected to sit around
all day and ignore the sobbing coming from someone about whom nobody will
tell her.  But our adolescent Jane Eyre discovers on the grounds of the
mansion a garden that was kept by her aunt and has since been locked up.  In
this garden there are bright colors, nature seems to be alive, and it's the
only truly alive place on the whole grounds.  Mary discovers the garden and
discovers her sick, apparently dying cousin.  Through her love of nature and
the garden and with the help of two wonderful servants, little Mary saves
her cousin's life, makes her own life worth living, and pulls her uncle out
of his miasma of self-pity.  But none of that is remotely surprising when
you see the magic of nature in the hidden garden.  Here robins understand
and love children.  Sweet little bunnies play with chubby little foxes and
get along perfectly well.  Little new-born lambs test their wobbly legs for
the first time.  It is a place where there can be no doubts that God is an
Englishman and this is his own personal petting zoo.
     THE SECRET GARDEN is a project of American Zoetrope, who in 1979
produced THE BLACK STALLION, the first half of which is a truly wonderful
piece of filmmaking.  And some of THE SECRET GARDEN captures some of the
same feel.  It was directed by Agnieszka Holland, who previously directed
EUROPA, EUROPA and OLIVIER, OLIVIER.  (I wonder if she wanted to rename this
one GARDEN, GARDEN.)  The photography (by Roger Deakins) is wonderful, even
if what is in front of the camera is exaggerated and unctuous.  When the
house should looks dismal, it looks really dismal.  The grounds are gray and
depressing.  Inside the garden all of a sudden every detail jumps out at the
viewer--every corny bunny and lamb.  Holland just perfectly captures a mood
so dismally ugly or so cloyingly sweet that I, for one, felt like gagging.
I admit what she did, she did well.  Artistically this is a +2 film; for my
experience it is a -1.  Let me split the difference and give this film a low
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Eric Walker
     Hollywood hates children.  The major studios see movies made for
the entire family as quick money-makers that portray the world as
sweetness and light.  They also have to be simple so that kids "can
understand them," with clear-cut good guys and bad guys and a happy
ending where the bad guys are defeated so that the good guys can have a
happy ending.  Movies for children these days must contain idiotic
slapstick, such as with the HOME ALONE movies and DENNIS THE MENACE, or
else they must be shameless, stupid tearjerkers like FREE WILLY or
HEART AND SOULS, or else they must be animated and full of special
effects and talking animals, as in the Disney films.  None of today's
Hollywood directors seem interested in making a challenging,
entertaining film that the entire family can enjoy.
     So it's no surprise that the most remarkable Hollywood debut since
Kenneth Branagh's HENRY V has come from Europe.  Agnieszka Holland, who
is best known for directing the outstanding drama EUROPA EUROPA, has
come to Hollywood, and in particular to Francis Ford Coppola's Zoetrope
Studios.  She made THE SECRET GARDEN, which utterly destroys the
conventions of Hollywood "family" movies.  It's the most amazing
feature film since THE BLACK STALLION (which also came from
Zoetrope--not a coincidence?), and it's a movie likely to be remembered
for years to come.
     This film has everything that Hollywood movies don't: a complete
lack of "good guys" and "bad guys," outstanding acting, believable,
lifelike performances from all--children and adults alike--beautiful,
haunting scenery, a warm, life-affirming message that everyone is good
(but the message is not the least bit sickly-sweet), and a storyline
that will genuinely touch your heart and soul.
     Based on the classic novel of the same name, it's the story of
young Mary Lennox, a spoiled young girl born to a "society" family in
India--but because her parents are part of society, they have no time
to give their daughter a proper upbringing.  She can't even dress
herself without a servant, and she is ignored her whole life.  She
never even learns how to cry.
     But when Mary's parents die in an earthquake, she is sent to
England to live with her uncle, Lord Craven, in a huge, mysterious
mansion in the English countryside called Misselthwaite.  It's a dark,
lonely place, completely shut up and seemingly trapping all life inside
it, refusing to let things grow.  Mary is promptly told by the head
servant, Mrs. Medlock, where her place is: just as before, she is to
keep to herself and be ignored, because Lord Craven refuses to see
her.
     But Mary is a stubborn, feisty spirit, and she will not allow
herself to be stifled.  It isn't long before she's out and about,
roaming the castle and the land around it, discovering the secrets of
why Misselthwaite came to be such a desolate place.  She soon unlocks
the door to the heart of the mystery: a garden, hidden away and
untended for ten years, visited by no one except the animals.  This
garden is not dead, however--underneath the weeds and the neglected
growths, there is life waiting to emerge and grow once again.
     Here's where the film's message makes itself clear: love and
caring will heal the deepest wounds and cause flowers to burst forth
from the most barren ground--even the cold, lonely hearts of
Mrs. Medlock and Lord Craven himself.  It's all told in an utterly
believable, careful fashion, so that we are never once hit over the
head by the message and we look at it as gooey Hollywood sap.
     As she breaks down the rigid order of things at Misselwaite and
allows life to enter the manor once again, Mary makes some friends at
last: the young, naive farmboy Dickon, who loves the animals and knows
how to care for the garden; and the pale, sickly Colin Craven, a young
boy who represents the stifling effect of the manor.  He's been
bedridden for ten years, tended by doctors and the well-meaning
servants, but what he really needs is love to bring him back to
health.  That's what all the residents of Misselthwaite need, and Mary
causes them all to sprout and reach for the sun once again.
     Much of the credit for the film's success goes to director
Holland, who is not afraid to use darkness to make us appreciate the
light.  We feel the ominous presence of Lord Craven's curse throughout
the entire film; it's there, behind every corner, waiting for the
chance to strike us down.  It's a far cry from the cheap, treacly-sweet
world of Hollywood kiddie movies, where you can't even say the word
"death" for fear of upsetting the children in the audience.  Its thesis
darkness that gives this film its resonance, letting us feel for Mary
and her friends.
     Animals are used as metaphors for the re-birth of life: a robin
leads Mary to the garden, it raises a family, and more and more animals
appear (squirrels, woodchucks, deer, lambs) as the garden is re-born.
It's been said that you should never appear in the same scene with
animals, because they steal away all of the attention, but that's not
true here.  They play their part as well as the actors, appearing on
the sidelines and making us smile, but never milking our sympathies so
that we say "aww, cute!" There's no "cute" here, but there is great
beauty.  The film exults in the joys of Nature, and we revel in it.
     This story seems obvious as I type it down, but on the screen the
elements blend together so beautifully--the darkness, the acting, the
scenery, the story--that not once did I ever think it was
predictable.  I found tears welling my eyes from the film's pure joy,
and my heart was stirred.  As the film moved towards its end, I found
myself thinking and even praying that there would be a happy ending.  I
cared for the characters so much that I did not want to see a tragedy,
such as death, put in to add cheap drama and make s cry.
     Suffice to say, the film does not descend to the level of crass
manipulation.  It never falters, from the first frame to the last.
     And here is where I have to report the bad news: it seems doubtful
that THE SECRET GARDEN will be seen by many of the people it was made
for.  This is a G-rated movie--an endangered species in
Hollywood--because it contains no violence.  It is not animated.  It
has no action scenes, no special effects (except for a scene where the
garden springs to life over the course of several weeks), and the
audience Hollywood caters to above all others--teenagers--will probably
find the movie boring because of this.  As a result, Hollywood decides
to promote ridiculously moronic comedies like THE CONEHEADS and
SON-IN-LAW as "family" entertainment.  Warner Bros., the studio
releasing THE SECRET GARDEN, is promoting FREE WILLY as the "family
movie of the summer!"  They don't realize what a treasure they have
here.  In the Boston area, this movie is only appearing at one single
theater (the Copley Place mall), while the mean-spirited and cruel
DENNIS THE MENACE was released to nearly two thousand theaters across
the country.
     Therefore, I urge you: go and see THE SECRET GARDEN now, before
it's too late.  It's an experience you won't forget.  You will be
delighted, entertained, moved, and you will leave the theater with a
smile on your face and joy in your heart.

Author
David Wong Shee
Directed by Agnieszka Holland.
Written by Caroline Thompson and Frances Hodgson Burnett (novel).
Cinematography by Roger Deakins.
Music by Zbigniew Preisner.
Acted by: Kate Maberly; Heydon Prowse; Maggie Smith; John Lynch.
Production designed by Stuart Craig.
Edited by Isabelle Lorente.
     Following the death of her parents in a natural disaster in India
ten year old Mary Lennox (Kate Maberly), newly orphaned, is returned to
the United Kingdom by the colonial authorities.  Her next of kin is a
wealthy uncle, Lord Craven (John Lynch) and she comes to live in his
mansion set in deep the British countryside.
     Arriving at the peak of winter, the huge largely derelict house
stands amongst desolate fog laden moors, in an atmosphere of pervading
despair.  The household live seemingly under a curse, blighted by the
death of Lord Craven's wife during childbirth ten years earlier.
     Undaunted by her surroundings, however, Mary explores the derelict
labyrinth of, she is told, at least one hundred rooms; as well as the
extensive grounds and fallow gardens which surround it.  She discovers
her aunt's favorite garden, sealed off since her death.  She also comes
across a cousin she never knew she had, Colin Craven (Heydon Prowse),
estranged from his father, Lord Craven, all his life due to the tragic
circumstances of Colin's birth.  Colin is an invalid who has lived all
his days confined to bed, destined it appears, never to see the light
of day.
     The film depicts Mary's liberation of herself, and her uncle and
cousin, from the smothering burdens of their shared and individual
pasts.
     A tale for children and for those who remain, as they say, forever
"children at heart".
     The plot contains all the elements one would expect of a
childrens' story set in Victorian times: orphaned aristocratic
children; a tyrannical housekeeper (Maggie Smith); mysterious, hidden
places where seeds of, figuratively, magical rejuvenation are
eventually to be found.  As with all good (children's) stories several
key existential challenges must be faced and overcome:
*   The catastrophic abandonment of parental death.  
*   Mistreatment and neglect by supposed guardians.
     I must say I was surprised that, apart from a little long distance
telepathy, there was no recourse to magic (nor appeal to any other
supernatural agencies for that matter) to bring about the resolution to
bitter realities.  The (s)hero (Mary) survives and rescues those around
her by drawing upon the indomitable resilience of the human spirit; and
its eternal capacity for redemption from despair and for triumphing
over the destructive consequences of death.
* Courtesy of the rec.arts.movies database.
