Title
Review for Goodbye Lover (1999)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Roland Joffe
Cast: Patricia Arquette, Dermot Mulroney, Ellen DeGeneres, Mary-Louise
Parker, Don Johnson
Screenplay: Ron Peer, Joel Cohen, Alec Sokolow
Producers: Chris Daniel, Patrick McDarrah, Alexandra Milchan, Joel
Roodman
Runtime: 102 min.
US Distribution: Warner Bros.
Rated R: sex, language, violence 
Copyright 1999 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
I'm not sure why the formal structure of a film review requires that a
brief synopsis of the plot be provided.  Readers who have seen the film
in question aren't going to be interested in a brief retelling of the
story; they're just interested in the opinion of the critic.  Readers
who are considering seeing the picture aren't going to want to know a
lot about the film before seeing it.  Sometimes, however, the film
itself begs a review with no plot synopsis.  Roland Joffe's Goodbye
Lover is this kind of film.  The trailer tells far too much about the
picture, and any plot synopsis that explains beyond the first ten
minutes is too explicit.  So, what you learn in the first ten minutes is
as follows:  Sandra (Patricia Arquette) likes sex.  She likes sex with
Ben (Don Johnson), who just happens to be her husband's brother.  Her
husband is Jake (Dermot Mulroney).  What these three people do is
something you shouldn't know going into the movie.
But that won't stop me from mentioning that the film is so busy and
packed with subplots that you're likely to walk away feeling assaulted. 
Goodbye Lover is a strange little film, one that passes for
entertainment but probably won't linger in the memory for long.  I liked
a lot of it, starting with a few of the performances, and there are some
very clever sequences scattered about the movie.  But it lacks
inspiration, and more often feels derivative of flicks associated with
Quentin Tarantino.  The Tarantino genre can be put to good use (recent
examples include Lock, Stock, and Two Smoking Barrels and Go), but
Goodbye Lover doesn't deliver the way it could.  It's also the kind of
movie that ignores the characters in favor of an elaborate plot, and so
emotional investment in the story is nearly impossible.
That's not to say that there aren't any characters, because there
certainly are.  They may be stock characters with one-note
personalities, but they're all interesting to a degree.  Arquette is
perfectly lurid and ridiculously sexual, and the motivations behind
Sandra's actions are fascinating; we're led to believe that she just
wants a comfortable life (later, this turns out to mean that she wants a
lot of money).  Johnson and Mulroney are believable as brothers, though
neither character is understandable on any human level.  The interesting
characters are on the periphery:  Ellen DeGeneres (whom I love) is grand
as Sgt. Pompano, a cynical cop who investigates the situation that
Sandra creates.  I also enjoyed Ray McKinnon, who plays Pompano's naive
partner.  Mary-Louise Parker is funny as the woman Ben seems to fall in
love with; she appears intensely uncomfortable in every scene she's in. 
And I like Joffe's direction; there are a lot of nice stylistic touches,
some tricky camera work, and an appropriate musical score by John
Ottoman.  I also loved the last scene, for it features a burst of irony
so overt that I couldn't help but laugh.
One problem I noted early on is the lack of inspiration; much of the
film marches relentlessly to its conclusion, force-feeding us obligatory
scenes just because they're required to tie up loose ends.  And you
might be wondering how all these characters are worked into the
labyrinthine plot that the screenwriters (Ron Peer, Joel Cohen, and Alec
Sokolow) have constructed.  You might also wonder why the picture
contains a serial killer named The Doctor, who kills young women by
injecting them with a deadly chemical, or why Vincent Gallo is present
as a hired killer, or why there are loud sex scenes that take place in a
church (though I did enjoy the sarcastic references to religion and
existence).  Goodbye Lover is fluff, but it didn't have to be -- there
is a place for complex black comedies, but the good ones make
characterization essential to plot.  And though Goodbye Lover is a
convoluted mess, it's not the worst movie I've ever seen that couldn't
be synopsized in two tightly-written paragraphs.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Goodbye_Lover_ (R) *** (out of ****)
Imagine you're the head of a major studio.  You have an interesting little
film that is hard to categorize, yet you have enough faith in the project
to unveil it at a major international film festival.  Your faith is
confirmed when the film receives, on the whole, a warm reception.  What do
you do now?  If you're the head of Warner Bros., apparently you don't do
anything.
Despite good notices at Cannes last May, Roland Joffe's
description-defying _Goodbye_Lover_ has been sitting on the studio shelf
ever since, its release date being randomly tossed around the schedule like
a hot potato (until recently, it had been targeted for a release in
January... of 2000).  But after much headscratching in the WB marketing
department, the studio has now finally decided to bite the bullet, setting
an all-but-concrete mid-April release.  So what exactly was the problem?
After watching the film, it's easy to see why Warner was at a loss as to
what to do.  _Goodbye_Lover_ is a very enjoyable lark of an entertainment,
but the film's virtues are exactly what made it such hell to market--it's a
deliciously unpredictable thriller with a dark, very offbeat sense of
humor.  That the film juggles both elements is unusual enough; that the
film juggles them as well as it does is even moreso.
A lot of the enjoyment to be had with _Goodbye_Lover_ hinges on surprise,
so I'll speak of the plot in the vaguest possible terms.  Sultry Los
Angeles real estate agent Sandra Dunmore (Patricia Arquette) is married to
Jake (Dermot Mulroney), whose career as an ad exec is threatened by his
little drinking problem.  Jake's older brother is slick, pompous public
relations exec Ben (Don Johnson), who is dutifully served by staff
underling Peggy Blaine (Mary-Louise Parker).  Needless to say, nothing is
quite as it seems in this twisted little circle, and eventually a crime
within it brings the group to the attention of burned-out police detective
Rita Pompano (Ellen DeGeneres).
 Warner Bros. is describing _Goodbye_Lover_ as a "film gris" (as opposed
to noir), and the description is apt (for the French-challenged, "gris"
means grey).  In the most basic sense, its underlying, tongue-in-cheek
sense of humor keeps it from reaching the darkness of pure noir, yet the
mordant nature of the humor doesn't exactly make the film a sunny romp,
either.  But the "gris" label also fits how seamlessly Joffe and writers
Ron Peer, Joel Cohen, and Alec Sokolow meld their two genre worlds.  They
have their cake and eat it too, coming up with a comic thriller that
genuinely surprises or, rather, a twisty comedy that delivers
laughs--though, it must be said, that a number of wisecracks, which
primarily come from the mouth of Pompano, clang.
However, the occasional groaner is forgivable when there is such an
intriguing cast of characters.  All are well-played by the actors, but
there are two cast members who stand out the most.  The most interesting
character is Sandra, who looks and dresses like a siren, yet she's also a
devout churchgoer (a volunteer, no less) who loves listening to
self-improvement tapes and _The_Sound_of_Music_.  Arquette's typically flat
line delivery, which often fails her (most recently in
_The_Hi-Lo_Country_), is actually works here, a perfect fit for the
character's ambiguity.  DeGeneres has an ideal film showcase as the heard-
and seen-it-all Pompano, and though her character's sarcastic asides don't
always hit the mark, she delivers them with aplomb.
The greatest irony of year-long marketing-mulling session on
_Goodbye_Lover_ is that regardless of what direction Warner Bros. decides
to take with its publicity campaign, the film is just about certain to
flop; its sensibilities are much too warped to appeal to a wide audience.
Nonetheless, its fresh, unique voice will likely win _Goodbye_Lover_ a
devoted group of admirers, as it did nearly a year ago at Cannes.  (opens
April 16)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
Roger Ebert devised a term for film noir that is jokey, sanitized and lacking
that air of desperation so central to the genre. He called it "deadpan noir",
which is precisely what "Destiny Turns on the Radio" was, and what Rolland
Joffe's execrable new film "Goodbye, Lover" is. It is so groundless and putrid
that you'll leave the theater in disgust for all the wrong reasons. 
Patricia Arquette stars as Sandra, a real-estate dealer who is having an affair
with a PR executive (Don Johnson), who is also an organist at the local church.
Their frequent trysts occur at the houses she plans to sell to prospective
buyers. 
Johnson wants to quit the affair, though, because Sandra's alcoholic husband
(the always unconvincing Dermot Mulroney) is suspicious and poised to kill her
lover. What makes things even worse is that the two men involved are brothers.
And Johnson, you see, is beginning an affair with his secretary, the underused
Mary-Louise Parker. Yes, I could feel the puzzle pieces of noir start to fit
neatly with aplomb and true danger. And it is around this time that the movie
comes tumbling down like the Berlin Wall. 
Without giving too much of the plot away, I can safely add that the movie's
twists and turns are predictable to the core, and that the motive behind a
murder in the film is so that the protagonists can collect a tidy insurance
settlement. We have heard that plot idea before - it goes back as far as the
classic Double Indemnity, along with a million other films. But "Goodbye,
Lover" does a curious thing - it becomes a sitcomish noir tale. 
In other words, the perilous machinations of noir becomes a set-up for an
elongated joke, a put-on, especially when Ellen DeGeneres turns up as a cynical
detective. Her comic timing is flawless and she is fun to watch...but what is
she doing in this movie? It seems as if we are in the latest "Ellen" episode
with a colorful cast of characters behaving like buffoons. 
"Goodbye, Lover" is an unredeeming piece of junk with no trace of humanity or
purpose. Arquette hardly dazzles as a siren with a fetish for "The Sound of
Music," unlike the alluring quality she displays in the underrated "Lost
Highway." Only Johnson seems to invest some interest and charisma in his
shopworn role, but it is short-lived. Roland Joffe's direction is surefooted,
but all the superb camerawork and canted angles can't do justice to an absurdly
uneven, rottenly scripted film. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at
Faust667@aol.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
GOODBYE LOVER
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Patricia Arquette, Dermot Mulroney, Ellen DeGeneres,
Mary-Louise Parker, Don Johnson, Ray McKinnon.
Screenplay:  Ron Peer and Joel Cohen & Alec Sokolow.
Producers:  Alexandra Milchan, Patrick McDarrah, Joel Roodman and Chris
Daniel.
Director:  Roland Joffe.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  97 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     GOODBYE LOVER is the kind of nihilistic entertainment that gives you
a few giggles while watching it, then leaves you feeling dirty for not
loathing the whole enterprise.  Aptly labeled a "film-gris" in the
production notes, it's a convoluted comic thriller centered around Sandra
Dunmore (Patricia Arquette), a real estate agent with dreams of the good
life and a car full of motivational tapes reminding her that she can have
it.  Standing in her way, unfortunately, is her alcoholic husband Jake
(Dermot Mulroney), which leads her to an affair with Jake's more
successful brother Ben (Don Johnson), while Ben also romances a co-worker 
named Peggy (Mary-Louise Parker) on the side.  When the tangled
interactions of this quartet leads to murder, Det. Rita Pompano (Ellen
DeGeneres) comes on the scene to investigate and discovers that very
little is what it appears to be.
     The reason nothing is what it appears to be is that GOODBYE LOVER is
a film about twisty-turny plotting...and, essentially, that's _all_ it's
about.  Allegiances shift, backs are stabbed (figuratively and literally),
and greed is the order of the day.  It's the kind of stuff that usually
makes a film interesting to watch thanks to its unpredictability, but
GOODBYE LOVER becomes strangely predictable in its unpredictability.  It's
so instantly obvious that it's a film about hidden agendas that it becomes
a matter of waiting until the next character's obviously hidden agenda is
revealed.  There's not much fun in the zigs and zags the story takes
because every 20 minutes or so you know it's going to be time for the next
zig or zag, and the next permutation in a series of unholy alliances.
     There's still something over-the-top goofy about GOODBYE LOVER which
makes it possible to slip into its sociopathic world.  Patricia Arquette
is an ideal cast as Sandra, a driven Barbie doll who sees herself as the
cutthroat reincarnation of Julie Andrews' Maria from THE SOUND OF MUSIC.
The performance is only so-so, but the character is such a wild blend of
madonna and whore that she's enjoyable to watch.  Ellen DeGeneres gets
most of the prime punch lines as the embittered Det. Pompano, most
directed at her morally upright Mormon partner (Ray McKinnon).  The real
key to appreciating GOODBYE LOVER, however, is slipping into the slickness
of a production which takes the image of Los Angeles as duplicity capital
of the world and blows it up to billboard size.  From the encounters with
spin-doctoring publicists to the ubiquitous use of mirrors, GOODBYE LOVER
has a blast with tarted-up sleaze and the way motivated misanthropes can
create an image that allows them get away with murder (literally and
figuratively).
     In fact, GOODBYE LOVER is so gleeful in its complete absence of
humanity that it may take you a while after it's over before you feel the
need to shower its decadence right off of yourself.  It's too self-aware
of its lack of real characters to inspire too much head-wagging, but it's
still one of those films that finds it cool to set up the only person with
an ounce of optimism as an object of ridicule.  GOODBYE LOVER is full of
ugly-on-the-inside types who feel justified doing whatever it takes to
grab the golden ring because, after all, everyone else is doing it.
There's just enough residual cheesiness to keep the film in the realm of
the surreal, with just enough bleak attitude to blunt its surreal appeal.
It's not a thriller so much as it is an ultra-black comedy, where part of
the joke is on you for leaving your moral outrage at the door.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        "Goodbye, Lover" sat on the shelf for almost a year since its
lukewarm reception at the Cannes Film Festival last May, and one look will
tell you why.  It's a mess.  And that's *way* before Ellen DeGeneres shows
up.
        The film is one of those torrid double-indemnity crime stories
that, in this case, required the services of three screenwriters.  I
suspect that one wrote a sexy thriller, one wrote a murder mystery, and one
wrote a comedy, then director Roland Joffé tried to piece it all together
in the editing room while scratching his head in bewilderment.
        I didn't laugh at Ellen DeGeneres much (I think I was supposed to).
DeGeneres is horrible and her character is even worse, a tough-talking
vulgar cop with a bad wardrobe and bad hair.  Either DeGeneres is wearing a
wig--as most of the actors appear to be--or she doesn't yet have enough
clout to secure a hairstylist.  Every single word out of her mouth is
supposed to be racy and hip, but her incessant wisecracking is
poorly-written and merely stupid.  Her reaction to the brutal killing of a
jogger is "at least she died healthy."  And that's one of her wittier
asides.
        DeGeneres' Sgt. Rita Pompano is called in to investigate the
allegedly accidental death of...wait.  To give away too much of the plot
would all but ruin a film that has very little going for it outside of its
numbing plot twists and multiple triple-crosses.  It's best described this
way:
        Sultry sexpot/real estate agent Sandra Dunmore (Patricia Arquette)
is married to Jake, a "creative yet unfocused" (and alcoholic) advertising
rep, played by Dermot Mulroney.  Sandra likes to act out her deep-seated
sexual fantasies and Jake's brother Ben (the suave-as-ever Don Johnson)
likes to help.  Ben is also coming on to his petite, mousy co-worker Peggy
Blaine (Mary-Louise Parker) and someone, somewhere, is planning to cash in
on that huge life insurance policy of his.
        The film is ripe with cheating lovers cheating on each other and
back again.  Although there are some genuine surprises, the plot twists get
too contrived too quickly.  Probably around the time DeGeneres' gumcracking
gumshoe appears.
        At least the former "Ellen" star is going for something a little
different.  Arquette turns in Yet Another of her stiletto-heeled, platinum
blonde bombshell roles (see: "Lost Highway," "True Romance") while quoting
embarrassing lines like "I'm not wearing any underwear."  I hope she got
paid a lot of money to do this.
        Here's an example of some of the film's flat-out stupidity.  Sandra
purchases a used car and disguises herself in a red wig prior to stalking
two of the film's duplicitous lovers.  She drives the motorbiking couple
off a cliff while blaring her favorite "The Sound of Music" on her car
stereo, intent on identifying herself to her hapless victims.  So what was
the point of the wig and the car?
        "The Sound of Music" stuff might be a reference to "The Wizard of
Oz" allusions in David Lynch's "Wild at Heart," but if so Joffé must have
forgotten that "Wild at Heart" was a despicable movie.  It's hard to
believe that "Goodbye, Lover" was directed by the same person who made "The
Killing Fields" and "The Mission."  It's not, however, hard to see why it
sat on the shelf for so long.  It should have stayed there.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
starring Patricia Arquette, Dermot Mulroney, Ellen DeGeneres, Mary-Louise
Parker, Don Johnson
written by Ron Peer, Joel Cohen, & Alec Sokolow
directed by Roland Joffe
Before seeing Roland Joffe's black comedy GOODBYE, LOVER, I didn't
think I would ever need to say that a film suffers because it doesn't
rip off Tarantino enough. But, alas, the unexpected has happen. For
the most part, GOODBYE, LOVER's plot is solid all the way through, and
the twists are timely and unexpected. But the script does not make for
good comedy, and none of the characters are interesting enough to care
much about.
GOODBYE, LOVER is the story of real-estate agent Sandra
Dunmore(Patricia Arquette), a woman as obsessed with kinky sex as she
is with "The Sound of Music". She is cheating on her husband,
Jake(Dermot Mulroney), with his brother, Ben(Don Johnson). Then, one
night, a drunken Jake calls Ben, telling him that he knows all about
the whole ordeal and that he is planning on throwing himself off of a
30-story building. Ben rushes to the building, and while he is trying
to help Jake away from the ledge, Sandra comes from behind and pushes
him off the building to his death.
Jake and Sandra then tell the police investigator, Sgt. Pompano(Ellen
DeGeneres), that Ben fell off while trying to help Jake, and it turns
out that what Jake and Sandra are trying to do is collect the money
from Ben's will, since Jake is Ben's only living relative...or so they
think.
But Ben decided to marry his ditzy co-worker Peggy(Mary-Louise Parker)
3 days before at a secret Las Vegas ceremony. But it's not long before
Sandra finds out, and everyone seems to be against everyone
else. Meanwhile, Sgt. Pompano is still trying to piece together the
whole ordeal.
GOODBYE, LOVER was supposedly kept on Warner Bros. shelves for quite a
while, because the company wasn't sure how to market it. The film
doesn't feature any big name stars, and the subject matter is too dark
and risky for most viewers.
Director Roland Joffe, who directed the great THE KILLING FIELDS and
the not-so-great THE SCARLET LETTER has taken a different route this
time around, with a film that is a lot of fun but doesn't provoke a
lot of thought. Patricia Arquette is good as always as the vixen, and
Ellen DeGenres is, well...Ellen DeGeneres. Walking out of GOODBYE,
LOVER, I wasn't sure what to think of it, because the film doesn't
leave you with much. The film is not as smart as FARGO or even last
year's CLAY PIGEONS, because what it is lacking is a script with the
least bit of comedic bite.  The screenplay, by Ron Peer, Joel
Cohen(don't worry, it's definitely not Joel Coen), and Alec Sokolow
seems to concerned with the story and it's plot twists that it doesn't
take the time to be funny or give us characters we can care about. If
GOODBYE, LOVER had been another PULP FICTION rip-off, I probably
would've enjoyed it more
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST 


Author
Steve Rhodes
Roland Joffé's GOODBYE, LOVER is the old tale of cross and doublecross.
Although the movie is entertaining, it's rarely fresh or imaginative.
Ron Peer's script is quite predictable, once you realize that every
relationship will contain a twist.
In the picture's best performance, Patricia Arquette plays a sexy,
platinum blonde named Sandra Dunmore, who plans on sleeping her way to
riches.  She loves nothing better than engaging in risky sexual
adventures.  In the opening, she sticks a Bach diskette in the church
organ and then pins the organist to the floor.  As the choir sings in
the chapel, she has intense sex with her husband's brother, Ben (Don
Johnson).  A real estate sales agent, she likes to take Ben along on
house calls when the owners are out.  She handcuffs Ben to the furniture
and has her way with him.
Besides being erotic, Arquette is also wonderfully quirky.  She enjoys
hamming it up as she listens to cassettes.  She repeats Anthony
Robbins's advice with him, and she sings along with Julie Andrews in THE
SOUND OF MUSIC.
Dermot Mulroney plays Sandra's flaky husband.  The performances by both
Mulroney and Johnson are bland and unconvincing.  Mary-Louise Parker, in
a role slightly out of character for her, plays Ben's co-worker and
possible girlfriend, Peggy.  Peggy likes sex, but prefers old Joan
Crawford movies.  Mildred Pierce is her favorite.  The scene in which
she and Ben almost make love is one of the movie's more promising ones.
But, like the rest of the movie, it is only partially successful.
The story's comedic role is given to Ellen DeGeneres as cynical Sgt.
Rita Pompano, who comes to the Dunmore house to investigate some
possible foul play.  Sgt. Pompano badmouths everyone and doesn't believe
any story she is told.  This trait comes in handy since truth is not
something that comes easy to the Dunmores.
The story, which starts off as a promisingly erotic thriller, loses its
way by the end of the first act.  Degenerating into a cinematic retread
of many movies you've seen before, it earns that kiss of death summary:
It's kind of cute.
GOODBYE, LOVER runs 1:42.  It is rated R for violence, profanity and sex
and would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "GOODBYE, LOVER" (Warner Bros.)
         This darkly comic, unpredictable, tantalizing thriller will
confound you. In fact, I defy you to predict what happens when a
saucy, seductive, manipulative real estate agent (Patricia Arquette),
who is married to an alcoholic public relations exec (Dermot
Mulroney), becomes the predator in an obsessive affair with his slick,
pompous, high-powered older brother (Don Johnson) who, in turn, is
adored by his mousy, insecure assistant (Mary-Louise Parker). It's
their warped penchant for vicious murder and grisly mayhem which
summon a nasty, cynical, wise-cracking detective (scene-stealing Ellen
De Generes) to the scene. In Los Angeles, self-realization and upward
mobility aren't easy tasks and, with this sociopathic quartet of
characters, nothing is what it seems to be - including the familiar
score of "The Sound of Music," which is integral to the story. Writers
Ron Peer, Joel Cohen, and Alec Sokolow have devised what Warner
Bros. describes as a "film gris," as opposed to "noir," which is apt,
since "gris" in French means "gray," and there certainly are a lot of
shady gray areas in this shrewd, superficial, twisted tale of
avarice. And, in a change of pace for his career, director Roland
Joffe ("The Killing Fields," "The Mission," "The Scarlet Letter") has
embraced and enhanced the imaginative, off-center wryness of it. He
keeps the tension taut, revealing only select pieces of the
deliciously intricate puzzle, one at a time, with credit going to the
superb lighting and camera work of Dante Spinotte
("L.A. Confidential").  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Goodbye, Lover" is a cynical yet captivating 7. It's so irreverent,
amoral, and gleefully exuberant that even the most jaded will get a
surprise or two.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Warner Bros./Regency 
 Director:  Roland Joffe
 Writer:  Ron Peer and Joel Cohen & Alex Sokolow
 Cast: Patricia Arquette, Dermot Mulroney, Ellen DeGeneres,
Mary-Louise Parker, Don Johnson
   Do you ever get the impression that people are no damn
good?  What's that...you say you saw "The Sound of Music,"
and that proves the opposite?  Well, now, I guess everything
depends on what you see in the movies, on TV, in
cyberspace--now that we all get our impressions of
humankind through the media rather than via personal
contact.  "Goodbye, Lover," for example, uses songs from
"The Sound of Music" for the same ironic effect that made
the Broadway musical the chief point of hilarity in last year's
"Welcome to Woop Woop."  The Rodgers and Hammerstein
classic of 1959, which ran for 1433 performances in New
York, was a treacly bauble even for the 1950s, when
everyone was buttoned-up and innocent.  How silly the tunes
and lyrics sound today in the avaricious 90s, when for the
first time in history a guy could actually plot to kill his own
brother!  And how ingenious to use its strains for
incongruously humorous impact in this movie!
   "Goodbye, Lover," which includes a fratricidal plot, was
introduced to a warm reception at the Cannes Film Festival in
May 1998, yet the movie has been sitting in a can on the
studio shelf ever since, was scheduled for release in January,
2000, and has finally seen the dark of night on April 16 of this
year. Despite its crackling good plot, superior performances,
and elaborate design, online critic Michael Dequina feels that
"its sensibilities are too warped to appeal to a wide
audience."  Perhaps this was the Warner Bros.' motive in
keeping the goodies locked out of circulation for so long.  I
have more faith that there's indeed a extensive mass of
moviegoers out there--in Europe if not in America--who can
identity with the story's most cynical character, Detective
Pompano (Ellen DeGeneres).  DeGeneres consistently steals
every scene she's in with her misanthropic convictions,
amusingly putting down her Mormon partner (who gets the
last words and the most ironic lines in the movie), Detective
Rollins (Ray McKinnon).
   Avarice is the subtext that runs throughout the film from the
opening moments, as sensuous real estate agent Sandra
Dunmore (Patricia Arquette) sprints through some self-
improvement tapes which she has committed to memory as
she drives to her clients.  She alternates by singing along
with Julie Andrews, whose honey-tipped voice permeates her
home and car. Though hers is a childless, two-career family,
her ambitions are dragged down by her alcoholic husband,
Jake (Dermot Mulroney).  Discouraged by her mate's
performance, she conspires murder with her brother-in-law,
Ben (Don Johnson), with whom she is having an affair and
who is in turn serviced by his mousy assistant in the ad
agency, Peggy (Mary-Louise Parker).  When bodies begin
piling up, Detective Rita Pompano and her partner Rollins use
extralegal police tactics to flesh out the killers.  
   Sharp noir fans in the audience will likely figure out the
intricate twists and turns of writer Ron Peer's story, directed
with flair by Roland Joffe and stylistically filmed with great
attention to detail by Dante Spinotte--who was behind the
camera for the less tongue-in-cheek and more graphically
brutal "L.A. Confidential."  Once you perceive that nothing--
absolutely nothing--is as it seems, you should be able to
calculate who's double-dealing whom and whose back will
next get the figurative knife.  After all, when eight million
dollar in insurance money is at stake, you don't expect the
character to act quite like Maria Rainer, the postulant at
Nonnberg Abbey.
   Though some of the curves appear contrived, the film rocks
with high-caliber performances especially by Ellen DeGeneres
in her signature role as scoffer-laureate, scoring sit-comish
hits off her hayseed partner Rollins--who has the strange
impression that the police exist to serve and protect the
public and are unequivocally capable of doing just that. 
Patricia Arquette, consistently an endowed performer in such
difficult but intriguing indies like "Lost Highway" and "Ed
Wood," comes across strikingly as a bad, bad girl while
Dermot Mulroney and Don Johnson fill the bill as brothers
whose only similarity is their affinity for plotting.  "Goodbye
Lover" has sharper, more defined lines than "L.A.
Confidential." Here is a labyrinthine exercise in film gris
balancing tension with tongues-in-cheek to fashioning an
ironic, malevolent, acrid and effervescent thriller.

Author
Matt Williams
A complex plot is not nearly enough to make an interesting movie, a fact
which is clearly demonstrated by the film noir Goodbye Lover. With
enough plot twists to fill three other films, Goodbye Lover shows that a
ludicrous number of double-crosses can't compensate for the lack of
enjoyable characters and quality dialogue.
The film is populated by a plethora of amoral no-gooders. Sandra
(Patricia Arquette) is a real estate agent who gets kicks out of using
other people's houses for her torrid sexual fantasies. Ben (Don Johnson)
is a PR weasel, the slimy type who, when not covering up for a senator's
tawdry misbehavior, is having an affair in the back rooms of a church.
Jake (Dermot Mulroney) is a bitter alcoholic, who is self-destructing
and wants to take everyone down with him.  The nicest of the bunch would
have to be Peggy Blaine (Mary-Louise Parker), who merely seeks intimate
relationships with her co-workers.
The plot of Goodbye Lover is too convoluted to summarize here without
spoiling half the movie.  Suffice it to say that it involves sex, money,
greed, lust, affairs, murder, fraud, backstabbing, serial killing, and
The Sound of Music.
Thrown in the midst of everything is Detective Rita Pompano (Ellen
DeGeneres), an extremely cynical investigator who tries to make sense of
all this.  With her new partner always a half-step behind, Detective
Pompano slowly but surely begins to unravel the truth.
Ellen DeGeneres is the best thing Goodbye Lover has to offer, even if
she comes across as more of a droll comedienne than a police
investigator.  Her witty banter is actually a bright spot in this
otherwise dull movie.  And, even though she's primarily a tangential
character, she's the most interesting of the lot.
The plotting of Goodbye Lover feels more like a soap opera than film
noir, and an unconvincing one at that.  Relationships, twists and
surprises seem to crop up simply because they could be worked into the
script... not because they make sense.
Goodbye Lover is chock full of twist and turns.  However, the film
actually isn't that hard to follow...it just gives you no reason to
bother.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Saravia
Roger Ebert devised a term for film noir that is jokey, sanitized and lacking
that air of desperation so central to the genre. He called it "deadpan noir",
which is precisely what "Destiny Turns on the Radio" was, and what Rolland
Joffe's execrable new film "Goodbye, Lover" is. It is so groundless and putrid
that you'll leave the theater in disgust for all the wrong reasons. 
Patricia Arquette stars as Sandra, a real-estate dealer who is having an affair
with a PR executive (Don Johnson), who is also an organist at the local church.
Their frequent trysts occur at the houses she plans to sell to prospective
buyers. 
Johnson wants to quit the affair, though, because Sandra's alcoholic husband
(the always unconvincing Dermot Mulroney) is suspicious and poised to kill her
lover. What makes things even worse is that the two men involved are brothers.
And Johnson, you see, is beginning an affair with his secretary, the underused
Mary-Louise Parker. Yes, I could feel the puzzle pieces of noir start to fit
neatly with aplomb and true danger. And it is around this time that the movie
comes tumbling down like the Berlin Wall. 
Without giving too much of the plot away, I can safely add that the movie's
twists and turns are predictable to the core, and that the motive behind a
murder in the film is so that the protagonists can collect a tidy insurance
settlement. We have heard that plot idea before - it goes back as far as the
classic Double Indemnity, along with a million other films. But "Goodbye,
Lover" does a curious thing - it becomes a sitcomish noir tale. 
In other words, the perilous machinations of noir becomes a set-up for an
elongated joke, a put-on, especially when Ellen DeGeneres turns up as a cynical
detective. Her comic timing is flawless and she is fun to watch...but what is
she doing in this movie? It seems as if we are in the latest "Ellen" episode
with a colorful cast of characters behaving like buffoons. 
"Goodbye, Lover" is an unredeeming piece of junk with no trace of humanity or
purpose. Arquette hardly dazzles as a siren with a fetish for "The Sound of
Music," unlike the alluring quality she displays in the underrated "Lost
Highway." Only Johnson seems to invest some interest and charisma in his
shopworn role, but it is short-lived. Roland Joffe's direction is surefooted,
but all the superb camerawork and canted angles can't do justice to an absurdly
uneven, rottenly scripted film. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com
