Title
Review for One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Brandon Herring
First thing's first, while I watched this movie, I found myself stunned. This
movie so entertained the viewer, as it did fascinate, and inform. A chilling,
disturbing, and revealing look into the mental institutions as seen through the
eyes of a con. Jack Nicholson, Louise Fletcher, Brad Dourif, Danny DeVito, and
Christopher Lloyd, round out the excellent, and very well casted cast.
Jack Nicholson brilliantly plays Randall Patrick McMurphy, an ex-con, who fakes
being mentally insane, to enter the institution. As he goes to the hospital, he
doesn't realize, that the people, and the atmosphere there is so out there. The
patients are really psycho, and creepy. Randall, must try and survive these
days, before he has to go to Jail. He has to entertain himself while at the
same time, find good in this place of craziness.
Lousie Fletcher plays Nurse Ratched, a soft; but strong willed nurse, who will
not take anything from anyone, or put up with misbehavior. She watches Randall,
and notices something different about him, hes not as psycho as the others, but
he is a little out there. Her job is touch indeed, having to put up with all
these men, who dont listen, some go crazy and throw fits, and others just sit
there and dont do anything.
Randall meets many new friends in this place, Brad Dourif who plays Billy
Bibbit, is a mentally unstable, but voluntarily institutionalized person. Danny
DeVito plays Martini, a slow but charming and sweet man, who means know harm in
what he does or say. Christopher Lloyd plays Taber, a man, who also voluntarily
institutionalized himself. He also meets Chief, a big 'dumb, and deaf' Indian,
who happens to like to play basketball.
Randall must try and survive these days with his new friends, and the hospital,
as well as an everlasting war as to which they can watch the world series on
TV. Put up with Nurse Ratched, and the other patients, doctors, vistors, and
nurses. Ultimately leading up to a dramatic finale, that makes you want to
stand up and cheer.
I think what was best about this film was the realism. I had no problem
believing that this was happening. Almost like a documentary, it was striking
and powerful, making the viewer not want to stop watching till the end. Some of
the sequences are memorable as the basketball game, and the fishing trip. Jack
Nicholson, who as always plays his character absolutely excellent, and makes
the viewer want hand him an Oscar himself. 
The supporting cast, Louise Fletcher, Danny DeVito, Christopher Lloyd, and Brad
Dourif also give terrific performances. Danny, Christopher, and Brad's careers
all were made with this superb movie. It's all sentimental, funny, dramatic,
intense, chilling, disturbing, diverting, and tragic. The finale leaves the
viewer stunned and sitting there thinking about what he just saw. See this
film, and believe it. I think you will find, its one of the BEST ever. 
The second film to win all five major Oscars: Best Picture, Best Actor
(Nicholson), Best Actress (Fletcher), Director, and Screenplay. And it deserved
all of them.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring (HorrorMvFn@aol.com)

Author
Chad Polenz
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1975, R, 129 minutes [2 hours, 9 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Jack Nicholson (R.P. McMurphy), Louise Fletcher (Nurse Ratched),
William Redfield (Harding), Sydney Lassick (Cheswick), written by Lawrence
Hauben, Bo Goldman, produced by Saul Zaentz, directed by Milos Forman, based
on the novel by Ken Kesey and the play by Dale Wasserman.
Milos Forman's "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" is good, but it should be
great. It's based on a classic novel which means it should have a vivid,
powerful theme, but that forms only in passing. However, what we do get is an
enjoyable (and often hilarious) piece of strange human interaction with a
battle against authority.
Jack Nicholson stars as R.P. McMurphy, a convict who is sane, but has faked
insanity to be transferred from a prison work farm to a mental institution.
When he arrives he is surprised because his fellow inmates don't seem too
crazy. But McMurphy doesn't know how to deal with these people. When he tries
to treat them as fellow prisoners his lack of sensitivity makes for scenes
that are more funny than they are thematic.
McMurphy's fellow inmates include: Harding (Redfield), a relatively sane man
who cannot get over his wife's adultery; Cheswick (Lassick), a paranoid
neurotic who has no self-confidence; Tabor (Christopher Lloyd), a cynical
sadist who likes to cause trouble; Martini (Danny Devito), a man with the
personality of a 3-year-old; Billy (Brad Dourif), a young, stuttering
paranoid whose shyness makes him deathly afraid of his mother; and "Chief"
(Will Sampson), a large Native American who claims to be deaf and dumb. All
in all, an excellent supportive cast.
The film is basically the story of how authority can be organized,
calculated, and polished on the outside but still corrupt on the inside. The
head nurse, Miss Ratched (Fletcher), represents that kind of power. She is
completely unemotional and quiet, but her sternness comes across clearly.
It's not what she does or what she says, but the way she says things with
such totality. Unlike a prison warden, she does not use force to control her
patients, but a precise system of intimidation. For example, McMurphy begs
her to let them watch the World Series, but she says that would interrupt the
schedule. The inmates are such slaves to Ratched that even when it is put to
a vote (the first of two times), McMurphy loses. 
Little happens in terms of plot. Instead, Forman opts strictly for
atmosphere to establish theme. Subtle mind games between McMurphy and Ratched
start to occur and become the most crucial element of the film, but does not
go overboard. We also get scenes of basketball and card games that are  funny
because the inmates are so paranoid they usually end up fighting with each
other. McMurphy even hijacks the institution's bus and takes them all on a
fishing trip. He knows he won't get into any more trouble because he's just a
crazy nut - right?
Although the film does an excellent job of characterization, after a while,
the lack of organization becomes distracting. Some elements start to become
questionable. For example, McMurphy is in a medium security institution with
mostly voluntary patients which doesn't seem logical. Also, why do they
complain so much if they can leave whenever they want?
Perhaps mental instability is contagious, and if so, McMurphy, along with
the film, seems to become unbalanced throughout the last act. He has an
opportunity to escape, but decides to throw a going away party for the ward.
It certainly is interesting to see how the "mental defectives" respond to the
anarchy. But everything comes to a boiling point as Nurse Ratched's control
indirectly leads to the most absolute of all power - death.
"One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" is good but has even more potential.
Because the film remains so lighthearted, the message isn't as poetic as it
should be, but it's still fun.         
please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
David Landers
RATING: **** out of **** - 9.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Jack Nicholson (Randle Patrick McMurphy), Louise Fletcher (Nurse
Ratched), Brad Dourif (Billy Bibbit), Danny DeVito (Martini), Will Sampson
(Chief), Christopher Lloyd (Taber)
DIRECTOR: Milos Forman
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for language 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1975
ACADEMY AWARDS: Best Picture, Best Director (Forman), Best Actor
(Nicholson), Best Actress (Fletcher), Best Adapted Screenplay (Bo Goldman
and Lawrence Hauben)
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Supporting Actor (Dourif), Best
Cinematography (Bill Butler and Haskell Wexler), Best Music (Jack
Nitzsche), Best Film Editing (Richard Chew, Sheldon Kahn, and Lynzee
Klingman)
ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST is definitely one of the most memorable
films of recent years.  Absolutely brilliant performances are turned in 
by many, although Jack Nicholson's role as Randle Patrick McMurphy stands 
out more than any.  McMurphy is a seemingly common man who just cannot
keep himself out of trouble.  In addition, Louise Fletcher's portrayal as
the evil Nurse Ratched is outstanding.  Moreover, the supporting cast is
full of familiar names in their very early roles, including Christopher
Lloyd (his first appearance ever) and a young Danny DeVito, both
performing as mental patients.  
ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST is a very convincing look into the lives
and events of mental patients and the different world that takes place
behind closed doors of a mental institute.  Milos Forman turns in an
extremely wonderful directorial performance in his first award winning
movie, and, in fact, only the third American movie he directed.  The film
is also a rebellious film, in which Jack Nicholson's character, McMurphy,
leads a "peasant uprising" against the cruel ways of the current
leadership, headed up by Nurse Ratched.  Until McMurphy arrives, the
mental patients do not so much as think to question the authority.  But
that all changes once McMurphy steps in.
On his most recent prison sentence, McMurphy formulates a plan.  His plan?
Pretend that he is insane so that he can get out of doing the standard
prison work.  Apparently, though, his performance is a little too
convincing.  He is sent to a mental hospital and admitted as a patient.
The head doctors of the institute examine and question him.  He is direct
to admit that he may do things that seem "crazy", but he definitely does
not belong in the mental institute.  Alas, the doctors feel that he does,
indeed, belong as a patient, and he is admitted.  Once inside, he is
subjected to the life that is led.  The rules are strictly followed and
the type of activity that McMurphy enjoys is condemned.  
Of course, McMurphy cannot bear to live his life this way, and he bends
the rules every way that he can.  This includes testing Nurse Ratched's
authority and patience every way he can, as well as setting up his own
small "gambling casino" in the washroom.  This does not last long, for
once McMurphy makes away with everyone's cigarettes (the currency), Nurse
Ratched closes his operation.  McMurphy also attempts to befriend Chief, a
very large Indian who is a patient at the hospital.  Chief is "a deaf dumb
Indian who can't say a word" according to the other patients, but McMurphy
is intent on teaching him, to begin with, how to play basketball.  He
teaches him well, for when the patients and workers organize a game, Chief
steals the show.  Chief also assists McMurphy in escaping.  McMurphy
decides to steal the bus and take the group for "a ride".  Once McMurphy
picks up a female friend, he takes the bus to a shipyard where he
convinces watchman that the men are a group of doctors from the mental
institute.  In a very memorable scene, each rather convincing "doctor" is
introduced.  The group then takes a boat for a fishing trip.
McMurphy gets his second strike against him when he gets into a rumble
with a few of the attendats, and he then receives ECT therapy.  But the
third, and most devestating strike occurs when McMurphy decides to host a
little "get together" inside the hospital one night.  The consequences of
this are devestating and lead to a very emotional ending.
ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST is a marvelous, sensational film that will
be long remembered as a film about a courageous man who changes the lives
of a group of mental patients and is not afraid to stand up to authority.
Definitely worthy of the many awards that it and it's cast and crew
members received, ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST should not be missed.


Author
Long Che Chan
Czech director Milos Forman, in 1984, made one of the most moving and
eerie films I've ever seen.  His Amadeus is theatrical, breathtaking,
and frightening in its emotional power.  How sad that he is remembered
most for One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest, a slightly good film that
became one of the only movies to win all five major Academy Awards and
boasted Jack Nicholson's trademark performance as Randle McMurphy.  To
be sure, Cuckoo's is quite an intense movie but the intensity seems to
disguise a rather flawed basis.
In this story of human bondage, tyranny, authority, and liberation,
McMurphy (Nicholson) is a man who has been jailed for "raping" a fifteen
("going on thirty")-year-old girl.  He commits crimes to get out of his
boring job, but he eventually gets sent to a mental institution for
allegedly being insane.  He is well aware that he is not crazy and the
head of the asylum is certain he isn't, too; nevertheless, he is kept in
the hospital for further observation.  During his prolonged stay, he
meets several colorful characters including Billy, a childish,
stuttering young man in perpetual fear of his mother (Brad Dourif);
Harding, an intellectual man unable to get over his wife's adultery
(William Redfield); Martini, a man of an infantile nature (Danny
DeVito); and Chief, a silent, tall figure who later becomes McMurphy's
greatest companion (Will Sampson).
McMurphy becomes acquainted with the head nurse at the hospital, Nurse
Ratched (Louise Fletcher), a seemingly heartless, cold, and insufferable
woman who casts a wicked spell of anxiety over the dependent patients at
the asylum.  Eager to annoy this strict authority, McMurphy encourages
the impressionable group of fellow madmen to rebel against her and the
hospital staff.  After trying so hard to get away from the real world,
McMurphy realizes how dangerous his new surroundings are to the human
spirit.  The staff are crooked, law-abiding, and merciless and only
inflict a sense of hopelessness and entrapment on the already weak
patients.
McMurphy, being sane, sees what is happening to these men.  They are
without any independence and are in a state of mental isolation.  Since
they have not been exposed to humanity and real life, they have become
useless in a world of stringent routines and life-abandoning
activities.  McMurphy learns that most patients at the institution are
not committed as he is and are free to come and go as they please.  They
don't leave, however, because they are too afraid of the real world.
McMurphy raises hell and is convinced he must not be pulled by the
current of brainwashing that has become the seeming sole priority of the
hospital.  The doctors and staff may have good intentions, but their
methods of "curing" the mentally ill are dangerous and emotionally
lethal.  Many patients, including McMurphy, are being worked on with
electric shock procedures.
(*Spoilers ahead, do not read further if you have not seen the film*)
Eventually, the voice of the enigmatic character, Chief, emerges.  First
thought to be deaf and dumb, Chief forges a strong friendship with
McMurphy and both share the same dream of escaping the hospital.
One night, McMurphy summons two lady friends from the real world, asks
them to bring booze to the asylum, and all the patients get drunk and
have a party.  Billy, in particular, undergoes a metamorphosis during
this pivotal night in the men's lives.  Once a stuttering, mentally
immature character, Billy loses his virginity and gains confidence
during the party, only to have it snatched from him by Nurse Ratched
when she returns the next morning and threatens to tell his mother about
what went on the preceding night.  Billy, tragically, commits suicide.
This and the final sequence are the most intense and bleak moments of
the film.  They ring true, though, and are not overly extreme like much
of the rest of the film.
In the final sequence, Chief is ready to escape the hospital with
McMurphy, but his plans are ruined when he discovers McMurphy has
finally been ruined by the electric-shock experiments performed on him
by the doctors.  In one of the most heartbreaking moments of the film,
Chief hugs his friend and mercifully smothers and kills him, saving him
from the joyless life inside the walls of the hospital.  The dismal mood
of that scene is replaced with the triumph of Chief, who becomes the
focal point of the story at the end.  He follows through with the
inspiring encouragement of McMurphy and escapes the institution.
What is pitiful about One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest is not these
scenes, which are memorable and not without their emotional pull.
Rather it is the repetitiveness of the rest of the story, which circles
aimlessly for more than two hours.  Instead of confronting the moral at
hand, Cuckoo's beats around the bush, diluting the power of the film's
message.  The atrocities of the hospital are accented while the truth of
the movie is allowed to fade into the background.
Aside from these criticisms, the performances are observant and, at
times, masterful.  Louise Fletcher is subtly cruel as Nurse Ratched.
Her performance is almost perfect.  Jack Nicholson, in a legendary
portrayal, is also worthy of attention and accolades.  He makes a great,
havoc-brewing hero.  Brad Dourif and Will Sampson also give poignant and
noteworthy turns.
However, this fails to compensate for the lack of enticing material in
the movie.  The horrors of the hospital are attention-grabbing, but are
of little interest to me in the muddle of a movie One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest is.  The movie is inconsistent: shifting from being
tedious to being very effective.  It is dark, moody, but only partially
successful.  With all the respect this movie has garnered from audiences
these past two decades, One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest came across to
me as trying desperately to extract profundity out of outrageousness
and, in my eyes, it fails.

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
(NOTE-This is the 3rd of 5 retro reviews honouring great Jack
Nicholson films I plan to do in the next few weeks. "Chinatown" &
"A Few Good Men" are already posted on the Internet.)
What is crazy? "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" made a bold
statement addressing insanity. It took a little over two hours to
introduce its characters, set up a plot, and then let these great
actors work with a top-notch screenplay. After their job was done
and this film broke into theatres, we knew more about mental
hospitals, so-called "crazy" people, and how one man can change
the lives of others around him than we had known before. Watching
this great film nearly 30 years later reveals much, much more
than just Jack Nicholson playing a volatile free-spirit and
collecting an Oscar for it. There are more underlying themes and
ideas in this film than you can shake a big stick at. I'll get to
all those fascinating subtexts in a moment, but first, a little
about the story, if you please...
It's 1963 (according to a radio broadcast of the World Series)
and R.P. McMurphy (Jack Nicholson) has been relocated from the
local penitentiary to the state mental hospital. He's a known
malcontent serving out a jail sentence for statuatory rape of a
minor. Sent to the hospital for evaluation, the prison
authorities think that McMurphy has been faking insanity to get
out of work. He has an immediate impact on his fellow patients by
taking their money in numerous bets and disrupting regular ward
behaviour. McMurphy deliberately tries to anger Nurse Ratched
(Louise Fletcher) and even wagers with the other patients that he
can, essentially, make HER crazy. The icy-cold nurse doesn't
crack, but proves that her single goal in the hospital is to make
her patients crack. McMurphy brings out the rebelliousness in
everyone--little knowing most of them have nothing to lose
because they're voluntary patients--and pushes Nurse Ratched to
take drastic measures to bring him in line.
"One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" has a limited musical score.
The music in this film nicely complements the story, yet never
interferes with the steady stream of superb dialogue. This is not
a big technical film, but Forman used sound and lighting well
considering that he had a confined area and so many actors to
photograph on film. This picture didn't win any technical awards,
but no one was crying about that on Oscar Night. It was the
second of three movies--"It Happened One Night" and "The Silence
Of The Lambs" are the others--to win the Top 5 Academy Awards for
Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor, Best Actress, and Best
(Adapted) Screenplay.
Nicholson and Fletcher won Best Actor and Best Actress Oscars for
their fine work, but the supporting cast was equally good.
William Redfield plays Dale Harding, an intelligent man who
cannot handle his wife's beauty and suspects that she's cheating
on him. Billy Bibbit (Brad Dourif in an Oscar-nominated
performance) is a young man with a tremendous lack of confidence
and a terrible stutter brought on by his mother's
overprotectiveness. Chief Bromden (Will Sampson) is thought to be
a deaf and dumb Indian until we learn that he has his own demons
which only McMurphy's influence can help him overcome.
Christopher Lloyd--in his underrated film debut--plays Taber, one
of the few committed patients on the ward and the one guy who
knows that everyone is full of it (I had to edit that last word
by six letters!). Danny DeVito, Sydney Lassick, and Vincent
Schiavelli are also solid. Milos Forman's Oscar-winning direction
is excellent and the adaptation of Ken Kesey's fine novel by Bo
Goldman and Lawrence Hauben also won a well-deserved trophy.
So, having laid out the groundwork, it's now time to analyze this
film to death. The obvious place to begin is with the "crazy"
factor. McMurphy says, "I must be crazy to be in a looney-bin
like this". Of course, the thrust of the film is that McMurphy is
the only one who ISN'T insane because he understands that he's
screwed up, but no more than the average person on the street. He
just wants to be free and tries to show the other men that they
have a right to be free too. Only the committed patients--Chief
and Taber--can truly understand why McMurphy wants to be free.
They don't want to be there, but aren't permitted to leave. They
can't sympathize with men who are too weak to face the outside
world when it's only a few steps away. So, watch the last scene
carefully and see which characters are highlighted--Chief and
Taber.
Of course, the voluntary patients aren't going anywhere because
of the presence of one of the very best screen villains
ever--Nurse Ratched. She destroys men rather than building them
up or trying to cure them. Her means of therapy is to humiliate
and expose weakness, then coldly and calmly break a man's spirit.
She's the proof that if you don't play the "game", then the
system will run right over you. Nurse Ratched has men in her iron
grasp and does whatever she has to do to keep them there. Even
the doctors take her advice--or is it that they obey her
commands?--against their own judgment. If it's threatening Billy
with the wrath of his mother or treating Cheswick (Sydney
Lassick) like a child, Nurse Ratched works on them until they
become her little puppies. No treatment--from shock therapy to
lobotomy--is too rash, no tactic is unfair. She's hateful. Her
hair looks like horns, implying that she's a devil twisting these
poor men into obedient servants of her rules.
This film was politically correct before that annoying phrase was
cool. Perhaps its "PC"ness was unintentional, but think about it.
There are representations from the black community (the
attendants) from the Asian community (one of the doctors) from
the Native American community (Will Sampson as Chief) and even
from the short community (Danny DeVito). The one representation
that comes across in a negative light is women. Either they're
domineering witches in white outfits (the nurses) or they're
bimbos (McMurphy's not-so-virtuous lady friends). But then again,
this film is told from the overpowered man's point of view. While
the women are shown as either sex objects or tyrants, it's a
necessarily harsh depiction to make the story work.
Speaking of sex objects, "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" is
chock-full of sexual overtones, homoeroticism, rape themes, and
double entendres. Harding has sexual issues with his wife while
patients Sefelt & Fredrickson have a subtle "relationship". There
are even smoldering sexual overtones between McMurphy and Nurse
Ratched. It's like the bitter rivals are playing a game to see
who can make the other one blink. However, the hinting of sex in
THEIR relationship is violent. When he attacks Nurse Ratched, it
could be taken as a rape. In keeping with the rape theme, Billy
claims that the others (led by McMurphy) forced him to sleep with
Candy, one of McMurphy's lady friends who sneaks into the
hospital. In truth, Billy IS pushed into the room after trying to
weasel out of the "date" which implies that he was raped. And, of
course, McMurphy was put in jail for rape in the first place.
This picture has some great subtleties. McMurphy starts out
wearing his own clothes, but gradually he dresses like all the
rest, wearing a complete hospital-issued outfit. In fact, this is
a sterile evironment where everything is white and bland. Only
McMurphy's spark can bring any colour into their lives. Another
humourous subtlety is when McMurphy names his fellow patients as
doctors while on an unscheduled fishing trip, except for rival
Harding (who is called "Mr. Harding"). It's a quick insult, but a
good one. Some of their names have hidden relevance too.
McMurphy's initials are R.P.M. which is also an abbreviation in
measuring velocity and speed. McMurphy is certainly a man who
moves quickly. St-st-stuttering Billy Bibbit's name even sounds
like a stutter. Harding's name becomes "Hard On" to McMurphy,
which implies something fairly obvious. And the final subtlety is
that in a film about men interacting with each other, there is an
appropriate amount of swearing--not too much, just right. 
Coming out in 1975, which was shortly after the Vietnam conflict,
this film about men failing to adjust to society was timely. Men
were coming back from the failure in Vietnam and many of them had
great difficulties adjusting to a "sane" society. Like "The
Exorcist" this film makes a perfect allegorical reference to the
Vietnam hangover. And, in the film AND in the flop known as
Vietnam, not even true democracy can win because a higher power
is calling all the shots. President Nixon pressed on despite
powerful opposition and Nurse Ratched follows rules so
stringently that she feels compelled to disallow a majority vote
to change the ward's TV policy because "the meeting was
adjourned". And keeping on the political kick, Milos Forman, who
suffered Czechoslovakian dictatorship, appreciates freedom. He
used it as the driving force in "The People Vs. Larry Flynt" and
in this picture. It works too. The main characters in both films
are sympathetic and interesting, if not particularly wholesome.
The greatest message of all in "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest"
is that humanity and freedom can conquer all adversity. Even if
it takes a symbolic gesture to free your spirit (Chief supplies
that gesture in the end), not conforming to unreasonable rules
and finding the courage to live life your own way is the most
important belief of all. Even doomed Billy had one great moment.
Even though his stutter comes back worse than ever when Nurse
Ratched rains on his parade, he had that one moment. This picture
is funny enough and compelling enough to rip your emotions in
half and LIKE that your emotions are being ripped in half. It's
impossible not to cheer along with them in the imaginary baseball
game sequence or when they score their first two points while
playing the attendants in a game of basketball. They experience
pure joy and the euphoria they feel is contagious. McMurphy
raises a ruckus of epic proportions and, while the other patients
don't seem to be affected outwardly in the final few moments, he
has indeed made a significant impact on their lives. Jack
Nicholson sure did fly "over the cuckoo's nest" and won his first
Oscar for playing a man who tries to be free. As McMurphy said,
"At least I did that".
USELESS TRIVIA--Academy Award-winning producers of "One Flew Over
The Cuckoo's Nest", Saul Zaentz and Michael Douglas, have also
won Oscars for other films. Zaentz took home Best Picture honours
for "Amadeus" and "The English Patient" while Douglas won Best Actor for 
"Wall Street".
THE RYAN RATING SYSTEM SAYS...
10/10--absolutely outstanding
 9/10--excellent
 8/10--pretty darn good
 7/10--sure, go on and give it a peek
 6/10--so-so; ye ol' recommendation point
 5/10--not quite worth the dollars
 4/10--only if you have a free pass
 3/10--don't go, PLEASE don't go
 2/10--avoid even if you DO have a free pass
 1/10--"Showgirls" territory; truly crappy
 0/10--bang your head off a wall instead
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com
