Title
Review for Poetic Justice (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Emily L. Corse
     In 1991, John Singleton set himself a tough act to follow.  At
just twenty-three years of age, he won Academy Award nominations for
both directing and writing BOYZ N THE HOOD, making him the youngest
nominee ever for best director.  And that was his first feature film.
     Unfortunately, the many fans of Singleton's beautifully conceived,
beautifully executed debut will be disappointed by his second feature
film, a rambling love story starring pop star Janet Jackson.
     Singleton's decision to step away from the scene of his original
success, the grueling violence and drugs of the 'hood, is both daring
and laudable.  POETIC JUSTICE is billed as a "street romance" and
presents a portrait of a young woman who finds herself through poetry
and, eventually, true love.  But the major strength of BOYZ was the
sensitive, believable characterizations of the young men whose lives
were chronicled--and this strength is missing from the new film.  The
fault lies mainly with the lead character, Justice.  As written by
Singleton and performed by Jackson, Justice does not ring true.
     Filmed against the ravaged landscape of post-rebellion Los
Angeles, POETIC JUSTICE begins "Once upon a time...", an ironic
reminder that not all stories are fairy tales.  Suddenly the screen is
filled with giant images of the ultra-white Penelope and Brad (Lori
Petty and Billy Zane) breezily trading bad dialogue and gunfire in a
glossy new-wave penthouse.  For whom are these role models?
     Certainly not for the youth of South Central L.A., who fill the
parking lot of the drive-in theatre, just barely noticing the
hilariously awful action on the giant screen above them.
     Among the audience are Justice and Markell (played by Q-Tip),
sharing an intimate, teenaged moment.  Before allowing too much
familiarity, Justice asks her boyfriend why he loves her.  "'Cuz you're
fun," he replies to her disappointment, before returning with the more
thoughtful, "...'cuz when I was in the county jail you sent me all
those nice poems."
     That's all we see of the relationship between the two young
lovers, as Markell soon falls victim to a casual, senseless murder.
The film's main story begins with an older Justice, still in deep
mourning, working as a hairdresser and hiding out from her feelings,
from the world, and from men.
     One of the hopeful suitors whose hopes she depresses is Lucky
(Tupac Shakur), a hip-yet-responsible mail carrier attracted by
Justice's flair for stamp-licking.  Shakur's Lucky is both convincing
and irresistible.  When a postal supervisor advises that he should use
mace to ward off vicious dogs, he exclaims, "That stuff is like Binaca
to them rottweilers!"
     With a standard plot twist, the two antagonistic protagonists are
forced into a long journey together, on a mail run up the California
coast to Oakland.  And romance blooms.
     It's a familiar scenario that could have worked with a stronger
lead, but Justice is only boring.  The poetry she writes in her
notebook, though beautiful and powerful in its own right, sounds
artificial in the passionless voice of Janet Jackson.  Justice's poetry
sounds like it's read from a book, not from her heart.  (In fact, the
soul-stirring poetry used in the film is the work of famed author Maya
Angelou.)
     Jackson's mediocre acting skills can't overcome the handicap of
her cover-girl looks and TV white teeth.  When she grimaces in pain, she
looks like she's smiling for the camera.  The only time her character
comes alive is during a montage of her lonely home life, to the
accompaniment of Stevie Wonder's "Never Dreamed You'd Leave In
Summer."  This scene of Justice eating popcorn with Tabasco, lying on
the floor in the dark, and trying on faces in the mirror is
well-filmed, realistic, and quite affecting.
     Tyra Ferrell plays Justice's boss Jessie, a sexy, no-nonsense
owner of a successful beauty salon.  Jessie's character has the depth
so lacking in Justice--she is self-assured and powerful; she nurtures
her staff to some extent, but remains unwilling to sacrifice herself to
the needs of others.  She's a little too hard to be happy, yet
fulfilled at least in her career.  POETIC JUSTICE would have been a
better movie if it followed the growth of her three-dimensional
character, as Ferrell's performance never falters.
     After the hard-hitting social commentary of BOYZ N THE HOOD, John
Singleton may take plenty of flak for POETIC JUSTICE--more for its
immature writing and flat, uninspired treatment than for its lighter
theme.
     With any luck, he'll remember Jessie's warning to Justice:  "Out
here ... sometimes you gonna lose one, like a blow dryer or a good
hairbrush."
