Title
Review for Country Life (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Director and screenwriter Michael Blakemore's COUNTRY LIFE is loosely,
as in very loosely, based on the UNCLE VANYA play by Anton Chekhov.  If you
are one of those like me who know and love the play, you will have to make a
decision early on.  You are watching a movie putatively based on UNCLE VANYA
that does have some of the same characters, but it is set in a different
place with 80-90% new dialog and with a different structure.  If you are
unable to get past this and enjoy COUNTRY LIFE for what it is, then I would
advise you to leave immediately and see what is playing on the next screen.
Although I was troubled by the carelessness of the adaptation throughout the
entire movie except the last part, I was nevertheless engulfed in COUNTRY
LIFE's characters and story.
     COUNTRY LIFE is set in the outback area of Australia right after the
end of World War I and was actually filmed (Stephen F. Windon) in the
outback in New South Wales.  It tells the story of a family, their friends,
their servants, and their sheep ranch.  On the surface it is a simple story,
and it happens over a short time frame.  Sally Voysey (Kerry Fox from
SHALLOW GRAVE and AN ANGEL AT MY TABLE) is a grown woman whose father,
Alexander (Michael Blakemore) left her when she was little.  He left to seek
fame and fortune, and ultimately he became a successful play critic in
London.  As the story unfolds he is returning home for the first time in
decades.  Although he is now old and gray, he is accompanied by a new and
gorgeous wife, Deborah, who is played by Greta Scacchi who is one of the
most beautiful women in the movies today and whose greatest movie is the
romance A MAN IN LOVE.  Deborah feels like a fish out of water in the hot
and crude outback.  Alexander is aghast at his relatives' crudeness.  My
god, they even have lunch at the uncivilized hour of 12 and dinner at 7.
Sally points out that waiting until 8:30 for dinner is hard when you have a
ranch to maintain and must get up before sunrise.
     The acting by all of the characters is excellent.  Sally's love of
animals and farming life is presented in a straight forward and believable
fashion.  Her make up, or more precisely the lack thereof, adds to her aura
of rural naturalness.  Even the minor characters like those of the servants
are excellent.  The cook, who is the real head of the household, bosses
everyone around and tells her "masters" off if they make any unreasonable
requests and indeed any requests that change her long established rhythms in
the house.  She feeds them mutton for three meals a day, and they better
like it or else.  This is a sheep ranch afterall.
     The most interesting set of characters and events are those involving a
love triangle of sorts.  Dr. Max Askey (Sam Neill who has been so wonderful
in so many things but whom I remember most fondly in REILLY: THE ACE OF
SPIES), Sally, and Deborah are interlinked in a tricky web.  The courting,
the passion, the forbidden romance, and the hurt are well acted and draw the
audience into the story.  Compelling performances by all three.
     Finally, I am happy to report that about the last 15 minutes of the
show is true to the original play and even has much of its dialog and with
some scenes almost totally intact.  These 15 minutes or so are by far and
away the best part of COUNTRY LIFE.
     COUNTRY LIFE runs about right at 1:45.  It is correctly rated PG-13 for
some sex and major drunkenness.  It has no nudity other than a quick shot of
Max from the rear.  There is not a hint of violence.  Although VANYA ON 42ND
STREET made my top 10 list for 1994 and I liked it much more than COUNTRY
LIFE, nevertheless, I thought COUNTRY LIFE to be an enjoyable and excellent
picture even if it is a poor adaptation of the original play.  I recommend
this movie to anyone over 12 and especially to those who like movies with
realistic sounding dialog and real characters that make you think.  COUNTRY
LIFE gets *** in my book.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sam Neill, Greta Scacchi, John Hargreaves, Kerry Fox, 
      Michael Blakemore 
Director: Michael Blakemore 
Producer: Robin Dalton 
Screenplay: Michael Blakemore based on Chekhov's UNCLE VANYA 
Cinematography: Stephen Windon 
Music: Peter Best 
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films 
     What happens when you take Anton Chekhov's classic UNCLE VANYA, 
change the principles' names, and re-locate the setting to a sheep farm 
in Australia?  The result might be something called UNCLE JACK, but, 
presumably because that title lacks a certain ring, writer/director 
Michael Blakemore has chosen to name this newest re-interpretation 
COUNTRY LIFE.  Like-yet-unlike VANYA ON 42ND STREET, this version of the 
story gives a modern slant to the Russian play. 
     At its core, COUNTRY LIFE is about lost opportunities and milking 
the most from one's lot in life.  Thrown in for good measure are themes 
of unrequited love, pacifism, and contrasts of city and country 
lifestyles.  If there was ever any doubt about the ageless quality of 
Chekhov's story, this transplant, which shifts not only country but time 
(it's 1919), should dispel such notions.  It wouldn't have taken much 
more imagination to bring it into the modern world. 
     COUNTRY LIFE opens with the return home of celebrated author 
Alexander Voysey (Michael Blakemore) from a long sojourn in England, 
where he amassed a reputation while living off his portion of the 
proceeds from an Australian sheep farm.  That farm is run by his 
brother-in-law Jack (John Hargreaves) and daughter Sally (Kerry Fox).  
Alexander arrives down under with his young second wife, Deborah (Greta 
Scacchi), who is immediately attracted to the local doctor, Dr. Askey 
(Sam Neill). 
     It doesn't take long before Jack discovers that Alexander is 
actually an intellectual fraud -- a self-centered, lecherous old man 
whose achievements are dubious at best.  Jack's response is unallayed 
bitterness:  he has slaved away on the farm to support a parasite.  His 
whole life, sacrificed for someone he thought to be great, has been 
wasted.  He responds to this knowledge by getting drunker than usual and 
railing against fate and Alexander. 
     Sally, on the other hand, is quite content.  She enjoys working on 
the farm alongside her uncle, and nurses a secret affection for Dr. 
Askey.  She is plain, and harbors no hope that he might ever reciprocate 
her feelings, so she takes pains to hide them -- until Deborah offers to 
bring her case before the doctor.  The unfortunate result confirms 
Sally's opinion that this risk might not the best course.  It's odd that 
Deborah, whose single goal in life is to be cocooned in safety, is the 
catalyst for such a gamble. 
     COUNTRY LIFE, like VANYA, ripples with repressed and unleashed 
emotions.  There's also a fair amount of humor, and these breaks of 
levity keep the film from sinking into lugubriousness.  None of the 
characters or their stories are short-changed and, by the end, there is 
a satisfying sense of closure, even though no relationship has turned 
out as it might in a Hollywood script. 
     The most striking member of the cast is Kerry Fox (THE LAST DAYS OF 
CHEZ NOUS, SHALLOW GRAVE), who brings pathos, resignation, and good 
cheer to Sally.  Greta Scacchi is adequate as Deborah, but somehow 
doesn't seem the sort to stir the passions of three men.  Sam Neill uses 
his consummate skill to flesh out Dr. Askey.  But John Hargreaves' 
overwrought Jack suffers greatly in comparison to Wallace Shawn's fresh-
to-the-memory portrayal of the same man (in VANYA ON 42ND STREET). 
     Taken as a whole, COUNTRY LIFE is effective, if not groundbreaking.  
Like something from Merchant-Ivory, it moves slowly, allowing the 
characters opportunity to breathe.  As either an introduction to UNCLE 
VANYA or a new take on the story, Michael Blakemore's production works, 
reaffirming that creativity can raise a phoenix from the ashes of a 
great classic. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
