Title
Review for Nuit américaine, La (1973)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Seth Bookey
(Day for Night, 1973; French with English subtitles)
Seen at the Paris for $8.50 on 17 August 1997.
The latest trend re-releasing lovingly restored or simply significant
films, 25 years or older (the exception being *Dirty Dancing*, being
completely remerchandised after a decade).
*Day for Night* is one of those movies every film student knows about bu t
never sees, and since I eschew video, I was grateful to stumble upon the
current screening just by walked past the theatre. 
The premise of *Day for Night* is simple: What goes on behind the scenes
of a film being made? Who cares? Many people don't but I loved it. The
characters all ring true, but they are not absolutely fascinating and
compelling. The true star of the film is the filmmaking process. The
shooting, the retakes, the "family" dynamics that take place and then
vanish when the film is over, the pressure to complete the film against
all odds. How do you deal with the drunken Italian actress who can never
remembers a line? How do you film a pregnant woman who is showing and her
main scene is poolside? Will neurotic English actress Julie Baker
(Jaqueline Bisset), show up on time, or flip out, again? Why is the
production manager's wife always nearby, knitting furiously and scowling
at every miniskirt? Why won't that damned kitten drink the milk already? 
These issues confront the director (play ed by the film's director,
Francois Truffaut) as he films *Meet Pamela.* It might look like
everything that can possibly wrong is--but guess what?  That's show biz.
The final product looks dreamy and seamless, but problems and a hell of a
lot of waiting be tween takes goes into every film. Scenes are improvised
and scenes are dropped; your private conversations appear in new dialogue;
the show must go on (film). 
*Day for Night* is told frankly against the backdrop of an angst-ridden
tragic romance being filmed. What is interesting, and probably more
interesting on repeated viewings, is the parallel of real lives compared
to the film. Life goes on for the cast and crew despite the filming *and*
their personal crises. In *Meet Pamela*, things are much more simple; the
new wife has an affair with her father-in-law and the son kills his
father; Pamela dies. All very neat and tidy--and fatalistic--those
tragedies. Not so in real life. True confessions are made and somehow,
people just deal with it. Amazing. 
Recent films like imitate *Day for Night*: *Living in Oblivion* and *The
Paper*; the former is an over-the-top comedy while the latter is a typical
Hollywood star vehicle about the newspaper business. They are fine, but
their focusing on the obvious is blissfully absent here. It's
lighthearted and funny "because it is true," for lack of a better
cliche.
All but three of the actors are probably unfamiliar to American viewers:
Truffaut himself, the bilingual Bisset (recently speaking French in *La
Ceremonie*) and Jean-Pierre Leaud, a longtime actor fixture in Truffaut's
films, most notably as Antoine Doinel, a character chronicled in several
films, starting with The 400 Blows (shown on Bravo). 
Also notable: The Paris treated us to a cartoon as well--starring the
well-known French actor Pepe le Pew. I sat next to some idiot gigglers. I
then took a brisk walk to the wonder Wondee Siam for takeout. 
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     DAY FOR NIGHT is a marvelous celebration of the art and toil of
filmmaking.  For those interested in the mechanics and the background
of the creation of movies this picture should be on your must-see list.
DAY FOR NIGHT won the Oscar for best foreign film in 1973 and received
nominations for best director and screenwriter for Francois Truffaut
and best supporting actress for Valentina Cortese.  With an excellent
print, the film is showing now in Manhattan.  Hopefully, the print will
make its way around the country so others can share the joy I had in
seeing it.  (The film is undoubtedly available on videotape of course.)
     Nervous director Ferrand, played with perfect precision by
Truffaut, is under pressure from his American backers to finish his
film called MEET PAMELA, a tragedy about a woman who falls in love with
her father-in-law.  Radiantly beautiful Jacqueline Bisset plays the
less-than-confident American megastar Julie, who has the starring role
of Pamela.  Julie brings her new husband, a silver-haired doctor old
enough to be her father, to the set with her.
     The English title DAY FOR NIGHT for the French film LE NUIT
AMERICAINE comes from the way filmmakers can shoot nighttime scenes
during the day and then darken them in the developing to look like
night.  The title is apt in that the fascination of the picture comes
from the behind the scenes look we get at the way pictures are made.  A
two hour documentary would not reveal less and certainly would not be
as involving as DAY FOR NIGHT.
     We see all of the details, large and small.  To avoid continuity
errors, the cigarettes are carefully chopped to the same length for
each take.  The actors step over the camera rails as they are being
filmed and are careful not to trip.  We watch them acting from facades
and observe the director and the editor pouring over the day's film
stock.
     Like real movie making, the production of MEET PAMELA has a slew
of problems, which puts the director's 7-week schedule in jeopardy at
every turn.  The lab destroys a complicated and costly crowd scene.
Costumes are sent back too early.  And, boy oh boy, are those stars
ever temperamental and thus keep getting in the way of a successful
completion of their production.  Still, little that happens, except the
ending, is a surprise.  The masterwork of the movie is that Truffaut
makes both DAY FOR NIGHT and the cheap melodrama MEET PAMELA
fascinating without tricks or gimmicks.
     But the picture is no boring pseudo-documentary.  The actors come
alive with enough mini-dramas for a couple of daytime soap operas.  As
in "Upstairs, Downstairs," the minor members of the crew have as many
trials and tribulations as the cast.
     Valentina Cortese plays the older actress Severine, who drinks too
much and forgets her lines as Pamela's mother-in-law.  Jean-Pierre
Leaud plays the impetuous young actor Alphonse, who is in love with
Bisset in both pictures -- who wouldn't be!  If you've never quite
understood how romances on movie sets develop, this movie demonstrates
how quite convincingly.
     In a revelation of the duality of an actor's real and celluloid
lives, Julie and Pamela come to the same conclusion.  "I've decided to
live alone," they both declare at different times.  "I know that life
is rotten."
     Although written a quarter of a century ago, the film seems
remarkably fresh and relevant.  The director complains that, "THE
GODFATHER is showing all over Nice, and it's killing the other movies."
With this summer's action blockbusters taking over most of the screens
this comment becomes so apropos.  If DAY FOR NIGHT were released for
the first time this summer, it would be buried by the fourth episode of
masked superheroes and the second of mechanical lizards as were ULEE'S
GOLD and PONETTE.
     DAY FOR NIGHT runs 1:55.  The film is in French with English
subtitles.  It is rated PG for mild profanity and for sexuality.  The
film would be fine for teenagers and those a bit younger.  I loved this
sweet film and think you would too, so it gets a strong recommendation
from me and *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
