Title
Review for Alien Factor, The (1977)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1978. Director/Screenplay/Producer - Donald M. Dohler, Photography 
- Britt McDonough, Music - Kenneth Walker, Special Effects/Makeup 
Effects - McDonough, John Cosetino & Larry Schlechter, Title 
Sequence/Additional Photographic Effects - Ernest D. Farino. Production 
Company - Cinemagic Visual Effects.
Don Leifert (Dr Benjamin Zachary), Mary Martens (Edie Martin), Richard 
Dyszel (Mayor Burt Wicker), Tom Griffith (Sheriff Jack Cinder), Anne 
Frith (Dr Ruth Sherman), George Stover (Steve Price), Richard Geiwitz 
(Deputy Pete Evans), Eleanor Herman (Mary Jane Carter)
Plot: The small town of Perry Hall, Maryland, is struck by a series of 
killings which are taken to be caused by a wild animal. But an 
investigating astronomer discovers an alien spaceship and that the 
killings are really the result of three escaped alien zoo animals.
`The Alien Factor' is a low-budget film regionally (Baltimore) made by 
Donald Dohler. Dohler is perhaps better known to some as editor of 
`Cinefex' magazine in the late 1970s/early 1980s which for awhile was 
__the__ magazine for all amateur film-makers wanting to learn how to 
achieve professional effects on shoestring budgets. A sense of fannish 
enthusiasm infuses `The Alien Factor' even if it doesn't emerge as a 
particularly good film. It has been unfairly read and promoted as a 
really bad film by the Incredibly Strange Film Festival - which it isn't 
at all. It has an interestingly original central idea - the rampaging 
monsters are really escaped animals from an alien zoo ship - and an 
effective twist ending. One suspects that if the basic film could have 
been made by a company like AIP or New World on B-budget resources and 
with a better director that it could have emerged as a worthwhile minor 
B effort. Unfortunately Dohler is hampered by a lack of budget and 
resources. The actors are amateurs - although none give truly bad 
performances. The photography is poor - the film is very dim and hard to 
see - and there is a tinny synthesizer soundtrack that sounds like it 
has been laid down on a pocket tape recorder. Dohler is not really that 
good a director either - even with the film's lack of resources he could 
have milked many of the scenes for far more suspense and atmosphere than 
he does. Nevertheless when it comes to what is clearly Dohler's forte - 
conducting professional effects on a zero budget - the film displays far 
more enterprising virtue than many better-budgeted films. There is some 
rather weak stop-motion at the climax, but certainly some imagination 
has been placed into making the other creatures look definitely 
non-human - a furred creature that seems to walk on three-toed stilts is 
particularly striking. And there is a particularly good vision of Earth 
seen from space at the start of the film.
Screening at the Christchurch 1998 Incredibly Strange Film Festival
Reviewed by Richard Scheib

