Title
Review for Bent (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Clive Owen, Lothaire Bluteau, Brian Webber, Ian McKellen, 
      Mick Jagger
Director: Sean Mathias
Producers: Dixie Linder, Michael Solinger
Screenplay: Martin Sherman based on his play
Cinematography: Yorgos Arvanitis
Music: Philip Glass
U.S. Distributor: Samuel Goldwyn
     It has long been recognized that Hitler's final solution 
exterminated more than Jews.  Gypsies and homosexuals were also 
routinely prodded onto trains like cattle and sent off to ovens and gas 
showers.  To this date, most films have examined the tragedy from the 
Jewish point-of-view.  A select few, such as Steven Spielberg's Oscar-
winning SCHINDLER'S LIST, have presented the truth with heartbreaking, 
gut-wrenching clarity.  Rarely, however, has a motion picture attempted 
what BENT does:  show the Holocaust through the eyes of two gay men 
enduring a grueling existence at the Dachau concentration camp.
     Unfortunately, what begins with an interesting premise and a 
promising first half quickly devolves into a boring, muddled, 
melodramatic love story.  BENT is based on the 1979 stage play of the 
same name.  By all accounts, the live version is both startling and 
moving.  The motion picture version is neither -- something critical was 
lost in the translation, even though playwright Martin Sherman wrote the 
screenplay.  Many of the things that can work in a play, when the live 
nature of the production allows an intimate rapport to develop between 
the actors and the audience, fail on the big screen.  The final fifty 
minutes of BENT are a prime example.
     The movie's first half is more successful.  It introduces us to a 
pair of gay lovers living out their lives in Berlin during the late 
1930s.  They are Max (Clive Owen), the "black sheep" of a wealthy 
family, and Rudy (Brian Webber), and effeminate dancer.  Together, the 
two spend their nights at Greta's, a dive run by a transvestite (Mick 
Jagger).  While Rudy performs, Max drinks, snorts cocaine, and picks up 
men for quick sex.  That lifestyle ends, however, when Hitler orders 
homosexuals sent to concentration camps.  Despite pleas from his uncle 
(Ian McKellen), Max refuses to flee Germany unless he can get Rudy out 
with him.  Ultimately, both men are caught and sent to Dachau.  En 
route, Max is befriended by a timid gay man named Horst (Lothaire 
Bluteau), who advises him not to acknowledge his lover if he wishes to 
remain alive.  Following that advice allows Max to survive after Rudy is 
beaten to death.  Later, by "performing" with a young girl to convince 
the Nazis of his heterosexuality, Max is able to "upgrade" his status 
from that of a homosexual (who must wear a pink triangle) to that of a 
Jew (who wears a yellow star).
     Once the movie reaches Dachau, it grinds to a screeching halt.  The 
remainder of BENT concentrates on the relationship between Max and 
Horst.  They meet in the yard every day, moving rocks back and forth in 
an example of pointless monotony.  This particular activity is not 
inherently cinematic in nature and BENT's banal, repetitious dialogue 
does little to liven it up.  Gradually, the tediousness of the second 
half sucks all of the potential drama (not to mention the energy) out of 
the film.  We give up caring whether the characters live or die.  They 
don't have anything interesting to say, and the scene in which they 
engage in "verbal sex" borders on being unintentionally funny.  Solid 
performances from lead actors Clive Owen and Lothaire Bluteau go in 
vain.  The final scene, which is supposed to be a triumphant crowd-
pleaser, comes across as obvious and overplayed.  
     One thing I don't doubt is director Sean Mathias' sincerity.  BENT 
is obviously an important story for him; it's just that he and writer 
Martin Sherman made too many bad choices in adapting the play.  Instead 
of being a revealing look at one often-neglected group of Hitler's 
victims, BENT turns into a lifeless, preachy love story where the 
characters lose their connection with the audience the longer they 
remain on screen.  In fact, BENT's most important contribution may be to 
illustrate by comparison how powerful a movie like SCHINDLER'S LIST 
truly is.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Bent (1997)
Clive Owen, Lothaire Bluteau, Brian Webber, Mick Jagger, Ian McKellen. 
Directed by Sean Mathias. 104 minutes.
NC-17, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
In 1979, Martin Sherman's "Bent" broke new ground. His play boldly 
addressed Nazi persecution of homosexuals during World War II, with a 
strong subtext about gay pride. At a pivotal moment, a character comes to 
terms with his homosexuality, saying "What's wrong with it?" That 
statement may have shocked audience members in those days, but that was 
then and this is now. Nearly twenty years later, "Bent" has finally hit 
the big screen and the film, while certainly admirable, feels more than a 
little dated. Through "Schindler's List" and many other fine works, the 
nightmares of the Holocaust are well documented. The goal of the 
survivors has been realized: we will never forget. The battle for 
societal acceptance and equal civil rights for gays continues, but few 
will argue that tremendous progress has been made. As for the fundamental 
message of gay pride, one has only to flip on a television to see dozens 
of positive gay role models on popular shows. 
So where does this leave "Bent?" In an awkward position, to say the least.
 The people who still need to be exposed to the film's message generally 
don't attend gay-themed movies, while many of those sympathetic to the 
concept will likely think "been there, done that," and opt not to attend.
It's a shame, really, because there are some good moments in "Bent." The 
film begins at a gay cabaret, as young men cavort under the watchful eye 
of the club's owner, Greta, a haggard drag queen played by Mick Jagger. 
The sight of Jagger in women's clothing is startling. Remember the 
episode of the Andy Griffith Show when Barney Fife went undercover 
dressed as a woman? That's exactly what Jagger looks like here.
But I digress. At the club, Max (Clive Owen) picks up the wrong man, a 
Nazi Stormtrooper, at the wrong time, the Night of the Long Knives, which 
marked the beginning of the Nazi's antigay campaign. After a night of sex,
 Max wakes to the sight his irate lover Rudy (Brian Webber) staring at 
the drunken soldier in Max's bed. Their quarrel is interrupted when Nazis 
burst into the room to execute the soldier. Max and Rudy barely escape 
and find scant help. Greta offers a little cash and Max's uncle (Ian 
McKellen, who played Max in the original London production of the play) 
does what little he can. Eventually, the two are arrested and thrown on a 
train to Dachau. Rudy quickly falls victim to the Nazis, but Max, who 
prides himself on being a shrewd deal-maker, survives by "proving" to the 
soldiers he's not gay by having sex with the corpse of a Jewish girl (off-
screen, thankfully.) He is rewarded with an upgrade to a yellow star (the 
designation for Jews) rather than a pink triangle (the gay symbol) for 
his prison uniform. 
While traveling to the prison camp, Max meets Horst (Lothaire Bluteau,) a 
gay prisoner who detests Max for denying who he is. The two end up 
assigned to the same task: moving rocks from one pile to another, then 
back again. The chore is designed to drive the men to madness, but as 
they labor, they gradually grow closer. 
The men are afforded a short break every two hours. During this time they 
must stand at attention side by side, forbidden to touch, or even look at 
one another. The centerpiece of the film comes during one of those breaks,
 when the men talk each other to orgasm.
At its core, "Bent" is a love story set against a nightmare. Owen does a 
fine job portraying Max's growth from a callow, self-centered hedonist to 
a man who puts love ahead of his own safety. Bluteau is effective as 
Horst, whose pride and defiance balance his sanctimonious outbursts, and 
Webber convinces as the fragile Rudy.
Director Sean Mathias tries to open up the play for film, with mixed 
results. The early scenes at the cabaret are excessive, but credible 
enough and the young men's flight from the Nazis is believable, but once 
the story moves to Dachau, things change. Max and Horst are always shown 
isolated from the other prisoners, in settings that look overly 
theatrical. Too often, the characters fall into that clipped, rapid 
exchange of dialogue that one only hears during plays. And the ending, 
while certainly true to the original, comes off like the overwrought 
climax of a high school drama production.
As a play, "Bent" was a landmark. As a movie, it's an anachronism. The 
years have not been kind to Sherman's work. The lessons of his story 
remain vital, but over the ensuing years we've seen them presented in 
better forms. All good intentions aside, "Bent" is a classic example of 
too little, too late.   

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen with Byron and Micki on 26 November 1997 for $8.50 at the Angelika.
The transition from stage to screen is not always easy--for the audience,
and Martin Sherman's *Bent* is a good example. What is probably a
compelling stage performance has been transformed into an sometimes
interesting but ultimately tedious cinema experience. 
*Bent* is the story of a Jewish gay man unlucky enough to be living in
Berlin in 1934. When Hitler's gay henchman Roehm and his gay coterie are
killed in one very bloody evening, it is open season on any man in
Deutschland who seems even slightly "bent." A lot of interesting
historical topics are touched upon in the movie, but it is destined to be
a gay film version of the Myth of Sisyphus. 
Max (Clive Owen) is abruptly taken from the debauched world of
freewheeling Berlin on that bloody night in 1934, and comes to realize
that a certain dangerous amount of conformity is needed to survive the
long madness of the Nazi period, where simply having any sort of power is
a sick temptation. Those with the power wield it cruelly and arbitrarily.
Don't be fooled. History is the result of the choices of thousands and
millions of people trying to survive intact and sometimes, trying to get
more than they should. 
Being involved with Max is dangerous, because he is a self-professed bad
person.  On the train to Dachau he is given a quick lesson in conformity
by Horst (Lothaire Bluteau). Max is determined to survive and eventually,
he is able, through his connections, to get Horst by his side as they
perform the useless duty of moving heavy blocks of stone from one end of a
pit to another.  This goes on for a small eternity while they talk and
talk and talk. The two men wind up loving each other. Only Horst is known
to be a "pervert" to the guards;  Max has chosen being a Jew. In the
universe of the movie, being gay is actually a bit worse in the Nazi view
than being Jewish. 
The heart of *Bent* is the existential struggle of bread versus free will,
with the horrific backdrop of a concentration camp. Free will gets you
killed, and bread allows you to watch silently as you hammer your own self
down. 
Visually, the film is interesting, as the two men are stripped of
individuality 
against the quarries and industrial sites used for concentration camp.
Despite good direction by Sean Matthias, it is very difficult to watch
what seems like an hour of two men talking away as they move stones back
and forth and back and forth. For those familiar with existential works,
you will fare better. My companions and I were very close to snoozing. The
film is very much the consciousness of these two men, one of whom has to
decide for himself what is ultimately more important--bread or free will. 
A documentary of the book *The Pink Triangle* would probably be a better
source of information on this topic. Bent is far too much like Woman in
the Dunes and not enough like Bertolucci's *The Conformist.*
Also starring Brian Webber as Rudy, Ian McKellen as Uncle Freddie, and
Mick Jagger as "Greta." 
Rated NC-17 for the lubricious depiction of simulated sex, men's buttocks,
and flaccid penises--like straight teenagers are flocking to this sort of
thing uncontrollably. A dense but worthy addition to the filmography
Channel Four Films (aka Film Four International / Channel 4 TV). 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Jerry Saravia
Turning a stage play into a film is almost always a recipe for disaster. There
have been the exceptions: David Mamet's adaptations of his plays such as "House
of Games" and "Oleanna" come to mind. A film is a visual medium, whereas a play
is an actor's, and writer's, medium. "Bent" is based on historic facts
surrounding the Holocaust, but the two main characters seem to be stuck in a
stage setting where they have to speak a great deal of dialogue. 
Playwright Martin Sherman adapted his groundbreaking play "Bent" that focuses
on a rare subject: the persecution of gays and lesbians who were the first
rounded up under Hitler's regime in 1934. The main character is Max (Clive
Owen), a Jewish homosexual who comes from a wealthy family. At the beginning of
the film, in a wonderfully bizarre backdrop, we see Max cavorting with other
homosexuals in a wild, all-night Cabaret party that includes Mick Jagger as a
singing, black-stockinged transvestite on a swing! This particular night was
known as the Night of the Long Knives, when homosexual Nazi commander Ernst
Rohm and other bent Nazis were cleansed. The handsome Max and his lover Rudy
(Brian Webber), a dancer at the club, escape and are accommodated by Max's gay
uncle (Ian McKellen). Eventually, the two lovers are apprehended and taken on a
horrifying train ride to Dauchau. 
During this trip, Rudy is severely beaten and thrown from the train by the SS
commanders. Max survives and finally arrives at Dauchau - it is there that he
develops a relationship with Horst (Lothaire Bluteau) who wears the Pink
Triangle. Max has to choose between wearing the Jewish Yellow Star or the Pink
Triangle, a statement of gay pride - he sticks with the Yellow Star. The two
end up working together in a mindless, excruciating job of moving rocks from
one area to another. This is an attempt to drive them into madness and possibly
suicide.        "Bent" is basically an existential film about the determination
to live, rather than to survive, in such a demographically undesirable
environment. The problem is that the film resembles a Samuel Beckett play where
the characters are stuck in one area and talk to each other endlessly. The
setting is a bare area surrounded by walls and dozens of rocks, and it is the
same setting for the rest of the film. The characters speak in quiet phrases
(which makes sense since the SS is watching around the corner), but writer
Martin Sherman and director Sean Mathias make no attempt to transcend the
play's origins by making it visually arresting or compelling. And since the
locations have an anonymous quality, it could therefore take place in any era,
not necessarily the Holocaust. 
Another flaw is the casting of Clive Owen as Max: he doesn't possess much in
the way of charisma or interest, and is mostly portrayed as a cipher. The rest
of the cast is splendid, but they appear in mostly fleeting cameos. Mick Jagger
is bitchily perfect as Greta, the transvestite owner of the club, who resorts
to betrayal, and his old business suits to escape. Ian McKellen is remarkable
as the closeted Gay Uncle - his one scene speaks volumes more than anything
else in the film. Lothaire Bluteau gives a touching performance as the weak,
sickly Horst who begins to love Max though they can't touch each other. It
would have been better if Bluteau had a more interesting co-star: how about
Jagger as Max? 
"Bent" is a fascinating and important story and therefore it should be seen for
that reason - I would have preferred, however, to see the unique play since it
works better on the stage than on film. The end result is that "Bent"
trivializes the Holocaust and, although, there are some superb visual pieces,
including the Cabaret club, there's precious else to hold one's interest. An
explosive ending made me wish that what preceded it was just as potent.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The best thing about "Bent" is that it adds to the wealth of
material available on the screen about the Holocaust. 
Focusing strictly on the Nazi purge of homosexuals which
occurred early on, in 1934, just after the election of Hitler to
power in 1933 and five years before the opening of World
War 2, "Bent" does for gays what the play "Good" did for old
people. It reveals the intolerance which the Aryan mentality
had for people it considered weak, immoral, or sick.  That its
principal character is also a Jew becomes relevant in the final
scene and has some resonance throughout, as Max (Clive
Owen), adamantly denying his homosexuality, has no problem
wearing the yellow star when he might have opted for the pink
triangle.
   Unlike "The Substance of Fire," a play which was quite
successfully and movingly translated into celluloid, "Bent"
appears difficult to decode from stage to screen, though
perhaps in the hands of another director, the technical
problems could have been resolved.  When Martin Sherman's
drama opened on Broadway seventeen years back, it moved
many in the audience to tears and elicited a review from the
New York Times 'Powerful and provocative," while Women's
Wear Daily called it "an explosive, overpowering experience. 
The power is lost in a naturalistic medium like the movies.  As
Greta, Mick Jagger sits on a large brass ring high above the
crowd of the cabaret belting out a mournful song about how
the city of Berlin will eat up its denizens--the kind of mise en
scene absolutely made for the stage but banal, even
unbelievable, on the big screen.  The one element of the
story which is improved by filming is the chase scene, though
Sean Mathias directs the panorama as a generic event.
   The opening scene at the cabaret is the movie's most
lavish, one designed to contrast with the bleakness of the
proceedings which occur later in a concentration camp. Max
is pictured as a charismatic fellow whose presence electrifies
those around him, as he works the room kissing several of
the people seated at one table, and attracts the attention of a
Nazi S.A. officer.  "Bent" touches upon an activity reminiscent
of big city bath-house exercises during the 1970s, as several
gays in the audience retreat to a dimly lit area for anonymous
sex--a grunt and groan escapade probably responsible for
earning the movie an NC-17 rating.
   When German officials, tipped off by Greta, raid Max's loft,
they slit the throat of their fellow officer who has besmirched
the uniform by engaging in homosexual activity and pursue
the fleeing Max and his partner Rudy (Brian Webber) into the
forest.  Captured and put on a train to Dachau, Max shows
his determination to survive by denying his friendship with
Rudy and beating him to death when so ordered.  At the
camp he meets Horst (Lothaire Bluteau), who declares his
love for Max, and scoffs at Max's refusal to wear the pink
triangle.  
   What is meant to elicit tears from the audience comes
across inadvertently as near-camp.  When Max and Horst
take their allowed three-minute break after a two-hour period
of moving rocks from one pile to another, they stand side to
side imagining what sex would be like.  Without even brushing
fingertips--two guards are constantly watching from the tower-
-they reach simultaneous orgasm.
   During the entire time Max and Horst move rocks
meaninglessly from one side of an outdoor area to another--a
scenario which takes up half the story--we get the impression
that Dachau was a camp built almost exclusively for them. 
There are virtually no other prisoners in sight: the cubicles in
which the doomed are allowed to sleep are populated by only
a handful of men.  Once again, this absence of population
would work just fine on the stage, where an audience can
easily suspend disbelief, but comes across as claustrophobic
on the movie screen.
   Ian McKellen is underutilized in the role of Max's uncle, a
homosexual who is married and urges Max to do the same to
put up a front during these repressive times.  Clive Owen and
Lothaire Bluteau do display a chemistry that convinces us that
they are lovers in spirit in this British production, filmed largely
in Scotland, about a little-known aspect of intolerance.  The
final tableau should please particularly the gays among the
viewers, Max's spectacular proclamation of pride in his true
identity.  Rated NC-17.  Running Time: 100 minutes.  (C)
1997 Harvey Karten
