Title
Review for Xiangnu xiaoxiao (1986)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Murali Krishnan
Time passes slowly in the rural countryside, so customs and traditions are
often slow to change in the absence of outside influences. Xiao Xiao is a
young girl just entering adolesense. Following custom, she has her marriage
arranged to Chun Guan, who is a child of about five years of age. The story
begins as Xiao arrives at the rustic family farm of Guan's family. Although
they are actually man and wife, their relationship at this stage more
resembles younger brother and older sister, in fact he addresses her as
"Sister". Guan's time is mostly spent in play and Xiao Xiao's time is mostly
spent in numerous farm chores. It actually quite a pleasant, contented life.
However, Xiao Xiao's friendship with one of the farmhands eventually
develops into a romantic relationship. This not something that she is know
would happen, because in her youth and naivete she cannot know the
consequences of her actions. She see first hand that the penalty for
adultery is severe by traditional law, but only when it is too late does she
realize the trap she has entered.
When people from one culture observe the customs and practices of another,
there invariably will be some that are shocking. There may be the perception
that the story is an illustration of the injustices of a particular culture,
but this is not the case. It merely provides the context in which customs
and practices exist in an equilibrium state. Certainly some of the events
are barbaric through Western eyes, but that is because of the context in
which they are viewed. It is not a depiction of a system that is perfect, in
fact there are undeniable injustices, but it is a system that serves to
order and balance the lives of its people.
This is a film that very ambitious and highly successful. It was apparently
not intended for the Western audience judging by the long period with no
distribution. To tell a story of one culture to another is very difficult
considering the lack of background that the audience will have. The story is
brilliantly written and flawlessly acted. The writing and cinematography are
so well done that viewing the film feels like living in a Chinese village.
Highly Recommended. Those familiar with Eastern cultures will reallly
appreciate the honest depiction of rural country life. The dialog is Chinese
with subtitles.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
In pre-revolutionary China, a 12 year old girl is married to a 2 year old boy,
following the ancient tradition of child marriage.  Four years later the girl
is a young woman, experiencing her sexual awakening.  She has an affair and
gets pregnant.  This is very serious, for the penalty for adultery is death -
by drowning.  An interesting and surprisingly funny film.
China (English subtitles), color, 1986 (released in US: 1988), 110 minutes.
Directors: Xie Fei, U Lan
     Set in the recent past in pre-revolutionary China, this is the story of
Xiao Xiao, a young woman who is married, at age twelve, to a two year old boy.
This is the ancient tradition of (arranged) child marriage.  Both Xiao Xiao and
her husband are peasants, and live with her husband's family in a rural 
village, where they are farmers.  Xiao Xiao's husband, as he grows up, refers 
to her as "sister"!
     Four years later, she is maturing and awakening sexually.  Xiao Xiao's
mother-in-law is critical of her, for being lazy, and, even worse, for not
binding her feet and breasts (a common practice of the day).
     Shortly thereafter, Xiao Xiao is raped by a neighbor.  Rather than report
it, she takes the man as a lover, for it seems that she really likes sex.  Soon
she realizes that she is pregnant, and she starts gaining weight.
     The next day a couple in the village are caught in adultery.  As
punishment they injure the man and drown the woman.  This terrifies Xiao Xiao
and her lover.  Soon, her lover flees, leaving Xiao Xiao to face her fate
alone.  Is she drowned, the standard punishment for adulterous women?  What is
her fate?  See the film to find out.
     This is a very interesting film.  It illustrates some of the customs of
old China: arranged child marriages, infanticide of female infants, and the low
status of women (lower than cattle, it seems) in that society.  Although a bit
slow at times, it holds your interest very well.
     One surprising thing about this film is its humor.  I don't think any of
it is intended to be funny, but there are many times when you cannot help but
laugh.  For instance, at Xiao Xiao's wedding, her husband (being only 2 years
old) decides it's a great time to cry.  Later, Xiao Xiao's "uncle" (father-in-
law) reports seeing "girl students" on a trip to the city.  These people find
it funny and strange; what do women need education for?  Besides that, the
"girl students" are shameless, exposing their arms and part of their legs for
all to see!
     There is one quote from the film that neatly summarizes it.  At a critical
time, an older woman tells Xiao Xiao that "women are born to suffer."  This
film perfectly illustrates their suffering in old China.  It is interesting and
reasonably well made.  Overall, a very good film - definitely worth seeing.
Distribution.  No information available; suspect that you might find it
screened at repertory theaters and/or art houses.  Print Source: New Yorker
Films.
Reviewer:  Thomas E. Billings, Department of Statistics
           University of California, Berkeley
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
