Title
Review for Ballad of the Sad Cafe, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE BALLAD OF THE SAD CAFE is directed by Simon Callow and produced
by Ismail Merchant.  It stars Vanessa Redgrave, Keith Carradine, Cork
Hubbert, Rod Steiger.  It was written by Michael Hirst (borrowing on
Edward Albee's 1963 Broadway play version) and adapted from Carson
McCullers's 1943 novella of the same name.
     Carson McCullers was a writer of mysterious, gloomy Southern
gothics.  She was a frail, tormented author, who died in 1963, whose
three major novels have been translated to film with unusual fidelity (A
MEMBER OF THE WEDDING, 1953; REFLECTIONS IN A GOLDEN EYE, 1967; THE
HEART IS A LONELY HUNTER, 1968).  This tradition continues in the fourth
major treatment, THE BALLAD OF THE SAD CAFE, which she wrote at the age
of 24.
     The film, produced by Ismail Merchant, was directed by one of the
great contemporary English actors, Simon Callow, who many of us best
know as the Rev. Beebe in ROOM WITH A VIEW.  Callow, in a recent
interview, said that Southern literature has a strong attraction to the
British because both locales have essentially rural, agricultural
cultures.  Be that as it may, Callow has served McCullers very well,
preserving the odd, isolated sadness and gothic extremism of the
original, as well as the weird flashes of humor.  The production design
is by Bruno Santini, who gives us a gritty, dirt-poor, spiritually
worn-out version of the South (the movie was shot in Texas, btw).  The
score is the haunting work of Richard Robbins, and the cinematography of
Walter Lassally emphasizes the other-wordliness of the story.
     The star of SAD CAFE is Vanessa Redgrave, who, as one of Seattle's
newspaper critics put it, was born to play Miss Amelia.  Miss Amelia is
tall, strong, rawboned, the richest person for miles around, who
completely dominates the local landscape otherwise inhabited by
zombie-like millworkers and farmhands.  She owns the town store, the
cotton plantation, the local still, gives out home remedies, and coldly
repossesses a family's sewing machine to settle a $2 debt.  She is a
tyrant, a feudal ruler, who is caught in the memories of her dead
parents, living in their house/store, fingering their mementoes.
Redgrave captures this mysterious, inexplicable, unknowable character
completely with her scowl, her loping stride (in a wedding dress!), her
tomboy blonde hair; she is power, strength, irrational, autonomous, and
unchallenged.
     Keith Carradine (Marvin Macey) is the local bad boy who becomes
obsessed with Miss Amelia and marries her in one of the funniest and
oddest courtships and marriages you will ever see.  Carradine is a
great favorite of mine and he has never been better, at least since
CHOOSE ME.  He is run out of Miss Amelia's life once and returns to
settle the score in a fight scene that ought to put Arnie et al to
shame.  As the husband, Carradine is weak and placating; as the avenging
demon, he is powerful and irresistible.
     The third element in the story is Lymon, a "bro'back" (hunchback
dwarf), Miss Amelia's putative cousin, and the only one who calls her
Amelia and can order her around.  He is the one who gets the idea to
change the store to a cafe as way to amuse himself and to ensure company
to help him get through the nights he so fears.
     It is the cafe that brings Miss Amelia and the town to life.  As
Earl Hindman who plays one of the townspeople says: "I'm not worth much
in this world, but now I feel good."  It is Lymon who is instantly
obsessed with Marvin Macey, who is obsessed in one way or another with
Miss Amelia, who is obsessed with Lymon.  Lymon is played to great
effect by Cork Hubbert.  Like all literary hunchbacks and dwarfs,
Lymon's affliction is an outward manifestation of a spiritual
brokenness.  His appearance is one justification for McCullers and
critics to call SAD CAFE a fairy tale.  Hubbert plays up his part with
the energy and detemination that far exceeds his stature and becomes the
Satan, or at least the familiar, of the piece.
     Rod Steiger in the expanded role of the preacher has a long speech
about the lover and the "be-love" which is supposed to explain the
action (the one who is loved more than loves grows to hate the lover
etc.), but honestly I think it's a red herring.  The real explanation,
pour moi, is power.  Each of the principals cannot love or respect
anyone who is less powerful than him or herself, but has to destroy this
other, less powerful person in order to establish his or her own power.
Strictly pecking-order stuff.  I don't see any love here, only power, or
the lack of power.  Maybe power is love in this crooked, twisted world
of McCullers's South.
     SAD CAFE is a remarkable film with memorable performances.  It is a
fit counternote to the big-budget, low-character summer hits.  I can
recommend it highly, even at full ticket price, to any adult film goer.
