Title
Review for Oscar (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
OSCAR (1991) ** 3/4 . Directed by John Landis. Written by
Michael Barrie and Jim Mulholland, from a play by Claude
Magnier. Photography, Marc Ahlberg. Music, Elmer Bernstein.
Cast: Sylvester Stallone, Peter Riegert, Chazz Palminteri,
Joey Travolta, Vincent Spano, Ornella Muti, Don Ameche, Yvonne
DeCarlo, Martin Ferrero, Harry Shearer, Elizabeth Barondes,
Jim Mulholland, Tim Curry, Kirk Douglas, William Atherton,
Marisa Tomei, Ken Howard , Richard Romanus, et al. A
Touchstone release. 100 min. Rated PG.
Would you believe Sylvester Stallone in a non-violent comedy?
Would you believe Yvonne DeCarlo back in circulation? Or a
stutterer played by Eddie Bracken who had retired in 1953?
Would you believe such an Italian-American, Italian (the
enchanting  Ornella Muti) or Italianate gathering of movie
eagles--well, mostly eaglets, canaris and sparrows--with some
Anglos thrown in for balance?   
As befits a farce of this type, the parts, from medium to
tiny, are shared. No one has a real lion's share, not even
Stallone. Everyone seems to be having a good time. But for a
long stretch, that good time is too good for the good of the
movie.
"Oscar" has nothing to do with the statuette. Superficially it
could be called a screwball comedy, but it is really something
different, a transplanted, Americanized adaptation of a French
"vaudeville" that ran endlessly, years ago, on the Paris
stage.
The "vaudeville" is a special type of French farce and has
nothing to do with British or American  vaudeville. Georges
Feydeau (1862-1921) was the undisputed master of the genre.
The original French "Oscar" was written by Claude Magnier--not
an undisputed master but still quite a skillful plot-maker.
Its American adapters did nicely too, except for some unfunny
excesses, e.g. baptizing Stallone "Angelo (Snaps) Provolone."
Essentially though, they caught the spirit of the play and
mostly kept to its "classical" format. Wisely, they did not
try to air it out and make it much more than  filmed theater
with unity of place (the Provolone town house) and time (under
one day).  
Provolone is an underworld boss in the early Thirties Golden
Age of gangsterism. Having promised his dying Papa Kirk
Douglas to go straight, he tries hard. On the day Snaps is
about to turn into a legit banker everything happens. Cops
stalk his house. Bankers plan to defraud him. His accountant
Anthony asks for the hand of Lisa, Snaps's daughter, while
telling his employer that he's been robbing him all along. 
Lisa lies to Snaps that she's pregnant  by the chauffeur
Oscar, now gone, because she wants to marry--anybody will do so
long as she can get out of the Provolone place. Can you blame
her? Yes you can, because Lisa has as little class as anyone
around her.
The girl that Anthony loves turns out to be Theresa, who
pretended she was Miss Provolone. Then come more mistaken
identities in a madhouse of entrances, exits, announcements,
revelations, engagements, separations, rival gangsters,
visitors, and, of course, the props of farce. Here those are
three identical black bags that play musical chairs as they
get endlessly switched . Respectively they contain jewelry,
greenbacks and the underwear of the former maid--who will marry
the former fiance of Snaps's daughter. 
The situation is madly promising. The execution is maddeningly
wrong, at least for a long time, with troubles ranging from
the direction to the pacing, from the acting to some of the
lines. Snaps, trying to be a gentleman and to eliminate both 
firearms and gangster parlance from his mob --sorry, from his
household staff--keeps rebuking them: "Don't call me Boss."
"Sorry Boss" is the knee-jerk reaction. Not once but again and
again and again.    
A 19th century thespian said on his deathbed: "Don't feel
sorry for me. Dying is easy, comedy is hard." Farce is even
harder. The secret is to play it cool, to underplay, to have
the text carry the actors and not vice versa. 
"Oscar" however makes wrong moves from the start, but
mercifully not to the finish. It goes from loud and raucous
notes to dead spots. The actors mug with huge gesticulations,
as if parodying  a bad silent movie. They shout in unison,
which is a deadly practice.
So what ought to have combined Damon Runyon and Georges
Feydeau falls flat. It's basically a simple case of overkill,
of exploding nuclear devices when one bullet would do. 
The jokes are of vaudeville (in the Anglo sense) caliber.
"Come here!" --" I can't, I'm smoking a salmon"--" So, put it
out."  Or " Of course I knew. I just had no idea." (Sam
Goldwyn said it better: "It's not only unfeasible, it cannot
be done.") 
Then, at some point, something good happens. I can't say
exactly where or how. Perhaps we've been desensitized by then,
but assuming the film was shot in sequence, the performers
seem to find the right level of timing and delivery. 
It helps that we also introduced to two amusing Italian
tailors, Ferrero and Shearer, and to the very funny and timid
Tim Curry who plays Snaps's  elocution teacher and ends up
marrying Lisa. Their appearances shift the mode from
raucousness to humor and even seem to bring a modicum of wit
to the other characters, the imbroglios and the confusion. The
film becomes genuinely comical . 
Except for those newcomers, acting honors go to the befuddled
Chazz Palminteri, Stallone's dumdum bodyguard and, would you
believe it, yes, to Sylvester himself. He maintains a nice,
gentlemanly cool throughout, is even endearing and looks as if
Rocky and Rambo would horrify him were they to show up at the
Provolone mansion.
Stallone is also the shortest man around. No effort was made
to put him in elevator shoes or have him stand on platforms
hidden from view. Could it be that someone decided that if it
was good enough for Edward G. Robinson as gangster boss from
"Little Caesar" to "Key Largo" to allow his underlings to
tower over him, it was good enough for Sly Stallone.
(Snaps Provolone, to better himself, learns a new word each
day. By an amusing coincidence, in the title role of "Bugsy,"
another 1991 movie, gangster Warren Beatty too practices
quotidian enrichment of his vocabulary). 
Long ago in Hollywood, pretty-boy crooner Dick Powell had a
solid second career as the tough hero of thrillers. Taking the
reverse route, Stallone could well become a pretty good
funnyman.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Fifteen years ago Sylvester Stallone became a major star with a single
film, ROCKY.  Since then he has made nothing but macho action films.  But
surely now he realizes that he cannot keep playing low-personality action
figures on the screen.  Even John Wayne discovered he had to put some acting
and character into his roles.  And Wayne was considered more charismatic on
the screen than Stallone.  So the time has come for Stallone to cross over
into comedy.  His choice of comedy shows unexpectedly good taste.  It is not
only a very funny comedy, but it is a comedy unlike comedies that have been
made for many years.  Although originally written in French in 1958, it is
very much in the style of some of Frank Capra's screwier comedies, such as
ARSENIC AND OLD LACE and YOU CAN'T TAKE IT WITH YOU.  It also takes some
chances in that it has the claustrophobic feel of a filmed stage play: 95%
of it takes place in one house and much of that is just in the course of one
morning.  But it is such a gem of a stage play that it may just do the trick
for Stallone.
     The plot defies describing in any detail, since a big part of the fun
is just making the plot more and more convoluted, until the characters
themselves are totally bewildered about what is going on.  The film opens
with a surprisingly unfunny scene between mobster "Snaps" Provolone
(Stallone) and his dying father (played by Kirk Douglas).  Almost
undoubtedly this scene was written just for the film, since it is poorly
written and it does not take place in the Provolone house, as most of the
rest of the film does.  Poppa makes Snaps promise to go straight.  Flash to
a charming credit sequence featuring what looks like a Puppetoon opera
singer singing the "Largo al factotum" from Rossini's BARBER OF SEVILLE.
Flash to a month later and Snaps's morning starts with an unexpected meeting
with his accountant, who admits that he has been embezzling from Snaps but
explains it is all okay because he will soon be one of the family since he
wants to marry Snaps's daughter.  Except it turns out to be a daughter that
Snaps does not happen to have.  Well, sort of.  If that sounds a little
strange, you ain't heard nothing yet.  That is just how it starts.  Give the
film another five minutes and stranger will happen still.
     The heart of this film is an incredible array of minor characters, some
very funny, far too many to mention.  The film is well chosen to let the bit
parts do the most to pull the film along and place small demands on the
leading man, who appears to be up to the small demands that are placed on
him, and even if he were not, the pacing, the script, and the minor
characters would still make this film worth seeing.  OSCAR makes it as one
of the funniest comedies in a long time.  I give it a +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.
