Title
Review for Two Girls and a Guy (1997)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I think words are not serving me well at all," confesses Robert
Downey Jr. in an excessively narcissistic performance as the two-timing
lover Blake Allen.  And the dense words -- at the rate of about one
million a minute -- of writer and director James Toback fail the
audience at every turn with the worst script I've had to sit through
this year.  (When the film broke during the press screening, I was
hopeful, but our resourceful projectionist fixed it quickly.  Where is
incompetence when you need it?)
     The claustrophobic film, TWO GIRLS AND A GUY, is set almost
entirely in a SoHo loft.  When Blake, an actor, fires a gun twenty
minutes into the show and splatters his bathroom with fake blood, the
audience will be disappointed to learn that he is not dead.  He just
did it to remind his two girlfriends how much they need him.
     Yes, that's two girlfriends.  The movie has a single interesting
idea.  A guy has sex with one girl three days a week, and with anotheron three other days.  It is never clear what happens on Blake's day
off, but since he constantly interrupts himself to call his mother on
his cordless phone, one might assume that he visits her.  The story is
     Carla, played by Heather Graham, is the prettier of his two
girlfriends, and Lou, played by Natasha Wagner, is the winner of the
film's speed talking contest.  How fast can they spew their trite
lines?  Regretfully, not quite fast enough so that you can miss any of
the lines.  "Maybe monogamy violates some essential part of our being,"
is how Lou explains their predicament.  This is one of many lines I
would just as soon have missed.
     The movie has the feel of a play in which they recruited three new
acting school graduates and filmed their first day of rehearsals.  None
of the actors, however, are new, and Downey is both famous and
talented.  Nevertheless, the picture is gratingly awful.  Even the
camera operator seems lost.  Many scenes find him panning the room
looking in vain for something interesting to record.
     In a scene typical of the nonsensical and profanity laden dialog,
Lou uses a stream of expletives in her comparison of Blake's behavior
to Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thompson (sic).  Blake, to no avail,
attempts to tell her she has the name wrong.
     After non-stop blather about the three characters' prevarications
and sexual infidelities, the film finally winds down.  But like the
supposedly dead monster in a horror film, it comes back.  This time the
movie wants to be a sentimental tear-jerker.  Needless to say, it is no
more credible as a soap opera.  The film's second, and final, ending
gives a blessed relief to those trapped in the theater.
     TWO GIRLS AND A GUY runs a mercifully short 1:32.  It was not
rated at the time of the screening, but will undoubtedly be an R for
sex, massive profanity, faked suicide and mature themes.  The film
would be acceptable for teenagers if they are older.  On the other
hand, no one of any age should waste their time with this asinine
dialog.  I give the film 1/2 of a star only because I have seen a few
worse films.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 25, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Alex Fung
TWO GIRLS AND A GUY (Fox Searchlight - 1998)
Starring Robert Downey Jr., Heather Graham, Natasha Gregson Wagner
Screenplay by James Toback
Produced by Edward R. Pressman, Chris Hanley
Directed by James Toback
Running time: 92 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   James Toback's return to directing after a eight-year layoff, TWO
   GIRLS AND A GUY, is a film which is comprised, more or less, of just
   that: one guy, Blake (Robert Downey Jr.); two girls, Carla (Heather
   Graham) and Lou (Natasha Gregson Wagner); one primary setting
   (Blake's absurdly spacious bachelor apartment), and a great deal of
   dialogue.  Embracing a near real-time approach, this is a highly
   theatrical feature that completely hangs upon the performances of its
   three actors and the quality of the dialogue written by Mr. Toback
   for his bantering characters.  Fortunately, the film's cast is up to
   the challenge, and the wordy exchanges between the triad of
   characters, while admittedly variable, are occasionally wickedly
   amusing.
   The film's setup is fairly generic in nature, and opens rather
   unpromisingly.  We meet self-possessed blonde Carla and feisty
   brunette Lou, both waiting outside a SoHo loft.  As they engage in
   idle chatter, it is revealed that they're both waiting for their
   respective boyfriends to return from the airport, and it doesn't take
   long for them to come to the realisation that they're being two-timed
   by the same guy.  More indignant with him than catty with each other,
   the duo break into Blake's loft and await his arrival for a
   confrontation.
   It's when Blake returns to his abode where the film hits its stride.
   Played with magnificent bombast by Mr. Downey Jr., Blake is a cad,
   all right, but a captivatingly dynamic, blusterous, and stealthy
   piece of work that bursts onto the scene and raises the stakes to new
   heights.  It's fascinating to watch this character in his natural
   habitat, and perhaps the film's best choice was to have his two
   girlfriends scamper off into hiding upon his return, allowing us to
   size up Blake not with his interactions with others, but by his own
   innate behaviour.  Whether he's flamboyantly behind his piano in a
   rollicking rendition of Vivaldi, or on the phone leaving messages to
   his beloveds (Carla, Lou, and his unseen sickly mother), it's never
   less than wildly entertaining and insightful.
   Though at this point I almost hoped the film would transform into a
   one-man show -- A Typical Afternoon In The Life Of Blake, if you will
   -- Carla, and then Lou, reveal themselves, and the sparks begin to
   fly.  (One of the great touches in the film is how Blake, when
   startled by Carla's unannounced appearance, begins to both verbally
   and physically backpedal even before he realizes that the cat's out
   of the bag.)  Double-teamed by the understandably aggrieved women
   (who are more smirkingly inquisitive than ferociously vengeful --
   they want a justification for his ongoing hypocrisy), an
   increasingly-flustered Blake weakly defends himself with apologetic
   and even self-righteous declarations against their verbal jabs.
   Surprisingly delightful in the waltz of scathing witty banter shared
   by its trio of characters, TWO GIRLS AND A GUY concludes its first
   sequence with an unexpected apoplectic act of such outrageous
   audacity that it seemed nothing was off-limits for this film.
   However, it'd be unfeasible to attempt to string along Carla and
   Lou's outrage to full feature-length, and it's as the movie gradually
   transforms into the sharing of exploratory profundities on the nature
   of fidelity and relationships that it slowly but surely begins to
   unravel.  The dialogue becomes less and less engaging and clever, the
   film's tempo loses its liveliness, the dynamic between the characters
   evolves in unconvincing fashion, and several sequences fall flat.
   Subtle and not-quite-subtle allusions are made (a poster of JULES ET
   JIM hangs prominently on the wall), and secrets are revealed which
   barrel the film toward an uncompelling weepy finale.
   One key turning point in the film is the kinky sex scene between
   Blake and Carla.  TWO GIRLS AND A GUY was embroiled in a bitter,
   long-running dispute with the MPAA with regards to this scene --
   contractually-obligated to deliver an R-rated film, Mr. Toback was
   forced to resubmit fourteen scaled-down versions of the steamy
   interlude before the MPAA withdrew their NC-17 rating in favour of an
   R -- and while admittedly titillating, the net effect of the vignette
   on the film's thematic narrative is rather dubious.
   If anything, TWO GIRLS AND A GUY serves as a showcase for the
   phenomenal talents of Mr. Downey Jr., whose versatility is put to the
   test in this film.  He plays the gamut from indignant to humbled,
   from self-assured to disconcerted, yet his acting gears shift so
   smoothly as to not be registered.  It's a wonderful performance in a
   role custom-tailored for him; Mr. Toback wrote the screenplay in four
   days shortly after Mr. Downey Jr. was arrested on drug charges, and
   it's hard not to see echoes of reality seeping into his character --
   in a monologue to his mirrored reflection, Blake's self-chiding to
   "get [his] shit together" is disquieting in its resonance.
   While Mr. Downey Jr.'s showstopping performance is undoubtedly the
   primary strength of the film, both actresses are solid in more
   broadly-observed roles.  Ms. Graham is quickly becoming one of
   America's more daring actresses, involving herself in three
   successive risky projects -- TWO GIRLS AND A GUY and BOOGIE NIGHTS
   are both quite sexually frank, while LOST IN SPACE has a screenplay
   penned by Akiva Goldsman.  She's quite appealing here, playing a
   character at once both dainty and sultry.  Meanwhile, Ms. Gregson
   Wagner initially portrays Lou with such an unwarranted spunk that
   audiences are likely to find it either annoying, or, like me,
   endearing.  She tones it down substantially as the film progresses,
   but I found her more fun to watch as the artificially excitable
   chatterbox.
   The film was reportedly shot in eleven days, filmed mostly in
   sequence, and the resultant artifacts of this rapid shoot are evident
   throughout.  TWO GIRLS AND A GUY has an agile, spontaneous sort of
   feel, and one senses that Mr. Toback encouraged a good deal of
   improvisation from his three actors.  While the film could be
   transposed directly to the stage more or less intact, it doesn't feel
   constricted; the expansive apartment setting is well-used to vary the
   background, and Mr. Toback allows his camera to wander and linger on
   his characters in an effective manner.
   TWO GIRLS AND A GUY falls short of its potential, but thanks to some
   stellar work by Mr. Downey Jr., it's still often an enjoyable,
   bitingly funny romp, particularly as we watch the
   surprisingly-resilient Blake evasively try to rationalize his
   behaviour and even turn the tables on his girlfriends.  "I'm an
   actor," he tells them at one point, using the ol' tried-and-tested
   occupational-hazard defense.  "Actors lie."  But not, they all seem
   to agree, Denzel Washington.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Sometimes, I have an overwhelming temptation to grab someone by the throat,
 head-butt them, leave them bleeding in the corner, saying 'That is my
 critical response to you.'" - NSFC award-winning director Mike Figgis

Author
Nicholas Amado
Starring: Robert Downey Jr., Heather Graham, Natasha Gregson Wagner
Two Girls And A Guy is a perfect example of how a single actor can turn around a script and an entire film. The first 15 minutes of the movie made me nauseous. The dialogue was trite and insipid, the acting below mediocre. Graham and Gregson Wagner open the film awaiting their boyfriend's return from LA. After chatting a bit, they come to realize that they are both involved with the same fellow. They break into his appartment and wait. At one point, I turned to my friend and told her that I planned on leaving if Gregson Wagner's character, Lou, didn't shut up.
Enter Robert Downey Jr. From then on, the film took a dynamic and thuroughly entertaining turn. The acting by Graham and Gregson Wagner improved and the screenwriting became fresh. Each character develops more and more deeply as the film progresses. 
The entire story takes place inside the appartment on a single afternoon. Blake, an actor for hire, comes back to what he thinks is his empty appartment in NY one afternoon. After a brilliant turn as an "actor alone in his appartment", Carla (Graham) pops out from behind a doorway to surprise the man she thought she loved. The following exchange is classic. Eventually, Lou comes out and the fireworks begin. I was never sure of the motives of any of the characters, and so I did not have any clue what was going to come of the confrontation. There is no action, there is no suspense, there are no wild characters that appear out of nowhere to distract the viewer. What you get is a unique tale and a marvelous performance by Downey Jr. Enough to make one wonder what he could do if there were no nasal or needle distractions in his life.
The production quality is perhaps the film's biggest flaw. There are countless voice-overs to fill poorly recorded dialogue. (Which is curious since it was all filmed in an appartment.) The volume level of the actors goes up and down and in and out. It almost seems like a sound experiment. Focus is another strange thing in this film. There are numerous focus changes. But they are so minor that I wondered if they were the mark of a bad cinematographer and focus puller or some brilliant artistic element that I just didn't get.
Two Girls And  A Guy is a fresh and energetic film that is stylishly told. It may serve as inspiration to prospective screenwriters who wonder if a three character, single location script can be written well. Yes.
Š 1998 Nick Amado
Email me with comments, questions, debate welcome. namado@concentric.net

Author
Seth Bookey
  Seen on 26 April 1998 for $8.50 with Laura at Angelika.
   Not knowing much about *2 Girls and a Guy*, I went into it
   without any preconceived notions or expectations. It started out
   interestingly enough, as two women standing on the steps of a Sohoi
   loft slowly discover the boyfriend they hoping to surprise upon his
   return from London is in fact the same boyfriend, Blake (Robert Downey
   Jr.). Carla (Heather Graham, most recently seen as Boogie Night's
   "Rollergirl") is tall, blonde, refined, and innocent looking. Lou
   (Natasha Wagner) is short, dark-haired, speaks in streetsmart tones,
   and has no problem scaling a fire escape and breaking into Blake's
   window so the two can really surprise him upon his return.
   The first 45 minutes to an hour of this movie work very well, as the
   two cuckolded women bond as they rehash all of Blake's lines and
   realize he's been seeing both of them for almost the same length of
   time--ten months. As Carla, wide-eyed, recites Blake's romantic
   mantras, Lou is able to finish them, word for word. The fun,
   therefore, is really supposed to begin when Blake returns and the
   women confront him and turn tables on him.
   Blake does return and immediately calls his mother. We learn from
   Carla and Lou that he is fixated on his mother. This plays prominently
   into the film, and it is interesting to see Downey tune the women out
   to call his mother, and then her doctor, and completely focus on
   everything but them.
   This movie takes place completely in Blake's loft, so it is
   interesting to see how director James Toback is able to keep it from
   getting too claustrophobic, and too talky, like My Dinner with Andre.
   However, the move takes a sharp left turn halfway through and never
   quite recovers. The things you might expect and look forward to do not
   happen, and instead, the films ends unsatisfactorily. Considering the
   sharp emotions and strong start the movie made, it is
   disappointing--to say the least--to see the characters do things no
   one would ever do, and basically wimp out.
   Despite the script, Downey and Graham sustain a level of energy that
   still keeps you wondering what is going to happen, way after that bad
   turn is made. Wagner's performance, however, despite promising
   delivery in the first half, peters out and leaves you unimpressed.
   Watching three characters that are eventually revealed to be
   emotionally confused is not for everyone. It's hard to figure out
   whether the conclusions we can draw are that a) the director is
   misogynist, or b) "Why try being honest with people? Life is so
   futile?"
   CINEMA FAN NOTE: In the loft you will notice a poster for Truffaut's
   film Jules et Jim, a movie about 2 Guys and a Girl.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Two Girls and a Guy (1998)
Robert Downey Jr., Heather Graham, Natasha Wagner. Directed by James 
Toback. 92 minutes.
R, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
It's impossible to watch Robert Downey Jr. in "Two Girls and a Guy" 
without relating his onscreen performance with his off-screen life. 
Director James Toback wrote the film as a vehicle for his friend Downey, 
tailoring the story to focus on the actor's all too well known demons. 
The result is a riveting, often painfully intimate look at the soul of a 
man who is dangerously out of control. You leave the theater feeling that 
Downey has opened up and shared the darkest, most personal parts of 
himself. Unless, of course, he was just fooling us, the same way his 
character fooled the women who confront him in the story. 
Set almost entirely in a SoHo loft, "Two Girls and a Guy" is essentially 
a three-character drama. Lou (Natasha Wagner) and Carla (Heather Graham 
from "Boogie Nights" and "Lost In Space") are strangers who meet outside 
a Manhattan apartment building as they wait to surprise their respective 
boyfriends. While making small talk, they come to realize they are both 
waiting for the same man. Blake Allen (Downey,) a charming, self-absorbed 
young actor, has been seeing Carla three days a week and Lou on three 
other days. As for the seventh day, it's safe to assume he wasn't resting.
The shaken women decide a confrontation is in order. Lou climbs the fire 
escape, breaks out an apartment window and buzzes Carla in. Soon, the 
object of their affection returns home and the mind games begin.
As a film, "Two Girls and a Guy" is a somewhat clunky, claustrophobic 
piece of work, playing like an occassionally inspired, often strained 
exercise in improvisational theater. But as a character study, the piece 
is absolutely mesmerizing. Graham and Wagner are exceptional actors, 
creating a strong dynamic between their very different characters. Carla 
is a well-educated woman with a sophisticated air, complimented by an 
earthy nature and a sharp tongue. She has the reserved demeanor that 
often accompanies classical beauty, while Lou is the cuter and more 
outgoing of the two. Lacking the schooling of her peers, Lou makes up for 
it with street smarts and a bolder presentation style. 
Despite Graham and Wagner's well-drawn characters, this is clearly Robert 
Downey Jr.'s show and the troubled actor's performance is a tour de force.
 When the women confront him, rubbing his nose in the hackneyed come-on 
lines he used on both of them ("I never experienced real love before I 
met you," " You own my dick", etc.) Downey goes into one of the most 
dazzling song and dances ever recorded on film. Panicked, he emits a 
stream of pathetic excuses and wild rationalizations. He tries 
diversionary tactics, even feigning a suicide to remind the girls of how 
much they need him. Desperate, he attempts to turn the tables, claiming 
that the women's premeditated confrontation was far more cruel than 
anything he did in the name of love. 
The watershed scene comes as Downey confronts himself in the bathroom 
mirror, sobbing "When are you going to shape up?" along with a stream of 
invectives. This is the moment when the line between actor and character 
dissolves and we find ourselves looking squarely at Robert Downey Jr., 
the drug-addict. While the story addresses sexual duplicity, the subtext 
actually deals with the duplicity of an addict who spent years saying 
whatever was necessary to convince those trying to help him that their 
efforts were working, when in fact, his self-destructive behaviors 
continued to spiral out of control. This is Robert Downey Jr. naked, in 
front of the unflinching eye of the camera, finally dropping all the 
bullshit and facing his personal demons at long last.
Or is it? Midway through the story, one of the women asks Downey's 
character  "Do you have any feelings, or do you just play Hamlet all the 
time and pretend to have feelings?" The same question applies to Downey 
himself. Is he really experiencing a crucial moment of clarity in the 
film, or is he just pretending to have the breakthrough he knew was 
expected of him?  
There's no way of knowing whether what we saw was real, pretend, or a 
little of both. As of this writing, Downey has completed his jail term 
and moved to a drug rehabilitation facility. It's notable that he spent 
an evening away from the center to attend the premier of this film. 
Robert Downey Jr. is an extraordinarily gifted actor and, despite a 
contrived storyline and shaky dialogue, "Two Girls and a Guy" is a 
striking film, thanks primarily to his inspired performance. Robert 
Downey Jr. is also an addict, and as Neil Young wrote, "every junkie is a 
setting sun." Hopefully, Downey, like so very many others, will find the 
inspiration to change his life before nightfall.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  James Toback
Cast:  Robert Downey Jr., Heather Graham, Natasha Gregson Wagner
Screenplay:  James Toback
Producers:  Chris Hanley, Edward R. Pressman
Runtime:  84 min.
US Distribution:  20th Century Fox/Fox Searchlight
Rated R:  strong sex scene, strong language and sexual dialogue,
violence
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Two Girls and a Guy is most easily summed up with the five words of its
title.  It's about two girls, Carla (Heather Graham) and Lou (Natasha
Gregson Wagner), and a guy, Blake (Robert Downey Jr.).  The two girls
meet outside of Blake's apartment building, at which point they realize
that they're waiting for the same guy.  It turns out that they're both
his girlfriends, and that he's been lying to them for the past ten
months.  They break into Blake's apartment, and have a lively
conversation about their mutual boyfriend.
Through about fifteen minutes of constant dialogue, they learn that
he's said the same things to both of them, word for word.  (My favorite
line is, "You own my [penis].  It's attached to me, but you own it."). 
Soon, Blake returns home, and his girlfriends hide out for several
minutes as he calls his mother, and then goes to the mirror and sings a
few tunes for himself.  At this point, Carla makes herself seen, and
they have a long conversation in which she toys with him and tries to
get him to admit his guilt.  Finally, Lou emerges from the closet, and
they engage in a big, hostile argument.
Written and directed by James Toback, Two Girls and a Guy is a static
picture that takes place almost entirely inside Blake's apartment, with
almost no lapses in time or jumps in action.  There are a lot of very
funny scenes, but there are also a lot of strange moments that feature
inconsistent tones and weird story developments (there isn't much of a
story, but it does develop a little bit).  Too much of the film feels
staged (the picture probably would have worked better as a play) and
doesn't quite strike me as realistic.  It's never a boring picture, but
there are almost as many flaws as there are laughs.  
Take, for instance, Toback's direction.  Since there isn't a lot of
movement (although the apartment is enormous and very interesting to
look at), there isn't much room for cinematography or intricate
camerawork.  And there really shouldn't be a lot of camerawork, but
Toback tries to do the pretentious artistic thing, which results in
really strange camera angles, random zoom-ins and zoom-outs, lots of
focus shifts (the person speaking is out of focus), and other such
pointless tricks.  It certainly doesn't help the film, and really just
calls attention away from the dialogue.
A lot of the dialogue is funny, and a lot of the segments work well as
stand-alone pieces (the film is episodic and can be watched in portions
without seeing the entire thing).  My favorite scene has Blake cornered
in his bathroom as Carla explains that she's been with four other men,
and Lou tells him that she's been with three women.  It's funny, and
works on the right kind of humor.  Most of the scenes that work don't
feel forced, and they are funny because of their realism.
But there are a lot of things here that simply feel strange.  The
entire subplot with Blake's mother is very odd, and never feels quite
right (even the end is completely ambiguous, and neither of the two
possibilities for what actually happened seem very plausible).  Halfway
through the film, Carla and Blake engage in a gratuitous marathon of
mutual masturbation and oral sex, and the reasons for this are not
apparent.  Blake also fakes a suicide at one point just to "prove a
point" as he says; but, the scene is strange and just wouldn't be
feasible in real life.
All of the acting is entertaining.  Downey is, of course, funny, and
seems allowed to roam free and do whatever he wants here (and he does
one hell of a Hamlet, I might add).  Graham is wonderful and beautiful,
and she just makes me want to look at her forever.  Wagner, an actress
I've not seen before, is also adequately spunky and is right for the
role.  It seems that a lot of the film is improvisation, and I think the
three performers have done a good job of staying with their characters
and making the film fun to watch.
Two Girls and a Guy is a reasonably interesting picture, but it has the
feel of a film that was thrown together on a whim, one that needed more
input from other sources.  I'm not sure if this kind of material is
right for film on its own, mostly because Toback doesn't utilize the
advantages that film has over other mediums.  And he's a talented
writer, but someone else should have been involved to mediate the scenes
that are peripheral and just plain strange.  I'm not sure if I liked Two
Girls and a Guy, but at least it kept me interested.

Author
Eric Lurio
How precisley do you film a minimalistic stage play? Consider what we've got
here. The title says it all. We've got three characters [Okay, five, but one
character (Frederique Van Der Wal) has two lines and another (Angel David)  has
a teensy part as a masher on the street] and a large empty set. 
So what James Toback has done, is is put in a short introductory scene in the
front of a SoHo apartment building, and put everything else in one large set.
It works.
Carla (Heather Graham) and Lou (Natasha Wagner) are strangers. They are waiting
in front of an apartment house in SoHo, and after the brief encounter with the
aforementioned masher get into a conversation in which they have the same
boyfriend one Blake Allen (Robert Downey Jr.).
So Lou climbs up the fire escape breaks into Blake's apartment, and buzzes
Carla up, where they wait to confront poor, unsuspecting Blake.
Downey give the performance of his life. He sings! He dances! He does Hamlet!
It's amazing the way he mugs at the mirror, how he squirms in front of the two
p.o'd significant others. He weaves, he parries, he slices and dices! It's
amazing.
Think of Shaquille O'Niell or Michael Jordan going one-on-two against two
college woman's basketball stars. Graham and Wagner are perfectly fine, but
they just can't keep up. 
This is Downey's movie plain and simple. The closest thing one can compare it
to is Robert Duval's performance in `The Apostle.' Powerful, effecting and
enthralling.
Without Downey, this thing wouldn't have worked. 
There's a sex scene which was reportedly cut down quite a bit in order to
bring the film down from an NC-17 to an R. That was an excellent move as the
sex scene was mostly gratuitous. 
Without it the film would have been PG-13.

Author
Scott Renshaw
TWO GIRLS AND A GUY
(Fox Searchlight)
Starring:  Robert Downey Jr., Heather Graham, Natasha Gregson Wagner.
Screenplay:  James Toback.
Producers:  Edward R. Pressman and Chris Hanley.
Director:  James Toback.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  85 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There's an inherent problem with the concept of group therapy as
drama, one which is pounded home by James Toback's three-character set
piece TWO GIRLS AND A GUY.  It opens with two women -- Carla (Heather
Graham) and Lou (Natasha Gregson Wagner) -- discovering while waiting
outside a New York loft that they're waiting for the same boyfriend, a
wannabe actor named Blake Allen (Robert Downey Jr.).  Outraged at his
duplicity, Carla and Lou both sneak into Blake's loft so that they can
confront him.  What follows is an extended exchange of profanities,
accusations and excuses, with Blake gradually stripped of his comfortable
protective coating of lies.
     It should have been a bracing, enthralling experience watching
Blake's deceptions -- and his very self-created identify -- crumble piece
by piece.  Toback, unfortunately, doesn't let the audience in on the
process of figuring this guy out.  Instead, every possible bit of sub-text
is turned into blunt, frequently awkward text.  When Lou hears "You Don't
Know Me" playing on Blake's stereo, she notes that "it's no wonder that's
his favorite song;" when Blake makes repeated calls to his never-seen and
supposedly ill mother, the Oedipal theme spills into a soliloquy from
"Hamlet" with a jab by Carla at Blake's obsession with Mom.  Dialogue
becomes a steady stream of diagnosis, a "you need everyone to love you"
bouncing off of an "I think you want to believe that."  There's even a
poster of seminal menage-a-trois film JULES ET JIM on Blake's wall to
offer Insight by Conspicuous Set Decoration.  Everyone and everything on
screen screams at Blake exactly what his problem is, giving us barely a
moment to consider what _we_ think Blake's problem is.
     That's a near-criminal waste of the complexity and intensity Downey
pours into his performance.  There are clear parallels between this
character -- a charming, self-deluding actor -- and Downey's own
much-publicized inner demons, parallels of which Toback was clearly aware
when he wrote the script with Downey in mind.  The film's two most
riveting scenes find Blake alone with those demons.  In the first, he
adopts a cheesy swagger as he rehearses for an upcoming gig in the
Catskills; later, he disintegrates in disgust as he confronts himself in
the mirror.  As effective as Downey is at Blake's rapid-fire
rationalizations and table-turning, he's staggeringly good when he is
alone:  naked and isolated, using his reflection for an audience because
he always has to be performing for somebody.
     Sadly, this isn't a one-man show.  Graham is solid as the more
sensible Carla, delighting in making Blake squirm or working him into a
lather in the film's controversial extended sexual encounter.  Wagner
improves as the film progresses, but her opening lines are delivered with
such plastic spunkiness that it's hard to avoid loathing her on sight.
Both actresses, however, are victims of a script which never lets them
become characters in their own right.  They're along to toss around
psycho-analysis, to back Blake into a literal and emotional corner and
force him to grasp reality.  It's baffling that after so much wailing and
gnashing of teeth, Toback's resolution seems to be that Blake isn't really
such a bad guy -- that he's not all that different from anybody else, that
relationships are all about deception anyway so let's give poor Blake a
break.  I'd conclude that Blake's story is much more interesting if he is
an entirely unique sort of sexual animal, but Toback was generous enough
to draw my conclusions for me.  Given Downey's troubled history, it's sad
to see Blake given such a simplistic Freudian out for his behavior.
Apparently, Mommy didn't love him enough.

Author
Michael Dequina
Writer-director James Toback's low-budget, high-concept three-character
(OK, there's really _five_ characters, but two of them only appear in the
first scene) drama is not nearly as provocative as its title or
much-publicized ratings troubles suggests.  The two girls are sensible
blonde Carla (Heather Graham) and streetwise brunette Lou (Natasha Gregson
Wagner), who find out they share the same guy, Blake (Robert Downey Jr.),
while waiting for him outside his apartment building.  Understandably
upset, the two break into his apartment and wait to confront him, hoping to
find out and understand why someone would resort to such duplicity.
At about the half-hour mark, just about all that can be argued about has
been, and Toback attempts to jumpstart the proceedings with a lengthy,
fairly tasteful, and rather gratuitous sex scene (sorry to disappoint, but
if you're looking for any menage action, watch Wild Things) that had to be
recut multiple times in order for the film to receive an R rating.  It
doesn't work.  More talk follows, about Blake's obsession with his mother,
about the possibilities of a three-way relationship, about the women's own
fidelity.  But any true insight into the nature of contemporary romantic
relations never arrives, as well-acted as this bona fide screen play is.
(opens April 24)
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   As the ditty has it, "Hinomous, honomis,/ Woman's
monogamous. Honomis, hinomous,/ Man is polygamous.  It's
a wonder that the male of the species ever accepted the
concept of marriage, which binds a man so unnaturally to a
single woman.  There comes a time in the life of every college
sophomore coed that she begins to question the wisdom,
even the truth of this saying.  Given the paucity of
monogamous relationships throughout the animal kingdom, is
it not possible that the female of the human species has
varied tastes as well?  This is the conclusion drawn by James
Toback in his risky new film, "Two Girls and a Guy," a chancy
venture in that its dialogue feels almost completely improvised
while its appropriate forum is live theater.  Frequently
materializing as an actors' exercise designed to showcase the
many talents of Robert Downey, Jr., "Two Girls and a Guy"
suffers from the claustrophobic ambience of a photographed
play and a tendency to repeat and rehash prosaic dialogue. 
Its particular appeal is in watching Downey, a master, at work,
particularly when he seems to be exorcising his own demons,
and in appreciating the facial expressions on its three
characters who are filmed by Barry Markowitz in bold closeup.
   "Two Girls and a Guy" recalls "The Designated Mourner,"
David Hare and Wallace Shawn's more static photographed
play with Mike Nicholas as a flawed individual who, joining a
cerebral family that takes pleasure in the arts, just doesn't get
it.  Downey, in the role of a narcissistic though down-on-his-
luck actor, is forced into a dialogue with two young women
who discover that the man has been two-timing them,
spending three nights per week with one and three nights with
the other, though insisting to each that she is his exclusive
lover.
   A more conventional story would have the girls seeking
revenge on the duplicitous performer, who touches our
heartstrings each time he shows his concern for his dying
mother and tickles our funnybones when backed to the wall
by his interrogating girl friends.  Toback, who has written the
script which he directs almost completely within a spankingly
decorated Manhattan loft, takes on a different center.  His
women want simply to know why their man insists on seeing
two different, lovely creatures, and while receiving only a
fragmented answer to their query, they wonder why he simply
did not tell each of them the truth.
   As a date movie, "Two Girls and a Guy" might have the
young men in the audience squirming as they recognize some
of the lines they traditionally feed their dates.  Blake, as the
Downey character is known, has relied on hackneyed phrases
which had been surprisingly accepted by each woman,
expressions such as "I never experienced real love before I
met you," and "You own my [sexual member]."  Lou (Natasha
Gregson Wagner) and Carla (Heather Graham), in turn,
respond with "I thought you loved me, I really did," and "He
showed how helpless he was in the grips of overwhelming
passion."
   As the camera pans about the loft--which features lots of
space on a bare, polished wooden floor, Japanese curtains
separating the bedroom from the living area, a grand piano on
which rest a picture of Blake's mother and another of his girl
friend du jour--it rests on two provocative scenes which are
almost embarrassing in their intensity.  In one situation, Blake
looks in his bathroom mirror and sheds a tear while intoning,
"When are you going to shape up," a line which will have the
cognoscenti in the audience wondering whether he is talking
about Robert Downey Jr. as much as about Blake.  In
another, an extended sexual sequence between Carla
(Heather Graham) and Blake in the bedroom, we watch the
steamy progression filmed in shadowy dimness while the
camera frequently pans outside to show Lou sitting just
outside, listening to everything without showing signs of envy.
   Heather Graham is stunning to look at and provides a foil
for the cuter, if less beautiful streetwise Wagner.  Downey
turns in a forceful and varied performance as foiled lover,
Shakespearean actor, and concerned son.  On the whole,
however, "Two Girls and a Guy" is a work for the stage and
could use pruning and a tighter script even at a fairly brief 92
minutes.  Rated R.  Running Time: 92 minutes.  (C) 1998
Harvey Karten

Author
Matt Williams
Two Girls and a Guy is an odd and pretentious character drama that can't
quite sustain interest beyond its first thirty minutes.  In fact,
reading the scandal sheets about its star, Robert Downey Jr, would
probably create a more lively experience.
The film opens with two women standing outside an apartment in New York
City. There's Carla (Heather Graham), who is seemingly quiet and
reserved. And there's Lou (Natasha Gregson Wagner), bounding with energy
and a non-stop talker.
After a little introductory chit-chat, the two discover that for the
past year they have been unknowingly sharing the same boyfriend, actor
Blake Allen (Downey Jr.).  Shocked and upset, the two decide to confront
Blake about his roguish activities.
But confrontation doesn't seem to be enough.  In the ensuing
argument/conversation that follows, the two girls try to discover the
reasoning behind his behavior.
The action of Two Girls and a Guy is confined to one set, Blake's
apartment, and, aside from a few minor roles at the very beginning, is
limited to the three main characters.  There's a lot of talking in the
movie, and its not very good (or even revealing) conversation.
The movie might stir some interesting comparisons between Robert Downey
Jr himself and the self-destructive character that he plays.  But that
is really the only interesting thing about his character.  The movie
never inspires the kind of curiosity about Blake that Carla and Lou
evince.
As for Carla and Lou, they don't quite hold their end of the show
either. Natasha Gregson Wagner fares the worst.  In the opening scenes,
she recites her lines with the liveliness of cue cards.  To be fair, she
gets somewhat better in subsequent scenes, but is never fully convincing
in the role.  Heather Graham does a better acting job, but is stuck with
the film's least interesting (and most perplexing) character.
Director James Tolback directed Downey Jr. once before in 1987's dull
The Pick-Up Artist. The second time's not the charm here.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Matt Prigge
Starring: Robert Downey Jr, Heather Graham, Natasha Gregson Wagner
Robert Downey Jr. is so good in James Toback's "Two Girls and a Guy" 
that I fear if he had made his primary entrance even a minute later than 
he had (at around the 20 minute mark), and if I hadn't been tipped off 
to the strength of his performance by more than three people, I might 
have turned it off. Shaggy and completely uninhibited, Blake Allen 
(Downey) pops onto the screen and is so much fun to watch and to listen 
to that he gives the film a kind of immeadiacy that it probably wouldn't 
otherwise have, like he knows that this is his show and he better do his 
best to present it well. And what this basically is is a one-man show, a 
showcase for Downey to do the same schtick that he's done before in 
several other movies, sometimes great (the otherwise trite "Chaplin"), 
sometimes bad (his annoying supporting role in "Weird Science"), only 
here he's the center of attention, performing his one-man show for the 
entire audience, and easily winning them over with a certain type of 
charm that most of us didn't know he had. When he makes his first 
entrance, he brings life to the film, doing a five minute long bit where 
he goes through his routine of calling people up, and then performing a 
little song for himself, while looking into the mirror. And as the film 
goes on, we watch him as he tries to defend himself from the accusations 
that he is a lying mysoginist by the two people most close to him - he 
speaks quickly and seems to come up with lies that are not only 
plausible sounding (or at least half-way so), but also sincere.
In the film, his two girlfriends, who have no clue the other exist, meet 
eachother waiting for him on his doorstep. They break into his 
apartment, and wait for him to come home, and once he arrives, they 
individually confront him, and force him to tell the truth, which of 
course he cannot, but his lies sound so realistic, and we sense that out 
of the three of them, he's the one who's most hurt from it, and when he 
finally stares at himself in the mirror, without anyone looking on, and 
tells himself to shape up, we can't help but fall for it, even if we 
hate ourselves afterwards. That's what's great about this film. On the 
other hand, the plot itself is a little too cutesy and the writing never 
goes to the distance it really could. And it's too laid back when it 
should be manic. And there's too many instances when it's unbelievably 
derivative. And the two females aren't that interesting. While I could 
almost recommend this on the mere strength of the Downey Jr. 
performance, I just can't get past the fact that this seems too much 
like a film with one great thing to boast and a whole lot of other 
things to bitch about.
Just for example, the plot itself, while promising, is never fully 
explored. With roughly 85 minutes to film, we waste a whopping 20% of 
that on the long-winded exposition, where we meet the two girls and they 
discover eachother, only to discover that they're nothing more than 
either pretty dull (Carla, played by Heather Graham) or pretty annoying 
(Lou, played by Natasha Gregson Wagner). While the film is infatuated 
with the charming nightmare that is Blake and spares nearly no expense 
to show off how interesting he is, it barely discovers anything about 
the girls other than they are mere plot elements. They're there to 
either act accusatory or sexually arousing, and with no interest in them 
comes the round robin this film gets into: irate accusations, Blake's 
rapid defense, some more accusations, some more Blake defense, and then 
a cool down, followed by some brief and slight making up (where, at one 
point, Blake and Carla go into one of the bigger rooms in his 
astonishingly spacious apartment and service eachother, while Lou, well, 
dances in the other room). Round and round this goes, but we rarely 
learn more about Blake than he's never going to change no matter what he 
tells himself, while we learn nothing about the other two. While they 
aren't exactly awful or bad in their design, they're not even a million 
times as interesting as Blake is.
But Toback doesn't seem to mind. This is not only a lovely present to 
Downey, who starred in his 80s film, "The Pick-Up Artist," and has 
recently been besieged with bad press for his constant drug abuse and 
jail time, but it's also apparently very autobiographical. Toback has 
been immodest in his revelations of the sex life he had in his prime, 
which is quite extraordinary, and it's clear that Blake is supposed to 
be a twist on him merged with the rapid timing that Downey is well-known 
for. But he only goes halfway in destroying himself. He never truly 
makes us sympathize with his main character (we're more charmed by him), 
and he does tack on a nicely ambiguous ending that I almost fell for, 
but the accusations made aren't more than vulgar name-calling (if 
someone has that list of obsenities that he's called, please e-mail them 
to me), and by the end, Toback has included a fight scene where more is 
revealed about the other two characters that almost makes us really 
sympathize with him and revolt the other two. The twists that come out 
are unfair to the way this film should have been played out, and I 
almost wish that Toback had done a major rewrite, adding more and more 
complexity to his film. Why not gradually strip Blake of his protective 
coating, revealing the naked, frightened boy inside?
Filmed almost entirely within the confines of his apartment, and shot in 
real time, "Two Girls and a Guy" is less like a scathing character 
study, like the far superior "Deconstructing Harry," and more like a 
mediocre off-off-broadway play, albeit one with a phenomenal performance 
at the center. But there's nothing else there to really love about this 
film, and Downey becomes the only one who walks away with it with any 
real credibility. It's like seeing a remake of "A Streetcar Named 
Desire," but with Stanley being the only interesting aspect. 
Nevertheless, it is still a fairly entertaining movie. I enjoyed 
watching it for the most part (even if they made Blake's favorite song 
"You Don't Know Me" - disgraceful), but only in the way that I'd be 
interested in seeing any kind of sub-par piece of art just to see one 
great entity.

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK/average)
1998, R, 92 minutes [1 hour, 32 minutes]
starring: Robert Downey, Jr. (Blake), Heather Graham (Carla), Natasha Wagner
(Lou); produced by Chris Hanley, Edward R. Pressman; directed by James Toback.
Seen April 24, 1998 at 9:25 p.m. at Crossgates Mall Cinema 12, theater C, with
Casey Rivers, using Hoyt's Movie Cash. [theater rating: ***: good seats,
sound, and picture]
        When a film goes out on a limb and does something unique it's an effort worth
giving credit for. However, credit and quality are separates issues as one
does not necessarily equal the other. "Two Girls And A Guy" demonstrates this
notion by using minimalistic storytelling to carry an entire movie, but often
seems too caught up in its niche to use it properly.
        The story starts off simple and never really expands beyond its basic
premise, which is set into motion just as soon as the opening credits
disappear. We meet two young women: Carla (Graham), an upright, professional
blonde; and Lou (Wagner), a streetwise brunette, as they wait outside an
apartment building for their respective boyfriends. After an encounter with a
wannabe-player, the two begin to talk and realize they are dating the same
man, Blake (Downey, Jr.). He's a struggling actor whom both had considered to
be a bit mysterious, but never realized how easily they had been duped until
now. They decide they must brandish Blake with a vengeance of some sort and
proceed to break into his spacious loft and wait for him inside.
        Establishing a story is one of the most crucial elements to filmmaking and
the way this film does this is symbolic of the way it works (or fails to). The
first scene on the steps of the building is rather awkward, as the attempt at
humor through confrontation with a generic, cartoonish character shows little
promise for originality. Add to that the weak dialogue and performances which
makes the film seem like a teenage-oriented sitcom. Listening to the
characters ramble on about nothing is quite annoying, however, once the story
is given something to focus upon it begins to improve.
        And so the film manages to stretch what could be a 2-minute sitcom bit into a
an entire act. This does provide for some characterization on behalf of Carla
and Lou and we learn a great deal about Blake simply through their stories
about him. He has said and done the same things to each at same general time.
Each thought they were the only woman he ever "loved" (not including the
raunchy-but-funny terms which mean the same thing in GenX-speak). At times
it's hard to believe they could have been so gullible, but once Blake enters
the picture, we begin to understand why. Blake is an actor who takes his
profession seriously and tries to justify himself by saying he believes he
fell in love with both simultaneously. But is he being sincere or is he
acting? This idea is brought up continuously throughout the picture and
provides for a semblance of theme.
        Writer/director James Toback wrote the screenplay specifically with Downey in
mind (after his recent trouble with the law), and it's amazing to watch him
absorb the script and atmosphere and deliver such a superb performance despite
the limits he is forced to work with. Downey is so good he completely upstages
Graham and Wagner which also hinders the script. The confrontation scenes are
at least interesting as performed, but to listen to the words and consider the
actions that take place, it doesn't make much sense. Carla and Lou are angry
with Blake and they have every right to be, but why does Blake not seem to
care? Why is there a gratuitous sex scene in the midst of such hostility? And
most importantly, why do they stay at his apartment as long as they do when
they are clearly fed up with him? That question never seems to be answered,
which is surprising since it's the niche to the film.
        Even if "Two Girls And A Guy" falters with its story, it's worth commending
for the way in which it is told (almost entirely in real-time with one
setting). Unfortunately, it's just another case of style over substance.


Author
Jerry Saravia
It's painful for me to witness three outstanding actors waste themselves on
slipshod material. That is the case with James Toback's "Two Girls and a Guy,"
a muddled comedy that pretends to be more than the sum of its parts. What it
lacks is the juice and vigor it needs to transcend its relatively stagy
premise. 
The story begins with two women standing on a typical New York street corner
waiting for their boyfriends. They are Carla (Heather Graham), a blonde,
sophisticated working girl type, and Lou (Natasha Gregson Wagner), a brassy,
streetwise brunette. It turns out that they are both waiting for the same
boyfriend, Blake Allen (Robert Downey, Jr.). "You are an unemployed, short
liar," as described in more obscene detail by Lou. Then why do the two women
hang around him and pester him in his glorious apartment? Why he is
irresistibly charming, of course. Blake, however, is a grandstanding
actor...and a pathological liar. He's always lying because as an actor, he's
entitled to it. Oh, really. And his other excuse is that he needs to check on
his mother who may or may not be sick, and whom he restlessly calls. In the
meantime, Carla and Lou try to discover what makes this guy tick, and I
discovered it after the first twenty minutes - the film drones for another
eighty. 
"Two Girls and a Guy" starts off quite well with some fine comic timing by
Downey - he steals the show. His delivery of lines is succinctly and flawlessly
executed. His body language is enormous, as evidenced by his Chaplinesque work
in the underrated Chances Are and Chaplin. But his being questioned and
pigeonholed by Carla and Lou makes for irritating viewing. They ask him crude
questions of little substance that yield little discovery. As played by Downey,
Blake is an arrogant S.O.B., who is full of himself and lives on being high and
mighty and dishonest with women. Didn't Carla and Lou suspect such mischievous
behavior from the start? 
I could live without certain elements in "Two Girls and a Guy" that downplay
its comical, dramatic rhythms. A gratuitous sex scene between Carla and Blake
is just marking time. That Blake doesn't touch Lou, except for a little peck on
the cheek, elicits discomfort at the screenwriting level since he claims to
love both women passionately. And then there's Lou's suggestion for a three-way
relationship that never builds to anything. Lou and Carla also turn the tables
on Blake by admitting their own sexual trysts - an uninventive method of
eliciting sympathy for Blake. The final dramatic conclusion feels unnecessary
and eradicates the film's central theme of deception. 
Robert Downey, Jr. is still superb to watch - look at the scene where he
stares at himself in the mirror and asks, "Why do you do this?" Heather Graham
is also a delight playing a mature, refined woman with class (very different
from her Rollergirl character in "Boogie Nights"). Only Wagner falls short
despite some hysterical scenes where she's describing the sincerity of Denzel
Washington and the dishonesty of Clarence Thomas. Nevertheless, she does start
to grate one's nerves after a while. 
"Two Girls and a Guy" is murkily photographed and unevenly scripted with brief
allusions to a superior, similar work, Truffaut's "Jules and Jim."
Writer-director James Toback ("The Pick-up Artist") seems afraid of dwelling on
the sexual, painfully honest questions that two women would have if they were
cheated on by the same boyfriend. The film careens out of control before we
realize that its pointless chit-chat aims to be nothing more than pointless
chit-chat. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 

Author
Greg King
The title says it all, really!  This is a film about two girls
and a guy who share an unusual sexual triangle.
Lou (Natasha Gregson Wagner, daughter of the late Natalie
Wood) and Carla (Heather Graham, from Boogie Nights, etc) meet outside
a New York apartment building.  They are both waiting for their
boyfriend to return from the airport.  During their discussion, they
both discover that they have been sharing a supposedly monogamous
relationship with the same man - Blake Allen (Robert Downey jr), a
struggling actor.  They break into his apartment and prepare to
surprise Blake.  The ensuing confrontation offers insights into
relationships in the '90's, and questions the concept of honesty
between men and women.
This low budget three-hander talk-fest was shot in a New York
loft apartment over a period of eleven days, and its deliberately
minimalist style gives it the look and feel of a filmed play.  The
action takes place on one set, and centres around the three main
characters questioning the dynamics of their relationships.  The film
begins promisingly enough, but after the first twenty minutes or so it
seems to run out of steam.  From then it struggles to retain the
audience's attention.
 There's the gist of a good short 
film struggling to get out here.  
Many of the scenes seem improvised, and it's almost as if
director James Toback (The Pick-Up Artist, etc) shot the actors
work-shopping their characters through various scenarios.  The fairly
straight forward plot is unbalanced by many other elements that jar
and seem misjudged.  There is an unnecessary sex scene that seems
inspired by 9 And 1/2 Weeks.  The dialogue is gratuitously frank, and
peppered with casual obscenities, but lacks genuine wit.
Then there is Blake's ailing mother, who becomes almost a
fourth character in the drama. Although she is never seen or heard
from, her presence is nonetheless felt, and her character often serves
to diffuse many of the volatile tensions and emotions that surface.
The poignant ending also seems like a desperate contrivance to elicit
some sympathy for Blake, a man behaving very badly.
Downey's performance is sensational, which is not surprising
since writer/director Toback created the role especially for him.
However, Toback fails to provide any sort of definite resolution to
the situation he has established, and most audiences will walk away
feeling disappointed.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robert Downey Jr, Heather Graham, Natasha Gregson Wagner
Director: James Toback
Producers: Chris Hanley and Edward R. Pressman
Screenplay: James Toback
Cinematography: Barry Markowitz
U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight
     When considering a title like TWO GIRLS AND A GUY, one can be 
forgiven for expecting something a little risqué.  (In fact, a friend of 
mine quipped, "I didn't think you reviewed movies like that.")  Add to 
that the swirl of controversy regarding the film's brush with an NC-17 
rating, and it's not unreasonable to anticipate more than a little 
flesh, and maybe a threesome or two.  However, anyone who goes into TWO 
GIRLS AND A GUY with those expectations is going to be very 
disappointed.  The movie is far from being a soft-core sex-fest.  In 
fact, this is really just a three-character play featuring absolutely no 
nudity. 
     It also features almost no story.  Two women, Carla (Heather 
Graham) and Lou (Natasha Gregson Wagner), discover that their boyfriend, 
Blake (Robert Downey Jr.), has been cheating on each of them with the 
other.  He spends three days a week with Carla and three days a week 
with Lou, then, on the seventh day, he rests.  So they break into his 
apartment and wait for him to return from a trip.  Instead of tying him 
up and torturing him, they talk to him, argue with him, and wait around 
while he makes phone calls to his apparently-sick mother.  One of them 
then has sex with him while the other listens at the door.  Later, it's 
true confessions, and it turns out that faithfulness in this twisted 
triangle is a rare commodity.
     TWO GIRLS AND A GUY survives on acting and dialogue alone.  A fair 
amount of the film, especially Downey's solo sequences, appears to have 
been improvised, and this lends an air of unpredictability to the 
proceedings.  All three characters are well-drawn, ably-portrayed, and 
strangely appealing (even the cad, Blake).  They are creations of the 
moment, however, with only sketchy histories and little depth.  Who are 
they outside the confines of Blake's apartment?  We never learn that.  
About all we know about the two girls is that Carla, the blonde, is 
beautiful, clever, and has a good heart, while Lou, the redhead, is 
cute, streetwise, and self-sufficient.  Blake is a compulsive liar who 
is obsessed with his mother's health.  His favorite song is, not 
surprisingly, "You Don't Know Me."
     To the best of my knowledge, TWO GIRLS AND A GUY was never produced 
on stage, but it could have been.  The setting is limited to a few rooms 
in an apartment.  The "action" is 90% talking, and, as with any movie of 
this sort, the quality of the acting is crucial.  All three leads are up 
to the task, which occasionally requires them to perform in lengthy, 
unbroken, dialogue-laden scenes.  Heather Graham, whose recent roles in 
BOOGIE NIGHTS and LOST IN SPACE have increased her exposure, is 
excellent as the reserved Carla.  Likewise, Natasha Gregson Wagner (the 
daughter of Natalie Wood and stepdaughter of Robert Wagner, for anyone 
who's interested) is effective as the impetuous, energetic Lou.  Both 
actresses use body language and facial expressions to compliment what 
they say.  
     Meanwhile, Robert Downey Jr. is stupendous as Blake.  His talent is 
on display here -- he can sing, dance, and act.  He can be funny and 
tragic.  Also, he appears to be slipping into the Woody Allen mode of 
bringing aspects of his off-screen persona into his parts.  In HUGO 
POOL, his own father cast him as a stoned, deranged egomaniac.  Here, 
there's a scene where he whispers the following lines to a mirror:  "Why 
do you do this?  Is this how you want to live the rest of your life?"  
It's impossible not to see this short monologue as self-referential. 
     So why the almost-NC-17 (which was eventually demoted to an R after 
director James Toback re-edited the offending scene umpteen times)?  
Penetration?  Gynecological close-ups?  Nope.  It's because the members 
of the MPAA have vivid imaginations.  They interpreted a certain scene 
to represent something that no one under 18 should be exposed to.  
(Personally, I thought the girl was just looking for a spot on the guy's 
underpants, and that he then kindly returned the favor.)  Never mind 
that it's not as unsettling as watching several hundred dead bodies bob 
around in the water like corks (TITANIC; rated PG-13) or as disturbing 
as viewing people getting disemboweled, decapitated, and mutilated by 
hooks, knives, and other sharp objects (any horror movie; rated R).  
Most curious of all, not only is the sex scene in TWO GIRLS AND A GUY 
unrevealing, but it's not even especially erotic.  
     For the most part, TWO GIRLS AND A GUY is lightly entertaining if 
you enjoy this sort of movie -- great performances, good dialogue, and a 
minimal plot.  It's more of a comedy than a drama, although the final 
fifteen minutes feature a peculiar, unwelcome change in tone.  With the 
exception of a strangely philosophical mediation on monogamy, the film's 
dialogue is surprisingly shallow.  Most movies like this (such as THE 
DESIGNATED MOURNER) spend lengthy stretches on deep issues.  Not so 
here, where Toback keeps the material accessible.  All-in-all, TWO GIRLS 
AND A GUY is a has its share of enjoyable moments, but there aren't 
enough of them to fill up the 84-minute running time.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by James Toback.
Cast: Heather Graham, Robert Downey Jr., Natasha Gregson Wagner, 
Frederique Van Der Wal, Angel David.
1998 - 85 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity and sex).
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews ">Http://members.aol.com/filmfan16/index.html>
"Two Girls and a Guy," directed by James Toback (1987's "The Pick-Up 
Artist"), is a three-character drama that is set entirely in the New 
York apartment of a struggling actor (Robert Downey Jr.), who comes home 
from a long trip to find that both of his girlfriends, Carla (Heather 
Graham) and Lou (Natasha Gregson Wagner), are there and have discovered 
that they both have been being played by him for the last ten months.
It is very difficult to make films like "Two Girls and Guy," in which 
there only a few characters and all they do is talk. It can be done 
(1995's "Before Sunrise"), but more often than not it comes off as being 
more appropriate as a play than an actual motion picture (1995's 
"Oleanna"). The successfulness of such a film usually depends on the 
quality of the dialogue and performances, which is unfortunate since 
"Two Girls and a Guy" rarely has intelligent and provocative dialogue, 
and the performances are far from impressive.
One of the main problems with "Two Girls and a Guy" is that it is 
constantly confused by what type of genre it wants to fall in. Mostly it 
is a comedy, which is somewhat of a predicament considering the fact 
that the subject matter is very serious. And then in the end, nothing is 
really resolved, and the picture makes a sharp u-turn towards melodrama, 
which isn't touching, but just seems out of place.
Another flaw is in its characters, which are the type of people you are 
glad you don't know in real life, since they are both unpleasant and 
downright annoying. Like "Oleanna," which equally grated on your nerves, 
it seemed like all of the dialogue was shouted at each other to the 
point of nausea, and I walked away from the movie with a literal 
headache. After seeing this film, I made a rule that in order to like a 
movie, it shouldn't be physically painful to watch.
"Two Girls and a Guy" is overdone in almost all senses of the word, and 
it is very messy. By not liking any of the characters, I didn't care 
about their problems or the outcome of them. I just wanted them to leave 
me alone.
