Title
Review for Century (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It was almost the beginning of a new century when enthusiasm was
high.  What new medical advances could be expected?  What changes in
style, in manners and in things unimaginable would the 20th Century
bring ... as well as a good deal of trepidation about what the future
would hold.
     Mr. Reisner (Robert Stephens), a Jewish merchant who had left
Rumania to establish a successful business in Scotland, is a
flamboyant, enthusiastic man.  He has a daughter, Miriam (Lena Headey),
and a son, Paul (Clive Owen).  Paul is on his way to London to do
medical research at the prestigious but controversial Whiteweather
Institute run by a brilliant doctor, Professor Mandry (Charles Dance).
     Mandry immediately spots Paul as the brightest of the researchers
and has Paul promoted as his assistant.  Together they visit the seamy
side of London, the sick and homeless about whom Paul had been
unaware.  Mandry, appears to be not only a great medical man but a
fine human being as well....  Paul soon learns otherwise,
     When a colleague of Paul comes up with a new theory about
neurology he would like to have tested, Paul sides with him.  To his
surprise, Mandry in effect says "No" by stalling.  Paul lashes out at
him for not pursuing this new research and accuses him of jealousy for
not having come up with the idea himself ... at which point Paul is
banished for a month from the Institute. Paul further learns, to his
horror, that Mandry is engaged in his own "ethnic cleansing" by
sterilizing poor sick women without their consent.
     It was during this period that many otherwise brilliant men of
letters were proposing some kind of method of "breeding out
undesirables."  The advent of Hitler put a lid on that kind of
thinking but is again, apparently gaining some converts in
Yugoslavia.
     There is, of course, a love interest for Paul in the film, and who
better than the beautiful Clara (Miranda Richardson), who works at
the institute?
     Director-Writer, Stephen Poliakoff does not have a wasted moment.
All of the cast is wonderful but it always amazes me how Miranda
Richardson can play such diverse parts so perfectly, as to name a few,
the sweet woman in ENCHANTED APRIL and the IRA hardliner in The Crying
Game.  For my money, one of the best actors working today. She will be
appearing shortly in TOM AND LIV ... and I can hardly wait.
P.S.  I did see TOM AND LIV tonight and Richardson was once again
perfection.  Excellent film, by the way.
