Title
Review for Mrs. Doubtfire (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I was one of the few human beings had not seen MRS. DOUBTFIRE 
at the movies.  Why had I avoided it before?  I thought, incorrectly, 
that it was a slapstick comedy made up mainly of sight gags.  I should
stop paying attention to the advertising.
     I found MRS. DOUBTFIRE to be a gem of a movie that worked almost
perfectly on two levels for me.  First, it was a comedy in the spirit
of, albeit not quite as good as, TOOTSIE.  I laughed so hard several
times that I had trouble stopping.  Second, it is a serious and sad
movie about the pains of a divorce - especially about the effects on
the Dad and on the kids.
     The mom (Sally Field) was a workaholic who even after the divorce
would drop the kids off late and pick them up early because she was so
busy you see and had very little time and had all of these things to do
for work and ...  The Dad (Robin Williams) was the positive force in
the family.  He was very funny with the kids, and they loved him unlike
his wife who decided she could not stand him.  His wild and crazy
antics, like the birthday party with the animals, were too much for the
wife.  She dumped him.  At the same time he lost his job over an
integrity dispute with his employer.
     Unemployed and needing a job he takes a position as the three
children's nanny but with disguised as Mrs. Doubtfire.  Unemployed and
without a suitable home for them, he is degraded by the courts to be a
visitor (Saturdays only) in his children's lives.
     I found even his costume to have wonderful symbolism in it too.
He was dressed as a fat and unattractive person whereas inside he was a
much thinner and good looking person.  He wanted in the worst way to
break out of this and be himself again.
     I hated the way they wrapped up the ending, but depending on your
situation and your beliefs, you may love it.
     This movie is a tour de force for Robin Williams - probably one of
his greatest roles ever.  I have had mixed but mainly positive feelings
about him in the past.  I thought he was brilliant in some of his
movies (AWAKENINGS, DEAD POET SOCIETY, GOOD MORNING VIETNAM, and MOSCOW
ON THE HUDSON) and unwatchably bad in others (especially THE FISHER
KING).  You can feel his pain in this movie, and his humor is
incredible.  The rest of the actors and actresses were okay, but in a
different league.
     MRS. DOUBTFIRE runs 2:07, but I thought it was carefully edited
(Raja Gosnell) and directed (Chris Columbus) and I would not want to
cut out or change very much of it at all.  It is rated PG-13 for the
seriousness of its material.  I STRONGLY recommend this movie to
everyone and rate it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Robin Williams, Sally Field, Pierce Brosnan, Harvey
Fierstein.
Screenplay:  Randi Mayem Singer & Leslie Dixon.
Director:  Chris Columbus.
     I've never been a member of the Robin Williams fan club.  A little
bit of his improvisationaly schtick goes a long way, and I sometimes
feel as though I'm watching a 40-year-old class clown.  In his films,
Williams has often tried to balance his mania with touchy-feely
emotion, leading to wildly uneven performances.  MRS. DOUBTFIRE seemed
ready-made for the same problems, but instead it proves to be Williams'
best comic screen project yet.  While it still contains some
characteristic self-indulgence, MRS. DOUBTFIRE is nonetheless an
engaging belly-laugh comedy served up with high energy.
     Williams stars as Daniel Hillard, a cartoon voiceover artist with
a penchant for irresponsible behavior.  One such incident proves one
too many for wife Miranda (Sally Field), and she files for a divorce.
Unemployed, living in a disastrously unkempt apartment and faced with
limited time with his three beloved children, Daniel decides to respond
to Miranda's ad for an afternoon housekeeper.  He turns to his brother
Frank (Harvey Fierstein), a theatrical makeup artist, and emerges as
Euphegenia Doubtfire, a matronly 65-year-old Englishwoman.  Daniel uses
his access to the house to keep an eye on Miranda's flirtation with a
wealthy client (Pierce Brosnan), to spend time with the children, and
to learn something about responsible parenting, all the while trying to
keep his identity hidden from the people who know him best.
     MRS. DOUBTFIRE has to overcome a mountain of implausibilities to
work, and basically it does so.  The most crucial is that no one in the
family recognizes Daniel, and thanks to the fantastic special makeup
that's instantly believable.  It may be one of the most convincing
transformations ever committed to film, making Dustin Hoffman's Dorothy
Michaels look like Milton Berle.  More problematic was a series of
calls Daniel makes to Miranda posing as nannies from hell; it's a bit
hard to swallow that she doesn't recognize any of the voices as her
husband's.  Perhaps the biggest contrivance we're asked to swallow is
that Daniel could make a quick change into Mrs. Doubtfire in a few
minutes.  There's more to realistic makeup than slapping on a latex
mask.  Fortunately, these are inconsistencies which only attract
attention as the credits roll.  During the film, I was generally too
busy laughing.  After getting off to a slow start involving too much of
Williams' riffing, MRS. DOUBTFIRE kicks into high gear once the wig and
pads are in place.  Daniel's frantic attempt to fool a court officer is
wonderful, as is the climactic restaurant sequence, even though I saw
the resolutions coming a mile away.
     Clearly, most of the credit for DOUBTFIRE's success goes to Robin
Williams.  It took putting him in drag, but for once he plays a comic
character that isn't just Robin Williams with a different name.  He
thoroughly inhabits Euphegenia Doubtfire, and seems to relish the
scenes in which he gets to play her as blunt and foul-mouthed.  Wisely,
he never aims for saintly.  His responses to the intrusion of new
suitor Stu are often petty, but the kind of thing most of us might do
with the benefit of anonymity.  It's one of MRS. DOUBTFIRE's charms
that neither Daniel nor Miranda is perfect, just people trying to be
better.  As Miranda, Sally Field is solid in a background role, and
Pierce Brosnan is nicely understated as Stu.  The children are also
good, although Mara Wilson is almost oppressively cute as the
youngest.  The supporting players merely step aside and allow Williams
to do his thing.
     It's easy to see MRS. DOUBTFIRE as little more than TOOTSIE warmed
over, and it's true that there are both broad themes and specific
details in common.  But MRS. DOUBTFIRE manages to carve out its own
space, particularly through the surprisingly honest moments involving a
judge's decision and the ultimate status of Daniel and Miranda's
relationship.  There's nothing dazzlingly new in MRS. DOUBTFIRE, but
there are plenty of laughs, and good comedies are always in short
supply.  And it's nice to see Robin Williams just act for a change.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Robin Williams plays Daniel Hillard, who is a bit like a big child.  He
tempermentally walks off of a job providing voices for cartoon characters
over a principle.  (This reminds one of TOOTSIE, and it certainly will not
be the last such reminder.)  To cheer himself up he throws a lavish birthday
party for his son which backfires involving both police and his wife Miranda
(Sally Field).  This is the last straw and Miranda files divorce proceedings
that severely limit Daniel's right to see his own children.  To appease his
need for work as well as his emotional need to see his children Daniel has
his brother, a gay makeup artist, make him up to look like a woman.
Disguised and taking the name Mrs. Doubtfire, he secretly takes the job of
nanny to his own children.  There he is able to win the acceptance, albeit
unknowing, of his family.  From there you can pretty well figure out what
comic situations arise.  For example, he must learn to cook for his family.
Most of the gags here do not even require the major premise of the film,
they are just generic learning to cook gags.  Then when his ex-wife starts
dating a rich handsome bachelor (Pierce Brosnan), and of course he uses his
position as confidant to steer Miranda back to him.  There are few
unfamiliar situations in this by-the-numbers comedy.  We even have that old
standby from dating movies, having to balance two simultaneous dates (well,
dinner appointments) without anybody realizing he is not spending full time
with them.
     I will not say I was a big fan of TOOTSIE, but at least it attempted a
little more substance than this light-weight comedy.  I will say that if I
saw both Dustin Hoffman and Robin Williams on the street dressed as women, I
would probably be more convinced by Williams portrayal, but there the
advantages of MRS. DOUBTFIRE over TOOTSIE end.  There are serious flaws in
logic in this film.  Not the least of these flaws is that even using a
bodysuit and mask, the Doubtfire costume would take on the order of fifteen
minutes to put on and perhaps as long to take off.  There are times in the
film where Williams slips in and out of his disguise in seconds.  Williams
is good at varying his voice, but probably not so good as the story calls
for him to be.  In specific, he fools his wife of fourteen years throughout
the story with many different voices.  I doubt that even Mel Blanc could
have done that.  The film glosses over the difference between being able to
put several different characterizations in a voice and the ability to
actually disguise a voice so is not recognizable.  Another flaw is the
dependence on slapstick comedy.  Yes it brings a quick laugh, but it just is
not as satisfying as real wit in writing.  Too many of the scenes are just
obvious and mechanical.  This is a fluffy see-once situation comedy that is
about what you would expect from Chris Columbus who directed the two "Home
Alone" films and the somewhat better ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING.  This one
gets a rating of +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Robin Williams, Sally Field, Pierce Brosnan, 
           Robert Prosky, Lisa Jakub, Matthew Lawrence, Mira Wilson
Director:  Chris Columbus
Producers:  Marsha Garces Williams, Robin Williams, and 
            Mark Radcliffe
Screenplay:  Randi Mayem Singer and Leslie Dixon based on
             ALIAS MRS. DOUBTFIRE by Anne Fine
Music:  Howard Shore
Released by Twentieth Century Fox
     It seems strange to watch MRS. DOUBTFIRE and not see Dustin
Hoffman.  This is, after all, a variation on TOOTSIE meets KRAMER VS.
KRAMER, both of which featured Mr. Hoffman.  Here, it's Robin Williams
fighting for custody of his children, and donning high heels and a
brassiere.
     In terms of plot, the film is rather feeble, but sometimes there's
more to a movie than story, and this is one of those rare occasions
when all the other elements pull together and lift the production.
MRS. DOUBTFIRE is great fun.  Strictly speaking, it's not a top example
of movie making, but it offers two hours of undeniably solid
entertainment, and not too many viewers can argue with that.
     Daniel Hillard (Robin Williams) loves his children deeply, but
divorce proceedings reduce his interaction with them to one day a week
only, which, as far as he's concerned, isn't enough.  When his ex-wife
Miranda (Sally Field) decides to hire a housekeeper, Daniel sees his
chance--unorthodox as it may be.  He gets his makeup artist brother
Frank (Harvey Fierstein) to turn him into a woman, and he arrives at
his old house as the redoubtable Scottish widow Mrs.  Doubtfire, who
rapidly becomes an indispensable fixture.
     The plot of MRS. DOUBTFIRE is a combination of worn-out formulas,
silly coincidences, and weary contrivances.  The script doesn't exactly
sparkle with originality, and this movie possesses all the signs of a
disaster waiting to happen.  Despite that, it triumphs.  Winning
performances and hilarious humor keep MRS. DOUBTFIRE's strengths far
more visible than its weaknesses.
     Robin Williams doesn't eclipse Dustin Hoffman, but he gives it a
game try.  He's not very funny when he plays with toy dinosaurs or does
silly voices, but put him in drag and he's hilarious, especially when
he's required to undergo a rapid-fire transformation.  During the
dramatic sequences, which are too numerous and cause the film to drag
on longer than it should, Mr. Williams shows his lack of range, but at
least he's subdued.
     Sally Field is pretty much wasted.  Her role requires little
ability, and she plays it as written.  The children give solid
performances--especially the two girls (Mara Wilson as young Nathalie
and Lisa Jakub as Lydia).  Robert Prosky and Pierce Brosnan manage to
impress with exceptionally sketchy stereotypes.
     One thing MRS. DOUBTFIRE does well is to avoid the often-used plot
device of turning Pierce Brosnan's Stu (Miranda's new love interest)
into a snake.  He never comes across as anything but charming, and
Daniel's dislike of him is based on purely selfish reasons.  In fact,
there really isn't a nasty or mean-spirited character in the movie.
Imagine that--a film without a villain.
     I have a minor gripe that some will call nit-picking.  In an
amusing opening sequence, Robin Williams makes a big deal out of a
cartoon being irresponsible by seeming to advocate smoking.  This is
fine, but MRS. DOUBTFIRE later makes a similar mistake (albeit in a
different context) when the children are shown riding bicycles without
helmets.  Not a big deal, to be sure, but that scene stuck out
precisely because of the attitude adopted in the opening sequence.
     Everything comes back to comedy, and for the most part, that means
Williams.  Due in part to his ability and in part to Chris Columbus'
sense of timing, most of MRS. DOUBTFIRE works.  It's rare that I
recommend such an obviously-flawed movie, but there are times when
sheer entertainment and enjoyment win out over the technical and
intellectual aspects of film making.  Few that see MRS. DOUBTFIRE will
emerge grumbling about wasting time and money, and anyone who doesn't
laugh during the course of the movie should check into a morgue.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
