Title
Review for Meet the Parents (2000)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In China in 1982 I turned the tables on our National Guide and
asked him if he had any questions about America.  I guess I was
expecting some sort of political question.  Instead, I was
dumfounded by what was most on his mind.  "In America, do wives and
their mothers-in-law get along well?"  He assured me in China that
they did, but I am certain if that were true he would not have
asked.  Even in China people seem to have problems relating to in-
laws.  Perhaps some of life's most difficult relationships arise
when families are suddenly artificially joined by marriage.  A man
trying to relate to his new prospective in-laws and vice-versa could
be the basis of a very strong comedy.  MEET THE PARENTS does not
demonstrate that fact, however.
     Greg Focker (played by Ben Stiller) has been dating and in love
with Pam Byrnes (Teri Polo) for ten months and is now ready to
propose to her.  He will do it during a weekend visit to meet
Debbie's family and to attend her sister's wedding.  From the
beginning the relationship is awkward between Greg and Jack and Dina
Byrnes (Robert DeNiro and Blythe Danner).  Through no fault of his
own, the airline has lost Greg's luggage.  And he has to ask to
borrow clothing.  It is the beginning of a game of one-upmanship in
which Greg is nearly always one-down.  As the games go on Greg is
more and more uncomfortable and uneasy which only contributes to the
mistakes he makes.  Greg is playing a game he does not understand,
in a league he is new to.  But perhaps along the way he will
discover some unexpected secrets about his father-in-law.
     This film had potential in its tale of one-upmanship.  It has
hit on a situation that many in the audience may find familiar--one
that has not been done overly frequently in films.   But the script
by Jim Herzfeld and John Hamburg is a little too contrived.  Too
many coincidences in the story work against Greg.  The script could
not decide if the main character was incompetent or simply unlucky.
Certainly he does not help his situation by doing everything wrong
he possibly could, but even when he is trying to do the right things
nature conspires against him.  There is an uneven mix of slapstick
sequences and human comedy.  Certainly the last part of the film
feels awkwardly written.
     The main reason to see MEET THE PARENTS is to see Robert
DeNiro's performance.  DeNiro plays the suspicious and not a little
fascistic father as tightly wound and threatening as he can.  The
little judgmental expressions on his face are a show in themselves
as Greg digs himself deeper and deeper into his insecurities.  But
we do not really see much of that digging.  Ben Stiller is an
affable presence in the film but is not really stretching himself by
playing the role as the nebbish to whom so many bad things happen.
It is nice to see Blythe Danner again on the screen.  But her
character has a basic conflict between a basic decency and her love
for her husband and the script should have given her more to do with
that.
     Randy Newman has written a playful score.  In the first few
seconds of the film it does something creative I have never heard a
film score do before.  There is a lot of source music that is
popular music of the 1960s.  Presumably that is what the upper class
listens to at least in somebody's imagination.
     Humor is subjective and some this film has been getting some
favorable comment.  But this is a comedy that works only
occasionally for me.  I would have to rate it 4 on the 0 to 10 scale
and a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
When I first heard about this comedy starring Robert DeNiro and Ben Stiller,
I was stoked. After DeNiro proved himself to be more than just a great actor
in last year's ANALYZE THIS, with a wonderful performance, and Stiller
continually solidifying himself as one of the best comedic actors of his
generation, the film could do no wrong in my eyes. But then I saw the first
trailer for the movie, and well...I won't mix words here: it wasn't very
funny. I was mortified, petrified! How could this be...DeNiro, Stiller, a
father-in-law comedy...how could it miss? But all of that anxiety quickly
dissipated as I sat to watch this film, a movie that has now become my
favorite comedy of the year. DeNiro is great in it once again, Stiller
perfect and the world is as it should be...
PLOT:
This is the story of young man who loves a young woman and wants to ask for
her hand in marriage. But before he does that, he believes that a meeting
with the young woman's father and asking for his approval would be a good
idea. They meet and things don't go too well. You see, the father loves his
daughter very much and isn't sure about this young man. The father is also
very good at psychological profiling...and he's quite paranoid. Let the fun
begin.
CRITIQUE:
A very funny movie that is able to combine a great premise with ideal
actors, laugh out scenes with a sentimental touch and over the top sequences
with a believable story line. Go see this movie and laugh! See it with your
parents and join in the fun. See it with your better half and remark on the
similarities. See it with your brother, your sister, you cat for God's
sakes, most "people" should be able to identify and appreciate this film.
And even though I love toilet humor as much as the next guy, I have to admit
that it was nice to see a movie that despite some "easy" dirty jokes (one
excellent running gag was the use of the Stiller character's last name
during the entire feature, spelled f-o-c-k-e-r), relied mostly on sight
gags, physical comedy and finely tuned humorous moments. Really well-made.
And kudos to director Jay Roach who came off his one-two punch of the AUSTIN
POWERS movies with a solid underrated uppercut a la MYSTERY, ALASKA and
TKO'd it all with this.
And DeNiro, boy-oh-boy, what can be said about Robert DeNiro? Is there
anything that this man can't do? Another one out of the ballpark for the man
best known for his dedication to the craft of acting, with one more
extremely effective comedic performance. Wow. Now let's see Pacino take a
few shots at the game of funny! Woo-haa, indeed! But I can't top off this
review without mentioning the great work done here by the incomparable Ben
Stiller. I love this guy! I love his whole persona, his nervous twitches,
his way of being sincere, funny and serious all at the same time. I really
do believe that he is one of the more underrated comedic actors of our time
and I sincerely hope that he gets more recognition after this. The rest of
the performers were also very well cast, notably Blythe Danner as the aloof
mother and Owen Wilson, set perfectly as the stinkin' rich ex-fiancé. Gotta
love that crooked nose of his. I enjoyed this entire movie from start to
finish. It's funny when it has to be, hilarious when it needs to be and even
touching as it nears conclusion. Many memorable lines, many funny moments
with the cat (cat haters beware!) and an overall good time. Don't go in
expecting the world to bowl you over with this but do expect to be
thoroughly entertained. Thumbs way up, folks!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Robert DeNiro is currently in Montreal, Canada shooting a film called THE
SCORE directed by Frank Oz, co-starring Marlon Brando and Edward Norton. Now
I mention this not necessarily as a "little known fact", but more as a "very
cool fact". Three actors greatly admired by their respective generations
starring in a film together. Wow. Pretty gosh darn cool.
Speaking of Ed Norton, he recently made his own directorial debut with
KEEPING THE FAITH, starring the always funny, and part-time director on his
own right (remember THE CABLE GUY?), Ben Stiller.
This is actress Teri Polo's "big break" movie, but fans of the TV show
"Felicity" know her as the recurring character Maggie. She also appeared as
Rebecca on the ABC sitcom "Sports Night".
Actress Blythe Danner, the mother in this movie, is Oscar-winning actress
Gwyneth Paltrow's mom in real life.
Besides playing the "goof" in many of his recent movie parts, actor Owen
Wilson is also a pretty decent writer as well. He co-wrote two critically
acclaimed movies with writer/director Wes Anderson, BOTTLE ROCKET and
RUSHMORE. He is currently playing a male model in ZOOLANDER, a comedy
written and directed by Ben Stiller, based on a character he came up with
for the VH-1 Fashion Awards three years ago.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Jay Roach.
Cast: Ben Stiller, Robert De Niro, Teri Polo, Blythe Danner, James Rebhorn, 
Phyllis George, Jon Abrahams, Owen Wilson, Nicole DeHuff, Kali Rocha.
2000 - 108 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 7, 2000.
Since his decidedly juvenile breakout hit, 1997's "Austin Powers: 
International Man of Mystery," director Jay Roach has grown up quite a bit as 
a filmmaker, as proven by "Meet the Parents." While still a comedy, much of 
it sprouts solely from the sharply observed dialogue and the subtleties in 
the comic performances, rather than from slapstick situations (although there 
is some of this, as well), and the movie is better--funnier--because Roach 
doesn't push as hard. Where the movie loses its luster, however, is in its 
slightly overlong length to get to a point that can be telegraphed well in 
advance. I hasten to add that there are jokes within that haven't made me 
laugh quite so hard in a while, and they alone are worth the price of 
admission to see, even if the whole enterprise comes off uneven.
The unfortunately named, sounds-like-it's-spelled male nurse Greg Focker (Ben 
Stiller) is passionately in love with school teacher Pam (Teri Polo), so sure 
that she is the one for him that he has bought an engagement ring to propose 
to her. When word hits that Pam's younger sister (Nicole DeHuff) is getting 
married, and her fiancee asked her father's permission before proposing to 
her, Greg decides to take the same impressive, old-fashioned route. With the 
marriage right around the corner, Greg decides to accompany Pam back home for 
the festivities, meeting her parents for the first time.
Things go wrong for Greg right from the start, with his suitcase, which holds 
the engagement ring, getting lost at the airport. Pam's father, Jack (Robert 
De Niro), is a lovable family man who, nonetheless, holds a dagger for any 
potential suitor who gets too close to his eldest daughter. A former worker 
for the CIA, Jack believes in honesty and telling the truth at all times, 
something Greg fails at in his attempt to win him, as well as Pam's lovable 
mother, Dina (Blythe Danner), over.
As with the Chevy Chase-starring "National Lampoon's Vacation" series, 
particularly 1989's raucous "Christmas Vacation" (which this film closely 
resembles in many ways), everything that could possibly self-destruct for 
Greg, does. From losing Jack's beloved cat, who has been trained to use a 
toilet to do his business in, to nearly setting the whole house on fire, 
Greg's chances of winning over Jack grow more and more obscure with each 
passing second, when all he wants to do is be as good of a life partner as 
possible to Pam.
"Meet the Parents" is an undeniable, crowd-pleasing comedy that refreshingly 
doesn't rely on endless raunchiness to be funny, and is consistently 
enjoyable up until the final fifteen minutes, which begin to overstay their 
welcome. It is very clear from the get-go where the film is headed, so a 
little tightness in the editing room might have solved its length problem, 
and made the jokes arrive at a quicker rate.
Where the movie excels in its its two standout central performances. Ben 
Stiller (1998's "There's Something About Mary") is perfectly cast in the type 
of comedic role he does best: the hapless good guy who can't seem to do 
anything right in the presence of others. When Stiller is forced to wear a 
humiliating speedo, or discusses how to milk a female cat, he presses the 
laughs for all their worth. His match in every way, Robert De Niro has great 
fun in playing with his big screen image (as he did in 1999's "Analyze 
This"). Essentially the straight man, De Niro is funny almost every time he 
speaks, turning otherwise ho-hum dialogue into riotous gold.
The female parts aren't nearly as fully written, although both Blythe Danner 
(1997's "The Myth of Fingerprints") and Teri Polo (TV's "Sports Night") are 
likable in their parts. All other supporting roles are superfluous, including 
Owen Wilson (2000's "Shanghai Noon"), wasted as Pam's ex-boyfriend. Showing a 
little spark with virtually nothing to do is Jon Abrahams (2000's "Scary 
Movie"), as Pam's teenaged stoner brother.
"Meet the Parents" follows a rather predictable, well-worn path, but the 
sheer joy of performing on the actors' parts sells the film as a whole. 
Director Roach and screenwriters Jim Herzfeld and John Hamburg have made a 
flawed, yet extremely witty comedy with enough spark to be able to disregard 
the noticeable kinks. While not a classic, "Meet the Parents" is the type of 
comedy that would be appropriate for almost any age group, all of which will 
undoubtedly have a good time and be entertained. It's rare that you can say 
that in a time when gross-out, scatological humor is at an all-time high, but 
for "Meet the Parents," it suffices.

Author
Ross Anthony
Some recent comedies seemed to have been searching, reaching, 
desperately grasping for something funny to print; "Meet the Parents" 
has the opposite problem. Funny bits abound -- there's barely room for 
them all. In fact, overstuffed to the point of tearing at the seams, the 
film might have benefited from a bit more cutting. 
Stiller is the Romeo in love with Pam. The couple must fly to her 
parents' home for the wedding of her sister. Stiller's objective is to 
"Meet the Parents" and win them over in order to acquire their consent 
to marry Pam. Ah, but pops De Niro is no push over. Pam warns, "Don't 
waste humor on my parents." 
In addition to abstaining from sex and cigarettes for three days, 
Stiller must field the suspicious De Niro who runs his household like a 
CIA agent or something of that ilk. The Poster shows the two sitting at 
a lie detector machine with Stiller in the hot seat. (Actually, at first 
glance I'd thunk wrongly that that was some kind of shock therapy.) 
Anyway, Stiller's stress factor increases geometrically as every good 
intentioned offering gets twisted on its ear. 
It's a very funny film (the first meeting sequence is absolutely 
wonderful), you'll have good hardy laughs, but the third act is a little 
messy. So messy, I just can't give the film the A- I would like to give 
it. 
Meet the Parents. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Robert De Niro, Ben Stiller, Blythe Danner,  Teri Polo, 
James Rebhorn, Hon Abrahams, Owen Wilson. 
*  Directed by Jay Roach. 
*  Written by jim Herzfeld and John Hamburg. 
*  Story by Greg Glienna and Mary Ruth Clarke. 
*  Produced by Mancy Tenenbaum, Jane Rosenthal, Rober De Niro, Jay 
Roach. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Christopher Null
     Pity poor Greg Focker.  Not only is the man employed as a male
nurse with an unfortunate name, but he's about to meet his girlfriend's
parents in order to ask dad for her hand in marriage.  Only dad is about
as humorless as, say, Robert De Niro.  And poor Greg can't do anything
right to save his skin.
     It all reminds me, with flashback-like intensity, of meeting my own
father-in-law-to-be, a guy so stern he makes De Niro look like Jim
Carrey.  Picture Ben Stiller as Focker (or me) and De Niro as himself,
and, like magic, you've got yourself one hell of a comedy that will see
few equals this year or any other.  (Note to Dr. Carder: This is just a
joke that I know you'll laugh about because we have such a great
relationship!  See you this Christmas!!!)
     De Niro comes off surprisingly perfect as the straight man to
Stiller's streetwise doofus, equally apt in his role as the guy who will
never be good enough for the girl (Teri Polo).  At first we see De
Niro's Jack as a harmless but hard-nosed retiree, with Focker (a name
which is repeatedly said aloud with great comic effect) doing everything
in his power to make dad like him.
     But as things like this typically go, nothing works out, and before
long the septic tank has overflowed, a fire has been started, the other
daughter's wedding has been ruined, and an incident involving a
champagne bottle, and urn, and a very naughty cat have filled your eyes
with tears so thick you can't see the screen.  Which is no good, because
you can't hear anything either due to all the laughter.  I literally
found myself gasping for breath during Meet the Parents' most comic
moments, wishing I could rewind the film.
     Ultimately, Meet the Parents is one of the funniest comedies I've
seen since Annie Hall, a film with which it shares a wry sensibility
about modern romance.  Jack, his true nature revealed, is so obsessed
with perfection for his daughter that he gives Greg a lie detector test
about his past.  Greg is so obsessed with making a good impression he
spray-paints a stray cat to look like Jack's pet when it goes missing. 
All of these situations are, against all expectations, utterly
believable, and invariably they are hilarious.  To top all that, somehow
the film has been kept suitable for teens with a PG-13 rating, yet it is
perfect for couples with its upbeat love story, and equally good for
anyone looking for a good comedy where they can let go and yuk it up.
     Director Hal Roach (of Austin Powers fame) handles the camera well,
framing Focker in scenes that would be worthy of The Fugitive if they
weren't so funny.  I can't think of much in the film that isn't done
equally well.  Randy Newman's title song "A Fool in Love" should earn an
Oscar nomination, along with the script and the two lead actors if
there's any justice in the world.  Altogether, Meet the Parents is one
of few films that I can highly recommend to anyone.
     But perhaps the best part of the film is its ending, which leaves
plenty of room for at least two sequels.  Like me, I'm sure you'll be
hoping they decide to make them before you're even back to the parking
lot.
Director: Jay Roach
Producer: Jane Rosenthal, Nancy Tenenbaum
Writer: James Herzfeld, John Hamburg
Starring: Ben Stiller, Robert De Niro, Blythe Danner, Teri Polo, Nicole
DeHuff, Jon Abrahams, James Rebhorn, Phyllis George, Owen Wilson
http://www.universalpictures.com/meettheparents/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Meet the Parents (2000)
Robert De Niro, Ben Stiller, Blythe Danner, Teri Polo, James Rebhorn,
Jon Abrahams, Owen Wilson, Phyllis George, Kali Rocha, Tom McCarthy,
Nicole DeHuff. Screenplay by Jim Herzfeld, John Hamburg, story by Greg
Glienna, Mary Ruth Clarke. Directed by Jay Roach. 108 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"Meet the Parents" is often funny and occasionally hilarious. I laughed
a lot at the story of a young man's nightmarish weekend with his
potential in-laws, but not as much as the people around me. Part comedy
of manners, part slapstick farce, the film does everything it sets out
to do, yet I still felt vaguely unsatisfied. Finally, I realized what
was troubling me.
I've seen this type of farce done better on "Frasier." Remember the
episode where the Crane family tried to help Daphne rid herself of an
old flame, only to get caught in an ever-increasing spiral of lies? Or
the one where Niles and Frasier vied for the sole open slot at an upper
crust men's club? How about the one where Niles mistakenly thought his
wife was having an affair with her fencing instructor and ended up in a
duel with the man, while his brother and a maid haplessly tried to
conquer a multi-language barrier? Or the one set at the ski lodge, where
five characters spent a sexually fevered night slipping from one room to
another, repeatedly ending up with the wrong person?
Each of those episodes featured tighter, more inventive plots and deeper
character development than "Meet the Parents." The comedy is a spirited,
relatively satisfying affair, but with names like Robert De Niro and Ben
Stiller attached to the project, I expect more.
Stiller plays a Chicago nurse named Greg Focker (and yes, the script
milks his last name to the hilt). Greg is on the verge of proposing
marriage to schoolteacher Pam Byrnes (Teri Polo) when she announces her
sister's engagement to a man who took the old-fashioned approach, going
to the father to secure his approval before popping the question.
Not to be outdone, Greg decides to accompany Pam to the wedding so that
he, too, can ask for his beloved's hand. He meets Pam's charming mother,
Dina (Blythe Danner) and her imposing father, Jack (De Niro) at their
sprawling home. Greg soon learns two things about Jack. First, he is
fiercely protective of Pam. Second, while introduced as a retired
florist, Jack is actually an ex-C.I.A. operative, with all the tools of
the agency at his disposal.
So begins the worst weekend of Greg's life, as he desperately tries to
curry favor from a father who peers at him like a shepherd eyeing a
coyote. The harder Greg tries, the more mistakes he makes, with Jack's
elaborate security cameras catching every screw-up. Making matters even
worse is the arrival of Pam's ex-boyfriend Kevin (Owen Wilson), a
too-perfect-for-words gentleman who took up carpentry because he
considers Jesus an excellent role model. Intimidated beyond belief, Greg
finds himself the center of an escalating series of misadventures,
beginning with the accidental destruction of a family urn and building
to riotous extremes.
"Meet the Parents" has all the elements for a memorable farce and
succeeds more often than not. Ben Stiller displays ace comic timing
portraying a schnook floundering in the deep end of the societal pool.
As the menacing straight man, Robert De Niro makes a great foil, looking
far more comfortable here than he did in "Analyze This." Don't expect
any surprises from either actor, though  both are playing variations of
their standard personas. The only revelation comes from Owen Wilson
("Shanghai Noon"), who reinvents himself as a being of otherworldly
nobility. Wilson is a true original, becoming more impressive with each
new film.
Pity the women in the production, who are given little to work with.
Blythe Danner does what she can with a sorely underwritten part, giving
Dina a wry sparkle that shades her character in ways the script doesn't
even hint at. As Pam, Teri Polo is simply there. There are no sparks
between her and Stiller as she plays a girlfriend from the generic rack.
The flatness of the female characters is but one flaw in a screenplay
that would have been well served by a rewrite or two. After a fairly
taut beginning, "Meet the Parents" grows awfully sloppy in the middle,
lobbing gags around with little style or grace. Director Jay Roach
handles the material clumsily, focusing on large set pieces at the
expense of smooth pacing or character development.
The best farces or comedies of manners flow like a mountain stream, with
finely etched personalities shaping the direction and speed of the
humor. "Meet the Parents" is more like a drainage ditch, with jokes
overlapping as the story gushes to a fitful conclusion. The film is
undeniably funny, but with some finesse, it could have been so much
better. Note to Jay Roach and company: Before you make your next movie,
think things through, construct fully rounded characters and, for Pete's
sake, watch a few episodes of "Frasier."

Author
Chad Polenz
As a single guy I know there's few things in life more uncomfortable than 
meeting your girlfriend's parents. You have this feeling that in the back of 
their minds they're thinking, "This is the guy who's corrupting my daughter." 
After years of movies and sitcoms with stories about this experience you tend 
to psych yourself into the worst, most nerve-racking scenario possible about 
meeting the parents. Thankfully, what actually happens isn't as bad as you 
had expected unless you're Ben Stiller in "Meet The Parents" where just the 
opposite happens. He goes in thinking positively and Murphy's Law takes over. 
The result is a funny but somewhat familiar comedy. 
Stiller stars as Greg, a male nurse who works in the ER of a Chicago 
hospital. He's been dating Pam Byrnes (Teri Polo), a kindergarten teacher, 
for over 10 months and is totally smitten by her. The opening scene shows us 
Greg's love for Pam is true because he's about to propose to her in a rather 
unique way. It's cute and funny (it involves little kids trying to spell) but 
due to some circumstances he aborts it at the last second when he realizes 
he's never met Pam's parents and gets the feeling they're the old fashioned 
type who would forever malign him if he didn't get their blessing first. 
Greg and Pam fly to one of Long Island's many upscale suburban towns - not 
unlike those neighborhoods from all the 1980s John Hughes comedies. The only 
reason this story doesn't take place there too is because there's a few 
crucial plot points and funny jokes that could only happen at an airport. 
Robert De Niro and Blythe Danner costar as Jack and Dina Byrnes and make for 
really convincing parents. You get the feeling they're a close family from 
their hospitality and how well they get along with each other. Greg feels 
welcome at first but he's still nervous because of what Pam has told him 
about her overprotective father. When she throws his cigarettes on the roof 
of the house he's already pretty freaked out and it's a mentality he's never 
able to snap out of (and with good reason). 
What ensues is a mixture of many formulas of commercial comedy. It's 
slapstick, it's one-liners, it's sight gags... and anything and everything 
else that involves being in the wrong place at the wrong time saying the 
wrong thing while doing the wrong thing. You get the feeling you've seen 
these things done before, and you have but only individually. "Meet The 
Parents" is not a carbon copy of any one movie, sitcom or specific plot - 
it's a hybrid of many of them and it works rather well. 
I'm not even sure how I would go about describing and analyzing the comical 
elements here. This is a big-budget Hollywood comedy directed by Jay Roach - 
the guy who brought us the "Austin Powers" movies, and his strategy here 
isn't all that different. The jokes are funny, they don't have a lot of setup 
for their execution to pay off (although there are quite a few long-running 
and foreshadowed jokes which work for the most part). Unlike the "Austin 
Powers" films which had much derivative British humor, "Meet The Parents" 
invokes more American humor. It's all about a nice guy who tries his hardest 
just to make his girlfriend's parents like him after he says or does 
something embarrassing that proceeds to compound after he tells a little 
white lie to try to get himself out of the corner he has backed himself into. 
The chemistry between Stiller and De Niro is great, one of the best 
father-and-son-in-law relationships I have seen. De Niro's Mr. Byrnes is a 
passive guy who rarely yells or loses his temper but you get the feeling that 
at any given moment he could snap and rip Greg's head off. Byrnes is 
constantly on Greg's case, busting his chops whenever he says something 
without properly thinking it through first (mostly for his own amusement, not 
because he's a mean codger or anything). The scene in which Greg claims he 
milked a cat is funny in and of itself but De Niro closes the scene with a 
hilarious one-liner. He upstages Stiller and humiliates the character Greg in 
one nonchalant breath. Who says De Niro can't do comedy with the best of 
them? 
Watching this film I made a mental list of other comedies I could compare 
individual aspects to: "National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation;" any given 
episode of "Frasier;" "Father Of The Bride;" "Planes, Trains & Automobiles;" 
"There's Something About Mary;" and a few others I can't think of now. And I 
just want to make it clear that I don't think this movie is ripping off any 
of these works, it's just reminiscent of them. 
"Meet The Parents" works because every character and his or her actions and 
reactions are convincing in every situation they're thrown in to. 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-69B9-1C0E5C5B-39E1E0D5-prod3
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Universal Pictures
 Director: Jay Roach
 Writer:  James Herzfeld, John Hamburg, story by Greg
Glienna and Mary Ruth Clarke
 Cast: Ben Stiller, Robert De Niro, Nicole DeHuff, Blythe
Danner, Teri Polo, Jon Abrahams, James Rebhorn, Phyllis
George, Owen Wilson, Thomas McCarthy
   When a young man's fancy lightly turns to love, before he
pops the question he'd better realize that he's marrying not
only one woman but the girl's whole family.  If the lucky
woman is a first-born, daddy's little girl, and has enjoyed a
solid relationship with her father, that's a good sign for the
most part.  A woman's relationship with her dad is a
barometer of her future life with her young man.  On the
other hand, a father with a strong personality who thinks that
no one is good enough for his lovely daughter can put a
crimp in marriage plans, particularly if the family is of a
different class or ethnic/religious background.  Such a
situation could produce a yarn that brings tears to the eyes
("Romeo and Juliet" or could be the basis of a story of
unmitigated charm ("Annie Hall").  In "Meet the Parents," Jay
Roach employs a script by Jim Herzfeld and John Hamburg
(taken from a story by Greg Glienna and Mary Ruth Clarke)
to bring on a steady stream of audience laugh with the
obligatory sentimental ending.  "Meet the Parents" is just
intermittently laugh-out-loud (for a better movie this season
take in Christopher Guest's "Best in Show") but given the
difficulty of extracting howls from a sophisticated audience,
"Meet the Parents" meets the standards of good, dependable
humor.
   Jay Roach milks the comedic effects of a meeting between
a potential father-in-law from hell and a young man who is a
bit of a shnook--as well as a member of class and culture
distinct from the dad.  Peter James's camera focusses in a
male nurse Greg Focker (Ben Stiller) as he practices a
marriage proposal on a patient in the ICU, later picking up
with fiance Pam Byrnes (Teri Polo) who has just taught a
class in meditation to some bright-looking first-graders.  They
take off from Chicago to her parents' picture-perfect home
outside New York City as Greg--having lost his luggage has
one strike against him while his name, Focker, is strike two--
meets the parents.  Since old money, WASPish Jack Byrnes
(Robert De Niro) is so overprotective of his daughter that he
once rejected her all-American suitor Kevin Rawley (Owen
Wilson), Greg seems not to have a chance--despite his
acceptance by Jack's considerably warmer and more
embracing wife, Dina (Blythe Danner).
   The gags are principally of the slapstick variety, the most
prominent occurring when Greg, desperately trying to capture
Jack's beloved Himalayan cat who has fled from the house,
climbs after the feline on the roof thereby releasing a Rube
Goldberg string of mishaps that barely avoids gutting the
entire house.   Other sources of physical humor are located
within the intense volleyball game played inside the Byrnes'
swimming pool and the sewage-laden flood which Greg
creates throughout the backyard lawn when he flushes a
malfunctioning toilet, while the more verbal chuckles come
from a lie detector test that Jack administers to his
prospective son-in-law and the good-natured dialogue
between Greg and Pam's multi-talented and strikingly
handsome former suitor Kevin.
   Robert De Niro shows once again his ability to do schtick
as well as he can perform in shadier roles by setting intricate
and sometimes devastating traps to find an excuse to get rid
of Pam's latest suitor.  For his part Ben Stiller plays
beautifully against the older man who comes from a different
world and evokes laughs even when simply standing still
while obeying the schoolmarmish commands of an airline
boarding agent.  When the jokes work, the picture is on
target, but many of the gags seem written for TV as we wait
vainly for a laugh-track to kick in.
   Robert De Niro, having already proved his ability to do 
shtick in "Analyze This," furthers his breadth as a comic artist 
while Ben Stiller--who can deliver laughs simply by standing 
sheepishly and wordlessly just beyond a airline boarding
ramp at the schoomarmish instructions of a ditzy reception
agent--is De Niro's match.  (Recall Stiller's performance in a
similar vein as a rabbi confronting his best friend, a priest, in
"Keeping the Faith").  Teri Polo provides good support as a
female straight man in a comedy that works for the most part
while in other sections has the audience waiting for a TV
laugh track that doesn't come. 
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 108 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Robert De Niro is at the top of his comedic form in MEET THE PARENTS.  
Playing, Jack Byrnes, a future father-in-law from hell, De Niro clearly 
has the time of his life ruling the story's comedic roost.  The rest of 
the cast fits nicely into the groove he creates for them.  And Jay 
Roach, director of both of the AUSTIN POWERS pictures, sets an 
absolutely perfect comedic pace.  
The result is a movie that can have you laughing so hard that you run 
the risk of injuring yourself.  My son kept telling my wife to breathe, 
worrying that she was going to make herself sick since she was laughing 
so hard that she was starting to choke.  (My septuagenarian parents were 
busting a gut as well.)  And in some of the longer jokes, such as a 
discussion about whether milking a cat is possible, the laughs build to 
such a crescendo that some of the best lines are lost amidst the 
audience's caterwauling.
As the story begins, Ben Stiller, playing a character by the risible 
name of Greg Focker, is about to propose marriage to Jack's oldest 
daughter, Pam (Teri Polo).  Surprisingly, this key part of the eldest 
daughter is the only underwritten one, although Polo does a credible job 
with it.  Greg switches plans when he learns that her old-fashioned Dad 
likes to have his permission asked first, so it's off to meet the 
parents in order for him to pop the question to her dad.
The first impression of Jack is likely to be that he's a gracious host 
and a real teddy bear.  Soon, however, it becomes obvious that he is a 
know-it-all and an absolute control freak, who runs his household with 
military precision.  To say that he and Greg don't hit off would be a 
colossal understatement.  They can't even discuss pets without Jack's 
taking offense.  Jack, being a (trained) cat person, can't understand 
Greg's preferences for dogs.  "Cats make you work for their affection," 
Jack informs Greg with disdain.  "They don't sell out like dogs do."  
James Herzfeld and John Hamburg's script gets as much or more mileage 
from the physical comedy than the dialog, but the film never dissolves 
into slapstick.  Simple scenes that you've seen a hundred times before, 
like two guys drag-racing their cars through city streets, are made 
fresh.  Through a combination of De Niro and Stiller's eye contact and 
the way they make the cars screech to a halt at each red light, the 
episode feels like you've never seen it before.
Once in the parent's house, Greg has such an awful time that he appears 
about ready to commit suicide.  Jack's a tough task-master who explains 
to Greg, with hilarious euphemisms, that there will be no premarital sex 
permitted while he's staying with them.  Jack's wife is played sweetly 
by Blythe Danner.  "Under my roof, it's my way or the Long Island 
Expressway!" Jack informs Greg.
In one of many funny subplots, Jack turns out to have an intriguing 
past.  A 34-year veteran of the CIA, he was responsible for 
interrogating suspected double agents.  With the aid of an antique lie 
detector machine, he puts the screws on poor Greg.  Jack is not the sort 
that you'd want to mess with.  "If I find you are trying to corrupt my 
first born, I will bring you down!" Jack tells Greg in no uncertain 
terms.  "I will bring you down to Chinatown!"
The occasion for the big visit to the parents is the wedding of Pam's 
sister, Debbie (Nicole DeHuff), to a hot-shot doctor.  Greg, in 
contrast, is "just" a male nurse, an occupation that earns him no small 
amount of grief from Jack and others.  Kevin Rawley (Owen Wilson), Pam's 
filthy rich ex-fiancé, comes to the wedding as well, much to Greg's 
consternation.  Kevin and Pam, a pair of golden gods, look like they're 
still an item.  The dark-haired Greg clearly looks like the odd man out.
Perhaps the reason that MEET THE PARENTS is so eminently likeable is 
that it is such a good-spirited comedy.  And at its core, it is a truly 
sweet romance.  One thing is certain, its conclusion contains one of the 
most unusual marriage proposals that you are ever likely to see.  
MEET THE PARENTS runs 1:48.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual content, drug 
references and language and would be acceptable for kids around 11 and 
up.
Most of the movie's comedy did not work for my son, Jeffrey, age 11, who 
gave the film just **.  He said that he found the jokes old and 
repetitive.  He thought the parents were too weird, and he didn't find 
any characters to like.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Homer Yen
For any groom on the verge of proposing marriage to
his girlfriend, there are certain rules that he needs
to follow.  Firstly, fill her life with happiness and
romance during the courtship.  Secondly, buy her a
beautiful ring that glitters as brightly as her eyes. 
Thirdly, find the perfect moment and location to
propose.  Finally, the groom-wannabe should probably
get her parent's blessing.  Of these four, the last
one can be a nightmare.  Meeting parents is a rite of
passage, fraught with unexpected questions, bouts of
nervousness, the reality of being disliked, and the
inability to make a positive impression.  If you're
lucky, things will go smoothly.  But, if you're Greg
Focker (Ben Stiller), everything will go wrong.  And
with a name like that, how could it not?
When Greg first meets his fiancée's father, Jack
Byrnes (the grimacing Robert DeNiro), Greg immediately
feels overwhelmed and is put on the defensive.  When
he tells Jack that he's a male nurse, the incorrigible
Dad shoots back, "Not many men in your profession,
huh, Greg?"  It's definitely not a good start.  But
Greg is determined to win him over, and it's this
desire that fuels the movie.  He first takes small
steps such as agreeing to say grace before dinner.  It
doesn't matter that he's Jewish.  If Daddy Byrnes asks
him to say grace, then that's what he's going to
gamely do.   "Oh God...you're such a good God", he
moons.  His discomfort at trying to force out a simple
prayer will make you chuckle, but when Jack gives him
the "DeNiro Squint" (that familiar, unsettling gaze
that gives DeNiro that aura of invincibility), it's
pretty hard not to grin.
Things get progressively worse for Greg.  And that's
too bad because he's a genuinely likable guy with a
romantic heart.  Eventually, he begins to try so hard
that he starts to mess everything up, committing a
host of gaffes that embarrass, humiliate or injure
other people.  It's a never-ending ordeal of missteps,
miscues, and mistakes.  He buys some champagne, but
uncorking the bottle leads to disastrous
circumstances.  He tries to find Jack's missing cat. 
But his method of solving the problem leads only to
more trouble.  And there are several other episodes,
each one trumping the next in outrageousness.  The
more our well-meaning beau screwed up, the more the
audience groaned in sympathy.  We liked Greg.  And, we
liked this movie.
"Meet the Parents" is a farcical comedy that certainly
has its moments.  Just sit back and watch Greg get
into trouble.  No matter what the situation, whether
its playing a harmless game of water volleyball or
sneaking a smoke on the roof of the house, things will
horribly go wrong.  We laugh at Greg's expense, but
love often makes a person do dumb things, and Ben
Stiller has the knack of playing the romantic fool. 
DeNiro is also affable, tough on the outside yet
sentimental on the inside.  Their tug-of-war is often
funny, the slapstick is elaborate, and there are
several topical throwaway gags (mostly targeted at the
airline industry) to make this film an amusing yet
smart lampoon about future in-laws from Hell.

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Jay Roach
Written by: Greg Glienna, Mary Ruth Clarke, Jim Herzfeld, John Hamburg
Greg (Ben Stiller) is simply nuts about his girlfriend, Pam (Teri Polo). In 
fact, he was planning on proposing to her until he learned he should ask her 
father, Jack's (Robert DeNiro) permission first. So, the two run off to meet 
the parents. Pam's mom, Dina (Blythe Danner), is a kind, pleasant natured 
woman. Jack, meanwhile, seems to be testing Greg all the time. He even goes 
so far as to hook Greg up to an antique polygraph machine. Nevertheless, 
Greg tries to make the best of things and make a good impression. He meets 
Pam's sister, Debbie (Nicole DeHuff), who is getting married in one day; 
Debbie's mother and father (James Rebhorn, Phyllis George), who take an 
immediate disliking to him; Pam's pothead brother, Denny (Jon Abrahams); and 
finally, in a moment of sheer cruelty, he's introduced to Pam's rich former 
fiancee, Kevin (Owen Wilson). Greg keeps trying to make a good impression, 
but things go from bad, to worse, to absolutely miserable in less than 24 
hours.
There's something strangely amusing about watching people completely 
humiliate themselves, isn't there? Something about watching a person do 
everything we know they shouldn't be doing to get out of already 
embarrassing situations. This is basically the only kind of humor you're 
going to find in "Meet the Parents", so if you're one of those rare people 
who doesn't find that sort of thing amusing, steer clear. Whenever I think 
of this sort of humor, one thing always leaps to mind. A British comedy 
series called "Fawlty Towers", in which John Cleese plays a stuck-up, 
priggish owner of a hotel who is always making himself look like a complete 
jerk. The difference between "Fawlty Towers" and "Meet the Parents" is that 
while Cleese's character deserves everything that happens to him, Stiller's 
character doesn't. Greg is such a likeable guy that it almost ruins the 
humor at times because you feel so sorry for him. If the roles had been 
reversed, and embarrassing things had been happening to Jack Byrnes, it 
might very well have been even funnier. Still, I can't rate a movie based on 
how I would have done things, and that's fine because taken on its own 
merits, "Meet the Parents" is a lot of fun.
"Meet the Parents" is carried entirely by the not inconsiderable comic 
talents of Stiller and DeNiro, but that's to be expected in a comedy like 
this. Having a large cast in a film of this sub-genre would ruin it, because 
you wouldn't get to know the characters' personalities as well. Stiller and 
DeNiro (particularly DeNiro) are obviously having a great time, and this 
carries over well to the audience. Stiller, who can go a bit overboard 
sometimes ("Mystery Men", anyone?), plays Greg as very likeable, but at the 
same time a little too eager to please (that's not an insult, the character 
should be played like that). DeNiro, on the other hand, has a great time 
hamming it up in a gleefully self-effacing performance. He's clearly making 
fun of himself, but he's having a grand time doing it. Blythe Danner ("Mad 
City") gives a pleasant performance as the good-natured mom, Dina. She's so 
nice in fact you can't help but wonder how on earth she hooked up with Jack. 
Teri Polo ("The Arrival") is a fairly talented actress, but she's horribly 
underused. Finally we have Owen Wilson ("Shanghai Noon"), turning up in an 
absolutely useless part as Pam's ex-fiancee. Wilson is a very entertaining 
comic actor, but he's given nothing to do in this pointless role.
If you're walking into "Meet the Parents" expecting another "There's 
Something About Mary", you're in for a disappointment. This isn't the kind 
of movie where you'll be laughing non-stop, it's a bit too sentimental for 
that. There are a lot of chuckles, and one or two massive laughs, but this 
one won't have you ready to pass out from laughing. Two of the absolute 
funniest scenes I can think of are the family's first dinner, and Greg's 
trip to the airport. The dinner scene is so funny because you have to 
sympathize with poor Greg, trying to make a good impression on his future 
mother and father in-law.Yet of course, as you knew was going to happen, 
everything goes horribly and hysterically wrong. The airport scene is great 
because anyone who has travelled has been there before. Greg deals with a 
stream of curt flight attendants who speak in uncaring, monotone voices, 
while they type a mile a minute on their computer consoles and inform him 
that he can't board the plane yet, because they're only seating aisles nine 
and up (he's in aisle eight, and there aren't any other passengers waiting 
to board the plane).
Unfortunately, there are a few things in the film that I didn't care for. 
First, the joke about Greg's name. It's Focker, and as Greg says, it's 
pronounced just how it looks. Now, when they first made fun of this, yes I 
laughed. I laughed the second time, and the third time, and I at least 
chuckled a bit by the fourth time. After about two dozen times making fun of 
his name, I was more than a little tired of it. Of course, that could just 
be me, because the rest of the audience laughed continuously at it. Second, 
a few of the characters are never developed in any way. While this wouldn't 
normally bother me, it does when the cast consists of only about eight 
actors. What bothers me even more is that one of the characters who is never 
developed is Pam. We know next to nothing about her by the end of the movie. 
Those few complaints aside, "Meet the Parents" is an entertaining, fairly 
light hearted movie (I say fairly because it does get a bit mean-spirited 
once or twice). It's a good way to spend a couple of hours, but don't expect 
much from it. The film runs a touch too long at 108 minutes. I'd recommend 
it to fans of Ben Stiller and Robert DeNiro since both turn in highly 
entertaining performances, and I give the movie three and a half out of five 
stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Ron Small
Screenplay: James Herzfeld, John Hamburg
Starring: Robert De-Niro, Ben Stiller, Terri Polo, Blythe Danner, James 
Rebhorn, Owen Wilson, Jon Abrahams, Phyllis George, Thomas McCarthy, Nicole 
DeHuff, Judah Friedlander, Kali Rocha
In MEET THE PARENTS, Robert De Niro, one of our most studied character 
actors, progresses further into staking out a little niche in playing 
identifiable caricatures. De Niro does this with about as much laid back ease 
as he employed energetic gusto for the wounded anti-hero roles he used to 
essay in the 70's. I'd rather see him in more movies like TAXI DRIVER or 
RAGING BULL, but I can't deny that he's been very (if not equally) effective 
in his latest ventures. Playing the aging, sad sack Mafia man in ANALYZE 
THIS, he indulged in a heightened variation of the wise guys he used to excel 
at dramatically, his face crinkled and pained with a tone thick, as if full 
of pasta; it was a terrific counterpoint to Billy Crystal's nervous nilly of 
a psychiatrist. Though I didn't really care for that film (it was more a 
series of skits [albeit some funny] that didn't really come together) I 
nevertheless enjoyed the anxious chemistry cultivated between Crystal and De 
Niro.
MEET THE PARENTS is also like a series of skits, these connected by the 
nightmare conceit of a groom attempting to impress his possible in-laws to be 
over one horrendous weekend. But here the skits hang together rather nicely, 
and Ben Stiller makes an even more likeable comic leading man than Crystal's 
callow invention. And De Niro's more interesting too; we've already seen him 
do the Mafia schtick more than we've seen George W. Bush make a mockery out 
of the human language (see, I follow politics), but I can't recall him ever 
playing a creepily wholesome, grandfatherly type; I'm guessing his research 
here amounted to viewing a slew of FATHER KNOWS BEST reruns.
But the film takes a while to get good; it opens pretty badly with a nearly 
nauseating shower of sweetness. We start with a scene in which the earnest, 
eager to please, and very unfortunately named Greg Focker (Ben Stiller) 
proposes to an off screen paramour. He's so sincere and puppy doggish, his 
blue eyes twinkling with hope, that we just know some kind of gag is 
a'brewin, and of course the camera angle switches to reveal that he's really 
proposing to an old man. Cue the laugh track. He's actually practicing for 
the real one, an easy guffaw, and the next scene continues in this dubious 
vein with Stiller attempting to propose to his girlfriend, Pam (Terri Polo) 
while several (contrived) interruptions manage to stop him from doing so. At 
this point I'm debating on whether or not to high tail it outta here and 
sneak into the new Stallone picture next door (his fifth come back vehicle, I 
believe, which should at least be good for a few laughs).
Thankfully the picture hits its stride in the very next scene, in which 
Stiller insists on spending the weekend with Pam and her parents, giving him 
the opportunity to do the right thing, that being, to ask for her beloved 
father's approval. On the way to the parents, the picture settles into a 
comedy of extreme errors, with the world seemingly conspiring against Greg. 
After a big hubbub with some bag checkers, he checks his mini-suitcase at the 
airport, later finding his worse fears confirmed; it's been misplaced, 
(presumably by the ear muff wearing blue collar folk in whose hands we must 
entrust our sacred belongings), along with it, the engagement ring and all 
his clothing. Poor Greg warily stumbles to a busy customer service lady, who 
pooh-poohs him away just as a baby upchucks all over him and the only clothes 
he has left.
Now Greg must go to already one of the most nerve wracking meetings 
in his life, stinking like "sour milk" which certainly doesn't leave a great 
impression on Pam's stern authoritarian father (yup, Bobby D.), who's so 
square and twinkly eyed he's damn near psychotic. We first meet De Niro as he 
peeps out the second floor window, his eyes narrowing like a Cheetah ready to 
pounce. (Additionally, menacing thriller music pipes up to let us know this 
guy means business, as if we couldn't already tell). Their first meeting is a 
gem with Stiller, at his awkward best, trying so visibly hard to say the 
right thing, but flubbing horribly, which always gets a laugh, then the 
camera clicking over to De Niro's frowning mug, incredulous that his daughter 
is sleeping with such a fool, which gets a bigger laugh.
Stiller, essentially playing the same role he essayed in FLIRTING WITH 
DISASTER (my favorite of his bumbling duffas trilogy) and THERE'S SOMETHING 
ABOUT MARY (a close second), has become an expert at flustered comic 
awkwardness. He's like a handsome Woody Allen, with his nervous tics closer 
to reality and less exaggerated than that little pipsqueak's (I use the term 
affectionately). Stiller has one of those common faces; look at him quick and 
you might mistake him for someone else like Hank Azaria or John Cusack or the 
guy who bags your groceries. He's an every man-type, almost immediately 
likeable, maybe because he reminds us of someone we know, and maybe because 
as an actor, he isn't afraid to look foolish or even let himself be upstaged 
by bodily fluids. Stiller is such a likeable presence that despite his 
character's occasional idiotic tendencies, we remain in his corner, almost 
protective of him; we might laugh at the guy as he's making a fool out of 
himself but ultimately we want him to win.
The wry Owen Wilson (SHANGHAI NOON) pops up in a bit part that could be 
described as the anti-every man. He's Pam's ex, a self-made millionaire and 
one of those fellows who likes to list his amazing achievements in an off 
hand way as if to say "ahh shucks, it was really nothing". Terri Polo has a 
bigger role, though isn't required to do much beside look at Stiller with 
either lust or concern. Blythe Danner is the WASPy mother whose greeting to 
her daughter, "There's my whittle girl", actually made me blush. Along the 
way director Jay Roach includes some amusing broad caricatures in minor bits, 
like the overweight stoner behind the supermarket counter who gets laughs 
because he isn't as stupidly over the top as he would be in an Adam Sandler 
picture, or the monotone stewardess who acts like a robot with a glitch in 
her system.
The film itself is little more than Stiller's non-stop attempts to ingratiate 
himself to De Niro and then the beautiful, cringe-inducing backfire, 
concluded by Stiller's hilariously perplexed mug, his jaw practically down to 
his knees, and De Niro, scowling as if to say "who is this man and what the 
hell is he doing in my house?" There isn't any emotional pull (well, a little 
bit but it's all arbitrary stuff about fathers not letting their little girls 
grow up, stuff that probably won't resonate with anybody who's watched a 
steady diet of sitcoms), or unnecessary sub plots or much of anything to get 
in the way of the film's sole desire to make its audience laugh and maybe 
even nod its head in recognition. There are occasional lulls (not many, but 
enough to note) that exist solely because the film isn't concerned with 
giving us much of anything besides the laughs (yes a minor complaint, but a 
picture like FLIRTING WITH DISASTER is so much more satisfying because of its 
added humanity).
Still, MEET THE PARENTS is very funny and well put together, especially for a 
broad mainstream comedy. The comic set pieces are similar to those found in 
the NATIONAL LAMPOON VACATION films, where despite that most of the gags are 
projected before they occur, they still get laughs; in this movie they work 
because of director Roach's canny comic technique (it's all in the reaction 
shots). In one scene we see a typical comic misunderstanding in which Stiller 
gets what he thinks is his suitcase back. It isn't. He leaves the room, and 
we see De Niro pick the lock to go through it, checking up on his daughter's 
suitor to, I guess, make sure he isn't some kind of wacko (which in itself is 
kind of wacko). Before he opens the thing we just know there's gonna be 
something odd inside, and therie is, but what sells the bit is De-Niro's 
slight facial grimace; we can feel his disgust.
For the most part MEET THE PARENTS doesn't follow the string of recent 
comedies that mistake oozing bodily fluids for punch lines (the descendants 
of MARY, I'm thinking of ROAD TRIP in particular). Though it does what's 
logically next in line; it mines the embarrassment of Greg's situation for 
all it's worth and then some. Right when you thought they were down with the 
poor fellow, the film makers make every little social lie, every tiny misstep 
take on near epic proportions, like when he lets the cat out of his sight, or 
smokes a cigarette on the roof, again, we know what's going to happen, but 
the laughs come in seeing it happen well.
 http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
<bams@3blackchicks.com>
MEET THE PARENTS (2000)
Rated PG-13; running time 108 minutes
Genre:Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0212338
Official site: http://www.universalpictures.com/meettheparents/
Written by: James Herzfeld
Directed by: Jay Roach
Cast: Ben Stiller, Robert De Niro, Teri Polo, Blythe Danner,
Owen Wilson, Nicole Debluff, Jon Abrahams, James Rebhorn (Larry Banks),
Phyllis George (Linda Banks)
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamstheparents.html
Whatever special water Robert De Niro drinks that makes him so talented,
somebody oughta bottle it up and give it to Hollywood's 20 Million
Dollar Club (you hear me, DiCaprio?).  Serious or funny, De Niro runs
big time circles around those so-called stars earning boucoup bucks.
Oh yeah: and Ben Stiller ain't so bad, either.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
MEET THE PARENTS is a comedy of errors: most of which were made by Greg
Focker (Ben Stiller).
Greg, a male nurse, is in love with elementary teacher Pam Byrnes (Teri
Polo), and wants to marry her; but just before he has a chance to
propose, he finds out Pam's father Jack (Robert De Niro), a "rare flower
dealer", expects any potential suitor of his daughter to ask him for her
hand in marriage.  Since Greg has yet to meet Pam's family, they set off
to meet Jack and Pam's mother Dina (Blythe Danner) during the weekend
when Pam's sister Debbie (Nicole Debluff) is preparing to marry her
doctor boyfriend.
Greg's suitcase, which didn't fit in the plane's overhead storage, is
lost by the airline - and from there, a series of interconnected foibles
befall Greg, affecting the whole Byrnes family, much to the
consternation of Jack, who doesn't like or trust Greg - even though Jack
has a secret or two of his own.  And yes: Wackiness Ensues.
The Upshot:
There were a bunch of folks in this cast - decent supporters, all - but
make no mistake: this puppy was Robert De Niro's and Ben Stiller's to
play with.  And play with it, they did.
That Ben Stiller could crack a rib or two, comes as no surprise; the man
had me near tears as his weekend went swiftly to hell in a great big
basket.  When his character, Greg, ran back into the house after
he...well, I won't spoil it, even though it's a scene that's been shown
in numerous trailers already.  Suffice it to say that the audience
erupted with laughter when Greg jumped through the upstairs window.
Though I've not liked him all that much in the past, Stiller's comedic
timing in "Parents", as well as KEEPING THE FAITH earlier this year,
really gave me pause to reconsider.  If nothing else, like Jack said,
I'll be keeping my eye on Mr. Stiller.
But De Niro was like a treasure found for me.  I won't waste my time or
yours in recounting the dozens of serious movies in which he worked his
acting magic; and though I've seen him crack a smile or two in flicks
like MIDNIGHT RUN and WE'RE NO ANGELS (and, of course, as an
ObMobster-type in ANALYZE THIS and similar fare), in "Parents", his mere
facial twitch, or "innocent" crack, kept the audience roaring.  I can't
wait to see his next comedy showcase.
The weakness of this movie was that there were too many characters, and
situations, that were left underused.  Blythe Danner was game as Jack's
ditzy wife Dina, but De Niro could've almost as easily gone it alone
without too much muss and fuss.  The rest of the family seemed equally
mere appendages, as if writer James Herzfeld needed to include a "whole
family" for Greg and Jack to bounce their lunacy off of.  And it's a
crying shame that the dysfunctional natures of both Pam's ex-boyfriend
Kevin (Owen Wilson) and her brother Denny (Jon Abrahams) weren't further
explored; surely, those characters had much more to offer than being
simple "straight men" for Greg and Jack.
Fun though MEET THE PARENTS may have been, by concentrating almost
exclusively on two characters out of many, it wasn't as great as it
could've been.  Still, I noticed no shortage of grins, and had a good
time remembering the first few meetings I had with my now-husband's
family.  At least I never had Issues with raw sewage...
Bammer's Bottom Line:
At times Laugh Out Loud hilarious, MEET THE PARENTS re-introduces a
different, funnier side of Robert De Niro to the world (or at least, to
that part of the world that didn't bother with that "Rocky And
Bullwinkle" mess).
MEET THE PARENTS (rating: greenlight):
But who knew that they could come up with funny riffs on the name
"Focker"? [end Sarcasm]

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Jay Roach. Screenplay by Jim Herzfeld and John Hamburg, from
a story by Greg Glienna and Mary Ruth Clarke, based on an earlier
screenplay by Glienna and Clarke. Starring Robert De Niro, Ben Stiller,
Teri Polo. Running time: 112 minutes. Rated PG for mild language by the
MFCB. Reviewed on October 23rd, 2000.
I started to get a sinking feeling about half an hour into "Meet The
Parents". I won't lie: it was a reasonably funny movie. There had already
been a number of amusing little set pieces -- like one where Ben Stiller
accidentally shatters an urn containing the remains of Robert De Niro's
mother and De Niro's beloved cat uses it as a litter box. There was just
one problem: I had already laughed at these scenes, two or three months
ago, when the previews came out.
Yes, "Meet The Parents" is yet another victim of its own publicity. In
between the various theatrical and television promos for the film, the ad
men seem to have successfully spoiled just about every joke in the movie.
Comedy relies on being unexpected; unless it's done exceedingly well, if
you can see a gag coming, your reaction to it is usually muted. And that's
the main problem with "Meet The Parents" -- the funny bits are either in
the trailers or are so blatantly telegraphed that they can be predicted
far in advance of the actual scene. (De Niro warns Stiller not to flush
the toilet in the bathroom adjoining his sleeping quarters; what are the
odds that, at some point, Stiller will forget and yet more chaos and
embarrassment will result?)
The premise of "Meet The Parents" is straightforward, but has a lot of
potential as a comedy vehicle. The unfortunately-surnamed Greg Focker
(Stiller) is in love with Pam Byrnes (Teri Polo), but decides he needs to
seek her father's permission before he asks her to marry him. Pam's sister
Debbie (Nicole DeHuff) is to be wedded soon, providing the perfect
opportunity for Pam to bring Greg home to meet the parents. Unfortunately
for Greg, Pam's father Jack (De Niro) turns out to be an intimidating,
no-nonsense figure whose sole concern is for the best interests of his
daughter. He seems to be utterly immune to Greg's affable attempts to make
friends.
What follows is a mounting series of catastrophes, as Greg tries 
desperately to ingratiate himself to Jack. But Greg's initial little white
lies soon turn into wholesale deceptions, and other forces conspire to 
make Jack think that Greg is about as far removed from proper son-in-law
material as is humanly possible. Everything that could go wrong does --
Greg makes himself look like an ass in front of Pam's rich and
multi-talented ex-fiance (Owen Wilson), inadvertently sabotages Debbie's
wedding on several occasions, and so on -- and it soon appears that not
only Greg's engagement plans but indeed his whole relationship with Pam is
in danger.
Preview spoilage or not, "Meet The Parents" could have been a delightful
little romantic comedy in surer hands. I can easily picture Jimmy Stewart
in the Focker role -- or, better yet, Buster Keaton -- bumbling his way
from misadventure to misadventure. But Stiller, although a good comedian,
does not possess an enormous reserve of innate charisma. Actors like
Stewart and Keaton generate sympathy naturally, but Stiller has yet to
learn how to do this. Unfortunately, the screenplay by Jim Herzfeld and
John Hamburg seems to operate under the assumption that we will naturally
root for Greg, no matter how absurd or extreme his behaviour.
For my part, though, I never really responded to Stiller in this way. In
"There's Something About Mary", we could at least see that Stiller's Ted
was a nice guy who became caught up in an unfortunate set of 
circumstances. In "Meet The Parents", Stiller's character is defined only
in terms of his affection for Pam. Is he really the right guy for her?
Should Pam's parents be accepting of him? This is assumed to be the case,
but is never really justified. Indeed, based on Greg's antics throughout
much of the movie, I found myself siding with Jack -- I wouldn't want this
guy marrying my daughter either!
De Niro is "Meet The Parents'" saving grace. He has seemed awkward in
previous comedies -- "Analyze This" and "The Adventures Of Rocky & 
Bullwinkle" are two recent examples -- but here he has found a character 
that suits him to a tee. He is not parodying his own past roles (as in
both the films cited), but is instead crafting something new and
interesting in its own right. As Jack Byrnes, he hits all the right notes.
He is neither too soft nor obscenely tough, and finds just the desired
level of exaggeration to portray every beau's worst nightmare.
Director Jay Roach does an acceptable job, but lets things drag in spots,
a situation further compounded by the sheer repetitiveness of the
storyline. "Meet The Parents" would have benefitted from the same manic
energy Roach helped bring to the "Austin Powers" movies, but ends up as
too lackadaisical. Only a hilarious encounter between Greg and a flight
attendant (Kali Rocha) in the movie's latter stages -- one of the few
comedy bits not spoiled by any of the advertising I saw, it must be noted 
-- really embodies the kind of comic intensity missing from a vast
proportion of the running time.
"Meet The Parents" is not a bad movie, exactly, and will no doubt appeal
more to those who have avoided the trailers and therefore will encounter
its major set pieces for the first time. But even getting beyond that, it
is still an all-too-formulaic movie which seems designed more for the
video shelves than for the big screen. Still, "Meet The Parents" does 
finally demonstrate that Robert De Niro can be a good comedy actor. Now he
just needs to find the right movie in which to strut his stuff.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/MeetTheParents.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Jon Popick
Based on a 75-minute short from 1992, Meet the Parents is an
entertaining look at the harrowing experience of meeting your
girlfriend's father for the first time.  Or, if you're a girl, the
equally harrowing experience of having your boyfriend meet your father
for the first time.  It's certainly enjoyable, but the film would have
been a lot more so if the majority of the funny bits weren't given away
in the trailer.
Ben Stiller (Keeping the Faith) plays Greg Focker, an E.R. nurse from
Chicago who is head-over-heels in love with a schoolteacher named Pam
Byrnes (Teri Polo, Felicity).  Parents begins with Greg rehearsing the
marriage proposal to his beloved, but when the time comes, the special
moment is interrupted by a phone call from Pam's sister, Debbie.  She
announces that she's engaged and will be married in two weeks, but the
best part of all is that her future husband had the good sense to ask
for her father's permission first.
A quick thinker, Greg palms the engagement ring he was about to give to
Pam, and the two take off for Oyster Bay, Long Island, the location of
Debbie's wedding and the home of Jack and Dina Byrnes (Robert De Niro,
The Adventures of Rocky & Bullwinkle and Blythe Danner, Forces of
Nature).  Greg plans on winning over Pam's dad and getting the green
light to pop the question to his eldest daughter.
But things immediately begin to spin out of control for poor Greg.
First the airline loses his luggage.  Then Pam tells him that he's not
allowed to smoke in front of her dad (it's a sign of weakness).  The big
surprise comes when Greg meets Jack for the first time.  Despite the
fact that he's a cat-loving, poetry-writing, Peter-Paul-and-Mary-singing
old man that uses baby talk to communicate with Pam (he calls her
`Pam-cakes'), Jack instantly becomes suspicious of his potential
son-in-law.  He makes fun of Greg's name and his occupation within
minutes of his arrival.
To make matters worse, Pam's ex-fiancé (Owen Wilson, Shanghai Noon) is
the best man at Debbie's wedding.  But things take an even more
disturbing turn for Greg when he finds out that Jack isn't really a
retired florist but an ex-CIA agent with the uncanny ability to tell if
people are lying (this is also revealed in the trailer).  Greg is like a
car stuck in the mud  the harder he spins his tires to get free from
Jack's bad side, the deeper he makes his hole.
Greg commits one hysterical social faux pas after another, ultimately
ruining Debbie's wedding.  There are a lot of well-timed set-pieces, but
the real charm of the film comes from the relationship between Greg and
Jack; the former looking like a deer caught in the headlights, the
latter giving disapproving looks with a perpetually cocked head.
It's hard to imagine anybody but Stiller playing Greg, and only
Christopher Walken could have played DeNiro's role better, and that
would have been a little too frightening.  There is also a very funny
running gag involving Greg's last name (pronounced like it's spelled).
You have to wonder what the MPAA thought about lines like `Jesus,
Focker,' and `Didn't you, Focker?' when a PG-13 movie is only allowed to
use the F-word once.
Parents was directed by Jay Roach (Austin Powers) and written by James
Herzfeld (Meet the Deedles) and John Hamburg (Safe Men), who based their
script on the short created by Greg Glienna (who played Greg in the
original) and Mary Ruth Clarke.  The film starts to drag as it
approaches the finale, and the ending is completely predictable.
Despite this, and the fact that the trailer gave too much away, the film
is still very fun and very entertaining.
1:40  PG-13 for sexual content, drug references and adult language

Author
Scott Renshaw
MEET THE PARENTS
(Universal) 
Starring:  Robert DeNiro, Ben Stiller, Blythe Danner, Teri Polo, Owen
Wilson.
Screenplay:  Jim Herzfeld and John Hamburg.
Producers:  Nance Tenenbaum, Jay Roach, Jane Rosenthal and Robert DeNiro.
Director:  Jay Roach.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, drug references)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Not surprisingly, MEET THE PARENTS is being promoted as a film "from
the director of AUSTIN POWERS;" when you've got a connection to a $200
million film in Hollywood, you take advantage of it. It just strikes me as
an absurdity of the highest order to pump up Jay Roach for his POWERS 
oeuvre. They were Mike Myers films, plain and simple, and pretending
otherwise is like giving Tom Shadyac credit for the success of ACE
VENTURA, or Dennis Dugan for BIG DADDY. To his credit, Roach knew enough
to mostly get out of Myers' way, showing he understands how to take
advantage of a gifted comic performer's strengths. Let's not forget,
however, that this is also the director of MYSTERY, ALASKA -- not exactly
the second coming of Preston Sturges.
     In MEET THE PARENTS, Roach gets to oversee yet another gifted comic
performer, and once again the film is primarily effective to the extent
that it gets out of that performer's way. Ben Stiller plays Greg Focker, a
Chicago male nurse who's ready to pop the question to his girlfriend Pam
Byrnes (Teri Polo). But before he does, there's a key test to pass: Pam's
no-nonsense father Jack (Robert DeNiro). Greg has gotten an inkling that
Jack is a tough man to win over, yet he's optimistic when he and Pam head
to upstate New York for the weekend to attend the wedding of Pam's sister. 
And that's when Greg realizes that Jack may be an impossible man to win
over, with his every attempt to make things better inevitably making
things worse instead.
     With Woody Allen having migrated away from his trademark schlemiel
character in recent years, Ben Stiller has become cinema's reigning
champion of outsider anxiety as comedy. There's more of an undercurrent of
hostility to Stiller's on-screen persona, but he still makes has an
uncanny ability to make his characters' frustrations and awkward
situations hilarious. MEET THE PARENTS gives Stiller plenty of
opportunities to squirm -- notably when he concocts an impromptu
recollection about milking the family cat -- and his discomfort is almost
always good for a laugh. He also gets a great straight man to work with in
DeNiro, whose straight-faced portrayal of the over-protective Jack is just
the right counterpoint for Stiller's manic antics. If you're a Ben Stiller
fan, you'll probably be a MEET THE PARENTS fan.
     Unfortunately, Stiller does have to struggle against an inconsistent
script and flaccid direction. Though MEET THE PARENTS is at least subtle
enough to avoid make Greg's antagonist an out-and-out villain, it's still
primarily a film of broad individual gags. The situations grow more
elaborate, and the set pieces more convoluted, but there's no natural
build-up to the comedy. Roach's direction misses the right rhythm both for
individual scenes (notably the domino effect after Greg unwittingly lets
the Byrnes' cat out of the house) and for the film as a whole. There's
never any sense that MEET THE PARENTS is building to a humorous crescendo
so much as it is doling out punch lines and pratfalls at regular 
intervals. Every possible situation comes to the expected worst-case
scenario for Greg, and the characters come to the expected epiphanies at
the expected times.
     That the film works in spite of the people behind the camera says a
lot for the people in front of the camera. The supporting players support
effectively; Owen Wilson, even underused as he is here, still adds an
off-beat edge to every scene he's in. MEET THE PARENTS is one of those
films where most of the laughs come from waiting for the protagonist's
next humiliation, and often such films are as nerve-wracking as they are
amusing. Stiller is simply so funny when he's sweating -- and so
determined not to be a victim even as he's being victimized -- that the
amusement manages to emerge triumphant. It's a shame that he's working
with a workmanlike director who cuts off scenes before they've reached
their zenith, but it's often the fate of brilliant comics that they can't
find brilliant directors to work with. Working with the likes of Mike
Myers and Ben Stiller is a smart career move for the Jay Roaches of the
cinema world. Even when the performers' gifts manage to emerge, the
reverse is rarely true.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Ben Stiller is playing the kind of character Adam Sandler should be playing. 
Not an idiot savant, mind you, but a grown-up jerk who has his heart in the 
right place. Stiller is still flirting with disaster and it is a joy to watch 
him in "Meet the Parents," a chaotic yet thoroughly restrained howler in the 
tradition of "Father of the Bride." When I think of Stiller in this film, I 
think of Murphy's Law - whatever can go wrong will go wrong. 
Stiller plays Greg Focker (!), a Jewish male nurse who is ready to propose to 
his sweetly precious girlfriend, Pam (Teri Polo), a schoolteacher. Problem is 
she catches him at the wrong time when she mentions that her father, who is 
hard to please, has agreed to her other sister's wedding proposal to be 
married on their front lawn. Naturally, Greg and Pam go to meet her parents 
on Long Island, NY, to attend the wedding. Enter Pam's father (Robert De 
Niro), who pretends to be a retired florist to cover for his ex-CIA 
activities, and Pam's mother (Blythe Danner) who has a tender smile, even in 
the midst of chaos. Everything goes wrong from the start of what should be an 
enjoyable weekend. Greg screws up the family prayer at the dinner table when 
he hilariously mentions how to milk a cat (he also tells bad jokes). There is 
the running gag of De Niro's prized pet, a cat named Mr. Jinx, whom De Niro 
considers as much a family member as anyone else. Mr. Jinx has been trained 
to relieve itself in a toilet, though Greg suggests at one point that the cat 
could probably flush too. Then there is the whole septic tank incident, not 
to mention Pam's ex-boyfriend (Owen Wilson) who lives luxuriously and invites 
them to his home to show off. An excruciating lie-detector test followed by 
the usual misunderstandings about marijuana, and the constant use of Greg's 
last name ad nauseam. 
Stiller is pitch-perfect as Greg - every scene he is in made me laugh louder 
than most comedies this year (and his resume is not bad either, from his 
roles in "Reality Bites" to "Flirting With Disaster" to "Mystery Men"). But 
what makes Stiller such a natural at being made a mockery is his 
vulnerability, whether it is seeing him dressed in pajamas when walking into 
his possible future in-laws at breakfast time or his slow burn leading to a 
completely frazzled condition in front of De Niro's hidden video cameras - he 
is the clumsy nerd with a core of humanity. We may not always understand his 
motives but we can't help but feel sorry for him, even if he spray paints a 
cat's tail!
De Niro is at his comical best relaxing with smoothness and calmness, the 
likes of which we have not seen since "Wag the Dog." De Niro does not force 
the audience to laugh with him, he merely plays it straight and has great 
comic timing. I cannot imagine a more suitable foil than De Niro's coiled 
charm to Stiller's maddening anxiety.
The Pam character and the ex-fiance are two characters that do not fit in to 
the frothy mix. Teri Polo is so bland and forgettable as Greg's girlfriend 
that she hardly seems worth all the trouble - that may be cruel but consider 
what someone with far more personality and range could have done with this 
role, say Lisa Kudrow or Uma Thurman? Owen Wilson also seems tired and flat 
as the ex, and it is generally a wasted, unnecessary role considering there 
is no payoff - he might dislike or disapprove of Pam's new love but there is 
not a single scene where he expresses that emotion. 
I would have loved more intimate scenes between Danner and De Niro (the most 
unlikely pair of actors to play a married couple), but "Meet the Parents" is 
quite a laughfest from start to finish. And watching De Niro come up against 
Stiller is a marvelous sight and a true laugh riot to witness. Let's see 
those two again on screen soon, and Mr. Jinx too.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com 

Author
Laura Clifford
When Chicago nurse Greg Focker (Ben Stiller) tries to propose 'cute' to
his schoolteacher girlfriend Pam (Teri Polo, TV's "Felicity"), she's 
interrupted by cell phone news that her younger sister is getting married.
As Pam discusses her sister's doctor fiance's courtly ways, including
his having asked her father for her hand in marriage, Greg realizes he'd better
follow suit and packs the ring away for a trip to "Meet the Parents."
Written by Jim Herzfeld ("Tapeheads") and John Hamburg ("Safe Men"),
"Meet the Parents" is every prospective son-in-law's nightmare.  Greg's
luggage is lost (along with the ring), forcing him to accept clothers
from his girlfriend's father.  His gift of a rare flower bulb to is met 
with apathy and he later learns Jack Byrnes (Robert DeNiro) isn't a 
horticulturist, but an ex CIA profiler.  Pam lets slip that Greg hates cat 
while Jack dotes on an arrogant Himalayan called Mr. Jinx.  A gift of 
champagne is uncorked to shatter the urn holding Jack's mother's ashes.  
Greg's told to 'keep his snake in a cage for 72 hours' and is enconsed in 
the den and told not to flush the toilet.  To top things off, he inadvertently 
finds Jack's hidden office, complete with polygrapher equipment and Jack 
arrives in time to 'treat' him to a demonstration.  Twenty-fours have yet to 
pass and things will get far worse.
Ben Stiller and Robert DeNiro are an inspired pairing.  Stiller can be
sexily romantic, painfully clueless, physically brilliant and hilariously
enraged.  He almost manages to rise above the fact that the script paints
Greg Focker as an obsequious schmuck, a character who is only likeable at
the beginning and end of the film.  DeNiro spends most of the film as
the personification of disdain and paranoia when he isn't loonily swooning 
over Mr. Jinx or obsessively little-girling his eldest daughter.  He, too,
is unlikeable until the film's denouement allows him to warm up a little
(and set us up for a sequel that appears to prove that warmth false).
Additionally, the script strains occasionally, as when it would have us
believe a well-to-do family would allow their septic system to get perilously
close to full days before a backyard wedding.  More often than not, however, 
the laughs are honestly come by.  The two most brilliant setpieces concern
Greg's attempt to rescue Mr. Jinx from the roof while sneaking a frowned upon 
smoke and a pre-wedding barbeque and the best man (and former fiance of Pam)
Kevin's (Owen Wilson, "Shanghai Noon") house.
Suppport is hit and miss.  Blythe Danner ("The Prince of Tides") is
endearingly ditzy as Dina Byrnes, all huge blue eyes and blonde halo of
hair.  She's the type of mom who serves food with baby names (hors
d'ouvres are 'pu-pus').  Brother Denny Byrnes, (Jon Abrahams, "Scary Movie") 
however, seems like an ill-advised homage to the demented brother in "Annie 
Hall."   Newcomer Nicole DeHuff resembles Parker Posey lite as bride to
be Debbie while her fiance Bob Banks (Thomas McCarthy, "30 Days") is a
loud jock.  His dad Larry (James Rebhorn, "The Talented Mr. Ripley")
is amusingly played as an almost Greek chorus to Jack.  Owen Wilson is
dead-on great as the so-perfect-he'd-be-obnoxious-if-he-weren't-so-damn-saintly
Kevin, a filthy rich Wall Street investor who creates elaborate carvings
because Jesus was a good role model as a carpenter.  ("Greg's Jewish,"
Pam advises him.  "Great!  So was JC!" Kevin enthuses.)
"Meet the Parents" had all the pieces in place to be a comic masterpiece.
While it doesn't quite live up to its potential, it's still a heck of a lot 
funnier than what usually passes for comedy in these days.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
 Great humor comes from simple, universal truths, and there
are few rites-of-passage as unnerving as meeting your prospective
spouse's family. That's the dreaded dilemma facing Greg Focker (Ben
Stiller) who realizes that it's important to get her father's
permission before he proposes to his girlfriend Pam (Teri Polo). A
trip from Chicago to New York for her younger sister's wedding seems
like the right occasion but things go from bad (lost luggage) to worse
when her father Jack (Robert De Niro) turns out to be an eccentric,
dogmatic, humorless ex-CIA agent, specializing in psychological
profiling, who spent 19 months in a Vietnamese prison camp. "Under my
roof, it's my way or the Long Island Expressway," dictates Jack,
regarding 21st century sexual mores. Feeling like an outsider about to
abscond with their first-born, Greg manages to do everything wrong, as
the cat disappears, septic tank overflows, sump pump explodes and
wedding altar catches fire. And his discomfort is augmented by Greg's
being a male nurse in a houseful of doctors. There's a hilarious scene
in which Greg muses about the meaning of "Puff the Magic Dragon,"
impelling Pam's mother (Blythe Danner) to placate Jack later, noting,
"Maybe he uses marijuana for medicinal purposes." Ben Stiller's
perfect as the hapless, anxiety-ridden interloper, while Robert De
Niro uses his serious, dramatic intensity to be an intimidating
adversary - much to the credit of director Jay Roach ("Austin
Powers"). Based on a story by Greg Glienna & Mary Ruth Clarke, the
wry, deftly frantic screenplay by Jim Herzfeld & John Hamburg evokes
multi-generational empathy before running out of steam. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Meet the Parents" is an uproarious,
entertaining 8. It's laugh-out-loud funny.
