Title
Review for Let Him Have It (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     LET HIM HAVE IT is a movie directed by Peter Medak and written by
Neal Purvis and Robert Wade.  It stars Chris Eccleston, Paul Reynolds,
Tom Courtenay, Eileen Atkins, Clare Holman, and Tom Bell.  Rated R --
due to violence and strong language.
     LET HIM HAVE IT presents a true story of the notorious
Craig-Bentley murder trial in Great Britain of 1952.  It is a gripping,
engrossing attack on miscarried justice and the death penalty.  Peter
Medak previously directed THE KRAYS, another true story set in the drab
Fifties, the endless row houses, and illuminated by the movies-driven
gangster obsessions.  But in terms of style and technique LET HIM HAVE
IT goes off in quite a different direction.  It is less showy, more
naturalistic, more a character study than a case study.
     The case has apparently been a controversial story in Britain for
four decades.  There have been, I understand, a West End play, a shelf
of books, several TV documentaries, a song by Elvis Costello, and a
petition drive to clear Derek Bentley's name.  The Home Office recently
decided to reopen the file.
     At issue is whether Bentley should have been hanged for the murder
of a police officer during a bungled break-in.  Bentley's pal Chris
Craig pulled the trigger and Bentley was already under technical arrest
at the time.  But Bentley was 19 and could be hanged, whereas Craig was
16 and too young to die; instead, he served 10 years in prison.  Adding
to the controversy was the fact that Bentley had a very limited
intelligence, rated no more than an 11-year-old's.
     It was Bentley's words "Let him have it, Chris" when the police
officer demanded Craig's gun that hanged him.  The prosecution said it
meant "Open fire" and the defense said it meant "Surrender the gun."
Craig let him have it and wounded that officer and twenty minutes later
shot another in the head.
     Medak builds a case that leaves no doubt in the viewer's mind that
Bentley should never have been tried, much less executed.  He follows
Bentley's life episodically from the time he as a child was buried alive
in building rubble during the bombing of London, an experience Medak
implies left Bentley with epilepsy or other brain damage or both.  He
builds up a sympathetic portrait of a young man who needed help more
than hanging.
     One of the glories of this film is its superb ensemble cast.  Chris
Eccleston and Paul Reynolds could not have been better as Bentley and
Craig, respectively; Eccleston commands the screen in an extraordinary
way for a newcomer, and Reynolds with his weird, sardonic, leary grin
and trickster energy is impressive as the angry, playful baby-gangster.
The elder Bentleys are played by Tom Courtenay and Eileen Atkins in
memorable, moving portrayals of loving people struggling against
currents totally out of their depths.  These four are supported by rich
performances from veterans of the Swinging London era of the Sixties --
Clive Revill, Murray Melvin, Michael Gough, Ronald Fraser, and Tom Bell.
Clare Holman as Bentley's sister is warm, caring, protective.
     In addition, Medak, his cinematographer Oliver Stapleton, and the
rest recreate violence-weary post-War Britain with amazing completeness
and conviction.
     The script by Neal Purvis and Robert Wade concentrates more on the
personal story of the Bentley family than on the sociology, psychology,
jurisprudence, or politics of the case.  We have wonderful portraits,
but we are left wondering why Bentley was hanged.  Were the police
determined to have a blood sacrifice to expiate the death of the
officer?  Did the Home Secretary connive at Bentley's death?  Did the
judge intervene unfairly in his summation to the jury?  Maybe these are
the questions that cannot be answered.  So we come away vastly moved,
saddened, repulsed by justice too swift and too final, deeply impressed
by a powerful film and a strange story.
     I hope you get a chance to see LET HIM HAVE IT.  In the Seattle
area it is playing at the Metro Cinema.  I recommend it at any price.
And if anyone in the U.K.  wants to write me about how the film was
received there, I'd appreciate it.
