Title
Review for Whatever Happened to Harold Smith? (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by UIP on March 10, 2000; certificate 15; 96 minutes; 
country of origin UK; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Pete Hewitt; produced by Ruth Jackson.
Written by Ben Steiner.
Photographed by David Tattersall; edited by Martin Walsh.
There are some basic facts about the 1970s that many movies have trouble 
understanding -- they took place in reality, and they took place on earth. If 
I've seen one, I've seen a dozen films and shows whose characters run around 
alive with the knowledge they're in The Seventies, squeeze the word "groovy" 
into almost every sentence, wear huge polyester garments and disco-dance at 
every given opportunity.
Perhaps I'm exaggerating, but my point is an excellent one -- it was a very 
loud decade, but not as loud as recent pop culture is making it out to be. 
Normally the misrepresentation irks me, but "Whatever Happened to Harold 
Smith?", a film chock-full of cheesy retro designs, brought a smile to my 
face. It's fun because it goes wildly over-the-top at every turn. 1977-1978 
is therefore the perfect setting, especially this preposterous vision of the 
period; after all, is there any other recent era so notorious for being so 
tawdry?
Two stories run concurrently throughout the film. One is the coming-of-age 
tale of Vince Smith (Michael Legge), a teenage legal clerk who is beginning 
to wonder if he really does identify with the disco scene, and who has fallen 
in love with an attractive young colleague, Joanna (Laura Fraser). Joanna is 
a strange girl, I think -- she's usually sweet, but has rash mood swings, 
getting angry at people out of the blue, or asking them provocative questions 
such as "Are you a virgin?" But she's gorgeous, so never mind.
Meanwhile, Vince's father, Harold (Tom Courtenay), is attracting nationwide 
publicity. After seeing Uri Geller bend spoons on television, you see, he 
decided to utilise his own magical talents, which include the ability to stop 
watches. When he performed this trick at a nursing home, he accidentally 
stopped some of the resident's pacemakers, and is under suspicion for murder.
The plot threads eventually come together in a scene that doesn't have any 
thematic resonance at all, and exists only to get us tapping our toes to the 
Bee Gees' song "Night Fever". But somehow, for all its lack of sense, 
"Whatever Happened to Harold Smith?" never seems bad, and comes across as 
more of a screw-loose send-up of bad movies. The bizarre comic set-pieces, 
which include Stephen Fry stripping to give his daughter a "birds and the 
bees" talk, are pumped so full of visual histrionics that we have to laugh -- 
partly from embarrassment, partly because we're impressed at the film's 
audacious lack of taste.
So everything that's going on is silly. That's a one-joke premise. The reason 
it doesn't get annoying or boring is that the three lead performances follow 
the essential rule of comedy -- nine times out of ten, it has to be played 
straight. Legge, Courtenay and Fraser (who was so terrible in last year's 
"Virtual Sexuality") are all straightforward and down-to-earth. Their 
surroundings are going mad, but they don't join in; they stand outside them 
looking bemused, which is a perfectly sensible reaction.
Normally people tell me I'm too critical a viewer. In the case of this film, 
though, I'm going to be getting letters and emails asking how I could 
possibly defend such nonsense. But first of all, I do not defend it. I praise 
it. And to paraphrase famed New Yorker critic Pauline Kael, movies are so 
rarely great art that if we cannot appreciate great trash we might as well 
not attend the cinema. "Whatever Happened to Harold Smith?" is not great 
trash, but it is good trash. Sometimes that's harder to pull off than good 
art.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic
