Title
Review for Eating (1990)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Frank Maloney
     EATING is a film by Henry Jaglom and features 38 women including
Frances Bergen, mother of Candace, widow of Edgar, and survivor of the
Edgar McCarthy wars, as the voice of sanity and nonunderstanding.
     Henry Jaglom is one of the world's great film makers and EATING is
the best film he's ever made.  Okay, so sue me, but that's my opinion
and I'll stick to it.  If for no other reason than that Jaglom is the
only man, woman, or child making movies today who has made a movie about
me.  I am obese, have been all my life, and, while I'm not a woman, I
can relate.  Boy! can I relate.  I mention this because I may be a
shade prejudiced as I attempt to review this film for you.  Forewarned
and all that.
     Bergen (I think) says: "Twenty-five years the secret subject of
women was sex, now it's food."
     Another women says: "I have yet to meet a man who excites as much
as a baked potato."
     The mise-en-scene is a birthday party for three women turning 30,
40, and 50 respectively.  The house fills up with the women and their
guests -- no men, although God knows men are there spiritually,
psychologically, every way but physically.  One of the guests is a
charming French film maker who is doing a video on women and food.  She
starts taping and interviewing the party people.  Much of the movie is
these people telling the video camera about their secret lives vis-a-vis
food and eating, eating and sex, eating and abortions, eating and men,
eating and women, eating and mom or dad, eating and bingeing and bulemia
and anorexia and diets and guilt.  Eating becomes a metaphor, an entre
into the neuroses, relationships, and guilty pleasures of millions upon
millions of people in Western society.  
     What they say is so startlingly naked, true, earnest, and honest,
it delights your soul and breaks your heart simultaneously.
     Meanwhile, the principal characters are playing out various crises
in their tangled lives as the party and the interviews surge ahead
uncontrollably.  Marriages and friendships founder, people wake up to
themselves, things fall apart, and things come together, all in the
context of the party.
     This is heady stuff and the truly amazing thing is that it works as
a film.  Critics and viewers are inevitably want to compare EATING to
SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE.  EATING is better because it is at once more
concentrated and more diffuse, without the distraction of James Spader.
Jaglom makes us laugh and cry, shake our heads with disbelief and shake
our heads with recognition.  Even the resident, self-described bitch,
bulemic, back-stabbing, treacherous, miserable bitch, is in the end,
crouched on the bathroom floor, sympathetic if not likable.
     These people are victims of the idea that we can be perfect, that
perfection is not only attainable, but desirable.  Some of them are
perfect asses, but it is their imperfections that we love in them, that
Jaglom's camera makes us love.
     Jaglom's film have always been low-budget, ex-tempore affairs that
breathe with more genuine life than all the big budget blowouts that
Hollywood can churn out in a season.  EATING is particularly alive and
accessible.  That one about his divorce -- sorry, don't have the name
here -- in the end made me furious; maybe I just younger, but I think
the quest for perfection there made people stupid and unlovable, made
them spoiled rich kids.  These people are almost all from the sunny side
of the street, but my class-warfare bells don't go off this time.
     EATING is being distributed mostly to art houses, but I urge you to
see it if you possibly can.  I guarantee you it will be one of the films
on my ten-best list.

Author
John Newman
    Director Henry Jaglom's new film EATING has the voyeuristic
attraction of spying on a group therapy session.  On the surface, the
scene of this film is a large birthday party in (where else?) southern
California, where 38 women gather to celebrate the birthdays of Helene
(turning 40), Kate (30) and Sadie (50).  However, much of the film
centers on the deeply personal revelations of these women concerning
their problems with food, men and body image.  As the film progresses,
we see more and more how the various problems of these apparently
independent and successful women express themselves in an obsession with
food, thinness and dieting.
    One of these women is Martine, a French television documentary
maker, played convincingly by Nelly Allard.  Martine is ostensibly
producing a documentary about Southern California lifestyles, but her
work actually centers on women and food.  This "play within a play"
mechanism is contrived, but it produces some of the most memorable
moments of the film.  EATING is sprinkled with short cutaways and
collages from this woman's videocamera, as the women at the party
describe the formative moments of their relationship with food.
    I will not try to list all of the notable performances in this film,
since every one of the actresses, even the nameless bit players, has her
moment of revelation, many in front of Martine's videocamera.  Director
Henry Jaglom obviously establishes a rapport with these women, and the
portrayals come across as absolutely authentic.  I will however, single
out two performances.  Gwen Welles plays the neurotic and unsympathetic
Sophie, whose jealousy of her successful (and, above all, thin) friends
leads her to viciously attack and manipulate her closest friend Helene.
And Frances Bergen (Candice's mother) plays Helene's mother, perhaps the
only character who is not obsessed with food, and who tries to confront
various other characters with their neurotic behavior.
    One memorable scene:  The cutting of the birthday cake, where slices
of birthday cake are passed endlessly around the room as if they were
time bombs.
    My favorite line:  "I guess I'm still looking for a man who will
excite me as much as a baked potato."
    While EATING does center on the topic of eating disorders, it is
completely unlike those preachy television docudramas which isolate
specific problems in an otherwise Leave it To Beaver world.  EATING
presents eating disorders with both humor and pathos, as a symptom of
the problems women face in affluent Western society.
    I strongly recommend EATING to anyone who can put up with "talky"
films.  In my opinion, this may be the best film to hit the arthouse
scene since JESUS OF MONTREAL.

Author
Myra VanInwegen
     Today I saw, in a matinee, STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY (directed by
?, sorry, I forgot to write it down; it's a woman, and the film is
sponsored by the National Film Board of Canada) [reviewed in a separate
article].  This time last week I saw EATING, directed by Henry Jaglom.
EATING is about a bunch of mostly beautiful, rich, well-dressed,
successful women gathered for a triple birthday party.  STRANGERS IN
GOOD COMPANY is about seven very ordinary women, six of whom are senior
citizens, who have gotten stranded by a broken-down bus.  Neither film
has any male characters in it (except for a very brief glimpse of a male
at the very end of STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY), and neither film is
missing anything by not having them.
     EATING is a fast-moving film where emotions run high and the words
run fast, and all the scenes are filled with people.  STRANGERS is a
much slower, quiet film, where the Canadian countryside is as much a
part of the film as the characters are, and emotions are much more
subdued, as if the many years of living have put these women's feeling
deeper into them.  EATING is billed as a comedy, but I thought is was
much more serious than funny, and the end result is that I felt very
depressed about being a woman.  STRANGERS is actually very funny, in a
quiet way, and I left the theater feeling uplifted.
     EATING is about women and food.  And boyfriends and husbands and
careers and friendship and loyalty and trust and childbearing and
daughters and mothers and smoking and drugs and cosmetic surgery.  But
more about food and the way we view our bodies than anything else.  The
overwhelming feeling I have about this movie, a week after seeing it, is
that it is about beautiful women complaining about how ugly and fat they
are.  Now, not all the women in the film have the shapes of Vogue models
(although some did), but most of them had perfectly normal shapes.  And
all these women were talking about their fights with food: how they
would binge, then starve themselves or force themselves to throw up, and
how each of them felt inferior in the company of all the other women.
     This made me think pretty seriously about myself.  I am right now
about the lightest I have been since growing to full size, but yet I
still feel fat.  I'm not thin, but neither am I fat, and I'm actually in
quite good physical shape (I'm exercising lots nowadays).  Now, I could
lose about 10 pounds, and it wouldn't be physically damaging to me, but
on the other hand, it wouldn't make me any healthier either.  Yes, I
would look better *by society's standards*, but is that a sufficient
reason to lose weight?  A man with a build similar to mine would simply
be considered stocky, and no one would suggest that he go on a diet or
ask him if he had gained weight recently.  But as women, we are
subjected to that sort of treatment.
     After seeing this movie, and seeing the extremes this can be taken
to, I say: to Hell with it.  We are beautiful *as we are*; we don't need
to be dangerously thin to look good.  In the past week, since seeing the
film, I have found myself challenging traditional notions of beauty when
expressed by my friends.  I hope this stays with me.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
EATING (1990) *** 1/4.  Written, directed, edited  by Henry 
Jaglom. Photography, Hanania Baer. Set design, Andrea Fenton. 
Cast: Nelly Alard (Martine), Frances Bergen (Mrs. Williams), 
Mary Crosby (Kate) Marlena Giovi (Sadie). Marina Gregory 
(Lydia), Daphne Kastner (Jennifer), Elizabeth Kemp (Nancy), 
Lisa Blake Richards (Helene), Gwen Welles (Sophie), Toni Basil 
(Jackie), Savannah Smith Boucher (Eloise), Claudia Brown 
(Gabby), Rachelle Carson (Cathy), Anne E. Curry (Cory), Donna 
Germain (Gerri), Beth Grant (Bea), Aloma Ichinose 
(Maria),Taryn Power (Anita), Jacquelin Woolsey (Milly). A 
Rainbow release. 110 min. Not rated.  
While lack of food is the greatest concern on this planet, 
among affluent Americans there is too much to eat. This has 
led to an obsession. 
People worry about their jobs, their income, politics, perhaps 
about the environment. But there's no common denominator like 
the fixation on food addiction, its causes, and the bad things 
it does to you. Especially within the large group that is the 
focus of Henry Jaglom's film EATING.
In an incessant stream of giggling arrivals bearing bizarre, 
California-culture, tension-relieving gifts, 38 women come to 
Helene's (Lisa Richards) for her 40th birthday. Most of them 
are younger than she is, and above-average in looks and 
figure. After all, this is Southern California, and the guests 
are in reality professional actresses. They also have heads 
which are probably filled with the helium of the balloons that 
festoon the house. Another reminder of where we are 
geographically.  
Some sanity is introduced by Helene's still-handsome mother. 
As played by Frances Bergen (Edgar Bergen's widow and 
Candice's progenitor), she is relatively wise. Otherwise 
almost everyone else is obsessed with body shape and with 
food. Some are secretly jealous of friends. All are openly 
envious of French guest Martine (Nelly Alard) who's been 
sunbathing topless by the pool. 
"Why do French women have such fantastic bodies?" they wonder. 
The question is valid but also discriminatory. Writer-director 
Jaglom leaves out the millions of men of France who can pig 
out on cuisine and still stay trim. 
Nominally, Martine is there to make a French TV documentary on 
Southern California behavior. Deep down, however, she shares 
the concerns of her American friends. Alternating between 
observing and filming, she is eventually drawn into 
participating. Adding her true feelings to those of others, 
she unexpectedly reveals her own insecurities. 
Jaglom is an oddity, a maverick who works entirely by himself 
and whose subjects are Hollywood people. EATING looks like an 
eavesdropping, voyeuristic Candid Camera film, or at least 
like a theatrical exercise of actors improvising at playing 
ordinary people. In reality this is a very clever, phony 
movie, a "staged documentary" whose every word on cellulite is 
penned by Jaglom and every foot of celluloid is creatively 
edited. Yet the actors are most convincing as real people and 
Jaglom's dialogues are amazingly on target. What an ear, what 
notebooks the man must have! 
The party and Martine's camera catalyze confidences, 
stock-taking and some shifts in relationships. Remember again, 
this is not a cross-section of America but a slice of Southern 
California. It is hard to sort out many of the guests, who are 
different people yet come from basic sets of molds. Hardly  
anyone is really interesting or has any dimensions beyond the 
talk of food. 
The talk brings out connected subjects or worries, such as 
sex, aging, family relations, sex, marriage, ambitions, sex, 
abortions, breast implants, shrinks, sex, and endless 
trivia--but no matter what is said, everything still returns 
to and revolves around the sun of food. The fact that the 
trivia are non-trivial to the speakers intensifies Jaglom's 
irony.   
There have been rather few movies with food as their main 
star. Here is an incomplete list I have hastily compiled.  
Luis Bunuel's surreal THE DISCREET CHARM OF THE BOURGEOISIE 
(1972) where a dinner is always interrupted; Marco Ferreri's 
LA GRANDE BOUFFE (1973), where people gorged themselves 
literally to death; a grotesque restaurant sequence in MONTY 
PYTHON'S THE MEANING OF LIFE (1982); Paul Bartel's EATING 
RAOUL (1982); Juzo Itami's TAMPOPO (1986); Gabriel Axel's 
BABETTE'S FEAST (1987); Peter Greenaway's THE COOK, THE THIEF, 
HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER (1989). 
Since 1990 and EATING we have also seen Jeunet and Caro's 
cannibalistic DELICATESSEN (1991); Alfonso Arau's romantic 
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE (1992); Ang Lee's THE WEDDING BANQUET 
(1993) and EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN (1994). 
Interestingly, the great majority of those films have been 
notable, even outstanding. Most of them are humorous or black 
humorous, while only BABBETTE, LIKE WATER and EAT DRINK 
glorify cuisine.
EATING is a most satisfactory movie too, while, with its 
realistic, cinema-verite approach, it differs a great deal 
from titles above, except that it can be very funny. A random 
example. A woman, anxious to break into movies, asks her 
actress friend: "Do I have to sleep with someone to get a 
part?" There's a tiny pause before the reply: "How big a 
part?" 
The movie proceeds from one little drama to the next.  All are 
ludicrous, most are comical, but some are funny-sad. A 
daughter reveals to her mother how the birth of her young 
sister Nancy drove her to compulsive eating and vomiting. She 
concludes with what cured her: "I finally threw up Nancy."
All this may not be everybody's cup of tea. Even when it is, 
some viewers may find it overlong. I did not. My main 
objection is that only unsophisticated fare is mentioned, 
chocolate chip cookies, baked potatoes and the like. Couldn't 
Jaglom have refined the bill of fare and added Burgundian 
specialties, pasta dishes, sauerbraten, mid-Eastern or Asian 
delicacies, Linzer, Sacher or Dobosch tortes? 
EATING is somewhat better than just good. It gets my three and 
a quarter stars but will not get even a single one from 
Gourmet Magazine. 
