Title
Review for Naked Lunch (1991)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Pedro Sena
The sad thing is that such a great novel, with so many unusual elementals in
it, is very difficult to translate into a film.
The good part, is that this film is fun to watch, despite, it not being able
to follow the book as closely as one would like to see.  I happen to like
the spirit of the work, which William S. Burroughs, creates in almost all
of his writings, stage work, and even in the original stuff he has done for
artist and musician LAURIE ANDERSON. (Sadder yet that she did not appear to
be a part of the film!)
And the neatest part, is that many good actors, just couldn't help
themselves when they had a chance to be a part of such fun and unusual work
to deal with.
The novel is not the easiest thing to bring to a screen.  It is very quick
in that it moves freely between various forms of a stream of consciousness
and narrative moments, or another set of events which the main character
can't quite keep up with, or has to go get himself a fix, disguised, or at
least so he thinks, while his alter ego is having fun with him.  For all
intents and purposes, this is a drug experience piece of work, and when it
is placed on the screen as a formal story, where the character has problems
dealing with his feelings, it quite doesn't come off.  Or Terry Gilliam
should have directed this whole thing, to help blend the inner and outer
aspects of the book.
But it is a rather depressing film, and not specially upbeat, although we
could enjoy all the weird goings on, as a bit of New York surrealism, if not
gutter New York naturalism.  I had enjoyed the book quite a few years
ago, when the Grove Press was making sure all the eclectic writers around
were getting their due.  I have to admit, that while the actors try very
hard and do very well, and nicely with what they have, the film is not as
lively
and jumpy as the novel is.  The novel keeps you interested.  In this film,
it  seems that everything is so casual, and not important....I like the
book.
The movie is good, but the book is better....if you like Burroughs, this
movie will not be your bag.  If you like surrealists, and odd 60's stuff,
this is actually interesting.

Author
Joe Van de Zande
     Well now.  What do you say to sheet lightning dropping from a baby
sky?  Not much.  Even the German shepherd cross I bear has enough sense
to dive for shelter, then peek out at the fireworks.  Lashing and
thrashing.  This is an ugly movie that walks like it talks.
     Details?  Forget it!  Okay, one.  The movie is *not* based on the
novel, not really, though there are two readings and one character from
it.  (Readers of the long gone and sorely missed B&H annals may
recognize Dr. Benway.)   Instead, it's a fantasy about Big Bill himself
in Morocco during the period NAKED LUNCH was written.  Very loosely
based on the recent biography, perhaps.
     Curious about the novel?  It's on my credenza, heavily dog-eared.
Just open it anywhere and read a couple of pages at random; it's one of
those.  Like Delaney's DHALGREN, right?  And would you like to meet the
real Burroughs?  Well you could run him to ground in Lawrence, Kansas,
last I heard, or you  could check out the defrocked priest toward the
end of DRUGSTORE COWBOY.  That's your man.
     Funny?  Umm ... do you laugh when Joan is shooting bug powder into
her breast and describes the sensation as "Kafkaesque"?  Some did,
others blanched.  A matter of taste.  Genri; Uncle Duke in a nasty mood.
Ever read Ciline?  Heh.  Try to him at the River Oaks Waldenbooks.
"Sure.  Behind the Hallmark cards".  One thing: I know it would have
ruined the atmosphere of decay and  corruption, but if I were the
director I'd've been tempted to slip Woody Allen in as ten second cameo
hallucination of the Ginsberg character.  
     This is an atmosphere movie, not one for a big screen.  You can't
go  wrong if you see it in Chicago; I believe it is only playing at the
Esquire on Oak, and the Broadway.  (Yes, silly, on Broadway.  Near
Belmont).  I went to the latter.  Packed.  Get your ticket early then
watch basketball for a while at Reflections two doors south.  (Did you
see DA BULLS work out on Utah?  Mercy.)

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
NAKED LUNCH: An examination of the creative process?  A spy story?  The
new, updated version of REEFER MADNESS?  Or just writer/director David
Cronenburg playing head games?  You decide.
PLOT/KICKOFF: Bill Lee, an ex-addict, ex-writer (?), turned bug
exterminator turned bug powder addict, has to flee the US to go to
Interzone, an Arabic-style refuge populated mainly by the Interzone boys
(hustlers) and giant talking cockroaches, centipedes, and creatures who
eject narcotics from tubes sticking out of their heads.  Or is most of
the action a hallucination?
CHARACTERS/ACTING: Peter Weller (ROBOCOP, BUCKAROO BANZAI) plays Bill
Lee in a low-key way.  His character reacts to the strangest of events
not with hysteria, but mostly with an air of taking it all in,
sponge-like, except when he's having drug reactions.  I found this
worked for the movie on all levels.  An excellent job.  Judy Davis
(IMPROMPTU) plays Joan, Bill's wife in the US and a pawn in Interzone in
a dry, zombie-like way which also worked for this movie.  I did like her
better in Impromptu, but that was a much more likable character, after
all.  Julian Sands plays the mysterious Yves.  I don't know who played
Joan's husband in Interzone (Ian Holm?), the Interzone boy Kiki (?)  or
the various bug voices.  A fine cast, all in all.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX: A tribute to this movie is that all the unbelievable
things going on in this movie didn't *look* unbelievable; they looked
like reality, not F/X.  There's a lot of ugliness in this movie.
VIOLENCE/GORE: bullet holes in bodies, drug injections, but the major
disgust factor was those bugs - gore when they're splattered, gore
during "sex," gore gore gore.  Much worse than THE FLY, IMHO.
LANGUAGE: very offensive language, and lots of homophobic slurs and talk
about them as being perverts, but I think considering the rest of the
movie we weren't supposed to take it any more seriously than the
spy-vs.-spy bugs.
SKIN/SITUATIONS: This movie was a turn-off for me.  Bug "sex" portrayed,
and it's not a pretty sight.  Yeah, some people have sex too.
Analysis: I understand this movie was sort of inspired by William S.
Burroughs' NAKED LUNCH.  I haven't read it, so can't comment on that
aspect of the movie.  As seen in the first section of my review, this
movie has several different levels and possible meanings.  Taken
separately, I don't think they hold up, but strangely enough as a whole
this movie *does* work.  However, yesterday my reaction of "Gross!
Yuck!  Ugh!" etc., still had the upper hand.  It took a couple of days
before I could get past that reaction, but now that I have, I liked much
about the movie, and only wish I'd paid more attention to some of the
lines in the movie (they may have been straight from the book),
particularly the ones about writers.  I don't want to give spoilers, and
I don't want to lecture on what I thought different parts of the movie
meant, but this movie did make me think about what makes a writer tick,
what drives them to write and why they sometimes have to be driven to do
so, what they may have to sacrifice, and how involved they should get
whatever they're writing about.  And surprisingly enough, parts of this
movie were very funny.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
120 min., R, Drama, 1991
Director: David Cronenberg
Cast: Peter Weller, Judy Davis, Ian Holm, Julian Sands, Roy Scheider,
      Monique Mercere, Nicholas Campbell, Robert A. Silverman
     During 1950's in New York City bug exterminator Peter Weller gets
introduced to injecting bug powder into himself by his wife Judy Davis.
He gets addicted and starts hallucinating.  He sees giant bugs which
start controlling his life, as he sinks lower and lower.
     I really can't recommend this film to anyone, because most people
will hate this film.  It is really bizarre and at some points it seems
to be a pointless jumble of nothing.  Other people will probably really
like this film.  I personally felt the film was okay, it wasn't the best
film I have ever seen, but I thought that it was worth watching.  On a
scale of zero to five, I give NAKED LUNCH a three.  NAKED LUNCH is rated
R for explicit language and adult situations.
     NAKED LUNCH is very bizarre, especially when Weller is under the
influence of the bug powder, and I think that this turned a lot of
people off on the film.  The bugs were well created, especially the
typewriter bug.  I think that a lot of thought went into the design and
it greatly improved the film.  Peter Weller (ROBOCOP) put in a wonderful
performance, along with the rest of the cast.
     I think that the bugs were the best part of the film.  As I
mentioned earlier, they were really creative.  I don't think that I have
ever experienced a film like this one before.  I got the feeling during
the film that I was the one high on the powder and the movie was my
hallucination (I know this isn't true because other film reviews on it
have come out.  Philosophy students might want to argue that this isn't
proof, but it is to me.).
     I haven't yet read the book NAKED LUNCH by William S. Burroughs,
but I have heard it has little to do with the film.  NAKED LUNCH is now
out on video, but I would suggest that if the film sounds interesting to
you that you seek out an art theater that is still playing it.  I saw
the film at my local art theater, and after thinking about it, I feel
that a lot of the impact of the film has will be lost on video
cassette.  If the film doesn't sound interesting to you, I would suggest
that you don't bother to see it, even off video cassette, because you
probably wouldn't like it.

Author
Liz Rizzo
Starring Peter Weller, Judy Davis, Julian Sands and Roy Scheider.
Written by William S. Burroughs (novel) and David Cronenberg.  Directed
by David Cronenberg.
There are some films that do more than tell us a story.  They create a
world so vivid, so lovingly created, that we feel transported.  We feel
that we have entered an incredible moving painting: a true motion
picture.  Two films that come to mind:  The Fifth Element and Midnight
in the Garden of Good and Evil.  In each of these very different films,
including Naked Lunch, there is a story.  But it is secondary to the
visual world created and the experience of being in it.
Naked Lunch is loosely the tale of William Lee, or should we say author
William S. Burroughs, and is loosely based on his novel of the same
name.  Our ill-fated protagonist is played to dry perfection by Peter
Weller and is joined by a superior cast of drug addicts, writers,
mysterious strangers and bugs.  Yes, homoerotic bugs play a large part
in this film, and if you can't handle it, you'd better get out now while
you can.
As I watched this film, I couldn't help but think about `normal' authors
- those who have loving families and regular writing schedules.  Those
for whom writing is a joy, to whatever extent that is possible.  But
then, who wants to watch a film about them when tormented, drugged-up,
hallucinating writers give invitations like this?  For as William Lee
falls deeper into his bug powder drug habit, he enters a dark world
called Interzone, and the trippy fun really begins.
This is not a film for everyone.  Much more palatable fare has been
rejected by the average audience for whom watching this film would
probably qualify as cruel and unusual punishment.  But surely every
writer can find a little corner in Interzone, a land where typewriters
become large, roach-like bugs that literally talk out of their ass and
`reports' are always due.  Surely every filmmaker can find something to
admire in this visual triumph.  And if erotic symbolism is your thing,
consider this your trick-or-treat bag after a long night of knocking on
doors.
An invitation to Interzone is an invitation to one author's private hell
and haven.  It is a strange and often uncomfortable place that draws you
in even as it repels you.  For as William Lee tells us, `the Zone takes
care of it's own.'   Care to visit?

Author
John Newman
Directed and written by David Cronenburg
after the book by William S. Burroughs
Starring Peter Weller, Judy Davis, Ian Holm, Julian Sands,
         Monique Mercure
Summary: NAKED LUNCH is a surprisingly conventional movie given
its namesake.  Nonetheless, its depiction of drug use and its
creatively obscene special effects go far beyond typical Hollywood
fare.  Peter Weller stars as William Lee, a writer, exterminator,
junkie and sometime secret agent trying to stay alive and stay high in
the mysterious Interzone.  A top-flight cast of supporting actors turn
in strange and excellent performances as Weller's friends, his wife,
and his acquaintances in the Interzone.  I recommend NAKED LUNCH for
the ambitious film-goer with a high tolerance for the weird.
     A film adaptation of NAKED LUNCH is an ambitious undertaking.
NAKED LUNCH, written by William S. Burroughs, centers on the themes of
drug (and other) addiction and homosexual perversion.  It is without
coherent plot, is set mostly in a paranoid fantasy, and is definitely
the most vile book I have ever struggled to finish.
     The film NAKED LUNCH adopts some characteristics of the book, but
stays within the bounds of traditional cinema.  A storyline is grafted
on, as are recognizable characters.  In fact, the film comes off in many
respects as a parody of detective film noir (such as, say, the film
versions of Raymond Chandler).  THE MALTESE FALCON was never like this,
though.
     William Lee (played by Peter Weller) is an writer and ex-junkie
trying to make it as an exterminator, but having trouble maintaining his
supply of roach killer.  He discovers that his wife Joan (Judy Davis)
has been shooting up the bug powder.  "It's a literary high," she tells
him, "... a Kafka high.  It makes you feel like a bug."  The police
bring William in for questioning, and this is when the film starts
getting very strange.
     In the police station, Lee is recruited as a secret agent.  The
agent-runner is a giant bug, a roach as big as a Compaq, brought to life
by the director's vile imaginings (as an oblique reference to
Cronenburg's earlier hit, THE FLY?) and a generous special effects
budget.  Lee escapes to the Interzone, an Arabian mecca wildly distorted
from Burroughs' experiences in Tangier.  The rest of the tangled and
not-always-coherent plot, you should experience yourself.
     In the Interzone, pleasurable substances and pretty boys are freely
available.  Lee samples all manner of narcotics, from hashish-like
Majoun to "the meat of the giant aquatic centipede."  Typewriters take
on a mythic quality; they direct the authors' work, write on themselves,
and metamorphose into secret-agent-bugs, incubi, and other obscene
creatures.  The aforementioned pretty boys are a major attraction for
visitors and residents of both sexes, and for some residents who aren't
exactly human.
     One notable quality of Cronenburg's treatment is his matter-of-
fact depiction of drug use.  He does not pull away from the needle;
nor does he zoom in on it, as a War On Drugs training film might.  We
see Judy Davis injecting bug powder at full length, without
over-dramatization, as if she were eating lunch.  Incidentally, this
means that Davis must pull this off without stand-ins or fancy camera
cuts; she performs admirably, although some of the audience may have
felt a bit queasy.
     The film is at its darkest when it stays closest to the book.
Peter Weller, as the book's protagonist, occasionally quotes a sentence
or paragraph from the novel, which is so much darker than the film that
he sounds sententious and out of character.
     Once NAKED LUNCH moves to the Interzone and goes hyperbolic, the
plot does not hold together.  Cronenburg's relatively conventional
spy-vs.-spy plot never really makes sense; the actions of the characters
also don't make sense.  What makes NAKED LUNCH worthwhile is the
excellent deadpan performance of Peter Weller and the off-the-wall
portrayals by the supporting cast, set off against the milieu of
Cronenburg's Interzone.  Also, NAKED LUNCH features some excellent
special effects, effects which don't really push the F/X envelope, but
which are quite different from anything you'll see anywhere else.  Do
see NAKED LUNCH, if you're not easily offended; it is an entertaining
film, and it breaks enough rules to put the rest of cinema in a
different light.

Author
James Brundage
Written and Directed by David Cronenberg
Based on the novel by William S. Burroughs
Starring Peter Weller, Judy Davis, Ian Holm, Julian Sands, and Roy Scheider
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 Quick, off the top of your head, tell me all you know about this movie.
 If you recalled fondly the line that Nelson said in an episode of "The
Simpsons" after Bart uses a fake ID to get into this film ("I'll tell you
two things wrong with that title"), then you're like most of America.  I
knew a little bit more coming in: that it was based on a novel by William S.
Burroughs that is the quintessence of non-linear narrative and that it was
directed by David Cronenberg.
 On the way out, I know precious little more.
 Naked Lunch is one of those films that is so mind blowing that it is
baffling.  So intelligent that it feels idiotic, and so strange that you
wonder if you took something beforehand and forgot about it.  Yet it was one
of those movies critics loved.
 In the movie Contact, James Woods asks "Why is it always the opinion of the
egghead set that aliens are friendly?"  Although the answer Jodie Foster
gave back was sufficient, it should have been a more callous response:
"Because we don't fear what we don't understand."  However, among the
intellectual set, things go one step further.  Among the intellectual set,
heresy is saying "I don't get it", and thus hidden meanings that weren't
there in the first place are put into books and movies.  The entire business
is subjective, we will not know the metaphors placed into them unless we
know their makers, and thus everyone is afraid to say "you're wrong" about
what the meaning is.
 The unknown doesn't scare us.  Admitting we don't know it scares us.
 Naked Lunch, like so many movies, has no real point to it.  However,
because it is so weird and so out of our heads it is the automatically taken
position of the intellectual set that "if I don't understand it, it must be
good."  Two things come out of this.  The first is the comedy when someone
tries to give an idiotic explanation of what something means in the midst of
ignorance (i.e. the man who thought "The Unbearable Lightness of Being" was
an expose about Bill Clinton).  The second is the tragedy when people keep
their mouths shut, not brave enough to say what is on their mind.
 What is on my mind, and the mind of just about anyone who has seen the
film, is "what the hell?"  You have no idea what is going on in the movie,
and by the end you still have no idea what is going on in the movie.  Yeah,
you've seen a lot of weird sights (the transvestite drug dealer, the
roach-centipede intelligence war, the cannibalistic typewriters), but you're
no closer to understanding what went down than anyone else is.
 There is a word for this, intellectual elite: incomprehensible.  I know
that it is the "I" word and that you're not supposed to say it in class or
conversation, but that's what Naked Lunch is.
 But, you know, what, it isn't just the intellectuals who do this.
 It's everyone else, too.  For more of my ranting and raving, go to see my
review of The Sixth Sense at www.filmfrenzy.com .
 That is, if you're not tired of hearing something that someone has needed
to say for a long, long time.
 Either way, stay away from Naked Lunch.  Movies such as that will only
confuse you.  They will not entertain you and they will not enlighten you.

