Title
Review for Slums of Beverly Hills (1998)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SLUMS OF BEVERLY HILLS (director/writer: Tamara Jenkins;
cinematographer: Tom Richmond; editor: Pamela Martin; cast: Natasha
Lyonne (Vivian Abramowitz), Alan Arkin (Murray Abramowitz), Marisa Tomei
(Rita Abramowitz), Kevin Corrigan (Eliot), Carl Reiner (Mickey
Abramowitz), Rita Moreno (Belle Abramowitz), David Krumholtz (Ben
Abramowitz), Jessica Walter (Doris), Eli Marienthal (Ricky Abramowitz),
1998)
The heroine in this wacky autobiography learns the hard way that it pays
to be unique, even if that might require an acceptance of her being
unhappy, if the alternative is, that happiness means that you have to be
like everyone else. The film's tone is set with a quote from Tolstoy:
"All happy families are alike; all unhappy families are unhappy in their
own way."
"Slums" is a sharp-witted, biting screwball comedy about a
semi-dysfunctional family who have some problems that prevents them from
being a happy family but not the kind of problems that can't be
overcome. Alan Arkin as Murray Abramowitz is a riot as a dour
65-year-old car salesman who after his divorce has been given custody of
the two boys, the high school student Ben (David) and the elementary
school student Ricky (Eli), and a vivaciously wearied 15-year-old girl,
a soon-to-be freshman in the high school, Vivian (Natasha), whose
coming-of-age experiences during the summer of 1976 will be the focus of
the film. Her wide-eyed and aghast looks at what she sees happening to
her are what give this film its particular flavor and her comical and
sad observations are right-on-target.
For the father, there are two things important about raising children:
they are to get a good education and live at the right address. This is
solved as this economically struggling Jewish family manages to live in
Beverly Hills even if it is only on the outskirts of town, in housing
that is not quite up to snuff. The price they pay for having a Beverly
Hills address, is that they live like nomads, often sneaking out of
their flea-bag apartments in the dead of night, rather than paying their
rent. He is so obsessed with this idea of having a Beverly Hills ZIP,
that he fails to see how he is ruining his family with his unchanging
ways.
Tamara Jenkins' amusing autobiographical "Slums of Beverly Hills" is an
engaging story, that centers on a young girl first becoming acquainted
with her body, her body functions, and her encounters with sex. She does
all this as she learns to live with a household of obnoxious males: a
nosy father, an older brother who is an aspiring actor and a wiseacre,
and a younger brother innocently asking impertinent questions. Murray is
a brash, intrusive, and insensitive single-parent, who means well but
overextends his good intentions and fails to see his mistakes in time.
The film opens as the father takes his daughter to buy her first bra.
She is concerned that her breasts have, as her father says, "sprouted
overnight.''Breasts become a big part of the story, as Vivian doesn't
know quite how to handle her newly found riches, at times, thinking she
is cursed to have such budding breasts, even going to a noted Hollywood
plastic surgeon for a "breast reduction" consultation, but at other
times, she is proud that it attracts so much attention from the opposite
sex.
Moving into their new apartment, which is no different than the "cheap
apartment" they just left, she meets Eliot (Kevin Corrigan), the
flirtatious kid who lives in the next apartment and who is immediately
attracted to her breasts. When she asks the seemingly historical-minded
Charles Manson T-shirted Eliot what high school he goes to, he tells her
"I dropped out of school because I wanted to join the work force,'' to
which she asks, "Doing what?'' And he replies: "Selling pot.'' He will
get to be the first to feel her up, because as she says, this is not a
serious relationship, it is just a "building thing."
With things not going so well for the Abramowitz family, Murray sees a
way out, as his rich brother Mickey (Carl Reiner) has a troubled
29-year-old daughter Rita (Marisa Tomei) who just escaped from a drug
rehab program and can't be controlled by him. He is willing to pay
Murray to take her in with his family and see if he can straighten her
out. This results in Murray getting Rita into a nursing program and him
taking his family to live in a posh Beverly Hills place, the first time
the family is an apartment they are not embarrassed to be at.
Tomei gives a wonderfully over-the-top performance as a lost soul, who
brings her quirky antics into a household that is trying to act like
"people" but can't seem to make it. She becomes buddies with Vivian,
telling her that she is pregnant and speaking with her in a gibberish
pig language which only they can understand. She becomes the big sister
to her and the female friend she desperately needs in the male house and
the one who is hip to things girls are curious about, no matter how
loopy she is. Also, in one madcap sketch, she teaches the young girl the
benefits of dancing around in a nightgown with an extra-large vibrator.
The family sees Beverly Hills through the demo luxury car Murray uses to
transport them after each move, as the kids look out the window and
identify the houses where the stars live, while they are usually on
their way for a steak breakfast at Sizzlers, something the father
splurges for, thinking that meal will keep the kids fit.
Naturally things don't work out according to Murray's plans, of living
off his brother. Rita, accurately observes, that Murray and her are
similar, they are both screwups. The two of them can't change their
errant ways. After one hectic day of nursing school, she realizes that
she is not fit for that vocation.
The family meets in a diner, as Mickey wishes to see what results he has
gotten from paying for Murray's expenses, anxious to question Rita about
what she has learned. But Mickey can't help from being crude and
ridiculing Murray in front of his children and when Murray is served
with a barrage of caustic comments by his brother, who repeatedly
reminds him how he is a failure and a bum, and that if it weren't for
his generosity, his kids wouldn't have clothes on their backs and
wouldn't be fed. This is too much for the vibrant Vivian to hear, as she
sticks a fork into her uncle's leg, and so ends their bourgeoisie digs.
This scene was funny but it was also very hurtful to watch. It touched
on all the nerves that made this into an intense dramatic scene, that
worked so well because the script was tight and the actors were
well-cast, with especially Natasha Lyonne, as the girl who was always
being surprised as she tries to find out who she is. She gives off hope
that she will come out of this childhood experience, scarred but not
beaten, ready to make her way in the world and embrace what her parents
have given her instead of feeling sorry for herself. She has life to
her, which Alan Arkin plays off, as he wisely plays his downbeat role
with a perfect eye for comedy, making all those around him blossom. A
small gem of a film, much better than the sitcom material it portends to
be.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Matt Williams
The nostalgia wave for the 1970s rolls on, this time in the guise of a
coming of age comedy entitled The Slums of Beverly Hills.
The Slums of Beverly Hills follows the path of a destitute family of
transients who make their way living in one cheap hotel after another on
the outskirts of Beverly Hills during the 70s. Why Beverly Hills, you
might ask?  Why, for the good schools, of course.
The central character of the film is Vivian Abramowitz (Natasha Lyonne),
a teenage girl who is just blossoming into womanhood.  Her father,
Murray (Alan Arkin), doesn't quite know what to do with her.  So, when
his niece Rita (Marisa Tomei) falls into his lap straight out of
rehab...it's a double blessing.  Not only does Vivian gain a sympathetic
female ear, but Rita's rich father (Carl Reiner) begins forking over a
healthy stipend to Murray for keeping Rita safe and out of trouble.
Adding to Vivian's confusion is the appearance of her raffish neighbor,
Eliot (Kevin Corrigan).  She doesn't quite understand why she finds
herself attracted to this Charles Manson-obsessed drug dealer, but she
feels compelled to explore her feelings.
The Slums of Beverly Hills rides mostly on the success of Natasha
Lyonne's sharp comic performance.  She manages to capture the confusion,
embarrassment, insecurity and the discoveries of being a teenager with
plenty of humor and insight.
Alan Arkin gives a strong supporting performance as a desperate man
trying to be a good father to his kids even though he has no ground to
stand on.  Marisa Tomei is a bit one-note as the drug-addled Rita, and
Kevin Corrigan is frankly unappealing as Vivian's love interest.
The script fumbles a bit when it comes to a few subplots.  Vivian's
plastic surgery inquiries never pan out either dramatically or
comically. And hints at a more complex relationship between Murray and
Rita fizzle out before anything happens.
But, still, The Slums of Beverly Hills is entertaining in the long run,
and Natasha Lyonne proves she's a talent worth watching.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Alan Arkin, Natasha Lyonne and Marisa Tomei.
Directed By Tamara Jenkins.
Running Time: 1 hour 30 minutes.
Appearing from nowhere, Slums of Beverly Hills turns out to be a pleasant
surprise. Lyonne plays teenager Vivian, who hates her large breasts. We join
her and her family during their adventures in the 'slums' of Beverly hills
(those two floored apartment buildings.) Adding some spice to the drama
Tomei who plays tearaway Rita who's just escaped from a rehab clinic and
lives with Vivian, her dad Murray (an excellent Arkin) and two brothers
Ricky and Ben (Eli Marienthal and David Krumholtz.) Also joining in the fun
is Eliot (Kevin Corrigan) their Jewish neighbour.
Although Slums is nothing more than another coming of age, it is a well made
and funny one. Jenkins, who both directed and wrote the film, has bought to
the screen a wonderfully witty, poignant film that is very hard to dislike.
Although nothing much really happens in the film as a whole, many of the
individual vinaigrettes are funny, and very truthful. Jenkins based much of
this film on her own experiences, and it shows. None of the scenes seemed
force, the whole movie feels natural. And many are downright hilarious. A
scene involving an vibrator had the whole cinema doubled over (even if the
punchline was obvious) and their are various other jokes in the film that
raise laughs.
The cast are also excellent. Lyonne brings an intense honesty to her role,
and Tomei delivers an excellent performance as the dizzy Rita (even better
than her performance in My Cousin Vinny.) Kevin Corrigan is highly memorable
as the intellectual Eliot, and the two brothers are also very good. The best
performance goes to Alan Arkin, however, as the bald headed, stressed out
father. His very natural handling of his character makes him shine through,
he has a gentle honesty about him.
While the acting and events are well realised, there are some flaws with
character development and plot. Sadly, the plot is very threadbare, it seems
more like an collection of sketches loosely tied together. And although the
characters are all likeable, they seem a little stereotypical. Jenkins tries
to develop the characters, but it comes off a little cliched, which is a
little disappointing. The movie never really strays away from the coming of
age formula.
Still, with the excellent performances, the funny jokes, and a bouncy music
score, it is very hard to dislike the movie. While there are problems with
the plot and character development that can be hard to ignore, the honesty
and humour of the film nearly wins through. Jenkins has delivered a
promising debut: let's hope she can work on the flaws for her next movie.
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!
"You know, for kids"- Norville Barnes

Author
David Sunga
Ingredients: Precocious teenage girl during the summer before high
school, family
Starring: Natasha Lyonne, Alan Arkin, Marisa Tomei
Synopsis: 
In this coming of age story a precocious girl named Viv (Natasha Lyonne)
lives with well-meaning family members such as a marijuana-smoking
brother and a ditzy female cousin (Marisa Tomei ) who has run away from
her rich home. The summer before high school, Viv discovers her breasts
have grown large. Before high school starts, she must learn how to use
menstrual pads and a vibrator, lose her virginity, and deal with her
breasts and family.
Opinion:
I applaud the efforts of writer/director Tamara Jenkins, who manages to
provide eccentric, sympathetic characters and writes quite well. At the
same time, I think the subject matter is problematic because of limited
appeal. There's probably not a very wide audience that finds summer
movie entertainment in pre-high school menstrual pads and vibrators.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Slums_of_Beverly_Hills_ (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
In late August, the Fox network is premiering a new period sitcom called
_That_'70s_Show_.  If I didn't know any better, I would have believed that
the pilot had already aired--on the big screen, under the title
_Slums_of_Beverly_Hills_.  For her first film, writer-director Tamara
Jenkins has served up a well-meaning, often engaging comedic slice of 1976
SoCal life, but even its pleasures would seem more at home on the tube.
This is not to say, however, that _Slums_ is without big screen-worthy
virtues.  First and foremost, Jenkins offers an unusually frank depiction
of a teenage girl's sexual awakening, that of 15-year-old Vivian Abramowitz
(Natasha Lyonne).  Vivian is neither completely excited over nor frightened
of her burgeoning womanhood, as films often depict; instead, she occupies a
more realistic, tentative middle ground.  A sore subject for her is her
ever-increasing breast size, but she is not afraid to use the allure of
such assets, allowing a
potential paramour (Kevin Corrigan) to touch them during what is only a
second meeting.  Jenkins also deserves credit for showing Vivian experiment
with a vibrator.  While she deserves credit for the mere inclusion of such
a scene, Jenkins's real accomplishment is making it tasteful, realistic,
and not at all ridiculous.
Lyonne is an endearing lead, and her performance is well-supported by the
rest of the cast, including Alan Arkin as her father, Murray; and Marisa
Tomei as her recovering drug addict cousin, Rita.  However, the cast is
ultimately only as good as the material, and Jenkins's script, while
consistently amusing and full of nicely droll one-liners, is fairly thin.
The title refers to the seedy areas on the fringes of the Beverly Hills
city limits where the divorced Murray insists he and his three
children--Vivian, wisecracking older brother Ben (David Krumholtz), and
nondescript youngest Rickey (Eli Marienthal)--make their home (he wants
them to get the education only the Hills of Beverly schools can provide).
Or, rather, homes--the family rarely stays in one location for longer than
a month, setting the stage for a few location changes that would suit an
ongoing television series.  Then again, a lot of _Slums_ would suit a
series, for the film feels like a pilot for a made-for-Showtime series,
with its formulaic episodes of zaniness (the growing comic complications in
a scene with an unconscious Rita follows a predictable "let's top this"
crescendo), a family member who pops in to stir the pot as a "guest star"
(Rita), plot threads eventually tied together into a cutesy little bow, and
an open ended resolution that screams out "to be continued," all of which
is laced with enough raunch to keep it from seeing broadcast network airwaves.
_Slums_of_Beverly_Hills_ is a reasonably enjoyable lark whose 91 minutes
go down smoothly.  You're guaranteed a laugh here and there, and plenty
more smiles.  But it's the snack food equivalent of film--it satisfies for
a while, but it doesn't fill you up in the long run.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "SLUMS OF BEVERLY HILLS" (Fox Searchlight)
First-time writer/director Tamara Jenkins scores with bawdy
humor and solid performances in this bizarre coming-of-age comedy.
"Happy families are all alike," reads the prologue. "Every unhappy
family has its own story." Based on her own memories of growing up on
the wrong side of the 90210 zip code, the story revolves the fractured
Abramowitz family whom Ms. Jenkins refers to as "nomads of divorce."
The movie begins in 1976, as the downwardly mobile father (Alan Arkin)
is once again moving his three children in search of a better
lifestyle. Firm in the belief that "furniture is temporary, but
education is forever," he is determined to stay within the Beverly
Hills school district, even if it's in "Casa Bella," a bleak two-story
apartment building with a fancy name and cheap rent. Natasha Lyonne is
the adolescent heroine. Confused and impressionable, she must cope
with distressingly well-developed breasts, an awkward situation only
exacerbated by her dysfunctional father and two insensitive
brothers. Complicating the situation, her wild, straight-out-of-detox
cousin (Marisa Tomei) arrives - to share her bedroom and teach her how
to use a vibrator. Then there's the boy-next-door (Kevin Corrigan)
who, in this case, is a Charles Manson-obsessed drug-dealer; the rich
uncle and aunt (Carl Reiner, Rita Moreno); and a snobbish, neurotic
socialite (Jessica Walter). Ms. Jenkins developed her script at the
Sundance Institute - hence Robert Redford's name as executive producer
- but her quirky humor is quite heavy-handed and she needs to learn
how to do some judicious editing. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Slums of Beverly Hills" is a raunchy, rowdy 5, a romp that's
probably too vulgar for mature movie-goers but should get laughs from
younger audiences.

Author
James Sanford
For most people, adolescence is a lonely, often humiliating time and,
writer-director Tamara Jenkins argues in the perceptive "Slums of Beverly
Hills," it's a lot lonelier and more humiliating if you have the misfortune
to be the only female in a family that's more worried about staying a step
ahead of creditors than it is concerned making about your adjustment to
womanhood easier.
 Such is the plight of 14-year-old Vivian Abramovitz (Natasha Lyonne, who
played Woody Allen's scheming daughter in "Everyone Says I Love You") in
1976 Los Angeles. She thinks her recently developed breasts are a curse,
since they make her the butt of coarse jokes. Even worse, her father Murray
(Alan Arkin) doesn't see anything wrong with dragging Vivian and her
brothers Ben (David Krumholtz) and Rickey (Eli Marienthal) all over the city
in a series of impromptu moves, most of which happen shortly before the rent
is due on whatever "dingbat" apartment they're in.
 Vivian complains but her words fail to sway Murray. So the Abramovitzs
drift from one semi-seedy home to another, finally landing on the very brink
of Beverly Hills because Murray wants to take advantage of the good school
system. "Is this it?" Vivian asks as the quartet settles in at their
so-called "luxury" digs at the Camelot, decorated in ghastly shades of
harvest gold. "Are we bourgeoise yet?"
 Reminiscent of Patty Dann's charming novel "Mermaids" and the delightful
1990 film based on it, Jenkins' semi-autobiographical screenplay is a
haunting reminder of what it feels like to be the kind of unfortunate teen
who gets caught almost everytime she tries something a little adventurous.
When he sees his daughter all but spilling out of a halter, Murray insists
Vivian wear an over-the-shoulder bra underneath the top. And luckless Vivian
is later discovered by her dad dancing (which is bad enough) while clutching
a certain item (which makes it much, much worse).
 Although she's the center of attention in almost every scene, Lyonne proves
she's more than up to the challenge of carrying "Slums." She never overplays
Vivian's gawkiness nor her petulance, finding a charming middle ground.
Though it's a sad fact of Hollywood life that "unusual-looking" young women
like Lyonne rarely go on to major stardom, here's hoping this offbeat beauty
can beat the odds; she's genuinely funny and easy to identify with.
 Arkin, who too often underplays to the point of becoming wallpaper, offers
a surprisingly fine interpretation of Murray's silent desperation. Once a
successful restaurant owner, this sixtysomething man is now reduced to
flirting with a widowed sugar mama (Jessica Walter) to scrounge up some
extra cash.
 When cousin Rita (a delightfully zonked Marisa Tomei, in her first good
role in ages) shows up at their doorstep after escaping from a detox clinic,
"Slums" truly shifts into high gear, as the Abromovitzs go to great lengths
to try to keep Rita clean and sober, the better to use her to squeeze a
generous allowance out of rich Uncle Mickey (Carl Reiner) and Aunt Belle
(Rita Moreno). Meanwhile, Vivian has her hands full trying to resolve her
relationship with Eliot (Kevin Corrigan), a pot-dealing Charles Manson
admirer who nevertheless wins her heart.
 Not all of "Slums" works: Jenkins overplays her hand with an ill-advised
scene between Murray and Rita, and some of the scenes depicting Vivian's
sexual awakening would seem crass were it not for Lyonne's presence. But
it's rare to find a comedy with so many memorably etched characters and
rarer still to come across a movie set in the 1970s that doesn't continually
beat you over the head with goofy period relics. By the end of "Slums,"
you'll want to know more about the Abromovitzs, and any film that makes you
actually hope for a sequel must be pretty good.
James Sanford

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Tamara Jenkins
Cast:  Natasha Lyonne, Alan Arkin, Marisa Tomei, Eli Marienthal, David
Krumholtz, Kevin Corrigan
Screenplay:  Tamara Jenkins
Producers:  Michael Nozik, Stan Wlodkowski
Runtime:  91 min.
US Distribution:  Fox Searchlight (20th Century Fox)
Rated R:  strong sexual situations, nudity, language, drug content
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Slums of Beverly Hills is, among other things, a quirky coming-of-age
tale about 14 year-old Vivian Abramowitz (Natasha Lyonne). 
Writer/director Tamara Jenkins diagrams a few months in the life of
young Vivian and her very-Jewish family -- her father, Murray (Alan
Arkin), and her brothers (Eli Marienthal and David Krumholtz).  They're
a group of nomads (as they like to put it) who move around Beverly Hills
from one cheap apartment complex to the next.  Murray's reason for doing
this is so that his kids can still go to the good schools, even though
they are, in fact, living in the slums of Beverly Hills.  
There are a lot of complications that arise; the most prominent,
perhaps, are the sexual developments that Vivian must endure.  At the
age of 14, she's irregularly large-breasted (I believe the common term
is "stacked," although it doesn't sound quite right in formal writing). 
She hates her breasts, even though they're perfect.  She also fumbles
about with the drug-dealing neighbor, Eliot (Kevin Corrigan).  The other
major subplot involves Murray's niece, Rita (Marisa Tomei), who comes to
live with the fam because she doesn't like her father.  Rita is a flake,
and also addicted to drugs, so, though she does bond with Vivian, she
also brings chaos to the household.
There's a lot going on in Jenkins' feature debut, and while it's a
likable and often hilarious film, it suffers from massive tonal
problems, and contains material that doesn't seem appropriate in a film
that is, at the core, pretty light-hearted.  There are some great scenes
with a vibrator, but there are some not-so-great scenes that involve
dialogue spoken entirely in Gibberish (the film introduces Gibberish as
a language all its own).  Jenkins also felt the need to slap us across
the face with her themes, which makes me wonder how confident she is in
her audience.  Jenkins is clearly a gifted writer and director; she just
needs to work on consistency.
The nice thing about Slums of Beverly Hills is that it's really funny. 
There are scenes that are immensely satisfying, such as the one I
mentioned above.  As I said, it involves a vibrator, but not in the
sense you might be thinking.  Much of the dialogue is razor sharp and
oozing with cynicism.  Many of the exchanges between the young,
sexually-active children are hilarious, including one meeting between
Vivian and Eliot:  "Do you want to touch my breasts?" she asks.  Without
flinching, without even smiling, he replies, "okay."  
The acting is very good, particularly from Lyonne.  She hits all the
right notes for this performance, giving Vivian equal portions of
bitchiness and likability.  Lyonne is an incredibly talented actress,
and her capacity for big, deep roles is apparent here:  she does so much
for this character that I felt like she was a real person by the end of
the film.  Arkin is also terrific; on the surface, it looks a lot like
most of his other performances, but he effectively conveys the
desperation of a poor man who has to look dignified to his children. 
The other notable performance is from Tomei, who is wonderful here. 
She's such a beautiful, energetic actress; unfortunately, all of her
dramatic scenes here are flaunted by Jenkins' errors in tone.
The worst scene takes place in a bathroom, just before Rita is to
present herself to her father.  It's basically a fight sequence between
Rita and Vivian, but they're talking in Gibberish.  The scene should be
leaning towards the serious side, but the Gibberish makes it impossible
to simply pay attention to what they're saying, let alone be moved by
the words.  Overall, the film is realistic, but scenes like this (and
there are a few) are surrealistic, and don't belong here.  The other
very bad scene involves a brief display of inappropriate conduct (that's
inappropriate in the Bill Clinton sense) between Murray and Rita.  The
scene not only has no relevance, but it blemishes our opinion of Murray,
which isn't necessary -- he's flawed enough as it is.  
I did like Slums of Beverly Hills, but my final impression is too mixed
to give it a strictly positive review.  Jenkins knows how to write
comedy, and her story is very insightful into the growing process of
girls.  Despite it's flaws, this film is worth seeing; I imagine,
however, that Jenkins will have cleaned up her act by the time her next
film roles around.  There's too much talent here to dismiss.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Tamara Jenkins
Starring: Natasha Lyonne, Alan Arkin, Marisa Tomei, Keith Corrigan, David
Krumholtz, Eli Marienthal, Jessica Walter, Rita Moreno, Carl Reiner
There are many reasons why I enjoyed "The Slums of Beverly Hills," but I
think the aspect I admire the most is that it's poignant but never
heavy-handed.  So many autobiographical films make sure that there are many
a funny moment, but then isolate those from the similarly isolated dramatic
moments.  It's as if the film would be the same if it just had someone
enter the scene holding a sign that said "Now here's the dramatic part of
the film."  "The Slums of Beverly Hills" doesn't do that, and it's still
poignant.  It moves effortlessly from hysterical moments to more dramatic
moments but never feels like it's overly organized.
But that's hardly the only good thing about this film.  "The Slums of
Beverly Hills" is a feverlishly entertaining film with a fresh take on that
point in all of our lives when we begin to mature sexually and we're not
quite sure what to make of it.  We all go through that, though not all of
us go through what Vivian Abramowitz, the lead character, goes through, and
that's the sudden rack-dom thereof (read: she got her boobies).  Nearly
overnight, she has jumped from an A cup to a C cup, and in the film's
opening scene, finds she's being given her first significant braissere.
Vivian is played by Natasha Lyonne, the wonderful young actress from Woody
Allen's "Everyone Says I Love You" (and, less significantly, "Krippendorf's
Tribe," which she was actually very good in), who has wild red curly hair,
and seems to be blessed with a face that is both in perpetual snarl and
forever cuteness.  She provides the voice and characterization of the
film's writer and director, Tamara Jenkins, who no doubtedly had a similar
experience back in her youth.
The film takes place in 1976, and we are introduced to Vivian and her
family, headed by her 65-year old father, Murray (a priceless Alan Arkin),
an unsuccessful used car salesman.  Murray's not the greatest father, but
he does indeed have a great love for them that's his big strong point. 
Vivian also has two brothers, one older one, Ben (David Krumholtz, who, I
see, didn't have to change him hair style after doing "The Ice Storm" prior
to this), a hilarious pothead/musical-freak who knows way too much useless
information; and a younger one, Ricky (Eli Marienthal), who's just weird. 
Together they're a strange family, but their strangeness is their own,
making them unique like every other family in the world.
Since Murray has so little money, they have to live in the lower rent areas
of Beverly Hills (they stay for the schooling), and are constantly being
awoken in the middle of the night so they can move to other places so they
can avoid the rent.  The film's main center happens when their cousin Rita
(Marisa Tomei) hikes out to the West Coast from the East Coast so she stay
with them instead of her tyrannical rich father, Mickey (Carl Reiner), who
ends up supplying Murray with a monthly sum if he watches over her and
causes her to try and get ahead in life.
So begins the rest of the film, as they live in a nice apartment, and
Vivian begins to learn all about sex, not only from Rita, who introduces
her to the enigma known as the vibrator (which launches a scene which is
the best vibrator joke since "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About
Sex," and one other extremely poignant and hilarious scene), but also from
a tennant she meets in one of her older apartments, Eliot (Kevin Corrigan),
a marijuana dealer who piques her interest for awhile.
"Slums of Beverly Hills" is wonderfully organized so that it's not so
organized, and as a result it comes off as a sometimes episodic remembrance
of an important period that is often overlooked in autobiographical films. 
It's as if it were a modern-day version of Truffaut's "The 400 Blows," if
it were funnier, less traumatic, and much more randy.  Tamara Jenkins finds
a strong voice, one that is very perceptive to what living in that time
period was like and especially what it was like living during that period
that we all go through.
The film would seem less substantial if it weren't for the flawless casting
of Lyonne, who provides the film with such a strong performance that it
avoids the mistake that many films like this succumb to: she's as
interesting if not more than all of her extremely eccentric supporting
characters.  Most films like this provide us with a boring, lifeless
protagonist, and allow the supporting characters to do all the work. 
Lyonne's Vivian is an increasingly watchable and lovable character, who is
cynical and curious about everything that's going on around her, and by the
end, she's the character we remember the most.
But while it's very personal, it also works as a giant ensemble piece, and
the supporting characters are incredibly wonderful.  Alan Arkin reminds us
what a cinematic treasure he is, with a performance which is perfectly
nuanced and the right mix between stern and malleable.  His breakdown
scene, though featuring an element that just plum doesn't work, is a sight
to behold.  Tomei, who's been in a bit of a career slump as of late, shows
that she's still a great comic actress.  Corrigan, a staple of indie/art
house films, gives a greatly funny performance.  And Krumholtz acts as a
major scene stealer, a more confident symbol of Jewish neuroticism than,
say, Woody Allen.
If there's anything wrong, it's that the ending is a bit of a mess.  A
series of scenes at an airport lack the irony and material to really
succeed.  No matter.  It worked for me in that it brought the film to a
satisfying close that is mature and intelligent.  Which is basically what
you get here: a series of sequences that mostly work, and others that fail
honorably, and as a whole, a film that's not only poignant, but perhaps
more importantly, entertaining as hell.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Scott Renshaw
SLUMS OF BEVERLY HILLS
(Fox Searchlight)
Starring:  Natasha Lyonne, Alan Arkin, Marisa Tomei, Kevin Corrigan.
Screenplay:  Tamara Jenkins.
Producers:  Michael Nozik and Stan Wlodokowski.
Director:  Tamara Jenkins.
MPAA Rating:  R (adult themes, nudity, sexual situations, profanity)
Running Time:  91 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Sometimes I just want to shake a film-maker who doesn't seem to
understand the strengths of her own story.  Take Tamara Jenkins, for
example, the first time writer/director behind SLUMS OF BEVERLY HILLS.
Her tale centers around the Abramowitz family, a semi-dysfunctional clan
living in Southern California circa 1976.  Papa Murray (Alan Arkin) is a
no-luck car salesman coping with persistent financial short-falls and
being a single parent to his three children, most problematic his only
daughter, 14-year-old Vivian (Natasha Lyonne).  Vivian is having enough
trouble dealing with typical teenage problems, like her suddenly daunting
breast size, without the added stress of moving from apartment to
apartment every few months to stay one step ahead of eviction.
     The mid-70s setting at first seems fairly arbitrary, a token attempt
at period color, but eventually the two main characters deepen the
resonance of the time.  Murray, the 65-year-old father of three young
children, is still very much a 1950s-style father, evidenced by a
throwaway scene in which he summons a black waiter in a restaurant with a
racial slur.  He defines his success as a father by his ability to provide
for his family, and makes it his goal to live in an area which will still
allow his children to go to the best schools (the "slums" of Beverly
Hills described in the title).  He certainly can't be the sensitive,
worldy parent Vivian needs as she begins exploring her sexuality in a time
light years removed from Murray's adolescence.  How can you discuss sex
with a dad who insists that you wear a bra with a halter top?
    That relationship forms the foundation for a solid story where the
laughs could have come from simple character interaction.  The two lead
performances are earnest and sympathetic, showing a strained affection
between father and daughter where communication is a challenge at best.
Lyonne in particular pulls off some difficult scenes of teenage sexual
experimentation without a hint of exploitativeness, ably assisted by Kevin
Corrigan as the next door neighbor with whom she experiments.
     Why, then, must Jenkins get hyper-quirky on us by introducing
Vivian's free-spirited older cousin Rita (Marisa Tomei), a troubled,
pregnant, recovering drug addict who comes to stay with Murray's family?
There's nothing faintly interesting or real about Rita or her problems;
they're like the shenanigans of a wacky relative on a television sit-com.
Every scene with Tomei is an over-the-top distraction, turning a low-key
character study into forced farce.  It's hard to take SLUMS seriously
when a tearful exchange between Vivian and Rita involves a gobbledegook
secret childhood language.
     It's not as though Jenkins needed to pad the running time because
there wasn't anything more substantial with which to fill it.  She never
quite explains why Vivian's mother is never discussed, never quite
explains what happened to the restaurant Murray once ran successfully,
never quite gives fully rounded personalities to Vivan's two brothers
(David Krumholtz and Eli Marienthal).  There's enough going on in that
slightly radioactive nuclear famliy to fill a feature film without
bringing in Crazy Cousin Rita.  SLUMS OF BEVERLY HILLS draws you in with
some sensitive observations about a family trying to cope with a profound
generation gap, as well as with a breakout performance by the
unconventionally fetching Lyonne.  Then, it starts pushing you away with
gratuitous eccentricity.  I wish Jenkins had showed more faith in Murray
and Vivian.  Like the Abramowitzes themselves, she doesn't seem to know
how good she really has it.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Furniture is temporary; education is forever," Murray Abramowitz 
lectures his kids in writer and director Tamara Jenkins's tale of modern 
nomads living in poverty in the shadows of great wealth.
     As Murray, Alan Arkin delivers a heartfelt and bittersweet 
performance as a working father whose two talents in life are mooching 
off his older brother and (just barely) scraping by.  He wakes the kids 
in the dead of night every few months so they can steal away without 
paying the rent at one cheap apartment in order to pull the same scam 
later at a new one.  (Many will write this off as a plot device, but 
since I have one close relative whose family got by with a similar ruse 
in the Great Depression, I could identify with their plight.)  The 
Abramowitzs live in squat, ugly, stucco boxes with ironic names like the 
"Casa Bella" apartments.
     Murray wants only the best for his children with his favorite treat 
being steak for breakfast so that the meat will strengthen them.  When 
the kids want to move to some place cheaper, like Torrance, he 
vociferously tells them no.  "We're staying in Beverly Hills for the 
good schools and the good address," he explains resolutely.  Even if 
they have to live in what goes for slum housing on the outskirts of the 
stars' homes, they are in the right ZIP code and school district.
     It would have been easier to have had Murray be unemployed, but the 
smart script gives Murray a job -- user car salesmen -- without the 
skills to make much money from it.  Arkin is quite convincing as a dad 
who adores his family but is a failure as a breadwinner.  He's ashamed 
of having to grovel and cheat, but he does whatever is necessary for his 
family and himself.  In a telling scene, he has a chance to send his 
three kids back to his ex-wife, but, as a senior citizen, he admits that 
his children provide him his raison d'ętre.
     His only daughter, Vivian, is the film's central character.  Played 
with spunk by the big, expressive-eyed Natasha Lyonne, teenage Vivian 
exudes pathos as a girl bursting, rather reluctantly, into adolescence.  
Set in the summer of 1976, the movie focuses on Vivian's suspected 
"deformity."  
     "What seems to be the problem?" asks the tony Beverly Hills doctor 
whom a friend had recommend she see to fix her problem.  "Breasts!" she 
retorts disgustedly.  The poor girl is aghast to find that she has 
developed full-fledged breasts.  She's sure that they are so large that 
people will laugh at her so breast reduction surgery might be just the 
answer.
     Marisa Tomei plays Rita, the 29-year-old daughter of Murray's older 
brother.  She is a free spirit who likes flashing her breasts in order 
to hitch rides.  Rita, who just left rehab, temporarily joins Murray's 
family in another one of Murray's schemes to extort money from his 
brother.  While there, she and Vivian hit it off.  The best scenes of 
them involve Rita's vibrator, which they use to put on a dance routine a 
la SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER in their shared bedroom.  Vivian, in a delicate, 
funny, and slightly erotic scene, finds even better uses for the 
vibrator when Rita isn't there.
     The comedy rarely subsides, and yet the picture is more touching 
than funny.  Director Jenkins has a deft touch in blending in plenty of 
humor to keep us interested while she weaves a poignant tale of a 
struggling family who manage to always keep their heads up and their 
bags packed.
     SLUMS OF BEVERLY HILLS runs 1:31.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, 
profanity and drug content, and would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Bob Bloom
 Eccentric families are a movie staple dating to the screwball comedies of
the 1930s.
 But in these more complex times the family dynamics are more complicated.
Humor can still be mined from the family situation, but it's harder to hit
a mother lode these days.
 Slums of Beverly Hills does come close though. Told through the eyes of
15-year-old Vivian Abramowitz (Natasha Lyonne), the story centers on the
family's constant struggle for a better lifestyle, as typified by Vivian's
father, Murray (Alan Arkin), who is constantly moving the family from one
cheap apartment to another, albeit all in the Beverly Hills School
District.
 Murray is one of life's losers. He's a former restaurant owner turned car
salesman. He lives mostly off the charity of his older brother, Mickey.
 Murray's one goal is to be able to maintain a lifestyle that will allow
his kids to stay in the school district. After all, he reasons about their
constant moves, "furniture is temporary, education is forever."
 All this turmoil is not helping Vivian. She's a "late bloomer" who is not
too happy with her new bodily contours. Also upsetting is the fact that
it's the center of family discussion among her father and two brothers.
 To the rescue comes Rita (Marisa Tomei), the family's crazy cousin who
recently escaped from a drug rehabilitation center.
 To get more money from Mickey, Murray promises to look after Rita and help
get her straightened out.
 Rita, in her own unorthodox way, is an affirmative influence for Vivian,
helping her realize the positives about herself as well as helping her
understand her budding sexuality.
 Slums of Beverly Hills is an eccentric comedy written and directed by
Tamara Jenkins. The movie marks Jenkins' feature debut, and if Slums is any
indication of her talent, she is a filmmaker who will be making an impact.
 Her writing is witty, sharp and crisp. Her directorial style is direct,
ignoring the fancy camera angles and movements used by many young,
first-time directors who use the camera more as a toy than as a part of the
filmmaking process.
 Her characters are multitextured and all too human.
 Murray, for example, is both comical and a bit tragic. Yet as played by
the wonderful Alan Arkin, he is someone you respect even as you pity his
situation. Near the film's finale, Jenkins stages a wonderful scene in an
airport restaurant in which Murray insists on picking up the check for
breakfast.
 He is rebuked and belittled in front of his children by Mickey (a jovial
venal Carl Reiner) for trying to play the big shot since whatever money
Murray has ultimately came from Mickey.
 Jenkins elicits strong performances from Lyonne and Tomei. Despite their
age difference the two are more like sisters than cousins. They even have
their own special, secret language.
 You root for this family to rise above its problems. Despite a less than
happy outcome, the family at least remains intact, its members having
strengthened their bonds.
 Slums of Beverly Hills is an interesting, comedy-drama. It will make you
laugh and at times it may shock you. You may even recognize aspects of your
own family in the Abramowitz clan.
  Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
Ind. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Wallace Baine
'Slums' an endearing look at growing up in the 1970s
Another stereotype falls in writer/director Tamara Jenkins's coarsely funny
and surprisingly touching first feature `Slums of Beverly Hills.' Unlike a
certain tired TV show, this one features a handful of kids from the world's
most elite zip code who don't look like their first words as babies were
`Vidal Sassoon.' In fact, Jenkins points out in this autobiographical
coming-of-age comedy set in the summer of 1976, even Zsa Zsa's neighborhood
has its white trash.
Front and center is bug-eyed Vivian Abramowitz (Natasha Lyonne of `Everyone
Says I Love You'), a gawky teenager struggling to make her way through
adolescense in a barely functional family of males with no tact when it
comes to the special challenges of female puberty. It's bad enough that her
older brother is always making cracks about her rapidly expanding bust and
everyone mistakes her father for her grandfather. On top of that, Dad (Alan
Arkin) is constantly moving the family from one cheesy Beverly Hills
apartment building to another, skipping out on rent when necessary and
struggling to ride out a slump in his job as a car salesman (He trying to
sell giant American-made gas guzzlers during the oil crisis).
As if that weren't hard enough for a girl to whom dignity is denied every
day, here comes a new neighbor, a leering dope dealer with an alarming
admiration for Charles Manson and thirst to see Vivian naked. And then,
enter Rita (Marisa Tomei), the out-of-control cousin fresh from a stint in
drug rehab, who moves in as a kind of female role model for Vivian. Rita's
apparent reasons for living, however, seem limited to vibrators and
Seconals.
With her frizzled mop of red hair and her doofus bearing, Lyonne plays
Vivian as a girl not yet sure how to wield her sexual weapons (`It's just a
building thing,' she says to her neighbor trying to keep him from blabbing
after he fondles her suddenly womanly breasts). Vivian looks at the
wreckage of family neurosis around her and can't decide whether to rebel or
join in. Her role is primarily to play as foil to the weirdos around her
and when these prickly personalities bounce off each other, `Slums' finds
an entertaining sense of comic mania.
Jenkins's script, heavy on girl-centric themes such as sprouting breasts
and menstruation, nicely surfs that territory between pain and humor. In
nearly every scene, Vivian's self-image is assaulted by the mega-ton
embarrasments of adolescense. At one point, she is trapped with a `girl
problem' in the bathroom of her dad's post-menopausal lady friend (Jessica
Walter). The woman comes to the rescue, digging around for products she
hasn't used in years, finally producing a maxi-pad as large as tennis shoe
with an accompanying `menstrual belt' to keep everything in place. Vivian's
slack jaw and slumping eyes betrays an oceanic mortification.
Marisa Tomei is also stellar in her role as Rita, the daffy cousin who
can't seem to keep her clothes on. But this film's most endearing
performance comes from Alan Arkin who as divorced dad Murray Abramowitz
puts up with the indignities of poverty to keep his children in the highly
regarded Beverly Hills school district. He is the very picture of Dad-ness:
insisting Vivian wear a bra under her halter top or, dragging the whole
brood off to T-bones at the Sizzler ... for breakfast. But, ultimately, his
is a kind, warm portrayal and is the film's most convincing evidence that
director Jenkins harbors no bitterness about her unorthodox upbringing.
It's refreshing to see the '70s themes not played as obviously as other
similarly set films tend to do. The details, however, are impeccable from a
genuine delight for shag carpeting to the omnipresent flickers of `Let's
Make a Deal' on the TV. Jenkins presents the '70s in loving memory as a
benighted time when Trix cereal could happily co-exist with bong hits,
neither of which are often associated with Beverly Hills. There goes
another stereotype.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   An ingenious mixture of (so to speak) broad comedy and
poignance, "Slums of Beverly Hills" works as both a
heartwarming ode to the joy of family living and screwball
comedy; not untypical ingredients in a teenager's coming-of-
age tale.  With an old pro like Alan Arkin anchoring the story
as the down-on-his-luck father of three kids who love him just
the way he he is, "Slums of Beverly Hills" avoids the laugh-a-
second genre of TV sitcom.  Instead it provides a deeper, more solid
account of a month or so in the life of a 14-year-old whose
dad will try anything to secure for her a good education and
favorable role models.  The movie is well cast with Marisa
Tomei in one of her usual madcap role with Natasha Lyonne
ably matching Ms. Tomei's considerable talent.
   The story is told from the point of view of the 14-year-old
Vivian (Natasha Lyonne), a perspective that might both
amuse and surprise people who haven't a clue what it's like to
be a 14-year-old undergoing physical and emotional changes. 
Vivian is obsessed with her breasts, which--as her 65-year-old
dad, Murray (Alan Arkin) comfortably points out--seem to have
sprouted overnight.  The revelation is that she considers her
bosom too large, despite the advice of the matronly
saleswoman in the bra store who assures her, "Breasts are
wonderful; you'll see."  Vivian's family--which includes her
older brother Ben (David Krumholtz) and her kid brother
Rickey (Eli Marienthal), are always on the move.  Since their
dad's auto dealership has never been really successful, they
are forced to move out regularly in the middle of the night to
stay a step ahead of the landlord.  To allow Vivian to take
advantage of the excellent school system of Beverly Hills,
Murray makes sure to reside in the town--but in shabby, one-
bedroom quarters with fancy names in rooms that seem held
together by Scotch tape.  
   Murray's big chance comes when his rich brother Mickey
(Carl Reiner) asks him to board Mickey's drug-addicted and
wild daughter, Rita (Marisa Tomei).  The 28-year-old, secretly
pregnant woman is destined to introduce her innocent 
cousin Vivian to the meaning of womanhood, their connection
best brought out by the movie's most hilarious scene, a
Dionysian dance which the two take part in while tossing a
running vibrator between them.  Also doing his part to
introduce Vivian to sex is her neighbor Eliot (Kevin Corrigan),
a nice chap who happens to sell pot for a living (not
uncommon in California in 1976).  
   Tamara Jenkins, who wrote and directed the movie, does
well in showing the parallel needs of Vivian's 65-year-old dad,
a divorced man who is also concerned about his sexuality and
seeks to form a liaison with a prim and proper friend, Doris
(Jessica Walter).  Their alliance is unlikely to be a happy one,
as shown in one scene, a dinner party, in which Doris shrieks
when she discovers that Vivian has ruined the needlepoint
cover on her chair when Vivian's period begins without
warning.
   Nothing is particularly new about "Slums of Beverly Hills,"
but splended performances particularly by Alan Arkin,
Natasha Lyonne and Kevin Corrigan make the picture a
welcome addition along with "Home Before Dark" to your
repertory of coming-of-age entertainments.
