Title
Review for Andrei Rublyov (1969)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
 While I find this film rather good, and just crying to be great, there is a
sad thing seen here..... and it is hard to tell if it is an aging film
community in Russia that is now trying to find its spark with  a new
identity, or, is it that the rapid changes in the Soviet Union have caused
the film community to fall apart, and it takes an effort by the likes of a
Tarkovsky, to keep it alive.
 There are several lapses in the print I saw, which seem to indicate that
there are a few problems in that industry.  The soundtrack is terribly
disjointed and more than once there are no sounds that appear that have
absolutely nothing to do with the events on the screen.  And the voice track
is also severely off sync in various spots, through out the vignettes in
this film.
 SYNC... that seems to be the theme if this rather long, but interesting
exercise in the development of a film that is done in 9 vignettes ( that's
how many I counted ) that cover about 23 years in the life of Andrei Rublev,
and what may have helped the painter come up with the art style that he used
to paint the Trinity church in St. Petersburg.
 The time is between 1400 and 1423, an unstable time in Russian history ( as
it was when the film was being done... ) and Andrei has been commissioned to
paint the cathedral -- but he is lacking the inner desire, or the vision, to
make his work come alive, and it takes him nearly 20 years to get to the
church for which his name is now imprinted in art history books.
 With a very typical Russian style of acting -- very serious -- long
monologues -- very detailed speech -- very thoughtful ( ie.. heads looking
upwards ) -- this film does not really bore the viewers despite its near
four hours, as much as it leaves us wondering where this story  is taking
us.  Possibly to the same discoveries that Andrei Rublev had to go through.
 The tradition of the Russian film is quite alive, even in the visual style
of Tarkovskey, something which allows the actors plenty of space to work
with, who are obviously well rehearsed, and do a fine job, even in dual
roles for at least four or five actors.
It is a good film, but are we ready for philosophy in movement, rather than
a story about a philosophy...??? That is Tarkovskey.

Author
David Arnold
Andrei Rublev (1969, Andrei Tarkovsky)
A retrospective review by David M. Arnold
Andrei Tarkovsky might very well have been the most gifted filmmaker in the
short 100-year history of the medium.  Tarkovsky is the other of the two
Soviet filmmakers apt to be familiar to American film dilletantes (the first
being Sergei Eisenstein).  With "Andrei Rublev", Tarkovsky elevates
filmmaking to an Art that requires as much intellectual investment on the
part of the observer as does the poetry of T.S. Eliot or the novels of James
Joyce.        And, he produced the this, as well as the bulk of his film output, in
the Soviet Union during the late '60's and '70's under a political regime
that, although not the most repressive, was still notorious for suppression
of creative art. The greatest irony is that "Andrei Rublev", a decidedly
uncommercial film made on an epic scale, could ONLY have been produced by a
subsidized film industry within a centrally controlled economy not driven by
the profit motive. It could not have been made in Hollywood.
Andrei Rublev was a Russian historic figure who flourished during the end of
the 14th century.  Rublev was the most important medieval Russian painter of
religious icons and frescos.  He is considered the father of the first native
Russian style of iconography.  Tarkovsky uses Rublev as the central figure in
his long, meditative reflection on the the meanings of Life, Faith and Art.
The film has no real plot and no protagonist:  Rublev (played by Anatoli
Solonitsyn, who portrayed Dr. Sartorius in Tarkovsky's brilliant sci-fi film,
"Solaris") is more an observer than a participant.  The first scene in the
film is a prologue featuring an improbable event.  A group of peasants
construct a crude hot air balloon and one of them takes flight in it.  We see
the earth from the balloonist's perspective, until the balloon ruptures and
crashes, killing its passenger.  Then, the film unfolds as a series of
vignettes representing historic events in Rublev's lifetime.  He is a monk. 
He meets Theophanes the Greek (Nikolai Sergeyev), the renown Byzantine
iconographer and becomes his pupil.  He is commissioned to paint the
Cathedral in Vladimir. He encounters a summer solstice worshipping group of
pagans and witnesses their persecution.  He has just completed the cathedral
in Vladimir when the town is viciously sacked by the Tatars.  His entourage
of assistants and helpers is scattered.  He endures famine.  He grapples with
his conscience, and for a time renounces painting and speaking.  He is
finally reconciled to his responsibility to his art as the custodian of a
God-given talent. At this point, the film shifts from black and white into
full color and we are presented with an epilogue of photographs of Rublev's
actual art.
"Andrei Rublev" is very realistic and frank about the value placed on life in
Russia during the middle ages.        We see inhumanity in the form of arrogant
noblemen and the Tatar invaders.  We see men being tortured and we see
brutality to animals.  There were several scenes that made me wince; I
especially dislike seeing animals being mistreated, whether or not through
the use of special effects (I suspect in some cases these were not effects). 
Tarkovsky was explicit in portraying this evil to underscore Rublev's
internal struggle.
The lack of a definite story arc and the brutal scenes of peasant life mean
that this film is not for everyone.  It is certainly not idle entertainment,
Tarkovsky expects the observer to be an active participant.  He provides a
series of images and leaves it to the viewer to tie it all together, and a
complete understanding of the film requires multiple viewings.        The film is
recommended for Tarkovsky's brilliant cinematic technique, for his long,
complex and lyrical tracking shots.  Like Steven Spielberg, Tarkovsky is not
encumbered by a sense of the Proscenium Arch.  His shots put you right in the
middle of the action.
Production on "Andrei Rublev" started in 1966, and the film was re-cut in
1969.  The Soviet authorities didn't quite know what to make of such a
personal and spiritual work, so it sat on the shelf until its premier in
1971.  "Andrei Rublev" is available in its original, uncut form on DVD from
the Criterion Collection.
Essay copyright (C) 1999 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
