Title
Review for Stupids, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tom Arnold, Jessica Lundy, Bug Hall, Alex McKenna, Mark Metcalf, 
      Matt Keeslar, Frankie Faison, Christopher Lee, Bob Keeshan
Director: John Landis
Producer: Leslie Belzberg
Screenplay: Brent Forrester based on characters created by 
      James Marshall and Harry Allard
Cinematography: Manfred Guthe
Music: Christopher Stone
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     THE STUPIDS is a pleasant surprise:  a comedy about dumb characters 
that doesn't insult the audience's intelligence.  Unlike such recent 
offerings as DUMB AND DUMBER, THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE, and KINGPIN, John 
Landis' brand of humor doesn't rely on flatulence jokes, double 
entendres, or sexual innuendo.  THE STUPIDS is relatively clean, 
entirely suitable for family viewing, and much funnier than countless 
films with harsher MPAA ratings.
     Brent Forrester's script is a Machiavellian masterpiece of 
misdirection, misrepresentation, and mayhem.  And be forewarned -- 
appearances can be deceiving.  Despite the title, this film is going to 
appeal more to the thinking viewer than someone who prefers to sit back 
and laugh at mindless gags.  The best aspect of THE STUPIDS is seeing 
events from two perspectives -- that of a "normal" person and that of 
our intrepid heroes, a family so dense that, put together, their 
combined IQs would have trouble reaching the triple-digit level.
     With a vacuous affability, Tom Arnold plays Stanley Stupid, the 
good-natured head of the Stupid clan.  Decked out in an outdated plaid 
sportscoat and straw hat, Stanley and his wardrobe both appear stranded 
in an earlier decade.  His wife, Joan (Jessica Lundy), and children, 
Buster (Bug Hall) and Petunia (Alex McKenna), are just as intellectually 
dim and fashion impaired.  Joan looks like she just stepped out of an 
episode of LEAVE IT TO BEAVER.  
     The story, which involves conspiracies to take over the world and a 
possible alien invasion, begins innocently enough.  Stanley goes out one 
morning to find his curbside trash cans empty.  Someone has stolen the 
garbage again!  Unlike in the past, however, he's no longer going to sit 
back and allow this sort of thing to continue.  So, several nights 
later, after setting the bait, he hides in the bushes and waits.  When a 
huge truck comes along and the men inside take not only his garbage, but 
that of his neighbors, Stanley reaches a stunning conclusion:  this is a 
conspiracy of global proportions.  Someone is draining the world of one 
of its most valuable resources:  garbage.  A typically illogical leap 
leads Stanley to connect this latest caper to a scheme he uncovered 
years ago while working for the Postal Service, where thousands of 
letters never reached their destinations because they were being 
diverted to a mysterious Mr. Sender.  The only evidence of this 
tampering was a message stamped on the envelope:  "Return to Sender."  
Soon, the Stupids are hunting down this dangerous enemy, overcoming 
obstacles by relying on "techniques that defy description."
     Somehow, Stanley and his family become involved with a pair of 
illegal arms dealers (Mark Metcalf and Matt Keeslar), a meek museum 
curator who has the misfortune of being named Sender (Bob Keeshan, best 
known as Captain Kangaroo), and a janitor called Lloyd (Frankie Faison) 
whom they mistakenly believe to be God.  During the course of their 
incredible series of misadventures, they get trapped in a planetarium, 
are tracked by veteran assassins, and visit a television studio.  While 
there, Stanley appears on a talk show where he gets to explain, in song, 
how he's his own grandfather.
     Done in a style that recalls the TV series spoof GET SMART, THE 
STUPIDS is more likely to provoke chuckles than uncontrollable bursts of 
laughter, but the wit involved in constructing this screwball comedy is 
undeniable.  Even at a slim ninety minutes, the running length is 
probably a little too long, but, for the most part, THE STUPIDS is fresh 
and energetic.  Stupid humor like this requires a smart audience, and 
it's probably necessary to be a member of Mensa to untangle all the 
relationships revealed in Stanley's wacky musical number, "I'm My Own 
Grandpaw."
     Director John Landis (THE BLUES BROTHERS, AMAZON WOMEN ON THE 
MOON), who has never been one to make conventional movies, manages to 
inject several viciously satirical sequences into the film.  THE STUPIDS 
pokes fun at action movie heroes (and does so in a far more effective 
manner than Arnold Schwarzenegger's bloated LAST ACTION HERO), late 
night TV talk shows, and afternoon tabloid programs.  There's a 
delicious fantasy sequence with Christopher Lee playing the Stupids' 
vision of Sender.  And there are cameos by film makers David Cronenberg, 
Atom Egoyan, Robert Wise, and Norman Jewison, as well as centerfold-
turned-personality Jenny McCarthy.  
     THE STUPIDS is loaded (if not overloaded) with all sorts of humor -
- everything from satire and wordplay to slapstick.  Not a moment goes 
by when something amusing isn't happening, even if it's taking place in 
the background (for example, when Stanley outlines Sender's plan, take a 
look at the notes in the margins of his master diagram).  THE STUPIDS 
will be seen in different ways by different people, but one thing is 
abundantly clear:  the film makers deserve congratulations for coming up 
with something this diabolically clever.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Director John Landis is back at it, still light years away from the
comic masterpieces of NATIONAL LAMPOON'S ANIMAL HOUSE, THE BLUES
BROTHERS, AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON, and TRADING PLACES, but
obviously having a high time adapting Harry Allard and James Marshall's
series of children's books.  The central joke here is that Stanley
Stupid and his family take *everything* at face value.  When their trash
is missing from the curb cans, they think somebody stole it.  When Dad
(Tom Arnold) discovers the city dump, he thinks he's uncovered the crime
of the century.  When the kids (Bug Hall and Alex McKenna) can't find
their father anywhere in the house, they think he's been kidnapped.  And
so on.
     Though it ultimately lives up to its title, THE STUPIDS is dumb fun
for, oh, about an hour.  The cast has enormous enthusiasm and the
costumes (and some sets) are relentlessly sunny.  (Kids would like the
latter, if this were a movie for kids.  I'm not sure if it is.) The
cheerfully chaotic plot is one of the most unpredictable in recent
memory, adding arms dealers, space aliens, and a postal conspiracy into
the mix.  Film fans will also enjoy the director's trademark in-jokes,
from "see you next Wednesday" to the casting of prominent directors in
cameo roles.  (That's David Cronenberg as Stanley's old boss and Robert
Wise as the neighbor.  You find the rest.)
     What's missing is a better attention to detail.  Though the sloppy
editing is entirely annoying-- *must* they cut away in the middle of a
musical number?-- the most glaring gaffe is the film's failure to adhere
to a consistent set of rules regarding exactly how this Stupid universe
is supposed to behave.  Other people, places, and things are allowed to
act as goofy as the title characters do and that's a mistake.  The core
contrast between smart and stupid-- the very essence of what the jokes
are about-- is undermined and that's no good.  This is one movie that
might be funnier if it tried to be less funny.  Trust in the Lloyd.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Shane Burridge
This silly comedy by John Landis could have been created for the screen 
without any reference to the children's storybooks by Harry Allard and James 
Marshall, but I suppose a copyrighted title like 'The Stupids' was too good 
to pass up.  The film utilizes the stories' characters and their pets 
(computer-animated in the style of Marshall's illustrations) but the plot is 
far trickier than their simple adventures in print.  What's great about THE 
STUPIDS is that its storyline is made of the flimsiest of ideas, thrown 
together with such abandon that you'll probably think scriptwriter Brent 
Forrester made the whole thing up as he went along.  Without giving away the 
gag that sets the story into motion, Stanley Stupid (Tom Arnold) believes 
there is foul play at work in his neighborhood.  After launching his own 
investigation he concludes that he has discovered a dastardly scheme of 
global proportions.  His wife and two children, who are just as oblivious to 
the real world as he is, don't need much convincing.  Living up to their 
family name, all four of them embark on a series of misadventures, which, of 
course, ends up with them unraveling a genuine conspiracy playing out right 
under their noses.
The humor of THE STUPIDS is a lot smarter than its title suggests, although 
like many comedies it resorts to slapstick for the finale.  The film's 
highlight has Arnold explaining his conspiracy theory to the rest of the 
family while we see it being played out for us in his mind (Christopher Lee 
is a hilarious asset to this scene).  It perfectly encapsulates both the 
world the Stupids live in and the rationale of the script, which derives its 
humor from the way that Stanley and his family create bizarre hypotheses to 
explain the most ordinary of day-to-day situations.  Clearly, the children 
have been brought up with the same insulated logic as their parents - they 
too misinterpret the most basic of encounters.  This allows the characters 
to interact in different combinations without having any one smarter family 
member offsetting the balance - for example, Father and Daughter believe 
they have died because the lights have suddenly been turned off (this is 
taken from the original stories); Mother and Son figure out that an elevator 
must be a time machine; Brother and Sister are convinced that their parents 
are being held for ransom in a Chinese restaurant; Mom and her children try 
to use a computer and blow up the office; Mom rushes into a wig shop to get 
a disguise and emerges covered entirely in wigs; and of course the family's 
patron, Stanley, creates mayhem wherever he goes on his crusade to save the 
world (he also gets to sing a hilariously complicated song about his family 
tree).
THE STUPIDS was generally slammed by critics and didn't do as well as other 
films by Landis, which is a shame as it has a goofy, easy-going charm that 
is absent in many of his later films.  One likely reason for its failure is 
that the public had had enough of Tom Arnold's tabloid-grabbing antics with 
former wife Roseanne Barr.  But I think Arnold, happily traipsing about in 
his powder-blue suit and straw hat, is a good choice for Stanley Stupid.  
Bigger comedy stars would have no doubt stamped their own brand of 
personality over the top of the character - they would have certainly 
outshone the rest of the family, whose parts are conspicuously underplayed.  
I have to assume that this flat acting style was a conscious choice of 
Landis, who didn't want his cast to mug it up.  Landis fans will also be 
quick to spot his trademark 'See You Next Wednesday' message incorporated 
into the film, a sight gag he uses to show that he has included material 
from an unused screenplay he once wrote as a teenager.  His other trademark 
- using fellow directors in cameos - is a little harder to spot, unless you 
really know your film-makers.  Film buffs may recognize Robert Wise as 
Stanley's neighbor.  Wise/Stupid.  Do you think that's another Landis 
in-joke?  Look for the re-named London Symphony Orchestra in the final 
credits.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
