Title
Review for Romancing the Stone (1984)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
Same as the westerns in early 1990s, adventure movies -
another classic genre forgotten in modern times - made short
Hollywood comeback ten years earlier. Series of high budget
adventure films made in early and mid 1980s were, however,
less inspired by nostalgic feelings of Hollywood executives
- the real impulse was given by the success of first two
films of Spielberg's Indiana Jones trilogy. Not
surprisingly, the efforts to mimic Spielberg and his formula
usually backfired. The only successful attempt was made by
Spielberg's disciple Robert Zemeckis in his 1984 adventure
comedy ROMANCING THE STONE - great commercial hit that
managed to spawn a sequel two years later.
The heroine of the film is Joan Wilder (played by Kathleen
Turner), writer of trashy romantic novels, whose
professional success makes great contrast to the utter lack
of romance in her private life. Everything changes when she
receives mysterious package from her sister Elaine (played
by Mary Ellen Trainor) who lives in Colombia. The package
includes the treasure map and this is reason why Elaine gets
kidnapped by American gangster Ira (played by Zack Norman).
Since the gangsters demand the map in exchange for Elaine's
freedom, Joan travels to Colombia where she gets greeted by
Zolo (played by Andreas Katsulas), nasty local character who
wants the map for himself. She intentionally misdirects Joan
to take the wrong bus and travel to jungle where he would
easily take the map out of hands of helpless American woman.
His plan is foiled by the arrival of Jack Colton (played by
Michael Douglas), American bird hunter who saves her from
Zolo and reluctantly agrees to escort her back to
civilisation. Soon it turns out that the unforgiving climate
and wild animals aren't the only obstacles on their way -
they are pursued by Ira's cousin Ralph (played by Danny de
Vito), and Zolo reveals himself as the deputy commander of
Colombian secret police. During the journey, Jack and Joan
decide to take the treasure for themselves, and Joan slowly
realises that Jack is the exactly the hero she was
describing in her books.
We might get impression that the time has done great
disservice to ROMANCING THE STONE. Decade and half after the
premiere, the film looks terribly dated, but the problem was
already there in 1984 - while Indiana Jones movies had
period settings and therefore kept their timeless quality to
this day, ROMANCING THE STONE somehow failed to bring the
spirit of classic adventure films like THE AFRICAN QUEEN to
1980s setting (partially due to Alan Silvestri's score that
sounds unmistakably 1980s and thus disrupts the illusion)
and, as a result, the film looked anachronistic from the
beginning. Thankfully, the scriptwriter Diane Thomas (who
tragically died a year after the production of the film) was
aware of concept's limitations and filled it with the right
combination of action, romance and comedy. Some characters
and situations are extremely funny or interesting, while
other look lame. For example, character played by Danny de
Vito, which is supposed to work as "comic relief" is
actually irritating for the most of time (Alfons Arau as
drug dealer and Holland Taylor as Joan's editor are more
effective in that area), and the film might work very well
without him. Same goes for Zack Norman as his partner, while
Andreas Katsulas manages to transcend one- dimensionality of
his villain character with enough dosage of creepyness.
However, the best assets of the film are the two main
actors. Kathleen Turner was incredible in this film - she is
equally believable in the role of mousy romance novelist as
she was in the role of manipulative seductress in BODY HEAT.
She also has a great chemistry with Michael Douglas, whose
role of classic adventure hero is so different from the
roles he had played in late 1980s and 1990s. Zemeckis'
direction is more than fine, although some scenes seem
heavily influenced by Spielberg, and the pace of the film is
satisfactory. The end result of his efforts is slightly
flawed and somewhat old-fashioned film that nevertheless
kept enough of its entertainment value to be recommended as
fine example of 1980s Hollywood's craftsmanship.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, check out http://surf.to/joblo
The man behind FORREST GUMP (7.5/10) and CONTACT (6.5/10), Robert
Zemeckis, spent his formative years in "smaller" movie directions, as
his eighties ventures rumbled him through BACK TO THE FUTURE (8/10),
WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT? (7/10) and the dismal sequel to this film,
JEWEL OF THE NILE (6/10). 
PLOT:
Hopeless romantic and novelist Joan Wilder must deliver a map to
Columbia in order to save her sister's life from the hands of
kidnappers. Joan is a total urbanite, and falls prey to some
misinformation once in South America, and must survive the jungles
alongside her deputized guide, Jack Colton, who is only in it for the
money. Many other evil people want the treasure map, and inspire
several adventures.
CRITIQUE:
Entertaining, adventurous, short, and somewhat dated adventure movie
that stood out from the RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK (8.5/10) copycats
through the mid-eighties. Good chemistry between stars Douglas and
Turner render this film bearable through many of its predictably
romantic liaisons, while the well-spaced spurts of action give the film
enough punch to designate a fun time. I veered from the nachos on this
one occasion (forgive me father), and tossed over some bills for a
thin-crusted pizza and breadsticks, but now recognize the error of my
ways, and apologize for my misguidedness.
This movie also balances many funny and light moments on one hand, and
suspense and action in the other. In the same vein, ROMANCING THE STONE
can be considered an all-family movie, because it does not contain any
scenes of extreme violence, sex or sailor-like swearing. It does
contain some nasty bad guys, despite their one-dimensionality, and
manages to skewer adventure through its entire meandering plot line.
Another great thing about this movie is the smoldering sexuality and
come-hither quality of the "young" and beautiful Kathleen Turner. This
film reminded me of the many reasons behind my puppy crush on her back
in the Duran Duran eighties (see wet nipple scene), and saddened me in
regards to her more recent acting work (see her latest TV movie of the
week.)
The one extremely bad aspect of this movie (and perhaps of most
eighties films, now that we look back on them) is the cheezy,
uninspired and ultimately annoying soundtrack and score from this
movie. The synchronized noises through most of the film did nothing but
harass my attention while I was enjoying the suspense and action, and
did very little in the way of enhancing any actual scenes. But I
digress on my small point, since for the most part, the film did manage
to generate great entertainment, some light and romantic moments, and
many scenes sprinkled with action and adventure.  
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Kathleen Turner spoke the uncredited voice of sexy Jessica Rabbit in
the toon-noir Zemeckis-helmed flick WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT? (7/10). 
Danny DeVito stands 5 feet tall.
Michael Douglas' smaller brother Joel, was also a co-producer on this
film, as well as being the 1st assistant director.
The phrase "Romancing the Stone" is a piece of jewellers' jargon,
referring to a step in preparing a gem for use in jewellery.
Eddy Grant recorded the title song, but it was never used.
Alan Silvestri was hired to do a temporary score for the film, but
director Robert Zemeckis like his work so much that he kept him on as
composer.
