Title
Review for Family Plot (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
Whenever the last film of a great director's career comes forth, one reacts 
with trepidation due to one's unfairly great expectations. This may be why I 
avoided Alfred Hitchcock's last hurrah, known as "Family Plot," for so many 
years. I have long admired and become influenced by Hitch's work. We are 
talking about a career that spans 54 films in its output, producing such 
classics as "Psycho," "North By Northwest," "Rear Window," "Shadow of a 
Doubt," "Vertigo" and several more. During the 1970's, Hitch was less 
prolific with one exceptionally thrilling and graphic thriller, "Frenzy" in 
1972, and "Family Plot" in 1976. Strangely, I must say I was pleasantly 
surprised: "Family Plot" may not be one of Hitch's finest but it is one of 
his few light comedies that has a few laughs and fine performances. It is 
light on its feet and quietly good fun. 
Barbara Harris stars as a phony psychic named Blanche Tyler (she calls 
herself a "spiritualist") whose latest client, Mrs. Rainbird, is trying to 
locate her sister's long-lost son. The trouble is that he may be dead but it 
hardly matters - Mrs. Rainbird wants Blanche to find him for a ten-thousand 
dollar fee since he stands to be heir of a million dollar fortune . This 
naturally excites Blanche and her cab driver boyfriend, George Lumley (Bruce 
Dern), who masquerades as a private eye and a lawyer. His act, which doesn't 
fool anyone, is to smoke a pipe, and he stands out like a true amateur. 
This whole search somehow involves another couple, in this case a rich 
married couple (William Devane and Karen Black - both ably cast) who are 
involved in kidnappings for rare diamonds. But I would not dream of giving 
away the connection between these two couples except to say that it is fairly 
foreseeable if you have seen other suspense thrillers. 
The fun in "Family Plot" is in the clues and the gradual tension and suspense 
involved in finding this missing Rainbird man. We have cemetaries with 
strange plots, tremulous psychics, bishops kidnapped for ransom, Karen Black 
wearing a blonde wig, secret compartments in garages, and so on. 
What is especially interesting about "Family Plot" is how laid-back and 
involving it is. There are a few great scenes told with Hitchcock's mastery 
of letting long-takes unfold without dialogue. Two stand out in particular: 
overhead shot of George walking through the cemetery dirt trails as he 
pursues an elderly woman; and a quietly effective sequence where George 
enters the rich couple's house through a garage window (shades here of Cary 
Grant entering a rich man's home in "North By Northwest"). There is also a 
very good chase scene where George and Blanche drive unable to stop their car 
due to faulty brakes. 
The performances are also low-key and intriguing. William Devane (who sounds 
like a smoother Jack Nicholson) does some of his best work here as a jeweler 
whose mind is always working creating dangerous schemes. I also love Karen 
Black, who has one greatly funny scene where she tries to warn Devane at his 
jewel shop of danger while pretending to be a customer. Bruce Dern is snappy 
and fitfully engaging as the somewhat dim-witted George, who's disinterested 
in Blanche's sexual pleas. Only Barbara Harris tends to go a bit over-the-top 
as Blanche, especially her seance scenes which provoke more groans rather 
than laughter. 
All in all, "Family Plot" is genial, lighthearted, clever nonsense - probably 
just a walk in the park for Hitch who was near the end of his health. All I 
can imagine is that Hitch must have been all sunny smiles while making 
essentially a parody of the suspense genre he helped create and perfect. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com
