Title
Review for Je rentre ŕ la maison (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
Harvey Karten's archived syndicate of 9 web sites
CompuServe Movie Channel (subscription)
ofcs.org (easiest to access)
rottentomatoes.com
www.azreporter.com (Arizona Reporter)
CompuServe ShowBiz   (subscription)
www.compuserve.com/movies/newreleases.asp (subscription)
www.all-reviews.com
www.digitalfxmedia.com
www.mrqe.com
us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Harvey+S.+Karten (IMDB)
Siltown entertainment www.siltown.com
 Director:  Manoel de Oliveira
 Writer:  Manoel de Oliveira
 Cast: Michel Piccoli, Catherine Deneuve, John Malkovich,
Antoine Chappey, Leonor Baldaque, Leonor Silveira, Ricardo
Trepa
 Screened at: NY Film Festival, 9/27/01
   If you were elderly and afflicted with an incurable disease,
would you take a drug that would give you 3 years of life but one
which would be accompanied with considerable pain, or would
you refuse the prescription thereby guaranteeing just two months
of life but without any pain?  Surprisingly, a major study
recently showed that the vast majority of older people want to live
as long as they can, even if they have to suffer considerable
discomfort.  Many of those who so chose do not have what
people would call deeply creative avocations, but still...you can
probably believe that someone who is living to the fullest,
particularly if he or she is celebrated in the field, would want to
enjoy life as long as possible.  However, what if a creative person
were losing his special talent gradually as he approaches the age
of 80?  This is the subject of Manoel de Oliveira contemplative
film, one which could scarcely be separated from the director's
own concerns.  After all, de Oliveira is 92 years old, having
dabbled in his early days as an actor and having directed all
sorts of features, long and short, for children and for thinking
adults.
   "I'm Going Home," his seventh work to be screened at the New
York Film Festival, pays homage to its lead actor, the 76-year-old
Michel Piccoli, perhaps France's greatest living thesp.  A veteran
of some one hundred features, Piccoli has turned up in movies
beginning with "The Bellman" in 1945 and most recently in
"One Hundred and One Nights." This time he plays an aging
actor, hit on for autographs even by youthful enthusiasts as he
walks the streets of Paris.  De Oliveira opens on the latest staged
work of the famed performer, Gilbert Valence, in the title role of
Eugene Ionesco's play "Exit the King," holding Sabine Lancelin's
lens a considerable length of time on the performance since the
king's concerns parallel's Valence's.  The king is facing his last
day on earth at a time that the earth is collapsing.  Yet he fights
desperately against the inevitable.  Once controlling his life and
nature, ordering men beheaded and ordering thunderbolts from
on high, he recognizes himself as a man rotting to death who
could end up treated in no better fashion than Ozymandias.   He
is disintegrating.
   But the actor in reality is not in such dire straits, though his own
world is collapsing around him.  He has just been told that his
wife, daughter, and son-in-law have all been killed in an auto
accident.  He is given charge of his 6-year-old grandson whom
he adores.  He appears to meet the challenge or raising the cute
young lad but his bigger test lies in his career.  Unwilling to take a
role in some Hollywood-style TV dreck despite the money, he
accepts a small role from American director John Crawford (John
Malkovich), an English speaking job in a modern adaptation of
"Ulysses."  He accepts, and, faltering on the job, he begins to
accept the end of his career.
   This proves for Michel Piccoli a marvelous performance and, in
fact, De Oliveira may have been more interested in giving
veneration to France's gift to the world than in presenting a compelling
plot.  Piccoli is in virtually every scene, the world seeming to
revolve around him as it does when he plays the role of the king,
but he elicits the pain that must be felt in every human being who
feels his mortality, particularly when the termination of life is
accompanied by a collapse in a promising career.
Not Rated.  Running time: 90 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
