Title
Review for Circle of Friends (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CIRCLE OF FRIENDS is a coming-of-age drama set in Dublin and in a
small town in the Irish countryside nearby.  According to the credits,
much of it was filmed in County Kilkenny, Ireland.  If you have been
lucky enough to spent some time in Ireland as I did for three weeks,
you know how beautiful it is.  The movie shows off beautiful scenery
without tending to overpower the story as some movies do, e.g., LEGENDS
OF THE FALL.  The cinematography by Kenneth MacMillan was peaceful and
serene in a natural and graceful way.
     Newcomer Minnie Driver plays Benny, a big boned, slightly homely
girl from a small town who wants to make it in life.  I think this may
the age of the wallflowers.  There are definite parallels to the part
Toni Collette played in Muriel's Wedding which was released in the US
about the same time.
     Benny grows up with a circle of two main girlfriends played by
Geraldine O'Rawe and Saffron Burrows.  They leave the village to go off
to University.  There they meet a circle of boys lead by Jack (Chris
O'Donnell).  Benny is ambitious about her schooling and her love life
and falls instantly in love with Jack.
     As you would guess, there are complications and complexities.
Some have to do with the small town, some with Benny's belief that
since she is not beautiful and Jack is, he will not be interested in
her, and still others have to do with the strict Catholic upbringing in
Ireland.  Of course, as in all movies, we find out that the church is
almost always in the wrong, and as soon as the characters grow up
enough or get smart enough, they realize this and leave or ignore the
church.  It would be nice to have religion appear in a movie every now
and then in a positive light.  After all, we have lots of movie
glorifying everything from gangsters to heavy drinking to you name it.
Oh well, ...
     The problem with the movie is that, based on the information I
just gave you, you could write the script now, and you would probably
be close.  The writer (Andrew Davies) took no risks, and the result is
a completely predictable plot.  The director (Pat O'Donnell) went the
safe route as well making for a nicely homogenized show.  This is all
quite surprising since the talent of Minnie Driver was clear and yet
was so often underutilized.  Moreover, the writer also wrote the very
inventive script for the To Play The King British series recently on
PBS here and the director did the extremely moving and imaginative
movie Cal.
     Although it could have been much better, and although I was able
to forecast every turn in the movie, I did enjoy being a member of
Benny's circle of friends for a couple of hours.  She was a character
I'm glad I got to know.  Her strength of conviction and her charm wove
a spell on me.
     CIRCLE OF FRIENDS runs a little long at 1:52.  It is rated PG-13
for sexual discussions and scenes.  There is no nudity of any kind and
no violence.  The movie would be fine for anyone old enough to be
seriously interested in romance, say 10 and above I guess.  I give the
movie a mild thumbs up with the reservations mentioned above, and I
award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my
employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Chris O'Donnell, the male lead in the film, is handsome, young
(24), and at the top of my list for a long and fruitful career as an
actor.  Remember him in SCENT OF A WOMAN where he played opposite Al
Pacino, winning a Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actor and
the Chicago Film Critics award for The Most Promising  Actor of the
Year?   His charisma hits you instantly.  In CIRCLE OF FRIENDS he plays
Jack Foley, the star of the rugby team at the college he attends in
Dublin.  (O'Donnell, by the way, is the only American in the film.)
     There are friends and there are friends and not always do they do
the expected.  In 1957, Benny (Minnie Driver) and her friend Eve
(Geraldine O'Rawe) leave their small town of Knockglen to attend
college in Dublin where they run into another friend, Nan (Saffron
Burrows).   While Nan is a blonde beauty and Eve is a beautiful
brunette, Bennie is the "plain Jane."  It ia interesting to note that
Driver, who plays Benny is a beautiful TV star in the UK who had to put
on thirty pounds to give her a somewhat dowdy look.
     The story, written by best-selling author Maeve Binchy, is of the
goals, the hopes and dreams of the three small-town women who are now
on their own and of Jack who sees in Benny the goodness and inner charm
that more superficial men had failed to notice.
     Conflict and deceit intrude among the friends in the circle;
nothing in real life goes smoothly forever.  Director Pat O'Connor
superbly brings all of that to life in this very lovely film.

Author
Christopher Null
     CIRCLE OF FRIENDS is the story of three Irish teenage girls, Eve,
Nan, and Benny, and their respective quests for love.  In 1957 Dublin and
nearby Knockglen, we return to a time before the world lost its innocence,
before our uncontrollable obsession with physical beauty took hold, and
before we had any idea about how a relationship was supposed to work.
     As the story opens, the three characters are entering their freshmen
year at a Dublin college.  Eve (Geraldine O'Rawe) is an orphan, living
with the nuns in a convent.  Nan (Saffron Burrows) is a gorgeous and
wicked socialite with ulterior motives.  And Benny (Minnie Driver) is a
Plain Jane heroine, plagued by overbearing parents and a trollish suitor
(Colin Firth), and is still trying to overcome her adolescent
awkwardness.  Chris O'Donnell plays Jack, "the cutest boy in school" who
becomes the eventual point of contention in the story, developing a deep
love for Benny, but perpetually confused and torn between those competing
for his affections and attempts to control his future.
     Overflowing with sexual tension and overtones, CIRCLE OF FRIENDS pits
against each other the issues of religion and personal freedom, family and
love, wealth and happiness.  Predictably, it lands on the more modern and
liberated viewpoints regarding these issues, and in the end, everything
neatly ties up into a rather typical coming-of-age story that we've seen
countless times before.  I was expecting something a little more original
like DEAD POETS SOCIETY, but ended up getting another reworking of an old
story.
     Excellent acting by all the players and the film's unique change of
setting make CIRCLE OF FRIENDS a worthwhile picture, but it suffers from a
painfully slow pace and no real originality in its message.  If you go,
bring a date and a box of tissues.

Author
Joan Ellis
     CIRCLE OF FRIENDS is a pretty picture about appealing people in a
lovely landscape, but not one surprise lies on its predictable path.
It's a wonder the audience didn't let out a collective shriek,
"Surprise me, please!"
     Actress Minnie Driver is delightful as Benny, the spunky young
girl who takes the daily bus from her country town to the university in
Dublin.  At first sight, plain Benny falls for Jack (Chris O'Donnell)
the reigning rugby jock who, to his everlasting credit, sees her real
spirit. "You really know yourself, don't you, Benny?" Jack asks. "Yes,
I do," she replies.
     Up to this point we have met Benny's protective parents, her
friends Eve and Nan, and enough of the bare Irish countryside to warm
the heart of a minimalist.  It can't go wrong, we think, and then it
does.  Hooked by a budding romance and the lilting Irish rhythms, we
wait interminably for the movie to live up to its good beginning, and
it never does.
     The truth is, we have been dropped into a soap opera.  Can a plain
little girl from a little country town find happiness with Dublin's
reigning rugby star?  In this circle of friends, will we have to worry
about rape, betrayal, a pregnancy, an accident?  Can Benny count on the
loyalty of Eve and Nan?  Like the soap it is, the movie dangles these
questions  before us, and when the answers come, they are so
predictable that all dramatic tension drains from the screen.
     And that's a shame when the central performance by Minnie Driver
is so strong.  With a ready smile, natural enthusiasm and open
curiosity, she makes Benny vulnerable, but with a sense of herself so
sure, that vulnerability never does her in.  Bennie suffers whenever
she is squeezed into the artifice of college life or a too-tight dance
dress, but she becomes a sparkling package of wit, loyalty and decency
whenever she is in a meadow with Jack or chattering with her good
friend Eve.
     Even Driver can't lift the picture out of the hackneyed dilemmas
of the 1950s.  It was a time when pre-marital pregnancy carried
consequences beyond the understanding of today's young people, a time
when the loss of a boyfriend meant being trapped at home until another
could be snagged.  These kinds of problems seem ludicrous in the 1990s.
     I wondered for a few moments if this might be a spoof on those
times, but it isn't.  Then I considered the possibility that it might
be an affectionate, if misguided attempt to capture the "flavor" of the
1950s.  Alas, it is neither.  It's a sudser, nothing more.
     If you are charmed by Ireland, think about going instead or also
to THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH, a small jewel of a film that captures
the extraordinary ability of the Irish to tell a story.  A good story
is something that eluded entirely the makers of CIRCLE OF FRIENDS.


Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     Recently, Ireland has produced a number of interesting and
intelligent films.  The latest Irish-import, CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, is a
smart and charming  coming-of-age drama that provides a thoughtful look
at the complexities of young romance.
     The film follows the romance of Benny (Minnie Driver) and Jack
(Chris O'Donnell), two Irish college students experiencing love and
romance for the first time.  Their romance is contrasted with separate
romances experienced by Benny's two closest friends: repressed Eve
(Geraldine O'Rawe) and worldly Nan (Saffron Burrows).
     Much of the film's appeal comes from the thoughtful and believable
way that screenwriter Andrew Davies (working from a novel by Maeve
Binchy) has these characters approach issues of relationships and
sexuality.  The film is set in 1957 and does reflect the more openly
conservative values of the time, but the writing still seems
contemporary thanks to the writer's recognition that most of the base
feelings and concerns in these areas never change all that much.
     The movie is at its best when it simply has the main characters
talking to each other.  We discover that Benny and Jack are right for
each other during some wonderful early sequences where they go on walks
together and find that they are able to freely talk with one another
about anything.  The physical attraction between the characters isn't
ignored, but the film makes it clear that the emotional and
intellectual attraction is what really counts the most.
     Davies and director Pat O'Connor wisely keep the secondary
romances involving Eve and Nan in the background, only using them to
provide counterpoints to the main romance between Benny and Jack. Eve
is an orphan that was raised by nuns in a convent, giving her extremely
traditional Catholic views.  Her romance with another college boy
(Aiden Gillen) is marked by an interesting combination curiosity and a
desire to remain true to her values.  Nan, on the other hand, is much
more worldly and quicker to jump head first into a passionate affair
with an older man (Colin Firth).  Both of these romances are used to
contrast Benny and Jack's romance with more extreme examples.  A twist
in Nan's romance also eventually provides some conflict into several of
the film's key relationships.
     One refreshing aspect of the film is the very realistic way that
religion is included as a major factor in the characters' lives.  The
girls are all Irish Catholics and many of their conversations include
some discussion of the conflict between their religious beliefs and
their natural curiosity about sex.  It is rare today that a film treats
religious values as a subject worthy of thoughtful discussion.
     The one major part of the film that doesn't work is an unfortunate
subplot involving Sean (Alan Cumming), a clerk at Benny's store who is
a rival for her affections.  This subplot is very ineptly played and it
winds up being an unwelcome distraction.  The big mistake is making
Sean into an >obviousthey

     Minnie Driver's performance is one of the best reasons to see this
film.  She is a very smart and charming presence who easily carries
every scene that she is in.  The film makes the point that she is a bit
overweight and generally plain-looking, but she has an inner-beauty
that is instantly recognizable.  In an early scene, Jack very
accurately describes Benny as a "solid" personality who truly knows who
she is and what she wants.  Driver's very smart and sincere performance
clearly conveys this to the audience.
     Chris O'Donnell is developing a lot of skill as a strong
supporting actor.  He is a very generous actor who truly knows when to
stand back and let other actors dominate the scene.  In this film,
Benny is very much the central character and it is important to let
Jack be primarily defined by her reactions to him.  O'Donnell is able
to do this, quietly playing off of Driver's more dominating performance
to create an interesting chemistry.  It takes a lot of skill for an
actor to know when to stay out of the way.
     CIRCLE OF FRIENDS is a small, pleasant film with some very
thoughtful and intelligent dialog and a tremendously good lead
performance by Minnie Driver.  The film is marred somewhat by the
unfortunate subplot involving the store clerk, but the parts of the
film that work are easily able to overcome the parts that don't.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release on 3/24/95  
Running Length: 1:43 
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, language) 
Starring: Chris O'Donnell, Minnie Driver, Colin Firth, Geraldine O'Rawe, 
          Saffron Burrows, Alan Cumming 
Director: Pat O'Connor 
Producers: Andrew Sellers, Alex Winitsky, and Frank Price 
Screenplay: Andrew Davies based on the novel by Maeve Binchy 
Cinematography: Ken MacMillan 
Music: Michael Kamen 
Released by Savoy Pictures 
     CIRCLE OF FRIENDS is the motion picture equivalent of a dime store 
romance novel.  It has all the requisite elements--it's a period piece 
(the bulk of the story takes place in the late 1950s); boasts women with 
heaving bosoms and a young, virile man; and throws numerous contrived 
complications in the way of the star-crossed lovers.  Frankly, though, if 
I wanted to watch a soap opera, I'd turn on the TV.   
     Taking place in a small village in Ireland, where "people have long 
memories", CIRCLE OF FRIENDS starts out as a story of three girlhood 
companions--Benny (Minnie Driver), Eve (Geraldine O'Rawe), and Nan 
(Saffron Burrows).  For a short while, this film seems like it might be a 
pleasant, relaxed examination of friendship, until the trio head off to 
college in Dublin and meet dashing rugby star Jack Foley (Chris 
O'Donnell).  From that point on, the movie becomes distressingly 
predictable, with nary a surprise to be found. 
     Of course, Benny and Jack are attracted to each other, but it
takes a while--and a tearful scene with Benny sitting alone at a
dance--before either is willing to admit it.  No sooner have they
gotten together than complications seek to pry them apart.  Benny's
father wants her to marry a local creep named Sean (Alan Cumming), but
she intends to wed for love, not money.  And Jack wants a little more
sex than a good Catholic girl is willing to give.  Meanwhile, Nan has
become involved with a pedigreed Englishman (Colin Firth) and Eve is at
work renovating a house willed to her by her dead parents.
     Though the narrative is creatively barren, the film is
nevertheless well-acted.  Chris O'Donnell slips easily into the
low-profile role of Jack, giving his least-forced performance to date.
Minnie Driver brings a lot of spunk to her part, presenting a heroine
who doesn't fit the model of a "typical" Hollywood beauty.  If there's
a reason to see CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, it's for Driver's boundless energy,
which enlivens a host of otherwise-insipid scenes.
     Unfortunately, the movie's plot could have been scripted by anyone
familiar with the most banal of romantic formulas.  A lot of films,
especially love stories, seek a level of comfort through
predictability, but this one goes too far.  Moments of originality are
scarce.  It's also apparent that CIRCLE OF FRIENDS suffered in the
translation from book to screenplay.  The narrative has a sparse,
bare-bones feel, and there are a couple of quick, "character building"
sequences that try unsuccessfully to convey a sense of personality and
motivation for several of the supporting players.
     Despite some dryly funny moments, there isn't enough comedy to
offset the pitiful dramatic structure and the virtual absence of
genuine characterization.  Generally, for a romantic comedy to succeed,
at least one of three factors has to be in place:  well-rounded,
real-seeming people; strong chemistry between the leads; or a
moderately-original story.  CIRCLE OF FRIENDS has none of these
qualities, and stands as an example of how to mire a solid cast in a
morass of mediocrity.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Chris O'Donnell, Minnie Driver, Geraldine O'Rawe,
           Saffron Burrows, Alan Cumming, Colin Firth.
Screenplay:  Andrew Davies.
Director:  Pat O'Connor.
     Maybe it's just a matter of perception, but movies seem to come
out in thematic waves.  1994 was widely noted as the year of the
simpleton, with both dramas (NELL, FORREST GUMP) and comedies
(AIRHEADS, DUMB AND DUMBER) focusing on those with social or
intellectual handicaps.  1995 may well turn out to be the year of
the Celt, with John Sayles' THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH already in
theaters and the highland adventures BRAVEHEART and ROB ROY due this
summer.  Between them comes a small Irish coming-of-age tale called
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS.  Though it occasionally loses sight of its
strongest elements, CIRCLE OF FRIENDS is mostly a warm, charming and
insightful little romance, buoyed by a delightful performance from
fresh face Minnie Driver.
     CIRCLE OF FRIENDS takes place in 1957 Ireland, where lifelong pals
Bernadette "Benny" Hogan (Minnie Driver) and Eve Malone (Geraldine
O'Rawe) are preparing to leave their small home town of Knockglen to
attend the University of Dublin.  There they re-connect with Nan Mahan
(Saffron Burrows), an old schoolmate who had moved years earlier.
Their lessons come both inside the lecture halls--where their
traditional Catholic upbringing and morals are challenged--and
outside.  All three friends seek to reconcile their religious beliefs
with their newfound romances, particularly the repressed Benny, who
falls hard for Jack Foley (Chris O'Donnell), the school's handsome
rugby star.  Nan, meanwhile, has designs on marrying into the wealthy
family of Englishman Simon Westward (Colin Firth).
     Based on a novel by Maeve Binchy, CIRCLE OF FRIENDS is mostly
about the struggle between holiness and hormones, about three young
women whose growing curiosity about sexuality collides with the
Catholic Church's pillars of "guilt and shame ... and fear" as defined
by their anthropology professor.  When Benny is the focal point of
this exploration, CIRCLE OF FRIENDS is an unqualified joy.  She is
the most introverted of the three when the story begins, an
over-protected only child required by her parents to commute to the
university while living at home, and targeted for a business-based
arranged marriage with her father's slimy employee Sean (Alan
Cumming).  However, as her relationship with Jack blossoms, so does
Benny.  Minnie Driver is enchanting as Benny, a shining if
unconventional beauty with a sharp mind and a keen sense of herself.
Her growth is thoroughly convincing because she neither begins nor
ends as an extreme; hers is a slow but noticeable growth from girl
into woman.
     CIRCLE OF FRIENDS is also interesting because the romance
between Benny and Jack develops in an unconventional way.  This is
not some John Hughes-like story where the wallflower suddenly wins
over the socialite at the end, because Jack in his own way is as
confused as Benny is, making their friendship and affection for each
other completely natural.  Chris O'Donnell's Irish accent slips here
and there, but mostly his is a very relaxed and confident
performance as a pretty boy lacking in confidence.  The scenes
between Driver and O'Donnell are the film's highlights, particularly
an uncomfortable little exchange in which they ask each other about
their previous sexual experiences.
     The primary problem with CIRCLE OF FRIENDS is that when the
story isn't focusing on Benny, it is more melodramatic and far less
enjoyable.  Too much time is spent on Nan's carefully planned
attempts to land a rich husband, and the rather melodramatic plot
developments which accompany those attempts work against the simple
believability of Benny's story.  Saffron Burrows is also rather dull
as the beautiful Nan, and for as much time as we spend with her
character, her motivations are never really clear.  Similarly
distracting is the sub-plot concerning Sean (played to low-life
perfection, however, by Alan Cumming) and his wheelings and dealings
with Benny's family.  The conflict between the three friends'
Catholic morality and their earthly desires is much more interesting
than the somewhat contrived external conflicts, and generally more
amusing besides.  CIRCLE OF FRIENDS takes some unfortunate and
unnecessary detours, but Minnie Driver and Chris O'Donnell take the
film's central story and turn it into a real winner.
