Title
Review for Girls' Night (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Greg King
Who would have thought that a low budget British film about
two middle aged women would have been so damn heart wrenching, or,
indeed, so entertaining?
Jackie (Julie Walters) and Dawn (Brenda Blethyn) are life long
friends and sisters-in-law, who have grown up together in the working
class town of Rawtensell, in northern England.  They work together in
an electronics components factory and live in the same street.  Dawn
is self-sacrificing and reserved, and devoted to her family, while
Jackie is abusive, sharp, and combative, with a healthy disregard for
rules and authority.
The only escape from the drudgery of their work and domestic
environment is their weekly Friday night outing to the local Bingo
hall, where they can briefly dream of a better life.  Jackie and Dawn
have always shared their small winnings.  This night, Dawn wins the
jackpot, a piece of good luck that changes their lives in totally
unexpected ways.
Jackie finally finds the courage to leave her husband and quit
her boring job.  Then Dawn is struck down by a mysterious illness.
She is diagnosed with terminal cancer, but decides to keep it a secret
from her family while she undergoes treatment.  The worried Jackie
learns the truth, and, on a whim, whisks Dawn off to Las Vegas to
fulfil a life time dream in the short time she has left.  Along the
way, the two women learn much about themselves, their friendship and
their lives that enriches them.
Like Thelma And Louise, this warm and moving British film is a
wonderful testament to that special bond of friendship that develops
between two women.  However, Girls' Night is tinged with a haunting
air of poignancy given Dawn's terminal illness.  Kay Mellor
(Children's Ward, Band Of Gold, etc) was inspired to write the film
following the death of a close friend, which lends an emotional
potency to the story.  The script is rich in insight and perception,
and features a pair of warm, credible and beautifully developed
central characters about whom the audience comes to care deeply.
Blethyn has made the role of the feisty working class house
wife her own in recent years, but her performance as Dawn lends a
vibrancy to the film, giving the character an unexpected depth and
vulnerability.  She delivers a solid, touching performance that is
thankfully free of some of the clichéd nuances of more recent films
(In The Winter Dark, Music From Another Room, etc).
Walters, too, is well-suited to her role as the bold, brassy
and tarty Jackie, and delivers her best performance since her
breakthrough role in Educating Rita.  Kris Kristofferson's screen
comeback continues to go from strength to strength, and he gives a
sympathetic, likeable performance in the smaller role as Cody, the
ruggedly handsome cowboy the girls meet in Vegas.  The supporting cast
all deliver solid performances.
Nick Hurran, a veteran of tv dramas making his feature film
debut, handles the material with surprising empathy and compassion.
He wrings every laugh and tear from the material, without becoming
obviously manipulative.  The film beautifully evokes the drudgery of
life in a northern town with honesty.  Hurran depicts the glitz and
glamour of Las Vegas with the awe struck approach of an outsider
visiting the town for the first time.  He creates a wonderful contrast
between Las Vegas and the harsh environment of Rawtensell, in which
the characters are sustained only by their optimistic dreams.
Girls' Night is easily the best British tear jerker since Richard 
Attenborough's Shadowlands.         

Author
James Sanford
 For decades, the British have produced scores of gritty comedy-dramas about
life among the less-fortunate, several of which have crossed the Atlantic to
become popular successes: "Secrets and Lies" and "The Full Monty" are the
most obvious recent examples. "Girls' Night" is from the same school,
although not in the same class.
 It does, however, offer a couple of sterling performances by Brenda Blethyn
(the long-suffering mom from "Secrets and Lies") and Julie Walters
(best-known in this country for her Oscar-nominated work in 1983's
"Educating Rita"). They make engaging company as Jackie and Dawn,
sisters-in-law who work side by side on an assembly line at an electronics
factory, trapped beneath a huge sign that keeps an up-to-date report of how
far behind they are on their quotas.
 Salty-tongued Jackie (Walters) rushed down the aisle because of an
unplanned pregnancy and now tries to compensate for a miserable marriage by
having an on-and-off affair with the manager of the local bingo hall. When
Dawn (Blethyn) isn't at the factory, she's at home, trying to keep some
peace amongst her rowdy children. Both women are stuck in a largely dreary
northern England town, and though they may daydream about taking off on a
luxurious holiday, they know those kinds of things don't happen to the
working class.
 Things seem to be taking a turn for the better when Dawn has a stroke of
good fortune at bingo and wins over $160,000, but just when the two should
be breaking out the champagne, there's tragic news and it turns out that if
Dawn and Jackie are ever going to have that big fling, they'd better do it
quickly.
 Blethyn's musical voice and melancholy smile are well-suited to Dawn's
self-sacrificing personality and she radiates motherly warmth and good
humor. Walters, whose movies have gone unseen on these shores lately, tells
us all we need to know about Jackie in her slight swagger and the barely
restrained bitterness that tinges her every word. Neither woman is glamorous
or even conventionally attractive but their compelling personalities keep us
hooked, wondering what's going to happen to them.
 Both actresses are far more vibrant than Kay Mellor's screenplay, which is
rather mired in gloom. Though the story is essentially simple, Mellor goes
to considerable pains to slow it down, as if she was afraid the audience
might not catch every dismal detail.
 The film perks up markedly when Dawn and Jackie find themselves swept up in
the bright lights and high stakes of Las Vegas, where they encounter rodeo
star Cody (a puffy Kris Kristofferson), a charming alternative to the
dullish men they're used to. Although the female characters ring true, this
is the kind of movie in which there are two kinds of males: the hunks and
the lunks. Small wonder it's called "Girls' Night."
James Sanford
