Title
Review for Cimarron (1931)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Cimarron" was the first Western to win the
Academy Award for Best Picture.  In fact, it
was the only Western to win that Oscar until
the 1990s.  The irony is that during that
period, there were probably hundreds of Westerns
made that were more deserving.
Richard Dix stars as an early Oklahoman settler.
With his wife (Irene Dunne) he participates
in the famous 1889 land grab, and helps
civilize the lawless frontier town of Osage.
He starts a newspaper, which is successful
despite its controversial editorials.
Having conquered Osage, Dix leaves town in
search of new adventures.  Dunne is left behind
to run the newspaper, and her character grows
from a timid housewife to become Osage's leading
citizen.
"Cimarron" cost RKO $1.5 million to make,
making it one of the most expensive films of
its era.  Despite its accolades, the studio
lost over half a million dollars.  The budget pays
off, however, in the group shots, especially the
re-enactment of the 1889 land grab.  This is
the film's most famous scene.
"Cimarron" is a mediocre film that is made
watchable by Dix's ridiculous performance.  He
provides much unintentional comic relief, and
in his absence the film drags.  Dix's character
is a blustering and swaggering Big Man on
Campus, fearlessly and impulsively taking on
challenges.
The problems with "Cimarron" begin with the
characters.  The audience is supposed to admire
Dix as a hero, when in fact he is unknowingly a
comic figure.  Dunne's personality changes are
artificial: first she's a wallflower, then a
snobbish socialite, and finally a distinguished
matron.  We don't learn much about her until
after Dix has left and can no longer steal scenes.
What we then learn is that she is boring.
Supporting characters are one-dimensional.
We are expected to laugh at a stuttering printer
and at racist caricature Eugene Jackson, but
the attempted humor doesn't work.  A bullying
gang leader exists to demonstrate Dix's manhood,
and prostitute and social pariah Estelle Taylor
exists to demonstrate Dix's compassion.  However,
neither character trait is as entertaining as
listening to Dix's contrived banter.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
