Title
Review for Mutters Courage (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Seth Bookey
Mutters Courage (1997, German with English subtitles)
  Seen on 18 September 1997 with Laura at the Film Forum for $8.
   The movie is framed by the device of Tabori on the set of the filming
   of his mother's Holocaust story. We see the actors and the sets and
   the strange meeting of George Tabori and the woman who will play his
   brave mother (Pauline Collins).
   My Mother's Courage presents such a vivid picture of the Holocaust and
   its ghastly procedures that it is often difficult to realize that it's
   just a movie. Many images familiar to people who have seen the film
   versions of the Holocaust are more vivid here because the film takes
   you right into the cattle cars in living color (many movies are more
   distanced or in black-and-white).
   The very arbitrariness of "order" is examined here. One moment you are
   a Hungarian citizen and the next you are being arrested on the street
   and being sent to your doom. Everyday you say hello to the shopkeeper;
   the next he is avoiding you entirely. What is so odd about this film
   is the comedy involved. Elsa Tabori is arrested on the street by two
   bumbling detectives who were pressed into retirement for the round-up.
   A sympathetic street car conductor wants to help Elsa escape; she gets
   off at the next stop and waits for the policemen to catch up to her.
   Beyond the horror of knowing what is behind the round-up, the waiting,
   the cattle-car trip, there is another level of thought going on. The
   immediate thoughts of the doomed. Elsa firmly believes that all you
   have to do is "be a good girl and everything will work out." This is
   put to the test when she takes on Maria (Natalie Morse), the gentile
   girl arrested--and violated--while visiting a Jewish friend the local
   fascists pursue viciously through her own home. Being a good girl does
   not, it turns out, become its own reward.. History and human nature
   often get in the way.
   We see a lot of Elsa's memories as she peeks through a crack in the
   cattle car to Auschwitz. The last ride of the doomed is contrasted to
   other rail passengers; gleeful children off to a lakeside trip, tawdry
   hooker in lingerie draped over fat crematoria builders in a luxury
   train car. Even the comfortable accomodations of the German officer,
   complete with LP player, provide a sharp contrast to what is happening
   in the cattle cars behind him, on the very same train.
   A lot of the moments in the film will be familiar to those familiar
   with the topic; e.g., the silent omniscient motorman who hangs out the
   side of the engine car is reminiscent of Shoah. What is unfamiliar is
   the comic elements, which do not always work, like the parody of the
   Hitler lookalike wearing the XX motif of Chaplin's The Great Dictator.
   Sometimes they work, sometimes they don't.
   The best parts of the movie belong to Pauline Collins. The decisions
   Elsa is forced to make are painful and contrary to her nature, and are
   truly show stopping and memorable. Also notable is the performance of
   Ulrich Tukur as the very Aryan, quixotic, and sympathetic Nazi officer
   in charge who proves that having power can make all the difference.
   My Mother's Courage is skillfully directed by Michael Verhoeven, best
   known for The Nasty Girl, and for an earlier exploration of the Nazi
   period in The White Rose (1982, about anti-Hitler German students). He
   knows when to keep away and when to close in.
   Most memorable shot: Elsa looks through the crack in the cattle car
   and sees the officer's reflection in a train passing by.
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
