Title
Review for Army of Darkness (1993)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Kong
Army of Darkness is written for and aimed directly at teens. However, I
found that I enjoyed it a lot also. There is something about the film that
is amiable and welcoming.
Forget that Army of Darkness is really part three of the Evil Dead series -
knowledge of the first two films is condensed into a ten-minute
introduction. Army of Darkness is a stand-alone movie that really doesn't
rely on its older brothers. As the story goes, Ash (Bruce Campbell) is
sucked into the past by an evil book. In the past the only way he can get
home is to find the book again and say a few magic words.
Ash, in the previous movies, lost one of his hands to an evil form. He now
attaches a chainsaw to the stump of the missing hand. In the other hand, he
carries his shotgun or "boom stick." Don't bother with how a one handed guy
can load a shotgun - this isn't a movie about reality or logic.
As Ash finds the book of the evil watch as he recites the magical words.
This movie is the perfect mix of stupid humor, horror, and action. The
character Ash is played straight faced by Bruce Campbell and this works
very well. The kind of characters that I laugh most at and with are those
who are caught in silly situations but don't know it. Ash is one of those
characters and Campbell knows it. Campbell is cool as Ash.
Army of Darkness is like a live comic book in the truest sense. The editing
of the film is cut-cut-cut, no transitions needed. This editing accounts
for the short 81 minute running time - this include credits! This is a
hyperactive movie. If this movie were one of the evil dead, it would turn
pale from not breathing.
Worth mentioning are the special effects in Army of Darkness. There are
some that stand out, such as the actual army of darkness standing on a hill
ready to attack the castle. Then there are those special effects that are
laughable, and I'm not sure if it was intended or not. This would include
the bad matting of the "little Ashes" with the big Ash.
Also worth mentioning is Sam Raimi and his cinematographer Bill Pope for
putting together some intricate and inventive shots. I love how Raimi and
Pope shoot flying projectiles. 
I surely can't recommend this film to everyone. I can recommend it for
teens. I can recommend it for those of you looking for a funny medieval
flick. However, for those of you looking for more substance, you won't find
it here. There's only a bag of bones here. 

Author
Brian Koller
"Army of Darkness" is a black comedy.  The genre may appear to be
horror or action-adventure, but the whole movie is just one big wink
from the director to the audience.
Bruce Campbell, also the film's co-producer, is perfectly cast
as the hero Ash.  Ash is in a cabin in the woods with his girlfriend,
when he makes the mistake of opening "the book of the dead".
This awakens demons who kill his girlfriend, then invade his hand,
which he obliged to cut off with an ax.  All of this occurred in
an earlier film which I have not seen.  Army of Darkness is a
sequel.
If the above description is revolting to you, this movie may not be
for you.  While the movie has a large amount of violence and gore,
it is cartoonish in character.  It is something to laugh at, like
Bugs Bunny whacking the stooge with a mallet.
Ash somehow finds himself in Medieval England.  This is not
well explained, but explanations aren't relevant anyway.  The
British knights attack his car with lances, then drag Ash off as
an enemy of the people, condemned to die by getting shoved into
a pit full of demons.
But Ash proves very good at fighting demons.  He has anti-hero
qualities: he does good things, but for the wrong reasons.  Not
to save his people, or to restore justice, but for the fun of
it.  Ash likes nothing better than spearing, torching, and hacking
his enemy.  This is revealed not just by his actions but by
statements like "Let's Rock" and "Want some of this?".  Life is
boring when there are no battles to be fought.
Now Ash is the people's savior against the demons.  He is taken
to a castle and meets a prophet.  He is told that the book of 
dead must be retrieved from a forest controlled by demons, 
not just to return Ash to his own time, but to save the people 
from demonic ravages.  
After much bluster and a silly romance (he shows no interest in
the heroine until she slaps him), Ash goes to the forest to find 
the book.  There, he is beset by various evil, animated objects,
including miniature and full-size wicked versions of himself.
Ash takes a licking but keeps on ticking.  He has to repeat an
incantation before taking the book.  He says it wrong but takes the
book.
Ash returns to the castle to a hero's welcome, until he admits
he told the incantation wrong.  The prophet says that now the
dead will awaken to retrieve the book.  At first, Ash insists
on returning home, but, later coming to his senses, decides
to stay and lead the coming battle against the dead.
In the forest, cool animated skeletons arise from graves, sword
in hand, and march against the castle.  This leads to much 
humorous carnage on both sides, with the battle's momentum shifting 
between the defenders and the dead.  It becomes clear that the battle 
is really just between Ash and the dead's general, as all the other 
soldiers on both sides aren't good fighters and are just 
expendable extras.
The defenders hold the castle, and the skeletons are forced to
retreat.  Ash repeats a chant from the book to return him to his
own time.  Of course he says it wrong, and while he is back working
at his beloved S-mart, a demon returns with him, giving Ash a final 
opportunity for battle.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Lars Lindahl
Review by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
"Army of Darkness" (1993) **1/2 (out of four)
Starring Bruce Campbell, Embeth Davidtz, Ian
Abercrombie, Marcus Gilbert, Richard Grove, and
Bridget Fonda. 
Army of Darkness, the third film in the Evil Dead
trilogy, is as close as you'll get to seeing a comic
book transformed into a movie. Full of cheesy one
liners you'd normally hear Superman declare, the
script is extremely terse and unspecific compared to
others of the same genre (The story Teenage Mutant
Ninja Turtles 2: The Secret of the Ooze presented
feels like James Joyce's Ulysses compared to this
one). The acting is horrendously bad, even for an Evil
Dead film. Bruce Campbell, as the "everyday joe"
turned macho superhero, looks like he's reading off
cue cards while "damsel-in-distress" Embeth Davidtz is
given a few lines and still seems to screw it up. 
So why didn't this movie get zero stars? Because
director Sam Raimi is making a bad movie on purpose!
He wants his audience to recognize how stupid the
script is and how bad the acting is, then he wants his
audience to laugh their brains off. To some extent,
Raimi succeeds. I laughed hard at some scenes; they
were just so asinine, you really can't help but laugh.
However, having seen Evil Dead II just a few days
before, the third installment wasn't nearly as
impressive as its immediate predecessor. I'll invent a
term to better explain my dissatisfaction with Army of
Darkness: Austin Powers Syndrome, or APS. Movies with
APS at first seem very funny. Though, as the film
progresses, an uncontrollable feeling of familiarity
begins to emerge in the back of your brain. It takes a
few minutes, but once you realize it, your enjoyment
for the movie is no longer there. The jokes are
exactly the same as the last film in the series, only
slightly modified. Not modified enough to hide the
fact that nearly everything in the movie you're
watching has been recycled by another movie you
cherished. It's a terrible feeling. I got this feeling
watching Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me and I
recently during Army of Darkness. 
Raimi attempted a very difficult task and ultimately
failed: He tried to satire the same subject using the
same characters and the same story twice. The slight
modification is, instead of alone in a cabin in the
middle of the woods, our hero Ash (Campbell) is
fighting evil ghosts and monsters during 1300 A.D.
with a large army of soldiers. As continued from the
point where Evil Dead II left off (although some
scenes from the end of Evil Dead II are oddly left out
of the beginning of Army of Darkness), Ash is sucked
into the past along with all of the evils that
terrorized him in the present. Conveniently, he finds
himself in the middle of King Arthur's castle (the
only hip place to be during 1300 A.D. according to the
movies). Arthur promises to send Ash back to the
present as long as he recovers the infamous book of
the dead from the woods, an environment inhabited by
dangerous spirits. 
The sense of familiarity begins to come out when Ash
finds himself in a cabin preparing to find the book.
He is first humorously attacked by miniature Ash's,
then by another, larger monster that could pass as his
evil twin. As all of these events, no matter how wacky
or unique they sound, are almost exactly staged and
presented like in Evil Dead II when Ash was being
attacked by his own right hand. I would have enjoyed
Army of Darkness a lot more if I had not seen Evil
Dead II. 
It is fitting that Army of Darkness is not titled Evil
Dead III, because, overall, it is very different from
its two prequels. The budget is more than the first
two films combined, the number of actors is more than
the first two films combined, and the movie lacks the
horror element that the others shared and cleverly
ridiculed. As a guilty pleasure, Army of Darkness is
great to watch with a group of friends. Everyone
involved in the film knew they were making a bad movie
and they had a lot of fun doing it. As it turns out,
they made one of the best B-movies of the 1990's. But
the ASP sticks onto the movie very early on and not
once does it show signs of letting go.  

Author
Thomas A. Miller
     I don't usually do these, so I don't have a standard format or
anything, but here are my thoughts on this film.  You'll note that I
don't have most of the actors' and actresses' names or anything like
that...
     ARMY OF DARKNESS is basically a sequel to EVIL DEAD and EVIL DEAD
II: DEAD BY DAWN.  Though I've only seen bits and pieces of those
other two movies, I noted the similarities between them and this one.
Directed by Sam Raimi (EVIL DEAD, EVIL DEAD II, DARKMAN), this movie
details the adventures (and misadventures) of Ash (Bruce Campbell) after
he gets thrown back into medieval times.
     In a nutshell:  It was hilarious.  I haven't laughed so hard in a
long, long time.  As a combination horror/comedy, this film works very
well.  It's like a "Bill & Ted" or "Wayne's World" movie, with much more
violence, and infinitely better special effects.
     Plot nutshell:  Ash tries to get back to his own time by finding
the Necronomicon and saying three words of power.  His inability to
speak the words results in an army of undead being raised, and he must
help the nearby people cope.
     Effects:  The walking skeletons were nicely done, as were the
close- ups of the various dead people/monsters.
     Humor:  Out of this world.  If you see this with a loud audience,
you'll miss some of the undeads' best lines (my audience shut up for the
most part, especially when Ash was talking.)  Also some of the things
that happen to the undead (and to the living) are really funny, if you
like this sort of movie.
     Overall:  I recommend it at full prices, and I'm not even a Raimi
fan.  I only went to see it because the previews looked good.  It's
perhaps even worth seeing twice.
     Disclaimer:  I don't do "real" reviews.  If you found this one to
be tolerable, thanks for bearing with me.

Author
Mos Eisley
     General Comment: If you have a life (i.e., you're not making a
fortune by sticking coal up your butt), you'll enjoy this movie.
     Sam Raimi has an intense visual style which I would characterize
as the Coen brothers locked in puberty.  And I don't mean that in a bad
way (by the way, the two directors are acquaintances and have a film--I
forget the name--in which all three were involved.  Sam Raimi also
appears in Coen Brothers' MILLER'S CROSSING, briefly.) One of Raimi's
proclaimed influences are the Three Stooges.  Curiously enough, it is
specifically that influence which pops up in ARMY OF DARKNESS as often
as the number of times undead pop out of the ground.
     It's a tough task that Raimi tackles in making a sequel to the
tightly crafted EVIL DEAD II: DEAD BY DAWN (essentially a remake of
EVIL DEAD, or as Raimi claims, a remake of EVIL DEAD as a *tribute to
the Three Stooges*.  Go figure.)  It's one thing to have mundane
machoman Ash (Bruce Campbell) surviving in an isolated house in the
woods chopping evil dead limbs, spouting one-liners to the already dead
like "You're going down" but it's a much more monumental challenge to
propel Ash into a movie of epic form, epic in the tradition of KING
ARTHUR AND THE ROUND TABLE and D&D-like fantasy novels.
     We have seen plenty of fantasy movies from Hollywood, and to be
quite frank, they all sucked (THE DARK CRYSTAL being a remarkable
exception, sci-fi not being included in the genre I call fantasy, and
THE PRINCESS BRIDE not really fantasy).  The pretense of making a
"real" fantasy just becomes too inflated on the big screen.  All the
costumes and makeup don't come even close to the images we've already
formed in our heads.  No one's been able to touch that dreamworld who's
foundation lies in the logos of reading books and playing D&D games.
And wisely enough, considering the character of Ash, Raimi avoids even
trying.
     Instead, Raimi sticks to his guns.  Army of Darkness is slapstick
and parody (a parody of King Arthur and other mythological legends)
backed up by solid effects and amazing camerawork.
     Just as a note, there are some scenes in which Raimi's cameraman
had epileptic seizures, and though they were intentional, it was a bit
distracting (I kept thinking through the fast camera work, "Don't tell
the story in pans ... tell the story in cuts, Sam.  No, Sam, schizoid,
fast blurry pans are not an exception to the rule.").  And as if he
heard me, Raimi's next scene involves a hilarious rapid-fire sequence
of cuts in which Ash dresses in knight gear.  Bravo!
     The comedy potential for situating Ash into a mythological role as
The Prophesized One is realized by Raimi, but only halfway.  There are
great scenes.  As Ash begins to gain respect from the medieval people,
he yells with authority, waving his gun in the air, "This ... is my
BOOM STICK."  The scene in which Ash finds the NECRONOMICON is also
unforgettable (and elicited the most noise from the audience as Ash
mutters "I know it starts with an 'n'...") However, it seems to me that
Raimi didn't study his fantasy films, because in the end he resorts to
Three Stooges (Ouch ouch!  Take this!  Oof!  Stop it, stop it!
Nyuknyuk!--you know the kind) type humor to keep his movie going.
While that base level of humor had its moments, overdoing it seemed to
drain the menace out of the Army of Darkness and hence the climax never
got off to a jump start.  There's the cliche technology vs. brute force
theme and that's about it.
     It is my opinion that Raimi should have limited his humor to the
interplay between Ash (90s man) and the medieval myth-seeking folk and
the machoesque manner in which Ash disposes of The Dead (great scene in
which Ash flexes after shooting a witch from behind his back).
However, he focused that Three Stooginizations upon The Dead also, a
mistake he didn't make in EVIL DEAD II.  The leader of The Army of
Darkness appeared stupid, harmless and for a while I thought he was a
metaphor for Curly.  Who knows.
     But there's something to be said for the almost Ren & Stimpy-esque
manner in which Raimi has his characters trying to prove their
manliness and survive at the same time.  There's something to be said
for the times in which indignity stares both Ash and the viewer right
in the face whether it be in the form of skeletal fingers or just
forgetfulness.  And I would never dismiss Raimi's talent as
prepubescent or wasted.  After all, I enjoyed the movie.

Author
John Beachem
Our one-handed, chainsaw wielding, fairly brainless hero, Ash (Bruce 
Campbell) is back. After being sucked into a vortex at the end of "Evil Dead 
II", Ash finds himself back in the middle ages, in the kingdom of King 
Arthur (Marcus Gilbert). Ash is taken captive by Arthur's men, along with 
Duke Henry the Red (Richard Grove), Arthur's mortal enemy. It seems Arthur 
and Henry are being attacked by the deadites (the demons Ash has already 
battled in the future), but they're still finding time to fight each other. 
Ash is taken back to Arthur's castle as a prisoner, despite the 
protestations of Arthur's advisor (Ian Abercrombie), who believes Ash to be 
the chosen one who will defeat the deadites. Ash soon escapes, entrances a 
young girl named Sheila (Embeth Davidtz), and promises to retrieve the 
Necronomicon for the wise man so the deadites can be stopped. Of course, Ash 
botches this retrieval pretty badly, and unleashes a massive army of the 
dead who will soon attack Arthur's castle. Now Ash, Arthur, and a handful of 
men must stop hundreds of walking skeletons from taking the Necronomicon and 
with it, the world. Maybe, just maybe Ash and his men can win.... yeah, and 
maybe I'm a Chinese jet pilot.
A lot of people call "Army of Darkness" the weakest entry into the "Evil 
Dead" trilogy. As a horror movie, yes, this is certainly the weakest film. 
While "Evil Dead" was a horror movie with occasional comic elements, and 
"Evil Dead II" was an almost 50/50 blend of horror and comedy, "Army of 
Darkness" is a comedy with an occasional horrific moment. For that reason, 
your average horror fanatic isn't going to have a great time. The rest of 
us, who enjoy comedies, will be rolling on the floor, laughing like idiots 
till we're blue in the face. Oh what a deliriously funny movie this is, 
filled with countless belly laughs and more chuckles than viewers have a 
right to experience. It's a movie packed with one-liners (nearly all of 
which were stolen by the video game, "Duke Nukem") that you'll be quoting 
for weeks (or in my case years), until your friends are ready to kill you 
for calling everything groovy whether it's groovy or not. What makes the 
movie so funny, so quotable, and just so memorable? Simple...
... it's Bruce Campbell. Campbell plays Ash a little differently this time 
around, but who can blame him? Battling a horde of demons is bound to change 
any man, and it has turned Ash into a man who thinks he's a lot smarter than 
he actually is. This makes for some great comic moments, such as when he 
must speak the sacred words (a little tribute to "The Day the Earth Stood 
Still") before removing the Necronomicon from the graveyard. Campbell's 
facial expressions during this and dozens of other comical scenes are second 
to none. The man is a master of contorting his face into expressions of 
sheer terror, complete bafflement, and lurking stupidity. One day Campbell's 
going to get his due, I just know it. Supporting characters meant little in 
the first two "Evil Dead" films, and they mean even less in "Army of 
Darkness". This is Campbell's movie, and no one tries to upstage him. Still, 
the supporting cast members do just fine in roles that require them to do 
little more than scream a lot. The only exception is Marcus Gilbert, who is 
really quite entertaining as the hard-as-nails King Arthur (No, I don't 
THINK it's that Arthur). Watch for Sam Raimi's younger brother, Ted, in 
three different cameos (a whining soldier, a cheering villager, and an 
S-Mart employee). Bridget Fonda ("A Simple Plan") appears briefly as Ash's 
girlfriend in a flashback (she's the third actress to play the same 
girlfriend).
While Bruce Campbell carries the film, he's assisted greatly by the always 
unique direction of Sam Raimi. Raimi toned his chaotic direction down a bit 
in "Evil Dead II", but he cranks it into overdrive here in part three. All 
the fat has been trimmed off this movie, which means no character 
development, no exposition of plot, no long scenes of dialogue, nothing by 
constant action and laughs. Obviously the film didn't fare too well with 
critics for those reasons, but it's sure to delight anyone ages 14 to 28 or 
so. It's frantic and wild, and it has more fun moments than you can shake a 
chainsaw at. My two personal favorite comic moments are Ash's scene in the 
graveyard, where he battles a horde of skeleton hands poking out of the 
ground (massive "Three Stooges" homage here), and Ash fighting a legion of 
tiny Ashes in a windmill. The latter scene leads into another great scene 
where Ash dances about singing "Mr. Goody Two-shoes" (don't worry, it'll 
make sense when you get there). But what about action, what about horror?! 
You're no doubt shouting that at your screen right now, and let me tell you, 
there is some great medieval action in "Army of Darkness". The final battle, 
involving an army of skeletons storming the castle, is packed with some of 
the best fantasy action you're likely to find in a movie. Sword fights and 
catapults and flaming arrows and - oh, sorry, I got a little worked up 
there.
But horror, where's the horror?! Well my friends, there's not much to be 
found. I suppose the scene with Ash fighting gouls in the pit could qualify 
as horror, but other than that you're not likely to find much here. Sorry. A 
lingering curiosity about "Army of Darkness" has always been the special 
effects. They're a curiosity because while they are, at times, really quite 
wonderful (particularly during the final battle, where we get hundreds of 
highly detailed skeletons marching in formation), they're also dreadful on 
occasion. I refer specifically to the matte jobs in a few scenes, like those 
with the tiny Ashes. They're so bad, and so dated, I can't help but think 
they're intentional for reasons buried deep within the mind of Sam Raimi (a 
terrifying place, I'm sure). One last thing worth noting is the film's 
score, and particularly one piece called "March of the Dead". It's composed 
by long-time Tim Burton collaborator, Danny Elfman, and a more perfect score 
could not possibly have been inserted in this film. "Army of Darkness" runs 
a lean, mean, 85 minutes. It stops just before it starts to wear out its 
welcome. I'd recommend it to fans of Bruce Campbell, fans of Raimi's unique 
directorial style, and fans of slap-stick comedy. I give it a well earned 
four and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Sam Raimi's EVIL DEAD was a low-budget horror film that was above
average for its kind.  It combined fluid camerawork (often with undercranked
cameras) and a fresh look at the then over-used concept of the walking dead.
It made a name for Raimi as a director willing to do the unusual.  While
ostensibility the same sort of film, EVIL DEAD II picked up the pacing and
increased the creativity by a large factor.  It was a wild, funhouse sort of
horror film where just about anything weird could happen.  The accent was on
being strange and funny with gooseflesh becoming a low priority.  The film
ended by dropping its main character through some sort of evil vortex into
medieval Europe.
     Determined to play the ball where it lies, the third of the "Evil Dead"
films begins with Ash arriving in medieval Europe and eventually gets him
involved in an epic battle between the living and the dead.  ARMY OF
DARKNESS is another giant leap in creativity, but this time Raimi has gone
too far.  This film shows just how far Sam Raimi has allowed his reach to
exceed his grasp.  ARMY OF DARKNESS is a truly magnificent failure.  The
concept of an apocalyptic battle of the powers of Darkness against the
powers of Light has been toyed with by writers from Milton to
J. R. R. Tolkien and James Blish.  When Clive Barker adapted his CABAL into
NIGHTBREED, he also said what he wanted to do someday--and what that film
gave only an inkling ofwas such a mammoth battle of the Dead against the
Living.  The Raimis (Sam co-scripted ARMY OF DARKNESS with his brother Ivan)
try to tell the story of such a battle, but squander too much of the effect
on cheap one-line jokes, insufficient humor, and images that often don't
work.  The scripting is weak and the camerawork often captures exactly the
wrong mood.  The Raimis could not get their tongues out of their cheeks long
enough to realize they were squandering what could have  been a great horror
fantasy classic.
     Bruce Campbell recreates his role as Ash, who now finds himself caught
up in a "Connecticut Yankee" sort of plot as he prepares for the battle.
However, the Raimis do not have the writing skill of a Mark Twain, so Ash's
programmed response to problems is to use his shotgun or his chainsaw.  When
Ash fouls up a mission to retrieve the NECRONOMICON--the classic book of
evil--he inadvertently looses on the world a battalion of skeletons.  The
Raimis fail to build much excitement about the ensuing battle, playing it
more for giggles than thrills.  And the final sequence of the film, which
seems horribly out of keeping with the rest of the story, is apparently an
afterthought.  The conclusion of the film as shown at the Sitges Film
Festival and reported in the October 19, 1992, VARIETY, was much bleaker but
also probably much more effective than what was shown in local theaters.
     I rate ARMY OF DARKNESS a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale, mostly on the
basis of some good ideas albeit mishandled.  Maybe somebody else will pick
up the idea again.
