Title
Review for Allegro non troppo (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
There are a few films that are all cartoons and they are often good, but
have had trouble finding an audience, specially if they are not quite for
children, or maybe they are for teenagers and adults.
ALLEGRO NON TROPPO is a beautiful series of cartoon spoofs set to classical
music, interspersed with some rather hmmm, hmmm, comedy bits in between the
sketches.  The sketches are between the cartoonist, the orchestra conductor
and the players of the music, which happens to be a group of elderly ladies.
The comedy sketches themselves are weak, although there are some very funny
moments.
Featuring the music of Debussy ( Prelude to an Afternoon of a Faun ), Dvorak
( Slavonic dance No. 7 ), Ravel ( Bolero ), Sibelius ( Valse Triste ),
Vivaldi ( Concerto in C Minor ) and a piece from Stravinsky ( The Firebird )
the visual interpretation of these musical classics is as good, if not
better, than Walt Disney's version.  At least, it is better because it isn't
just a fanciful, and spirited, attempt to attract the kiddies.  It is much
more sophisticated, and better thought out from a writing standpoint.  Of
course,
it is easier to say that when Mr.. Disney has already set a standard some
forty years prior to the release of this film.
Debussy .... This cartoon is about an aging satyr attempting to rekindle his
old flame, only to fall prey to his aging.
Dvorak ....  The funniest piece, a great attack on the morality, or
immorality
of the monkey copycats of the twentieth century.
Ravel ....  Rather difficult to explain, but it is about the creation, and
growth of man through out history from the prehistoric days to a modern
freeway.
Sibelius ...  A really sad, and magical piece about a kitty remembering his
better days before the war destroyed his home.
Vivaldi ...  Very funny cartoon about a very independent, and vindictive,
Mrs. Bee, trying to enjoy her gourmet breakfast.
Stravinsky .... A piece about a snake and its mistake when it ate Adam's
apple
and became cursed with the history of man and modern madness.
All in all, this is an exceptional film worth seeing, if it comes around or
is released in video ( I bought it ) to various stores. It really has a more
direct connection with the music than what Fantasia appeared to have for me.
The cartoonist actor, is Maurizio Nichetti, who went on to make THE ICICLE
THIEF which I have reviewed.  Maurizio made his fame by putting together
commercials with a comedy edge to them in Italy.
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1994
Reviewer and Moderator of the CENTIPEDE's THE FILM.
