Title
Review for Airport '77 (1977)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Nusair
Starring Jack Lemmon, Jimmy Stewart, Lee Grant
"Airport '77", an entertaining disaster film, can easily be broken down
into three seperate sections.  First, we meet all the passengers on the
doomed flight.  This takes about 45 minutes.  Secondly, we see the evil
hijackers attempt to take over the ship and eventually fail.  This also
takes about 45 minutes.  Finally, the last half hour is devoted to the
rescue effort of the Coast Guard following the ship's crash into the
ocean.
Despite the predictable nature of the screenplay, "Airport '77" is
enjoyable enough, in a leave-your-brain-at-the-door type of way.  Jack
Lemmon stars as the earnest and dedicated captain who's determined to save
his ship and passengers.  Jimmy Stewart plays a rich business man who's
daughter and grand-daughter are on the flight.  He doesn't do much except
look really, really worried.  And of course, this being an "Airport"
movie, there are many stars on the flight.  Some will live, others will
die.  George Kennedy inexplicably shows up halfway through and starts
ordering people around.  I suppose he's here because he was in the
previous "Airport" films.
There's nothing terribly original about "Airport '77".  Everyone's just
going through the motions, including the always-great Jack Lemmon.  This
is a story that's been done many, many times before and one can sense that
the only reason a movie like this was even made was to assemble all these
aging stars that would otherwise be out-of-work.  If making movies like
this is what it takes to see actors like Olivia de Havilland and Joseph
Cotton working again, than so be it.  
Besides, the movie itself isn't all *that* bad, once you get past the
utter predictability of it.  For a film made in 1977, the special effects
aren't too shabby (of course, they're nothing compared to "Star Wars",
also released in'77), and there are moments of genuine excitment.  
"Airport '77" isn't exactly ground-breaking entertainment, but it is worth
watching just for a chance to see a lot of legendary actors working in the
same movie.
