Title
Review for Viva Las Vegas (1964)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
An Elvis Presley movie has to be approached as entertainment, nothing more. 
His best films, "King Creole" and "Jailhouse Rock," offered more than 
entertainment - they had meaty stories and well-drawn characters. "Viva Las 
Vegas" is one of Elvis's most popular movies but when all is said and done, 
its mere novelty is that it is nothing more than a pictaresque travelogue 
with Elvis and Ann-Margret chewing up the screen with their songs and dance 
moves. 
Elvis stars as Lucky Jackson, a cocky race car driver with aspirations to 
race at the Grand Prix in Las Vegas. The trouble is that there is a powerful 
engine he needs to buy for his precious car. Lucky tries his luck at a Vegas 
casino and actually wins the money. Unfortunately, the engine is bought by 
someone else, and through a series of misadventures, namely falling in a pool 
while making courtly advances to a fellow employee, Rusty Martin 
(Ann-Margret), Lucky loses his money and finds himself working as a waiter at 
a hotel. 
In the meantime, there are a series of montages involving Lucky and a rival 
driver, Count Elmo Mancini (played by singer Cesare Danova), who spend about 
twenty minutes searching for that pretty redhead Rusty at every single Vegas 
casino and showplace on the Strip (which leaves about one hour of more 
repetitive montages). There are also the requisite songs sung by Elvis and 
Ann-Margret - my favorites are the title tune, "The Lady Loves Me," and 
"Appreciation." And Cesare does not get to perform one song...how cruel!
To criticize "Viva Las Vegas" is to ask for trouble. How can you argue 
against a movie that hardly has a story or credible characters, and is just 
concerned with being silly and fluffy nonsense? The movie is mostly an 
advertisement for Las Vegas, offering scenic beauty and plenty of helicopter 
shots of the horizon in Cinemascope color. And there is Elvis and 
Ann-Margret, two dazzling, sexy, charismatic stars who unfortunately have 
little in the way of chemistry. And the final race car competition results in 
two deaths (though one of them survives relatively unscathed if you check out 
the final wedding sequence), and apparently starts at midnight though it 
seems to last through the next day!
There are some electric moments with the dynamic Ann-Margret, a fabulous 
singer and dancer and a better actor than Elvis. Elvis himself has one high 
comedic point where he splashes champagne all over Cesare, who is trying to 
woo Ann-Margret. Beyond that, I expect much more than pretty scenery and a 
few good songs, but why carp? People seem to love this movie, so be it.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com
