Title
Review for Last Days, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE LAST DAYS (1998) **** Directed and edited by James Moll. Produced 
by June Beallor and Ken Lipper. Photography, Harris Done. Music, Hans 
Zimmer; P; presented by Steven Spielberg and Survivors of the Shoah 
Visual History Foundation. An October Films release. 88 minutes. 
PG-13.
The Witnesses:  Congressman Tom Lantos, Alice Lok Cahana, Renee 
Firestone, Bill Basch, Irene Zisblatt.
Ordinary --or even extraordinary--standards, criteria and judgments 
cannot apply to documentaries, especially those on the Holocaust. The 
most valid and obvious thing one can say about "The Last Days" is 
that it belongs to that handful of life-and-death documents which are 
indispensable viewing by all humans.
Put it this way. Whenever I am asked to name my favorite movie, or my 
Best 10 or 100, I reply that I cannot do it unless it is a list of 
the 1,000 Best.  On the other hand, if all films were to disappear, 
except for a few  that could be saved, I would begin that very small 
list with "Night and Fog, " the 1955,  32-minute documentary on 
extermination camps. It was made by Alain Resnais who is French but 
not Jewish. And the most recent film in that to-be-rescued group 
would be "The Last Days."
It is about the Jews of Hungary, one of the largest groups in Europe. 
In the mid-1930s the population of that country was about 8.5 
million. The ruler (as Regent) was the pro-fascist, antisemitic 
Admiral (in a landlocked country!) Horty. In June 1941 Hungary joined 
the Axis war on the USSR. By then the country's population had 
increased through Hitler's "gifts," annexations of areas in 
neighboring lands, These also has Jewish populations.
Like the Jews of Germany, those of Hungary were and felt assimilated 
in every way. They co-existed well with their Gentile friends and 
neighbors, although, to their bewilderment, when persecution later 
came full force,  antisemitism often showed its hidden face, 
especially in provincial towns and rural areas.
By 1941 there were about 825,000 Jews in Hungary, many of them in 
Budapest. By and large they felt safe. After all, they were "true" 
Magyars! They had no knowledge of Nazi atrocities elsewhere. This 
"ignorance," though hard to believe today, was quite common among 
both Jews and Gentiles all over the world..
By the end of World War II,  620,000 Hungarian Jews had been 
exterminated. The horror began systematically when, on March 19 1944, 
Hitler, by now mistrustful of his ally, invaded  the country. As it 
is often said, although he did not admit -- even to himself-- that 
after the rout at Stalingrad the Germans had already lost the war, he 
was more hell-bent than ever on winning his war against the Jews and 
making the Final Solution really final.
The title "The Last Days" stands both for the last days of the war 
and the last days in the lives of Hungarian Jews. The film  focuses 
on five Shoah survivors, each of whom tells his/her story to the 
camera in something like a historical stream of conscioussness.  No 
interviewers are seen or heard. Nor is there the usual narrator. The 
survivors themselves (who, coming to America after the war created 
families, professions and occupations) are the ones who narrate their 
past in bits, pieces, scenes or sequences. They are also shown 
visiting, decades later, their old Hungarian haunts and the scenes of 
the  Nazi crimes.
Thie tragic tales are edited and blended superlatively well, in 
criss-cross fashion. Intercut are period, family, and other 
photographs,  as well as documentary footage  of the war, the camps, 
the killers and the killed. Much  of this was shot by German 
soldiers. Every sight and sound shakes you to your foundations.  A 
great deal of the footage is new or rare or recently discovered.
It is not possible for me to find the right words that would 
characterize the skill, effectiveness, lucidity, and emotions of the 
process. Adjectives such as "superb," "magnificent," or "astounding" 
imply esthetic or showmanship values, all of which make those terms 
inappropriate. The witnesses are tremendously moved and moving.
All five witnesses are most likable. Opening the film is Tom Lantos, 
the 10-times elected Congressman from California and the only 
Holocaust survivor in Congress. He often adds striking notes of black 
humor which reinforce the horrors. He is the only Budapester of the 
group, the son of patrician parents, both killed in camps. Highly 
educated, handsome, elegant and calmly eloquent, he points out that 
he would not be here today without Raoul Wallenberg, the heroic Swede 
who saved thousands of Hungarian Jews --and later vanished in Soviet 
hands. Mr. Lantos came to the United States in 1947 on a Hillel 
scholarship--with no money but with a big Hungarian salami which was 
confiscated by customs.
Without duplicating the film in writing one cannot describe or 
characterize each participant, especially since their own 
descriptions of facts, events, thoughts and feelings are stunning, 
rich in variety yet similar in pain. Each time I have seen this film 
something special has jumped out and struck me. At the latest 
screening one of those moments was a witness, recounting her low 
point in the camp, says "that's when I stopped talking to God." And 
every time I am dumbfounded by the matter-of-factness of a German, 
Hans Munch, head doctor of a camp where experiments were made on 
humans. This chill-making is balanced by the warm scene where a black 
G.I., now a doctor, is brought an astonishing gift, the legacy to him 
by a man he and other soldiers had liberated from slavery.
The witnesses were all teen-agers then. They grew up fast, and grew 
older with admirable faith, in their beliefs,  and in the positive 
side of humanity.
There is more suspense in the film than in fictional thrillers, 
stunning absurdism and surrealism (among the Nazis), a depth of 
feeling and pain  that no fictional melodrama can approach. One can 
hardly think of 88 screen minutes as packed as these.
Director Moll and co-producer Beallor had previously made for TV the 
prize-winning "Survivors of the Holocaust" and "The Lost Children of 
Berlin." They bring hearts, minds and expertise to "The Last Days" 
which won the Oscar for Best Documentary.
It also has won the highest possible ratings from all film critics, 
more praise than for any film I can remember in the last many years.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   In a recent op ed column, New York Times columnist Abe
Rosenthal writes of "The Last Days" that "we do not go see
the picture to see 'new' things.  Go to see again what you
know--the living skeletons with nothing but skin and bones on
their buttocks and thighs, the dead skeletons filling scores of
boxcars because the Nazis wanted them dead before U.S.
troops give them life."  The most vivid images shown by this
Holocaust film, which is executive produced by Steven
Spielberg and sponsored by the Shoah Foundation is that of
scores of victims of the camps just after their liberation.  They
are indeed as close as you'll get to the walking dead, ribs
protruding on bodies that are virtually devoid of skin.  There
is nothing that this current release shows that has not been
exhibited before in the vast array of such documentaries, but
as the philosopher Santayana once said, "Those who forget
the past are condemned to repeat it."  If so, "The Last Days"
serves as yet another reminder of the most vicious and
senseless crime ever perpetuated by human beings against
others.  Ultimately the Shoah Visual History Foundation will
have at its disposal video clips of 50,000 interviews with
survivors in 57 countries in 31 languages, doubtless the most
recorded sequence of taped historical data of any of history's
great tragedies.  This is documentation that makes an
absolute mockery of the claims of a relative handful of
wackos who have the unmitigated malignity to claim that the
Holocaust never took place.  
   Directed and edited by James Moll with Harris Done behind
the camera, the picture profiles five survivors living in
America who have a common Hungarian background.  They
have lived in this country for decades.  All are fluent in
English, are articulate (no uhs, ahs, ya knows), and expound
on their memories eloquently with only an occasional pause
by one of their number for tears. Director Moll follows the
standard pattern of documentaries of this nature, varying the
talking heads with both still clips from the past and, in this
case, the use of archived films taken at the time--some in full
color.  
   The  best-spoken of the interviewees is 9-term California
Congressman Tom Lantos, whose district covers parts of San
Francisco.  Toward the end of the film we are shown the one
gratifying scene of the story, the 17 grandsons and
granddaughters that have brought so much inspiration and
joy to the legislator, the ultimate vindication of the will of the
Jewish people to survive as they have done for millennia
despite the pogroms of their demented enemies.  
   Congressman Lantos, a seventy-year-old, Budapest-born
legislator, came from a family of intellectuals including an
uncle who was a professor at the Budapest University who,
like most of his fellows, considered himself a patriotic
Hungarian.   Lantos describes the growing fear among the
Jews of his country after Hitler had annexed Austria, and
although the Germans were right on the Hungarian border, he
felt that nothing would happen since the Jewish community
would be protected by their own countrymen.  How wrong he
was.  As director Moll shows clips of the Arrow Cross, a pro-
Nazi group of Hungarians, we see how it was possible for a
typical village in Hungary to be "occupied" by only two
German soldiers as so many Hungarian people themselves
supported the Nazi movement fiercely.  
   With expert editing by the director, "The Last Days" cross-
cuts among interviews with the four other principals with
cameo appearances by an African-American doctor who
helped liberate one of the camps (and who killed a German
officer who had spit in his face); and a remarkable
conference with a Dr. Munch, one of the German physicians
who experimented on the Jewish prisoners, but who was
acquitted of any crime because (as he puts it) he delayed the
execution of many inmates by performing harmless medical
experiments on them.  (We draw our own conclusions about
whether he is indeed another Oskar Schindler since, after all,
how innocent could a German doctor be if he chose to
participate in this evil research?)
   Some of the more dramatic testimony of the lucid survivors 
interviewed for the film includes a story of three teens who
had taken an oath that they would die for one another but,
when a guard insisted on killing one of them who was walking
with a limp, the two buddies who had stood in front to protect
their friend moved away.  Renee Firestone, now a white-
haired, calm woman who occasionally breaks into tears,
describes how she hunched over to hide from her father,
wanting to conceal her shaved head and ragged clothes.  As
her father marched to the ovens, however, their eyes locked
for the last time.
   The giant of Holocaust documentaries remains Claude
Lanzmann's mammoth 1985 work. "Shoah," a nine-year labor
chronicling the memories of those who lived through the
Holocaust.  Lanzmann was able to trick the ex-Nazis he
interviewed into admitting vile deeds under the pretense that
he was thoroughly neutral. "The Last Days" is a solid effort
but by contrast a relatively sober film, one which fills a niche
by focusing exclusively on what the Nazis did to the Jews of
Hungary.  

Author
Scott Renshaw
    There's more than a touch of irony to the title of THE LAST DAYS, the
first feature film project from Steven Spielberg's Shoah Foundation.  On
the surface it refers to the time when the film's five principal subjects
-- Hungarian-born Holocaust survivors Tom Lantos, Renee Firestone, Alice
Lok Cahana, Bill Basch and Irene Zisblatt -- were taken from their
homeland in 1944, as Germany saw its chances at winning the war slip away
and made a last desperate attempt to complete Hitler's Final Solution.
Yet for these five people and thousands of other survivors like them, the
last days were only the beginning, the first days of a lifetime spent
trying to make sense of what had been taken from them.
     It's this concern with the world of the survivors -- rather than
simply the world of the concentration camp internees -- that makes THE
LAST DAYS more than "just another Holocaust documentary."  The film is
told entirely by witnesses to the Holocaust, without a moment of
narration, yet accounts of attrocities in the camps make up a relatively
small portion of the film.  There are certainly many powerful
recollections in the survivor testimony, the kind that can make you cry
out in pain.  Irene Zisblatt tells a tale of preserving the family
diamonds that makes Christopher Walken's gold watch monologue in PULP
FICTION seem appallingly banal; she describes seeing two children killed,
and realizing "that's when I stopped talking to God."  Director James Moll
also uncovers rare footage for which no adjectives will suffice, images
shot by liberating Allied forces of skeletal survivors walking in a
ghostly parade.
     As effectively as THE LAST DAYS captures the "during" of the
Holocaust, it also takes time to explore both the "before" and the
"after."  If there is anywhere it disappoints, it is in capturing the
uniqueness of this particular "before."  Bill Basch ruefully notes in the
film's opening moments the absurdity of Hitler's late push to add the
Hungarian Jews to his European slaughter -- "killing Jews," Basch says,
"was more important than winning the war" -- but Moll doesn't build on
that premise.  While his focus on the survivors keeps the story personal,
it doesn't allow for a perspective on what was happening in the bigger
picture of 1944, and how a different allocation of resources by the
Germans might have changed that picture.  Accounts of how Hungarians
believed the stories drifting in from Poland could never happen in their
own country feel more like generic back-story than a context for this
particular phase of the genocide.
     Ultimately, however, Moll finds his most powerful stories in the
"after."  There is still 35 minutes of screen time left when the war ends,
leaving us with stories of our five narrators trying to pick up the
pieces.  We see scenes of the survivors returned to Birkenau and
Bergen-Belsen with their families, memories and tears washing over them.
We see Renee Firestone visiting her childhood home, and breaking down at
finding a locked gate.  We see Firestone confronting a German
concentration camp physician with evidence that he experimented on her
sister, receiving evasive responses to the medical records like "yes,
everything normal."  Most significantly, we see the survivors turning
their experiences into art (by Lok Cahana), into political action (by
Lantos, now a California Congressman), into education for another
generation (by Firestone in lectures).  Their days in concentration camps
could have been the last days for these five individuals, either for their
lives or for their souls.  THE LAST DAYS shows survivors in action,
seeking resolution, working for a world that will never forget.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In the waning months of World War II, when Hitler would naturally have 
been expected to marshal his forces in the German homeland to protect 
its citizens, he sent his troops in the opposite direction to invade 
Hungary.
Over and above his dreams of world domination for his "Reich that would 
live a thousand years" was his dedication to the infamous "Final 
Solution."  By the last 6 months of the war, Hungary had the largest 
remaining Jewish population in Europe.  By conquering one last country, 
Hitler planned the mass extermination of the Jews that lived there.  In 
a record 12 brutal weeks, he rounded most of them up and sent them off 
to concentration camps to be annihilated.
James Moll's lucid documentary, THE LAST DAYS, tells the little known 
story of horror and courage of this final Jewish purge of the war.  
Interviewing a few of the Hungarian Holocaust survivors and avoiding the 
overlaying of a supercilious narrator, the story has a quiet and 
unmanipulative power.  (To those of you who are thinking that you 
already know the story, you probably don't know this one.  Even if you 
are one of the few that do, you'll gain fresh insights and see some 
chilling footage that you almost certainly haven't seen.)
Moll makes an inviting and intriguing documentary by weaving lush color 
scenes of Hungary today with black and white images of it in the height 
of the Nazi occupation.  One gets a genuine appreciation for what the 
Jews lost when they were forced out of their homes.
Chief among the stories you may know is that of the courageous Swedish 
diplomat Raoul Wallenberg.  He came to Budapest and obtained middle 
class apartment complexes where he housed Jews.  Giving them fake 
Swedish passports, he claimed that these Jews were on their way to 
protection in Sweden and therefore could not be captured by the Nazis.  
That he got away with these audacious acts is a miracle, but these phony 
ids saved thousands from the gas chambers.
Most Jews were shuttled off to the camps to be experimented on and to 
die.  Upon their arrival, families were divided into 2 lines - those who 
would live and those who would die.  The young and the old, as in those 
over 50, were routinely exterminated.  By the time those chosen to live 
had been processed into their barracks, their less fortunate loved loves 
were already dead.
The massive terror that the concentration inhabitants had to endure is 
hard to fathom so the film sticks to a few examples.  One woman talks of 
the eye experiments conducted on them.  They were given eye drops and 
stuck in a pitch-black basement for days with nothing to eat or drink.  
Standing in water the whole time in the flooded basement, they drank the 
same water into which they had to urinate and defecate.  When they 
emerged, some of them were blind for days.
The movie's most shocking new scene will undoubtedly evoke a strong 
visceral reaction in audiences.  We have all seen images of emaciated 
victims of the Nazi's cruelty, but they are usually black and white 
pictures of barely moving near-corpses.  THE LAST DAYS has some color 
footage of a half dozen naked men waddling away from the camera.  With 
malnourished bones and basically no fat, these men are reduced to a 
state where each step looks like it could be their last.
The movie ends with one of the women going back to her old home in 
Hungary for the first time since the war.  She finds their holy 
synagogue stripped of its Stars of David and now used as a secular 
concert hall.  She meets one old neighbor who remembers her.  He says he 
knows about the Holocaust because he's seen the movies.  He asks her 
casually if it really was as bad as the movies made it appear.  
"Unfortunately, it was worse than the movies," she replies with a look 
that suggests that she knows that he will never come close to 
understanding.
THE LAST DAYS runs a fast 1:28.  It is rated PG-13 for graphic images 
and descriptions of Holocaust atrocities and would be an excellent film 
for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Greg King
Established by Steven Spielberg in 1994, the non-profit
Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation aims to record and
document the stories of Holocaust survivors as part of a lasting
record for future generations.  Spielberg and director James Moll have
already produced a couple of award winning tv documentaries.  This
remarkable and haunting Oscar winning documentary is the first feature
film from the Foundation, and depicts the unique Hungarian experience.
In 1945, even when it became obvious that the war was lost,
Hitler began a massive campaign to eradicate the Hungarian Jews.  He
directed enormous resources away from the Russian Front and assigned
them the task of moving the Jewish population from the ghettos to the
death camps, where they were systematically executed.  Culled from
intensive research and an exhaustive series of interviews, this
moving, powerful and ultimately inspirational documentary tells the
story of those horrific last days of the war through the eyes of five
survivors.
The five survivors have gone on to lead fulfilling lives,
devoted to humanitarian causes, and their inspirational stories
deserve to be heard.  Tom Lantos is now a US congressman; Renee
Firestone is a teacher who educates school children on the Holocaust;
artist Alice Lok Cahana uses art as a way of capturing her
experiences; while businessman Bill Basch and Irene Zisblatt continue
to share their experiences.  Although they come from different
backgrounds, they share stories of horror, sacrifice and extraordinary
courage in intimate and painfully personal terms for the camera.
Moll eschews traditional narration here, intercutting between
the various stories to dramatically reveal the full impact of their
horrific experiences.  Moll deliberately pushes a number of emotional
buttons throughout the film, arousing audience sympathy for his
subjects.  He is aided by a highly emotive background score from Oscar
winning composer Hans Zimmer.
As with the Oscar winning 1995 documentary Anne Frank
Remembered, director Moll has taken some of the survivors back to the
ruins of the camps to put their reminiscences into perspective.  Some
of them visibly break down on camera.  It may be uncomfortable viewing
for some, but it certainly makes for great drama.  In one scene, a
survivor actually confronts the Nazi doctor who performed experiments
on her sister in the camps.  But the most haunting and indelible
images come from the previously unseen footage of the painfully thin
and desiccated survivors of Dachau, taken by the US soldiers who
liberated the notorious camp in 1945.
This intelligently constructed documentary tries to capture
the grim extent of the unimaginable horror of these camps, but it is
also a wonderfully uplifting testament to the resilience of the human
spirit.  The Last Days is one of the most powerful and memorable
documentaries to hit our screens for some time.

Author
Marty Mapes
The sheer horrific audacity of the Nazi plan to exterminate the Jews of
Europe is almost incomprehensible. People may make documentaries about
it for another hundred years and still not understand the organized,
methodical hatred.
Five concentration camp survivors from the last days of World War II
tell their stories in THE LAST DAYS, the first documentary from Steven
Spielberg's Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation.
The five interviewees are linked by their Hungarian ancestry. As the
introduction explains, even as Germany started to lose the war, the
Nazis stepped up their extermination of the Jews in Europe. In 1944,
Hungary had the last big population of Jews within Germany's reach, and
they became the last target of Hitler's "final solution."
Each of the five tells his or her story. Their stories are intercut
chronologically, starting from normal life in pre-war Hungary. They
recall the Nazi invasion of Hungary, being sent to "work" camps and
their realization that they were actually in death camps.
They recall their horrible, precarious lives in Auschwitz and
Buchenwald; the deaths of their family and friends; their loss of hope.
Each recalls his or her unfathomable, eventual liberation. And finally,
THE LAST DAYS shows their cathartic, pained, modern-day return to their
old homes and the camps.
Needless to say, their stories are horrifying, amazing, and emotionally
draining. By themselves, the stories would be forceful testaments, but
by cutting them in parallel, their impact is multiplied by five.
THE LAST DAYS is a talking-heads style documentary -- it's mostly
pictures of people telling their stories, intercut with period
photographs and newsreel footage. In this kind of movie it's almost
impossible to get archival pictures from the same time and place being
discussed on-screen, but director James Moll made a better effort than
most at finding specific, or at least relevant, images to go with his
subjects' narration.
The liner notes (one of the many nice features of this DVD) indicate
that there is some never-before-seen historical footage in THE LAST
DAYS. It's not clear which scene it is. It could be one of two that I
hadn't seen before, both powerful. One is rare COLOR footage, shot by an
American, of piles of victims in cattle cars. There is something
jarring, something unsettling about seeing the pictures in color, when
so much of the footage from World War II is in black and white. Another
segment shows walking skeletons; survivors who are so starved that they
hardly look human anymore.  
There has been a glut of Holocaust movies and I was skeptical that a new
documentary would have anything new to say. But by focusing on Hungarian
Jews during the last days of the war, Moll told a specific part of the
story in a new way, in greater detail. And I'm glad he did because his
careful filmmaking stands up well compared to other movies on the same
subject.
The transfer to DVD is rich and beautiful. X-Mozilla-Status: 0009f words
for a Holocaust documentary, but some of the interviews take place in
Europe in late spring, when skies are blue and trees are green. Also,
the movie was shot on 35mm film (and not video!), so the richness and
detail are impeccable.
The DVD's features are plentiful and well-chosen. There is a theatrical
trailer for the movie, which is a great introduction to the subject
matter. There are about fifty still photos, both from the production
crew and from the private collections of the survivors. Also, the disc
has two complete versions of the movie (widescreen and full screen),
both on the same side.
One of the more interesting DVD features is an outtake segment for each
of the survivors (plus one for the crew). You'd think outtakes would be
inappropriate in a Holocaust documentary, but they're not bloopers.
Instead, they are solid, moving segments that were probably cut from the
film only for length. 
One of them continues a confrontation that was only touched on lightly
in the film. Renee Firestone (one of the five) spoke on camera with Dr.
Hans Münch, a German doctor who ran the medical clinic at Auschwitz.
Firestone was aggressive, questioning the doctor about what his children
thought. The doctor was evasive and clearly uncomfortable. Another of
the outtakes showed Bill Basch saying a prayer for his dead friends at
Auschwitz. He ends his prayer by saying "... forgive me for surviving."
It's ambitious to shoot a documentary on 35mm film. It's ambitious to
make it on a subject that has saturated cable, television, and movies.
It's ambitious to make it 54 years after the events it covers. But THE
LAST DAYS handles all these potential obstacles very well.
It's only fitting that the DVD, with its wealth of interesting and
relevant features, would also be ambitious and successful.
DVD Features: • Widescreen or Full-screen version • English subtitles
for the hearing impaired • Outtakes • Photo galleries • Theatrical
trailer • Introduction by Steven Spielberg • Filmmaker biographies • 23
chapter stops • Printed liner notes inside the inner sleeve. 
-- 
__________
Marty Mapes
mmapes@moviehabit.com
"Have you ever heard of Russian roulette?"
"Certainly, I played it all the time with my father" 
-- Rex Harrison & Linda Darnell(?), Unfaithfully Yours (1948)
