Title
Review for Cirque du Soleil: Journey of Man (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
     The venerable performance troupe Cirque du Soleil (with two
concurrent Vegas shows to their credit) hits the big screen -- the big
big screen -- with a big-budget, dazzling, 3-D IMAX production called
Journey of Man.  While ostensibly there's a story to hold this thing
together (that being the life journey of a kid from infant to old man),
the film is really just a vehicle to show off the acrobatics of the
troupe to those unwilling to shell out the $80 or so for a glimpse of
the real thing.
     As it turns out, the movie really does feel a lot like the genuine
"journey of man" -- assuming your journey has a lot of bungee jumping,
synchronized swimming, and cube dancing in it.  If you've seen a Cirque
du Soleil show before, you'll know what I'm talking about, as the stunts
are the same as they are on stage.  Only here, the settings are
different.  Watch a fetusy-type person swim through the water to enjoy
some water dancing.  Watch a tyke in the jungle enjoy a little bungee
dancing.  Watch a grown man see some people painted to look like statues
do some balancing tricks on a big tadpole.  And watch the old guy look
on as some N*Sync lookalikes do some flips in his house.
     This is all well and good, but unfortunately a 100' screen and 3-D
effects add nothing to the visual display of the theatrics.  In fact,
I'd say Journey of Man would have been better if it was smaller and in
2-D.  As it stands, the movie is often out of focus and frequently
leaves you to hone in on little but the extreme strain on the
performers' faces -- something you aren't meant to be paying attention
to.
     The film is padded with long, helicopter shots of landscapes, the
gibberish prattling of typical otherworldly Cirque characters, and some
truly strange moralisms ("Each of you was born with three keys..."), as
narrated by Ian McKellen.  The end result at 38 minutes is not much
longer than a sitcom, and it's not much deeper, either.
     Ultimately, all of this, coupled with having to put up with an
audience full of idiots snickering at the scantily clad performers may
make you wonder why exactly you're shelling out 10 bucks.  I did, and I
wasn't even paying.
Director: Keith Melton
Producer: André Picard, Peter Wagg
Writer: Steve Roberts, Peter Wagg
Starring: Ian McKellen, Nicky Dewhurst, Brian Dewhurst, Anait
Karagyezyan, Chris Van Wagenen, Kenny Raskin, Cully Smoller, Mikhail
Matorin, Yves Decoste, Marie-Laure Mesnage
http://www.cirquedusoleiljourney.com/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
