Title
Review for Cousin Bette (1998)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Matt Williams
With the preponderance of period pieces at the movies during recent
years, it doesn't seem too farfetched that someone would adapt Balzac's
novel Cousin Bette. However, this farcical tale of revenge falters right
out of the starting gate and never recovers.
Jessica Lange stars as Cousin Bette.  As a child, her cousin Adeline
(Geraldine Chaplin) was favored and pampered by her family.  Adeline
even stole Bette's true love, Baron Hector Hulot (Hugh Laurie).  But
Bette just swallowed her pride and let it fester inside her.
The movie opens with Adeline on her deathbed.  Bette promises to look
after Adeline's children (but not the way Adeline intends).  However,
once she is unintentionally scorned once again by Hector, she begins to
plot the Hulot downfall.
She enlists the help of a young sculptor, Wenceslas (Aden Young), and a
burlesque star, Jenny Cadine (Elisabeth Shue) to further her plans.  But
her evil is all consuming, and even her allies are in danger of becoming
victims of her schemes.
Intended as a farce, Cousin Bette never quite works.  Though quite
frequently ridiculous, the film doesn't commit itself wholeheartedly to
the concept.
Lange is easily the best thing in the movie, though her character is
rather slow to develop.  In the opening scenes, we get the sense that
she is already plotting her evil revenge, but then she has a sudden
relapse into niceness.  It's not until much later that her true
character has a chance to come out.  Whether it is a conscious ploy for
audience sympathy or not, it gives an inconsistent tone to her
character.
Elisabeth Shue peppers the film with several truly horrid musical
numbers. They're intentionally bad, and here's one area where the
filmmakers succeed grandly.  They're so bad that they are actually
painful to watch.
If not for Lange's performance, the film would be a complete loss...and
it almost is anyhow.  Those seeking seduction and betrayal in period
dress should probably rewatch Dangerous Liasons, and ignore Cousin
Bette.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Louis Proyect
Nearly all of Balzac's novels dramatize Karl Marx's observation in the
Communist Manifesto that "The bourgeoisie has torn away from the
family its sentimental veil, and has reduced the family relation into
a mere money relation." Des McAnuff's film "Cousin Bette," based on
Balzac's novel of the same name, is faithful to both Balzac and Marx
on this score.
This is no bland and pretty costume drama in the Merchant-Ivory mold.
The aristocrats and the haut-bourgeoisie are repellent gargoyles in
McAnuff's film, just as they are in Balzac. The film is a gritty,
radical satire of bourgeois mores that constantly reminds us of the
price-tag attached to all human relations. McAnuff explains what drew
him to the Balzac novel:
"When it comes to choosing a project, I look for something that
illuminates my life and times. 'Cousin Bette' began to feel more and
more like a story about a large American city, where we have perhaps
some of the same social and political problems that Paris faced in the
nineteenth century...Paris was in a depression in the 1840s and no one
in fact saw the turmoil coming. Having gone through the riots in Los
Angeles, it began to feel remarkably similar. When I saw this link to
current times, that's when I really climbed aboard and started to
shape the story."
Cousin Bette (Jessica Lange) is a forty year old seamstress who works
backstage in a music hall. Her sister has just passed away and she
hopes to snag the wealthy grieving husband Hector Hulot (Hugh Laurie).
When he meets with her, he certainly seems to have this intention
since he speaks about the vacuum in his life and the need for someone
to look after his college-age daughter. To her disappointment, she
discovers that he is merely offering her a job as a housekeeper. This
blow to her self-esteem ratchets up her resentment against the world
one more notch. While she is the protagonist of the film, one can feel
no sympathy toward her or any of the other characters for that matter.
The key to the success of the film, and the novel it is based on, is
that it caters to our morbid curiosity. The cast of players, who are
all essentially corrupt and money-hungry, fascinate us like a bunch of
scorpions under glass.
We are introduced to Hulot's daughter Hortense (Kelly MacDonald) as
she is being propositioned by the superrich Crevel (Bob Hoskins), who
offers her 200,000 francs to look at her naked body. She turns him
down.
Another central character is the young, handsome fallen aristocrat
Wenceslas (Aden Young) who lives in poverty in the same rundown
tenement as Cousin Bette. He is trying rather unsuccessfully to launch
a career as a sculptor. At night he tiptoes into her apartment in
order to steal cheese from her rat-trap and sneak a drink of wine from
the bottle she keeps on a shelf. He is not aware that she has been
awake when he makes these nocturnal visits and, moreover, has fallen
in love with him.
One day Cousin Bette discovers Wenceslas unconscious in his flat,
where he has tried to kill himself by filling the room with fumes from
his coal-stove. She throws open the window and revives him. Then she
offers to subsidize his career, albeit in a modest fashion. She will
pay for his rent and his meals, but emphasizes that she will keep a
strict account of all sums advanced. Like Crevel, she is consumed with
love but knows that everything has a cash value as well.
The singer-dancer Jenny Cadine (Elisabeth Shue) rounds out the cast of
miscreants. In her spare time, she is courtesan to Hulot. We meet her
onstage as she is complaining that her costume does not show off her
best features. Cousin Bette, her seamstress, approaches her from
behind and cuts a large patch in the fabric covering her backside. She
then announces that everybody can now see the star performer's best
feature. Jenny looks at her naked ass and likes what she sees. From
that night on, she performs bare-assed.
After Wenceslas has become Cousin Bette's protégé, the young Hortense
decides to steal him away. After Bette discovers that the two have
become lovers, she confronts him in his studio. What about us, she
asks. He tells her that he will always love her as the mother in his
life. This rejection inspires her to take revenge against all who have
caused her misery and disappointment. Like Iago, she conspires behind
the scenes to set one character against another until they are all
ruined. In contradistinction to Othello, the major character in
Balzac's tale is the villain, not the hero. Since Balzac's cynical
world-view excludes heroism, this has an air-tight logic. Furthermore,
in some sense, villains are more interesting. Milton's Lucifer is one
of the great characters in literature. We remember him, not any of the
angels.
One of the greatest achievements of the film is the casting and the
way McAnuff directs his cast. You lose track of the associations you
have with the various actors in previous films and only know them as
the Balzac characters. Jessica Lange is perfect as the dark and
vengeful Bette. Hugh Laurie, best known for his Bertie Wooster on the
PBS series, brings the vain spendthrift aristocrat Hulot to life.
Hoskins has often played vulgarians, so his perfection as Crevel comes
as no surprise. What is a surprise, however, is Elisabeth Shue's Jenny
Cadine. Shue is best known for her role as another prostitute in
"Leaving Las Vegas." What she brings to the role of Jenny is a keen
sense of the class antagonism between her and Hulot, who pays for her
love. When he--or any other of her wealthy clients--can no longer pay
for her services, she instantly turns cold and haughty. As such, she
is the perfect illustration of Marx's dictum that capitalism has left
no other nexus between man and man than naked self-interest, than
callous "cash payment." By implication, the same thing is true of man
and woman.
What makes "Cousin Bette" exceptional cinema is the modernist
aesthetic vision of director Des McAnuff, who never worked in film
before. He is a two-time Tony Award-winner ("Tommy," "Big River") who
understood completely how to bring Balzac alive. He has entirely
rejected the temptation to romanticize 19th century France. Thus,
certain directorial decisions make perfect sense, among them the
decision to use cinematographer Andrzej Sekula, who worked previously
on "Pulp Fiction" and "Reservoir Dogs." Instead of the languid camera
work of an Ivory-Merchant film that dotes self-consciously on
wallpaper or petticoats, we get a hard-edged vision of the underbelly
of French society.
McAnuff was clear about the look he expected from Sekula:
"This film is about outsiders and insiders, about
contrasts...Visually, it was a question of finding a chateau for the
Hulots that was spacious and had that fading first Empire look,
reflecting the end of an age of abundance and plenty. Then, we wanted
to contrast that with Bette's neighborhood, a medieval city that was
suffering from the diseases of the early industrial revolution...We
wanted to avoid romanticizing the suffering of the people...We wanted
cobblestone streets, very narrow lanes, a sense of claustrophobia,
almost a rat's maze, full of smoke, coal dust and dung, alongside
spectacular eighteenth century architecture."
In other words, he wanted to convey sharp class distinctions.
The film concludes with fighting in the streets as the  revolution of
1848 erupts. The decadence of aristocrats and haut-bourgeoisie like
Hulot, Wenceslas and Crevel has finally brought the masses into the
streets. The most resolute section of the masses was the proletariat,
of whom Marx wrote the following in "Class Struggles in France
1848-1850":
"It is well known how the workers, with unexampled bravery and
ingenuity, without leaders, without a common plan, without means and,
for the most part, lacking weapons, held in check for five days the
army, the Mobile Guard, the Paris National Guard, and the National
Guard that streamed in from the provinces. It is well known how the
bourgeoisie compensated itself for the mortal anguish it suffered by
unheard -- of brutality, massacring over 3000 prisoners. The official
representatives of French democracy were steeped in republican
ideology to such an extent that it was only some weeks later that they
began to have an inkling of the significance of the June fight. They
were stupefied by the gunpowder smoke in which their fantastic
republic dissolved."
Balzac hated the bourgeoisie and workers equally. Only as the
industrial working-class became better organized politically and more
self-confident, did novelists such as Zola begin to champion its
cause. Balzac's importance is that he wrote brilliantly about the
social decay that capitalism breeds. Thus, he is a novelist who
remains very contemporary. As such, McAnuff's bitter, dark comedy
"Cousin Bette" does Balzac perfect justice.
(For Marxist discussion: //www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html)

Author
Seth Bookey
*Cousin Bette*, to date, has been reviewed by only two other
rec.arts.movies.reviews critics. One, a Marxist, loved it, and the other,
a Balzac purist, hated it. Both are right. *Cousin Bette* is the
cinematization of one of Balzac's last novels. The Marxist notes the evils
portrayed by Balzac are accurate--the haute bourgeoisie elevated to
nobility by Napoleon want to live well no matter who gets hurt, no matter
how much they have to borrow from others to attain the rich lifestyles
they think are necessary to pass into high society. The purist duly notes
the gutting of the novel for the sake of the film. I will comment on this
later. 
I am somewhere in the middle. As a film, *Cousin Bette* is quite
entertaining, in darkly humorous way. In the film, Bette, the "plain"
cousin, promises her dying cousin Adeline (Geraldine Chaplin) that she
will "take care of" Adeline's family. In the short deathbed conversation,
it all becomes clear--Bette was the slighted, plain cousin. Bette notes
she was sacrificed at Adeline's alter, leaving her a bitter spinster who
lives in a shoddy part of Paris, working as a seamstress backstage at a
musical burlesque theatre.
Adeline's family--the Hulots--comprise her philandering husband Hector
(Hugh Laurie), her ingenue daughter Hortense (Kelly MacDonald), sensible,
level-headed son Victorin (Toby Stevens), his wife and baby, and a lot of
superfluous servants.
Bette Fischer is played by Jessica Lange--a lovely woman made plain here
with dark makeup and drab olive and black clothing and dark braided hair.
Bette has been excluded from the life she wants--a home, a family, love.
She is 40, but in Paris 1846, she might as well be 80, considering her
bitterness. Bette's rage for the time is understandable--today she'd be
considered a stalker or a borderline schizophrenic. When Bette cannot have
what she considers rightfully hers, her rage is volcanic, as it is in the
novel.
Bette forms a friendship with actress/singer Jenny Cadine (Elisabeth
Shue); they are both originally peasant women from Lorraine-about as far
from Paris you can get, in some ways. Bette also befriends and saves the
life of her upstairs neighbor--Count Wenceslas Steinbach (Aden Young)--a
Polish noblemen and sculptor. She provides funding and scheduling for his
work, hoping gratitude will turn into love. It doesn't. In fact, her young
cousin Adeline deliberately "steals" the count from Bette, causing Bette
to manipulate situations that bring about the emotional, financial, and
physical downfall of her "beloved family."
For all the dark revenge-minded plotting, there is a lot of humor here.
Bob Hoskins is hilarious as the lecherous parfumerier Crevel, as is Laurie
as Hector. Both are in pursuit of the beautiful Jenny. Macdonald is
perfect as the spoiled Hortense, and Young is good as the much loved
rapscallion goldbrick Wenceslas.
While the best parts of the book are sacrificed at the alter of modern
motion picture viewing brevity, the soul and wit of Balzac survive. It is
a shame that Valerie Marneffe is never seen. In the book, she is Bette's
partner in crime, who convinces at least four men that they each are the
father of her unborn child (which did not even exist) while extorting
money from each of them. Adeline is a major figure in the book; killed
here for some cinematic expediency. But the full dissipate nature of the
nouveau riche is felt here. Living lavishly while plunging into
life-threatening debt is made abundantly clear. Marxists everywhere would
nod their heads while watching the beautiful trapping brough forth. 
However, director Des McAnuff, who is primarily a theatre director, brings
some truly wonderful cinematic moments here. What would have taken many
chapters to explain in the novel, he does here with a well-timed glance
(like when Hortense asks Bette if she ever loved any one, and Bette tells
her while looking at Hector; Hector married Adeline instead of her, and
only we see this bitter glance). When Bette discovers Wenceslas is "two
timing" her, her rage is only quenched by plunging her head in a basin of
water. This is straight out of the novel and very well done. One of the
best scenes in the movie is Bette's arrival at the young couple's wedding;
she sees them through screens set up around the outdoor party. She is
partitioned to be an outsider, and only catches glimpses of the life she
so desires from the outside. Bette always plays her part and is never
discovered. Her cutting remarks are often only felt by us; she does what
is expected of a "spinster." Ending the film with the 1848 Revolution that
toppled the "Citizen King" Louis Philippe, while not in he book as I
recall it, helps drive the disaster home, and ties it into the more
lucrative *Les Miserables*.
*Cousin Bette* is lively and entertaining , and along with a fluid camera,
this atmosphere is abetted by a lively classical soundtrack and some
original songs as well. This version might not be as correct and full as
the 1972 six-hour miniseries, but it's a worthy version that truly
captures Balzac's wit and commentary. That figures from Balzac's wider
"Comedie Humaine" are mentioned--Nucingen, Marneffe, Birotteau--shows some
loving reverence to the author a fan like myself is happy to notice. It is
one of two Balzac adaptations out there now--Passion in the Desert being
the other. If 1998-99 is the Balzac revival year, I happily apply for
more.
Written by Lynn Siefert and Susan Tarr; cinematography by Andrzej Sekula;
original music by Simon Boswell; production design by Hugo
Luczyc-Wyhowski; costume Design by Gabriella Pescucci; film editing by
Tariq Anwar.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Des McAnuff
Writers: Lynn Siefert and Susan Tarr (based on the novel by Honoré de
Balzac)
Starring: Jessica Lange, Elisabeth Shue, Kelly MacDonald, Aden Young, Hugh
Laurie, Bob Hoskins, Toby Stephens, Geraldine Chaplin
"Cousin Bette" presents us with a nasty yet lovable revenge plan that we
follow from Square One, yet the best thing about this film is that the one
doing the revenge is probably the least evil of everyone else in this
movie.  Perhaps it's because she, unlike everyone else, isn't obsessed with
greed or sex.
Balsac's novel, like many of his works, is a scathing little portrait of
the society of his time, where everyone's motivation was the aquisition of
money and the greatness of a man was measured in how rich he was.  When one
man slips into a pit of depression, it's because he's damn near flat broke
and his reputation in society is at an end.  The movie, like the book,
questions our choice of whom to like: the woman who's trying to destroy
everyone else, or everyone else who are all a bunch of greedy gits?
The aforementioned woman is the eponomysly titled character, played by
Jessica Lange with her hair dyed black and always in a bun above her head,
giving her the appropriate feel of bitterness and loneliness.  The cousin
of a rich family, she tends to the deathbed of her cousin, Adeline Hulot
(everybody's favorite living Chaplin, Geraldine), and even though she has
basically raised the children as her own and kissed enough ass through her
days, she discovers that her cousin's death doesn't mean the
sorta-promotion into wealth that she feels she deserved, but rather a new
job title as "nanny."
Bette is pissed off not so much at the loss of money, but more at the lack
of love and adoration she deserves.  She decides to hatch a revenge scheme,
moving everyone she meets like a pawn in her plan.  She first meets up with
a piss-poor sculpturer who lives below her, Count Wenceslas Steinbach (Aden
Young), who just happens to be the type for her cousin's young daughter,
Hortense (Kelly MacDonald, Diane from "Trainspotting," only now British and
a tad older).  Meanwhile, she also manages to enlist the help of one Jenny
Cadine (Elisabeth Shue), a sultry actress of sorts at the local burlesque
house where Bette works, and also the mistress of many a man in Paris,
namely Bette's cousin's widower, Hector (the great Hugh Laurie).
Much of what Bette does is improvisational, and it's a treat watching her
slowly, over the course of almost a year (or so) destroy the very people
who have almost destroyed her (even Hortense, who's still an innocent
victim), but that's not the real point of the film.  Bette is a horrible
person, and by the final shot, it has obtained a kind of scariness that is
simply unsettling.  But it's not so much about the revenge plan that makes
this film interesting, as it is watching all the pawns in her plan meander
around in search of happiness in wealth and sex.  We see Wenceslas turn
from a greedy sculpturer into a pathetic sloth, whose speeches about how
great his work will be are ten fold more intriguing than the final project
(isn't that what it's always like with artists?).  And we see Jenny turn
from skank to hopeful happy person back into skank again, all because she
can't live without two things: money and people who adore her and give her
money.
Directed by Tony Award-Winning Broadway director Des McAnuff, this film is
a lavish period piece, with wonderful costumes, a wonderfully classical
score, and some great period detail (though, sadly, nary a French accent in
the entire film).  But unlike the films that belong in the Merchant-Ivory
category of period pieces ("Howards End," "The Remains of the Day," blah
blah blah), it has a more light, comical feel to it.  Everything from the
casting (Bob Hoskins and Hugh Laurie playing off eachother - classic) to
the bright cinematography (not to mention the sex and nudity - Shue bares
her behind four - count 'em - four times) gives it a distinct feel that
separates it from the other so-called "period pieces."
That's probably because Balsac is so much different from, say, Henry James
or Jane Austen.  Though all are satirists in their own respects (see "Sense
and Sensibility" for some good, fun satire), he was much more bleak and
comical.  The film seems to love mocking the aristocrats because they could
only live with money and spoke as if they actually knew what they were
talking about.  While this does become a tad arduous at times to watch
(especially in the more dramatic moments, which sometimes makes the film a
tad, well, moody), it nevertheless actually carries on into the 90s, and
makes this fairly accessible to modern-day audiences since these kinds of
people still, in fact, exist.
I enjoyed this film, as I do most clever social satires, but what I liked
most is that it chose a very good protagonist.  Bette is a terrible person,
but she's the best protagonist you could come up with, at least in this
film because she's bitter, not greedy.  And she's likable for the sole
reason that out of all the characters in this film, she's the least shallow
and sadly the best person.  Disturbing.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Joy Wyse
In the musical/movie "The Music Man" reference is made to the works of
"Balzac".  His novels are thought of as scandalous and should be banned
from the River City Library.  I can see why.  But in today's less
sheltered society, this is very entertaining.  Not only are we shown the
respectable side of life in the era, we are privy to the naughty goings-on
in the background.
Jessica Lange is the title character  who causes most of the mayhem that
engulfs the other's lives.  She has been secretly harboring resentment
against her cousin who married the man of her dreams.  After the cousin
dies, Bette is led to believe that he will now finally marry her. 
Instead, he offers her the position of housekeeper.  Little could he guess
how that "insult" could affect him.   Bette cleverly enlists the aid of
others in her scheme to have a happy ending, Bette-style.
There are hysterically funny scenes involving Bob Hoskins, whether in the
bedroom or on the dueling field.  Elisabeth Shue is perfectly cast as the
dance hall girl who seduces at will and for her own profit and enjoyment. 
As a warning to some: this IS Balzac, complete with some very naughty, but
fun,  sex scenes.    Don't leave early thinking that it's over [as some
people did].  There is a very clever final scene.
I will probably watch this again, on video or TV.  I give it a solid B.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So what has happened to Jessica Lange.  Her acting in her last
project, the atrocious HUSH, was ridiculously off-the-wall, and her
work in the one before that, A THOUSAND ACRES, wasn't much better.  Her
new picture, a screen adaptation of the great Balzac novel, "Cousin
Bette," finds her badly miscast.  In contemporary films like BLUE SKY
and THE MUSIC BOX, her talents have shone, but in a costume drama about
nineteenth century manners, she and her costar Elisabeth Shue are
awkward and out of place.
     Anyone who has ever seen the BBC miniseries will be bitterly
disappointed by the movie COUSIN BETTE.  Whereas the television version
had interesting characters with some considerable depth, the movie
version, as scripted by Lynn Siefert and Susan Tarr, is as flat and
blandly modern as the nightly news and as shallow as a comedy sketch.
     Director Des McAnuff stages the scenes confusingly so that people
who have not read the novel may have trouble keeping up with the
meandering storyline.  The superficial film seems to try for a light
parody, but mainly the story just drifts.  Some scenes are so bad they
are good.  The "best" of these has Shue and one of her lovers covered
in lumpy, gooey chocolate as a sexual turn-on.  (This is certainly not
your father's COUSIN BETTE.  Balzac is probably turning over in his
grave.)
     Dressed in drab olive greens and dingy blues, Jessica Lange is
Bette, the show's manipulative protagonist.  A voluptuous Elisabeth
Shue plays burlesque actress Jenny Cadine.
     As the story opens, Geraldine Chaplin shows up so that she can
quickly die and leave her relatives to squabble over her luxurious
estate and to squander her fortune.  Bette goes off to make her life as
a seamstress since she does not receive a cut of the money or the
estate.  She spends the rest of the movie getting even with her
relatives for not sharing.
     Typical of the overly cute staging is the scene in which Jenny and
Bette first meet.  As Jenny's seamstress, Bette cuts off the entire
buttocks area of Jenny's costume.  This makes the already popular
actress even more so.  Nothing like bare buns to excite the nineteenth
century masses.  (There goes Balzac turning over again.)
     Simon Boswell's loud and pervasive music has all the subtlety of
the "Pomp and Circumstance March."  Although it overwhelms the
production, at least it is of consistently good quality - listening to
it is just like sitting in the drawing rooms of the nineteenth century
rich and famous and enjoying a live concert.
     "Life is so boring, don't you think?" Bette remarks to Jenny right
before the director cuts to a scene of the Parisian rebellion in the
streets.  This movie version of the rich and wonderful Balzac novel has
so little to recommend it that it is, indeed, quite boring.
     COUSIN BETTE runs 1:50.  It is rated R for brief scenes of sex,
nudity, and violence and would be fine for most teenagers.

Author
Joy Wyse
In the musical/movie "The Music Man" reference is made to the works of
"Balzac".  His novels are thought of as scandalous and should be banned
from the River City Library.  I can see why.  But in today's less
sheltered society, this is very entertaining.  Not only are we shown the
respectable side of life in the era, we are privy to the naughty goings-on
in the background.
Jessica Lange is the title character  who causes most of the mayhem that
engulfs the other's lives.  She has been secretly harboring resentment
against her cousin who married the man of her dreams.  After the cousin
dies, Bette is led to believe that he will now finally marry her. 
Instead, he offers her the position of housekeeper.  Little could he guess
how that "insult" could affect him.   Bette cleverly enlists the aid of
others in her scheme to have a happy ending, Bette-style.
There are hysterically funny scenes involving Bob Hoskins, whether in the
bedroom or on the dueling field.  Elisabeth Shue is perfectly cast as the
dance hall girl who seduces at will and for her own profit and enjoyment. 
As a warning to some: this IS Balzac, complete with some very naughty, but
fun,  sex scenes.    Don't leave early thinking that it's over [as some
people did].  There is a very clever final scene.
I will probably watch this again, on video or TV.  I give it a solid B.
