Title
Review for Léolo (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Maxime Collin, Ginette Reno, Roland Blouin, 
           Yves Montmarquette, Julien Guiomar
Director:  Jean-Claude Lauzon
Producers:  Lyse LaFontaine and Aimee Danis
Screenplay:  Jean-Claude Lauzon
Music:  various composers
Released by Fine Line Features
French with English Subtitles
     Leolo (Maxime Collin) has a very strange family and, although his
mother (Ginette Reno) says he is the strongest of her children, even he
is not without some rather extreme peculiarities.  To escape the
ugliness of his day-to-day existence, Leolo has fashioned a dream world
in which he can find temporary refuge.  The more he watches life go on
around him, the more convinced he becomes that an existence within his
family is not worth having.  As a result, his reliance on dreams grows
from day to day.
     LEOLO shows the world through the eyes of a twelve-year-old boy,
so many of the things that adults take for granted look absurd.  Of
course, the balance of the movie isn't helped by the instability of
most of the characters.  Leolo is surrounded by a group of nuts.  His
brother, after being beaten up by a bully, goes all out to bulk himself
up to gargantuan proportions.  However, when the opportunity to avenge
himself arrives, he goes through another humiliating defeat, despite
his obvious physical advantages.  Leolo's sisters are simply weird.
His grandfather, who enjoys having half-naked girls trim his toenails
with their teeth, has tried on at least one occasion to kill him.
     Leolo has invented an elaborate fantasy world into which he
frequently flees to escape the harsh realities around him.  The movie
frequently blurs the lines between what's real and what isn't, lending
much of LEOLO a dream-like quality.  It's an interesting, often
effective, and occasionally confusing method of telling the story, and
demands the audience's attention.
     LEOLO is essentially a comedy--albeit of a dark and unusual
sort--and the story is filled with humorous moments.  Many of these are
off-color, dealing with a variety of bodily functions.  Those who are
offended by such "bathroom humor" (literally), would do best to stay
away from this movie.
     Moments of bleak, and often shocking, reality occasionally intrude
on LEOLO's mainly-lighthearted tone.  Some of these scenes are
disturbing (such as a scene where Leolo's schoolmates torment a cat).
However, writer/director Jean-Claude Lauzon has managed to expertly
weave together the humor and drama into a cohesive, if often erratic,
whole.  Frequently, comedies with messages result in an awkward
end-product.  Lauzon avoids this pitfall.
     The soundtrack for LEOLO is notable.  An amalgamation of oddball
and melodic pieces, it perfectly captures the feel of the movie.
There's nothing commonplace about anything that transpires during LEOLO
and the choice of music conveys that.
     Despite all the weirdness going on in LEOLO, the movie has a
captivating quality.  There is a fascination associated with such a
bizarre-yet-plausible family, and it doesn't take long to sympathize
with the title character.  Even though this film has its dull
moments--not to mention the occasional bouts of confusion it
causes--LEOLO is not an easy film to turn away from.
Note:  In response to some requests, all movie reviews written by me may
       be reprinted provided that they carry the following notification:
       "Copyright 1993 by James Berardinelli".
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
