Title
Review for Deathline (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
Canada/Netherlands. 1997. Director - Tibor Takacs, Screenplay - Takacs & 
Brian Irving, Producer - Irving, Photography - Zoltan David, Music - Guy 
Zerafa, Visual Effects - Randall William Cook, Special Effects 
Supervisor - Jak Osmond, Production Design - Istvan Ocztos. Production 
Company - Nu Image/Mondofin/1204019 Ontario Inc.
Rutger Hauer (John Anderson Wade), Yvonne Scio (Marina K/Katya), Mark 
Dacascos (Merrick), Randall William Cook (Special Prosecutor Vanya), 
Michael Mehlman (Serge), Patrick Dreikauss (Mishka)
Plot: John Anderson Wade is shot and left for dead by his partner 
Merrick during an operation smuggling contraband into a near-future 
Russia. However Wade is revived from the dead by the special police 
prosecutor on orders of The President. Allowed to escape, Wade heads 
after Merrick, who has trying to take over Moscow's crime syndicates, to 
seek revenge. But as he pursues Merrick, Wade finds himself caught in 
games between The President, the Special Prosecutor and the crime 
syndicates.
Canada's Tibor Takacs is a director of modest B-films that has in the 
past proven capable of quietly surprising with  efforts like `I, Madman' 
aka `Hardcover' (1989), `The Gate' (1987) and its even better sequel 
`Gate II' (1990) being better than they might have seemed. Like a number 
of recent films, `Redline' takes a post-Soviet Russia as its setting. 
Takacs creates an abundance of atmosphere in the milieu of a Russian 
Mafia-dominated underworld - journeys through bathhouses, street 
markets, chic nightclubs, sports clubs where naked contestants engage in 
combat - suggesting both at once a world of decadence and near-anarchy. 
The interiors, shot in cavernous, Soviet Politburo-styled buildings, add 
a dazzling sense of verisimilitude - even if, ironically, the film was 
shot in Hungary. Set amid this are some neat science-fictional devices - 
flying spy satellites, virtual reality torture, advertisements for 
Hawaiian holiday resorts in Crimea. Although by and large the film 
doesn't seem that interested in its Cyberpunk background - writers like 
William Gibson, Jack Womack or Bruce Sterling would have had field days 
with this milieu. In fact with little rewriting the plot could  have 
easily have worked as a standard action film without the need for any 
future setting. Takacs quotes other films - the graveyard of fallen 
Communist statues from `GoldenEye' (1995); an amusing parody of the 
oft-copied Odessa Steps sequence from Eisenstein's `Battleship Potemkin' 
(1925), recreated on a tv show called `Moscow's Deadliest Criminals'. 
Italian actress Yvonne Scio makes quite a promising English-language 
debut as the heroine.

