Title
Review for Haiku Tunnel (2001)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
If you've ever worked in a large office, for a law firm, or even as a temp,
you'll definitely want to check out Haiku Tunnel, a new film based on Josh
Kornbluth's popular one-man play.  It's better than Office Space when it
comes to milking the cruel banality of office work for comedy, but I'm not
sure that people unfamiliar with the concept of cubicles and printer jams
will really get it.  Those folks ought to try, though, because it's a very
funny film.
Kornbluth, who looks like a balding cross between Horatio Sanz and Jack
Black, stars as himself, a native New Yorker living in the "proletarian"
area of San Francisco.  He's employed by a temp agency called Uniforce and
prides himself on his ability to arrive at work on time and get the job done
quickly.  Josh loves being a temp, as he seems to have a commitment problem,
having just dumped a beautiful girlfriend for being too perfect.
Tunnel takes place over just one week, which begins with Josh being assigned
to a law firm called Schuyler & Mitchell (or S&M) to provide secretarial
work for an attorney who may actually be the Prince of Darkness (Warren
Keith), though he's nowhere as scary as Kevin Spacey in Swimming With
Sharks.  Shunned by his co-workers because he's just a temp, Josh is given a
cassette containing the dictation for 17 very important letters that must be
sent immediately.  But he's constantly sidetracked by a myriad of things,
including a very funny office orientation (conducted by Harry Shearer),
several attempts to write a novel and an enticing offer to become "perm."
Because S&M agrees to cover the cost of his psychiatric visits, Josh
eventually caves in and gives up his beloved status as a temporary employee,
which earns the attention of the peculiar co-workers who had previously
ignored him.  Mindy (Amy Resnick), Clifford (Brian Thorstenson) and DaVonne
(June Lomena) will each remind you of at least one wacko you've been forced
to work with at some point in your employment endeavors.
Though it's oddly structured (there are flashbacks within flashbacks) and
things seem to fall apart in the third act, Tunnel is still a cute, charming
little film that will delight a demographic that desperately needs more
humor in their lives.  It's obvious Kornbluth has extensive experience in
temporary office jobs, but according to the press notes, so does most of the
film's other acting talent (some still temped during filming).  Plus, how
can you possibly dislike a film that plays The Pixies' "Debaser" over the
opening credits?
1:30 - R for language and some sexuality

Author
Norm Schrager
Josh Kornbluth is a funny guy.  He has a nervous, jittery way about him,
delivering his views on the world with gusto, while giving off a unique
combination of being both obsessed and lazy.  He looks odd, a pudgy
schlump with glasses, a balding head, long messy hair on the sides and
back, and an array of Hawaiian shirts.  Even his name is kind of funny.
But he has the guts to play a version of himself in this smart comedy,
one in which Kornbluth is in every single scene, riding the surprisingly
lively script into the world of office temp stardom.
And that screenplay is very close to Kornbluth's heart -- written by him
and his brother Jacob (they're co-directors and co-producers, as well),
it's based on a monologue of Josh's, chronicling his life as a temp in
San Francisco, and the horrors that can occur when permanent employee
status comes knocking at your formerly comfortable career door.
In fact, the story is so close to the real Josh that he opens the film
with a charming disclaimer, saying that actors were used in the film and
that no "real lawyers" were portrayed (much of the action takes place at
law firms).  To further state his point, he tries to convince us that
the setting is the beautiful, fictional town of "San Franclisco."
On paper, the comparisons to Woody Allen are easy -- a well-weaved
combination of both whip-smart comments and broad comedy -- but those
disappear once you see Haiku Tunnel.  It's got a more agreeable
simplicity than Allen's movies, both in its presentation and in its
characters.  Josh easily explains, with no apologies, that being a temp
gave him such a simple pride, and he was never late.  However, the
intricacies of being a permanent staffer (but having the same job
tasks!) make him late all the time.  It's got a certain sweetness.
And that succeeds through most of the film, even when the story gets a
bit surreal for the sake of fun.  Josh's minimal success, his sad,
fellow secretaries in the firm and the female lawyer that begins to fall
for him all have a real human side that the brothers/directors make sure
to bring out.  It injects a film that often looks like a first feature
with a cool dose of humor and maturity.
Comedies about the workplace have certainly been done before, and recent
movies like Office Space and Clockwatchers have collected loyal fans by
expressing the boredom and pain of today's 9-to-5 in a cube.  By
reducing the experiences to one man -- one, funny, neurotic, sloppy man
-- we get a different take, with a guy that can write, direct, produce,
and truly star in his own feature.  Sounds like a good job.
Director: Jacob Kornbluth, Josh Kornbluth
Producer: Brian Benson, Jacob Kornbluth, Josh Kornbluth
Writer: Josh Kornbluth, Jacob Kornbluth, John Bellucci
Starring: Josh Kornbluth, Warren Keith, Helen Shumaker, Amy Resnick,
Brian Thorstenson, June A. Lomena, Sarah Overman
http://www.spe.sony.com/classics/comingsoon.php?filmid=7
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
The bizarrely named HAIKU TUNNEL -- no, it's not a Japanese anime -- is a
sweetly humorous film that oozes charm from every pore.  Starring Josh Kornbluth
as Josh Kornbluth, it is a crowd-pleaser that puts the audience into rolling
howls.  Although not up to the level of Mike Judge's low budget masterpiece,
OFFICE SPACE, HAIKU TUNNEL is an over-the-top, yet dead-on, office comedy that
rings true even when it's the most exaggerated.
Josh, a happy yet neurotic balding guy, has a predicament, "to perm or not to
perm?"  No, he's not worried about what to do with his long, shaggy side-hair,
but whether he should make the big leap in life and convert from a temporary
secretary at the law firm -- S&M, no less -- where he works, to a permanent
employee.  Like a virgin who finally decides to make the big plunge -- "I don't
go perm on my first week." -- he throws caution to the wind and signs up.
At first the story looks like it will be a dark, Kafkaesque one.  When Josh goes
to work at S&M, he finds that the only paper on his desk is an eleven-and-a-half
page memo to the previous secretary explaining precisely what the boss expected
of her.  Although he fears that his boss is the devil incarnate and he worries
that he'll be caught messing up by the Nazi-like head secretary, his fears prove
unfounded, and the story turns out to be one of the sweetest ones of the year.
Along the way Kornbluth, who sometimes reminds one of a chubby Woody Allen,
copes with his many neuroses with great flair.  A wonderfully likeable actor,
Kornbluth could easily carry the movie on his own shoulders, and, indeed, the
film sometimes plays like a comedy monologue.  The supporting cast, which brings
an improv feel, perfectly complements the star.  My favorite is Helen Shumaker. 
A wisp of a middle-aged woman with salt-and-pepper hair, she plays the stern
looking Marlina D'Amore, the head secretary, which she slowly transforms from
the Wicked Witch of the West into a real sweetheart.
The writing has Orwellian sharpness, and a key subplot concerns the office class
hierarchy.  The story also gives the nondescript items of office work a life of
their own.  In one of my favorite episodes in which Josh retrieves his long lost
letters -- they were printed on a printer in another building thanks to the
screw-up of a system admin geek -- the pages coo and sing to him in chorus,
"You've come for me."  Take their advice.  Come and see Josh and his wacky
workers.  They're certain to put a smile on your face.  
HAIKU TUNNEL runs 1:30.  It is rated R for "language and some sexuality" and
would be acceptable for teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States today, Friday, September 21,
2001.  In the Silicon Valley, it is showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
