Title
Review for Redboy 13 (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
     Indie filmmaker Marcus van Bavel may not have a knack for catchy
titles, but he certainly has a flair for spoofing the big-budget spy
genre on what must have been a low six-figure budget.
     REDBOY 13 pays homage to DR. STRANGELOVE, FULL METAL JACKET, DIRTY
HARRY, MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, RAMBO, and, most importantly, the James Bond
films.  Hell, if it wasn't for AUSTIN POWERS, REDBOY 13 would be the
first real spy spoof to come along in a while.
     Especially considering its humble origins in the backwoods of
Texas, it's a damn good one.  Er... a *gosh darn* good one, as Colonel
Calcan (Logan) would say.  Set in the waning days of the Cold War,
REDBOY 13 is the story of a 13-year old boy (Roy-Brown) who is trained
to be a top agent for a splinter group of the U.S. government called the
C.Y.A.  Under the supervision of Calcan, Redboy is sent to Central
America to overthrow a military regime... when he returns, he'll be "the
biggest hero since Ollie North."  There's even a big Bondian opening
credits sequence with silhouettes, grandiose vocalizing, etc.
     REDBOY 13 plays it straight all the way, with the exception of van
Bavel's appearance(s) in the film as three supporting characters, a la
Peter Sellers in STRANGELOVE (one of the characters is even a
wheelchair-bound mad scientist whose allegiance is with Nazi Germany). 
In fact, if van Bavel didn't look so frighteningly like shock filmmaker
John Waters, one might be tempted to take REDBOY at face value.
     Tempted, but impossible.  A darling of the festival circuit, REDBOY
13 is shot in 35mm Cinemascope, has dozens of computer-generated effects
(they look kinda cheesy, but hey, this is an indie pic), and only really
suffers during some hammy acting that wanders into Leslie Nielsen
territory a few times.  But in the end, van Bavel's assured technical
direction and clever photography make REDBOY imminently watchable.
Director: Marcus van Bavel
Producer: Marcus van Bavel, David Boone
Writer: Marcus van Bavel
Starring: Robert Logan, Devon Roy-Brown, Charlie Schmidt, Wendy Blech
http://www.io.com/~mvb/rb13.html
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com
