Title
Review for Galapagos: The Enchanted Voyage (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ross Anthony
Want to scuba, but don't want to shell out the money for lessons, equipment,
and travel? For about the rental price of a snorkle and goggles "Galapagos"
brings the experience to you - and you don't even have to get wet!
Marine Biologist Dr. Carole Baldwin descends thousands of feet into the
ocean to get her high, "I don't know whether to be excited or terrified. And
then I remember how privileged I am to be here. With only about one percent
of the ocean floor explored, the deep sea is Earth's last great frontier."
But before we go under, the 240-pound IMAX 3D camera (like a fishering net)
scoops up the rich surface animals of the Galapagos Islands. Hundreds of sun
basking marine iguanas become jagged rocks as our aerial shot widens.
Crystal blue water crashes into porously gloss black shoreline as
sidestepping crabs go under and reappear. Mossy turtles slurp up seaweed
like spaghetti as carefree seals flip and twist.
Dr. Baldwin swims with the absolutely huge schools of impartial fishes while
a loose-necked group of hammerheads converge. We're swimming too, navigating
the underwater currents with the back-flipping seals while the appropriately
large and swelling music caps the experience off as simply spiritual.
Having been the first to chronicle these islands 600 miles west of Ecuador,
Charles Darwin would have been a mossy phosphorescent green with envy
watching as Dr. Carole Baldwin (3000 feet underwater) vacuum-gathers samples
off the ocean floor from inside the Johnson-Sea-Link Submersible.
The film's only fault: about fifteen percent of the time the images don't
quite mesh, leaving unsightly ghosts as the two separate film projections
overlap with a shift. A mar that is overwhelmingly forgivable for a
production that makes wide and fertile usage of 3D technology.
Rich in color, dimension, education, entertainment and reverence; you're
kids will be reaching out toward the screen, their mouths round with the
word "Wow" repeating over and over. It's as if the theater becomes an
aquarium leaving you to swim with the finned animals. I was surprised I left
the screening dry.
Galapagos (3D IMAX). Copyright Š 2000. Rated G.
Starring Dr. Carole Baldwin of the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum
of Natural History.
Directed by AL Giddings and David Clark.
Written by David and Barry Clark.
Produced by AL Giddings and David Clark at Mandalay Media Arts.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
