Title
Review for Die Hard 2 (1990)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Chris J Hillery
     Finally, a movie which restores my faith in sequels.  After the
disjointed disappointment of ROBOCOP 2 and the utter idiocy of GREMLINS
2, I must say I went into DIE HARDER with a few reservations.  Happily,
they were mostly proved unfounded.
     Now, make no mistakes: the original DIE HARD was the superior
movie of the two.  It was a fabulous thriller and a well planned action
movie, with plenty of amazing stunt work and expensive (!) scenery-
chewing; a pretty hard act to follow.  However, DIE HARD 2 makes a
valiant effort, and with considerable success.  It certainly matches
up in action and violence; this was almost certainly a more expensive
movie, and the action, stunt work, and blowing-up-of-expensive-objects
were all at least on par with the first.  I would go so far as to say
that, as an action movie, this was superior to the original.  Where it
falls a bit short is in the suspense end of the line.  DIE HARD 2 has
few edge-of-your seat thrills, little "omigosh, what's going to happen
now?"; indeed, there's little room for this between the continuous
stream of finding out what's going to happen (mostly "boom!"s).  The
main cause for this is that, while the first movie was placed in a
skyscraper, with close proximity between McClane and the Bad Guys (tm),
no escape and the claustrophobic tension brought about by that, DIE HARD
2 is set in a big, open airport -- and the Bad Guys weren't even there,
for the most part, instead having their base of operations in a nearby
church.  Because of this, there's few times we either are tensely
expecting someone to jump out or are surprised by someone jumping out,
etc....
     Despite this, DIE HARD 2 succeeds well in being a non-stop action
movie.  It doesn't fall into the common trap, of which even DIE HARD 1
was somewhat guilty, of taking too long to get going; the action is
nearly from the word go.  Also, the plotline, while necessarily a bit
credibility-stretching (these terrorists were *really* prepared for
anything) and over-done, was not distractingly so; it followed its own
lead, all apparent inconsistencies were well-explained, and while
several turns were pretty obvious, there were a couple true surprise
twists stuck in to keep things interesting.  On the other hand,
character development was a bit lax in this sequel.  McClane was again
surprising and interesting, but even he was somewhat flat; the wry
humor which was so common in the first movie was notably absent.  Also,
the other central characters were, in the main, pretty one-dimensional,
and maybe even a little cliched.  I must say, though, I'm only now
thinking of these problems; it's a tribute to the amount of sheer action
in this movie that those flaws simply didn't occur to me while I was
actually watching the thing (I guess that makes them not really flaws,
doesn't it?).  DIE HARD 2 tries to blow you away with action, and it
does that exceedingly well.
     Principally because I prefer a good thriller, I can't rate this one
as well as the first, but nonetheless it is far and away the best movie
I've seen yet this summer (although I have yet to see DICK TRACY, TOTAL
RECALL or ANOTHER 48 HOURS).  If you enjoy a good slug/blow-up fest,
this is the movie to see (definitely more so than ROBOCOP 2); and, if
having seen a few too many rotten flops, you need something to convince
you that a sequel to a good movie *can* be made and made well, here's
your choice.  Do note, though, that this really is not a movie to take
the whole family to.  While many of the deaths involved seeing how many
ways one can blow up airplanes, there were a good number of  unique and
grisly ways to finish off your favorite enemy employed and plenty of
bodies filled with lead; and these people are every bit as foul-mouthed
as in the first.
   DIE HARD 2, Rated R:  violence, profanity.
   Please note that the "Overall" rating is not designed to be an average
   or any sort of summary of the preceding ratings, but rather a true
   rating of how good the movie was taken as a whole.  With four
   categories one can't fully rate all aspects of a movie, nor should
   they all be weighted equally; also, as is the case with DIE HARD, a
   movie can sometimes be more (or, in other cases, less) than the sum
   of its parts.  In the case of DIE HARD 2, the movie was exactly the
   sum of its parts; fortunately, most of the parts were pretty strong.

Author
David Wilcock
After the incredible sucess of Die Hard (1988) it would seem
obvious that a sequel would be on the way. However, this film
breaks the golden rule of sequels, which is that the sequel must be
worse than the oringinal, by actually being better. It's bigger, it's
more fun, and generally this is a much better film.
The films starts with John McClane (Willis) in Dulles Airport
waiting for his wifes (Bedelia) flight. However, the airport is soon
under the grip of the deranged Colonel Stewart, played evilly by
Sadler, who are waiting to pick up a drugs baron who is being
flown into the country (the drugs lord is played by Franco Nero)
Of course, it's up to Willis, and not the police (the cheif of police is
played by Dennis Franz, star of NYPD Blue) to save the day.
The film then follows the Die Hard genre closely, by delivering big
explosions, a few deaths, and the usual Willis one liners. The
director, Renny Harlin, who's only previous film was Nightmare
On Elm Street 4, directs very well, and Willis gives a good
performance. The best performance has to go to Dennis Franz,
who's police is very good. Sadly, William Atherton, who played
the news reporter in Die Hard, is wasted here, and serves no
purpose in the film at all. William Sadler, though, is terrific as the
Colonel. Although nowhere near as outlandish as Alan Rickman in
Die Hard, he plays Colonel Stewart with superb menace.
But, of course, no-one watches an action film for the
performances, they watch it for thrills, spills and destruction. And
here, Die Hard 2 really delivers. The airport setting gives chances
of luggage hold shoot outs, an ambush on a skywalk, and of
course planes blowing up, and Die Hard 2 gives us two planes
exploding, both with massive explosions. Die Hard 2 also features
one of the most incredible scenes in action movie history, by
showing Willis eject out of a plane, while the plane explodes below
him. It really is an incredible sight, one of the best explosions put
on film.
Fun though Die Hard 2 is, the plot is incredibly stupid (much like
any action film) The audience are supposed to believe that the
terrorists can build practically a airport tower in a church, which
could never really happen. There some other things that happen in
the film that are ridiculous aswell, such as the police taking so long
to act on this terrorist threat. The script is just about average (in
action film standards), with some in jokes for Die Hard fans, but
it's not the cleverest script in the world. 
But despite the plot flaws and weak script, Die Hard 2 proves to
be a great popcorn film, and even better than Die Hard, partly due
to the fact that it's got a far more sensible running time (just under
2 hours, unlike Die Hards 2 hours 30 minutes) An excellent action
movie

Author
Jeff Wallace
     The Los Angeles Times recently asked "Where's this summer's
blockbuster movie?"  The answer is: it's finally here and it's name is
DIE HARD 2.
     I loved the original DIE HARD and I fully expected to be
disappointed by the sequel.  Incredibly, this movie is as engrossing and
even more spectacular than the original.  The plot isn't all that
important, but it provides a good foundation for John McClane (Bruce
Willis) vs.  the bad guys as in the original.
     It's Christmas time again and McClane is at Dulles International
Airport waiting for his wife's flight to arrive.  Also due to arrive is
General Esperanza, a deposed Latin American dictator, who is being
extradited to the U.S.  to face drug charges.  Esperanza appears
unruffled by his extradition and we quickly discover why.
     A group of terrorists/mercenaries take control of the airport and
threaten mass destruction if Esperanza isn't released to them.  Of
course McClane figures out that something nasty is occurring before
anyone else.  And, of course, the local police don't listen to him.
     This occurs in the first 15-20 minutes which leaves our hero,
Lieutenant John McClane, now with the Los Angeles Police Department, a
good 90+ minutes to kill bad guys, get shot at and make wisecracks.
     The story isn't highly original and it certainly isn't going to win
an Academy Award for script writing, but you don't go to an action film
expecting an in-depth character analysis.
     Once the basic set-up information is out of the way DIE HARD 2
takes off.  It rolls from shoot-outs to explosions to chase scenes
without letting you (or McClane) catch your breath.  The fast pace is
perfect for this movie and it holds your attention from start to finish.
     The bad guys are very bad.  The good guy is very good (and very
lucky).  The photography is impressive and the stunts and effects are
stupendous.  Industrial Light & Magic is at its peak once again.  ILM's
models can easily convince you that you're looking at a real 747.  This
movie is at its finest in 70mm at a theater with a good sound system.
     It is a perfect put-your-mind-in-neutral-and-kick-back summer
adventure movie.
----
Jeff Wallace, Experimental Computing Facility (XCF), U.C. Berkeley
Internet: jeffw@scam.Berkeley.EDU UUCP:...!ucbvax!scam!jeffw

Author
Steve Kong
I love the Die Hard series and if you were to ask me to rate the three, the
first would be on the top of my list, followed by the third and Die Hard 2
would be the last. For me Die Hard 2 is the weakest of the three, but that
don't mean that it's a bad film at all. It just means that the other two
are a lot stronger than this one. I fell that the missing presence of Die
Hard and Die Hard: With a Vengeance director John McTiernan is what makes
Die Hard 2 a weaker film.
John McClane says that the story of his life is about being in the wrong
place and the wrong time. And that seems to be true. In Die Hard 2, it's
Christmas again and McClane is at the Dulles International Airport waiting
to pick up his wife who is coming home from a business trip. Also at the
airport are some terrorists who are there waiting to pick up their boss,
who is a deposed leader, General Esperanza. Die Hard 2 sets up the story
quickly so that it can move into its amazing action sequences.
Along the way we meet our typical stereotypical characters who are nothing
more than cardboard cut out stock characters that serve the only one of two
purposes: 1) help McClane or 2) die. This is not a problem though because
the story itself is so preposterous that it is actually pretty fun to
watch. Yes, the story is pretty unbelievable but director Renny Harlin does
a good job at keeping the pace quick and brisk. This makes it easy to
suspend your disbelief, actually, it leaves no time for disbelief. And this
is where I see the problem with Die Hard 2, the action is sometimes way too
over-the-top and comes at a pace that is so brute and in your face that
it's painful. Harlin who seems to like to show everything when doing action
sequences shows a lot of unnecessary violences and gore.
Bruce Willis IS John McClane and there's no doubt there. Willis seems so in
touch with the McClane character that he is wholly fun to watch. Dennis
Franz is the lead-in-the-head typical antagonist for the McClane character,
and while Franz fills in the shoes OK, he's not really doing too much
during the film. William Sadler is Stuart, the leader of the terrorist, and
he does a good job with his part. I did like the performance of John Amos
as Grant who shows up halfway through the film.
Die Hard 2 might be the weakest of the series, but it is still a great
action film. Don't miss this one. Willis is made for his part and it is he
who makes this so much fun to watch.

Author
Randy Parker
        DIE HARD 2 is an altogether unfortunate fiasco, inferior to the
original in every respect.  Place the blame squarely on the shoulders of
Steven de Souza and Doug Richardson, who wrote the film's pathetic
screenplay.  Every line of dialogue reeks of either smarmy sap or forced
humor.  The plot is altogether implausible; the convoluted story line
involves a band of terrorists who take over Dulles Airport and shut down
the control tower, leaving a dozen planes stranded in the air waiting to
land.  The film has zero credibility, and all of the characters come off as
cliched, cardboard cut-outs.
        So much for the script.  How about the action?  Well, let's put it
this way: director Renny Harlin could learn a few things from John
McTiernan, who directed the original, as well as THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER
and PREDATOR--all standouts for their hair-raising suspense.  By contrast,
Harlin doesn't have a clue when it comes to choreographing action, and
consequently, DIE HARD 2 never picks up steam.
        DIE HARDER is impossible to take seriously even for a minute.  In
fact, the movie often seems deliberately campy, and it almost reaches the
threshold of being so bad it's good.  You do laugh, but you laugh at the
film, not with it.  DIE HARD 2 should have never been cleared for takeoff.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This year there is no James Bond film, in fact, but there is a
reasonable substitute.  There is no film about British superspy James Bond
being sent out to save England, but there is a film about L.A. supercop John
McClane sending himself out to pick up his wife from Dulles Airport in
Washington D.C.  McClane is played by Bruce Willis who is my idea of no
actor, but in films such as this can be a reasonable substitute.  Of course,
dealing with an airport during Christmas rush is never easy.  McClane has to
deal with airport police who ticket him for parking in a no-parking zone and
with a bunch of Army-bred mercenaries who are trying to free Manuel Noriega
(thinly disguised under the character name Esperanza).  DIE HARD 2 is the
story of how McClane gets the airport police to tear up the parking ticket
and how he picks up his wife on a night when Dulles is not at its dullest.
I will not say exactly how McClane gets the ticket torn up but it involves
killing a bunch of "bad guys" and saving a lot of "good guys" (to use his
sophisticated jargon).  It also involves him being just about the only guy
with intelligence and pluck in an airport full of and run by jerks.
     DIE HARD 2 *is* a big beefy action film much in the style of a James Bond
film.  It follows the time-honored traditions of Bond films, like all the
luck working for the hero.  McClane makes no false moves while trained
commandos make mistakes such as running out of ammunition without realizing
it.  Eight bad guys can be having a showdown with McClane but they will very
obligingly attack one at a time so McClane can pick them off like Horatio at
the Bridge.  Later, when there is one piece of equipment that McClane really
needs it just sort of falls into his hands, no muss, no fuss.  That is not
to say there is not a whole lot of mussing and fussing in the film.  But
McClane is the sort of hero who can go through a trash compactor, wince and
maybe bleed a little to remind the audience that it is painful to be
compacted, and five minutes later he is back to normal.  His bones must be
made of the stuff they built Patton tanks from (or perhaps should build them
from).
     There are a number of reasons the plot could not really proceed as it
does.  McClane gets an identification on a character based on fingerprints
that he faxes from a car rental stand.  Even assuming he could coerce the
car rental agency to do his faxing, it is very unlikely the print at the
other end would have anything but black blotches.  But I guess part of the
fun of seeing a film like this is picking holes in the screenplay, which in
this case was written by Doug Richardson and Steven de Souza.  The latter
wrote 48 HOURS and here is adapting 58 MINUTES, the novel by Walter Wager on
which DIE HARD 2 is based.
     Visual effects are impressive and provided by Industrial Light and
Magic.  One very nice shot involves McClane sort of flying away from an
explosion but toward the camera.  The musical score is by Michael Kamen.
Rare is the film review that has a spoiler warning for a comment about the
musical score, but this one does.  Jump to the next paragraph if you wish to
avoid it.  Through the film Kamen often uses a theme for the villains that
sounds just like the first eight notes of Sibelius's "Finlandia."  Well, I
had always thought they did sound ominous, but was it coincidence or was
Kamen really quoting?  Sibelius's tribute to Finland has, after all, little
to do with the story at hand.  Then in the final suspense scene the
orchestra finally breaks out into a big chunk of "Finlandia."  The end
credits then are a full orchestral performance of "Finlandia."  It sounds
mighty good in Dolby Surroundsound.  That's worth fifty cents of the
admission price all by itself.
     This is an enjoyable action film: nothing requiring great thought, but
certainly enjoyable.  I would give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Die Hard had it all: a sympathetic hero, a wonderfully serpentine
villain, kick-ass fight scenes and shootouts (which are really hard to
make entertaining, in the glut of routine action flicks that overflow
our video racks), an enjoyably quirky supporting cast of character
actors, and dialogue you could really sink your teeth into.  ("I wanted
this to be professional.  Efficient, adroit, cooperative, not a lot to
ask.  Alas, your Mr. Takagi did not see it that way, so he won't be
joining us for the rest of his life.")  This flick was so pervasive, we
had to endure a slew of rip-offs: Die Hard at sea, Die Hard on an ocean
liner, Die Hard in a friggin' library!  OK, so they never did one in a
library, but that would be pretty funny, wouldn't it?  [Indeed they did
do it in a library: Masterminds.  -Ed.]
What a pity that Die Hard 2: Die Harder (based on the novel 58 Minutes)
falls into the trap of being just another Die Hard in Washington's
Dulles Airport.  I mean, it's kinda funny that John McClane (Bruce
Willis, having a good ol' time) acknowledges his pathetic luck.  Not
this shit again!  He's waiting for his wife's plane to land when
terrorists seize control of the airport, crashing a plane just to prove
that they'll stop at nothing.  Yes, they will stop at nothing!  Insert
an evil laugh here, and throw in a moustache twirl, why dontcha?
Bruce Willis is not to blame.  There are plenty of other movies he
destroyed with his monstrous ego, but I've always been fond of his blue
collar cop that takes a licking but keeps on ticking.  The biggest
problem is the lack of any memorable bad guys.  William Sadler plays a
sneaky Oliver North buckaroo presiding over a team of faceless
assassins, and Franco Nero is the South American dictator they're gonna
extradite (or something.)  They lack the personality of Alan Rickman's
sinister and silky Hans Gruber, who did not so much speak his lines as
purrrrr them.  They also lack the balletic grace of Alexander Godunov as
Rickman's trusty, ferocious kickboxing psycho-killer right-hand-man.  
Come to think of it, they're lacking in almost every way.  Were they
even in the movie?
No matter.  A good action scene could make it all palatable.  Ha!  Too
much to ask.  A lot of people get shot and many punches are thrown, but
there are zero memorable setpieces.  OK, so we all remember the scene
where Willis takes flight in the exploding chair, but it wasn't a
particularly effective special effect.  It calls attention to itself too
much.  LOOK AT ME!  I much preferred Willis hanging from the skyscraper
hanging on to a fire hose for dear life -- now that was a scene.  (Not
in this movie, though!  Director Renny Harlin is nothing but a well paid
hack.)  I was so bored throughout Die Hard 2, I started evaluating the
squib shots: Yes, that one looked realistic.  Hmm, that one was
extra-bloody.  Wow -- the blood looks just like ketchup in this scene.
Many of the original Die Hard cast members are back for round two,
though none of them are particularly well used.  Bonnie Bedelia frets
and pouts as Mrs. McClane, William Atherton has entirely too much screen
time as obnoxious reporter Dick Thornburg, and Reginald VelJohnson is
given a pointless cameo as donut muchin' Detective Al Powell.  New faces
fare better, including NYPD Blue regular Dennis Franz as, what else, an
obnoxious cop, and John Amos as a soft-spoken major (sent in to help
John McClane) who may have an ace up his sleeve.
There is exactly one good scene in Die Hard 2. (OK, there's some
adequate stuff, but really only one bona fide good moment.)  Poor John
McClane is forced to climb through another ventilation system.  Poor
bastard.  At least he's in on the joke.  "Just once, I'd like a regular,
normal Christmas.  A little eggnog, a fuckin' Christmas tree, a little
turkey.  But, no!  I gotta crawl around in this motherfuckin' tin can!"
Director: Renny Harlin
Producer: Charles Gordon, Lawrence Gordon, Joel Silver
Writer: Steven E. DeSouza, Doug Richardson
Starring: Bruce Willis, Bonnie Bedelia, William Atherton, Reginald
VelJohnson, Franco Nero, William Sadler, John Amos, Dennis Franz, Art
Evans, Fred Dalton Thompson
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
