Title
Review for Astronaut's Wife, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ASTRONAUT'S WIFE, THE (director/writer: Rand Ravich; cinematographer:
Allen Daviau; editors: Steve Mirkovich/Tim Alverson; cast: Johnny Depp
(Spencer Armacost), Charlize Theron (Jillian Armacost), Joe Morton
(Sherman Reese), Clea DuVall (Nan), Nick Cassavetes (Alex Streck), Blair
Brown (Shelly McLaren), Tom Noonan (Jackson McLaren), Samantha Eggar
(Doctor), Donna Murphy (Natalie Streck); Runtime: 109; 1999)
A too obvious derivative supernatural thriller, most imitative of
"Rosemary's Baby," but without the same fresh intensity and without a
credible script. What it had going for it, was a sleek look (the
cinematography was simply out of this world) and an able workmanlike
craftsmanship. Rand Ravich does a fine job directing his initial film,
but fails miserbly with the storytelling part of his script. This
results in a film that is watchable but not believable.
Spencer Armacost (Depp) and Jillian Armacost (Theron) are madly in love
with each other, living in Florida near the space center, where he is an
astronaut commander at NASA and she is an elementary school teacher. On
a routine orbital mission, he and Captain Streck (Nick) are trapped in
space outside the space shuttle and lose contact for two minutes,
experiencing pitch black darkness, silence, an explosion, and something
strange that the men refuse to talk about. It will turn out to be a
noise that humans can't hear, and that sound is a way for aliens to
travel undetected from outer space by hiding in the transmission signal
while traveling at the speed of light - like a thought.
In this arty mystery, which doesn't have too much mystery if you watched
a few of these
supernatural films before, Spencer and Streck come back different men
from what they were before they experienced the two minutes of mystery.
Streck will become sexually aggressive and act very strange, and he will
suddenly die from a stroke, while his wife (Clea) will become pregnant
with twins and commit suicide. The gentle Spencer is also a different
man, as he has rough sex with his wife, and he also impregnates her with
twins. He will quit his NASA job and move to New York City to become a
top executive in charge of building a fighter plane. What is strange
about this, is that he hates NYC and loved his current job, telling his
wife he will always be a pilot.
A crazed NASA official (Morton) risks his life to warn Jillian about the
twins. He was terminated when he presented his theories to his NASA
bosses that there was an alien in the space craft when the men
experienced their two minute blackout and that the astronauts returning
are not the same men, and when he clears up the film's mystery about
three-quarters of the way into the film, the film loses its suspenseful
impact.
Without a mystery to end on, the film becomes banal, having established
no point of view and having nothing to say about space travel, it just
becomes a predictable guessing game of how Jillian will defend herself
against her husband, someone who is really not her husband. The other
question is will she have the kids, who have the potential to be aliens,
as she is not absolutely sure if she became pregnant before or after the
doomed mission.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Something not of this world is gestating in Charlize Theron's
tummy, and methinks not-what-he-seems hubby Johnny Depp--who just returned
from deep space with a weird look on his face--is the responsible party.
        That's all you really need to know about "The Astronaut's Wife," a
silly and inconsequential little thriller about some icky alien space spawn
insinuating its way into the lives of two very attractive people, causing
them to re-evaluate their lives as human beings.  It begs the best bits of
the "Species" series and borrows the worst bits of the "Alien" series; in
between, there's some stuff worth watching and there's a lot of stuff that
isn't.
        If you've seen the trailer, you've seen the film.  In retrospect,
the trailer is actually more satisfying than the full-length feature, since
it gets to the point much more quickly and omits the dumbbell finale, which
to appreciate fully requires an understanding of electrical conductivity.
        Nevertheless, Depp and Theron have never looked so attractive on
screen, each sporting short-cropped blond hair and an endless wardrobe of
fancy duds.  So alike are our two leads that at times it's hard to tell
which one's the astronaut and which one's the wife.  But as we've learned
time and time again (the most recent example being "Eyes Wide Shut"),
good-looking performers do not a movie make.  Since Depp will soon co-star
with a headless horseman (Thanksgiving's "Sleepy Hollow") and Theron
recently shared top billing with a large gorilla (Disney's "Mighty Joe
Young"), the allure of going head-to-head with some yucky space issue must
have been irresistible.
        Joe Morton, typically so reliable, overdoes it as a government
shirt who cottons on to Depp's identity crisis following the two minutes
NASA lost contact with him.  An unrecognizable Samantha Eggar has a brief
scene as Theron's gynecologist.
        But perhaps the film's most bizarre moment occurs when Theron's
character, relieved that her husband's antique radio isn't blasting out
those secret alien transmissions, flips up her collar and goes into a
gratuitous salsa grind, heading for the refrigerator and downing the
Redi-Whip faster than you can scream "wanton product placement!"
        "The Astronaut's Wife" could have been a better movie had the
commitment Depp and Theron brought to the project been imitated by
writer/director Rand Ravich, whose uncreative screenplay can't decide
whether to be a horror show, plain and simple, or something deeper.  As it
is "The Astronaut's Wife" is predictable and uneventful, despite the
valiant attempts of its pretty players.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Jamey Hughton
As of late, certain summer movie releases have been utilizing a common
trend. In The Sixth Sense, an unforeseen final twist in the story-line
has surprised many moviegoers who were not expecting anything of the
sort. And earlier in the season, the terrorist thriller Arlington Road
concluded with a devious turn of events that had me staggering out of
the theater. The Astronaut's Wife is the latest summer entry to attempt
this strategic maneuver, and the first to fall flat in the process.
If writer/director Rand Ravich does one thing effectively, it's building
the audience's anticipation for his uneventful script to switch into
high gear. As this predictable and untimely surprise finale hits, a
painful realization sets in. Ravich has been moderately successful with
intriguing us until this point, only to reveal he has nowhere to go.
This leaves numerous questions unanswered, many opportunities unfairly
squandered, and ultimately an unsatisfied audience exiting the theater
while swearing and cursing in disgust. The set-up is interesting enough,
but sadly there is no recognizable payoff in this disappointing effort.
The story follows NASA employee Spencer Armacost (Johnny Depp), who is
sent into orbit with fellow astronaut Alex Streck (Nick Cassavetes) on a
routine space shuttle mission. The assignment seems to be going
according to plan until a freak explosion occurs, severing all
communications to Earth for roughly a two minute period. Worried wives
Jillian Armacost (Charlize Theron) and Natalie Streck (Donna Murphy) are
relieved when their husbands arrive back safely. But both are surprised
to find bizarre personality changes occurring in the men. When Jillian
becomes pregnant, she begins to question if Spencer is the same person
he was before the mission. What happened in those two minutes? Use your
imagination....
The beautiful Charlize Theron is, consequently, displaying a short
blonde look that suspiciously resembles Mia Farrow's in the 1968
thriller Rosemary's Baby. This is only one of the movies that The
Astronaut's Wife derives its premise from. There is also a pinch of
Species II (of all things) and a dash of The Fly thrown in to boot. The
best elements of these films combined could produce an excellent,
hair-raising suspense film. Unfortunately, The Astronaut's Wife is
hardly a top-notch effort. Theron's character spends basically the
entire duration of the film learning facts we already know, thanks to a
very informative trailer that spoils most of the thrills. Despite
enormous potential in the initial story, there is hardly a twist
involved - excepting (of course) the final `surprise'. One would hope
that Ravich had something stylish or striking up his sleeve, but it is
ultimately disappointing when we realize he has settled on the obvious.
His script and direction leave much to be desired.
In the title role, Theron does an admirable job. Her emotional and
mental breakdowns in certain scenes are highly convincing, even as she
goes through the familiar steps. Johnny Depp, speaking with an unusual
drawl that made me cringe, has considerably less success. His delivery
is highly flawed, and Depp seems surprisingly miscast in the role. The
excellent Joe Morton (Speed, Blues Brothers 2000) provides some thankful
assistance as Sherman Reese, a NASA official who fears that something
went terribly wrong in space. And Clea DuVall (The Faculty) has some
promising moments as Jillian's younger sister.
The Astronaut's Wife was not screened for critics before release, and
I'm not exactly sure why. There's certainly early promise, some solid
acting, and a steady pace that maintained my complete attention. While
Ravich doesn't do anything terribly wrong to upset the balance, he never
succeeds in doing much right either. And who can blame the average
viewer for feeling cheated, after staying with this promising formula
for nearly two hours, only to have it botched by a pathetic ending like
this. We deserve more than The Astronaut's Wife delivers.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   My esteemed online colleague, Bryant Frazer, suggested
that this picture be called "Apollo 13 Meets Rosemarie's
Baby," which suggests that perhaps the reason New Line
Cinema chose not to screen the movie for critics is its belief
that the derivativeness would turn off reviewers.  You can find
in "The Astronaut's Wife" elements of "Rosemarie's Baby,"
but also some of "The Thing," "Species II," "The Brood,"
"Village of the Damned," and a host of other sci-fi thrillers. 
Since the picture avoids the usual schlock shockers like eels
crawling out of bellies and snakes from eyes, the picture
might suggest even "The Blair Witch Project."  After all,
except for a quick, understated flash of the usual
horror-genre special effects near the conclusion, "The
Astronaut's Wife" is free of shoddy visual disturbances.  
   Stylishly designed and photographed, the movie recalls
Robert Altman's "Ready to Wear," except that first-time
director Rand Ravich's piece gathers increasing momentum
as the story glides and then lurches toward its predictable
conclusion.  Like Altman's fashion statement, Ravich's movie
seems conceived as a showcase for one of Hollywood's
prettiest performers, Charlize Theron, in the title role.  With
her hair cut short to accentuate every aspect of her alluring
features, Theron becomes a veritable object of love for Allen
Daviau's camera.  And what a wardrobe has been set out for
her!  Theron's character, Jillian, dons dresses for all
occasions--black for formal wear when she is at a party of
her fabulously wealthy New York neighbors, a lovely
chocolate-brown turtleneck for more casual days around her
Washington Square digs.  Her ensemble cannot quite cover
up her emotional instability, however. While we in the
audience are always aware that something may have gone
terribly wrong with her marriage after her husband returns
from space, we can't help feeling that her psychological
condition merely reflects stress from her move to New York
and from her new experience with pregnancy.
   While "The Astronaut's Wife" focuses on Theron's
character, Jillian Armacost, Ravich's script provides ample
possibilities for Johnny Depp to play against type as a
straight, all-American space traveler who raises few
suspicions about his emotional stability for the major part of
the drama.  Depp plays an astronaut, Commander Spencer
Armacost, who travels on a shuttle mission with co-pilot Alex
Streck (Nick Cassavetes).  When the two-man crew loses
contact with mission control for two minutes, the ship is
brought swiftly back to earth, where Streck soon dies of a
heart attack and Armacost refuses to discuss the
phenomenon of the lost minutes in space.  When Jillian
becomes pregnant, she begins to suspect that her husband is
not the man she knows, but is afraid to reveal her suspicions
for fear they will be mistaken for the musings of a woman
undergoing hormonal changes.  
   The major part of the picture is paced slowly.  Ravich is
more interested in exposition than in punctuating the story
with crude shocks, trusting that the payoff will be all the more
dramatic when the situation heats up.  Since we're bound to
be a couple of steps ahead of Jillian, having perhaps seen
more sci-fi movies than she, the outcome is anticlimactic, and
what's more we're not entirely clear what a sinister, alien
force has in store for us human beings.  We can live with
these flaws given the stylish design that Ravich throws on the
proceedings, almost as though he had chosen to compete
with John McTiernan's  "The Thomas Crown Affair" for lavish
settings.  We get some good, satiric insight into the life of
New York society as the wife of an aerospace executive,
Shelly McLaren (Blair Brown), talks of fashion and the French
Caribbean, and as a guest at a company party finds better
things to do than to waste time with a second-grade teacher. 
Joe Morton doesn't fix any pinball machines this time around
but puts in a reliable performance as a NASA official who
goes half-crazy when he discovers some frightening
information, and Johnny Depp glides confidently through the
picture as the blond-haired hero with a trophy wife that he
genuinely adores.  

Author
Greg King
In the recent Species II, a highly decorated astronaut
returned to earth carrying a vicious, predatory alien creature intent
on destroying life on earth.  The Astronaut's Wife takes the same
concept, but explores it on a far more subtle and visceral level,
injecting the intriguing premise with a healthy dose of paranoia and
90's style cynicism.  This eerie, stylish but low key paranoid
thriller also adds a healthy dose of low key horror, reminiscent of
the classic Rosemary's Baby, although ultimately it fails to deliver.
During an unexpected accident in space, shuttle astronaut
Spencer Armacost (Johnny Depp) loses contact with earth for a couple
of minutes.  During that time something mysterious happens that leaves
him and his partner Alex Streck (Nick Cassavetes) in a coma.  When he
recovers Spencer somehow seems different.  The changes in his
personality are slight, but they are enough to unnerve his emotionally
fragile wife Jillian (Charlize Theron, from The Devil's Advocate and
Mighty Joe Young, etc).
When a tragedy befalls the Strecks, Spencer decides to leave
the space program to take up an executive position with an
aeronautical company developing a new high tech weapons system.  He
also leaves sunny Florida for the claustrophobic confines of new York,
a city he supposedly hates with a passion.  Jillian reluctantly
follows him, but becomes more and more spooked by his behaviour.  Then
Reese (Joe Morton), a disgraced former NASA employee, approaches her
with frantic messages and dire warnings that her husband may not be
the man she married.  Did something happen to him in space during
those lost two minutes?  Is she pregnant with an alien life form?
 
First time director Rand Ravich (whose previous credits
include the script for Candyman II: Farewell To The Flesh) doesn't
give easy answers to many of the questions raised by the plot, forcing
audiences to do some of the work in piecing together the details of
this challenging, unusual film.  Ravich develops a nicely ambiguous
mood, and we are not quite sure whether the unstable Jillian is
imagining things or not.
Ravich opts for creating an unsettling atmosphere here, and he
certainly gives us that in spades.  Much of the credit for the film's
cold and deliberately unsettling ambience and visual style goes to
veteran cinematographer Allen Daviau.  His unnerving use of close-ups
imbue inanimate objects with a very real sense of menace, and his very
mobile camera adds movement to otherwise static scenes.  The
impressive production design and the cold interior of the Armacost's
sterile apartment also enhance the film's mood.
The performances are also interesting, and underscore the
ambiguous tone.  Depp continues to find interesting roles outside the
mainstream of American cinema, although he gives a fairly one-
dimensional and uninspired performance here.  Although his understated
performance hints at madness, somehow he never seems as menacing or as
chilling as he should be.  This is actually Theron's film, as she is
in every scene and virtually every frame.  The camera loves her and
spends an inordinate amount of time ravishing her in close up.  This
unfortunately distracts from her performance, which is a mixture of
appealing vulnerability and strength.  Morton is also good as the
deeply disturbed Reese.
The Astronaut's Wife is an off beat, low key and down beat
sci-fi thriller that lacks the broad appeal, spectacular pyrotechnics
and visual effects of most big budget Hollywood blockbusters.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Rand Ravich.
Cast: Charlize Theron, Johnny Depp, Joe Morton, Clea DuVall, Donna Murphy, 
Nick Cassavetes, Samantha Eggar, Blair Brown, Tom Noonan, Cole Sprouse, Dylan 
Sprouse.
1999 - 109 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, and sex).
Reviewed August 29, 1999.
Charlize Theron's really gotta get out of the city. In 1997's superb 
thriller, "The Devil's Advocate," she starred as a happy-go-lucky wife who 
travelled to New York City with her husband when he got a job at a 
prestigious law firm, and immediately went into a mental downward spiral as 
she began to suspect the people around her were demons. Change the demons to 
aliens, and what you've got is "The Astronaut's Wife," which certainly has 
the talent involved to make the film a suspenseful thriller, but is solely 
sunk on the shoulders of one culprit: writer-director Rand Ravich. Judging 
only on the work he does here, Ravich is akin to writing overblown, at times 
even laughable, dialogue, and wouldn't know subtlety if it came up and 
slapped him on the face. Sorry, folks. What you see is what you get with "The 
Astronaut's Wife," and what I saw wasn't very pretty.
Spencer (Johnny Depp) and Jillian Armacost (Charlize Theron) are a warm, 
loving married couple living in Florida, with Spencer an astronaut, and 
Jillian a second-grade teacher. When Spencer blasts off once again with his 
colleague, Alex Streck (Nick Cassavetes), Jillian is worried as usual, and 
even more so when, the next day, she and her younger sister, Nan (Clea 
DuVall), catch a report on the news that states Spencer and Alex lost contact 
for two minutes after a mysterious blast in space. Jillian and Alex's wife, 
Natalie (Donna Murphy), are relieved to learn by Mission Control that their 
husbands are fine, have been tested for any possible problems, and are 
recovering. Things go back to normal, almost. Although Spencer never talks 
about what happened during the two lost minutes (on the taped recording, 
there was a bunch of screaming, but nothing more), he announces to Jillian 
that his piloting days are over, and that he has been offered a business job 
in NYC. She hesitantly agrees, but before they leave, Alex abruptly suffers a 
stroke and does, while the grieving, paranoid Natalie commits suicide at the 
funeral reception a couple days later. In New York, Jillian quickly gets 
another elementary school teaching job, but she starts to suspect something 
isn't quite right with Spencer, this suspicion further confirmed when an 
official from Florida, Sherman Reese (Joe Morton), comes up to tell her that 
the third noise on the audio wasn't the blast, but another lifeform, and that 
Natalie was pregnant with twins when she killed herself. Oddly, Jillian has 
also just discovered that she is a few months along with twins, so...what 
exactly is inside of her?
"The Astronaut's Wife" isn't the most original of films, but (aside from it 
blatantly ripping off 1968's spooky Roman Polanski classic, "Rosemary's 
Baby," right down to Theron's short blond hair mirroring that on Mia 
Farrow's) it is the type of story that effortlessly could have become an 
enthralling, frightening motion picture on the subject of paranoia, somewhat 
like the recent "Arlington Road," had it been made with a firmer hand. 
Unfortunately, what we get instead are a group of characters who are 
intellectually far slower than the viewer, because if they had realized the 
obvious right from the get-go--that Spencer isn't really Spencer once he 
returns--then the movie would have been over at the 30-minute mark, which 
isn't exactly long enough to add up to a feature film. It really is 
frustrating, however, to watch people who are unmistakably written below 
average intelligence, because you instantly stop believing what is happening 
on-screen, and are forced to realize that, yes, it is only a movie, albeit 
one that holds its audience in contempt.
That's not the worst of the film's problems; I wish it was. Also on the 
screenplay level, the dialogue often is some of the most unintentionally 
laugh-inducing of the whole year. In one supposed-to-be-serious scene, 
Jillian is speaking on the phone with Sherman Reese, who is trying to tell 
her some important information about her husband. What is her reply? "Did you 
ever hear the story of the prince and princess, Mr. Reese?" Jillian asks, as 
she goes on to tell an elaborate fairly tale as tears stream down her face. 
In another sequence, out of the blue, Jillian turns on the radio and does a 
dance around her apartment. And finally, in what should have signalled the 
firing of the costume designer, and did signal a pretty hearty laugh from 
myself, Nan wears a ritzy, colorful feathered coat out to a restaurant, and 
doesn't exactly blend in with the others. Did she win the lottery after 
Spencer and Jillian moved up to the Big Apple?
If the movie is a disaster on the writing and directing levels, at least most 
of the performances are strong and effective, and on a technical level, it is 
often impressive. Amid her embarrassing lines of dialogue she is forced to 
mutter, Theron once again proves to be a presence to be reckoned with. Even 
if her character isn't written at the fully-developed level of the tragic one 
she played in "The Devil's Advocate," give her points for rising above the 
material and successfully acting as a likable protagonist. The 
almost-always-superb Johnny Depp is the weakest acting link. Regardless of 
the palpable air of menace he presents here, his character is a 
one-dimensional villain, and every facial expression he vents off practically 
screams, "I'm the baddie here!" In supporting roles, Donna Murphy has a 
touching final scene, and Joe Morton is sympathetic even if his only reason 
for being is to explain the goings-on. Clea DuVall, as Jillian's sister, Nan, 
gives the best performance in the whole film, and sells each and every one of 
her lines. It's just too bad she also is written to be a nitwit who doesn't 
even bother listening to Jillian's predicament, and the pay-off of her 
character is extremely disappointing.
"The Astronaut's Wife" carries out a bidding war throughout on a pacing 
level. Every time it gets set to take off, it quickly slows down again. If 
this movie was a stick-shift car, I would be fully convinced that the driver 
had never been taught how to use it. On a positive note, there are some nice 
touches sprinkled throughout, including a powerful visual image in one scene 
of Jillian and Spencer sitting in front of a giant U.S. flag that covers the 
whole background. Another scene set in a storage building extracts a fair 
amount of tenseness out of the situation, while the use of the atmospheric 
music score, by George S. Clinton, and fast-motion cinematography, hint at 
how striking the film might have been with someone else at the helm. 
Too bad director Ravich betrays his audience even more during the last act. 
Not only has this "twist" been done before, but in the confines of this 
particular film, it is almost maddeningly inadequate and a huge cheat. Forget 
about the time we have invested getting to know and like Theron's character; 
forget about the 109 minutes we've wasted waiting for a gratifying finale; 
oh, and forget about me even considering giving this inept sci-fi/thriller a 
passing grade.
   - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman.
     Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Frankie Paiva
There are times when you just seem to disagree with what everyone else has said
about a movie. I’m sure out there (somewhere) there are people who loved Wild
Wild West, or thought Jawbreaker was a funny movie, there may even be some
people who enjoyed Idle Hands. But if I am  the major supporter of one film
this year that everyone else hated its got to be The Astronaut’s Wife. While
certainly got a quality thriller in the spiritual and life-changing meaning
sense, it still delivers what it set out to do in the first place, be a good
summer movie.
Spencer Armacost (Depp) is an astronaut whose wife is worried about him when he
goes out on his next expedition into space. While in orbit, Spencer and another
astronaut get cut off from all communications for nearly two minutes. They
manage to make it out alive and are regarded as heroes when they return to
earth.  But his wife Jillian (Theron), a school teacher, seems to notice some
differences in him after he lands. He takes a high class job in New York
without even telling her, and the other man he was up in space with dies. Not
to mention his wife electrocutes herself in the shower. 
Jillian soon learns that she is to be the mother of two bouncing baby boys.
Twins that look eerily like little alien bodies. Spencer gets to be stranger
and stranger, sometimes he doesn’t call if he’s coming home late and he
always seems to be listening to different frequencies on the radio. We all know
something is wrong, but we can’t quite figure out what. Then a NASA scientist
shows up at her door with some of the medical records and documents on Spencer
before he got on the spaceship and after. All of the newer ones seem slightly
altered then the ones he signed before getting on the ship. Poor Jillian begins
to think that her Spencer is no longer human and some type of alien creature
has taken the place of her former husband. The idea is confirmed when we learn
that Spencer is stalking the scientist and beats her when she tries taking
pills to kill the baby. 
Yes, I am fully aware that this sounds like an extremely cheap rip-off of
Rosemary’s Baby, but it’s not. There aren't any evil aliens with ray guns
that try to take over the solar system, the film mostly deals with the suspense
and wonder of Spencer's true identity. The suspense is drawn out just about as
far as it can, the film is EXTREMELY slow for the first thirty or forty minutes
until things get rolling. Theron is great, while slightly unbelievable as a
pregnant woman (she still retains her thin frame) she adds a lot of emotion
that you probably don’t expect from seeing the trailers. Johnny doesn’t get
to do much in this picture, and the only word I could come up with for his
acting ability would be retrained. The ending is kind of a disappointment, it
easily could have been made so that we wonder what happens to the her two sons.
Still, the film shot well, has some clever twists and turns, and has some
pretty tense moments. If only Jillian could have been able to discover for
herself what was happening to her husband instead of someone else telling her.
I think it would have been much scarier that way. A good movie in the midst of
August junk, The Astronaut’s Wife gets *** stars.
The Young-Uns: Tense moments, and death by electrocution occurs near the
beginning and end of the film. A man also rapes his wife and there is some
language. Good Age 14 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://www.homestead.com/teenagemoviecritic/mainpage.html

Author
Paul Foley
Here `Rosemary's Baby' meets `The Right Stuff,' or, more
accurately, the wrong stuff.  A near total lack of
characterization torpedoes this lackluster film, and Theron's
somnolent acting doesn't help.
It has been said that science fiction is about ideas, not
character.  Bad science fiction certainly is, and `The
Astronaut's Wife' qualifies as bad sci-fi.  While Theron's
character, Jillian, is front and center throughout the movie, I
left the theater without a clue as to who this woman is.  Or her
husband Spencer (Depp) either, for that matter.  Depp at least
has an excuse for looking blank and empty inside: he's been
reprogrammed by space aliens and is a pod person.  In
Theron's case, it's just bad acting.
Really bad acting.  She can't even manage a convincing
American accent.  In scene after scene, things happen to her--
mostly bad things--and she looks like she simply doesn't know
how she should be reacting, and would be incapable of
conveying the emotion even if she did know.  She's hopelessly
vague, except for a couple of scenes where she overacts.
Admittedly, the material is not very good.  But Theron does
absolutely nothing with it.  Jillian is pregnant; there's
something wrong with her husband, he's changed, and she
becomes gradually convinced that he's possessed.  There may
be something wrong with the twins inside her.  Nobody will
believe her of course: to complicate matters, she has a history
of mental illness.  At first she loves her husband (or so we're
told), then she suspects him, finally she's afraid of him;
throughout, she reacts with the same stony indifference.
Depp's character is a confused mess too.  Is he a good ol' 
boy who drinks Budweiser from the bottle or a corporate shark
who sips Scotch?  His hair style and accent give him an
uncanny resemblance to an Elvis impersonator, which doesn't
help his credibility as the film's heavy.  He does at least
manage to come across as creepy at times.  He keeps appearing
unexpectedly behind Jillian; it had me thinking maybe she
should hang a bell around his neck, like a miscreant cat.
Both Depp and Theron are way too pretty to be believable in
these roles.  He looks like he stepped off the cover of GQ, she
from Vogue.  One moment she's uneasy about uprooting from
their Florida home; in the very next scene she's mixing with
New York society, wearing expensive clothes well. Theron
should have stuck to modeling; she's always striking poses in
the film.  I half expected there to be a man just offscreen with a
Nikon calling out, `Pouty, pouty ... work it!'  Jillian and
Spencer's cavernous NY apartment is straight out of
Architectural Digest, too.  It just isn't a believable transition
from Cocoa Beach. Even NASA offices look fabulous in this
absurd film.  There are lots of extravagant camera angles and
unnecessary camera movement too, in order to jazz up the
visuals.  This movie is all surface.
There are some clever bits, including one where creepy
Spencer caresses Jillian and lets his fingers pause to feel the
pulse points in her neck and wrist.  This lets the audience know
there's something odd about this guy.  (It also had me
wondering why Jillian didn't notice.)  There's another clever
scene where Jillian turns Spencer's radio on and is so relived
that it's not tuned to interstation static (he receives messages
from his pals the aliens that way) that she starts doing a little
dance to the music.  It's the closest Jillian ever comes to being
charming and real in this movie, plus there's a nice shock
when the ever-lurking Spence pops up and scares the bejezus
out of her.  Never mind that we've already seen this gag done
on a 30-second hair color commercial....

Author
Steve Rhodes
Let me answer the question that is on the mind of every viewer who has
seen writer/director Rand Ravich's THE ASTRONAUT'S WIFE: Is the movie
really in slow motion as it appears?
No.  But, the zombie-like movements so carefully mastered by the story's
leads, Johnny Depp and Charlize Theron, make it seem that the
projectionist is running the movie at one-quarter speed.
When we meet the Armacosts, husband Spencer (Depp) is off to his office
in space.  He's a NASA astronaut who will lose a mysterious 2 minutes
while on a space walk.  The story, which essentially reveals almost
everything from the beginning, makes it obvious that aliens have visited
him during this communication blackout.
Spencer's wife, Jillian (Theron), wants some answers when he gets back
on earth, but she doesn't get them until months later.  At a busy,
company cocktail party in New York, where he has gone to accept a
lucrative executive position at an aircraft firm, Spencer finally agrees
to answer her constant queries about the infamous missing 2 minutes.  He
pulls her around a corner at the crowded enclave and begins having sex
with her as he provides an explanation of sorts.  Never does she
interrupt him and suggest that he tell her the answers first before
engaging in any sexual activity.  The scene itself somehow shifts in
mid-thrust to their bedroom.  The story is rife with many such illogical
and implausible happenings.
At least the party does provide an opportunity for some much needed
humor in a movie that, given the hackneyed quality of the material,
takes itself way too seriously.  "I used to be into AIDS," one emaciated
socialite tells Jillian.  "Now, I'm into hunger."
Shot in shadows with heavy tones of dark wood paneling and deep blues,
the film tries its best to look convincing.  The script certainly needs
all of the help it can get.  The film, which is as inert as outer space,
uses choral music full of over-the-top creepiness to supply most of the
fright factor.
Johnny Depp, in one of his lesser performances, still manages to be the
only even partially satisfying aspect to the movie.  Charlize Theron,
who was so good in a similar role last year in THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE,
talks in constant whispers as if she thinks she's having a religious
experience.
Jillian's hairdo?  Short like Mia Farrow's.  You know, like in
ROSEMARY'S BABY.  Cute, huh?
Okay, now finish the story yourself.  You don't need any more clues.
THE ASTRONAUT'S WIFE runs 1:49.  It is rated R for violence, language
and a strong scene of sexuality and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     In this summer of uniquely adult suspense fare like THE BLAIR WITCH
PROJECT and THE SIXTH SENSE, THE ASTRONAUT'S WIFE initially seems like a
promising companion piece.  Writer/director Rand Ravich's tale begins with
blissfully happy couple Spencer Armacost (Johnny Depp) and his wife
Jillian (Charlize Theron) sharing a tender moment before Spencer's latest
mission as a shuttle astronaut.  That mission goes awry, however, sending
Spencer and a fellow astronaut home unconscious after an unexplained
communications failure during a spacewalk.  Both men initially seem to
come through the experience fine, but Jillian slowly begins to sense
something amiss with Spencer after they move to New York City.  She's even
more troubled once she becomes pregnant with twins, and a former
colleague of Spencer's (Joe Morton) shows up with some disturbing
information.
     There's certainly an aura of familiarity to the story, but that
almost seems to work for the build-up of suspense.  Charlize Theron's Mia
Farrow-circa-ROSEMARY'S BABY hairstyle hardly seems coincidental, much
like the mere casting of Theron after THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE (Theron
characters clearly need to stop moving to New York, encountering sinister
forces and going insane).  Everything about THE ASTRONAUT'S WIFE aims for
an ever-growing sense of menace -- Ravich's odd camera angles, time-lapses
and slow motions; cinematographer Allen Daviau's murky photography;
production designer Jan Roelfs' sterile interiors.  Technically, there's a
lot to like about THE ASTRONAUT'S WIFE and the way it keeps a viewer
unsteady and uneasy.
     As a narrative however, nearly everything seems just ever-so-slightly
off.  The film feels like it starts too late, eventually revealing crucial
pieces of Armacost family history that really should have been shown to
us. Individual scenes flow smoothly, but the transitions between them are
awkward and abrupt.  Characters who seem like they should play a much more
significant role flit in and out of the story inconsistently.  Ravich
doesn't seem entirely in control of the pace, letting the film ooze along
eerily without ever knowing where to crank it up or tone it down.  The
familiar "devil inside" plot elements are played deadly straight, creating
the impression that Ravich is taking his story far too seriously.  Even
the key moments of exposition drift by so deliberately they're gone before
you have a chance to register that they might be important.  THE 
ASTRONAUT'S WIFE spends 106 minutes convincing you that it's just about to
turn into something compelling, then never does.
     The performances and characters are certainly a significant part of
the problem.  Like the rest of the story, the characters feel incomplete.
Depp plays the post-close encounter Spencer with a disquieting flatness,
but we see too little of Spencer the good guy to make the transition
unsettling.  Theron has already proven in THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE that she
knows how to play frantic and tormented, but again there's a back-story
missing from her performance (though it's dropped into the dialogue).
Even the usually reliable Joe Morton is left adrift when his NASA
operative turns up as an unshaven wacko with no sense of how he became
one.  Ravich keeps building THE ASTRONAUT'S WIFE as though the plight of
the characters is going to elevate the genre story, when ultimately the
characters don't mean a thing.
     I must admit that I was startled to find THE ASTRONAUT'S WIFE
remotely watchable when it appeared without preview screenings.  The look
of the film is nearly enough, combined with Theron's haunted stares, to
make it linger in your head for a while.  It just doesn't deliver on the
most basic level, leaving you itchy and unsatisfied as though you had just
watched a film that wasn't quite finished yet.  There are too many other,
better choices for viewers who want a little substance with their chills.
After you get through admiring the style of THE ASTRONAUT'S WIFE, all
you're left with is a lot of empty space.

Author
Bob Bloom
The Astronaut's Wife (1999) 1/2 star out of 4. Starring Johnny Depp and
Charlize Theron
 The only purpose I can see for "The Astronaut's Wife" is using it as a
cure for insomnia.
 This dull excuse for a science fiction thriller is about as exciting as a
countdown, as enthralling as a systems check.
 The film holds your attention by putting you into a stupor. It lulls you
to sleep. You'll find more excitement in reading "Goodnight Moon."
 What's unfortunate is that "The Astronaut's Wife" offers a first-class
cast, headed by Johnny Depp as the astronaut and the beautiful Charlize
Theron as the wife.
 Depp affects one of those cool, laid-back Southern drawls that sounds like
an audition for "Gone With the Wind". This is not one of Depp's finest
hours on film.
 He is a first-rate actor, as proven by his work in "Edward Scissorhands",
"Cry Baby" and "Ed Wood." He has the ability to inhabit a character, of
making whoever he portrays a full-bodied individual, no matter how bizarre
or outrageous.
 In "The Astronaut's Wife," though, he is defeated by a script that
basically gives him nothing to do but try to look spooky while reassuring
the Mrs. that he's the same good ol' boy rocket jockey he was before his
last space mission.
 During that flight, Depp's Spencer Armacost and his partner, Alex Streck
(Nick Cassavetes), lost consciousness and were out of contact with Earth
for two minutes.
 It is what happened during those 120 seconds that is the crux of the story.
 If you have seen enough "Twilight Zone" or "Outer Limits" episodes, or
read enough science fiction, you can pretty well figure out the details.
 But writer-director Rand Ravich decides to stretch the obvious to the
intolerable.
 We know what happened, of course. Most of the characters sort of have an
idea of what took place, so why try to create a mystery and milk suspense
from a situation that is so blatantly apparent?
 Probably because Ravich had a premise but did not know what to do with it.
At least that's what it seems as Depp and Theron merely play cat-and-mouse
until the inevitable finale and expected plot twist.
 The premise of an extraterrestrial spouse was done with more chills and
excitement in the 1957 B-offering "I Married a Monster From Outer Space."
 That movie, despite its minuscule budget and cheesy special effects, packs
more wallop in five minutes than all of "The Astronaut's Wife."
 What is difficult to comprehend is how "The Astronaut's Wife" was
green-lighted because the script's shortcomings are so clear.
 Ravich expends all his time and energy trying to create an atmosphere of
suspense where none exists.
 "The Astronaut's Wife" is a major letdown, a snoozer, a movie that will
soon be consigned to the sales bins at your local video outlet.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Jamie Peck
Rating: * (out of four)
New Line / 1:46 / 1999 / R (language, violence, clothed sex)
Cast: Charlize Theron; Johnny Depp; Joe Morton; Clea DuVall; Donna
Murphy; Nick Cassavetes; Blair Brown
Director: Rand Ravich
Screenplay: Rand Ravich
In "The Astronaut's Wife," Charlize Theron plays a young woman with a
nervous demeanor , pixie-hairdo and demon spawn unwittingly growing in
her belly. If only her name wasn't Jillian, the makers of this
embarrassing bit of sci-fi shlock could have come up with a far more
appropriate title: "Rosemary's Species." What a shame it is to see such
a gifted actress as Theron - Oscar-worthy in "The Devil's Advocate" -
struggle with the lamest rip-off of a screendom classic in recent
memory.
OK, maybe "The Astronaut's Wife" deviates from "Rosemary's Baby" turf
for its set-up, which finds our heroine terrorized not by Satan's
minions but her possessed husband (Johnny Depp), a shuttle pilot whose
mission mishap leaves him, um, a changed man. Predictably, he and the
missus get it on in a sequence best described as unpleasant, his evil
seed impregnating her with twins and realizing that great "Bowfinger"
line about "alien love." Theron's "Advocate" character faced a similar
dilemma, the horror there resonating strongly. "Astronaut" provides only
artificial anxiety.
Last year's equally noodle-headed "Species II" spun a similar premise
about the breeding habits of an extraterrestrial on earth, but at least
that movie more or less knew it was garbage. "The Astronaut's Wife" is
grave and humor-free, passing its increasingly silly story off as
full-fledged serious, right down to an ambiguous finale that isn't even
going to satisfy those who've stayed with it thus far. Here's a hint: It
involves lots of water, electrical equipment, a special effect from "The
Abyss" and the tots who doubled up as Adam Sandler's co-star in "Big
Daddy." Draw your own conclusions.
Director/writer Rand Ravich coats the proceedings in dynamic sights
masterminded by legendary "E.T." cinematographer Allen Daviau, but too
often favors the film's visual presentation over the story he's trying
to tell. This bodes horribly for each dramatic development, like the
surfacing of a suspicious NASA official ("Speed"'s Joe Morton) to
instigate Jill's slow and stupid comprehension of the truth. His
hyper-erratic behavior is probably supposed to give Wife a paranoid
edge. Instead, he adds to the phoniness.
Theron and Depp are certainly beyond this junk and will get other
chances to prove themselves this fall - she as part of an imposing
ensemble case in the John Irving adaptation "Cider House Rules," he in
the lead of Tim Burton's eagerly-awaited "Sleepy Hollow." Undeserving of
such talent, "The Astronaut's Wife" manages to be derivative, dull and
uninvolving despite its seemingly ripe potential for unintentional
laughs. In space, no one can hear you scream. But in a movie theatre,
everyone can hear you snore.
Š 1999 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit The Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/
"The best possible argument for including [a shot of Bruce] Willis'
genitals would have been that the movie, after all, contains everything
else." -Roger Ebert on "Color of Night"

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
        Writer/director Rand Ravich came up with an intriguing premise
for this sci-fi tale: What would happen if an astronaut was, somehow,
changed after he returned from a supposedly routine space journey? Who
would know?  Good idea, right? So, Johnny Depp - newly blond with a
Southern drawl - plays a NASA shuttle pilot, one of two crew members
who are nearly killed when a satellite explodes and ground control
mysteriously loses contact with them for two minutes. His companion
(Nick Cassavetes) flips out soon after their return to Earth. But Depp
doesn't. Instead, he announces his decision to quit the space program
and impregnates his beautiful wife, played by Charlize Theron ("Mighty
Joe Young," "The Devil's Advocate"), with twins. But then strange
things begin to happen. First, Cassavetes dies from "a severe insult
to the brain" (i.e.: a stroke). Then Theron's confidante, played by
Donna Murphy, is electrocuted. Nevertheless, the now-former astronaut
and his now-fearful wife leave Florida and move to New York, where
she's befriended by the wife (Blair Brown) of her husband's new
corporate boss (Tom Noonan) in the aerospace industry. Are there any
surprises? Only when British actress Samantha Eggar turns up as an
obstetrician with a thick German accent. Otherwise you can probably
guess what happens. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Astronaut's Wife" is a fumbling, formulaic 4. Think of a sluggish
"Rosemary's Baby" with an extra-terrestrial twist.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
The film is as good as or better than the average Hollywood release. It's scary. It's well-acted. It's filmed with a degree of flash and elegance -- chilly, muted, symbolic and refreshingly free from cheap shocks. It is a stylish and feverishly beautiful psychological thriller with several interesting science fiction elements. 
Commander Spencer Armacost and his wife Jillian (Depp and Theron) are an extraordinarily close and happy couple, until something goes wrong during what should have been a routine shuttle mission. NASA mysteriously loses contact with Armacost and his co-pilot, Captain Alex Streck (Nick Cassavettes) for a full two minutes, and when the shuttle is brought down both men are unconscious. Armacaost appears unhurt, but Streck has suffered a heart attack and later dies under disturbing circumstances. The whole business leaves Jillian, who has a troubling history of mental unbalance, in an emotionally fragile state, as does Armacost's uncharacteristic decision to retire from flying and take an executive position at a New York City-based aerospace company. Already feeling isolated and lonely, Jillian then learns that she's pregnant. Is her increasing conviction that her husband isn't the man he used to be a matter of hormonal swings and stress-induced paranoia, or did something unimagin!
ably awful happen to Armacost out in the cold void of space? 
This is an analogy to Roman Polanski's horror classic "Rosemary's Baby", and director Rand Ravich directs pretty much in the same fashion, where the most important element is the surrealism -- you'll be walking along side the main characters on the blurry line between dream and reality. The symbolism is thick and heavy, with multiple references to dual identities and insensitive husbands. The film is also incredibly beautiful. Its graceful cinematography, its flashy editing and haunting musical score are all part of a wonderfully rich atmosphere. 
The two leads are both extraordinary and both at their right place. Johnny Depp is convincing both as the "true American hero" at the beginning and as the mysterious entity after the "accident". He is capable of hiding the beast within. Charlize Theron is likewise incredible. The enormous emotional core of the script is challenging and requires a very serious, talented actress. Theron is obviously up to it. The character reminds us about Mia Farrow's ("Rosemary's Baby")character with the same haircut and problems -- she gets pregnant with twins and begins to wonder what exactly she is carrying. Unfortunately Ravich didn't take her far enough from her previous film and it looks like she's still playing the role of Keanu Reeve's wife in "The Devil's Advocate." 
It's very artistic, very stylish, but regrettably also rather stereotypical. For most of the time the film is feverishly interesting because nothing is kept too obvious. Everything is raptured in mystery, which makes it completely unpredictable. By the end of the film, when it's time for dazzling the audience with a worthy ending, the director changes his rhythm and selects the most primitive and disappointing resolution of all -- the typical Hollywood brain-killer, reminding about the infinite "X-Files"-episodes -- deluding, mysterious and very primitive underneath. Absolutely nothing is explained. What did the alien intelligence actually want? What is their objective? What actually happened? You almost expect "TO BE CONTINUED.." to appear on the ending credits. This is truly a fatal error that creates a rather anticlimactic atmosphere. But even though it happens at the very end, and everything else is almost flawless, it's hard to enjoy the film after watching it through. An!
d it doesn't hold anything of special interest to watch it twice. It's certainly better than the average science fiction cliché released every year, but hardly anything else. 

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Astronaut's_Wife_ (R) ** (out of ****)
        New Line opted to not screen in advance for critics this
once-high-profile sci-fi thriller, but the film is far from the flat-out
disaster that decision would imply.  In fact, there is a lot of merit on
display here, not the least of which is that of the terrific lead
performance of Charlize Theron, who once again proves to be the real deal
actingwise.  She plays the title character, whose world becomes
increasingly nighmarish after her husband (Johnny Depp) returns from an
accident-plagued space mission.  Something is not quite right with him,
and neither are his unborn twins that she is carrying.  For a first-time
director, Rand Ravich displays a strong sense of visual style as well as
a command of mood, for an atmosphere of dread is ominously felt
throughout the picture.
        However, it turns out that Ravich has no idea what exactly the dread is
leading up to.  He is also a first-time writer, and his inexperience
shows.  All the stylish visuals in the world cannot hide the fact that
the film's story simply does not add up, leaving tons more questions than
answers in its incredibly unsatisfying wrapup.  One such question is that
of the miscast Depp's (alas, "evil" is beyond this good actor's range)
involvement in this picture, other than the obvious (i.e., an easy
paycheck).  Theron and Ravich's style keeps one watching, but by the
conclusion one may wish one hadn't.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Stephen Graham Jones
The X-Files taught us that alien colonization won't be loud like
Independence Day, but insipient, like Body Snatchers, Puppet Masters, all
that. More They Live than War of the the Worlds. The trailer establishes all
this with minimal effort, too, as it's already conventional knowledge. And
we are hungry for it, or something like it. It's been two summers now since
Contact made the aliens benevolent, paternal, essentially erasing the
(ir-)rational fear of the Alien series. Which is to say it's high time to
give those aliens fangs again. The Astronaut's Wife does just that.
Or, to be more specific, it gives NASA pilot Spencer Armacost ('Texan'
Johnny Depp, a long way from 21 Jumpstreet, bit closer to Elm) fangs, via a
low-orbit close encounter. And of course no one can see those fangs for most
of the movie. His wife Jillian (Charlize Thiron) has her suspicions, but,
luckily for Spencer, Jillian is an ex-mental patient, so is thus easy to
convince that it's all hallucination and paranoia brought on by her
pregnancy. And there's even the suggestion that it might all just be
paranoia. But then there wouldn't be any special effects. To writer/director
Rand Ravich's credit, however, he is able to milk a lot of tension from an
otherwise subdued movie by keeping the range of Spencer's suprahuman
abilities more or less under wraps until the closing frames, a bit of
dramatically-effective concealment.
But Spencer's not the title-character here. Jillian is. Along with their
marriage, which is so ideal for the first few minutes that it has to be
doomed ('unmade in heaven'). This is something of a non-traditional
approach, though, putting the wife--the ostensible victim here--in the
leading role. Typically, it's the alien's pursuer who gets the screentime,
which gives the movie license to use all the cop/criminal conventions in
space etc, but The Astronaut's Wife isn't Predator, is a bit more low-key
than that. Which is to say it has to rely on a whole nother set of
conventions. Specifically, those Polanski hammered out once and for all with
Rosemary's Baby. Chereze Thiron even has a schoolboy Mia Farrow haircut and
a husband who spends his days at the office. And everyone who shares her
suspicions is summarily removed. It's all about isolation. The only
difference is that instead of giving birth to the supernatural, Jillian may
be giving birth to the extraterrestrial. Not the 2001 kind of
extraterrestrial, though, but something less the benign-infant, more our
replacement. Again, it's how aliens get a terrestrial foothold:
hybridization. And don't think Starman here. Think Species.
Jillian does. But too, she has a little more of that final-girl resolve than
Rosemary did. Very Jamie Lee Curtis, except instead of intense action and
longindying screams we get intense dialogue and longindying stares. Which is
a bit of a change. The stand-off as opposed to the shoot-em-up. This is a
drama, after all, nevermind the alien overtones. It's about trust in
marriage, what the breakover point is. What will convince Jillian she's not
losing it, that Spencer is in fact listening to the coded-static radio
transmissions we know from Contact, Arrival. And it's all fairly strong up
until then, until her convincing. And then, inside of two minutes, it simply
falls apart, uses the same cheap trick Fallen used to 'surprise' us in the
closing frames. And the thing is, there was such a better ending within
reach. In all The Thing incarnations there's always the distinct possibility
early on that these people have just been cooped up too long. Instead of
expanding on that, using it for the ending, The Astronaut's Wife takes the
easy way out, the grand way out, the Hollywood way out. Shoots for the
disturbing Twilight Zone ending and doesn't quite make escape velocity, has
to settle for the typical, when it had the potential to be so much more.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones
for more like this, check out http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Steve Evans
The Astronaut's Wife  Written and directed by: Rand Ravich. Starring Johnny
Depp, Charlize Theron, Joe Morton, Nick Cassavettes and Blair Brown.
The pitch: Rosemary's Baby meets E.T. in this trashy exploitation flick
apparently designed to scare the bejabbers out of pregnant women and bore
everyone else.
Affecting a suthern accent, a bleach-blond Depp sleepwalks his way through
the role of a shuttle astronaut who, while orbiting Earth, loses contact
with NASA for two minutes. He returns to Floridaa changed man.
His wife, the lovely but bland Theron, senses something is wrong, even
though she faithfully returns to her teaching job each day at the local
elementary school. But all is not well. Depp's fellow crewman, Cassavettes,
drops dead a week later at a party as his wife stares in horror. Did
something happen to the astronauts during those two minutes of silence in
space? Why, hell yes, we've got another 90 minutes to go. [Side note Part I:
Cassavettes apparently needed some quick cash to get on with his successful
career as an independent filmmaker. He's following in his dad's footsteps.
The late John Cassavettes also starred, from time to time, in some equally
cheesy, low-rent movies (check out Two Minute Warning) to pay the bills in
between his own independent projects. Side note Part II: this basic
storyline was handled with much more suspense in I Married a Monster From
Outer Space (1955).]
Okay. At Cinema Uprising we would never reveal key plot points in a good
movie: By the end of Act I, Cassavettes' wife commits suicide, which does
little to reassure Theron. Unfazed by all the sudden death, Depp picks the
only sensible solution that can propel the plot  he quits his NASA job for
a gig with a major engineering firm, packs up his wife, cuts out of Florida
and moves to New York. This worries Theron even more, since she did the same
thing with Keanu Reeves two years ago in The Devil's Advocate.
In his new job, Depp designs amazingly complex aircraft for a military
contract, raking in scads of green money. Pretty soon he's kissing corporate
ass at parties and doing an awkward bumpity-bump with his wife in public
places. Next thing we know, Theron is taking a pregnancy test in the
restroom stall at her new school. (As any would-be parent knows, those tests
are supposed to be taken first thing in the morning. Or did Mrs. Astronaut
drive all the way to work just to pee?)
Does it matter? Yes. In a movie already swollen with improbabilities, the
incorrect administration of a pregnancy test might seem like a minor sin,
but we beg to differ. We believe people deserve more for their $7 tickets
than a movie that actively defies their intelligence. Worse, we're appalled
that a film would dare to exploit a woman's greatest fear  that she might
give birth to Webster.
Theron doesn't have it quite so bad. The poor woman eventually gloms to the
fact that she's carrying twins. And Depp seems to take a preternaturally
unusual interest in their safety. One of Depp's former NASA associates tries
to warn the expectant mommy that she's carrying a heap o' trouble, times
two. Problem is, the doomsayer is played by Joe Morton, a character actor
who gets killed in practically all his movies. Who's going to believe him?
Or the preposterous ending, with cheap-looking special effects and Theron
acting like she's swallowed enough Quaaludes that somebody ought to call
poison control.
Stoned, sedentary or fast asleep, The Astronaut's Wife is still a space
cadet.
Rated R for language and uncomfortable-looking sex.

Author
Eugene Novikov
"What happened during those two minutes?"
Starring Charlize Theron, Johnny Depp. Rated R.
In many ways, The Astronaut's Wife is a very decent Hollywood thriller.
It is utterly compelling for most, if not all of its running time;
intense and well acted, moments had me on the edge of my seat. So it is
only in retrospect that I was able to discern its many prevalent
inadequacies. As the story unspools the film seems to work but after it
is over you realize that cerebrally The Astronaut's Wife did not begin
to live up to its admittedly impressive visceral effect.
Jillian Armicaust's husband, Spencer (stoic Johnny Depp), is the
respected commander of a space shuttle. On his latest mission there is
an accident. As Spencer and his partner are trying to fix a satellite
there is an explosion. Houston (we have a problem) loses contact with
the two austronauts for two whole minutes. When communication is
regained they are immediately brought back to Earth. Spencer seems fine
but his partner has a massive stroke and dies.
Soon Charlize is pregnant with twins. It is then that she begins to
notice strange things about her husband. Nothing apparent, but little
things that are off. At first she pays no mind, and when a concerned,
fired NASA official comes to her claiming that there was something very
odd about those two minutes alone in space she shoos him off, in obvious
denial. But then she realizes that something is very wrong and begins to
suspect that there is something in those mysterious two minutes, in her
husband and inside her that may not be of this earth.
As I ran the scenes over in my head after the movie I got the feeling
that Ravich was afraid of getting caught on a plot contradiction and
decides to prevent that by being as neutral as possible. He suggests
things about the nature of the aliens but he never develops the
concepts. He gives clues but he never provides specifics. Not only is
this frustrating to the viewer, not only does it detract from the movie,
but it's also a sign of laziness on the part of the writer.
Charlize Theron (The Devil's Advocate, Mighty Joe Young) is a
magnificent actress, and she is terrific in The Astronaut's Wife. In a
role that could have easily been played over-the-top B-movie style,
Theron maintains her dignity throughout and delivers an intense,
satisfying performance. Johnny Depp fares just as well. Towards the
climax where it would have been easy, once again, to overact and make
his character cheesy he remains calmly menacing; clearly a force to be
reckoned with.
We never get to know Spencer before the change so it's hard for us to
compare them, which is another thing detracting from the movie. How are
we supposed to believe everyone who insists that there's something wrong
with him when we don't know what he's like when there isn't anything
wrong? That's a fundamental problem; a flaw in the film's very structure
and one that would have been corrected had anyone involved in the making
of this film used his common sense.
Despite its many detriments, The Astronaut's Wife is still a moderately
satisfying affair. It's the kind of film that I generally tend to like;
the kind where quiet intensity rather than cheap thrills is what engages
the audience. This particular film is often quite effective as far as
adrenaline is concerned but it quickly falls apart if you try and
actually think about what just went on.
I'm not sure if I can come out and recommend The Astronaut's Wife to
you, but if you do decide to see it I doubt you'll feel like you wasted
your money. I didn't like this movie but I can't say that it
disappointed me either. It's certainly not bad; it's just a shame that
it isn't better.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov

Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
James Brundage
Written, Produced and Directed by Rand Ravich
Starring Charlize Theron, Johnny Depp, and Clea DuVall
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 The end of August comes to us in the dismal form of late-rate movies.  You
know the ones I'm talking about.  These are the ones that studios backed but
bilked out on when they saw the final cut.  They knew they needed a summer
release to recapture the budget, and they knew that the only was to do this
was to stick it in the pack of films being released in late August.  All of
the studios know this trick.  Were I completely conspiracy minded, I would
say that they coordinate their releases in order to give us no choice but to
see crappy movies.
 The Astronaut's Wife is one such movie.
 Unlike the majority of summer films, it has plot.  In fact, it almost
drowns in plot.  What it lacks in is pace.
It does have a pace: ultra slow.  Alfred Hitchcock, a master of suspense,
said that the anticipation is better than the payoff.  Rule of thumb to
horror film makers: do not follow every rule of thumb that Hitchcock put
out.  The fact is that when you have a movie that is all anticipation with
no payoff, you have crap.
The plot of The Astronaut's Wife is that all-American astronaut Spencer
Armacost (Johnny Depp) is possessed by an alien transmission, and the first
thing he does when he gets back to Earth is the most logical: he impregnates
beautiful-all-American schoolteacher and wife Jillian Armacost (Charlize
Theron).  Spencer quits NASA for a corporate job (and yet no one doubts this
guy's sanity until the creepy music comes on???) in New York, where the two
of them pursue their oh-so-happy existence while an alien spawn grows inside
her.
For me, The Astronaut's Wife spells proof-positive that this Second Coming
of horror films is worst than the first.  With the 80s horror films, they at
least were funny to watch.  With the 90s horror films, they take themselves
way too seriously to be funny to watch and result in a complete two hours of
boredom.  We have the same cheesy plot as any 50s B-movie would throw at us.
We have the trademark cliches of the modern breed of B-movie (i.e. Jillian
was once suicidal and now is a position to trade her life to save the world,
can we say The Seventh Sign?).  Yet we lack the ultra-horrible dialogue and
performances that made horror movies of the 80s enjoyable.
As for describing the rest of the movie, I will allow maxims to do my job
for me.
For the performances: "When you can't act, overact."  Everyone does their
jobs as far as acting is concerned and then some.  In fact, one wonders
whether Johnny Depp's is taking acting lessons from Al Gore.
For the cinematography: "Beauty is only skin deep, but ugliness goes all the
way to the bone."  There are a few pretty shots, but they come too little,
too late.  Instead, we get pretty much nothing.
For the special effects: "I can see!  It's a miracle!  Oh, wait, I was
wrong."  The one time that special effects are used appears cool at first
and then takes form so it looks like someone is being attacked by a giant
piece of Jell-O.
Yeah, it's late August.  You can smell it in the air, you can feel it in
your bones, you can see it on the faces of children, and you can tell when
every single movie on the marquee doesn't appeal to you at all but you want
to see one anyway because you have a date.

Author
James Sanford
         Here's further proof Hollywood's powers that be have no sense
whatsoever: Last week, the trade paper Variety reported we'll soon be
treated to a "Starsky and Hutch" movie.
 Yes, "Starsky and Hutch," that utterly vapid 1970s cop series
featuring David Soul and Paul Michael Glaser as undercover cops who
regularly cruised discos with their sidekick Huggy Bear (Antonio
Fargas), a dopey would-be pimp. Has anyone even thought about "Starsky
and Hutch" since it left the air 20 years ago? It's just the latest sign
that absolutely anything can be turned into big-screen fodder these
days, provided it's been done before.
  Take, for example, "The Astronaut's Wife," in which pixieish
schoolteacher Charlize Theron begins to suspect her husband is not the
man he used to be. Although writer-director Rand Ravich doesn't
acknowledge as much in the credits, the movie is essentially an update
of the 1958 drive-in classic "I Married A Monster From Outer Space,"
which, like "Invaders From Mars" (1953) and "Invasion of the Body
Snatchers" (1955), utilized the prevailing fear of Communism and loss of
individuality in a sci-fi context.
 In "Monster," newlywed Gloria Talbot is spooked by spouse Tom
Tryon's aloofness and the way he and the other men in town gather down
at the bar every night simply to talk, not to drink. Eventually, she
learns Tryon and most of the other local guys are actually
alcohol-intolerant creatures from the planet Andromeda who have stolen
human bodies. Their plan is to impregnate women and repopulate Earth
with monsters like themselves.
 In "Wife," Theron's Jillian becomes pregnant with twins shortly
after her husband Spence (Johnny Depp) returns from a space shuttle
mission during which he lost contact with mission control for two
mysterious minutes. Although joyous at first, Jillian is unnerved by
Spence's strange behavior -- including the odd faces he makes after
tasting a drink at a party -- and begins to think something might be
horribly wrong.
 Jillian makes this assumption so early on in the story one
might expect Ravich has a big twist up his sleeve, a la "The Sixth
Sense." But no. Once it has set its course, the languorous "Wife"
lumbers to a wholly predictable conclusion made worse by Ravich's
attempt to throw in an unsurprising surprise at the very last minute.
 The movie is also handicapped by its casting. Theron, in a role
almost identical to her part in "The Devil's Advocate," tries terribly
hard but she's not a skilled enough actress to carry a film on her own.
She can manage one emotional state per scene, usually tearful shock,
which doesn't make for a particularly fascinating character.
 Although the always edgy Depp might seem the perfect choice to
play a man who may or may not be under an alien influence, the actor has
little to do here but stand around looking ominous. He's stifled by the
script; Ravich shows us so little of the early Spence it's difficult to
determine exactly how much the man has changed.
 The other key figures in "Wife" are as run-of-the-mill as they
come, including a possibly crazy former NASA exec (Joe Morton),
Jillian's hard-luck kid sister (Clea DuVall) and an understanding
veteran astronaut's wife (Blair Brown) who counsels Jillian. Only DuVall
shows any signs of life, putting a nasty spin on such lines to her
sister as "you landed Johnny Rocket Boy and I keep getting different
versions of Throws Up On Himself Elmo."
 Ravich tries to disguise his well-worn material with bursts of
stolen style, having the camera do Brian DePalma-style circles around
Jillian in moments of stress or throwing in a weird little MTV-ish
episode with Jillian standing perfectly still in a school hallway while
children run around her at lightning speed. Perhaps Ravich was so
concerned with making the movie look good he forgot about coherence:
Those who like to pick out continuity errors will particularly enjoy the
sequence in which our heroine ducks into a subway station in the middle
of the night and emerges minutes later in the light of day. James
Sanford

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Johnny Depp is a great looking man. In fact, gun forced to my head, I would
absolutely "do the man" without any qualms, despite the fact that I do not
naturally swing that way. Charlize Theron...beautiful woman. Reminds me a
little of Mrs. JoBlo, as a matter of fact. Both pretty good actors in their
own right, with Depp certainly racking up a diverse repertoire of parts. Oh,
the movie, you say? Well, it's not good.
PLOT:
An astronaut loses contact with earth for two minutes while floating around
in space. Upon his return, his wife and others notice that he has become
somewhat "different". Over time, we begin to suspect that an
extraterrestrial may be inside the poor bastard.
CRITIQUE:
What can I say...this movie's trailer wins the annual award for "The Best
Trailer Giving Away Everything, And I Do Mean, Everything, That Is Going To
Happen In A Movie!" (With DOUBLE JEOPARDY finishing a close second!). It's
unfortunate because there may have been a couple of things that would have
surprised me otherwise, but I guess the marketing geniuses at New Line
Cinema figured that it would be more beneficial for people to know EXACTLY
what is going to happen in the film, without even seeing it!? Good move,
guys. That aside, the film is not a horrible watch, in fact Depp and Theron
certainly pull out some decent performances, with Depp hamming it up via his
Elvis accent, and the blonde streaks in his hair. Theron's role seemed
similar to her role in the much better DEVIL'S ADVOCATE (8/10) film, with
her deteriorating over time, and crying a lot. Having said that, she does it
very well, and she sure is nice to look at. The story of this film seemed
ambitious, but unfortunately for us, it basically goes nowhere. In fact,
count yourself lucky if you haven't seen the preview of this film, for you
will not have seen 95% of the movie like the rest of us.
The film itself plods along at a pretty slow pace, doesn't offer any real
tension or intrigue (Just a couple of "easy scare" scenes with people
popping out of nowhere), and is choked with plot holes. In fact, we never
really know why the extraterrestrial has come to earth, what his plans are,
or how Depp seems to show up every time that something that he doesn't like
is happening. The ending is also very stupid, with a twist which I
personally could have done without. And if you're grooving to see this movie
because of any special effects, forget about it right now, there are
probably more in DUDLEY DO-RIGHT. All in all, this movie is not a horrible
movie by any stretch of the imagination, but it's basically just "there". If
you like the two main actors, or love watching really great looking people
get paid millions of dollars to act on the big screen while you pay for
their kid's tuition, then by all means, go see this movie. Otherwise, wait
for it on video, sit around and watch it with your drunk friends, and have a
blast making fun of all the gaping holes in the script.
Either that, or try to figure out which of the two actors is the prettier?
Depp or Theron? Theron or Depp? Or try your luck at our Johnny Depp Movie
Trivia Quiz (http://www.joblo.com/youdontknowshiteaboutmovies21.htm). 
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Charlize Theron's mother killed her father with a gun one night, after he
got drunk and began abusing her again. The mother was charged, but received
not time in jail, after she was found to have been acting in "self-defense".
The father had apparently been an abusive husband for years on end. Charlize
was 10 years old at the time. He was French, she is of German heritage.
Charlize was born and grew up in South Africa, where she is now doing TV
promos against rape.
At the age of 18, Charlize's mom convinced her to go Los Angeles to try a
career in the movie industry. She came to LA without knowing anyone in the
city but after two weeks when she was standing in line on Hollywood
Boulevard an agent gave her his card. After eight months in LA, she got her
first part.
Johnny Depp has dated several young starlets in Hollywood including Winona
Ryder, Sherilyn Fenn,  Jennifer Grey (pre-nose operation which changed who
she was!), Kate Moss and actress/singer Vanessa Paradis from France. He most
recently sired a child from Paradis. It was a daughter whom they named
Lily-Rose Melody Depp. He likes to call himself "Mr. Stench".
Johnny's full name is John Christopher Depp III. He was born in Kentucky and
has been featured
on a rock album from the British band, Oasis. Depp played lead slide guitar
on the track, "Fade In-Out", after Oasis' own lead guitarist was too drunk
to perform it himself. Depp stepped in and nailed the lead on one take.
This is director Rand Radish's directorial film debut. He was known
previously as a writer, having written the screenplays for such films as
CANDYMAN 2: FAREWELL TO THE FLESH and THE MAKER.
The two twins in this film are played by Cole and Dylan Sprouse, the same
kids who played the one character of Julian in this summer's other comedy
BIG DADDY (7/10).
Actress Clea DuVall has no relation to great actor Robert Duvall. Her full
name is Clea Helen D'etienne DuVall.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: Rand Ravich
WRITTEN BY: Rand Ravich
CAST: Charlize Theron, Johnny Depp, Joe Morton, Joe Morton, Joe Morton
The film is as good as or better than the average Hollywood
release. It's scary. It's well-acted. It's filmed with a degree of
flash and elegance -- chilly, muted, symbolic and refreshingly free
from cheap shocks. It is a stylish and feverishly beautiful
psychological thriller with several interesting science fiction
elements.
Commander Spencer Armacost and his wife Jillian (Depp and Theron) are
an extraordinarily close and happy couple, until something goes wrong
during what should have been a routine shuttle mission. NASA
mysteriously loses contact with Armacost and his co-pilot, Captain
Alex Streck (Nick Cassavettes) for a full two minutes, and when the
shuttle is brought down both men are unconscious. Armacaost appears
unhurt, but Streck has suffered a heart attack and later dies under
disturbing circumstances. The whole business leaves Jillian, who has a
troubling history of mental unbalance, in an emotionally fragile
state, as does Armacost's uncharacteristic decision to retire from
flying and take an executive position at a New York City-based
aerospace company. Already feeling isolated and lonely, Jillian then
learns that she's pregnant. Is her increasing conviction that her
husband isn't the man he used to be a matter of hormonal swings and
stress-induced paranoia, or did something unimaginably awful happen to
Armacost out in the cold void of space?
This is an analogy to Roman Polanski's horror classic "Rosemary's
Baby", and director Rand Ravich directs pretty much in the same
fashion, where the most important element is the surrealism -- you'll
be walking along side the main characters on the blurry line between
dream and reality. The symbolism is thick and heavy, with multiple
references to dual identities and insensitive husbands. The film is
also incredibly beautiful. Its graceful cinematography, its flashy
editing and haunting musical score are all part of a wonderfully rich
atmosphere.
The two leads are both extraordinary and both at their right
place. Johnny Depp is convincing both as the "true American hero" at
the beginning and as the mysterious entity after the "accident". He is
capable of hiding the beast within. Charlize Theron is likewise
incredible. The enormous emotional core of the script is challenging
and requires a very serious, talented actress. Theron is obviously up
to it. The character reminds us about Mia Farrow's ("Rosemary's
Baby")character with the same haircut and problems -- she gets
pregnant with twins and begins to wonder what exactly she is
carrying. Unfortunately Ravich didn't take her far enough from her
previous film and it looks like she's still playing the role of Keanu
Reeve's wife in "The Devil's Advocate."
It's very artistic, very stylish, but regrettably also rather
stereotypical. For most of the time the film is feverishly interesting
because nothing is kept too obvious. Everything is raptured in
mystery, which makes it completely unpredictable. By the end of the
film, when it's time for dazzling the audience with a worthy ending,
the director changes his rhythm and selects the most primitive and
disappointing resolution of all -- the typical Hollywood brain-killer,
reminding about the infinite "X-Files"-episodes -- deluding,
mysterious and very primitive underneath. Absolutely nothing is
explained. What did the alien intelligence actually want? What is
their objective? What actually happened? You almost expect "TO BE
CONTINUED.." to appear on the ending credits. This is truly a fatal
error that creates a rather anticlimactic atmosphere. But even though
it happens at the very end, and everything else is almost flawless,
it's hard to enjoy the film after watching it through. And it doesn't
hold anything of special interest to watch it twice. It's certainly
better than the average science fiction cliché released every year,
but hardly anything else.

Author
Ross Anthony
This is one weird film. Weird and scary. Scarier than that Witch film,
probably the scariest film I've seen this summer (though it's been a tame
summer on the fright-o-meter). The fine sound engineering does a splendid
job toward this goal.
Lift-off looks promising with a cast of three actors I adore. The simply
irresistible Charlize Theron, rock solid actor Johnny Depp and strong
supporter Joe Morton from "T2" fame. Johnny goes up in space, has an
incident, comes back a little weird, or is it wife Charlize who's paranoid?
A creepy psychological thriller.
Surprise, it's no "Apollo 13." Though the film hooked me heartily in the
beginning, I grew tired in the middle (though scared), and while the twist
ending was indeed something I did not expect at all -- it wasn't something I
cared for either.
Great concept, awesome actors, fine dialogue, but a lack of that right
stuff.
Starring Johnny Depp, Charlize Theron, Joe Morton, Clea Duvall.
Director/Screenwriter Rand Ravich.
Produced by Andrew Lazar at New Line.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
