Title
Review for Great Moments in Aviation (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Allan Toombs
     As the spearhead of the 'Screen Two' season GREAT MOMENTS IN
AVIATION was premiered on television last night in the UK, although it
should receive a full cinema release throughout the rest of the world.
As the work of Jeanette Winterson, writer of ORANGES ARE NOT THE ONLY
FRUIT--a semi-autobiographical account of a teenage lesbian affair in
a parochial, god-fearing middle-England, I expected a certain
magical-realism and feared an excess of pretension.  However I was
impressed by Winterson's restraint and clarity in producing a gorgeous
pseudo-period piece.
     It is the late forties/early fifties and Gabrielle Angel (Rakie
Ayola) a young Grenadan girl boards a cruise liner bound for Britain.
Through an administrative error she finds her cabin-mate is a man,
Duncan Stewart (Jonathan Pryce).  Next door are two jolly Englishwomen,
missionaries returning home to blighty and it looks like they'll all
have super fun en voyage.  However when Professor Goodyear (Jonathan
Hurt) recognises Pryce as Alistair Birch, a long-dead friend, it is
clear that not everyone is who they claim to be.
     Okay, so far it all sounds very Goldcrest, very British, very OUT
OF AFRICA meets MURDER ON THE ORIENT EXPRESS.  Certainly period detail
is all-important, the liner has all the trimmings, ballroom dance bands
and deck-chess.  None of the emergent modern world with it's politics
is allowed to intrude.  However this is used by the director to create
a stunning visual stylisation.  The whole film is drenched in sepia
tones achieved through adherence to the brown decor and clothing of the
period.  Sequences of Gabrielle's folks in the Caribbean are given a
dreamlike quality by use of bleached sepia filters.  It is here the the
films deeper point is made.  As the action plays out over a succession
of brown veneered cabins a deeply sensuous effect is created so that we
become very aware of skin-colour.  Rakie Ayola has a gawky kind of
beauty and a strange sexual tension springs up between her and Pryce.
When they do make love there is an amazing contrast between his palid
flesh and her dark curves.  Their union is very non-phallic and akin to
coffee and cream mixing.  Thus the viewer is seduced into appreciating
Gabrielle as a black woman free from any racial framework.  Indeed I
feel Jeannette Winterson is asking us to appreciate her as another
woman might.  The camera enjoys her, there is none of the objectivity
of say THE COLOUR PURPLE, we become Gabrielle and share her innocence,
hope and triumph.
     There is a second story to the film and that is our two spinsters,
played by Vanessa Redgrave and Dorothy Tutin.  Certainly they add an
eccentric spin to the film and you almost feel Winterson is parodying
her critics when they honestly dismiss the idea that they are
lesbians.  Later Tutin confesses her love of thirty-five years and they
both laugh at just being good friends for such a long time-span.  This
is a very powerfully written scene and works very well given that we
must imagine two old friends beginning a physical phase in their
relationship.  Consider here that the true mood of the time tacitly
approves sexless marriage let alone homosexual love.  Winterson is
exploring her own sexual-politics, where the lack of historical figures
can make a strong case for Lesbianism being a late twentieth century
phenomena.  Obviously Jeanette Winterson feels the mutual longing
between the ladies would have been enough to overcome social taboo, and
who am I to argue.
     Another strong theme of the film and the source of the title is
Gabrielle's fascination with flying.  Apparently her grandfather was a
mail pilot whenever the weather was so bad white pilots wouldn't fly.
He is lost on a run and becomes her dream-icon.  At one surreal
juncture Gabrielle wears a pair of theatrical wings and this reminded
me strongly of a similar image of beauty in the late Derek Jarman's
CARAVAGGIO, another film seeking to create a mode of seeing rather than
tell an absolute story.
     This is not a film to watch for the plot which is uninspiring.
However it's rich warmth has a feminine quality.  You will savour the
colours, the deep burnt umbers, the amber of tea and whiskey, the
nutmeg, the saffrons, the chocolates.  This is a film about
transcending mundane racial and sexual thinking.  It is about the
pigments revealed when you stop labelling people and start really
looking at the world.  As such it is thoroughly uplifting and fresh
enough to suggest new avenues for the future.
