Title
Review for Clear and Present Danger (1994)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Steve Rhodes
     God, I love Tom Clancy stories.  I went to see CLEAR AND PRESENT
DANGER with high expectations and was never disappointed.  I had read
the book a few years ago when it first came out in hard cover.  I could
swear I had seen this movie before because some of the places, like in
the drug lord's home, were exactly as I had imagined them from the
book.  Heavy deja vu.
     Simply stated, the plot involves Latin American drug lords, covert
operations, the president, the CIA, and most of all, Jack Ryan
(Harrison Ford).  In it we have a government official testifying to
congress about something that turns about to be totally false.  After
watching the recent hearings into the tip of the Whitewater iceberg,
this show could not have been more up-to-date and relevant.  Deja vu
again.
     The movie is filled with several action scenes that keep you on
the edge of your seat.  My favorite is the one on Ryan's first trip to
Columbia.  Great tension.  Watch for the excellent editing by Neil
Travis and as he cuts back and forth between the good guys and the bad
guys.  The cuts and the action seem to speed up right along with your
own increased heartbeat.  The directing by Phillip Noyce showed a real
understanding on how to bring a Clancy movie to the screen with maximum
tension and suspense.
     Other than Clancy's story, what makes this movie really click is
Harrison Ford.  I found myself reflecting on how smart it was for the
studio to drop Alec Baldwin after the first Clancy movie (THE HUNT FOR
RED OCTOBER) and replace him with Ford playing Ryan.  Baldwin is fine
in pretty boy roles (his best was in MIAMI BLUES), but he is out of his
depth playing Ryan who is a complex and always highly vulnerable
character.
     Some of the supporting characters were great.  My favorite was
William Defoe as the CIA operative.  One of his best roles I think.
Anne Archer was wasted on the other hand.  She played a wife who was
basically "there."
     My only complain with CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER was that at 2 hours
and 16 minutes, it was way too short!  There was a lot of material that
was included but stuck in too abruptly by the screenwriters, John
Milius, Donald L.  Stewart, and Steven Zaillian, and not developed
enough.  A good example is the part of the FBI leader's secretary.  4
hours would have been perfect, but it would not have made much money.
3 hours would have been a better compromise I think, but then again, I
am not a multimillionaire movie mogul so why should they take my
advice.
     It is rated PG-13 for violence, and I agree with the rating.  I
think teenagers will love this show as did I.  I highly recommend it
and award it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Those who don't approve current "humanitarian" bombing of
rump Yugoslavia often refer it as "Clinton's War". Whether
their argument is valid or not, the fact remains that U.S.
administration, and its chief executive, have enormous
powers at its disposal. Those powers, as any other, can be
abused and the consequences of those abuses can be
disastrous or even apocalyptic, not only for those directly
affected, but for the rest of world, America included. One
of the rare Hollywood movies that tries to cover that
subject and deal with the murky line between long-term
national and selfish political interest is CLEAR AND PRESENT
DANGER, 1994 spy thriller and third in the series of movies
based on the novels by Tom Clancy.
The movie begins when U.S. Coast Guard intercepts the yacht
of wealthy American businessman and discovers the evidence
of massacre. It turns out that the businessman used to be
close friend of President Bennett (Donald Moffat), while in
the same time having links with Colombian drug lords.
Infuriated because of his friend's death, President orders
secret war and assassination campaign to be conducted
against drug cartel led by Ernesto Escobedo (Miguel
Sandoval). In the meantime, CIA analyst Jack Ryan (Harrison
Ford) becomes the deputy for his mortally ill boss, Admiral
Greer (James Earl Jones). While investigating the series of
violent events in Colombia, that start claiming toll in
American lives, he discovers the evidence of US government's
complicity. Facing both by drug lords and unscrupulous
politicians and top bureaucrats in Washington, Ryan would do
anything in his power to uncover the scandal and save his
country and men from harm.
Although having the screenplay written by three different
authors (John Millius, Donald Stewart and Steve Zaillian),
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, like very few movies in
contemporary Hollywood, has a very complex, yet interesting
and compelling plot. Unlike other two movies about Tom
Clancy's hero Jack Ryan, this one doesn't present the bright
post-Cold War picture of the world dominated by omnipotent
American technology and military might. On the contrary, the
film shows that even that power has limits, and biggest
limit of them all is the fact that behind the super-weaponry
lies the hand of human who can be imperfect and incompetent.
As a result, unlike most of the films in the action genre,
this one is dark, depressive and sometimes even disturbing,
and the happy ending is hardly unambiguous.
Director Philip Noyce, whose best work so far is an
excellent thriller DEAD CALM, worked with the script very
well. Action scenes are very well shot, and movie cleverly
paced, not allowing boredom for the viewers through the
almost two and half hours of its time. Characters, on the
other hand, seem a little bit card-board, but in films like
this, they are secondary element. Anyway, this film has
great acting names in small roles, but although they don't
put their best efforts (including Ford, who probably
couldn't do much with such straightforward hero), they do a
fine job. Balance between cerebral and physical action is
very well done. Unfortunately, film in the end changes its
character - interesting, thought-provoking political
thriller is downgraded with the finale in which we must
suspend disbelief and see humble CIA bureaucrat Jack Ryan as
Rambo-style action hero. The impression is even worsened
with melodramatic scenes in the end, when Jack Ryan shows
his patriotic moral superiority of a civil servant over
pragmatic politicians. Those who know how the real world
operates would have some trouble believing those scenes in
the end. But, even with such flaws, CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER
is a very fine piece of seldom seen brain candy from
Hollywood.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When the U.S. Coast Guard intercepts a derelict yacht floating in
American waters, it discovers that it was the scene of a grisly set of
murders.  The victim was a prominent businessman and his family, all
personal friends of U.S. President Bennett (Donald Moffat).  Bennett is
shocked and angry, particularly when investigation proves the murdered
man had financial ties to Columbian drug lords.  Bennett hints to his
security advisors that the time has come to start striking back against
the Columbian drug families.  And the action taken and its results are
the heart of this story.
     Harrison Ford returns as Jack Ryan, and he remains a disappointing
choice.  Ryan is someone who should be alert, perhaps hyper-active, and
should have a youthful appearance to live up to his boy scout image.
Even with his character under fire, Ford seems only 90% awake.  He is
popular with audiences, but his acting is a liability, in my opinion.
Donald Moffat returns to playing a President not unlike his Lyndon
Johnson of THE RIGHT STUFF.  Adding no new tricks to his bag, Harris
Yulin, familiar for many roles as villains, plays National Security
Advisor James Cutter.  Willem Dafoe does not stretch his talents much as
a commando.  Anne Archer repeats her role as Cathy Ryan.  Miguel
Sandoval is a rather winning rich drug lord.  It is probably Moffat and
Sandoval who stand out as the better actors of the film.  But the
emphasis is more on the story than on acting.
     Phillip Noyce, the director of the (recommended) thriller DEAD
CALM, and the less satisfying PATRIOT GAMES does have a better script to
work from in CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER.  Generally a script credited to
three people will have some problems, but CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER seems
to suffer from this less than most such films.  That could be because of
who the three people are.  One is John Milius who wrote films like
MAGNUM FORCE, APOCALYPSE NOW, CONAN THE BARBARIAN, and general action
films.  Then there is Donald Stewart, veteran of MISSING and the two
previous Jack Ryan films.  The third writer was Steven Zaillian, whose
screen credits include AWAKENINGS, PATRIOT GAMES, SEARCHING FOR BOBBY
FISCHER, and SCHINDLER'S LIST.  It is an unlikely trio, but it works in
a script that has action and is cerebral.  Somebody at Paramount was
concerned about getting good writing and the screenwriting credits are
as impressive as any of the other credits.
     The script is good, but not perfect.  Toward the end of the film
the action starts becoming a little less intelligent and a little more
action-oriented.  In short, it becomes a little too reminiscent of James
Bond films.  Though an action sequence in the first third is very well
done (if one ignores a touch of cliched slow motion).  This one piece is
the high point of the film and really leaves the audience breathless.
After Ryan escapes from this trap, there is little else he does that is
as impressive.  A sequence intercutting between a formal ceremony and a
bloody massacre perhaps borrows a little heavily from the "Godfather"
films.  Also refreshing in the writing is the presence of a strong and
intelligent woman who is clearly not present for decorative value.  But
what is most impressive in this film is the moral ambiguity of Ryan's
position.  Ryan remains the hero to the audience, but for the first time
in the series, a serious case could be made that he is not acting in the
best interests of the United States.
     Of course the classic spy film series to date has been the James
Bond series.  What I think is often forgotten is that the Bond films all
too often had contrived and simplistic plots.  They were better than
this year's TRUE LIES in that regard, but there was little to engage the
viewer's mind.  The plots were too dependent on chase sequences and
fight scenes.  The other extreme is a story like TINKER, TAILOR,
SOLDIER, SPY in which everything that goes on is cerebral.  The Jack
Ryan films are a happy medium between the two and none more so than
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER.
     There are more reasons to prefer Ryan to Bond for spy films.  The
Bond films spend a lot of time on sexual subplots.  It is fun, but it
takes valuable time from the plot.  It is always clear that Ryan's best
working organ is between his ears.  Clancy's Ryan is a happily married
family man who doesn't fool around ... in any sense of the word.  With
that screen time out of the way, the writing has more room for
intelligence (no pun intended).  And unlike in Bond films which have
long chase scenes, one never feels that it is action scenes alone
driving the plot.  The action pieces are there, but they serve the plot
rather than the reverse.  I think I can safely say that CLEAR AND
PRESENT DANGER not only has a more satisfying plot than any of the Bond
films, it is even the best of the Ryan films.  The basic idea of the
last two films could really be told with some justice in one or two
sentences each.  That is most definitely not the case in CLEAR AND
PRESENT DANGER.  The game keeps changing for Jack Ryan through the
entire film.  Rather than this being a two-sided game, there is the kind
of chaos one gets with several sides pulling in different directions.
The script makes clever use of recent U.S. history to tell parts of the
story that there would not be time to tell explicitly in the film.
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is the best spy films in several years.  It
also is as riveting as any Bond film ever made.  I would give CLEAR AND
PRESENT DANGER a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jon A. Webb
     CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER returns Harrison Ford to the screen as
Jack Ryan (PATRIOT GAMES), now taking over as the Deputy Director for
Intelligence of the CIA from James Earl Jones.  Unfortunately for him,
the President of the United States, played by Donald Moffat, is once
again planning an illegal war, and Ryan is supposed to be the fall
guy.
     This is a conventional spy-thriller, as you'd expect.  I found it
a little bit boring towards the end.  Somehow this kind of action film
doesn't seem to me to be quite suitable for Ford, though he's played
them often enough.  I'm thinking of THE FUGITIVE, where Ford and the
bad guy, both middle-aged, spend fifteen minutes or so running around
bashing each other.  Something very much like that happens again here.
It's like watching those B-grade sci-fi flicks of the Fifties, made
with plastic-model dinosaurs, which always seem to move with jerky
slowness, even when they're trying to bite each other's arms off.
     The thing I liked best about this film is Anne Archer, who plays
Ryan's wife in a small role.  She's aging, beautifully.  There are not
many roles for middle-aged women anywhere; they get discarded once they
can no longer play someone in their twenties, regardless of how
talented they are (Meryl Streep), as stewardesses used to be.  I'm
happy Anne Archer, at least has found a part she to which she can bring
her elegant beauty for at least a few more years.
     Willem Dafoe puts in a nice turn as the ambiguously evil
free-lance CIA operative who runs the war.  But I would've preferred
Chuck Norris in this role.  After all, we know Dafoe can play this kind
of part, can Norris?  He would've fit the action-hero scenes better,
too.
     Harrison Ford doesn't get to use his trademark confused-intensity
look here much.  He says it himself, "I hate this job."  He's supposed
to be much more of a direct-action type here than he was, say, in
PATRIOT GAMES, where his family was at risk.  His only conflict is over
loyalty to the President, which is oddly downplayed in Philip Royce's
direction (given that its the only source of dramatic conflict.)  As a
result, he just doesn't have that much to be confused about.  Pity.
     The script is about average for this kind of film.  I've given up
expecting great attention to detail; it just doesn't seem to be an
issue anymore.  For example, when Ryan buys something expensive, you'd
think that no one in the world has ever gone to a South American
country pretending to be associated with the CIA and trying to get
something for nothing, or South Americans are unbelievably stupid.  Or
the nonsense about breaking into computers, or a scene which reminded
me of the joke about a blackmailer handing his intended victim an
incriminating photograph: "Be careful, that's the only copy I've got."
     Overall, it's an entertaining way to spend a couple of hours, but
not a terribly entertaining way.  It's not as good as TRUE LIES, though
you may find yourself put off by TRUE LIES tongue-in-cheek approach to
spy thrillers (though I didn't.)  This is meat-and-potatoes fare,
served up a little too cold.

Author
Chris Klecker
Starring   Harrison Ford and William Dafoe
     "How dare you, sir!" Harrison Ford yells near the end of the film,
that has us all screaming, "Yes! Yes! Yes!"  After enduring about two
hours of watching Jack Ryan getting pushed around like some shopping
cart we get to witness Ford's irresistible anger as he lays it all down
on the President.  Amidst the amount of political garble and CIA
research, CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER delivers yet other tally for the Tom
Clancy chalkboard.
     CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is about a successful drug dealer who
orders the death of two senators, one being the President's friend.  So
now in a fit of rage the President announces that there in a fact a
clear and present danger in Columbia and against all drug dealers from
Columbia.  The book was in fact based in Mexico instead of South
America, however it really makes no difference in this movie.  After
the President makes his speech, he takes $650 million that was issued to
them to help stop the drug cartel in Columbia with strict orders not to
use any military or troops to fight the war on drugs.  Ryan answers
back with, "No troops."
     So now it gets interesting.  With Ryan's word, the President break
the promise and uses the money to finance a small army that is under
strict cover from any outside sources.  William Dafoe's character is an
ex-marine and heads the mission personally from Columbia.  Dafoe's army
conquers a few planes and factories when suddenly a hit on a house
become futile.  Ryan hears the news and immediately becomes suspicious.
Suddenly the army is cut off and now Ryan has to choose what's more
important: The elimination of drugs or the truth.
     CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is far better than PATRIOT GAMES, but not
as cunning and resourceful as THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.  Nonetheless,
Danger gives Ford another notch in his almost perfect movie record.
Not only is CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER interesting, but automatically
assumes that the audience is in fact smart enough to know what's going
on.  Moreover, watching Ford down the President like it was his job was
well worth the $6.50.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Harrison Ford, Willem Dafoe, James Earl Jones, 
           Anne Archer, Henry Czerny, Joaquim de Almeida, 
           Harris Yulin, Donald Moffat 
Director:  Phillip Noyce 
Producers:  Mace Neufeld and Robert Rehme 
Screenplay:  Donald Stewart, Steven Zallian, and John Milius based 
             on the novel by Tom Clancy 
Cinematography:  Donald M. McAlpine 
Music:  James Horner 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
     Like PATRIOT GAMES and THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER before it, CLEAR
AND PRESENT DANGER takes liberties with its source material.  Whether
this is "good" or not will be left to Clancy-o-philes to mull over.
With all the hype attendant to it, however, this particular Jack Ryan
adventure is somewhat disappointing.  Beneath its posturing as a
"techno-thriller", CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is really little more than
a high-class blast-and-bang festival.  It's SNIPER with more plot, a
better cast, and an hour of extra running time.
     CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is all plot and no characters.  The
people running around on screen have about as much depth as the sheen
of sweat on Harrison Ford's forehead.  Jack Ryan is the most
disappointing of all.  He's disgustingly virtuous: a flawless fighter
for good and justice, a Superman without the cape.  I spent half the
movie wondering if this guy was ever going to show anything to mark him
as vaguely human.
     The story is exceptionally, and often needlessly, convoluted.
This comes as a result of attempting to retain some of the flavor of a
long, complex novel.  More attention is demanded of the audience than
is probably necessary for this sort of movie.  A little lapse of
vigilance is all that's necessary to lose your way, yet the ultimate
payoff doesn't seem worth it for those who manage to navigate the
film's labyrinthine twists.
     A massacre on board a boat in the South Caribbean starts in motion
the wheels of vengeance in Washington.  One of the victims could claim
a friendship with the President of the United States in addition to his
connections to the South American Cali drug cartel, from whom he had
stolen more than $600 million.  So, under the command of the battle-
hardened Clark (Willem Dafoe), an elite team of soldiers is sent into
Columbia to assassinate the drug lord responsible for the shipboard
slaughter.
     Meanwhile, Admiral Greer (James Earl Jones), the Deputy Director
of the CIA, is diagnosed with terminal pancreatic cancer.  Unable to
continue his job, he asks Jack Ryan (Ford) to take over for him.  Ryan
does so, only to end up in the middle of a high-level coverup.
>From Washington to Columbia and back again, Ryan attempts to disinter
the truth while certain nervous factions of the government seek to have
him killed or, failing that, set up as a fall guy.
     Some of the technical elements of CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER are
fascinating (principally because the movie actually gets a lot of this
stuff right), and there are several well-executed action scenes (even
if Harrison Ford is getting a little old to be getting involved in so
many fist fights).  There's also a moment of cinematic flare where the
proceedings of a normal funeral are intercut with those of a very
untraditional - and bloody - one.
     As can be seen in CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, there's only so much a
performer can do with a sketchily-written role.  With parts of minimal
importance and limited visibility, Anne Archer and James Earl Jones are
vastly underused.  Harrison Ford, the man with top billing, is steady
(as usual), but unexceptional.  There will be no "best acting"
nominations from this film.
     CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER boasts excellent sound - too bad the
pedestrian visuals aren't of equal quality.  In a time when good
special effects are the standard, the viewer has a right to expect more
from a picture of this magnitude than a cheesy-looking smart missile.
     At least there's more complexity evident here than in THE PELICAN
BRIEF, the straightforward John Grisham thriller that dealt less
effectively with high-up Washington corruption.  Nevertheless, whether
because of or in spite of CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER's involved plot, too
many corners are cut.  The uneven flow is as likely to lead to a
snoozing viewer as to one on the edge of their seat.  CLEAR AND PRESENT
DANGER is enjoyable, but it's a shallow enjoyment that doesn't leave me
hungering for Paramount Pictures' next Clancy adaptation.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by     Philip Noyce        
Written by      Donald Stewart, Steven Zaillian, and John Milius
Cast Harrison Ford, Willem DaFoe, Anne Archer, Donald Moffat, Harris Yulin,
     Henry Czerny, Joaquim de Almeida, Raymond Cruz, Miguel Sandoval,
     Dean Jones (!), Hope Lange (!!), James Earl Jones
MPAA Rating     "PG-13"
Running Time    144 minutes
     Continuity buffs can rejoice at the return of Jack Ryan in CLEAR
AND PRESENT DANGER, the third Tom Clancy adaptation behind THE HUNT FOR
RED OCTOBER and PATRIOT GAMES.  Back is second-star Harrison Ford
(after Alec Baldwin).  Back is second-director Philip Noyce, who helmed
the horrendous PATRIOT GAMES.
     The story sees Jack stepping into the shoes of his boss (James
Earl Jones), the Acting Deputy Director of Intelligence.  Conflict
comes when Ryan's White House "buddies" won't let him in on a little
secret--the fact that President has given his round-about
authorization to a covert military operation against a Columbia drug
lord (Sandoval).  (Said czar murdered a friend of the President (Donald
Moffat) that is a very bad thing to do.)
     So, when the operation inevitably goes from worse to up doo-doo
creek, Ryan finds out too much, too late.  And he blows.  His.  Stack.
     CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is a big, loud, military movie, brimming
with bombs, and jets, and Coast Guard cutters, and aircraft carriers,
and, of course, stone-faced soldiers carrying flag-draped caskets.
Just the way that Tom Clancy writes 'em, and just the way co-writer
John Milius scripts 'em.
     Like THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, the cast is filled almost entirely
by solemn, serious-looking men who spend all of the their time making
Important Decisions without every cracking their countenance.  Ford,
Moffat, Jones, Harris Yulin, Henry Czerny, Joaquim de Almeida, Raymond
Cruz, Miguel Sandoval, and Willem DaFoe make up *the* best boys club of
the summer.
     (Best of the bunch in Harris Yulin as the President's Chief of
Staff.  His silence speaks volumes.  But what's Dean Jones doing here?)
     The film has a good pace, despite the mildly confusing plot.
Those who haven't read the novel (or seen a good spy movie lately) may
need to take notes.  The politics are also very good and, even though
the bad guys *do* get theirs, the film is remarkably devoid of any
gratuitious violence.
     Too bad that everything is played way-too-straight.  CLEAR AND
PRESENT DANGER is about as rigid as they come and, under the
unexpectedly tight reigns of Noyce, allows almost *no* room for
levity.  James Earl Jones gets to show all of two smiles, and Harrison
Ford loosens up some, and that's about it, and that's a shame.
     CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is too long and too literate to be a
toss-away actioner, but, with a little added "breathing room" for the
characters, could've been on *heck* of an epic.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Harrison Ford, Willem Dafoe, Joaquim de Almeida, Henry
Czerny, Donald Moffatt, Anne Archer.
Screenplay:  Donald Stewart, Steven Zaillian and John Milius.
Director:  Phillip Noyce.
     Pyrotechnicians have had quite a showcase summer at the movies.
It seems as though something has been blowing up around every corner--a
freight jet in SPEED, the Seven Mile Bridge in TRUE LIES, half of
Boston in BLOWN AWAY.  There are also explosions in CLEAR AND PRESENT
DANGER, the latest adaptation of Tom Clancy's best-selling novels, but
don't let them fool you into thinking that's all there is to it.  CLEAR
AND PRESENT DANGER is the summer's sharpest thriller, less break-neck
than SPEED but just as consistently tense, and is a quantum improvement
over the disappointing PATRIOT GAMES.
     Harrison Ford takes his second turn as Jack Ryan, an upright CIA
man who finds himself in the middle of a huge government conspiracy.
When an old friend of the President (Donald Moffatt) is murdered over
double-dealings with a Columbian drug cartel, the Chief Executive makes
it clear that a military response is in order.  CIA Director of
Operations Robert Ritter (Henry Czerny) hires ex- Company man Clark
(Willem Dafoe) to lead commando missions to shut down the drug lords,
prompting a counter-response from one of drug lord Escobedo (Miguel
Sandoval) and his chief lietenant Cortez (Joaquim de Almeida).  When
Ryan takes over for his ailing boss (James Earl Jones), he begins to
realize that something is rotten in the U.S. government, and sets out
both to find the paper trail that leads to the top and to save the
American soldiers stranded by another executive order.
     I wasn't terribly optimistic about CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER after
director Phillip Noyce's sluggish work on PATRIOT GAMES and the
appalling SLIVER, but his work here positively crackles.  He turns a
showdown in a single barricaded street into a chase as exciting as 90%
of cinematic car chases covering miles of ground, a chaotic and dynamic
set piece.  The level of tension is nearly perfect in scenes that
ordinarily would be hum-drum, like a walk through an airport where Ryan
is being shadowed by Clark, but we're often unsure where Clark is.  And
in one of DANGER's snappiest sequences, Ryan races to download evidence
from Ritter's computer files before they are deleted.  There are a few
moments where Noyce goes overboard, like an inexplicable slow-motion
shot of Escobedo in a batting cage, and a sequence at a funeral that
plays far too much like the baptism sequence from THE GODFATHER.  These
are minor quibbles, however, in a film that comes off as one of the
best espionage thrillers in a decade.
     It might have been even better if Harrison Ford had managed to
break out of his recent habit of playing every part in a slight daze.
To his credit, he seems to have re-discovered Jack Ryan the desk
jockey, looking comically uncomfortable traipsing through the jungle
and providing a very reluctant heroism.  But ever since PRESUMED
INNOCENT in 1990, Ford has been doing variations on his overwhelmed
Everyman, and as a result is beginning to look even older than his
years.  CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER asks very little from its cast as a
whole, though, so Ford's lower-than-low-key Ryan doesn't seriously
detract from the proceedings.  Only James Earl Jones, spending most of
his scenes in a hospital gown, truly energizes his role, though Willem
Dafoe does out-charisma Ford in the supporting role of Clark.
     But let's be real here: no one expected James Bond to be
multi-faceted and tormented.  CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is thoroughly
plot-driven from minute one, and its oddball screenwriting team of John
(RED DAWN) Milius and Steven (SCHINDLER'S LIST) Zaillian (along with
Donald Stewart) do an impressive job with a challenging adaptation.  If
political moralizing isn't your cup of tea, be forewarned: CLEAR AND
PRESENT DANGER has more than its share.  It also has as much action as
the bloated TRUE LIES, and nearly as many honest laughs.  What THE
FUGITIVE was to 1993, CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is to 1994, a
pulse-pounding late summer surprise with smarts.

Author
Adam Taylor
     Well, what can I say?  Harrison Ford still hasn't done a bad
movie; he must be one of the most successful actors ever.  The movie
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is a complicated political action/thriller.
The main plot is that the US wants to get revenge on a Columbian who
killed a US businessman, and also would like to stop drug smuggling
from Columbia into the US.
     Do not expect to go to this movie and just sit back and not
think.  CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER in some parts is hard to follow so if
you are expecting a easy-to-follow, "full-of-action" movie you may not
want to see this one.  It deals with more legal and political subjects
than action, but this movie has a great finish and the acting is
superb.
     Although this film is mostly serious, some humour has been
slipped into it to make it a bit more entertaining during the "slow"
parts of the film.  Harrison Ford plays Jack Ryan, who works for US
intelligence and is forced to take over James Earl Jones's job as Deputy
when James Earl Jones finds out he has cancer.  Harrison Ford then
falls into a deadly trap since he has to fly down to Columbia under the
President of the US's orders to apprehend a man who is wanted for the
murder of a woman working for him.  Ford finds that this flight becomes
a lot more dangerous than he expected since he barely gets out alive
after many Columbians (from a drug smuggling clan) begin a small war by
shooting at Ford's car and other vehicles around him.  Ford does get
out alive, but just barely.
     The movie starts off quite slow but by the end you are into it
since the action and suspense is classic (sort of like that of the
previous Harrison Ford/Tom Clancy movie PATRIOT GAMES).  This is not
one of Ford's best movies, but I would say it is worth the 8 bucks to
go see it since it is fit for the big screen, and it is a nice lengthy
entertaining yet complicated movie.
