Title
Review for Sunrise (1927)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
David M. Arnold
Sunrise: A Song of Two Humans (1927, F. W. Murnau)
A Retrospective Review by David M. Arnold
"Sunrise" has to be the most romantic silent film ever made.
It concerns a man (played by George O'Brien) and his wife (Janet
Gaynor) who are nameless (although we learn from the original
photoplay that they are named Ansass and Indre).  It's better that
the film doesn't name them -- they become archetypes for all
couples.  They appear to be peasants living in a vaguely Eastern
European village, one in which the residents make a little extra
money by renting out extra rooms to summer vacationers.  Ansass is
smitten by a Woman From the City boarding at a neighboring farm
(Margaret Livingston, called "the Vamp" in the photoplay, using the
1920's argot), who convinces him to murder Indre, sell the farm and
move to the City.  He agrees to stage a boating accident and to leave
Indre to drown.
When the moment comes, Ansass is unable to commit the crime.  He rows
to shore and Indre, in a panic, runs and catches a tram into town.
Ansass jumps onto the tram and tries to comfort her.  During an
impromptu adventure in the City, he quells her fear and rekindles the
love between them. They renew their marriage vows, they have their
photograph taken, and they spend an evening in some kind of amusement
park that appears to be a cross between a state fair midway and the
Rainbow Room.
Then, after they have revitalized their relationship, the pair are
confronted with an ironic final crisis.
F. W. Murnau, along with Fritz Lang, were the two directors to emerge
from the post-WWI German Expressionist movement who revealed any
enduring  talent.  I believe Murnau to have been the better of the
two:  Unfortunately his career was cut short by an untimely automobile
accident, leaving only Lang to develop a significant canon of work.
Released in 1927, "Sunrise" was on the cusp between the true silents
and the talkies.  Fox had already developed their "Movietone" system,
an optical sound-on-film technique that they used for their newsreels.
"Sunrise" was distributed with a Movitone sountrack that included a
musical score and some sound effects but no dialogue.  Dialogue was
presented using the tried-and-true silent film technique of intertitles.
It would still be a few years before sound technology would be fully
shaken out, and before both filmmakers and their audiences had adapted
to the new medium.
"Sunrise" premiered at the Roxy Theatre in New York, accompanied by the
Roxy Orchestra conducted by Hugo Riesenfeld.  Microphones picked up
the score and the signals were transmitted via telephone wires to the
Western Electric labs where they were recorded and converted into a
Movietone soundtrack.  We are fortunate that the Movitone soundtrack
survived, even if the reproduction is crude by today's standards
(although I think the audio sounds better than many surviving late
'20's vintage phonograph records).
The Fox laserdisc of "Sunrise" offers two soundtracks:  The digital
track is a modern score for orchestra composed and conducted by silent
film accompianist Timothy Brock, and the analog track is the original
Movietone soundtrack.  Watching the laserdisc on home theatre equipment
featuring a big screen, and listening to Brock's score in high fidelity
stereo gives the viewer a taste of what a silent film experience must
have been like in a large, urban film palace with a live orchestra.
However, The true power of the film comes through when experienced with
Riesenfeld's original Movietone sound track.  As good as Brock is at
creating  silent accompaniaments (I admire his work featured on the
"Cabinet of Dr.  Caligari" laserdisc and DVD), Riesenfeld is the true
pro.  Riesenfeld's score truly enhances the moods and emotions of the
visuals.  The difference between the two scores is most dramatic at the
close of the film, Riesenfelds's rising to a crescendo to drive home the
theme of Love Victorious.  Brock's score evokes the original silent film
experience; Riesenfeld's score drives one to tears.
William Fox brought Murnau over from Germany after he made his film
"The Last Laugh", famous for not requiring a single title card.  Fox
wanted  "Sunrise" to be a showcase for his studio's abilities.  This
film has it All:  Huge sets built in forced perspective and using
children and midgets as extras to provide the illusion of great depth;
a tram track laid for the long, lyrical ride from the country to the
city; process shots (including Schuefftan effects and travelling
mattes); deep focus.
Murnau was a master at fluid camera movement.  A scene in which
Ansass trudges through a marsh on his way to his assignation with
The Vamp was done in a single shot involving complex camera tracking;
the effect is breathtaking.  Shots are taken while riding the tram
and on board boats.  Murnau was also a master of open form, suggesting
space outside the slightly claustrophobic, narrowed Movietone frame
by having action move in from the sides of the screen.
He also exploited multiple images in "Sunrise".  Some of the stuff
might seem a bit corny to modern viewers, but the World saw a lot of
it here first.  The only shot that doesn't work for me is the one at
the end of Ansass's and Indre's night on the town when they embrace
and the shot dissolves to them embracing as cherubs circle over them
looking like they were suspended from the blades of a spinning
Casablanca-style ceiling fan.
Janet Gaynor won the first ever Academy Award for Best Actress for her
work in "Sunrise", along with "Seventh Heaven" and "Street Angels".
Margaret Livingston is absolutely believable as the lascivious, amoral,
goldigging home wrecker.
One of the requirements that a film must satisfy before I consider it
to be a great film that it bear watching over and over again without
losing its freshness or appeal (it's funny, but silent films seem to
have an easier time satisfying this requirement).  "Sunrise" not only
bears repeated viewings, it deserves them.
"Sunrise" is available on VHS tape from Critics Choice Video.  This
version features the original Movietone soundtrack.  The Fox laserdisc
features a much cleaner print, and includes Timothy Brock's modern
score, along with the Movietone soundtrack, plus some supplementary
production material.
Essay copyright (C) 1999 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Michael Har-even
Director: F.W.Murnau
Cast: George O'Brien, Janet Gaynor, Bodil Rosing, Margaret Livingstone.
Released in 1927, 110 minutes.
     SUNRISE tells the story of a peasant who is encouraged by his
mistress, a city vamp, to get rid of his beloved wife.  The actual tale
is well known but the unique way that Murnau has managed to treat the
subject turns a cliche to one of the great masterpieces of cinema.
     It is impossible to relate this film to a precise style or genre.
Basically, it is a realistic film (but not naturalistic) mingled with
surrealistic and expressionistic scenes.  It is not a drama more than
it is a comedy.  It is a silent film yet every spectator can imagine
the colors and hear the sounds of each scene.
     The main subject is the relationship between men and women in the
modern society.  Men and women are different creatures.  Men like sport
while women like to dance.  Men are active while women are passive.
Men are direct while women are more sensitive.  In the modern world
(the city), the distinctions between the sexes are not that strict any
more.  Men must learn to be sensitive while women should pay for their
lunch.  How can that change take place?
     The only possible way is through love.  Love unites men and women
and gives them the strength to cope with troubles.  In SUNRISE, the man
and woman are peasants who enjoy the modern world but in the same time
have difficulty in adjusting to it.  As a result, there are several
very funny scenes that Keaton and Chaplin would have been proud of.
For example, after dropping a reproduction of Venus of Mile, the two
peasants cannot find the missing parts of the body on the floor.
     SUNRISE describes the rebirth of love.  The magnificent thing is
that the way the story is told is as delightful as the story itself.
Only on rare occasions, the audience becomes so close to the main
characters.  The actors are wonderful and Murnau succeeded to transform
their feelings and thoughts to the spectators.
     The expressions of the actors are so revealing that the spectators
are forced to unite with the main characters.  As a result, all the
events and the situations are very realistic.  Murnau exploits the
exterior for the same purpose.  When the hero is happy, a street full
of cars turns into a magical forest.  When he is full of lust for his
mistress, images of her are dissolving around him.  Even the titles are
formed in different shapes to express sarcasm.  A set of panning shots
are used to retain the realistic atmosphere after the expressionistic
and the surrealistic scenes.
     The result is one of the most sensible love stories ever told.  It
seems that SUNRISE is more interesting, more enjoyable, more original
and more authentic than any film of our decade.  How come?
     Like a true modern artist Murnau had an aesthetic theory on the
background of his films.  He tried to avoid the conventional so he
explored his ideas by creating films.  On the foreground, he loved his
actors, he loved his actresses, he loved the camera--he was in love
with cinema.  The greatest quality of SUNRISE is that some of this love
is passed to us.

Author
Brian Koller
"Sunrise" is about a farmer and his young wife, and their
relationship.  He has been neglecting the farm as of late,
instead cheating on his sweet, childlife with an evil,
chain-smoking seductress, who not only tells him to kill
his wife, but has worked out the plan.  He is to take her
rowing on the lake, then, when no one is around, push her 
out.  (Montgomery Clift must have seen this movie, for he
would later pull the same stunt in "A Place In The Sun".)
While the farmer loves his wicked girlfriend, he is racked
with guilt about what he is doing to his trusting wife.
Standing over her menacingly in the boat, she is terrified
and pleas for her life.  He can't go through with it.
Upon reaching shore (they are across the lake, in the big
city) she runs from him.  There are several scenes of him
caressing and reassuring her.  One wonders what the
Mystery Science team would be wise-cracking.
They attend a wedding, and as he hears them taking the
vows, he acts so guilty and contrite that she forgives him.
They have a romantic kiss in the middle of the street,
their tender moment not appreciated by the 1920s street
traffic.  Since the movie isn't particularly good, it is
fun to check out Hollywood's depiction of 1920s transportation.
There are trains, trolleys, a double-decker bus, and
horse-drawn carriages.  Surprisingly, the roller coaster
looks much like it does today.
The farmer is getting a shave, just like in the old
western movies.  The wife admires from a distant seat, when
some rascal sits next to her and shows great disrespect.
When the farmer's shave is finished (he has his priorities)
he rescues his wife and pulls a knife on the cad,
demonstrating that is okay to threaten someone's life
as long as you are only just giving them a good scare.
Our couple has their photo taken, and we can admire the
enormous vintage camera.  While in the studio, the two
act goofy and break a ceramic statue behind the photographer's
back.  The head has been knocked off, so the farmer replaces
it with a golf ball decorated with a smiley face.
Next, they go to the carnival.  The farmer proves expert
at a carny game of throwing balls.  This somehow results in
a baby pig running loose into the dance hall, then into the
kitchen, much to the surprise of a waiter sneaking a drink.
He drops the bottle, apparently never having seen a small
pig before.  The pig reluctantly drinks the spilt liquor,
apparently the best take the director can come up with.
The couple go dancing.  Since this is a movie, as soon
as they begin, all the other couples stop and applaud, as
if they had never seen anything so amazing.  But the bill 
must still be paid.
The reconciled couple row the boat home.  Bad luck has it that
a wicked storm arises, eventually capsizing the boat.  They
are separated.  The husband makes it to shore (now back in
the hinterlands) and calls for his wife, rallying the countryside.
Dozens of men in boats with candles suddenly show up, looking
for the wife who was last seen clinging to a bundle of reeds.
Some random reeds are shown floating, and the poor farmer is
devastated.
Meanwhile, the evil brunette has been waiting all this time
for her sap to return without the wife.  She meets him, and
he throttles her, much to the cheers of the audience.
Lucky for her, he is called away from his act of assault 
and battery by cries that they have found his wife, who is
safe after all.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
