Title
Review for Pledge, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Sean Penn. Screenplay by Jerzy Kromolowski and Mary
Olson-Kromolowski, based on the novel by Friedrich Dürrenmatt. Starring
Jack Nicholson, Robin Wright Penn, Aaron Eckhart. Running time: 125
minutes. Rated AA for bloodletting by the MFCB. Reviewed on August 28th, 
2001.
Synopsis: Retiring detective Jerry Black (Nicholson) becomes involved in 
the case of a murdered girl, and promises her parents that he will find 
the killer. He purchases a gas station on a route he believes the killer 
takes, and there befriends Lori (Wright Penn) and her young daughter. As 
Jerry and Lori fall in love, can he do what must be done to fulfill his 
pledge?
Review: At first, "The Pledge" appears to be just another standard, if 
well-executed, crime drama. It is anything but; in its final hour, it 
turns the corner and becomes a riveting, terrifying study of its lead 
character, Jerry Black. Penn pays attention to all the trappings of the 
serial killer genre, but they are just window dressing. His interest here, 
unequivocally, is Jerry, a man so haunted by his pledge that it consumes 
the entirety of the his existence. At first, we see this only in small 
hints; some of his habits change, for instance, and he suddenly takes up 
smoking in a big way. But then, when Jerry buys the gas station and 
befriends Lori, the true extent of his mania draws horrifyingly into 
focus. Nicholson is fantastic, portraying Black with rare subtlety and 
animus; Jerry's gradual descent into obsession is like a car wreck, a 
thing horrible to look at but impossible to turn away from. Penn coaxes 
good supporting performances from much of the rest of his cast, too. Only 
Eckhart disappoints as Jerry's replacement, Stan; he never seems entirely 
convincing, too much a tool of the plot. Penn's direction is astounding, 
each frame looking as though it is parched -- of water, perhaps, or of 
sanity. It all builds up to a shattering, devastating climax which lingers 
uncomfortably in the mind long after the house lights have come up.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Warner Bros./ Morgan Creek
 Director: Sean Penn
 Writer:  Freidrich Durrenmatt (book), Jerzy Kromolowski,
Mary Olson-Kromolowski
 Cast: Jack Nicholson, Dale Dickey, Benicio Del Toro, Aaron
Eckhart, Helen Mirren, Tom Noonan, Robin Wright Penn,
Vanessa Redgrave, Mickey Rourke, Sam Shepard, Lois
Smith, Harry Dean Stanton
   How do you feel about the prospect of retirement?  Are you
counting the days till you get away from your desk, free to
roam the world or simply head up to your favorite stream to
see how they're biting?  Or is your identity tied up so much
with your work that you dread the thought of giving it up? 
Sean Penn's sometimes lethargic but ultimately moving and
lyrical "The Pledge" focusses on a police detective faced with
these existential questions on the last day of his job.
Considered one of the greats by his buddies on the Reno
force, he is popular enough with his colleagues that he gets a
slam-bang sendoff party on the day he is to call it quits.  In
the role of Detective Jerry Black, Jack Nicholson looks out
the window and sees a man hobbling forward on a walker. 
He visits a nursing home only to find elderly men and women
hooked to breathing devices or being aided to their seats.  He
is haunted by a vision that his real life is over on the day he
hangs up his bulletproof vest.  To add to his misery, he takes
a sacred pledge thrust on him by the crucifix-carrying
Margaret Larsen (Patricia Clarkson), mother of an eight-year-
old girl who has just been found slashed and mutilated in the
snows of Nevada, a promise that he will not give up until he
finds the perpetrator of this loathsome act.
   "The Pledge" is too phlegmatically paced to be of much
interest to the crowd whose idea of a police drama is the
"Lethal Weapon" series or who wonder whether any current
movie can be even called a cop story without the presence of
David Morse.  But Penn's latest outing as a helmer would be
pursued by fans of his similar achievements, his moody 1991
movie "The Indian Runner," about a man's attempts to get
closer to his kid brother who had jsut returned from the 'nam,
and his more recent incursion into the killing fields, "The
Crossing Guard," about an individual's attempt to deal with
the drunk-driving death of his daughter at the hands of a perp
who had just been released from prison.
   Somber but by no means lifeless, "The Pledge" is a piece
about a just-retired detective so driven by his commitment
that the book by the Swiss writer Frederick Durrenmatt
(whose great drama "The Visit" is one of the most
imaginative and compelling stage works of its decade) is
virtually without humor.  Adapted to the screen by Jerzy
Kromolowski and his wife Mary Olson-Kromolowski, "The
Pledge" is a framed story opening on a bizarre sequence that
could have come from a post-lobotomy "All Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest," then cutting between the grisly discovery of a
girl's mutilated body and the joyful occasion of a popular
detective's retirement bash.  When a retarded Indian, Toby
Jay Wadenah (Benicio Del Toro) confesses to the crime at
the clever promptings of Detective Stan Krolak (Aaron
Eckhart), the case is closed.  But Jerry Black must have
thought that Wadenah had watched Stephen Hopkins's
"Under Suspicion" once too often and persuades chief of
detectives Eric Pollack (Sam Shepard) to reopen the case.  
   Acting as a one-man squad who has dedicated his first
year of retirement to solving the murder, he interviews a
plethora of Nevadans such as the murdered girl's mother,
Margaret (Patricia Clarkson), grandmother Annalise (Vanessa
Redgrave), and the father of a girl similarly slain, Jim Olstand
(Mickey Rourke).  He is himself interviewed by a doctor
(Helen Mirren) who catches some negative vibes from the
detective and wonders whether he has become unbalanced
by the search for a killer.  When he discovers a waitress in
the Nevada boonies, Lori (Robin Wright Penn) whose
daughter is similar in age, hair color, and clothing to the ones
who have been killed before in a similar style, he buys a gas
station and settles in as a resident in Lori's backwater
community.
   Penn's film is a psychological study in obsession, a man's
fixation on a single goal which, if affording no closure, could
result in his turning from a top-level detective into a deranged
and perhaps dangerous fellow.  Willing to stop at nothing to
solve the case, even using a lovely eight-year-old girl,
Chrissy (Pauline Roberts) as bait without her mother's
consent, Jerry conveys what could happen to any of us given
the appropriate circumstances.  A tribute to Penn and to his
top-notch ensemble of actors, "The Pledge" breaks with the
conventions of the cop dramas by featuring no explosions
either verbal or chemical.  The Canadian snows filmed by
cameraman Chris Menges look both inviting and threatening
while Jay Cassidy's editing and Hans Zimmer's violin-
dominated soundtrack are unassuming.  
   Absolutely not for all tastes, "The Pledges" is lyrical,
convincing, and an obvious labor of love for Penn and his
stellar group of performers.
Rated R.  Running time: 124 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Jerry Black (Jack Nicholson) is only hours away from retirement with the
Reno, Nevada police department when he learns of the brutal murder and rape
of a little girl in a nearby town. Drawn to the case like a firehouse horse
to flame, Jerry helps with the investigation and volunteers to tell the
girl's parents of her death. He opens a Pandora's box of problems for
himself, though, when he vows to find the murderer in Sean Penn's "The
Pledge."
Director Penn, from the start of his helming career with "Indian Runner"
through "The Crossing Guard" and now with "The Pledge," has proven to be a
serious filmmaker who knows his craft, but fails to give a range of emotion
to his work. He explores the darker side of life in all of his
behind-the-camera efforts and provides a good character showcase for his
stars, but he is too earnest in his efforts. As such, there is a relentless
quality to "The Pledge" as we see Jerry vow, on his mortal soul, to find
the killer of little Ginny.
The stage is set within minutes that this is the story of a man, a cop for
a lifetime, facing the unknowns of retirement. Like an old bloodhound too
tired to continue but too proud to quit, Jerry, in his waning hours as a
police detective, latches on to his last case - the brutal murder of the
little girl. The case becomes an obsession for the ex-cop when he pledges
to the girl's mother, on a cross Ginny made herself, to solve the case, no
matter what. It's a character study by Nicholson that falters only a little
along the way and is a nice departure from his usual "Jack."
Joining Nicholson is a collection of actors who settle nicely into the film
tapestry created by Penn and his companions. Robin Wright Penn goes out on
a limb, forgoing glamour for gritty in her perf as a bruised and battered
woman and mother who accepts Jerry's offer of protection from further
abuse. Wright Penn gives an arc to her role as Lori, who trusts Jerry
implicitly only to have that trust tested by his obsessive dedication to
fulfill his pledge to another. When Lori sees that Jerry put her daughter,
Chrissy (Pauline Roberts), in harms way to honor his promise, she, too,
sees the depth of his obsession. Aaron Eckhart is serviceable as Jerry's
former partner, Stan Krolak). Benicio Del Toro gives yet another different
performance to his growing resume of character roles.
It's amusing to see the star power of someone like Sean Penn when he builds
a project like "The Pledge." Besides his second time collaboration with
Nicholson, the helmer attracts a bevy of name actors who fill in the small
and cameo roles in a who's who of Hollywood. Vanessa Redgrave lends her
grand dame personage to the touching performances as little Ginny's
grandma. Also appearing are Sam Shepard, Mickey Rourke, Harry Dean Stanton,
Tom Noonan and Helen Mirren in a variety of small perfs that help flesh out
the background of "The Pledge."
The story is adapted by Jerzy Kromolowski and Mary Olson-Kromolowski from
the novel by Friedrich Duerrenmatt. The tale is many things, besides its
character study by Nicholson, including investigation of murder and the
search for a child killer. There is an obviousness to the story, not unlike
Jerry's own, that make the unraveling of false leads and would-be killers a
device used to misdirect the viewer from the real killer. The ambiguity of
the ending and Jerry's plunge into mental collapse make "The Pledge" more
interesting as a character study than a murder yarn.
The techs behind the camera are outstanding. Chris Menges provides
unconventional photography that pulls you in close to the action, using the
camera to give very different points of view. Production design is
striking, at times, especially when Jerry goes the turkey ranch owned by
Ginny's parents. In a brief moment of humor, the turkeys appear to be
gathered to hear Jerry's bad news, holding on to his every word. It's a
striking image.
Helmer Penn knows his craft and how to get good perfs from his actors. His
unrelenting stalwartness as a director is keeping him from infusing
humanity into his directing work, though, and he keeps the viewer at arm's
length throughout his telling. Good acting, especially from Jack Nicholson,
helps save the day and I give "The Pledge" a B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Director Sean Penn and actor Jack Nicholson, who last collaborated in 
the over-the-top THE CROSSING GUARD, surprise us this time with THE 
PLEDGE, a picture of remarkable grace and subtlety.  Taking a formula 
story -- that of a recently retired cop who wants a closed murder case 
reopened -- it changes the structure, the tone and the events to put 
fresh spins on old themes.
THE PLEDGE focuses almost exclusively on Jack Nicholson as Detective 
Jerry Black, although many fine actors show up to turn in nice cameos 
and supporting parts.  Chief among these are Robin Wright Penn, as a 
scraggly haired, chipped tooth waitress, Helen Mirren, as a reluctantly 
helpful psychiatrist and Patricia Clarkson, as a dead girl's mother who 
extracts a pledge from Black to find the killer.  The pledge is made on 
a cross that the girl had constructed herself.
As the story begins, Black leaves his retirement party to help 
investigate the rape and murder of a second grade girl.  Later, much to 
the consternation of his replacement, Stan Krolak (Aaron Eckhart), Black 
insists that they've got the wrong man.  This belief leads Black on a 
statewide quest for what he thinks is a serial killer on the loose.  
If the first part of the film is more standard issue with the obsessed 
cop on the prowl for the perp, the second part is a change of pace, as 
Black retires to a life of fishing.  Or is he just lying in wait?  Or is 
it both?  What is most unusual about the second half is that the script 
by Jerzy Kromolowski and Mary Olson-Kromolowski, based on Friedrich 
Dürrenmatt's book, telegraphs where it is going yet maintains the 
tension.  And, when the story finally gets to the easily guessed 
destination, the film avoids the most committed sin by screenwriters 
everywhere -- the obsession with tying up all the loose ends.  This, of 
course, may drive anal-retentive viewers nuts, but it does provide for 
great post-theater car conversations.
Still, what you will remember a week later isn't the ending.  It will be 
Nicholson's exceptional and atypically reserved performance.  His 
detective doesn't come from some overwrought method acting.  Nicholson 
searches deep down within himself and comes up with a character whose 
furrowed brow says it all.  Black is deeply scarred by the deaths.  He 
has internalized the pain of the victims and their families.  This has 
transformed him into a man driven as if by hidden demons.  His worries 
are made palpable through an intense but delicately nuanced performance 
by Nicholson.  It may not be his very best performance, but it sure is a 
treat to observe.
THE PLEDGE runs 2:04.  It is rated R for strong violence and language 
and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, January 19, 
2001.  In the Silicon Valley it will be showing at the AMC and the 
Century theaters.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Laura Clifford
When Reno homicide detective Jerry Black (Jack Nicholson) leaves his own
retirement party to assist at the remote mountain murder site of an
eight-year-old girl, he doesn't know he's taking a life-altering step in
"The Pledge."
"The Pledge" may begin with a couple of hoary movie cliches (a detective on 
the verge of retirement coupled with a potential serial killer on the loose),
but from this jumping off point, the film takes few expected turns.
Jerry proves his worth and experience at the crime scene by advising his
partner Stan (Aaron Eckhart, "Nurse Betty") to get the child's buttons bagged
for fingerprinting purposes.  The inept local cops have not only compromised
the crime scene, but have dragged their feet on notifying the victim's parents.
Jerry takes this duty on only to find himself making a solemn oath to 
Mrs. Larsen (Patricia Clarkson, "High Art") that he will find her daughter's
killer.
When a suspect is quickly brought into custody, Stan gets the feeble minded
native American (Benicio Del Toro, "Traffic") to confess, but Jerry isn't
convinced.  Under the guise of his retirement fishing trip, Black continues
to investigate the crime, even purchasing a gas station at crossroads he's
convinced the killer will visit.  Jerry also forms an attachment to single
mother Lori (Robin Wright Penn, "Message in a Bottle") and her eight year
old daughter Chrissy.
Adapted from the Friedrich Durrenmatt novel by Jerzy Kromolowski and Mary
Olson-Kromolowski, "The Pledge" is a character study of a man so obssessed
with his mission that he loses the chance to make a life for himself.
Director Sean Penn ("The Crossing Guard") has assembled an incredible cast
to flesh out the story as he focusses on Black/Nicholson's journey.
Penn gets the closest thing to a real performance out of the superstar 
that Nicholson's given in years.  Unfortunately, Nicholson has become such a
larger than life caricature of himself that when he attempts to shed his
own persona you sometimes see the gears turning.  
Support is almost an embarrassment of riches with some of the best in the
business appearing in little more than one scene cameos.  Firstly, Benicio
Del Toro goes out on a limb with a strange interpretation of the feeble
minded initial suspect and not only pulls it off but makes an indelible
impression while doing so.  Vanessa Redgrave is perfect as the Scandanavian
grandmother of the victim who professes to be 'all business' when giving her
granddaughter her piano lesson.  (Great resemblance casting as well - Redgrave
looks like the mother of Patricia Clarkson.)  Helen Mirren is a psychologist
Jerry goes to for help to interpret a drawing of the victim's.  Mirren
creates tension (ably assisted by Penn's multiple POV editting choices) by
turning the tables on Jerry's motivations (which in turn present him as
a possible suspect).  Lois Smith ("Twister") is good as a disabled, elderly
mother who may not see her son for what he is while Tom Noonan ("What Happened
Was...") is creepily effective as the religious man with an interest in
Chrissy.  Mickey Rourke is the broken father of a missing girl.  Harry Dean
Stanton is the bored gas station owner who gets an unexpected windfall.  Sam
Shepard is Jerry's former boss.
In the larger supporting roles, Wright Penn captures a broken woman happy
to just be just getting along, amazed when she gets something better.  Aaron
Eckhart makes Jerry's partner Stan a young Turk who can't wait to brush
aside the older guy to step prematurely into the limelight.
Technically, Penn is supported by cinematographer Chris Menges ("A World 
Apart") and editor Jay Cassidy ("The Crossing Guard") who capture the 
gorgeous terrain (British Columbia, Canada, stands in for Nevada) and
intimate interiors in unconventional ways (overhead shots, dissolves,
overlapping time sequence edits).  An early scene, where Jerry approaches
the Larsens to deliver bad news, is staged amidst thousands of turkeys
who drown out the (unneeded) dialogue - a unique and brilliant choice.
The score by Hans Zimmer and Klaus Badelt ("Gladiator") enhances the story 
by using musical themes to denote character (native American drum percussion 
worked with piano, for instance).
"The Pledge" has a unique, albeit open ended conclusion which may leave
some viewers feeling unsatisfied.  Penn has clearly taken the artistic
high road here, and while he doesn't always succeed, he's created a 
haunting piece of work.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
  In this dark psychological drama, Jack Nicholson delivers a
wrenching performance as a stressed-out Reno police detective facing
retirement. On his last day at work, there's a grisly homicide. An
eight year-old girl has been found slashed, raped and mutilated in the
Nevada snow. Her distraught mother (Patricia Clarkson) forces him to
promise to find the killer, intoning:"Do you swear by your soul's
salvation on this cross made by our daughter?"  Despite the
"confession" of a retarded Native American (Benicio Del Toro), coerced
by another cop (Aaron Eckhart), Nicholson is convinced that the child
molester is not only still free but will strike again. So he
ploddingly goes undercover, buying a local gas station and befriending
a battered single mom (Robin Wright Penn) with a trusting young
daughter (Pauline Roberts) he can use as bait.
  Judging by Sean Penn's first two films ("The Indian Runner,"
"The Crossing Guard") and this, his directing choices are as quirky as
his acting choices, beginning with extreme close-ups of Nicholson ice
fishing, armed with a bottle of Glenfiddich.  The sequence where
Nicholson breaks the tragic news to the parents is set in the barn of
a turkey farm; it's a long shot with no dialogue. That scene is
profoundly moving, graceful and lyrical, as are Nicholson's
conversations with the child's grandmother (Vanessa Redgrave) and a
psychologist (Helen Mirren). But the story by Frederick Durrenmatt
("The Visit"), adapted by Jerzy and Mary Olson-Kromolowski, is flat
and deliberate, almost lethargic, framed by Nicholson's bizarre
ramblings and ruminations, resulting in an emotional detachment which
is hard to overcome. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Pledge" is a haunting 8, emerging as a subtle study of pathological
obsession.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Sean Penn.
Cast: Jack Nicholson, Robin Wright Penn, Pauline Roberts, Aaron Eckhart, 
Helen Mirren, Vanessa Redgrave, Patricia Clarkson, Benicio Del Toro, Tom 
Noonan, Sam Shepard, Harry Dean Stanton, Lois Smith, Mickey Rourke.
2001 - 124 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, and gore).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, January 27, 2001.
They say the first two months of every year is littered with the movie 
studios' unwanted children--those films that they have little to no faith in, 
and release at a time when they can exit quietly from theaters without being 
noticed. Each year, however, one movie does seem to come out that is a step 
above everything else. In 1999, it was Neil Jordan's vastly underrated "In 
Dreams," and in 2000, it was Curtis Hanson's underseen "Wonder Boys." Sean 
Penn's "The Pledge" is a film like those two, and in a few superficial ways, 
bears a slight resemblance to "In Dreams," a frightening, astonishingly 
original serial killer thriller (seek it out if you haven't seen it, by the 
way). 
"The Pledge" opens like most police murder mysteries do, with the discovery 
of a mutilated body, and the immediate question of who committed such an 
atrocity. But there is a subtle difference here, because the film already had 
managed, by the opening ten minutes, to involve me so deeply that I didn't 
dare take my eyes off the screen and my mind off the story and characters 
until the end credits rolled. With the aid of Jerzy Kromolowski and Mary 
Olson-Kromolowski's tightly wound, multilayered screenplay, and Chris Menges' 
chilly, unforgettably beautiful cinematography, the movie miraculously seemed 
fresh, even while wading through early familiar territory. Beginning as the 
story of a murder investigation, it isn't long before the film's true, 
insulated aspirations emerge.
It is the final working day before dedicated homicide detective Jerry Black's 
(Jack Nicholson) retirement when a young boy discovers the bloody corpse of a 
seven-year-old girl lying in a snow-covered wooded area. Jack decides to 
accompany his eager, young replacement (Aaron Eckhart) to the crime scene, 
and later takes the duty of informing the child's parents. Promising the 
devastated mother (Patricia Clarkson) that he will find the person that did 
this to their little girl, Jerry becomes deeply embroiled in seeking out the 
truth, even after their biggest suspect, a mentally challenged Indian 
(Benicio Del Toro) who was seen at the scene of the crime, commits suicide 
while at the police station.
It seems that the deceased girl had made a buddy right before she died that 
she told her friends was called "The Wizard," a giant-like figure in a black 
car that gave her small porcelain porcupines as gifts. With two young girls 
murdered eight and three years ago within the same Nevada vicinity, both 
wearing red dresses and killed in a similar fashion, Jerry is convinced the 
killer will strike again soon. Buying a home/gas station off one of the main 
roads, Jerry prepares to, once and for all, find the culprit. His chances 
start to look up after meeting a distressed coffee shop waitress (Robin 
Wright Penn) whose eight-year-old daughter, Chrissy (Pauline Roberts), is 
given a porcupine while at a flea market.
"The Pledge" runs through the paces of a generic serial killer thriller in 
the first half, but it is far from ordinary. The movie doesn't even seem 
terribly interested in the identity of the killer, since Jerry more or less 
figures out who it is before the end. Instead, the nervy edginess that 
director Sean Penn provides stems from whether little Chrissy, a lovable 
child whom Jerry grows close to, will be the next victim. And more than even 
that, the film gradually transforms into a thoughtful, morose character 
study--one that concludes on such a tragic, unforeseen note, it has the power 
to leave you not only shaken, but deeply provoked into thinking about the 
movie as a complete whole. Every part, every scene, every red herring holds a 
clever purpose in distracting you for as long as possible while it sets up 
Jerry's desolate downfall.
In Jerry Black, Jack Nicholson has found a role that is every bit as 
memorable and stirring as that of Jack Torrance in 1980's "The Shining," even 
without nary a scene in which he turns evil and begins chasing people with an 
ax. Widely known for his offbeat charm and sinister eyebrows, Nicholson feels 
more human here--more flawed, yet caring--than he rarely has been captured on 
film. His Jerry is a warm, compassionate man that you can't help but 
sympathize with as his goal becomes a deep-seeded obsession that is putting 
his life and newfound relationships in danger.
Surrounding Nicholson are an array of exciting performers, many of which are 
little more than cameos, but all of which leave some sort of precise 
impression. Robin Wright Penn (1999's "Message in a Bottle"), equipped with 
an unattractive, dark haircut and a chipped front tooth, gives a courageous 
performance, both physically and internally, and newcomer Pauline Roberts, as 
her little daughter, Chrissy, is a natural young actress with a lot of 
charisma. Aaron Eckhart (2000's "Nurse Betty") is appropriately smarmy as the 
cop that replaces Jerry, and therefore sees himself as superior, while 
Patricia Clarkson (1998's "High Art") and Vanessa Redgrave (1999's "Girl, 
Interrupted"), as the deceased girl's mother and grandmother, respectively, 
offer up indelible, poignant turns. Finally, Benicio Del Toro (2000's 
"Traffic") literally disappears into his mentally challenged Native American 
character who is believed to be the murderer early on.
"The Pledge" is, on the one hand, about the oath a man takes so seriously it 
washes over his entire existence, but it is also about a person's 
terrifyingly subtle descent into madness when all that he ever lived for is 
taken away from him. A provocative morality tale, "The Pledge" is not only 
the first great motion picture of 2001 (and one that might even appear on my 
annual ten-best list), but also a film that exposes Sean Penn as being every 
bit as talented a director as he is an actor.
    - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
      http://www.us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 PLEDGE, THE (director: Sean Penn; screenwriters: Friedrich Dürrenmatt
 (book)/Jerzy Kromolowski and Mary Olson-Kromolowski; cinematographer:
 Chris Menges; editor: Jay Cassidy; cast: Jack Nicholson (Jerry Black),
 Benicio Del Toro (Toby Jay Wadenah), Aaron Eckhart (Stan Krolak),
 Helen Mirren (Doctor), Robin Wright Penn (Lori), Vanessa Redgrave
 (Annalise Hansen), Patricia Clarkson (Margaret Larsen), Mickey Rourke
 (Jim Olstand), Sam Shepard (Eric Pollack), Tom Noonan (Gary Jackson),
 Michael O'Keefe (Duane Larson), Harry Dean Stanton (Floyd Cage),
 Pauline Roberts (Chrissy), Michael O'Keefe (Policeman); Runtime: 124;
 Warner Brothers; 2001)
"The Pledge," adapted from a novel by the Swiss writer Friedrich
Dürrenmattis, is the third and the finest of the three films Sean Penn
(The Crossing Guard/The Indian Runner) has directed. It's a grim tale
filled with nostalgia, tenderness, and grief. Jack Nicholson gives a
subdued and arguably his best performance ever as a sixtysomething,
retired Reno, Nevada, homicide detective, Jerry Black, who aims to go
fishing for his retirement but instead continues working a case started
on his last day on the job, of a grisly child rape-murder mutilation,
because he promised the victim's mother that he would get the killer. He
swears this on a cross the child victim made. The only reason he goes
out to the parents' turkey farm to tell them the tragic news, is because
no one else in the sheriff's department feels comfortable enough to do
it.
The film is set just outside Reno, in the beautiful mountain towns where
poverty and harsh living conditions loom for those who care to see
beyond what the tourist sees as idyllic conditions. The story revolves
around a police investigation to get the killer of the little 7-year-old
Ginny Larsen, but the investigation quickly closes when the snowmobiler
youngster who found the body tips the police off about an agitated
Indian (Benicio Del Toro) he spotted in the crime vicinity and the
Indian when brought in for questioning confesses and then kills himself.
The film then becomes more about the aging loner detective and about his
psychological composure, as he has a strong hunch that the Indian wasn't
the killer; but, his interest in the case is frowned upon by his fellow
officers who moments ago were praising him, at his retirement reception,
to the skies for his career work. His successor is Stan (Aaron Eckhart),
who is a brash young man and of a totally different generation; he's
aggressive in getting a confession, seducing the Indian to confess by
sidling up to him and cajoling him to tell him what he wants to hear.
Stan once thought Jerry was a great cop and looked up to him, but now
along with the police chief, Eric (Shepard), thinks Jerry has lost it
and is just a drunken clown who can't handle not working and being in on
the macho action.
Jerry is so obsessed with this murder that comes on his last day on the
job, that he decides to dedicate himself to catching the killer on his
own without help from his former colleagues. He begins by locating a
policeman in another district and finds that the little girl victims all
fit the same profile. He takes a drawing that Ginny made of a giant
giving her presents, that was hung in her school, as he believes this
drawing clearly shows the killer as a tall white male, driving a station
wagon, and is luring her by offering the girl presents. To reaffirm what
the drawing might mean he visits a psychologist (Mirren), who can only
speak of the drawing in hypothetical terms. But she spots that since his
retirement, he's going bonkers because something is weighing heavily on
his mind: as he hears voices, nervously chain-smokes, and is sweating a
lot because he's in an agitated state. He also visits a father (Rourke)
who's daughter has been missing for 3 years, and reconfirms his own
grief over the victim and that all the victims wore a red dress.
On a whim he buys a mountain gas station from Floyd (Stanton), and uses
that as his place to observe the comings and goings of any suspects. In
town he befriends a battered waitress, Lori (Robin Wright Penn, the
director's wife), who has an 8-year-old daughter named Chrissy. She also
has a restraining order against her husband and when he batters her
again, she moves in with the pensive and sensitive Jerry. The
arrangement blossoms as Jerry enjoys taking care of them and acting
fatherly to the little girl. But when Jerry's suspicions lead him to
believe that a smiling part-time minister and snow-plow driver, Gary
Jackson, is his man, he sets a trap for him using Chrissy as bait; this
obsession with the case leads to Jerry's downfall.
Penn is to be commended for his nuanced shooting of the film and his
confident way of telling the story through a retired detective who is
becoming mentally unbalanced, and in the ambiguous ending that makes the
viewer resolve the story as he thinks it should be. The last shot of
Nicholson mumbling to himself in the already gone to seed filling
station, is a striking reminder of how an artist can become so obsessed
by his work that he might lose sight of his own life. Penn has directed
a superb film, that is interestingly photographed and brings out fine
performances from this sterling cast. Many cast members gave cameo
performances that fit the grey mood of this very emotionally felt film.
It's one of the better murder mystery stories made, one that is more a
psychological study of the detective than of the killer. It is more
pertinent as a character study than as a murder investigation.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jerry Saravia
After seeing Sean Penn's latest directorial effort, "The Pledge," I am 
convinced that Penn can work equally well on both sides of the camera. He is 
an exceptionally superb actor but his first two films as a director, "The 
Indian Runner" and "The Crossing Guard," showcased his stunning ability to 
write sharply defined characters and to know how to get the most out of his 
actors. He has had the macho ethic of actors like Dennis Hopper, Charles 
Bronson, David Morse and, yes, Jack Nicholson diminished in favor of showing 
men grappling with the sins of their past. Nicholson is the star of "The 
Pledge," and it is his most gripping portrayal yet in what remains Penn's 
best film by far. 
Nicholson is the retired Nevada cop Jerry Black, a man torn by the latest 
savage murder of a little girl. The night of his retirement party is the 
night he chooses to investigate the case, despite the averse reactions of the 
hotshot detective Stan Krolak (Aaron Eckhart) and his former boss (Sam 
Shepard). A mentally challenged Indian (Benicio Del Toro) is seen at the 
scene of the crime and is forced to confess to the murder but Jerry doesn't 
buy it - he feels the real killer is still on the loose. And to temporarily 
relieve his retirement, Jerry makes a pledge to the dead girl's mother (a 
devastatingly fierce Patricia Clarkson) to find the killer. 
I know what you are all going to say - the same old story about a cop resting 
on his gut instincts to solve one last case. "The Pledge" stars off as a 
routine cop story but what unfolds afterwards is stimulating, haunting and 
unpredictable. This is no ordinary movie-of-the-week and it is no action 
thriller - it is, my goodness, an existential character study of one man's 
pledge and obsession leading to madness and despair. Sounds too depressing? 
Well, yes, but who says all movies need to end in happy endings? 
As the film progresses, Jerry buys a gas station following a hunch that the 
killer resides in a nearby county. There is also the suspected car model 
deduced from the dead girl's drawing of a tall man who gave her porcupine 
chocolates. I will not say much more except that Jerry meets the local town 
waitress (Robin Wright-Penn) and his intentions with her and her own daughter 
are not what they seem.    
"The Pledge" is full of symbolic montages, beautiful, lush scenery, and 
Penn's typical slow-motion scenes punctuated by moments of silence. One 
terrific moment is likely to be missed where a long shot of Jerry fishing on 
a lake with a rainbow in the distance mirrors one of the dead girl's 
drawings. I also love the scene where Jerry breaks the news to the girl's 
parents in a turkey farm - a typical scene powerfully executed. 
Nicholson uses admirable restraint as Jerry Black, in lieu of his trademark 
persona, for a complex portrait of a man who may be losing his marbles 
investigating a seemingly no-win case. He shares some great scenes with 
actors like Vanessa Redgrave as the dead girl's teacher, Helen Mirren as a 
child psychologist, Tom Noonan as the local Reverend, Harry Dean Stanton as 
the owner of a gas station, and Mickey Rourke in a heartfelt performance as 
the dad of one of the other murdered girls in town. 
"The Pledge" begins with Nicholson scratching his legs and muttering to 
himself, and the frustration the character feels at slaving away on this 
murder case is felt by the audience. "The Pledge" is a pessimistic, 
tough-minded film that stays on course through its existential journey. For 
the last year or so, I've been saying that in this postmodern world of 
cinema, irony has replaced existentialism and that stories are now bereft of 
the risks they used to take, particularly with characters as unsentimental as 
Jerry. "The Pledge" is proof that some directors are willing to take the 
plunge into the sea of despair without making compromises. Bravo Sean Penn!
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com 

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
"We Put the SIN in Cinema"
 ŠCopyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Like Frank Darabont has cornered the unique market of Stephen
King-written period prison films (The Green Mile and The Shawshank
Redemption), Sean Penn is making a name for himself by directing films
that star Jack Nicholson and use the death of a young girl as the
story's catalyst.  The two, along with Penn's wife Robin Wright, made a
pretty decent but largely unseen 1995 film called The Crossing Guard, in
which Nicholson plays the vengeful father of a girl killed by a drunk
driver.
The Pledge pits Nicholson (As Good as it Gets), playing a retiring Reno
cop named Jerry Black, against a serial killer who rapes and murders
little blonde girls with red dresses.  The most recent slaying
interrupts Jerry's retirement party, but the dedicated detective chooses
to can his celebration and investigate the crime scene.  After promising
the girl's mother (The Green Mile's Patricia Clarkson) that he would
find the person responsible for the murder, the police get a quick
confession from a retarded mountain man (Benicio del Toro, who mumbles a
la Fenster from The Usual Suspects and sounds a bit like Yoda).
Jerry, like any other screen dick worth his weight in donuts, doesn't
believe they got the right guy, but his boss (Sam Shepard, All the
Pretty Horses) and arrogant young partner (Aaron Eckhart, Erin
Brockovich) think Jerry is just reluctant to let go of his last case.
Blowing off his retirement party present of a fishing trip to Cabo San
Lucas, he begins a rogue investigation into the brutal murder.  Like del
Toro's quick appearance and exit, there are a handful of great one-scene
appearances from numerous acting giants like Helen Mirren (Teaching Mrs.
Tingle), Vanessa Redgrave (Girl Interrupted), Harry Dean Stanton (The
Green Mile) and Mickey Rourke (Get Carterokay, maybe he's not an acting
giant).
The Pledge kind of shifts gears when Jerry buys a tiny gas station in
the area where the murders took place.  He also befriends single mom
Lori (Wright Penn, Unbreakable) and her young, blonde daughter,
eventually inviting them to live with him in the home above his gas
station.  It becomes clear that he is using Lori's daughter as bait for
the killer, providing his Jerry with one of the best character flaws in
recent memory.  He clearly will stop at nothing to catch the suspect,
and you can tell the pursuit has completely taken over every aspect of
Jerry's life.  There's a scene where Jerry reads fairy tales to the girl
as they lay in bed, giving a whole new frightening dimension to the
Brothers Grimm and raising questions about the identity of the killer
for the more imaginative viewer.
Fans of non-stop action will probably start groaning during the film's
middle portion, which is full of what may seem like a whole lot of
superfluous stuff.  But this isn't an action film.  It's something that
makes conventional audiences shudder:  a character study  something we
don't get to see much of nowadays in a major release.  And it doesn't
come as much of a surprise to find it in a film directed by an actor.
Penn wrote his previous two directorial efforts but The Pledge was based
on Swiss author Friedrich Dürrenmatt's book (adapted by Jerzy and Mary
Olson-Kromolowski), leaving Penn to focus his talent solely on the
film's direction, and the result is startling.  It's easily Penn's best
behind-the-camera work yet, as well as a considerable improvement over
The Crossing Guard.
This is also the best Nicholson has been in several years.  He is
extremely believable as a man unhinged by both a savage crime and his
own futility.  The Pledge also marks the third major release in the
first three weeks of 2001 to feature Traffic's del Toro (making '01 the
Year of the Bull), and one of two due in theatres this week where the
actor is unrecognizable and doesn't last too long (the other is
Snatch).  In addition to a handsome score from Gladiator's Klaus Badelt
and Hans Zimmer, The Pledge is also beautifully photographed by two-time
Oscar winner Chris Menges (The Mission, The Killing Fields).
2:03  R for adult language, light sexual content and some pretty
graphic crime scene photos

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A life-long cop retires but not before a case about a murdered little girl
falls into his lap. After promising the little girl's mom that he will find
the killer, the man sets out to solve the mystery just as his retirement
comes to fruition.
CRITIQUE:
Other than re-iterating the well-known fact that "life sucks", I didn't
really get much out of this movie. Was it a mystery, was it an existential
drama about what life is like after an all-consuming career or was it simply
about giving Mickey Rourke a job? Who knows. One thing that I do know is
that it was definitely NOT an action movie, or your typical police thriller.
In fact, there was no action or thrills in this entire movie (don't let the
trailer fool ya!). This movie is more in the realm of "cinema" and the
art-house crowd. Not for your "everyman", that's fer sure. It's another
depressing, slow-paced cinematic effort with death as its major underlying
theme, by director Sean Penn, who seems to get off on films featuring a
protagonist who smokes like a chimney, drinks like a fish and looks real
cool in slo-mo shots. But I'm getting ahead of myself here. The movie
actually started off on a pretty nice footing. The whole
"cop-retiring-but-not-until-he-solves-that-one-last-case" thing was cool,
but unfortunately, the film takes a huge turn at about the one-third mark.
It almost seems to change into another movie altogether. It's too bad
because either one of the stories in this film might've been interesting on
their own, given their own scripts and direction, but the mix of the two
just doesn't click here.
The first story is a pretty standard murder mystery, while the other delves
deep inside the psyche of a man faced with his own futility at the dawn of
his retirement. Interesting enough on paper, but despite the film's engaging
set-up, the whole midsection of the movie is simply overloaded with
redundant scenes featuring bit parts by various actors, birds flying and a
whole lot of scenery, which ultimately all add up to very little in the end.
In fact, I remember turning to my friend at one point and remarking how
"nothing" had basically happened in the past 45 minutes. And when I say
"nothing", yeah sure, there is definitely stuff happening on the screen, but
the film simply wasn't progressing. At that point, I was hoping that the
film's conclusion would salvage some of its own misdirection, and add to the
solid outing by Jack Nicholson, perfectly underplaying his role, the
picturesque scenery and Penn's able, if not somewhat over-directed style,
but alas, t'was not to be. The ending did nothing to help me complete the
circle that was prepared by its lead character, and frankly left me quite
frustrated and unsatisfied. I think I understand what Penn and the writers
were trying to say with this ending, but God knows the film and its
anti-climactic conclusion, did very little to either entertain or enlighten
me either way. Montage after montage after montage after montage, all laced
in a pile of sad songs, a very thin mystery and plenty of useless one scene
cameos by "name" actors, mark this film as my first real disappointment of
the new year. Note my previous scores to related films below and see if you
and I are close in movie mindset.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
8MM (6/10) - As Good as it Gets (8/10) - Bone Collector (7.5/10) - Crossing
Guard (5/10) - Seven (10/10)

Author
Jonathan Curiel
An early note to parents with young, blonde daughters: Think twice about
seeing The Pledge, and if you must go -- if you're eager to see Jack
Nicholson give one of his best cinematic performances ever -- then take
a Valium before entering the theater and practice saying, "This won't
happen to my family!  This won't happen to my family!"
>From the opening shot, where we see the top of Nicholson's half-bald,
hair-transplanted head, The Pledge is an exercise in stomaching an ugly
truth.  Body parts, pony-tailed girls splotched with blood and bruises
-- this isn't a film about happy endings and human triumph.  Suspected
sex perverts lurk down every road in The Pledge, causing Nicholson's
character, a retired homicide detective, so much angst that he becomes
his own worst enemy.
Sean Penn has directed a dark thriller that encrusts Jerry Black
(Nicholson) with a Sisyphean task: Find the person who savaged a child
in the snow near Reno, Nevada.  Bloated and baggy-eyed, Black enters the
case on the night of his retirement party, then volunteers to work on it
for the next year and a half, after pledging to the dead girl's mother
that he'll bring the killer to justice.  (Hence the movie's title.)
Trailers for The Pledge have played up the intensity of Nicholson's
character, but those expecting a bigger-than-life caricature a la A Few
Good Men or The Shining (or any number of other Nicholson vehicles) will
be disappointed.  Nicholson, whose character looks like he'd be
perfectly at home in a bowling alley, is relatively understated in The
Pledge, and that's what makes it so riveting and believable.  There are
no over-the-top moments that call for lines like "You can't handle the
truth!"  Instead of yelling his way past obstacles, Jerry Black
navigates through clues like an old, frustrated man.  Nicholson told a
Hollywood reporter that he was "more of myself" in The Pledge, and
moviegoers have Penn to thank for this real-life performance.  Penn and
Nicholson are good friends and apparently share a love of storytelling
that doesn't rely on gimmicks or pyrotechnics.  In fact, Penn based The
Pledge on a 1958 novel by Swiss writer Friedrich Durrenmatt: "A German
existentialist," according to a man at the screening I attended.
Existential terror is just one of the many layers that give The Pledge a
sheen that is sickening and yet satisfying to watch.  There is beauty in
The Pledge, represented by the snowy, green outdoors and the face of the
young girl who Jerry Black strongly believes could be the next victim. 
An ensemble cast of veteran actors and actresses (led by Helen Mirren,
who plays a psychologist) lets Penn add scenes that flush out the edges
of Nicholson's memorable character.
My biggest complaint: Why did Penn have to give his wife, Robin Wright
Penn, such a big role?  Wright Penn has improved her acting since She's
So Lovely, the 1997 flick that showcased her, her husband, and John
Travolta, but that's like saying Monica Lewinsky has gotten smarter and
more articulate since first emerging into the international spotlight
from the shadows of the White House.  Wright Penn is a blight on the
Penn name.  For her to appear in the same movie as Nicholson, let alone
kiss him on screen and consort with him, is a testament to the credo,
"Anything is possible in America."
And anything is.  The Pledge is a reminder that evil is alive and well
on this planet.  Getting rid of it is harder than it looks.
Director: Sean Penn
Producers: Sean Penn, Elie Samaha, Michael Fitzgerald
Writers: Jerzy Kromolowski, Mary Olson-Kromolowski
Starring: Jack Nicholson, Robin Penn Wright, Sam Shepard, Aaron Eckhart,
Benicio Del Toro, Venessa Redgrave, Michael O'Keefe, Helen Mirren,
Mickey Rourke, Harry Dean Stanton, Lois Smith
http://movies.warnerbros.com/thepledge/
---
Jonathan Curiel - curiel@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
