Title
Review for Genghis Blues (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
        Here's the premise: Filmmakers accompany a blind blues musician to the
small country of Tuva, just north of Mongolia, to participate in the
1995 throat-singing symposium in Kyzyl.  My roommate passionately
rhapsodized over it for days, yet nothing about this premise connected
with me.  "Lemme tell you something, pal -- I'd rather watch mute nuns
performing The Sound of Music than watch these guys do their... their...
their crazy throat-singing ritual!"
        Just goes to show, you can't judge a book by its cover.  Boy, did I
feel silly when I actually sat down to watch Genghis Blues, one of the
more exhilarating and passionate documentaries about music and culture
to appear in recent years.  Who would have thought I'd actually love
this music and want to learn more about it?
        There are too many layers of Genghis Blues to discuss within the
context of a review.  And unfortunately, the act of describing the
adventures of our filmmaking team and their companion, Paul Pena (blind,
mouthy, and sharp as a whip) might strike readers as, well, boring.
        Who would think that you could get excited about these characters
packing for their long trip east, riding in planes, buses, and cars for
thousands of miles through the desert?  Or that the history of this
small country would prove exciting?
        You wouldn't expect the musical performers who gather at this event to
cause the average viewer (me) to sit bolt upright on the couch, mouth
agape in amazement, as they sang notes which seemed like the distant
rumblings of an underground cave or an impossibly beautiful wood
instrument.  The experience was beautiful and strange.
        This is no stodgy, academic National Geographic special.  The people of
Tuva are lively and buoyant, pleased, and excited that the American,
Pena, would take such an interest in their art of throat singing, which
allows them to voice more than one note at the same time.  Pena is also
familiar with their vivid, colorful garb and language, long banned by
the Communists.
        And he's blind.  He learned it all by translating from Tuvan to Russian
to English, in Braille!  Rocky Balboa, you're a stinking chump.  You
ain't nothing!
        The story is inherently dramatic.  This is Pena's first time in this
country, whose customs he has studied so passionately.  As a participant
in their competition, he's under enormous pressure created by his own
fear.  Right before he goes on, he's in the midst of paralyzing stage
fright (which multiplies itself by a thousand when he's told that he
cannot perform the song he had prepared, as some of the audience would
be offended).
        Paul and the filmmakers also journey through the land, meeting shamans
and wrestlers.  They take part in a goat slaughtering ceremony and bless
themselves in the water of sacred rivers.  While the filmmaking is
rough, sometimes choppily cut together, you can't beat the beautiful
landscapes or the appreciation that shines through Pena's face.  This
American has found his spiritual home.
        Genghis Blues doesn't make Paul into a saint.  As a blind man, he's
often confused and disoriented, battling bouts of self-doubt and
depression.  It's heartbreaking to learn that in America the farthest he
can walk alone is the corner store, that he often feels alienated or
misunderstood as though he were some freak.  And when some of his
medication runs out, they may need to cut short their trip to Tuva, so
Genghis Blues, for all its fascination with exploring new sights and
sounds, is not without tears.
        Saddest of all, an artist like Paul Pena can only find acceptance in a
foreign land that doesn't look at his craft with confusion and
misunderstanding.  If Genghis Blues accomplishes anything, it makes
Pena's world accessible to folks like me who might not give a damn, were
they not led to the stream and asked to drink.
Director: Roko Belic
Producer: Adrien Belic, Roko Belic
Starring: Paul Pena, Kongar-ol Ondar, Lemon DeGeorge, Mario Casetta
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Curtis Edmonds
Genghis Blues:  The Best Movie You Haven't Seen
It was the Year of our Lord 1989 and International Communism in Europe
came crashing down with a thump.  Writer P.J. O'Rourke was in Berlin,
setting aside his usual cynical mien to exult.  "The West won the Cold
War," he shouted.  "The privileges of liberty and the rights of the
individual went out and kicked butt."  O'Rourke saw an impoverished East
German border guard stretching out a skinny hand through the ruins of
the Berlin Wall, begging some raucous students for a souvenir piece, and
he got all choked up.  "The tears of victory rolled down my face." he
wrote, "and the snot of victory did too, because it was an awfully cold
day."
Where O'Rourke was standing, he could still hear the glorious sound of
power tools tearing the Berlin Wall to pieces.  He couldn't have known
that, over ten years later, the triumphant echoes of that sound would
still ring out across the world.  And he would never, ever, have dreamed
that the echoes of freedom would stretch to a little Soviet
mini-republic called Tuva, half a world away from anywhere, and that
they can still be heard in the harmonious echoes of a traditional form
of music called throat singing.
Tuva is a little country on the map, wedged in between Siberia and
Mongolia.  We're told it's about the size of North Dakota, and it looks
to be on the same latitude as Winnipeg.  Its people are nomadic
sheepherders with a religion that's part shamanistic and part Tibetan
Buddhist.  Just as the Tibetans have been squashed by the Chinese
Communists over the years, the Soviets oppressed the Tuvans, forbidding
their clothing styles and culture and even their language.  When the
Soviets folded up their yurts and headed back to Moscow, the Tuvans were
free once more to talk and think and dress as they pleased, and pass on
their unique culture to their children.
But the recovery of freedom in Tuva is not the whole story of Genghis
Blues.
For, you see, Tuva had been free once before, back in the mid-1920s when
the Soviets were too busy fighting the Russian Civil War to pay
attention to Tuva.  The first free Tuvan state might have passed into
total obscurity had not they issued a set of odd-looking stamps.  A
young man named Richard Feynman collected these stamps, and grew up to
be a famously iconoclastic Nobel Prize winning physicist.  He developed
an interest in all things Tuvan (after all, he said, any place with a
capital named "Kyzyl" had to be interesting), but was denied permission
to visit Tuva by the Soviets.  His friends maintained the "Friends of
Tuva" association and were eventually successful in bringing some Tuvan
musicians to play in San Francisco in the early 1990's.
But the unlikely relationship between Americans and Tuvans is not the
whole story of Genghis Blues.
No, the real story is even more unlikely.  For at the Tuvans' concert in
San Francisco, a member of the audience met up with them backstage and
began throat singing a Tuvan ballad in the ancient style.  Paul Pena, a
blues musician who is blind, heard a Tuvan throat singing performance on
a shortwave radio some years before.  Fascinated, he figured out the
Tuvan musical style of throat singing, which involves using the lungs
like bagpipes to create this weird harmonic sound.  Well, the head of
the Tuvan delegation immediately invited Pena to the Tuvan throat
singing competition and cultural symposium in 1995.  Pena left San
Francisco and traveled to Tuva, accompanied by a team of kamikaze
filmmakers and a local radio DJ.
This is the story of Genghis Blues -- the story of the triumphal visit
of Paul Pena to Tuva -- and you won't see a better movie this year.
Now look, I know what you're thinking.  You're thinking that I've lost
my mind.  This can't be the best movie of the year.  It's a documentary,
for crying out loud.  It's got subtitles.  It's about some weird kind of
music that you have to hear to even believe.
I know.  It sounds incredibly goofy.  It sounds like the sort of movie
that your friend the film buff tells you to see that's only playing at a
tiny theater on the other side of town and has Ralph Fiennes wearing
something other than a Nazi uniform or Harvey Keitel not wearing
anything.
But trust me.  This is a great movie.  Let me tell you what happened to
me.  There's a scene, early on, where Pena visits a school in Tuva.  All
these little kids are lined up, and they're demonstrating throat
singing.  After they're finished, they come up to Pena -- who's this
great big shaggy bear of a guy -- and hug him and welcome him to their
country.  And one of these kids is wearing a San Francisco Giants cap,
and when I saw that, I started grinning and didn't stop.
It gets better.  (Not right away, there's a sheep slaughtering scene in
between, but it does.)  There are two scenes in this movie where Pena
gets on stage and performs... and... well, I'm never going to be a
throat singing fan, and if this stuff ever hits the airwaves on anything
other than NPR I'll be shocked.  But that doesn't matter, not one little
bit, because these scenes are electric.  Pena develops this incredible
rapport with the audience that completely transcends the music,
East-West relationships, anything you care to name.
There are those who say that 1999 was a great year for movies, and a lot
of them point to what they call "movie magic".  From a pure special
effects angle, they have a point, and movies like The Matrix and the new
Star Wars movie show a lot of technical wizardry.  But the real magic of
movies is not what's on screen but what's in the heart.  Genghis Blues
is the most magical movie of the year.  It tells an extraordinary story
about great characters in a faraway land, and it does it with the kind
of open, exuberant spirit you don't see in movies anymore.  Genghis
Blues reminds us that movies, like children and music, have the power to
stir the most cynical bean-bag of a heart.  Yes, and to make it dance.
Movie Reviews:  http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Curtis+Edmonds
http://www.epinions.com/user-curtisedmonds
"Good fences don't necessarily make good neighbors, but high fences
help."
      -- Hank Hill, WD-40 For The Soul

Author
Frankie Paiva
There is not one other film this year that will give off the same amount of
emotions that Genghis Blues does. At first, it's tone is rather comedic, it
follows the story of a blind man's (Paul Pena) journey to Tuva, a country just
north of Mongolia, to enter the throat singing championships. Throat singing is
manipulating the human voice into singing two notes at once, and Paul's
nickname is earthquake for a reason
He is greeted by everyone. Being one of the first Americans ever to want to
visit Tuva, he spends most of the film traveling the countryside and singing in
the contest. He experiences his first sheep slaughtering, a bath in a holy
river, and delicious Tuvan vodka. His times there are very happy, but things
begin to go bad. Running out of his depression medication, the crew in forced
to have some shipped directly to them (which isn't very easy.) This let's us
see Paul's more vulnerable side, and it's extremely sad.
But the film is so much more than that. Have you ever seen a film that can be
sad, uplifting, depressing, and trimuphant all at the same time? No, you
haven't. In Paul's home of San Francisco he is just a stupid blind man who's
only place he can go by himself is the local mini-mart. They tell of a time
where Paul was asked directions while a man took a $400 dollor check out of his
hand. 
But in Tuva he is a god. And his memories there is something that people can
never take away from him. Genghis Blues appeared at the Seattle International
Film Festival and has begun a two week run in Seattle. I'm not sure if it will
be released elsewhere, but if it does, I highly recommend that you see this
wonderful movie. This is a true triumph of human emotion. Genghis Blues gets
*** 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains a sheep slaughtering scene (it's not that bad)
and some mild language. Good Age: 9 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic
