Title
Review for Niagara (1953)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
Ray Cutler (Max Showalter) is a winner of a shredded wheat essay
contest, and his prize is a trip to Niagara Falls, with his wife Polly 
(Jean Peters).  Ray is good-natured but somewhat smarmy.  Peters
has no discernable personality.  Ray is waiting at the hotel
for shredded wheat corporate bigshot Mr. Kettering, hoping for a job offer.
At a humble motel at Niagara, they meet a troubled married couple.
George Loomis (Joseph Cotten) is a moody, paranoid man, unable to
keep a job and in the process of losing wife Rose (Marilyn Monroe)
who is voluptuous and much younger.
The Cutlers are nosy, especially Peters, going out of their way to
talk to the Loomis's.  Later, while touring the falls, Peters
sees Monroe making out with a young man (Richard Allan).
It turns out that Monroe is plotting with Allan to kill her husband.  
No wonder she is in such a good mood.  She sets a trap for
Cotten, with Allan and Cotten alone in the same elevator.
Later, Monroe pretends to be frantically worried about her missing
husband.  Again the Loomis couple are brought into the story
as police search the area for Cotten.  A body is fished from
the rapids, and Monroe must identify it.  We don't see the body,
but Monroe does, screams, and is carried unconscious to a hospital.
For some reason, the motel owner moves the Cutler's belongings
into the Loomis' former room.  Peters is sleeping, when Cotten
(he's alive!) enters, brandishing a kitchen knife, thinking Peters
is Monroe.  Peters gives an excellent scream (much more spirited than
Monroe's was).  Ray doesn't buy the story about Cotten being alive,
and tells her she had a nightmare.
Mr. Kettering (Don Wilson) and wife arrive.  Wilson is a gregarious 
backslapper, and insists and showing the Cutlers the area.  They go to 
visit the falls.  
Now the story becomes increasingly unbelievable.  Somehow, Peters
isolates herself from the party, convenient for meeting Cotten, who
just happens to be there.  Peters runs from Cotten, who tracks her
down, admits to murdering Allan, wants her to "help him" without bothering 
to explain what help he wants.  Peters escape, but doesn't tell anyone 
what she's seen.  Returning to the motel, a police detective is waiting.  
Oddly, she lies to him at first, then finally tells him that Cotten is 
alive and Monroe knows it, not mentioning the murder of Allan.  
Amazingly, the detective leaves without asking any further questions.
Monroe makes the mistake of wandering about alone.  Cotten, who
certainly gets around, happens upon her, stalks her, and strangles
her in the bell tower.  He happens to get locked in the tower,
but makes no effort to escape until the door is unlocked the next
morning.  Instead of remaining in hiding in Canada, Cotten returns
to the American border, where he is sure to be spotted by a mass
of people and policeman, who by now are looking for him.
Meanwhile, the Cutlers are boating with the Ketterings.  In another
unbelievable coincidence, Cotten, after hiding behind trees, sneaks
into the boat after distracting the others.  Peters returns alone
to the boat.  She sees Cotten, he tells her to leave, she physically
attacks him, without calling for help!  He knocks her out, heads
straight to the falls to escape police, and runs out of gas.  Perhaps 
the whole movie plot has been a slow-moving setup for Peters to be 
in peril.  Cotten sacrifices himself for the damsel in distress, 
who watches in horror as Cotten goes over the falls.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 NIAGARA (director: Henry Hathaway; screenwriters: Charles
 Brackett/Richard Breen/Walter Reisch; cinematographer: Joe MacDonald;
 editor: Barbara McLean; cast: Joseph Cotten (George Loomis), Marilyn
 Monroe (Rose Loomis), Jean Peters (Polly Cutler), Casy Adams (Ray
 Cutler), Richard Allan (Patrick), Don Wilson (Mr. Kettering), Lurene
 Tuttle (Mrs. Kettering), Denis O'Dea (Inspector Sharkey), Russell
 Collins (Mr. Qua), Will Wright (Boatman); Runtime: 89; 20th Century
 Fox; 1953)
An edgy George Loomis (Cotten) can't sleep and wanders aimlessly along
the banks of Niagara Falls on the Canadian side of the border and
returns to his motel cabin, where he observes his much younger and very
sexy wife Rose (Monroe) as she sleeps.
A young couple, on their belated honeymoon, just arrive from the Midwest
to stay in the same motel cabin as the Loomis'. Polly (Peters) and Ray
Cutler (Adams) are a satisfied couple, excited to be tourists and eager
to enjoy the falls. He works for a cereal company in Ohio whose main
factory is on the New York side of the falls, and he just won this
vacation for a catchy advertising slogan he submitted, as he also hopes
to meet the big boss of the cereal plant Mr. Kettering (Wilson) and try
to advance his career. The couple is ready to move into their reserved
cabin that overlooks the falls but the Loomis' haven't vacated, as Rose
complains that she can't move her sick husband at present because he's
sleeping, something he rarely does. She also mentions that her husband
was just released from a veterans mental hospital. Mr. Qua (Collins),
the motel owner, reluctantly gets the couple another cabin, as Polly
doesn't want to disturb someone who's sick.
While the Cutlers are touring the falls, Polly spots Rose smooching with
her lover (Allan).
Later on, at the motel, Rose joins some young dancers at the motel and
asks them to play a record called "Kiss." She's overdressed or
underdressed, depending on how you look at things, as she wears a sultry
red, low-cut dress, which prompts Ray to say, "Hey, get out the fire
hose." Upon hearing that song, George, in front of the dancers, breaks
the record in a fit of anger and cuts his hand. Polly patches up the cut
and George tells her how he met his saloon waitress wife and how she's a
tramp and that since he married her his life has gone downhill due to
his instability and his concern about her unfaithfulness, but he loves
her so much that he can't leave her.
Rose's diabolical plan is to have her boyfriend kill her distraught
husband and dump his body over the falls to make it look like a suicide.
But things backfire when the boyfriend comes after George with a wrench
but is overcome by him. The action takes place offscreen. George leaves
the sightseeing area by taking the boyfriend's clothes, hoping that he
will be taken for dead and he therefore can freely go after his wife.
When Inspector Sharkey (O'Dea) asks Rose to identify if the body found
by the falls is her husband's, she faints. A little later, Polly spots
George in her room thinking his wife is there, but Polly can't convince
her husband that she wasn't having a nightmare, that she really saw
George. She will later call the police even though she's sympathetic to
him, but she's afraid he will kill his wife.
Some viwers might consider Niagara more of a steamy melodrama than a
noir, but it does have all the dark ingredients fitting a noir film,
whereby an innocent is overtaken by a lust that consumes him, while the
femme fatale is a heartless schemer with a large sexual appetite. This
was Marilyn Monroe's first starring role, after having been in already
eighteen other films, but mostly in small roles.
The real star in this film is the majestic and powerful Niagara Falls
and the costar is the bell tower, where musical requests by the visitors
are honored. The falls symbolizes that the sexual conflict of the
Loomis' is getting out of control and leading to their destruction.
Director Hathaway does a nice job of crafting the film and exploiting
its colorful location, but what he doesn't do that well, is allow the
mystery part of the story to gracefully unfold. The last reel plays like
an action film, with a strangulation, a kidnapping, a helicopter rescue,
and one character doomed to be going over the falls.
In contrast to the Loomis', the Cutler's are seen as being a
conventional couple, and the camera seems to be gently eyeballing them
and showing that their sex life is calmer and more suited for a positive
and loving relationship than the Loomis'. Yet the normal couple is
attracted to the more exotic one, especially Polly, through whose eyes
the film is filtered out to us.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
