Title
Review for League of Their Own, A (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Chuck Dowling
A League of Their Own (1992) **1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Tom Hanks, Geena
Davis, Madonna, Jon Lovitz, Rosie O'Donnell, Lori Petty, David Strathairn,
Garry Marshall, Tea Leoni, Bill Pullman.  Directed By: Penny Marshall.
Running Time: 128 minutes.
Another example of a critical hit that just isn't that good. Hanks plays a
drunken ex-baseball star who is given a job as the manager of one of the
all-girls baseball teams developed during World War II.
The movie is basically about two baseball-playing sisters (Davis and
Petty) who love each other but Petty also hates Davis because Davis is a
big star and is stealing the spotlight away from Petty. So Petty bitches
and whines and breaks things throughout the entire film and then ends up
victorious in the end. What?
Whining and complaining brings about glory and victory?
Another problem with the film is that Davis is given too much screen time
and the rest of the cast is neglected. Hanks and Lovitz are outstanding, but
given little to do. In the beginning of the film, a big deal is made about a
plain-looking girl who can play the game really well. Then you really don't
see her again. And then there's another girl who can't read. So you're
thinking that during the film there should be some minor yet heartwarming
scenes about teaching her to read, right? No, just one joke involving
Madonna and a sex novel.
And how about that Madonna huh? She's finally found a role that she can play
without difficulty. She's a slut. But, she's a slut with a heart! Throughout
the film she keeps mentioning all the things she does with men. Then when
the players are told that there will not be another season of women's
baseball, she starts to cry hysterically saying that she won't go back to
dancing in front of men. Then in the next scene she's off to town to pick up
guys. Huh? It's ok to sleep with as many as possible but degrading to get
paid just to dance for them?
Given all the talent involved with the film, it's a shame that it's simply
mediocre at best.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Frank Maloney
     A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN is a film directed by Penny Marshall, from a
screenplay by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel.  It stars Geena Davis,
Lori Petty, Tom Hanks, Madonna, Rosie O'Donnell, and Megan Cavanaugh.
Rated PG for mature humor.
     A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN is a funny, warm movie about a nearly
forgotten moment in U.S.  professional sports.  It is also less than it
could have been and backs off from having the kind of impact that Geena
Davis' last movie, THELMA AND LOUISE, had.  What's here is fine, but it
is only the surface of what should be a great story, rich and
reverberant beyond the limited significance of the story per se.
     Penny Marshall, the director of BIG and AWAKENINGS (as well as
JUMPIN' JACK FLASH, but that's a different story), backed off the larger
meaning of the story in its latter part, when the story focuses on the
relationship of the two sister-players, played by Davis and Lori Petty.
The predictable story plays itself out with lots of emotion and
schmaltz, like any self-respecting baseball picture, in the Big Game at
the end.  But up until the story shifted into this phase, Marshall had
done a pretty good job of expanding the story to make some telling
points about the sexism of the times, about racism (in a brief and
memorable scene involving a black woman with a fierce pitching arm and a
fiercer face, knowing that two barriers were keeping her out of pro
ball), the personal price war exacts, and the bravery and strength of
individuals in the face of oppressions of all kinds.
     It is, however, the actors that really make LEAGUE the success that
is.  The secondary parts are filled by some primary talent.  Jon Lovitz
as the baseball scout steals every one of the few scenes he's in with
his dry, tough wit.  Megan Cavanaugh as the homely, downtrodden slugger
is hilarious and not a little heartbreaking; this is the what the world
does to such people, and you have to cheer them when they learn to fight
back.
     Madonna as "All-the-way" Mae Mordabito is completely charming; it's
a made-to-order part, but what makes it and her good is not her "bosoms"
(as in "What if my bosoms, you know, fall out?"  To which Rosie
O'Donnell replies "You think there ain't no man in America what ain't
seen your bosoms?")  is Mae's friendships first with Doris Murphy
(O'Donnell), then with the player she teaches to read with the help of a
dirty paperback; it's these friendships that make us take a interest in
this ex-taxi dancer.
     O'Donnell herself walks away with her scenes, leaving Madonna in
the dust.  O'Donnell is feisty, fierce, loyal, and full of energy as the
third base player.
     But, of course, the greatest scene stealer is Geena Davis who
towers over the rest of the cast figuratively and literally.  The woman
who plays the older Dottie, by the way, looks like a very tall version
of the Beav's mom, Barbara Billingsley, which is a little unnerving.
Davis plays Dottie Hinson, the best player in the All-American Girls
Baseball League, the only one who says she does not love baseball.  But
she's competitive and while she's a player she plays as the game is
meant to be played.  Davis is strong and straight; she looks right with
dirt on her face, she looks right spitting tobacco.  She's a believable
leader, and her role in redeeming Jimmy Dugan, played by Tom Hanks, is
entirely credible.  And the scene with her husband (Bill Pullman) is
nicely underplayed and breathlessly exciting.  It is pleasurable to
watch her every scene in this movie.
     Lori Petty plays her sister Kit.  Kit's the interesting one in
terms of having problems to work through.  Kit is jealous and feeling
under the shadow of her big sister.  She may come off as a little
petulant, perhaps not entirely sympathetic.  And whether she honestly
earns her place in the sun at the end in an open question that movie
posits without following up on.
     Tom Hanks plays a washed up, self-pitying, alcoholic ex-great who
is reduced to "managing" the Rockford Peaches.  He's a mess and it's
great fun to see Tom who has gotten entirely too much mileage out of
being cute being very uncute here and still be engaging and very funny.
He has a couple of scenes, including one consisting of him holding in
his anger, which are well worth the price of your ticket.  Hanks as
Dugan is a charmer, but it is also a character that is built up and then
dropped, much as Cavanaugh and Petty are, all in the interest of going
for the laughs and the tears.
     There is some sentiment in LEAGUE, scenes that made the tears
stream down my face.  The ending recreates the inauguration of the
Women's Baseball exhibit at Cooperstown, an event that saw the
beginnings of the film itself -- Marshall attended the ceremony and
interviewed some of the living veterans of the AAGPGL before she decided
to go with LEAGUE -- an event, I say, that may charm and move you or
make you squirm depending on your tolerance for sentiment.  But the
older versions of the players are a fine and interesting group of women,
and I found their presence refreshing and uplifting.
     I recommend A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN to you, recommend it
enthusiastically and wholeheartedly.  You can even play full price and
get your money's worth.  It is, I think, the best general-release,
Hollywood movie I've seen this summer.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Move over, Rosie the Riveter: this film
     celebrates Betty the Baseball Player.  Penny Marshall tells
     the story of the women's baseball league founded during World
     War II.  The script is a little cliched and predictable, but
     Marshall, as usual, tells an engrossing story.  Rating: +1
     (-4 to +4).
     At one point in A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN, Dottie Hinson (played by Geena
Davis) observes that playing baseball is hard.  Veteran ballplayer Jimmy
Dugan (played by Tom Hanks) tells her sagely, "If it wasn't hard, everyone
would do it.  The hard makes it great."  I think that must play better to
baseball fans than it does to me.  Having as I do virtually zero interest in
the game itself, I would not play no matter how easy it was for me.  Nor do
I believe that the game is great or that its hardness makes it great.  The
presence of baseball will not make a film very good in itself.  For a
baseball film actually to be good it has to rely not on good baseball
content or the belief that playing baseball is somehow a noble profession.
That is why I like THE NATURAL and FIELD OF DREAMS, but THE PRIDE OF THE
YANKEES leaves me cold.  I think that A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN really requires
of the viewer a belief that there was something noble in women playing
baseball and keeping the sport alive while most of the men players were
fighting in World War II.  For me that is a difficult leap of faith to make
and you can weight this review accordingly.
     A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN is, I suspect, almost pure fiction vaguely
inspired by real events as was director Penny Marshall's previous film,
AWAKENINGS.  Undoubtedly some of the background detail is accurate, but most
of the drama is probably made up of the whole cloth.  The story tells how
Hinson and her sister Kit Keller (played by Lori Petty) are recruited by a
hilariously rude and obnoxious scout (played by Jon Lovitz).  Sixty-four
women are chosen to field the four teams of the All-American Girls
Professional Baseball League.  Kit is more anxious to play than is her older
sister, but Dottie is a natural.  Not that anyone seems to care.  Their
alcoholic team manager, Dugan, introduces himself to his team by shuffling
drunkenly to the locker room urinal, using it, and shuffling back out.
During the games, he shows his commitment to the team by sleeping,
scratching his crotch, or practicing what appears to be a regimen of losing
ten pounds a week by spitting.  Hanks takes to this role as if his view of
baseball players mirrors my own.  League President Ira Lowenstein (played by
David Strathairn) at first is anxious only to be certain that the skirts on
the uniforms are short enough to attract audience interest.  The news media
seems even less interested, editorializing against the "masculinization of
women" and then making amused and patronizing newsreels about the women's
league.
     The script is by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel and is something of a
comedown for the team, who wrote PARENTHOOD and CITY SLICKERS.  Much in the
plot is incredibly predictable and overly cliched.  A word that is overused
to describe a film of this sort is "manipulative."  Actually, a film should
be manipulative, and Ganz and Mandel have done it well in the past.  Here it
is often done well, but other times done too obviously.  The last ten
minutes of the film are maudlin and drag.  They could and should have been
cut to two minutes.  The script comes perilously close to making fun of the
awkward, plain, and shy Marla (played by Megan Cavanaugh).  While some of
the male characters redeem themselves later in the film, they almost
universally are insensitive jerks when we first meet them.
     That brings me to the issue of hypocrisy in this superficially feminist
film.  The order of billing is Hanks, Davis, Madonna (as a stereotypical
loose woman), and Petty.  Based on contribution, the order should have been
Davis, Petty, Hanks, and Madonna.  Top billing for Hanks is absurd; he just
did not do more than Davis or Petty.  The locker room scenes are G-ratable
in the first half of the film, then suddenly turn "peek-a-boo" in the second
half of the film.
     The score by Hans Zimmer deserves some credit, occasionally having some
of the mythic feel of Randy Newman's score for THE NATURAL.  However, it
mixes in rock, which seems out of place in a film mostly about the 1940s.  I
would like to call some attention to David Strathairn as Lowenstein.  He
plays quiet and usually likable characters of integrity.  He played a
policeman sympathetic to the strikers in MATEWAN and a commander very
worried for the safety of his men in MEMPHIS BELLE.  He reminds me a lot of
a latter-day Henry Fonda.  I have never seen him in a bad film, which
indicates either that he is intelligent enough to select only better scripts
or that his acting has qualities that appeal only to better filmmakers.
     One final nice touch: the script calls for us to see most of the main
characters as they look almost fifty years later.  Normally this would be
done with a makeup effect. These makeup effects are rarely done believably
and the results are almost always at least suspect.  Marshall went to the
effort of finding look-alike actors of approximately correct ages, then had
the younger actors dub the voices.  The effect is reasonably convincing.
     Considerable money and effort was lavished on this production, but
problems in the script diminish the effort to a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
