Title
Review for Metroland (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Dennis Schwartz

METROLAND (director: Philip Saville; screenwriter: Adrian Hodge/based on
the novel by Julian Barnes; cinematographer: Jean-François Robin; cast:
Christian Bale (Chris Lloyd), Emily Watson (Marion), Lee Ross (Toni),
Elsa Zylberstein (Annick), John Wood (Retired Commuter), 1997)
The phone rings at 5:30 am in the home of advertising man Chris Lloyd
(Bale) and his wife Marion (Watson) and their baby girl. When the phone
rings that early, Marion says she expects bad news. It's 1977 and this
bourgeois couple in their early 30s, who live in the London suburb of
Eastwood, a community once optimistically dubbed the place of the
future, that had plans to link this commuter railroad all over England
and to the continent, but all that fell through and it it is now just a
typical bedroom suburban community with a train to the city. A retired
commuter (Wood), will tell Chris on his last commute after 45-years,
that "Metroland" is not a place but a state of mind."
The trouble, on the phone, turns out to be Toni (Ross), the best friend
of Chris and a reminder of his rebellious days as a bohemian in the
'60s, and someone Marion detests for his anger and the blame he casts on
others for his failure to be a recognized poet. In other words, she
knows that he is a phony. But he is Chris' life-long friend, someone he
has lost contact with for the past 5-years, except for the occasional
postcard, like the one that said: "Africa's where it's happening.
Vibrant culture. Great people. Thinking of hanging out here for a while.
Eat the rich. Love, Toni." If I got a postcard like that, I would think
of getting a new best friend. Anyway, that starts a rather predictable
meeting with his old friend and the beginning of a cliche-ridden story
about a mid-life crisis that the restless Chris is having with his
decision to live in the suburbs, as he is yearning for the good old days
of being free from marriage and responsibilities. Toni upon meeting him,
tells him he has become like his parents.
This is a story which turns out to be so flat and without emotion and
plays like a film you can almost swear you saw before even if you
didn't, that's how forgettable and regretable the story and the acting
are. It almost makes you wonder what the filmmaker is trying to say
about this trite conundrum his protaganist has. The film never comes to
any surprises or reveals anything you wouldn't have known if you didn't
see the film. Which is why, I would think the sensible thing to do for
those who value how they spend their time, would be to avoid this one.
At least, that's what I would do if I had it to do over. But that's not
to say that the film was so terrible that it can't be seen, that would
not be true, since it is not so bad as it is a case of it being so dull
that it negates any enjoyment value.
Toni fills Chris in on his life, telling him that he was teaching a
writing course in California and seducing his female students (isn't
that charming!), and being a world-wide traveller. He is also someone
who is constantly berating his friend for being bourgeois without even
asking him if he is happy about his decision to go from being a
free-lance photographer living in Paris to such a hopelessly
middle-class situation here. Why Toni is a poet, we have to take as a
statement of fact coming from the filmmaker, because he appears like an
obnoxious jerk and an actor who is badly miscast, and there was no
evidence given in the film that he shows even enough intelligence to
spell poet, let alone to even consider him to be a poet.
The film flips back and forth between the Beatlemania-era of the early
'60s and the suburbs of the '70s, as it uses the means of flashback to
show Chris then and now, as he wonders how his life would have turned
out if he stayed with his upfront, sexually free girlfriend in Paris,
Annick (Zylberstein), who had no trouble fitting in with the other
actors playing their parts, as she also gave a zombie-like performance.
Chris, as a bohemian, was too pathetic to seriously believe and not
funny enough to laugh at. But what was really laughable, was the
filmmaker's bourgeois conception of what a bohemian is.
What's left for the story to tell, are those predictable scenes of the
friend who is not the friend he pretends to be, but someone who is
jealous of his friend' material comforts and satisfying marriage. The
task of getting all this straight for our befuddled hero's handsome
head, is his solid wife, and she will tell our hero this even if he
finds it so hard to believe.
In one flashback scene, I was personally annoyed to hear one of my
favorite French directors, Robert Bresson, have his name being dropped
by Chris when he asks Annick, "Do you want to see a film? There's a new
Bresson playing. "This film will not be mistaken for a Bresson. Trust me
on that.
The film was able to muster one great line of dialogue, and it comes
from Marion, as she tells her hapless hubby, "You will get married
because you are not original enough not to."
The worst line in the movie is when Chris realizes he has a good thing
going with Marion and tells her his reason for not fooling around with
another woman, "Who wants fast-food if you can eat at the Ritz."
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Scott Renshaw
     There are few central dramatic conflicts trickier to pull off -- or
more potentially annoying -- than a mid-life crisis.  The protagonist can
easyily become unsympathetic, his introspection little more than
self-indulgence.  It's rare to find a character with the potential to turn
a family man's grass-is-always-greener musings into something compelling,
but that's exactly what we find in Chris Lloyd (Christian Bale), the
central figure in METROLAND.  What a shame that potential isn't remotely
realized.  METROLAND is a character study with huge chunks of context
missing, a surface-level gloss on the clash between youthful idealism and
adult responsibility.
     The story opens in 1977, where advertising man Chris is living with
his wife Marion (Emily Watson) and infant daughter in the London suburb of
Eastwood, a bedroom community dubbed "Metroland" for its dependence on
rail commuters.  Chris feels a vague discontent with his domestic life, a
discontent that becomes more palpable with a visit from his childhood
friend Toni (Lee Ross).  An itinerant would-be writer still living free
and easy, Toni inspires Chris to reflect on the path that led to his own
domesticity.  In flashback we see Chris first as a rebellious teen in
1963, then as an aspiring photographer living in Paris five years later.
There he has a sexual affair with a French woman named Annick (Elsa
Zylberstein), an affair that haunts him with thoughts of a life that might
have been
     Plenty of things about Chris are intriguing conceptually.  As a
youth, and again as an adult, he is convinced by Toni that life in this
"bourgeois" world is pathetic, a shabby substitute for a life of art and
random affairs.  What Chris finds hard to accept is that Metroland is
actually the world he prefers.  He drifts from Annick to Marion because he
feels disconnected from the life he craves, then he drifts from Marion
because he thinks he has sold out the bold dreams of his youth, even
though he was never entirely committed to them.  As mid-life crisis
material goes, this is pretty unique stuff:  a man who strays not so much
because he's unhappy with what he has, but because he figures he's
_supposed_ to be unhappy.
     Don't make the mistake of assuming director Philip Saville and
screenwriter Adrian Hodges will flesh out those ideas.  For all its
flashing back, METROLAND never portrays Chris interacting with his family
as a youth to provide background for his feelings about suburbia.  It
never spends enough time developing the friendship with Toni that will
color Chris' entire life.  It never explores Toni's character in any
depth, relying on third-party psychoanalysis to explain his motivations.
There's a consistent superficiality to METROLAND, a refusal to give the
characters a depth that makes plot developments -- like a late revelation
regarding Marion -- feel anything but arbitrary and exploitative.
     There's some nice atmosphere to METROLAND, particularly from Mark
Knopfler's silky score and an effective period look, but it doesn't come
close to making up for the narrative shortcomings.  It doesn't help that
Seville uses inefficient techniques like cross-cutting with 1977 Chris'
pondering face throughout the 1968 flashbacks, or that Christian Bale's
performance is most notable for his perpetual petulant pout.  It's a film
in which the only clarity comes from its most obvious observations. 
METROLAND is a missed opportunity to give thematic weight to a mid-life
crisis, leaving yet another story of a horny husband trying to be 21
again.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Lions Gate Films
 Director:  Philip Saville
 Writer:  Adrian Hodge, novel by Julian Barnes
 Cast: Christian Bale, Emily Watson, Lee Ross, Elsa
Zylberstein, Rufus, Jonathan Aris, Ifan Meredith, Amanda
Ryan, John Wood
   A recent article in the New York Times Science section
takes the view that mid-life crisis is in large part a red
herring: that the vast majority of people go through their
thirties and forties quite content with their lives. Well, heck,
Julian Barnes, whose novel "Metroland" was published in
1980, let us in on that secret two decades ago!  With due
respect for the genuine problems that afflict our world, many
"crises" are manufactured or inflated by the press, by
Hollywood, and by the media in general to sell stories.  
   "Metroland," adapted from Barnes' novel for the screen by
Adrian Hodges and directed by Philip Saville, is about Chris
(Christian Bale), a man in his early thirties--not quite at
midlife but acting as though he were--who seems to have it
all.  He's got a lovely and smart, though cynical wife, Marion
(Emily Watson), a healthy daughter, and a tidy home in a
clean London suburb known as Metroland (the last stop on
the city's metro line). He enjoys a moderately successful
career as a commercial photographer, but senses that
something is missing.  He's too secure.  When his best friend
Toni (Lee Ross) drops in for a visit in 1977, Chris's mind is
transported back to an earlier, more carefree time during the
late sixties when he and Toni part company to seek
adventure in their separate ways.  Chris, insisting like
so many adolescents and twenty-somethings today that he
will never be like his staid, bourgeois parents, takes his
camera to Paris.  He opts for a Bohemian life, scraping up a
few francs each day from his pictures, and enjoys a torrid
affair with a beautiful, liberated Parisian woman, Annick (Elsa
Zylberstein). With her, the inexperienced Chris loses his
virginity (in an amusing scene showing him as a clumsy oaf)
and becomes increasingly committed to the release which the
French way of life afford him.  His spirit changes when he
meets an English girl, Marion (Emily Watson), who brings out
Chris's homesickness and whom he ultimately chooses
because, really, you can't escape your innate character.  The
fun-loving Marion is more restrained, more earthbound than
her French competition, and Chris recognizes her as his
soul-mate.
   Stories about once-radical friends who drop back into
society inevitably bring to mind American classics like
Lawrence Kasdan's 1983 "The Big Chill," a surface-level look
at the characteristic cycle that brings head-in-the-clouds
young people back to Earth.  It's not just that we acquire
kids, mortgages, and steady jobs we want to hold on to
because of incremental gains in position, salary and pension. 
It's that after we've sown our wild oats for a decade or so
and have seen the boozy party scene for what it is, we
realize that we not only can't go back; we don't even want
that life any more.  With stability comes a kind of contentment
that we'd not trade for the world, and few (if any) pictures
bring that notion home more strikingly, honestly, and
authentically as "Metroland."  Though Toni and Chris have
parted ways after a long and intense friendship, they remain
fond of each other, though their life-styles remain far apart
when they reunite.  Toni remains the perpetual adolescent,
still traveling--to Africa, to Italy, to California and New York--
still picking up girl friends and reawakening in Chris a
questioning of his bourgeois ideals.  Has Chris sold out for a
boring job and life in a suburb where each day monotonously
repeats its predecessor?  Was Chris wrong to marry
girl-next-door Marion, his sexual life restricted by each cry of
his baby daughter in the next room--while Toni's days are
pervaded with wine, women and song?
    Director Saville resists the temptation to cast Toni as a
homebreaker.  He is a man who, despite his many
acquaintances on three continents, longs to reestablish the
good old days with his boyhood chum.  Toni's return does,
however, threaten to injure Chris's marriage as Chris
increasingly looks back with nostalgic thoughts on his
untroubled years in Paris.
   Mark Knopfler's original soundtrack highlights the distinct
personalities of the three principals: Toni, who refuses to
grow up, or at least to surrender to what society tells him is
mature; Marion, the sensible if domesticated woman who
enjoys her suburban life, resisting the latest threat to its
continuation; Annick, the seductive, devil-may-care French
lover whose seductiveness oddly becomes insipid in Chris's
mind; and Chris, torn between the glitter of his youth as a
freelance photographer in an unrepressed Paris and his more
serene thoughts about his life in Metroland.
   For all the story's motif--that life is best when we adapt
ourselves contentedly with its seven Shakespearean stages--
Saville aims for some balance in displaying one dispirited
commuter (John Wood), taking his last ride to Metroland after
forty-two years with a company that has scarcely recognized
his contributions.  Chris looks closely at him, imagining
himself three decades hence--a miserable, broken man
regretting that he did not follow Toni's call to arms.
   Emily Watson, having turned in a first-rate performance as
Jacqueline du Pre in one of the ten best picture of 1998
continues to strike us with her lack of affectation.  While
Christian Bale appears in virtually every scene, Watson, the
author's ideological mouthpiece, anchors the show.   Jean-
Francois Robin's photography nicely contrasts the party-
loving Paris of La Vie Boheme with the London suburb of
generally contended suburbanites washing their cars, raising
their families, making their peace with the passing years.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
"You should be able to have affairs. It will be good for our
marriage. And don't worry, I'll still do your laundry and wash the
dishes." In Philip Saville's METROLAND, those are the lines spoken to
Chris(Christian Bale), by his wife Marion(Emily Watson), in a
recurring dream of his.
Chris and Marion live in 1970's Eastwood, a small town in England in
an area dubbed Metroland.  They are young, married and have a small
child. One early morning, Chris recieves an unexpected phone call from
a rebellious, despicable old friend named Toni(Lee Ross).  Toni
invites himself over for lunch, and he seems amazed at the change that
Chris has gone through.  "You're living your parents' life," he tells
Chris. It is then that Chris remembers the past through flashbacks.
It turns out that Chris lived in the Metroland area as a child, only
to leave to Paris to further his career in photography. While working
at a diner, he meets Annick(Elsa Zylberstein), a beautiful young
French woman(who speaks English) and begins a lusty, sex-filled
relationship with her. But while taking photos in the park, he meets
Marion for the first time, and begins seeing her often(but just as
friends). But when Chris lets Annick know about Marion, his
woman-friend, she freaks out and moves out, and Chris and Marion take
their relationship to the next level.
But as the film skips back to the present, we see how Toni is pushing
Chris to be a wild child again and cheat on his wife. But Chris is a
very trustworthy man, and monogamy is one thing that he is very
careful about. The marital dilemmas between Chris and Marion are the
core of METROLAND, and the best thing about it. Chris is conflicted
whether his stable life in Metroland makes him happy, or merely
content.
For the most part, METROLAND is a slow, weak film, saved only by
occasional good dialogue and acting. But as Chris and Marion's
marriage is questioned, the film becomes much more fascinating,
perhaps because of Bale and Watson. Those expecting to see a lot of
the great Emily Watson will be disappointed, but METROLAND gives her a
chance to restrain herself, as she plays a character not nearly as
animated as her previous ones. VELVET GOLDMINE's Bale similarly holds
his own, but one can only leave METROLAND wishing someone had given
both actors a better movie. Nonetheless, some parts of METROLAND are
better than others, but don't expect another Oscar nomination for
Watson; at least not yet.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST


Author
Steve Rhodes
With a lovely wife and baby, a lucrative job, and an upper middle class
home in the British suburbs, Chris, as he tells everyone, couldn't be
happier.  Too bad he doesn't believe it.  Lately he's been talking long
walks alone at night making voluminous mental lists "'til the panic
subsides."  Among other anxieties, he has become almost paralyzed with
dreams of his long gone, youthful life across the Channel.
10 years ago, as a photographer living in Paris with a sexy French
girlfriend, he boasted to his friends then of his complete bliss.  The
problem is that, just below the surface, he was as full of doubts then
as now.  And then, as now, he was blessed with a sensuous and supporting
woman with whom he shared his dreams as well as some wild sex.  (Okay,
if truth be told, the current state of his marital sex life isn't what
it was when he first got married.)
If ever a guy had it all, twice in fact, it is Chris.  Philip Saville's
METROLAND, set in 70's England and 60's Paris, is an insightful and
intimate character study of Chris and the two loves of his life.
Without explosive behavior, the finely tuned film challenges your mind
rather than manipulating your emotions with the cheap theatrics typical
of most films.  In a stunning performance that is purposely shallow and
ambiguous, Christian Bale becomes Chris.  Never letting Chris degenerate
into a caricature, Bale makes his character easy to empathize with.
Cutting back and forth between the two decades, you want Chris to stay
with the one he's with at the time, and yet you can understand the
emotions tugging him one way and then another.  In some ways like
Michael Apted's 35UP, the documentary that contrasts people's feelings
about their life at various ages, METROLAND provides few easy answers.
But it asks some pertinent and challenging questions.
As the story starts, Toni (Lee Ross), Chris's bosom buddy from his
student days to his days in Paris, has come for his first visit in 5
years.  Like an evil twin, Toni, who is jealous of Chris's success,
taunts him for renouncing his former Bohemian lifestyle in favor of his
new bourgeois success.  Like the devil, Toni provides many temptations
for Chris.
Emily Watson, after 2 juicy and high profile starring roles (BREAKING
THE WAVES and HILARY AND JACKIE) that garnered her back-to-back Academy
Award nominations for Best Actress, takes a crucial supporting role this
time.  Playing Chris's wife, Marion, Watson gives a preciseness and
richness to a role that in lesser hands would fade into the background.
Chris is no match for Marion's intellect.  She knows what she wants, and
it is Chris for a husband.  Not long after they meet, she remarks
casually about his getting married someday.  Shocked, he explains that
he's a rebel who'll never be married.  With complete confidence, she
explains why he most certainly will be wed.  "You're not original enough
not to," she tells him perspicaciously.
As his lovely, free-spirited, French girlfriend Annick, Elsa Zylberstein
gives her character a sympathetic warmth that allows Annick to be much
more than just an extended fling.  The casting is ideal in that she is
only modestly better looking than Marion, which makes Chris's indecision
about something other than surface beauty.
METROLAND's strength comes from its remarkably sophisticated attitude
about sexuality.  The picture's completely natural portrayal of sex is
funny, playful and quite erotic without ever being cheap or excessively
explicit.  Chris's first sexual encounter with Annick, with him being
awkwardly overeager and her being lovingly supportive, is precious.
Similarly, the pillow talk between Chris and Marion about some of their
earlier, wild sexual encounters is sweet and humorous.
Adrian Hodges's intelligent script, based on the novel by Julian Barnes,
is filled with real characters that never say anything that rings false.
Hodges captures Chris's predicaments with delicate precision.  Even the
story's most minor characters are well drawn.  One passenger on a train,
for example, laments that this is his last ride on this route.  He's
been put out to pasture by the firm for whom he has worked for 42 years.
His going away gift was a whiskey decanter.  Sadly, he comments that,
after that long, they should have realized that he didn't drink.  The
younger Chris discusses the origin of the name of the area, Metroland,
with him.  Chris says he wants to leave Metroland.  "It doesn't matter
where you go," the man counsels him.  "Metroland isn't a place.  It's a
state of mind."
The only disappointing aspects of the production are the cinematography
and the music.  The former is dull and dingy, and the latter is bland
and uninspired.  Absent these two, relatively minor criticisms, the film
is an astute and intriguing story loaded with subtle but quite
impressive acting.
After seeming to have no satisfactory conclusion, the movie ends quite
well.  As you leave the theater, you may begin to wonder how the rest of
Chris's life will turn out.  Remembering that it was just a movie, your
thoughts may then turn to anticipation for these actors' next movies,
hoping that their future films will be as rewarding and satisfying as
this one.
METROLAND runs 1:45.  It is not rated but might be an R for sex, nudity
and profanity and would be acceptable for older and mature teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
James Sanford
 If you thought that exchange was taken from director Stanley
Kubrick's "Eyes Wide Shut," you're wrong, but not terribly far off the
mark. It's actually from "Metroland," a British drama based on Julian
Barnes' 1980 novel. Both "Metroland" and "Eyes" deal with a comfortable
marriage jeopardized by temptation, but whereas Kubrick's film had the
wife (Nicole Kidman) instigating the conflict, in "Metroland" it's the
husband who opens Pandora's box.
 "Metroland" is set in 1977. Chris (Christian Bale) has settled
down comfortably in a middle-class London suburb with his wife Marion
(Emily Watson) and their baby daughter. He's got the job, the mortgage,
the car payments, the backyard garden and all that goes with it. Then
Chris' old pal Toni (Lee Ross) shows up, still living the swinging life
in his mid-30s. Now Chris has something else to deal with: self-doubt.
 He flashes back to his days in Paris almost a decade ago, when
he wore black turtlenecks, attended Truffaut movies and dreamed of being
a photographer. Did he make the right choice in leaving behind that
bohemian lifestyle for the safety and tranquility of his homeland? Would
he have been happier had he stuck with his free-spirited French lover
Annica (Elsa Zylberstein), instead of abandoning her to go off with
Marion? The primary difference between the character of Chris in
"Metroland" and Bill (Tom Cruise) in "Eyes" is that while Bill went
looking for thrills in the present day, Chris is probing his past,
looking back on what he's already done.
 "Metroland" is likely to strike a chord with a lot of young
husbands, especially those who find themselves sometimes envying their
single friends. Though the movie is considerably more straightforward
than "Eyes" and doesn't have an enormous amount of ground-breaking
information to impart about making marriages work, Bale and Watson are
utterly credible, as is the beguiling Zylberstein in a role that might
have gone to Teri Garr 15 years ago.
 Adrian Hodges' script manages to mix a bit of fantasy into
Chris' mundane existance without throwing off the tone of the film, but
his real strength is his dialogue; some of his words have surprising
sting. Especially memorable is the first conversation between Chris and
Marion, in which he insists he'll never get married and live in the
suburbs. "I think you will," she tells him. "You're not original enough
not to."  James Sanford
