Title
Review for Danger Island (1992) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian L. Johnson
97 min., not rated, Suspense/Action, 1992, Made-for-television
Director: Tommy Lee Wallace
Cast: Lisa Banes, Richard Beymer, Maria Celedonio, Gary Graham,   
      Kathy Ireland, Joe Lara, Christopher Pettiet, Beth Toussaint,
      Eddie Valez, Nikki Cox, June Lockhart, Gina Malina Aurio
     Several people are stranded on a tropical island after the private
plane they were in crash-landed in the ocean.  The island, which seems
uninhabited, turns out not to be a vacation in paradise.  Something in
the ocean attacks two of the people, which one of disappears soon after,
and the other one gets physical deformities.  The rest of the people
travel through the island trying to find help, unaware of the strange
things that are going on around them.
     DANGER ISLAND, which was made for the NBC television network, is
exceptionally good, especially for a television film.  I hope that it
gets released on video cassette, because it would allow people who
missed it when it was aired to see it.  On a scale of zero to five, I
give DANGER ISLAND a five.
     DANGER ISLAND is very well written and seems to transcend its
television roots.  The story is interesting as well as suspenseful.  The
characters are well developed and are ones that found myself wanting to
know more about.  The special effects are very well done.  The locations
picked for the filming look great.  Interestingly enough, the film
leaves itself open for a sequel.  Whether this was intended or not I
don't know.  If handled correctly, a good sequel could be made.
     I think that this is one of the best television films that I have
ever seen.  The budget for the film seemed to be larger than most
television films.  The major problem with most television films is that
they are either one of the many "disease of the week" films, which I, at
least, am getting sick of, or the film has a good idea, but it seems
that a talented writer couldn't be found that would fit in the budget.
This isn't a "disease of the week" film (thank God!) and the writer did
a great job (meaning he probably won't be working for television for
very much longer).

Author
Justin Felix
THE PRESENCE (1992)  
A film review by Justin Felix.  
Copyright 1999 Justin Felix.  
Any comments about this review?  Contact me at justinfelix@yahoo.com  
All of my film reviews are archived at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix 
Written by William Bleich.  
Directed by Tommy Lee Wallace.  
Starring Gary Graham, Kathy Ireland, and June Lockhart.  
Rated PG-13 (contains violence)  97 mins.  
Synopsis:  A whole bunch of people flee an unspecified country and an
unspecified skirmish in a plane.  They crashland near an unspecified island,
where they discover that an unspecified group of scientists working for
unspecified employers have experimented with biological weapons.  
Comments:  Even though THE PRESENCE is packaged as a real movie with a real
movie rating (PG-13), it becomes patently obvious early on that this is a
made-for-TV movie, and if you stick around until the end of the credits,
you'll discover that NBC was responsible for this fluff.  It's not bad fluff
really, as far as cheesy science fiction and TV movies go.  Corny dialogue
and poor acting are plentiful, so you'll have lots to laugh at.  If not, the
creature at the end of the film will make you chuckle:  a slow-moving guy in
a rubber suit slightly reminiscent of the Gill Man in the 1950s classic
CREATURE FROM THE BLACK LAGOON.  
As I said, this is NBC's version of a science fiction thriller, and what a
version it is!  THE PRESENCE opens with bikini-clad supermodels who read
Shakespeare's THE TEMPEST during a photo shoot in what is apparently a war
zone.  Most of the film takes place on a giant island with huge research
facilities which haven't been touched since the mid-1970s and some sort of
native tribe who, despite their primitive ways, can produce supermodels with
surprisingly well-conditioned hair.  And through it all, an aged June
Lockhart (from the old LOST IN SPACE TV series) stands around and offers to
make coffee.  This is a very, very bad movie, but a fairly fun and funny
B-movie.  Wipe the dust off this box at your local video store and check it
out.  
