Title
Review for Made in America (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MADE IN AMERICA (1993) ** 3/5. Directed by Richard Benjamin. Written by
Holly Goldberg Sloan, from a story by Marcia Brandywynne and Sloan.
Photography, Ralf Bode. Editing, Jacqueline Cambas, Music, Mark Isham,
Production design, Evelyn Sakash. Cast: Whoopi Goldberg, Ted Danson, Nia
Long, Will Smith, et al. A Warners release. 120 minutes.  PG-13.
Back in 1972, Woody Allen broke filmic ground of sorts by playing Sperm
in one of the episodes of "Everything You Wanted to Know About Sex (But
Were Afraid to Ask.) "  By now, 21 years later, sperm has come of age in
films, including "Made in America," a silly, innocuous and would-be
romantic comedy. 
The movie entertained me, but then I saw it under ideal conditions. To
wit: I attended a morning screening, which means that the long day had
not yet fatigued me and my critical disposition was on the tolerant
side. The theater empty but for a couple of Whoopi-ite friends who came
along . We were not subjected to a crowd whose laughter often comes at
the wrong moments. 
Since the film had been around for some weeks, I had seen negative or
very mixed reviews and,  expecting the worst I found much of the film
enjoyable. .Of course, in restrospect, the movie is slighter, kinda
dumber and more forgettable than when you watch it.  Even so -- at least
by TV sitcom standards-- "Made in America" is a cute little picture.  
In Oakland, California, Sarah (Goldberg) runs an African-American
bookstore with paraphernalia and objets d'art. The place is called "The
African Queen," a name that could be seen initially as allusive, given
the gayness of at least one of her employees. But this is either a red
herring or a politically correct joke. The real subject attempted is
black and white relations.
It all starts with a most unlikely school-lab session where the students
are frantically pricking one another to establish blood types.  Sarah's
daughter Zora (Nia Long), a top graduating senior, discovers that her
late father could not have been her progenitor. 
She faces her mother who admits that after losing her husband she wanted
a child so badly that she resorted to a sperm bank. Zora is
understandably upset but quickly pacified by Sarah, with whom she has a
wonderful relationship. Even so, understandably Zora wants to know who
that biological father was. 
She dragoons her classmate and best male friend Tea Cake (Smith) into a
visit to a sperm bank. Tea Cake provides the excuse and the laughs. 
Zora, one of the computer whiz-kids of Generation X (cf. "Jurassic Park"
and remember "WarGames" and many other flicks) taps into the records and
finds out the name and Social Security number of the donor. 
It is all improbable, as is Zora's lightning fast tracking down of the
man. She is horrified to discover that he is white, while Sarah, equally
shocked, worries about what all this will do to her daughter.  
Note however that the movie is politically correct all the way and makes
short shrift of color differences.This  has a comforting effect on
audiences that increasingly see black Americans and black-white
relations in contexts of racism, strife and violence. 
What especially outrages Sarah is not so much that Hal Jackson (Danson)
is not black but that he is crass, loud, superficial and obnoxious. The
owner of Jackson Motors, he is a car dealer who invades the TV screen
with commercials that feature him in stunts with animals. Twice
divorced, hard-drinking, chain-smoking and played convincingly as a
dumbo, Hal lives in a beautiful home with Stacy (Jennifer Tilley) a
bimboid aerobics instructor who exhausts him sexually and whose
brainlessness is apparent even to the empty-headed Hal.   
Following confrontations between Sarah and Hal, miscellaneous
sheenanigans and physical mishaps involving people, a bear, an elephant,
a bicycle and a car accident, there grows (predictably) real affection
between Sarah, Zora and Hal, and love inevitably blossoms between Mama
and Papa.
The movie is almost mathematically divided into four half-hour quarters.
The first is very funny. The second less so but still amusing. Parts
three and four struggle for what to do next. Groping for a "denouement"
they respectively stress feelings and romance, and throw in a plot twist
(we can see it coming) before the happy, warm ending.
There's no character development to speak of here, just superficialities
and arbitrary changes, the most incredible causing Danson to reform
suddenly,  throw away his smokes and booze and become calm and sweet. 
The naysaying reviewers find the Goldberg-Danson relationship to be the
film's saving grace, but in fact Sarah and Hal generate neither mutual
electricity nor sexiness. Yet each in his/her way, does have a special
kind of charm. 
The film's main lure lies in its comedic and slapstick effects -- broad,
even cheap,  but often rib-tickling -- and in the supporting cast. Young
Nia Long ("Boyz N the 'Hood") is appealing. Jennifer Tilly is droll. 
She is not even mentioned in the movie's information materials -- a
cruel omission since she's a show-stealer in her blend of airheads a la
Gloria Grahame, Marilyn Monroe and others. 
Excellent too is actor-rapper Smith ("The Fresh Prince of Bel  Air" on
TV). He is very likable, a kinetic delight who delivers his lines with
sympathetic zest. This makes up a lot for a sketchy part that leaves us
confused about Zora's relationship with him. 
Movie veterans will spot, as one of the production assistants who are
making the Hal Jackson commercials, a dead ringer of the young Richard
Benjamin. The end credits list him as Ross Benjamin. It's nice to have a
papa in the business. 
PS. Above written in 1993. A 1996 re-viewing on cable TV yields the same
positive reactions to this often underrated, even maligned comedy.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  5/28/93
Running Length:  1:50
Rated:  PG-13 (Language, mature themes, sexual situations, brief nudity)
Starring:  Whoopi Goldberg, Ted Danson, Nia Long, Will Smith, 
           Jennifer Tilly
Director:  Richard Benjamin
Producers:  Arnon Milchan, Rick Bieber, and Michael Douglas
Screenplay:  Holly Goldberg Sloan
Music:  Mark Isham
Released by Warner Brothers
     As a result of a simple science class blood test, Zora Matthews
(Nia Long) discovers that the man she had long thought of as her
father couldn't be.  After confronting her mother with this disarming
truth, Sarah Matthews (Whoopi Goldberg) confesses to Zora that she is a
product of artificial insemination.  This sparks a quest for Zora to
discover her real father.  After getting the information from the sperm
bank's records, she goes to meet Hal Jackson (Ted Danson), and finds
out that the man whose sperm her mother used is rude, crude, and, worst
of all, white.
     Yeah, there are a lot of implausibilities in this script, but the
story moves along snappily enough that most of them are easily
overlooked.  More difficult to miss is Richard Benjamin's occasionally
inadequate direction.  There are numerous scenes that could have been a
whole lot funnier had Benjamin been more deft in choreographing them.
Too often, he is heavy-handed, but the film survives in spite of him.
     The first half of MADE IN AMERICA is highly amusing.  Comedy is
divided nicely between the outrageous and the subtle (although Bejamin
likes to "point out" the less obvious moments by using tricks such as
slow-motion).  Unfortunately, the comic momentum fades as the film
moves to a climax, with the big "plot twist" near the end seeming like
something out of bad television melodrama.  There are a lot of
different ways that the story could have gone; the route it chooses is
less-than-satisfying.
     Surprisingly, although this is billed as a romantic comedy, I
didn't find the romance between Sarah and Hal of particular note.
Despite the rumors linking Goldberg and Danson together off-screen,
there doesn't seem to be much chemistry between them.  Far better are
the interactions between mother and daughter, and father and daughter.
I could believe these, which are at times touching and sweet, and on
other occasions laced with bitterness.
     There's no question that the best performance is given by Nia
Long.  Goldberg and Danson don't have to stretch much to keep in
character.  Hal is little more than a southern extension of CHEERS' Sam
Malone and Sarah Matthews echoes roles that Goldberg has played in the
past (a politically correct African-American single mother).  Jennifer
Tilly has a minor role as Hal's blond, airheaded, helium-voiced
girlfriend.  This seems to be a part that she was born to play.  Never
have I been more impressed with Ms. Tilly's acting than when she
stares into the camera with that vacuous expression.
     One of the failures of MADE IN AMERICA is in the way it introduces
the two main characters.  At the outset of the film, both Sarah and Hal
are portrayed as irresponsible, arrogant, and thoroughly dislikeable.
Although they soften as the story progresses, and the audience
gradually warms to them, this is not a positive way to start a movie.
It's typical in a romantic comedy for one of the partners to be acerbic
and unpleasant, but it's unusual for this to be true of both of them.
Had the comedy been less fresh, MADE IN AMERICA might have lost me
early on.
     As far as comedies go, this one is above-average, primarily
because there aren't many clunkers among its jokes.  Character
development is so-so, and there are number of  problems, some of which
are significant, about the way the story progresses during the last
half-hour.  Overall, however, MADE IN AMERICA is enjoyable.  It handles
the issue of a mixed-race relationship sensitively (instead of
sensationalistically) and presents an intriguing look at a very
different family dynamic.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
