Title
Review for Larger Than Life (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Rob Conrad
I just came back from seeing Bill Murray's elephant movie. I wish I had
happy news for you, but I don't. Bill has been very, very funny in the past
and in some part of himself he must know how far off the tracks he has gone,
like even the worst alcoholic knows dimly, in the back of his or her mind,
that they once had another life somewhere and that it was different from
where they are now. Bill, if you can hear me -- if this reaches you -- Get
away from the people you're with! Move your legs! RUN!!! You can do it! 
This movie blows like an elephant blows. It sucks like an elephant sucks.
Even though it was written by Roy Blount, Jr., one of my favorite prose
comedians, the script is inept, embarrassingly predictable and irritatingly,
boringly cutesy-pie. There is no dramatic tension. You can see the end of
the movie from the beginning of the movie. The best Bill lines come in
(literally) the last five minutes of the movie, and the best line before
that is delivered by Bill's mother in (literally) the first five minutes of
the movie. If it should ever be my great fortune to meet The Great Smart Ass
Comedy God face to face, I will ask him for a partial rebate on the $5.75 I
put into his alimony payments this evening.
I know mainstream American cinema has dug itself into a deep, deep rut, but
-- Bill should examine his artistic conscience and think long and hard about
why he feels the need to participate. Bad Bill! Kneel!
Even avoid it on video or at the 99 cent theatre. One huge elephant trunk down!
AND BECAUSE I KNOW YOU CARE DEEPLY ABOUT THE STATE OF THE CINEMATIC ARTS IN
AMERICA TODAY
Why do we feel the need to put EVERY SINGLE PERSON who was in ANY WAY
connected with the movie, in the credits? I'm talking about people
identified as Assistant Accountants (yes!) and Coffee Person (true!), and
I'm just getting started. What's next, The Guy Who Put the Sprocket Holes In
the Film? I believe we're heading for a situation where the credits will
eventually be longer than the film. We'll watch names for 87 minutes and
then a very brief two-minute movie, about as long as a trailer is now. A few
cars will explode, two people will hold onto each other like velcro while
Whitney Houston sings part of a song, maybe a quick shot of Arnold
Schwarzenegger or Whoopi Goldberg, and that's it, that's your movie. Ticket
prices won't go down. This is what I'm thinking!
_____________________________
Rob Conrad (540)628-TYPE
Dependable Type Graphic Design
robconrad@naxs.com

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Bill Murray, Tai, Janeane Garofalo, Matthew McConaughey, 
      Linda Fiorentino, Anita Gillette, Pat Hingle, Lois Smith, 
      Keith David, Jeremy Piven
Director: Howard Franklin
Producers: Richard B. Lewis, John Watson, and Pen Densham
Screenplay: Roy Blount Jr. from the story by Pen Densham and 
      Garry Williams
Cinematography: Elliot Davis
Music: Miles Goodman
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     LARGER THAN LIFE is an unremarkable road movie with a slight twist 
-- Jack Corcoran's (Bill Murray) traveling companion is an 8000-pound 
elephant named Vera (Tai).  The concept -- Jack has five days to 
transport Vera from the Maryland to California -- isn't loaded with 
promise, but at least the producers had the good sense to hire Bill 
Murray.  Jack is the kind of irritable, self-absorbed guy that Murray 
can play perfectly, and the comedian's presence in LARGER THAN LIFE 
lifts it to a considerably higher level than it might have otherwise 
attained.
     The human-befriends-animal storyline has been worked to death with 
almost every kind of four-legged (or finned) creature imaginable:  dogs, 
cats, whales, dolphins, seals, polar bears, pandas, and so forth.  Now, 
add an elephant to the list.  In most of these films, the spectacle of 
an amazingly well-trained animal is enough to steal the show from his or 
her less-interesting homo sapien partner.  Not here, though.  Murray 
knows how to keep the spotlight on himself, and only yields it when 
absolutely necessary.
     Murray has certainly done better work.  LARGER THAN LIFE can't hold 
a candle to GHOSTBUSTERS or GROUNDHOG DAY, but it's a lot better than 
duds like CADDYSHACK.  Apparently, Murray did his share of ad-libbing 
here, which is probably a reason why several of the comic sequences 
work.  Since Murray is simply "being Murray", there isn't a lot of 
intensive acting going on.  As a result, there are long stretches when 
LARGER THAN LIFE is like watching a standup routine shot on location 
with a very unusual "straight man".  
     The story, such as it is, goes something like this:  Jack, an East 
Coast author and motivational speaker, is bequeathed Vera (and a $30,000 
debt) by his estranged father, a clown with a traveling circus.  Jack 
doesn't want the animal, but the only people willing to take her off his 
hands are in California.  There's Mo (Garofalo), a zookeeper in San 
Diego, who wants to send Vera to Sri Lanka as part of a breeding 
experiment, and Terry (Linda Fiorentino), an animal trainer in L.A., who 
wants to make Vera a movie star.  So, by train, truck, and elephantback, 
Jack heads west, racing against the clock (there's a five-day deadline) 
and encountering the requisite assortment of oddball characters along 
the way.
     The film has an interesting and varied cast, but if you're hoping 
for more than a glimpse of anyone other than Murray or Tai, prepare to 
be disappointed.  No one else, from two of 1996's "hot tickets", Janeane 
Garofalo and Matthew McConaughey (as a truly irritating, off-the-wall 
truck driver), to the likes of Pat Hingle (as an old buddy of Jack's 
father) and Anita Gillette (as Jack's busybody mother), has more than a 
few token appearances.  
     LARGER THAN LIFE doesn't offer anything startlingly new or 
original, although the best gags are worth at least a chuckle.  The film 
opens with Murray mercilessly lampooning self-help and motivational 
speaking by delivering a buzzword-rich speech at an upholstery 
convention that culminates in the building of a human pyramid out of 
attendees.  For those who enjoy physical comedy, there's an amusing bit 
where Jack attempts to mount Vera. ("Okay.  Where's the ladder?")  For 
movie aficionados, there's a sendup of SHE WORE A YELLOW RIBBON, with 
Murray dressed up like John Wayne, Tai playing the role of Wayne's 
trusty steed, and the theme from THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN in the 
background.  There are also the obligatory "fish out of water" scenes:  
the elephant walking down a street in a suburban neighborhood, the 
elephant running through an airport, and the elephant outside a roadside 
diner.
     LARGER THAN LIFE isn't likely to be around for long.  Unless it 
does unexpectedly well at the box office, it will be swamped by the 
impending, major fall releases.  It's a reasonably innocuous film, and, 
partly as a result, it's suitable for children.  This isn't my notion of 
top-notch entertainment, but there are worse ways to spend money at a 
movie theater.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So what is it with Bill Murray?  Does he have a periodic death
wish?  Surely a comedic genius like that can see when a script is fully
developed and when it isn't.  Although he has made some incredibly
funny films, GROUNDHOG DAY and GHOSTBUSTERS being two prime examples,
many others of his fall flat.  My least favorite of his is SCROOGED,
but I think there are even worse ones that I chose not to see.
Although his latest, LARGER THAN LIFE, isn't a bad movie, it is
certainly an underdeveloped one.  Lost opportunities abound in it.
     Second tier motivational speaker Jack Corcoran (Bill Murray)
travels the fried chicken circuit giving speeches to bored groups of
business people.  His shtick is teaching how to "Get Over It" as he got
over his father's early death.
     His dead father dies again, but you'll have to see the show to
understand this bit of logic.  It turns out his father was a circus
clown, and he has left Jack a "large inheritance" according to his
father's lawyer, Trowbridge Bowers (Harve Presnell).  Yes, you guessed
it, the large inheritance is an elephant.  The elephant is named Vera
after Jack's mother.
     It seems Vera is like the proverbial bull in a china shop.  Since
she has destroyed much of the town, Bowers presents Jack with a bill
for $35,000 in damages that must be paid within a few days.
     "I'm probably going to have to entertain some more offers.  I'm
probably going to have to talk to Roy of Roy and Siegfried," claims
Jack in negotiating on the phone with Mo (Janeane Garofalo) at the San
Diego Zoo.  She tells him if he gets the animal across the country in
five days, she will pay him $30,000 and send Vera to Sri Lanka.  The
race against the clock is on.  The subplot has Jack bargaining with
Terry Bonura (Linda Fiorentino) who supplies animals for the movies,
but doesn't treat them right.  Perhaps she will make him a better
offer.
     "How much is your salad bar?" asks Jack of a waitress at a coffee
shop.  "$4.95" she says.  But he corrects her, "The entire salad bar I
mean."  I wish the dialog by Roy Blount Jr. (based on a story by Pen
Densham and Garry Williams) was always this sharp, but it isn't.  The
script is the weakest part of the film which is a shame since the
possibilities are endless.  You've got one of the greatest comedians in
the world and a huge elephant, but the mean time between laughs is
interminably long.  Director Howard Franklin's pacing and the plodding
editing by Sidney Levin only serve to compound the problems of the
screenwriter's lack of ideas.
     Along the way on this road picture, they come up on a panoply of
quirky characters.  Typical is circus man Vernon Blockhead (Pat
Hingle).  His specialty is cramming large objects up his nose.  His
wife is in her 70s, and she has tattoos covering every part of her
anatomy.  Elliot Davis's camerawork fixates on these colorful scars on
her skin with lots of close-ups.
     Vernon advises Jack not to sell the elephant to Mo saying, "Rain
forest! That's just another word for jungle."  Vernon is full of
stories including his, "One time I traded a blind lion for a pickup
truck, ten dancing chickens, and a trampoline."
     The low point in the movie is when Jack gets picked up by trucker
Tip Tucker (Matthew McConaughey).  Tip is an obnoxious guy with strange
theories about life.  Never has McConaughey overacted so much.  I could
hardly watch his grotesque performance.  The saving grace was that he
mumbled most of his lines so you did not have to listen to what he was
saying.  His whole character should have been eliminated.
     The film even has a romp through our local San Jose airport with
Jack and Vera.  I don't think I was there that day.  After a movie with
a paucity of ideas, they attempt a bittersweet ending which almost
works.  Ultimately the tragedy of the show for me is all of the talent
that is wasted.  Why didn't they wait for a better script?  What was
the hurry?
     LARGER THAN LIFE runs thankfully just 1:33.  It is rated PG for a
little bad language, none of it necessary in a picture to be seen by
mainly by grade school kids.  There is no sex or nudity.  There is a
potentially scary scene near the edge of a cliff where Tip chases Jack
with iron bar.  Jeffrey (age 7 1/2) says he thinks kids need to be at
least 5 to see the show.  He gives it a thumb almost up.  Personally, I
do not recommend it and give it * 1/2 for a few good laughs and funny
visuals.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    LARGER THAN LIFE, the comedy that puts Bill Murray on the road with
an elephant (!), almost warranted a walk-out, but not because this
particular pachyderm played in the odious OPERATION DUMBO DROP.  Rather,
it was the number of children in attendance that left my companion and I
unable to relax in our seats.  (Upon entering the theater, Waverly Place
in Cary, we were dismayed to discover bare walls.  Without stereo sound
to drown out the inevitable noise of an underage audience, the situation
was rapidly approaching lose- lose.  Did I mention the dried vomit on
the seat in front of us?) Happily, the brats were well-behaved, though I
doubt that any of them appreciated Bill Murray's character of a smarmy
motivational speaker.  (His motto, obviously modeled after multiplex
managers, is "get over it.") They came to see an elephant and, oh, what
an elephant it was!  Vera, as she's called in the movie, can bow and
play dead and do almost any trick, except perform a rewrite on Roy
Blount Jr.'s clearly understocked script.  In fact, no human that Mr.
Motivation meets on his cross-country trip to California-- to sell Vera
to either a zoo-keeper (Janeane Garofalo) or an animal trainer (Linda
Fiorentino)-- is particularly funny, not even the manic trucker Tip
played by an unrecognizable Matthew McConaughey.  Critters watching
critters notwithstanding, LARGER THAN LIFE is best enjoyed as another of
Murray's feature-length slow burns.  And stay awake for the movie's one
great scene, when Murray tries to drive a big rig.  Hilarious.  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>
