Title
Review for Live and Let Die (1973)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Where is SPECTRE when you need it?  Why waste the talents of that
superspy James Bond on something as mundane as tracking down a drug
trafficking operation?  Devotees of the great Bond expect him to fight
organizations ready to set off the next world war.  Even if we are
ready to lower our expectations, the eighth Bond film, LIVE AND LET DIE
from 1973, still disappoints at almost every turn.
     Marketed as "Get Moore!", the show, starring Roger Moore,
delivered even less the one episode, ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE,
that starred George Lazenby as Bond.  Whereas Lazenby tried to imitate
Connery's style, Moore doesn't seem to think style is even necessary.
He takes a by-the-numbers approach to the role.
     Roger Moore, the third actor to play the classic James Bond
character, lacks the confidence and savoir-faire one has rightfully
come to expect from our hero, 007.  Although Moore adequately copes
with every situation, he frequently seems less in charge than just
drifting along.
     With Moore's lack of charisma, it will be interesting to see if he
eventually warmed up to the role in subsequent episodes.  In this one
he acts like he is playing in some inconsequential TV movie of the
week.  (Our family is watching all the Bond pictures in sequence, and
since I have not seen most of them since their original release, I
remember only parts of them.)
     The beautiful and intelligent Jane Seymour, who went on to play
numerous other roles, my favorite being her part of Emma Fogarty in the
TV series "The Onedin Line," is listed in the opening credits as making
her movie debut.  Actually her part in the film, as a fortuneteller
named Solitaire, who works for the story's villain, is her fourth
movie.  Solitaire, with way too much makeup, wears such outlandish
outfits as a massive, red and green sequined cape with a large
headdress.  Although we know now that Seymour's talent later blossomed,
in this move little of it is in evidence.
     The black drug dealers in the movie with their big Afros, long
sideburns, and exaggerated gestures reminds one of those 1970's
low-budget films sometimes referred to as blacksploitation flicks.  One
expects that genre's star, Pam Grier, to show up at any moment, but she
doesn't.
     Set again in the Caribbean, the story pulses with a voodoo rhythm
and has poisonous snakes slinking around every corner.  Bond goes to
the island to investigate a death, and after he arrives, more occur.
Geoffrey Holder, who did the famous 7-UP "uncola" commercials plays a
mysterious character who sings, dances and, of course, bursts out with
his signature, big, wicked laugh.
     Yaphet Kotto, last seen in the awful TWO IF BY SEA, plays the
story's villain Kananga, a.k.a. Mr. Big.  Arguably the happiest bad guy
Bond ever faces, he smiles so much that he never appears the least bit
menacing.
     In the worst part of the movie, Clifton James attempts the part of
Sheriff Pepper, a cliched, tobacco-chewing, redneck sheriff.  His
overacting is so pathetic that it is embarrassing to watch.
     The best scenes in the show involve New Orleans jazz-style funeral
processions.  Twice, as a bystander watches and wonders who the corpse
is, he is killed and put in the casket, and the happy mourners crank up
the music to celebrate.
     Another good sequence has Bond driving a double-decker bus with
crooked cops in hot pursuit.  When the cops see a low bridge sign they
smile from ear-to-ear since they figure they've got him now.  In the
predictable result, Bond guns the engine and shears the top off
smoothly.
     Bond has a lot of little gadgets this time, including a small
transmitter the size of a pack of cigarettes that is used to send Morse
code.  Some of Bond's futuristic technology has become commonplace
today.  Typical of this is a wristwatch with a digital (red LED)
readout rather than an analog dial.  M is impressed that Bond has a
coffee grinder and an espresso machine in his kitchen.
     "Live and Let Die," the movie's theme song that is sung and played
in several renditions in the picture is the best part of this lame
movie.  I hope Moore develops some charisma and style in his later Bond
films.  Why Ian Fleming reportedly thought Moore would be the best
person to play Bond continues to baffle me.
     LIVE AND LET DIE runs 1:59.  It is rated PG for violence and
sexual innuendo and would be fine for kids around nine and up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, liked the movie but complained that
there were "too darn many snakes."  He liked Moore as Bond but not as
much as Connery.  He said the movie was much better than his least
favorite, the Lazenby one, ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        As far as the obligatory James Bond theme song goes, the one 
here, by Paul McCartney and Wings (not the dreaded four-times-a-
day-on-USA sitcom), is by far the best. (Don't tell me those Swedish 
meatballs a-ha even come close with "The Living Daylights.") Also, 
LIVE AND LET DIE brags the accomplishment of having more black 
people than the other seventeen Bond movies combined.
        It's kind of sad, actually, to have to hear James Bond being 
referred to as "honkey" and "cue ball" while in Harlem. (You wouldn't 
think a white guy would get that kind of treatment in Harlem, but oh 
how the times have changed.) This dramatic shift in focus is most 
likely the result of Louis Farrakhan replacing David Duke as executive 
producer of the Bond series.
        That's not the only replacement we see in LIVE AND LET 
DIE. Roger Moore replaces Sean Connery as 007, beginning a seven-
movie run extending through 1985's A VIEW TO A KILL. Moore, 
naturally, doesn't completely capture the smooth, debonair feel 
Connery put forth in his six outings as the secret agent, but he does 
assume the role surprisingly well. He'd almost be on the same level as 
Connery if not for the fact that he reminds me so much of Adam West, 
TV's Batman. Or is it just my imagination running away with me?
        The plot mixes the typical drug lord scenario with voodoo, 
shifting from Harlem to San Monique to New Orleans in pursuit of 
Mr. Big. Solitaire, Bond's third girl of the movie, is a Tarot card 
reader. Bond stacks a deck of cards with "The Lovers" in an attempt to 
poke her. (Get it? Cards. Poker.) He takes her virginity away, which in 
turn takes away her magical ability to read the future. (She should 
have seen it coming, I say.) So was it worth it, Mr. Bond? Huh? Just so 
she could be your 863rd conquest?
        LIVE AND LET DIE is entertaining in two ways. First, it 
works as a straight action movie almost the entire time. The only lapse 
is an overlong boat chase in which bumbling redneck Sheriff Pepper 
(whose brother is a Sergeant) is introduced as some kind of comic 
relief, trying to capture Bond and his pursuers. Second, LIVE AND 
LET DIE is more dated than most other Bond movies, especially with 
its introduction of jive talkin', bushy-sideburned blaxploitation 
villains, giving it an unintended camp hilarity.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Roger Moore, Yaphet Kotto, Jane Seymour, Julius W. Harris, 
      Geoffrey Holder, David Hedison, Clifton James, Gloria Hendry, 
      Bernard Lee, Lois Maxwell
Director: Guy Hamilton
Producers: Harry Saltzman and Albert R. Broccoli
Screenplay: Tom Mankiewicz based on the novel by Ian Fleming
Cinematography: Ted Moore
Music: George Martin and Paul & Linda McCartney
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     Following six James Bond movies with Sean Connery (and one with the 
dead-on-arrival George Lazenby), it was difficult -- to say the least -- 
for fans to accept the transition to wisecracking Roger Moore when he 
debuted in 1973.  It didn't help that his introductory film was one of 
the worst Bonds of all time (ranking alongside Moore's OCTOPUSSY and 
Timothy Dalton's THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS).  Worse still, the only thing 
about LIVE AND LET DIE to weather the test of time is its title song 
(written by Paul & Linda McCartney, and performed by Wings).
     After dealing with SPECTRE and megalomaniacs for his first seven 
films, Bond is pitted against a different kind of villain in LIVE AND 
LET DIE -- the conscienceless Dr. Kananga (Yaphet Kotto), the ruler of a 
small Caribbean island and would-be monopolistic heroin supplier.  When 
three British agents are murdered, Bond is sent to investigate.  With an 
assist from old pal Felix Leiter (David Hedison, the only man to play 
the role more than once), 007 begins his scrutiny of Kananga.  The 
resulting search leads him from Harlem to the Louisiana bayous, and has 
him meeting a beautiful Tarot priestess named Solitaire (Jane Seymour), 
a sinister voodoo doctor (Geoffrey Holder -- the man with the golden 
laugh), and a modern-day Captain Hook (Julius W. Harris).
     Without KGB agents and the threat of worldwide destruction, this 
007 adventure seems lame and misplaced.  LIVE AND LET DIE sees Roger 
Moore groping for the right tone for his Bond -- half the time, he 
appears to be attempting to imitate Connery (although this could be the 
fault of the screenplay).  At least Moore  has a modicum of screen 
presence, which is more than can be said of two other Bonds:  Lazenby 
and Dalton.
     Of all the Bond adventures, this is the most dated.  One look at 
the film and it's obvious it was filmed in the '70s.  Because much of 
the action takes place on U.S. city streets, the haircuts and dress 
styles of the time are distressingly apparent.  George Martin's score 
only adds to the "leisure suit flavor", proving that the definitive Bond 
composer is John Barry. (This was the first 007 feature that Barry 
didn't have a direct hand in scoring.)
     As is often the case with Bond movies, this one runs too long.  
There is a speedboat chase that, aside from being executed in a 
pedestrian fashion, goes on forever.  It's not exciting, and the 
introduction of comic asides with Sheriff J. W. Pepper (Clifton James) 
are wildly out-of-place.  Pepper (who returned in THE MAN WITH THE 
GOLDEN GUN), a tough-talking, bigoted buffoon, is fitfully amusing, but 
the character would be more at home in BENNY HILL than with James Bond.  
     LIVE AND LET DIE has the requisite action scenes and several 
enticing women for Bond to woo (including a CIA agent played by Gloria 
Hendry and Jane Seymour in her first screen appearance), but, in 
addition to missing Connery's presence, the movie lacks the usual 
tension and energy. Watching LIVE AND LET DIE isn't a complete waste of 
time, but there's no overriding reason why anyone should go out of their 
way to see it unless they're a die-hard Bond fan or are curious about 
Roger Moore's first turn in the role.
