Title
Review for American Psycho (2000)
Number of Reviews
34

Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: Killer comedy. Killer creepshow. Killer indie arthouse flick.
As always, no comparison is made to the Source Material.
It will probably help your appreciation of American Psycho if you hit
the ground running during the 1980s, or were close to the kind of yuppie
mentality that was oppressive during those days -- kidlets just out of
college making way too much money and spending that cash freely and
openly on status stuff. The right kind of suit, tie, eyeglass frame,
luggage and so forth. All flash and little substance. The stereotype
that generated catcalls of "DIE YUPPIE SCUM DIE!" (Understand here that
Cranky was a director for NBC back in them days, making way too much
money at way too young an age . . .
.. . . but good God, it was nothing like the Wall Street buttholes that
are center stage in American Psycho.)
Perhaps it's a good thing there's a whole lot of breathing room between
now and then. That makes this story of a serial killer to whom DIE
YUPPIE SCUM DIE is a manifestation of incredible self-hatred and/or
guilt  -- and/or just another career choice  all the more bearable.
American Psycho so perfectly recreates that 80s Yuppie bullshit that,
despite the fact that it's been well publicized as being about a serial
killer, the film is very funny. From the title credits on out, where
what appear to be droplets of blood fall across a virgin white screen,
this flick is killer funny. Four lookalike Yuppie's drop their platinum
cards to split the dinner check at an ever so trendy restaurant. Their
conversation consist of vainglorious egocentric boasts, one after
another (when they're not dissing anyone not like them, or backstabbing
fellow employees at the Wall Street firms where they work)
Center of the story is Patrick Bateman (Christian Bale), a Wall Street
type working for Dad, making insane amounts of money and doing very
little obvious work. When in the process of picking up a model type at a
trendy club, Bateman  is asked what line he's in. "Murders and
Acquisitions," he says, quite honestly. "Mergers and Acquisitions" is
what everyone hears. That's the perfect slam on 80s yuppie-dom. If it
ain't about the green, it ain't never gonna be seen on the internal
radar. Welcome to the morgue . . .
Bateman carefully details for us every aspect of his life, from the
number of stomach crunches he can do to the kind of exfoliant he uses to
keep his skin looking young and fresh. He lives in a world where the
printing on a business card speaks volumes. Where he doesn't mind taking
his sexual fantasies out on street hookers and "high class" call girls,
sometimes two at a time. Where he believes that his fiancee Evelyn
Williams (Reese Witherspoon) is probably having an affair, which is all
right 'cuz he's sleeping with her zonked to the gills best friend
Courtney (Samantha Mathis). There's something perversely funny about all
of this, which makes American Psycho a very funny movie.
Just when you begin to get the comfortable with the notion that the
"Psycho" of the title refers only to a headcase slash nutjob, out comes
a knife and a homeless man goes down for the count. Bateman doesn't
restrict his kills to the anonymous street folk, however. One side
effect of yuppie-dom is that everyone tended to look alike . . . and
Bateman does not like being confused for someone higher on the corporate
food chain. His bloodlust is such that he doesn't mind taking out people
in his own circle. Prior to the upper-class kills, Bateman spouts like a
music critic, analyzing the complexities and deep meanings in songs by
Phil Collins and Whitney Houston -- artists disdained by the general 80s
Yuppie establishment (even as we bought the CDs and hid them under the
mattress). When Bateman goes into his spiel, well, certain characters
you'll meet you won't want to see snuffed. Mary Harron's direction
evokes some unbearable tension, even as the modus operandi elevates from
knife to ax to industrial strength construction equipment, and so on.
You know in your guts that it's just a matter of time before the killing
spree catches up to Bateman. When it does; let's just say that "Psycho"
has a lot of meanings, all of which you may find yourself discussing
after the fact. Also of note in the cast are Chloe Sevigny as Bateman's
secretary Jean and Jared Leto as Paul Allen, one of those other yuppies
who disappears from view. A private detective (Willem DaFoe) comes a
calling. It's just a question of whether he's in the case to find a
killer, or if he's in the case to protect the upper-upper-class from
embarrassment in the New York Post.
There's a third alternative answer to this equation . . . but that would
be telling.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to American Psycho, he would have
paid...
Cranky bought in whole hog. American Psycho is so perfect for the
arthouse circuit that it may not break out of that after the first week.
As written, if you don't lock into the period, you may not find much to
laugh about and, in that case, it's a long time until you get to the
unpleasant parts.
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
James Sanford
        Did Bret Easton Ellis' "American Psycho" have to be made into a
movie in the first place? Probably not, but since someone chose to do
it, we should be grateful that person was director-screenwriter Mary
Harron, who at least had the good sense to turn the stomach-churning
book into a satire of American morals in the last days of the Reagan
Administration. And Harron also made an excellent choice in picking
Christian Bale to play anti-hero Patrick Bateman, a Wall Street shark
who's more interested in murder than in the markets. As a result,
"American Psycho" the film is exceptionally well-played and Harron's
screenplay (co-written with "Go Fish" director Guinevere Turner) is
often hilarious and extremely creepy at the same time. Given the subject
matter, this is about the best result the people behind the movie could
have hoped for.
 The people most likely to be disappointed by Harron and
Turner's adaptation are those looking for non-stop carnage and gore.
Harron instead keeps most of the violence offscreen or in shadows,
making this film seem downright tame next to "Natural Born Killers" or
even your average teen slasher flick.
 Although Bale, the young Welsh actor who initially burst onto
the scene as the star of Steven Spielberg's grim epic "Empire of the
Sun" 13 years ago, has given some sharp performances in the past
(particularly in the largely unseen "Metroland" and in the Winona Ryder
version of "Little Women"), he sets a new standard for himself here.
>From the outside, his Bateman is the walking embodiment of male vanity
-- his medicine cabinet is stocked with honey-almond body scrubs and
herbal-mint facial masks and he refuses to use aftershaves containing
alcohol because alcohol "dries out your skin and makes you look older"
--  and fastidiousness. He's the type who won't set a glass down without
making sure there's a coaster to put underneath it.
 He speaks to his friends and associates in a plastic,
faux-cheerful voice, but, when necessary, he can quickly switch over to
a hollow, mock-sympathetic drone that sounds as if he's hosting a
telethon for a cause he's doesn't really believe in. He works out
obsessively, fusses over his clothes and watches and keeps his Manhattan
apartment spookily spotless.
 The fashionable exterior cloaks a truly sick mind, however.
While pretending to help out a homeless man, Bateman seizes the
opportunity to stab the guy to death and then to stomp on the victim's
dog. He sees bizarre messages on the screen of his ATM. He hires call
girls for dates that end with the women heading to the emergency room.
    Yet he finds a kind of justification for his bloodlust in
the lyrics to such Yuppie anthems as "The Greatest Love of All." "In
this world we live in, it's impossible to empathize with others," he
notes. "But we can always empathize with ourselves." Bateman often takes
time to recite his ridiculous mini-discertations on pop music, usually
just before doing something horrible; when he turns on Huey Lewis and
the News' "Hip to Be Square," his guest had better watch his back.
 "American Psycho" relies heavily on Bale since it really
doesn't have much of a story to tell. It's certainly not a mystery or a
thriller and, because the movie's biggest joke turns out to be that
nobody except his secretary (Chloe Sevigny) and his snippy fiancee
(Reese Witherspoon) seems to know who Bateman is anyway, there isn't
much suspense as to whether or not he'll get away with his crimes.
 It's impossible to imagine Leonardo DiCaprio, who was
reportedly courted to play Bateman, pulling off this role. But Bale,
with his wholesome good looks and x-ray stare, plays it for all its
worth and then some. Even as the movie becomes progressively
surrealistic in its last half hour -- it reaches a peak around the time
Bateman runs naked through the hallway of a high-rise while brandishing
a chainsaw -- Bale doesn't allow his character to become a cartoon,
which makes Bateman that much scarier. James Sanford

Author
Brandon Herring

American Psycho * * *1/2 out of * * * *
Starring: Christian Bale, Reese Witherspoon, Chloe Sevingy, Willem Defoe,
Jarod Leto, Samantha Mathis.
Directed by: Mary Harron
Rated R: some graphic violence and gore, strong sexuality, nudity, language
and drug use.
Running Time: 101 Minutes
Controversy is one of my favorite words in the dictionary, because when
controversy and movies are mentioned in the same sentence, its a good bet
that the movie will either be a huge hit, or a huge flop. "American Psycho"
opened to great critical acceptation, but failed to make it big at the box
office, after a few months it had faded away, but those lucky people who saw
the movie were shocked, offended, and amazed by this movie.
Patrick Batemen is not your typical business man, he is a handsome, well
built man who keeps his body in shape, and takes care of his body. In the
opening five minutes we learn how Patrick does this, by applying exfoliating
lotions, soaps, etc. But Patrick has a downside to him, he is a psychotic
killer, who likes to slice and dice women and kill men.
Of course Patrick's colleagues and friends don't know this, and neither does
his fiance played by Reese Witherspoon. After an acquaintance of Patrick's
ends up dead Patrick is questioned in the murder of this man, of course we
know Patrick did it...why? Because we see Patrick chop this man up with an
Ax. From here on, the movie is a study of Patrick's life, as he finds out who
he really is...
Christian Bale takes over the difficult role of Patrick Bateman, and let me
be the first one to say this may be the best male leading role I've seen in
the year 2000. His dialogue comes out of his mouth with such greatness, and
I think Christian started to really get into the role. With the scenes of
graphic violence, he seems to use them in a skillful way, and Mary Harron's
direction doesn't make it as gratuitous as one might think.
Next to Christian Bales the performances from Reese Witherspoon as Patrick's
annoying yet lovable fiance is quite funny, and she seems to be enjoying
herself on screen, and the audience is enjoying themselves watching her.
Willem Defoe as Detective Kimbell is good, but his character seems to me to
be underdeveloped. The standout of the supporting cast is Chloe Sevingy who
last year gave a fantastic performance in Boys Don't Cry, one of my picks for
best picture last year.
"American Psycho's" biggest flaw is the last 15 minutes, in which it makes
little sense, and starts to take itself seriously, with talks of a sequel in
the works, I will definitely be first in line to see it, as long as the
original cast returns. "American Psycho" is a great film that I recommend to
anyone who enjoys watching messed up movies that are brilliant.

Author
Scott Renshaw
AMERICAN PSYCHO
(Lions Gate)
Starring:  Christian Bale, Willem Dafoe, Chloe Sevigny, Reese Witherspoon,
Jared Leto.
Screenplay:  Mary Harron and Guinevere Turner, based on the novel by Bret
Easton Ellis.
Producers:  Edward R. Pressman, Chris Hanley and Christian Halsey Solomon.
Director:  Mary Harron.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, sexual situations, nudity, profanity, adult
themes)
Running Time:  97 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I've never read the Bret Easton Ellis novel on which AMERICAN PSYCHO
is based, so I don't know whether its reputation as literary garbage is
warranted. Word on the street has it that Ellis' notion of satire
generally involved shopping lists of designer brand names, ad infinitum,
ad nauseam; the word further informed that his descriptions of destroying
a human body left little to the imagination. That could easily make for a
very tedious, dehumanizing read, so I can understand why potential viewers
might be skeptical about a film version of this much-reviled book. After
all, what could possibly be entertaining about watching a sociopath spend
an hour and a half obsessing over colognes and suits between capital
crimes?
     Maybe Ellis didn't "get it" when it came to offering an icy-cold
attack on the go-go ethos. Mary Harron, however, does. Harron's telling of
the tale mixes 1980s nostalgia with pitch-black humor, anchored by
Christian Bale's riveting performance. Bale stars as Patrick Bateman, a
New York mergers and acquisitions vice-president who lives for all the
best things in life: reservations at the finest restaurants, a taxing
physical regimen, clothing by only the most deified designers. He also
finds himself unable to control his impulse to murder on a regular basis,
whether the victim may be a homeless man, a prostitute or an envied 
co-worker. When Det. Donald Kimball (Willem Dafoe) begins poking around,
Patrick begins to fear that he could be caught. Then again, he could have
a greater fearthat he _won't_ be caught.
     The heartless, soulless heart and soul of AMERICAN PSYCHO is Bale's
brilliant performance as Bateman. The role was once said to be Leonardo
DiCaprio's for the taking, but he opted instead for THE BEACH. Bad for 
Leo; good for us. Bale plays Bateman with an exaggeration that's sure to
be misconstrued as hamming it up. Bateman isn't just play-acting at
belonging in the professional social circle in which he runs (his
nepotistically-influenced job seems to consist mostly of reading
pornography, watching "Jeopardy" and doing crossword puzzles); he's
play-acting at being a human being. Bale's work is also brutally funny,
most notably in scenes where he engages in rambling deconstructions of
some of the decade's most banal music (Huey Lewis' "Hip to Be Square;" 
Genesis' "In Too Deep"). If this performance doesn't prove to be one of
the year's best, we're in for a very good year indeed.
     There is, of course, also the matter of the much-talked-about sex and
violence, which cost the version screened at the Sundance Film Festival a
few seconds of excised gyrating. Naturally the content will make AMERICAN
PSYCHO a film for very specific tastes, but viewers should be clear that
this isn't primarily a thriller we're talking about. Yes, there are
suspense elements, and there are a few grisly deaths (most taking place
out of the frame), and there are some moments of moderately explicit 
naughtiness. All of those elements should also be viewed in context. How
anyone could view Bateman's narcissistic orgy as pornographic (or even
eroitic) is beyond me; how the film could be perceived as a commercial for
unbridled appetites and surrender to the id is baffling.
     There's no point pretending AMERICAN PSYCHO has anything radically
new, profound or insightful to say about its era. Satirical critiques of
yuppie materialism have already become somewhat trite a decade later, and
it's clear from minute one that the film is about turning the figurative
ability to get away with murder into the literal equivalent. That doesn't
make many of AMERICAN PSYCHO's finer moments any less effective, from the
shallow one-liners ("I'm not really hungry, but I want to have a 
reservation somewhere") to the hysterical scene in which characters define
their pecking order by the quality of their business cards. The third act
does begin to drag, and the hallucinatory closing scenes are bound to
leave some viewers scratching their heads. But AMERICAN PSYCHO gets
creepier, funnier and more insinuating the longer I think about it. Source
material be damned: Even if Ellis' AMERICAN PSYCHO is junk, it provided
the framework for something savagely entertaining.

Author
Ron Small
Author: iysmall@aol.com (Ron Small)
Screenplay: Mary Harron and Guinevere Turner
Starring: Christian Bale, William Dafoe, Jared Leto, Chloe Sevigny, William
Sage, Cara Seymour, Reese Witherspoon, Samantha Mathis, Guinevere Turner,
Justin Theraux
At one point during AMERICAN PSYCHO a naked, bloodied Patrick Bateman
(Christian Bale) pursues a very unlucky hooker through his posh, modernist
apartment all while brandishing a chainsaw at about crotch level. (Note: This
is the second time I can recall seeing a chainsaw being employed as a phallic
symbol in a film, the first being SLUMBER PARTY MASSACRE, which was also
directed by a woman. Draw your own conclusions). The poor prostitute stumbles
into various rooms and closets, running into Bateman's other victims some of
which lay dormant in transparent, sealed bags, while others pop out of hiding
places as if to shout "Boo!" It's a true "mad slasher" moment--insane,
frenzied, and absurdly funny, containing all the giddy sleaze that eluded
recent antiseptic slasher films like URBAN LEGEND and DISTURBING BEHAVIOR. And
AMERICAN PSYCHO isn't even a slasher film. At heart it's yet another in a long
line of recent bitter satires of American culture, although its "slasher"
elements will probably keep many from seeing it as that. The book had a similar
problem.
AMERICAN PSYCHO is based on Bret Easton Ellis' much debated novel of the same
name. As of now it's Ellis' penultimate novel, a vicious satire of the Me
Decade featuring a yuppie serial killer as a metaphor for 80's culture and
values. Bateman is that killer, a competitive narcissist (not to mention,
psycho) whom we first encounter, in the film, adorning himself like a Christmas
tree with various male beauty products (lest anyone forget that the 80's was
the decade when it became cool for a man to care what he looked like). Like
many psychotics, his life has some kind of order, a routine: he performs
countless abdominal crunches while THE TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE plays in the
foreground, heads off to work where he snidely interacts with his equally snide
colleagues, parties in nightclubs (the cheery 80's music is the ultimate
anti-theses of Bateman's debauched machismoâŚthink PSYCHO set to the WEDDING
SINGER soundtrack), then caps off the night with frenzied sex and exaggerated
murder all while providing his commentary of popular 80's tunes to his
bewildered victims.
Though the movie contains much uncomfortable violence (but is really just about
as graphic as your average SCREAM flick), it's not nearly as detailed as its
source material was. In the film we see all this unfold in bits, never privy to
all of Bateman's acts, while the book is told entirely within Bateman's head.
We see everything through his subjectivity, and Bateman thrives on minutia. He
provides us with the various details of applying facial cream, choosing the
right suit, and so on. This is rather comical at first, till we soon realize
that he will use this technique to describe everything, even the heinous
murders he commits (some descriptions rattling on for five pages) going into
every thing he does to his victims, and every reaction he gets from doing so.
The result is vivid, but depressingly so.
Nonetheless, Ellis found a fresh way to comment on 80's greed and narcissism by
revealing the decade through the eyes of an upper echelon killer tweaked on a
culture that tells its young executives to destroy their opposition.
Bateman is a literal product of the 80's, caring only for his own
gratification. Throughout the novel we stay in his cluttered head, and marvel
at his contempt for everything except bland 80's music ("It's hip to be
Square!"). And we realize that the only thing that separates him from his
co-workers (all narcissistic and self-absorbed) is that he takes the wolfish
kill or be killed message quite literally.
It's to the film's credit that Bateman remains intact, expertly played by
Christian Bale as a man so far gone he's hardly a man anymore. Bale speaks in a
discombobulated growl, like an overly false parody of a how a "real man" should
talk. The affection isn't all that dissimilar from the ones his colleagues put
on. And on the outside Bateman doesn't seem terribly different from all the
self-absorbed brats who surround him. It's more than a joke that these guys can
hardly recognize each other; they're like drones with personalities that bleed
into one and other, and what a perfect place for a killer to get away with
murder ("Bateman? No he couldn't have done it, I had dinner with him last
nightâŚI think"). Problem with the novel is that it gets bogged down with the
excess of drugs, sex, and murder. Harron focuses her film more tightly on the
satire and absurdity of Patrick.
Still it's interesting that much of Ellis does get up on the screen up on the
screen (as opposed to the film adaptation of LESS THAN ZERO, which featured
nothing of the author). This feels like a Bret Easton Ellis movie yet it works
to a greater extent than his novels because it contains all that makes him a
wily social commentator and little of what makes him a vacuous provocateur.
Harron's film gets at things that may have been obscured by the novel's extreme
vehemence. She shows us the casual disgust that men have for women while around
each other in scenes that play a lot like IN THE COMPANY OF MEN. Only Harron
takes it further, driving the message into us. It's as if the violence
committed by Bateman (the angry male) on his mostly female victims is an
extension of all the disgust and anger that males harbor towards women. The
novel's graphic rhythms have been reconfigured slightly, and transplanted to
the screen as the ultimate horror movie for women. A horror movie in which all
the men are predators, but only one truly indulges in his vicious predatory
urges.
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It would seem that Ed Gein has inspired yet another film.  The
real Ed Gein was a retired Wisconsin farmer who in November 1957 was
discovered to be a serial killer.  He made a hobby of killing at least
fifteen women and eating or playing with the parts including wearing
the skin of his mother.  His crimes were the inspiration for the films
PSYCHO, THE TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE, and now AMERICAN PSYCHO.  To date
almost all serial killers have been portrayed on the screen as being
lower class or at best lower middle class.  AMERICAN PSYCHO asks, "What
if such a person were in Wall Street's high-earning elite?"  For the
purpose of satire, Bret Easton Ellis's controversial novel looked at a
wealthy young financier at a serial killer.  The intent is not so much
horror but as a satirical view into the lives of the rich, successful,
and vacuous.  Canadian Mary Harron, who scripted and directed I SHOT
ANDY WARHOL, has scripted and directed AMERICAN PSYCHO based on the
Ellis novel.
     As Patrick Bateman (Christian Bale) readily admits to himself and
to the audience, he is empty.  Patrick Bateman is in most senses just
"not here."  Nobody greatly notices.  Bateman is one of a set of nearly
identical vice-presidents of a Wall Street financial firm.  He makes a
salary that is at least six figures and probably more.  He wears the
perfect suits, he eats in the best restaurants, and he comes close to
having the perfect business cards, though this is a field of great
competition among the vice-presidents.  Like the other vice-presidents
he does everything so perfectly that they are really impossible to
differentiate him from the others and themselves have problems telling
each other apart.  Bateman's one distinguishing characteristic is his
hobby of sado-masochism and murder.  If Patrick Bateman really did
inhabit his body he might have some feelings about the killing, but as
he sees himself as an empty shell he might as well enjoy the momentary
respite from total monotonous boredom.
     Much of the film is just a view into the wealthy lifestyle with
people who feel no human emotion but greed.  They go to absurd lengths
to get reservations at the finest restaurants but will return only to
those whose bathrooms that have the best facilities for snorting
cocaine.  Bateman takes the luxury a step further with a home gymnasium
where he can exercise to the strains of THE TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE and
pornographic movies.  Every once in a while he will do in a homeless
beggar or a co-worker.  At work he seems to do little real work beside
tell his secretary (Chloe Sevigny, Oscar-nominated for BOYS DON'T CRY)
what to wear.  He has a fiancee (Reese Witherspoon) and a mistress
(Samantha Mathis).  Both are very spacey though it is a little harder
to tell with the fiancee since her condition does not come from
chemicals.
     Christian Bale plays his role cool, making seamless shifts from
dapper to ripper.  But he seems really to enjoy his hobby of killing.
Reese Witherspoon has just a small part, but now every role she takes
reminds me of the high school prig she played in ELECTION.  Willem
Dafoe plays a police detective is the traditions of Columbo.
     It is curious how this film echoes other recent films.  Bateman's
descent from the rich and stylish into his netherworld of violence
resonates with a similar descent in EYES WIDE SHUT.  In this film
Bateman readily tells people that his hobby is murder, but people just
do not connect with him as we saw in GROSSE POINT BLANK and THE SIXTH
SENSE.  Bateman's money seems to go into entertainment gadgets, not
unlike the people we saw in BOILER ROOM.  One could even say that
Bateman's secret anti-social actions resound with THE FIGHT CLUB.
This is a film that makes a sharp, strong, but surprisingly simple
statement.  But perhaps the one statement is less than we should expect
for a feature-length film.  I rate this a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

AMERICAN PSYCHO (director/writer: Mary Harron; screenwriters: based on
the novel by Bret Easton Ellis/Guinevere Turner; Andrzej Sekula; editor:
Andrew Marcus; cast: Christian Bale (Patrick Bateman), Willem Dafoe
(Donald Kimball), Jared Leto (Paul Allen), Josh Lucas (Craig McDermott),
Samantha Mathis (Courtney Rawlinson), Matt Ross (Luis Carruthers), Bill
Sage (David Van Patten), Chloe Sevigny (Jean), Sara Seymour (Christie),
Justin Theroux (Timothy Bryce), Guinevere Turner (Elizabeth), Reese
Witherspoon (Evelyn Williams), 2000)
Mary Harron ("I Shot Andy Warhol") plays with Bret Easton Ellis's gory
novel and reduces it from a movie mainly about an out-of-control serial
killer to one having more of a surreal black comedy flavor to it. I had
an empty feeling seeing this film from its dripping blood onset, which
was really the drippings from a raspberry sauce being poured over a
fancy poultry dish, to its ambiguous ending (where it is suggested that
all the killings are in the psycho's head), and by the time the trick
finale comes about, my empty feeling is just as prevalent as when I was
bombarded by all the lists of toiletries the psycho prefers, his fancy
squid ravioli with lemongrass sauce and arugula Caesar salads in those
upscale restaurants, and all the butchery that took place during the
course of telling this President Reagan era fable about yuppie greed, a
slight variation on Wall Street's- "greed is good message." I felt I was
tricked once too often in this film, that with all its intended satire,
it still ends up being a rather tasteless film that basically had not
much of a point to it.
This is, to say the very least, a disturbing film, even if it trimmed
down on the novel's savagery and that the grisly killings take place
mostly offscreen. It is a film about someone who is only human through
his vices. While the film tries desperately to catch something about the
psycho that an audience could sympathize with besides his good looks,
but what results is that he can't be put together to look like a real
person. He has become a composite sketch of what a serial killer is
like, touching bases with some of the famous ones like Ted Bundy. He, in
essence, remains an illusionary being, someone who doesn't exist as
himself. And that is what becomes the main problem for the film, it is
both creepy and sickly funny, but it offers no insights into a serial
killer's mind-set that hasn't been said before. Despite the film's
glitzy photography, all the beautiful men in it, its various techniques
used to make this a thought-provoking film, all fail to convince me that
when all is said-and-done, this is not a sensationalized film, reveling
in the subject's sickness and need for pornography and violence and
consumerism. It also makes a blatant attempt in comparing the white men
of corporate America to serial killers. This is a superficial
psychological comparison, and though it might sound good saying the two
are alike, if you take the time to think about what is being said, it
becomes easy to see that there are just as many similarities as
differences between the two groups.
What gives this film an elegance, if that's the right noun to describe
the film's sleekness, this elegance can certainly not be taken from its
turgid story, or what it has to reveal about the era of greed in the
1980s, which is nothing fresh; but, in the mesmerizing performance
gleaned from the energetic Welshman, Christian Bale, as the psycho,
Patrick Bateman, a 27-year-old New York mergers and acquisitions
vice-president who lives for his self-gratification: reservations at the
trendiest restaurants, living at the right address and in a posh
apartment, keeping obsessively physically fit, his obsession with pop
music through Huey Lewis and Phil Collins, and wearing clothing only by
the name designers. His main problem, besides his minor ones-- of being
an arrogant corporate-type, a crybaby wimp, someone people can't seem to
remember, someone who is a control and cleanliness freak-- is his
uncontrollable rage to kill. He appears normal on the plastic surface
but inside he is a misfit, with a modern Jekyll and Hyde personality.
His killing spree, he tells us by the end of the film, is in the range
of 40, but the audience only witnesses the following: the stabbing of a
homeless black man; the beheading of a model he dates; a prostitute and
a pleasure seeking lady acquaintance of his, whom he chainsaws- one to
death and the other he kills by tossing the chainsaw atop her when she
ran screaming down the stairs- after a menage-a-trois; a male look alike
co-worker he pole axes to pieces; an old lady who stops him from killing
a cat, and several policemen who chase him.
When Donald Kimball (Willem Dafoe) comes calling on him at his sterile
workplace, which is similar to his immaculate
all-white-and-steel-colored gadget-filled apartment, Patrick's empty
life is buzzing with delusionary thoughts and he becomes visibly shaken
by the private detective's innocuous questions. Patrick freaks out when
anyone touches him or tries to get too close to him. Kimball has been
hired by the family of Paul Allen (Leto) to look into the disappearance
of Paul. The only other thing that I remember from the detective's role,
is that Dafoe has a deep, rich voice, as his part was miniscule and not
very well thought out.
Reese Witherspoon is the shallow socialite he is engaged to; Chloe
Sevigny is his loyal but unconfident secretary, who is attracted to him
and almost gets killed by him; and, Samantha  Mathis, is the attractive
girlfriend of one of his colleagues, who has a drug problem and is
someone he uses coldly as a sex object. These women lend adequate
support in their minor roles as the only people he knows that have any
resemblance to being human beings.
The men in his life, all colleagues and look alikes, seem to be
dressed-up as gentlemen but underneath that veneer, they are
Neanderthals. In one successful scene, that is an amusing satire on
status among the corporate-types, his colleagues compare their business
cards as to the texture of the paper and the quality of the printing.
These fellow workers are Jared Leto, Justin Theroux, Matt Ross and Bill
Sage, and they represent the male as the cold-hearted hunter of his
prey.
American Psycho, on-the-surface, captures the emptiness of corporate
America and the white men who find material success in it; while, it
also depicts a psychopath who is miffed into a frenzy when not noticed
or who is prepared to kill at random when his appetite is whetted. But
the film's drawback, is that it is only about a general person and not
about an individual, despite Bale's tour-de-force performance and the
aims of the director to get more out of the film than the book got. It
still has an unpleasant subject matter to deal with and is only
successful in making passing comments about a way of life that is easy
to ridicule- the "Me" generation.
I might have liked the film better, if it had the balls to stick with
its serial killer story, as difficult a task as that may have been,
which is the heart of the story anyway, instead of yielding to so-called
good-taste and accepting a lame Hollywood cop-out ending (which probably
was a business decision more than an artistic one, since the film will
now at least bring in some profit). The film left me with an empty
feeling, by implying the psycho is still a psycho, even if the killings
are not real. While that might be true to a certain extent, the author
still believed, according to the way he told the story in his book, that
a psycho is really a psycho only when he does kill.
I certainly don't think music or books about serial killers makes them
serial killers or do their repressed thoughts. I believe they are that
way because they are driven by what's inside them that is uncontrollable
and all that could be done in a film that is not made just for
entertainment or exploitation, is to try and see if we can understand
them a little better. I'm not sure if I can say that this film
accomplished that and I'm not sure if I felt wholly entertained by the
film, though the film was to its credit was not an exploitive one. Yet,
an empty feeling is what lingers, even long after I saw the film and try
to recall it. Other than the film looking good, being titillating in
spots, being competently put together and well-acted, I don't think
there is much else to say about it that is thought-provoking.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Mary Harron.
Cast: Christian Bale, Chloe Sevigny, Willem Dafoe, Cara Seymour, Reese 
Witherspoon, Samantha Mathis, Jared Leto, Matt Ross, Guinevere Turner, Justin 
Theroux, Bill Sage, Josh Lucas.
2000 - 100 minutes
Rated R (for violence, gore, nudity, sex, drug use, and profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, April 15, 2000.
Are you, more or less, setting yourself up for disappointment if you go to 
see a film adaptation of one of the most powerfully written novels you can 
recall reading? At the time of its publication (after one publishing company 
dropped it at the last minute), Bret Easton Ellis' horrific 1991 satire was 
widely reviled by some critics for being an offensive exercise in misogyny 
towards women, a "how-to" book on slaughtering someone and getting away with 
it. They not only missed the boat, but the entire ocean with this conclusion. 
Having read Ellis' novel the week prior to seeing the controversial film 
version, what struck me was not only its gracefully flowing and mysteriously 
alluring writing style, told in first-person by the central character, but 
also its portrait of a man come unhinged, who "isn't really there," and has 
no answer for why he commits such heinous crimes except to say that it is 
close to a masturbatory experience for him. And, of course, the book offered 
a right-on-target satirical view of the '80s--full of conceited egos, wealth 
and power, and materialistic excess. In other words, Ellis may have been 
lightly poking fun, but there was a startling amount of truth in everything 
he wrote, right down to the minuscule details. 
After several years of the film adaptation rights thrashing around from one 
studio and director to the next, "American Psycho" has finally surfaced on 
the big screen with, shock of all shocks, a female director, Mary Harron 
(1996's "I Shot Andy Warhol"), and a female collaborative screenwriting 
partner, Guinevere Turner. What we have here, however, is a motion picture 
that misses the mark in a way that the book critics did nearly a decade ago. 
While still attempting to be a satire, Harron has whittled down the book's 
casual product placement; violence; unforgettably self-absorbed, yet nuanced, 
characters; and its overall depth, to bring audiences a basic Cliffs Notes 
version of a masterful novel. In doing so, Harron has also altered a story 
supposed to be about a shallow era into a film that is, ultimately, just 
shallow. 
Patrick Bateman (Christian Bale) is a 27-year-old yuppie on Wall 
Street--overly wealthy; generically handsome (he looks much like the rest of 
his buff, chiseled colleagues); health conscious; womanizing; and only 
interested in "hardbodies" and getting reservations at the swankiest 
restaurants. What Patrick's coworkers and acquaintances don't know, though, 
is that he works out in his sterile, desolate apartment to the likes of 
pornos and "The Texas Chainsaw Massacre," and casually murders anyone he 
feels like it--old friends, bums, prostitutes, working partners, you name 
it--while spouting off a vocal review on the merits of some of his most 
beloved singers and bands, including Genesis, Whitney Houston, and Huey Lewis 
and the News. 
Like the novel, "American Psycho" has no actual story, with a plot that moves 
from Point A to Point B and so on, but is a loose gathering of thoughts and 
moments set in the life--a rather pathetic one, at that--of Pat Bateman. A 
modicum of a story does arise after Paul Allen (Jared Leto), Patrick's 
coworker, is axed to death, and Detective Kimball (Willem Dafoe) shows up at 
Pat's job to question him about the unknown whereabouts of Paul. 
One of the most compelling aspects of the novel was eventually realizing that 
Bateman is not a vile excuse for a human being, but simply an unstable man 
who, somewhere down the line of his life, has lost the ability to feel 
emotion, either for himself or those around him. It was a surprisingly 
poignant notion by Ellis, subtle, yet effective. The film attempts the same 
thing, but verges off-course in its conclusion to be something that almost 
begs you, in an overwrought fashion, to feel sympathy for this man.
Christian Bale has gotten a lot of publicity and early acclaim for his work 
as Patrick Bateman, and while he is playing a calculating character set on 
being physically perfect and financially sturdy, his performance remains cold 
and at a distance, speaking in a monotone voice that wears out its welcome 
right away. Bale is a fine actor, and he nails the adrenaline rush and 
childish excitement he gets on inflicting torture to others, but that is just 
about the only compliment he can be given. 
All other characters are minor, as they are all merely players in Patrick's 
own little world. They are often so inconsequential onscreen, however, that 
they make no impact. Reese Witherspoon, as Patrick's equally self-absorbed 
fiancee, Evelyn, is especially wasted in comparison to the stature of the 
character in the book, with her role whittled down to a mere three brief 
scenes. Witherspoon is given no chance to create any sense of a character at 
all, and so she is forced to basically phone in her performance. The same 
goes for all of Patrick's friends (played by Bill Sage, Justin Theroux, Matt 
Ross, and Josh Lucas); his drug-addled lover, Courtney (Samantha Mathis); and 
Detective Kimball (Willem Dafoe).
The only two who come away unscathed, and with their full respect intact, are 
Chloe Sevigny, as Jean, Patrick's adoring secretary, and Cara Seymour, as 
Christie, a sad-eyed, ill-fated prostitute who makes the wrong decision when 
coming back to Patrick's apartment for a second rendezvous. Sevigny 
especially nails her character, the only likable one in the film, and adds a 
much-needed complexity to her scenes that is absent from the rest of the 
picture.
The soundtrack, filled to the brim with nostalgic '80s song, such as Phil 
Collins' "Sussudio" and Huey Lewis and the News' "Hip to Be Square," aids in 
capturing an era that, aside from the costumes and hairstyles, fails to be 
brought to life. Other credit must go to Andrzej Sekula's appropriately 
sparse cinematography, with an emphasis on space and the color white to stand 
for the emptiness in Patrick's heart. And the central murder setpiece, 
arriving approximately an hour into the film, is spectacularly suspenseful, a 
bravura piece of filmmaking reminiscent of Stanley Kubrick's work in 1980's 
"The Shining." But what difference do these minor things make when the film 
at hand is an otherwise depressing, vacuous experience?
Thank goodness I read the book before seeing "American Psycho" because, while 
constantly being disappointed with the hack job director Harron and 
co-screenwriter Guinevere Turner have done with the source material, at least 
I could fill in the important blanks that the movie so mercifully leaves out. 
The novel notwithstanding, "American Psycho," the film, has nothing 
insightful to say about anything, not even the aforementioned subjects it 
attempts to satirize, while the dialogue comes off feeling stilted and 
annoying "written." By the time the twist ending kicks into gear in the final 
twenty minutes, most audience members will be left confused and feeling empty 
themselves, as what happens is nearly incomprehensible, with no attempt to 
bring reason or any answers to the proceedings. Although I don't want to do 
it, since film adaptations shouldn't fairly be compared to their written 
counterparts, it must be brought up once more. Having read the novel, it is 
impossible to watch "American Psycho" and not have your expectations 
tarnished, as the whole affair is an enormously large missed opportunity. 
Harron has taken nearly all that was great about Bret Easton Ellis' fine 
novel, stripped it of its dignity and profundity, and left it for the 
film-viewing world to behold as a sadly trivial, puerile, and, ultimately 
pointless, misfire.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Lions Gate Films
 Director: Mary Harron
 Writer: Mary Harron, Guinevere Turner, novel by Bret Easton
Ellis
 Cast: Christian Bale, Willem Dafoe, Jared Leto, Reese
Witherspoon, Samantha Mathis, Chloe Sevigny, Justin
Theroux, Josh Lucas, Guinevere Turner, Matt Ross, William
Sage, Cara Seymour
   If the doctrinaire ayatollahs of the film industry in Iran ever
get up the guts to allow their people to see movies that are
not about children, "American Psycho" would fit their
propaganda plans perfectly.  What have the high priests of
the Iranian government been saying over and over about the
Great Satan?  "America is so consumed by materialism that
its people have lost all spiritual values."  This is not an
exceptionally new idea, nor one restricted only to regimes of
extremist political energy.  A case could indeed by made that
almost any rich country is going to list shopping and
consuming among its eminent pleasures, Sunday church-
going aside.  But in the hands of Mary Harron, who directs
and co-scripted "American Psycho" based on one of the most
controversial novels of the early nineties by Bret Easton Ellis,
the theme gets a razor-sharp representation, its title
character compensating for his inability to feel and his
incapacity to express a personal identity by an uncontrollable
urge to kill.
   Harron and her co-writer, Guinevere Turner, have taken 
pivotal scenes from the book, furnishing a swift pace to the
story of the psychotic Patrick Bateman (Christian Bale).  They
capture novelist Ellis's response to the spirit of the 1980s in
America, but particularly in the world's finance capital of New
York, where thousands of people in their twenties and thirties
made millions not by erecting buildings and bridges or
inventing better mousetraps but simply by shuffling paper in
the midtown offices of Manhattan's skyscrapers.  Lest any in
the audience think of the film as merely a period piece about
a bygone era, think of today's wild stock market, with prices
of stock--particularly of Internet companies that haven't
turned a profit--soaring to surreal price-earnings ratios.  
   Director Harron lays out a coterie of nattily clad young
men, vice presidents all in the Wall Street mergers and
acquisitions department of a leading brokerage house.  As we
watch these vapid individuals get together several times a
week at pricey restaurants for arugula salads, chateaubriands
and Scotch, we wonder how they ever find the time to get
their work done, the labor for which they are grossly
overpaid.  Look closely and you will not find a single moment
of the movie describing what these people actually do, so
busy are they in one-upping each other in tangible goods
from exquisitely designed business cards to elegantly tailored
suits.  The almost unbelievable name dropping in the book is
almost completely dispensed with, however.  Still, Bateman's
opening monologue will give those who have not perused the
Viking book--scheduled for re-release in April--a good idea of
the lengths to which the author goes to impress on the reader
the importance of labels to the yuppies of the Reagan years. 
As Harron's photographer, Andrzej Sekula ("Pulp Fiction")
follows Bateman to his morning shower, we hear the 27-year-
old executive discuss his skin treatment with no one in
particular, gesturing to an array of bottles in the bathroom of
his Upper West Side apartment house that would tap the
envy of the most gorgeous models in the city.  We get an
early hint that Bateman (whose name may have been
inspired by the Bates Motel) is a deranged personality in that-
-despite an array of beautiful women at his disposal--he
watches sadistic porno movies on his TV as he performs his
daily two-hour workout.
   The scenario of these yuppies is so amusing that we're
almost saddened when Harron cuts to Bateman's earliest
victim, a homeless man whom he distracts by seeming to
befriend him only to stab the poor, hungry and cold man
several times in the stomach and chest before stomping his
friendly terrier to death.  The violence of the act is in no way
comparable to the fury of the book's murder scenes.  Take a
look at the way Bateman describes the vicious attack on the
seated, smelly beggar on the printed page...
   "I put out a long, thin knife with a serrated edge and, being
very careful not to kill him, push maybe half an inch of the
blade into his right eye, flicking the handle up, instantly
popping the retina...with my thumb and forefinger hold the
other eye open and bring the knife up and push the tip of it
into the socket, first breaking its protective film so the socket
fills with blood, then slitting the eyeball open sideways, and
he finally starts screaming once I slit his nose in two..."
   Harron is determined, however, to avoid slasher-movie
formula so that at no point do we witness a prolonged display
of any of the man's twenty to forty killings.  Slasher fans,
however, will be reasonably amused by one of the book's
pivotal scenes displayed in somewhat gory detail.  Bateman
picks up a street hooker, Christie (played with almost
priceless facial expressions by Cara Seymour), takes her to
his flashy pad, whereupon he phones an escort service for a
more sophisticated young woman.  (This is the scene that
was later cut to give the movie an R rating.  Bateman, in the
midst of a sexual orgy, observes the action in his mirror as
he flexes his muscles...we see the menage-a-troi in the
mirror's reflection, which photographer Sekula films in blue as
though Bateman were watching not himself with the
prostitutes, but a disembodied porno video.)  After arranging
a second date with a reluctant Christie who, at this time joins
a rich debutante (co-writer Guinevere Turner), Bateman
dispatches the deb and then runs naked through the hallway
chasing the panic-stricken Christie with a chain saw.
   Much of the dark comedy throughout the movie comes
from Bateman's observations which he expresses aloud to
whoever is in the room with him--or to us in the audience if
no one is present.  An almost hilarious monologue has
Bateman discussing the works of Whitney Houston as though
he were a true connoissuer in a scene that Ellis and Harron
might just have intended to be a riff on critics in general.
   The one concept difficult to sort out is this...Bateman is
shown as a Frankenstein monster, a man who cannot control
his homicidal instincts, presumably because he was
genetically deformed from birth.  Yet we are tempted to make
the stretch and try to interpret his endeavors as a reaction
against the soul-stifling conformity of his business and social
circle.  His inability to feel, which is not a truly rare
psychological state, does not come from his being part of a
greedy, 1980s society.  Greed and hostility are the only
emotions he can feel, but this aberration would exist in him
regardless of the spirit of the times.  
   Nonetheless, "American Psycho" is not a picture you'd
want to miss.  The scenarios are as cut to the bone as the
victims of Bateman's chain saw, nicely edited by Andrew
Marcus with thrills and humor alike pumped up by Barry
Cole's original score.  Christian Bale--who is said to have
worked out just like his character for months before the shoot
began and who has obviously had an effective speech trainer
to give him an authentic preppy accent--is unbeatable in this
role. The handsome Welsh performer apparently was chosen
after Leonardo Di Caprio turned down the role (a fortunate
decision for the movie).  Jared Leto as Bateman's victimized
friend Paul Allen gives new meaning to being axed from the
cast, while Chloe Sevigny is absolutely charming as an alpha-
male, idol-worshipping secretary who is thrilled to the core
when invited on a date with her loco boss.  Other performers
include Reese Witherspoon in a silly, undeveloped role as
Bateman's fiance and Willem Dafoe as a private investigator
looking into the disappearance of Bateman's hatcheted friend.
   Filmed in New York and Toronto, the movie has an
impressively expensive look courtesy of Gideon Ponte's
production design.  The sparkling scenes of Manhattan by
night should be welcomed by the New York Tourist
Commission, providing a gleaming backdrop for what is
justifiably the most talked-about movie of early 2000.
Rated R.  Running Time: 97 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Christopher Null
     From the opening scene, showing drops of blood on a pristine white
surface, we know we're in for... well, not your ordinary slasher flick.
Turns out the "blood" is a berry sauce being applied to a plate of haute
cuisine.  And the mind games of AMERICAN PSYCHO have only just begun.
     Steeped in controversy and mired in production for years, AMERICAN
PSYCHO tells the story of Anybroker Patrick Bateman (Christian Bale), a
highest-society late 1980's Wall Street investment banker with a
penchant for murder and a bloodlust that doesn't quit.  Think of it as a
portrait of Gordon Gecko as a young man.
     With knives, axes, guns (bullet and nail), and/or chainsaw, Bateman
hacks up homeless people, hookers, and even a few of his friends,
especially if they talk nasty about him behind his back.  Between bouts
of rough sex, a rigorous shower and exercise routine, drinks and dinners
with friends and dates, and listening to his favorite music (Huey Lewis,
Phil Collins, and Whitney Houston), it's surprising that Bateman
actually has time to get to work.
     And murder's just not enough for Bateman.  He's engaged to Evelyn
(Reese Witherspoon) but is boning her sister (Samantha Mathis) and a
whole lot of whores, to boot.  Everyone but his assistant (Chloë
Sevigny) is getting a piece of the action.  Not that you'd want any,
because most everyone who visits Patrick's apartment ends up in the
fridge.
     AMERICAN PSYCHO has the tendency to be a character in search of a
plot, as was the case with the novel, but director Mary Harron has
infused Bret Easton Ellis's tale with so much twisted and neo-farcical
psychosis that she's really turned a rambling psychothriller novel
tinged with comedy into a ribald satire tinged with thrills.  The
murders in AMERICAN PSYCHO aren't particularly gruesome, it's the glee
with which Bateman carries them out that makes him a true villain.  Even
the novel's most gruesome killing (which I won't detail here, but which
involves a bound woman, a starving rat, and a Habitrail) has been cut
from the film.
     As for Bale, well, I think we've just witnessed the defining moment
of his career: the role for which he will forever be compared to.
(Think Leonardo DiCaprio (who was rumored to be taking this part at one
time) in TITANIC.)  He certainly plays Bateman to a T, even if the
dialogue he's been given is a bit flat.
     Harron has often described this film as a work of feminism.  I
don't know about that.  It's scattered and often random (like the novel)
and any female point of view was lost on me.  No matter.  AMERICAN
PSYCHO vibrates between being deliriously funny and just plain
delirious.  And for some reason, it made me really want to work on my
abs.
Director: Mary Harron
Producer: Christian Halsey Solomon, Chris Hanley, Edward R. Pressman,
Ron Rotholz
Writer: Mary Harron, Guinevere Turner
Starring: Christian Bale, Willem Dafoe, Jared Leto, Reese Witherspoon,
Samantha Mathis, Chloë Sevigny
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "AMERICAN PSYCHO" (Lions Gate Films)
  It's really hard to be objective about this picture. I
loathed it. But why? Based on Bret Easton Ellis's controversial 1991
novel, it revolves around Patrick Bateman, a vain, rich, vacuous Wall
Street stockbroker who becomes a serial killer. The profanity-laden
screenplay leaves much of the gruesome gore of the grisly
dismemberment and grotesque disembowelment of his victims to the
imagination and attempts, instead, to be a black comedy. For example,
the stylized opening sequence depicts crimson drops of what one might
assume is blood - but, in truth, they're drippings from a thick
raspberry sauce being poured over an exorbitantly over-priced poultry
entree served at a trendy Manhattan restaurant. Yes, Patrick Bateman
is a phony, obsessed with designer clothing, exercise, and pop
music. Writer/director Mary Harron and co-writer Guinevere Turner have
fashioned a sanctimonious social satire on the greedy excesses of the
'80s, and Christian Bale plays the psychopath with exuberant relish as
Reese Witherspoon, Chloe Sevigny, Willem Dafoe, and Jared Leto lend
support. Plus there's an abundance of male and female nudity with the
warm skin tones photographed in exquisite settings. But what made me
flinch was the cold, explicit glorification, the utter delight the
movie-makers took in the sleek horror of murder. To me, serial killers
simply aren't funny - no way, even if - as it's suggested
inconclusively - it's all in Bateman's warped mind. (Leonardo DiCaprio
was wise to have bailed out of this project.) On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "American Psycho" is a reprehensible 2 - and it
should have been NC-17, not R.  Trimming a sex scene involving a
threesome orgy does not make this film acceptable for a multiplex,
where young people can and do sneak in. I wish I hadn't seen it.

Author
Shay Casey
Year: 2000.
Starring Christian Bale, Willem Dafoe, Jared Leto, Reese Witherspoon, 
Samantha Mathis, Chloe Sevigny, Justin Theroux, Josh Lucas, Guinevere 
Turner.
Screenplay by Mary Harron and Guinevere Turner.
Directed by Mary Harron.
Rated R.
"American Psycho" opens by presenting us with a plain white screen and 
proceeds to drop big red things down across the opening credits. Then 
red stuff is smeared across the screen -- it's blood, right? After all, 
this is a movie about a serial killer, isn't it? Our anticipation grows 
as a big knife is raised, ready to slash its next victim, which turns 
out to be . . . a piece of meat. Whoops. All that red stuff was nothing 
but pieces of fruit and some sauce, and we are not looking at a 
conceptualized murder; we are looking at food preparation. This opening 
credit sequence is a fine precursor for what "American Psycho" will 
eventually become: This is a film out to give you exactly what you don't 
expect. It's not going to be an easily consumed slasher flick. "American 
Psycho" wants to subvert your expectations -- to make you think.
Christian Bale plays Patrick Bateman, a hotshot young Wall Street 
executive. Patrick is handsome and successful. He gets chauffeured 
around in a limo, lives in a cavernous, posh apartment, and throws money 
around like confetti. He also has a problem: He kills people. Not right 
away; he's busy trying to make himself appear successful to his 
coworkers by getting fancy new business cards and attempting to score 
reservations at the most exclusive European restaurants. But Bateman is 
frustrated. He still gets one-upped by a fellow exec who looks just like 
him (Jared Leto), he is still bored with his socialite fiancE9e (Reese =
Witherspoon), and his extramarital lover (Samantha Mathis) has grown 
cold and drugged-out. So he takes out his aggression by committing 
violent murders, usually in the comfort of his own apartment while 
philosophizing about the virtues of commercialized 80's music (Huey 
Lewis, Phil Collins). Patrick likes to kill prostitutes mostly, but 
he'll take a coworker or a homeless man if it suits him. Possible 
problems surface when a private detective (Willem Dafoe) is hired to 
look for one of his victims, and this detective may or may not suspect 
Patrick of the murder.
"American Psycho" was based on the novel written by Bret Easton Ellis, 
one that drew controversy at the time of its publication for its graphic 
descriptions of brutal murders and perceived misogyny. It was considered 
"unfilmable." Despite such sentiment, director Mary Harron has managed 
to produce a film version, and she's made a fairly coherent work out of 
it too. If there is a misogynist streak in this version of "American 
Psycho," it's of the deeply satirical variety: Harron doesn't glorify 
Bateman's murders, but rather presents them as the deeds of a sad, 
repressed man who turns to murder as his only recourse against a 
stifling world. This is satire of consumer culture at its best. The film 
jabs at the vast emptiness caused by defining oneself by comparison to 
others, as Bateman does, eventually letting his jealousy push him over 
the edge. A colleague has a superior business card? Invite him to your 
house and kill him! Frustrated with your more conventional sexual 
conquests? Invite prostitutes in and kill them too! The analogies are 
not lost on Harron: Bateman even holds a chainsaw over his crotch in one 
of the later (and more over-the-top) scenes, and black comedy abounds in 
the early going. Witness Bale dissecting the finer points of "Hip to Be 
Square" while preparing to take an ax to a man's head (also witness his 
hilariously stiff dance moves)-never has Huey Lewis seemed so profound. 
The aforementioned "pissing contest" involving business cards is also 
extremely well-done, and very funny, unless you're the sort of person 
who actually *can* explain why eggshell is preferable to off-white.
Christian Bale delivers a whale of a performance, one that may not be 
fully appreciated until the film has run its course. Playing a weird 
hybrid of Tom Cruise and Jim Carrey (with a little Malcolm McDowell 
thrown in for good measure), he initially appears to be underacting, 
then overacting. But afterward comes a realization that he delivered a 
perfectly modulated, very carefully planned performance, one that 
managed to consistently jibe with Harron's ever-shifting objectives. 
It's important to realize that Bale is not so much playing a person as 
he is a representation of a specific kind of person, one who has put 
material gain above all else. His facial ticks and voice inflections are 
meant to confuse initially and illuminate afterward -- many of the 
choices Bale makes don't appear to have a clear meaning until after the 
end credits begin to roll. Bale is also surrounded by a capable 
supporting cast, including Dafoe, Leto, Witherspoon, Mathis, and Chloe 
Sevigny as Bateman's insecure secretary. Their performances generally 
range from "good" to "excellent," and their efforts help the film a 
great deal.
It's important to realize that Harron's film is one that requires a 
certain investment from the audience to be effective. It is not enough 
to sit back and demand entertainment from "American Psycho." Only the 
attentive viewer will be rewarded, and nowhere is this more evident than 
in the final suggestion that none of Bateman's murders actually 
happened. This is not certain-the script (by Harron and Guinevere 
Turner) is ambiguous enough to allow for multiple possibilities-but it 
helps to explain certain formerly inexplicable occurrences. No one hears 
Bateman comment about wanting to kill people or being in the business of 
"murders and executions, mostly" (a model hears it as "mergers and 
acquisitions," and I'll leave interpretation of the wordplay up to you). 
But maybe no one hears because he never actually said it. That would 
also explain why no one in his apartment building complains about 
screaming women running down the halls while chased by naked men with 
chainsaws, and why our boy Patrick is somehow able to blow up a cop car 
with a handgun. The argument over whether or not Bateman imagined all 
his murders is not, as some critics have suggested, pointless. An 
entirely new dimension is added to the film once you consider Patrick a 
repressed loser who only wishes he were someone as cool as a serial 
killer. It better supports a point Harron seems to be making here: A 
person need not be a murderer to be a "psycho." He just needs to be 
insane. Bateman's crisis isn't resolved either; by film's end, he still 
hasn't escaped from his shell. This is not an exit.
"American Psycho" has its share of problems: It repeats itself too much 
and seems to consider itself far more important than it actually is. I'm 
also wondering why it had to be set specifically in the 80's. The satire 
is universal enough to be applied to many a time period, so specificity 
only makes the film feel dated. It would probably have been better to 
set "American Psycho" in an invented world that doesn't actively suggest 
any particular time or place, a la "A Clockwork Orange" or "Fight Club." 
Still, "American Psycho" must be given attention despite its problems. 
It's deeper than it appears, far less bloody than advertised, and also 
begs an interesting question: Does all that 80's music help make one a 
better murderer? Notice how Patrick Bateman only actually succeeds at 
(or imagines succeeding at) killing someone after listening to music. 
Considering his taste, it's not surprising. Heck, if I listened to Phil 
Collins every day, I might be about ready to kill someone too.
For more reviews, go to http://www.geocities.com/sycasey/movies.html

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
American Psycho (2000)
Christian Bale, Willem Dafoe, Jared Leto, Reese Witherspoon, Samantha
Mathis, Chloe Sevigny, Justin Theroux, Josh Lucas, Guinevere Turner,
Matt Ross, Bill Sage, Cara Seymour. Screenplay by Mary Harron and
Guinevere Turner, based on the novel by Bret Easton Ellis. Directed by
Mary Harron. 97 minutes.
Rated R, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
In 1991, "Less Than Zero" author Bret Easton Ellis stirred up a hornet's
nest with "American Psycho," possibly the most reviled book of the
decade. The novel detailed the thoughts of Patrick Bateman, a yuppie
obsessed with status and murder, offering non-stop brand name dropping
and surgically explicit descriptions of the mutilations of his prey.
Outraged readers denounced the story as a misogynist (most of the
victims were female) piece of gore-porn.
Nine years later, "American Psycho" returns to the spotlight as a film,
written and directed by women.
Director Mary Harron, who co-wrote the screenplay with Guinevere Turner,
dismisses the critics, calling the novel "a brilliant social satire and
a devastating portrait of the 1980s." By keeping most of the violence
off camera, she has crafted a highly stylized fable, a combination
creep-show and pitch-black comedy that steadily builds to an almost
hallucinatory climax. While virtually every element of the film was
better explored in last year's exceptional "Fight Club," Harron's
adaptation holds several distinct rewards.
Chief among them is the performance of cult favorite Christian Bale
("Empire of the Sun," "A Midsummer Night's Dream") as Patrick Bateman.
Bale looks like an elongated, stressed-out Tom Cruise and adopts an
upscale Eastern American accent. He starts with a mildly exaggerated
power tone that gradually escalates to full hysteria, venturing
extremely close to caricature while never quite crossing the line.
Bale spent months weight training for the role and looks great, but in
the context of the story, his body appears less like that of a sexually
attractive male and more like a well-designed android. Despite his
constant grooming and preening, Patrick Bateman is just an anonymous
capitalist, so indistinguishable from his Wall Street peers that he is
often mistaken for another of the corporate boys.
Boys, by the way, is the operative word. These arrested adolescents
define themselves totally by their clothing and acquisitions. Instead of
comparing penises, they whip out their business cards to determine whose
is the most tastefully extravagant.
Of course, attacking materialists for being shallow is about as daring
as calling politicians dishonorable, but Bateman's personal life does
provide some twisted fun. He does crunches while watching "The Texas
Chainsaw Massacre." He peppers his conversations with serial killer
references and drops hints about his homicidal leanings (asked what he
does for a living, he glibly says "murders and executions," which his
companion hears as "mergers and acquisitions").
During foreplay, he gives impassioned lectures about his favorite pop
artists. Particularly enjoyable are his inane comments on Huey Lewis.
Bateman states that the homogenized popster's early works were "too New
Wave" for his tastes and describes one of whiter-than-white Huey's songs
as "too black sounding." He also rhapsodizes about Whitney Houston and
Phil Collins, going so far as to play Collins' infamous "Sussudio," one
of the most wretched songs ever recorded, while having sex.
Incidentally, that sex scene, which shows Bateman gazing adoringly in
the mirror at his muscles as he makes it with two women, was the only
segment that had to be edited to satisfy the prudes in the MPAA. To
avoid the dreaded NC-17 rating, a couple of thrusting motions had to be
cut out (Harron intends to put them back in when the film hits DVD).
After a round in the sack, Bateman likes to cap things off by hacking up
his partner. The film's most memorable stretch has him chasing a hooker
through the halls of his apartment building (a la "The Shining") while
hoisting a chain saw in front of his nude form like some mega-phallus.
Not exactly subtle, but it works.
If, like me, you grow weary of "American Psycho's" repetitious narration
and lack of plot, try entertaining yourself by deciding (WARNING:
POTENTIAL SPOILER AHEAD) whether the murders are real or figments of
Bateman's imagination. A case can be made either way, although oddities
in a number of scenes, coupled with a wildly surrealistic finale, point
strongly to the latter. I prefer the it's-all-in-his-head scenario;
serial killer movies are a dime a dozen, but the idea of a nicely
mannered co-worker smiling and nodding while quietly fantasizing about
hacking me to pieces is chilling (END SPOILER ALERT).
When I give even a qualified positive review to a film like "American
Psycho," I inevitably receive a handful of letters from readers furious
that I "lured" them into wasting their money on "a parade of utter
crap." As a preemptive strike, I wish to clearly state that "American
Psycho" is a difficult movie. D-I-F-F-I-C-U-L-T. If you generally prefer
mainstream fare, there's a good chance you will not enjoy yourself. Got
it? Good.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Satire: n. a literary genre in which ridicule is thrown upon something by
stressing its worst features, often by the use of irony, thus assuming or
affirming a norm by which aberrations are judged. You must appreciate the
definition of a satire if you truly want to experience this film on the
level upon which it is presented. Many satirical cinematic presentations
have flopped, others flourished. This one...works!
PLOT:
Patrick Bateman is a typical Wall Street yuppie who worries more about what
brand of suit to wear in the morning, than he does about hurting anyone's
feelings with his contemptuous attitude. Well...actually, there is one thing
that does set him apart from the rest of his ilk...Patrick also has an
uncontrollable desire to kill people. And did I mention that he loves 80s
pop music?
CRITIQUE:
Sick. Funny. Horrific. Charming. Unsettling. A delight. A film that can have
you laughing out loud one minute, and freezing up horribly the next. A
definite original, one that should have people talking for some time to
come, and most definitely not for everyone! I loved the humor in this film,
I loved the many great lines in this film, I even loved the whole point of
the film, about a time and place in our society in which people and material
objects transcended one another and became one in the same. And with
materialism, greed and objectification running rampant, what is a guy like
Patrick Bateman to do? Well, he essentially does what everyone in that world
was doing from day to day...hiding their secrets on the inside, while
maintaining a mask of serenity on the outs. The only problem with Patrick is
that his "secret" is just a little more damaging than that of anyone else.
Yeesh...is it ever! But if there's one reason to see this movie, one reason
that I would have to pick to see this movie again, and one reason why the
casting of Leonardo DiCaprio just seems totally ludicrous right now (even
though he is a great actor in his own right)...two words...Christian Bale.
I hope that this film will catapult this solid thespian to greater heights,
cause he doesn't just play the role of Patrick Bateman in this movie...he
becomes it! A wonderful caricature of an intelligent, charming, outgoing man
teetering on the brink of insanity. His look, his clothes, his eyes, his
smile, his sweat, his toned body...Christian conquers this character's
sardonic manner, his abundant charisma and most definitely...his killer
instinct. If it sounds like I'm in love with Mr. Bale, well, you may be
right (not that there's anything wrong with that). Simply an awesome
performance...nominate the guy for something, for God's sakes! Of course,
the story itself really isn't a story as much it is a slice-of-life movie
featuring one really bizarre character head-tripping through some very odd
situations in his life. I enjoyed the performances, which were all blessed
by a tongue and cheek, loved the directing, Harron showing the world that
she is more than a one-trick pony, and in the end, I was simply entertained
and excited by the entire film. I guess you can't really ask for more than
that when seeing a movie, right?
Add to that the fact that the ending is kind of ambiguous (but in a good
way), the powerhouse performance by Christian Bale and the many, many funny
lines and over-the-top sexual situations, and this film is a complete
success on its own terms. Of course, it also manages to offset much of that
humor with a few pretty gruesome moments with respect to Patrick's dirty
little secret, a task handled quite admirably, it must be said. And for all
you poor saps who've apparently been robbed of a 10-second bit during one of
the film's menage-a-trois sequences, well, let me just say from the
perspective of someone who did see the missing snippet (I'm Canadian,
eh!)...no big fuss, folks. Just a guy doggying a girl in front of a mirror.
You gotta love that MPAA! "Harumph....no, no, no...we can't have this sexual
position in the movie...it's disgraceful!! What...a decapitated head in the
refrigerator? Oh, that's no problem...that could stay."
A very cool satire featuring one messed up dude portrayed splendidly by one
awesome actor.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Born in Wales, Christian Bale made his major film debut starring in Steven
Spielberg's epic EMPIRE
OF THE SUN, as the lead kid. His next role will be in this summer's remake
of SHAFT, in which he plays the villain.
Director Harron's first choice for the role of Patrick Bateman was Christian
Bale, despite rumors which had Leonardo DiCaprio with the part early on in
the pre-production. Bale took his role very seriously. He prepared for
months, transforming himself physically through diet and a heavy exercise
regimen. He even trained with a voice coach to perfect the right preppy,
Wall Street accent.
This is Harron's second picture. Her first film, I SHOT ANDY WARHOL, was
nominated for Best Picture at the 1996 Independent Spirit Awards. She began
her filmmaking career creating documentaries for British television, as well
as short films, including one called HOW TO MAKE AN OLIVER STONE MOVIE.
Before working in film, Harron was a rock journalist. She helped start
"Punk," the first punk magazine, and was the first writer from an American
publication to interview the Sex Pistols when they were a hot new London
group. She is a native of Canada and graduate of Oxford University. She is
also the daughter of Don Harron, the much-loved Canadian actor and comedian.
She is married to filmmaker John C. Walsh who directed ED'S NEXT MOVE.
This film is based on the controversial best-seller by Bret Easton Ellis
(who also wrote the novel LESS THAN ZERO). The screenplay was written by the
director of this film, Mary Harron, and Guinevere Turner, who also plays the
character of Elizabeth in this film. Guinevere has also held various other
film roles including parts in CHASING AMY and DOGMA. In fact, her friendship
with director Kevin Smith runs pretty deep, as he apparently named the
character of Gwen Turner in MALLRATS after her.

Author
Michael Dequina
_American_Psycho_ (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
As the sugary sounds of Phil Collins' "Sussudio" blare in the
background, a man has rough, sweaty sex with not one, but two women.  
It's a common male fantasy brought to life, but the man is less
interested in the sex act than himself, his gaze fixed on himself in the
mirror as he flexes his muscles while thrusting away.  Now, can anyone
imagine Leonardo DiCaprio in this role?
Neither can I, especially not after seeing Christian Bale so
effortlessly pull off this scene as the title character in
_American_Psycho_, a part that at one point been offered to--and very
nearly been accepted by--the golden boy of _Titanic_.  This adaptation of
Bret Easton Ellis' controversial novel of sex and serial murder in the
image-obsessed '80s would be absolutely unthinkable without Bale, who is
a stunning revelation as the social status-minded sociopath.  It is also
difficult to imagine the film being as wickedly satirical--while
genuinely disturbing--as it is had it not been made by
director/co-scripter Mary Harron.
The notorious reputation of _American_Psycho_ the novel comes from its
extremely graphic depictions of violence, a point with which Harron has
cheeky fun from frame one.  As the credits unspool on a white background,
drops of a red liquid fall across the screen, followed by the image of a
knife slicing in the air.  But then it's revealed that the knife is
cutting meat (not of the human variety), which is then placed on top of a
plate sprinkled with the previously seen red sauce, making one of those
insanely artistic dishes served at swank gourmet dining establishments.
The film's tone is further set by the formal introduction to the
_Psycho_ of the title, Wall Street hotshot Patrick Bateman (Bale). 
Patrick narrates his typical morning routine, which is not unlike most
people's--get up, exercise, shower.  The difference is how his attention
to hygiene borders on obsessive narcissism, going through a veritable
laundry list of products in the shower and even more than that for a
post-shower facial treatment.  It's overkill by most people's standards,
but Patrick's unironic, matter-of-fact narration makes it clear that it
couldn't be a more natural part of taking care of himself.  In fact, the
names of the products Patrick uses is the most specific information given
about him; no clear background is ever established--but then perhaps all
is said in one revealing comment in this opening voiceover: "There is no
real me."
Like Patrick's waking rituals, Bale's vocal performance seems a bit
much, at least at the beginning.  The British actor adopts not just than
an American accent for this role, but also the perfectly enunciated and
overwrought cadences of a TV announcer.  But as the film goes on, his
speech proves to be in perfect alignment with the film as a whole.  This
is not necessarily because _American_Psycho_ grows more outrageous--and,
it could be easily said, over the top--as it progresses (and it does),
but because it is a double-edged reflection of the film's deeper concerns
about identity and conformity.  On one hand, to make oneself sound more
bombastically important is an attempt to stand out from the crowd in the
"Me" decade; on another, in sounding so self-important, Patrick actually
makes himself that much more like his preppy peers, in essence defeating
the whole purpose.
There is one characteristic of Patrick Bateman that distinguishes him
from the rest of his power suit-sporting kind, and that's his pesky habit
of slicing and dicing people.  Unlike Ellis, whose novel lingered on
every last grisly detail, Harron doesn't show more than she has to; she
leaves most of the action to the imagination, opting for shots of blood
splattering on Patrick instead of those of blades tearing into flesh. 
The technique serves its purpose; it makes the killings more disturbing
while not being so harsh as to steal the focus away from real point,
which is satire.
The surface satire in the script by Harron and Guinevere Turner (who
also appears in a small role) is fairly facile; much of the humor derives
from Patrick and his peers' fascination with status symbols.  But Harron
and Turner go about it in an efficient, creative, and very funny way; the
absurdity of their pursuits is perfectly and inventively captured by a
scene where Patrick and co-workers engage try to outdo each other's slick
business cards.  (The cards themselves are indicative of Harron's fine
attention to detail; another witty touch I enjoyed are the overdone theme
menus for the fancy restaurants.)
Such broad strokes threaten to make _American_Psycho_ cartoony, but
Harron achieves compensation in reality through her actors.  Providing
effectively earnest counterbalance are Willem Dafoe as a policeman
investigating the disappearance of one of Patrick's victims, and a trio
of actresses playing the film's comparatively more grounded female
characters: Cara Seymour as a prostitute whom Patrick employs, Reese
Witherspoon as Patrick's high-maintenance fiancée, and the
ever-impressive Chloë Sevigny as Patrick's sweet and devoted secretary.
There's no denying, however, that the film belongs to Bale, who handles
the tricky task of playing a character as an exaggeration yet not a
caricature.  Patrick's hyped-up eccentricities--such as his pre-murder
pontifications on the pop songs he uses as background music--are indeed
comical, and Bale milks them for every sick laugh they're worth (which is
plenty).  Yet there's never anything inherently funny about the character
himself; he's a psychotic murderer, and Bale (and Harron) doesn't
sugarcoat Patrick's murderous rages.  In fact, Bale goes the extra mile
and infuses him with an almost sad desperation--for what, exactly, is
left for the audience to decide.  His repellent actions could easily be
just a sick way to grab more attention for himself (he doesn't do too
discreet a job of hiding his guilt during the cop's interrogations); they
could be read as a dementedly cathartic release for his frustrations;
they could be an interchangeable nobody's extreme attempt to become a
unique somebody.  Whatever way, Bale's achievement is in  suggesting far
more dimensions than his character would ever admit to having.
As Patrick's mind increasingly unravels, so does the film to an extent;
the final act lacks some of the urgency and bite of the first two thirds.
 What it does maintain, and even enhance, is the atmosphere of dread that
always lingered beneath the surface.  Given how unsettling the film's
ultimate effect is, it almost seems inappropriate to call
_American_Psycho_ "enjoyable," but most of this wild and perverse trip
can easily be classified as being so.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Vince Yim
Disclamer: This review may divulge a few more plot details than you'd
like to hear.  If you wish to view the film, you may wish to skip this
review.  Besides, you can't really be prepared for your experience when
watching this film anyway.
Starring Christian Bale, Willam Dafoe, Chloe Sevigny, and Reese
Witherspoon.
American Psycho (2000) tells the tale of Patrick Bateman, a 27-year old
yuppy with an upscale apartment, rows of suits, a really nice watch, abs
of steel, and a bunch of dead body parts decorating his apartment.  
The film has been a subject of controversy over the past little while. 
First of all, it is an adaptation of a book of the same name, which has
been reportedly banned, and was also the book read by notorious Canadian
serial killer Paul Bernardo (proving that yes, movies, books, and video
games will turn an average joe into a cold blooded killer).  And then
there's the little matter of a sex scene that has to be trimmed in order
to avoid the dreaded NC17 rating.  
After watching it, I'm still left with the nagging question of whether I
liked the film or not.
American Psycho works on multiple levels.  On one level, it is a bloody
slasher pic on par with Texas Chainsaw Massacre (which, if I'm not
mistaken, is actually featured on a television in the background as the
protagonist does situps).  On another level, it is a witty satire along
the lines of RoboCop and Fight Club.  On another level, it is a
hilarious comedy that makes you feel really bad for laughing.  But does
it work as a combination on those levels?
The film takes place in the late 1980s and deals with the greed and
materialism often associated with the "Me" generation, where everybody
is so absorbed by their new CDs, their fancy business cards, their brand
name stereo equipment, their cellphones, and their ability to get
reservations at the fanciest restaurants.  The film attempts to make a
social commentary about that, telling about how one man who has it all
-- beautiful women, money, all the coke he can snort -- is dissatisfied
by everything material and must kill people in order to be content.
Hence, we are treated to really graphic showings of him killing people
with reckless abandon.  This is done in such an over-the-top manner
that, a lot of the time, it just leaves you in stitches.  One scene
involves Patrick inviting a co-worker rival to his apartment, which he
has decorated with newspaper plastic sheets to cover the furniture and
carpet.  He then pulls out a shiny axe, which he uses to hack his
co-worker into itty bitty bits to the tune of Huey Lewis and the News'
"Hip to be Square".  Another scene involves him wielding a chainsaw
while chasing a prostitute, while completely naked.  These scenes are
really sick and difficult to watch, yet you can't stop laughing no
matter how hard you try.
As well, there is the scene that had to be trimmed for American
audiences (I love being Canadian!).  In one scene, Patrick has picked up
two prostitutes and is having a menage-a-trois.  But, all throughout the
experience, he his actually staring at himself in the mirror, flexing
his muscles and posing.
Towards the conclusion, the audience is given a Fight Club-esque plot
twist, leaving the audience members confused as to the homicidal nature
of the character.  This does make for an interesting message -- does
having far too many material things ultimately lead to a hollow life,
which in the end leads to something close to psychosis?
The unfortunate thing about the film is the way it handles the social
message.  The film practically jams it down your throat, with constant
mentions of material things and people's attachment to them (ie: Patrick
goes through his daily routine and lists off the products he uses in
minute detail).  
>From a technical standpoint, the film is really well done.  With a $7M
budget (half of which was recouped in the first weekend of release), the
film has beautifully designed sets, good attention to detail,
interesting camera angles, and is a good film to look at and listen to. 
But the ambiguous ending leaves you a bit cold.
I do recommend this film, but mostly on the basis of Christian Bale's
acting and the fact that this is not a film where one can just be told
to like it or not.  This is the type of film where one has to see it for
themselves to make their own judgement.  
-- 

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Whether it's a caustic indictment of yuppie Wall Street do-nothings
with more money than they can shake a platinum American Express card at, or
an equally derisive put-down of popular music (think Robert Palmer,
Genesis, Huey Lewis and the News), "American Psycho" delivers its
message--blam!--like a nail gun to the back of the head.
        Some critics have damned Mary Harron's film--she made the indie hit
"I Shot Andy Warhol" with Lili Taylor--as being nothing more than an
upscale version of "The Texas Chainsaw Massacre."  But that comparison
proves accurate for reasons opposite those intended.
        Tobe Hooper's influential horror masterpiece from 1974 succeeded by
showing a true face of horror without catering to excessive gore and
bloodshed.  And in "American Psycho," Harron has, with almost eerie
confidence, done the same.  Save for one sensationalistic scene in a
stairwell (featuring that old staple a chainsaw no less), "American Psycho"
bottles up its horror in the mind and contradictions of its central
character, leaving the graphic realization of his actions as much
off-screen as possible.
        Based on Bret Easton Ellis' satirical novel, "American Psycho"
centers on one Patrick Bateman (played with wild abandon by Christian
Bale).  Bateman is a wealthy, white-collar executive for the
Manhattan-based firm of Pierce and Pierce which specializes in mergers and
acquisitions (or "murders and executions" as Bateman cynically refers to
his trade).  Since Bateman's father virtually owns the company store,
Bateman spends most of his workday listening to tunes on his walkman and
reading pornography, while his nights are spent schmoozing in the flashiest
New York restaurants, where it's deadly important to get a dinner
reservation even if you're not particularly hungry.
        Bateman obsesses about everything: his wardrobe, his toilette
(which he dictates in great detail like an Esparce waiter describing the
daily specials), his physique (and it's some physique), right down to whom
at the office has the finest business card.  Bale mugs his way through the
role splendidly, as if his Bateman were Chevy Chase possessed by Travis
Bickle.  Because this smart, mannered sophisticate has a tendency to allow
the fervor inside him to erupt in homicidal bursts of rage.
        Chloë Sevigny ("Boys Don't Cry") plays Bateman's beleaguered
secretary Jean in a nicely subtle turn.  There's a point in the film at
which Bateman invites Jean back to his West 81st Street penthouse and
things quickly start to turn sour.  "You'd better go now" he advises.  "I
might hurt you if you stay."  Delicate, knowing moments like these make
"American Psycho" an extremely effective thriller, since we are privy to
Bateman's depraved excesses long before the other characters discover them,
usually after it's too late.
        But the film isn't all doom and dismemberment.  It has a lighter,
brighter side too.  There's something gleefully subversive about the way in
which Bateman whips two hookers into shape while espousing the merits of
Whitney Houston's debut album, backed by Phil Collins singing "Susudio,"
for example.  Sick and twisted yes, but darkly comedic just the same.
        "Killer looks" reads "American Psycho"'s tagline.  Killer looks
indeed.  And one stone-cold killer performance from Christian Bale.  Add to
that Harron's tight direction and a creepy Bernard Herrmann-esque score
from John Cale and you've got a stylish exercise in modern-day sociopathy
that bears strong comparisons to some of the best comic horror films around.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Eugene Novikov
American Psycho is technically superb, tantalizingly ambitious, morally
sound and very well acted. And yet I can't, in good conscience,
recommend that people go see it. Though in hindsight the film is an
excellent think piece, I left the theater with a sour taste in my
mouth. I'm a liberal guy, but this movie goes beyond "disturbing" and
gets dangerously close to "repulsive" in its portrayal of senseless
sadistic violence and sexual violence. It's true that American Psycho's
purpose was to jar the viewer but I wonder: should any movie being
passed off as entertainment go this far?
Patrick Bateman (Christian Bale) is a yuppie living in New York in the
1980's. He's a sleek, efficient businessman, perhaps less cocky than
his friends, who regularly have business card contests (an obvious
symbol for the men's sexual frustration) and have competitions to see
who can get the most difficult restaurant reservations. This is what
the lives of everyone but Bateman consist of. When Bateman himself goes
home, he kills: viciously and for no apparent reason. He also likes to
hire prostitutes and have bizarre, violent sex.
One of Bateman's murders doesn't go over so well. When he kills one of
his co-workers, Paul Allen (Jared Leto), he makes a few mistakes which
send a detective (Willem Dafoe) after him. Though the detective never
makes it clear whether or not he is really on to him or whether he is
simply doing routine questioning, Patrick, for the first time in his
life, becomes a little paranoid and loses his seemingly perpetual cool.
American Psycho has stirred up talk in Hollywood since day 1.
Originally, Leonardo DiCaprio was slated to play Patrick Bateman; when
he bowed out, little-known (though prolific) British actor Bale was
brought in and the budget went down. Then, as the film creeped closer
to completion, new controversy came up. The film got an NC-17 rating
for a graphic mжиnage Я trois scene. Director Mary Harron, at first,
refused to cut a minute of the film but later gave in and edited it for
an R (in my opinion, the film should have still received the NC-17).
The MPAA didn't seem to be particularly concerned about the movie's
violence which is abundant, but not as graphic as you might think.
Still, it was presented so nonchalantly that I was genuinely shocked by
some of it even though I've technically seen more explicit violence in
teen slasher movies. It's all in the attitude. I agree that this was
exactly the film's intention and can only counter with one argument:
the movie made me feel terrible. Movies aren't supposed to do that.
Still, there's a lot to praise in this adaptation of what was widely
regarded as an "unfilmable" novel (unread by me). *MAJOR SPOILER AHEAD*
Mary Harron leaves some things deliberately ambiguous; at the end, she
raises the question of whether these crimes may have been committed in
Bateman's bored, materialistic mind. Consider, for example, the fact
that nobody seems to notice when Bateman kills a half-naked woman with
a noisy chainsaw on an apartment stairway. No one even peeks out of a
door to see what all the ruckus is about. Harron does not emphasize
this but it is hard to believe that she would just forget about it
accidentally. This makes the movie good for debate later if you don't
bolt out of the theater halfway through, like I was very close to doing.
Christian Bale is a wonderful actor, perfectly pulling off the darkly
comedic scenes scattered throughout the movie. It would have been most
amusing to see DiCaprio try it: I don't have an antipathy for the actor
but I don't think he would dare play some of these scenes straight.
Chloe Sevigny, an Oscar nominee for the similarly disturbing but far
less lurid Boys Don't Cry also shows up for a small part as Bateman's
secretary.
Look: this movie didn't warp my mind. I'm not scarred for life because
I saw it. But I can tell you that it made me feel very uncomfortable,
going beyond its intention of throwing the viewer somewhat off-balance.
If that floats your boat, fine. But if you bring a friend, you may be
severely berated afterwards.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Entertainment Distribution on April 21, 2000; 
certificate 18; 101 minutes; countries of origin Canada/USA; aspect ratio 
2.35:1
Directed by Mary Harron; produced by Chris Hanley, Edward R. Pressman, 
Christian Halsley Solomon.
Written by Mary Harron, Guinevere Turner; based on the novel by Bret Easton 
Ellis.
Photographed by Andrjez Sekula; edited by Andrew Marcus.
Patrick Bateman is someone Tom Wolfe might have come up with if he had 
written his books on acid. He's an arrogant suit from Wall Street obsessed 
with physical fitness, facial care products, designer clothing and expensive 
restaurants. And scoring cocaine. And misogyny. Oh, and he likes to mutilate 
people, and play around with their guts, too.
The character is the creation of Bret Easton Ellis, whose 1991 novel 
"American Psycho" was set amid the Manhattan yuppie scene of the late 1980s. 
The book was twisted, but it needed to be, because it had extreme things to 
say. Ellis saw the widespread obsessive egoism and greed of the Me Decade as 
dangerously sick, and his vision of its potential to produce vicious 
murderers makes a fair amount of sense. After all, any idiotic businessmen 
who made enough bucks could follow their every impulse and shit on whomever 
they wanted to, and their attitude was championed as fashionable.
Now "American Psycho" is a film directed by Mary Harron, with Christian Bale 
in the lead role. As in the source material, Bateman divides his time between 
working out, making lunch appointments, sitting around in his office and 
butchering fellow New Yorkers. Onscreen we see him stabbing a homeless man 
and a female acquaintance, decapitating a hooker with a chainsaw, blowing up 
a crowd of cops, chopping up one of his colleagues with an axe and telling us 
about numerous other crimes. Even when a private detective (Willem Dafoe) 
starts investigating the disappearances, though, Bateman never comes close to 
being caught. Why would anyone suspect a 'normal', standard, efficient young 
capitalist earner of criminal activity?
The killings in the story hammer home in a jarring manner the message of how 
inhuman Bateman and his ilk are; although his chums don't kill people or know 
that he's doing so, they do share his level of detachment from decent values. 
Most of the film illustrates this through black humour. In one scene, for 
example, a group of men use their business cards for a vanity contest, 
comparing them like cowboys showing off the sizes of their guns.
The problem with the comedy in the film is that Harron doesn't trust the 
material to be intrinsically funny, and has her actors deliver lines in 
broad, goofy tones, making clear they're in on the joke. That doesn't prevent 
us from laughing, but it does affect the satirical power of many moments -- 
we giggle mainly because the characters are talking in a preposterous manner, 
rather than because they're saying preposterous things.
Since almost every scene is performed in this silly way, the film is nowhere 
near as intense as the novel. If we laugh at the characters' paper-thin 
morals, that's the extent of our reaction; Harron doesn't let us give them 
enough thought to also be appalled by them. You could take the murders out of 
her "American Psycho" and it would be the same movie -- its purpose is to 
merely point at the vacant pomposity of the male yuppie, and ridicule it.
Still, on that level the movie works well. Although it is a missed 
opportunity (Ellis's angry expression of the madness of the situation was 
more affecting), it is at least an entertaining deflation of white-collar 
stuffed shirts, and those guys can be the most despicable of people. I see 
them all the time in bars and restaurants, thinking their suits make them 
mature, arrogantly raising their voices, telling stupid childish jokes to 
each other, rambling in stockbroker jargon that they think impresses 
onlookers. And now, whenever that happens, I can smile to myself that someone 
else in the vicinity will have probably seen this movie, and will be laughing 
inside at what morons it shows them to be.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Brian Matherly
Cast: Christian Bale, Willem Dafoe, Jared Leto, Reese Witherspoon,
Samantha Mathis, Chloë Sevigny, Guinevere Turner 
Written by: Mary Harron and Guinevere Turner 
Directed by: Mary Harron 
Running Time: 100 minutes 
Set in the late 80's at the height of yuppie excess and based on the
book by Bret Easton Ellis (who explored the same themes in another book
which was also made into a movie, Less Than Zero), American Psycho puts
a new spin on the yuppie "genre" that Ellis helped to create.  Christian
Bale is perfectly cast as Patrick Bateman, a high powered yuppie who
hides a terrible secret from his fiancée and his colleagues.  It seems
that Bateman is a serial killer and, unfortunately for his
contemporaries, his tenuous grasp on reality is starting to slip.  As he
tries to balance his meticulous daily routines with slaughtering
co-workers and prostitutes and hiding their bodies, his mental fabric
slowly begins to unravel.  
I was first introduced to the novel when I was still in high school.  I
read an Associated Press article in our local Sunday newspaper detailing
the problems Ellis was having getting his novel published due to the
controversial violence in it. As usual when anything is controversial I
try to seek it out, but I soon forgot about the novel and didn't end up
thinking about it again until I stumbled across it a couple of years
later at a bookstore.  I picked it up and read it, but was ultimately
disappointed because it left more questions than answers.  The movie has
a similar effect, but at least it's less cryptic than Ellis' novel.  For
once, a film has actually turned out to be better than the novel it was
based on.  
Both the book and the film open with Bateman describing his fastidious
morning preparations (down to exactly what facial scrubs and exfoliating
creams he uses) but the novel seems to concentrate more on these
excesses throughout.  The movie continues to touch upon these things but
makes more of a point to immerse us in Bateman's impending madness than
to detail things as painstakingly as the novel does.  As a result, the
film is immensely more entertaining.  
Lions Gate seems to be the studio champion of controversial films
(having picked up Kevin Smith's Catholic-rattling Dogma) and here with
American Psycho there is no difference.  Screenwriters Mary Harron and
Guinevere Turner had the unenviable task of trying to take a novel about
yuppies filled with graphic violence and sex and make a marketable film
out of it.  Some cuts had to be made to the finished film to keep from
getting an NC-17, mainly involving a sex scene comprising Bateman and
two women, and initial reports said the film was unwatchable. 
Thankfully, it IS watchable and Harron and Turner have made one of the
most scathingly satirical films this side of South Park:Bigger, Longer &
Uncut.  
Side Note #1: Co-writer Guinevere Turner also makes an appearance in the
film as an ill-fated acquaintance of Bateman's who, after Bateman
suggests that she start making out with a female prostitute, proclaims
that she's not a lesbian nor has any interest in it.  The ironic humor
of the scene stems from the fact that Turner (the writer/director of the
film Go Fish and who also assisted Kevin Smith with parts of his script
for Chasing Amy) is a lesbian.  It's a subtle in-joke and it's one I
found to be pretty humorous.  
Despite having a rather high profile supporting cast of young
up-and-comers (including Reese Witherspoon), most of the roles are a
waste and are the equivalent of extended billed cameos.  The real draw
here is Christian Bale and his over-the-top performance as Patrick
Bateman.  Whenever I read a novel I always try to imagine what it would
be like as a movie and who would be perfect to cast as the characters. 
I always had a hard time trying to decide who I would cast as Bateman,
but I never thought Bale would deliver a performance as perfect as his
ends up being.  To say Bale runs away with the character is a vast
understatement and he proves that he's as adept at chewing scenery as Al
Pacino or Rod Steiger.  One sequence in particular, involving Bateman
describing his love for Huey Lewis and the News' song "Hip to Be Square"
right before burying an axe in a co-worker's head, features one of the
most eccentric and kinetic performances I have ever seen on film.  
Side Note #2: Despite the fact that Huey Lewis' "Hip to be Square" and a
pair of Phil Collins songs appear in the film, don't expect to see them
on the soundtrack release.  Huey Lewis expressly requested that his
song, featured in a rather large set piece in the film (much akin to the
use of "Stuck in the Middle with You" in Reservoir Dogs), not be
included on any soundtrack release.  I'm assuming that Collins requested
the same.  On a similar note, Whitney Houston's cover of "The Greatest
Love of All" is also involved in a scene comparable to the other two and
it is very obvious that it isn't the Houston version at all but merely
an instrumental version culled from an unknown source.  Apparently,
Houston wasn't as open about the use of her song as the others were.  
A bigger controversy than the violence and sex has been brewing since
the film's release: that of whether or not Patrick has actually
committed the crimes we have viewed during the course of the film. 
Don't look to the book for any answers because it will only serve to
confuse you more.  Several web sites have been dedicated to the subject
but I'm still undecided.  There is evidence both for and against but the
most scathing evidence against comes from a scene near the end of the
film where Bateman goes on a killing spree taking out cops, old ladies,
and cleaning staff with equal gusto.  The scene seemed very dream-like
and as absurd as the action films it suddenly seems to be parodying (as
an example, Bateman blows up a police car VERY cinematically after
firing several shots from a handgun in the general direction of the
car).  I kept waiting for Bateman to wake up and for the film to
continue on from there, but Bateman never does wake up and the whole
sequence, though comic, throws the film off-balance (which I suppose was
the intention).  
Other than the few flaws I have mentioned, American Psycho is an
incredibly entertaining film (although you may not leave the movie fully
understanding whether or not what has just transpired actually occurred
in Bateman's reality).  I think this movie is destined for greatness as
a cult film and deserves the spot it will take as such.  It may not
change anyone's life, but it will certainly have an effect.  I know I
will certainly hear "Hip to be Square" in a different context the next
time I hear it.  [R]
Reviewed by Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
A review of the book "American Psycho" by Bret Easton Ellis
(New York, Vintage, 1991).  Review by Harvey Karten,
film_critic@compuserve.com.
   An article on the rich and super-rich in the business section
of a recent New York Times shows that the number of rich
people in the U.S. has grown dramatically since the 1980s,
when the Reagan administration sanctified the accumulation
of wealth.  In 1983, for example, only 46,500 households had
a net worth of $10 million or more.  The figure now is
350,000.  Rex Golding is one of the individuals cited by
journalist Laura M. Hoolson in the March 3 edition of the
newspaper.  Though he controls assets of over $10 million,
he gripes, "My 6-year-old is starting to say things like, 'their
house if bigger.'"  There is simply no end to the compulsion
of large numbers of Americans to make money.
   Is this a bad thing?  Probably.  Think of one of the most
prominent slogans of the 1980s, "Die, yuppie scum!"  Why
the antagonism of so many to young urban professionals? 
Envy cannot be ruled out.  Nor are the sloganeers distressed
about those among the rich who have an attitude of modesty. 
The target of the expression is groups of our residents who
make their money exchanging paper rather than contributing
concrete goods (as engineers, construction workers, and
factories do) and who are so self-involved and absorbed in
spending their ill-gotten loot on luxury goods that they are
spiritually dead.  
   With his third novel "American Psycho"--now adapted for
an April 14 opening as a Lions Gate movie starring Christian 
Bale--Bret Easton Ellis focuses on a 26-year-old serial killer, 
Patrick Bateman, an investment banker whose yuppie friends
are so self-absorbed, so wrapped up in their accumulation of
designer clothing and dinners in high-priced, trendy
restaurants, that they ignore Bateman's confessions of his
multiple crimes against women and the homeless.  The novel
describes Bateman's acts of torment and torture so
graphically that the book was roundly denounced by feminists
and moralists as vacant pornography designed exclusively to
titillate the lowest elements of a book-reading society. At the
same time, the novel has been praised by other feminists and
moralists as a work designed to inform its readers of a
dangerous spiritual emptiness in our overly materialistic
country.
   The author is no stranger to commentary of this sort.  One
of his previous novels, "The Rules of Attraction," is about the
sexual posturings and agonies of three college students
during the 1980s, while his "Less than Zero," situated in the
eighties as well, highlights a bunch of kids in an affluent,
liberal arts college who at a tender age have indulged in too
many drugs, too much sex, have had too much money, and
who wind up disaffected nihilists devoid of feeling.  Ellis
cannot be accused of making broad, general statements
about the spiritual emptiness of segments of young, rich
people.  In "American Psycho," his most realized work, he
delves into the lifestyles of Pat Bateman and his circle in
excruciating detail, dropping more names of designer clothing
in just 399 pages than film critic Armond White drops names
of movies in three years of reviewing.
   "American Psycho" is narrated by the homicidal maniac of
its title, Pat Bateman, in a such a flat tone that you wonder
whether he is nothing more than a documentary filmmaker.
Treating one of his gruesome murders with about the same
level of emotion that he discusses a restaurant reservation or
the kinds of clothing worn by people with whom he comes in
contact, Bateman drones on in this manner:
   "I run into Bradley Simpson from P&P outside F.A.O
Schwartz and he's wearing a glen-plaid worsted wool suit
with notched lapels by Perry Ellis, a cotton broadcloth shirt by
Gitman Brothers, a silk tie by Savoy, a chronograph with a
crocodile skin band by Breil, a cotton raincoat by Paul Smith
and a fur felt hat by Paul Stuart."  Ellis drops literally
hundreds of names like these, assuring the reader that he
knows the society whereof he speaks.  His writing is so
entertaining in describing yuppie concerns that we are almost
sorry when he begins to describe the homicidal inclinations of
his central character--as late as page 131.  Eventually he
decorates his room with the skin and bones and brains and
hair of his innumerable female victims, some from his circle
of acquaintances, others bimbos whom he has brought over
by calling escort services.  Here is Pat Bateman's description
of his feeling toward the homeless:
  "I pull out a long, thin knife with a serrated edge and, being
very careful not to kill him, push maybe half an inch of the
blade into his right eye, flicking the handle up, instantly
popping the retina....with my thumb and forefinger hold the
other eye open and bring the knife up and push the tip of it
into the socket, first breaking its protective film so the socket
fills with blood, then slitting the eyeball open sideways, and
he finally starts screaming once I slit his nose in two...
   In moments like these, you won't be faulted for wondering
whether Ellis uses the theme of American spiritual vacuity
ingenuously to give his novel a profound, spiritual meaning--
whether he really is the pornographer that so many people
accuse him of being, interested only in arousing the baser
emotions of the readers.  Let's for the record give him the
benefit of the doubt and accept the book for what it is: a
harsh indictment of a society that is so wrapped up in
spending, on keeping up with the Joneses and spurring the
envy of its neighbors, that it has lost its spiritual center. 
Those among us who are not rich or famous or trendy can
argue that nothing in this book applies to them.  Really? 
Components of the underclass who mug people not to buy
food for their families but to afford the trendiest athletic
footwear cannot escape blame.  If you are just about getting
by comfortably, can you say with certainty that you and your
circle of family and friends genuinely feel for those outside (or
even inside) your circle--that you sympathize with the
homeless, care for the desperate, and live your life to make
the world a better place than it was before you arrived? 
Perhaps you can, perhaps not.  But that's a subject for
another novel.  Ellis--are you listening? (C) Harvey Karten,
film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Mary Harron. Screenplay by Harron and Guinevere Turner, from
the novel by Bret Easton Ellis. Starring Christian Bale, Chloe Sevigny,
Willem Dafoe. Running time: 102 minutes. Rated R for extreme violence and
graphic sexual content (MFCB). Reviewed on April 17th, 2000.
Few movies have engendered such controversy as "American Psycho". Not only
has there been concern over its violent and sexual content, but the 1991
Bret Easton Ellis novel upon which the film is based is notorious for
having been read by Karla Homolka, accomplice of convicted sex murderer
Paul Bernardo.
But those who have sought to censor "American Psycho" have done so with
little merit. This is not a movie about murder per se, and any intelligent
watching of the film should make that obvious. Does the lead character,
Patrick Bateman, kill people? Yes, and the implication is that many more
die off-screen. But this very fact -- that much of Bateman's crime spree
is referred to only in passing -- makes it clear that the movie is less
concerned about his deeds than about Bateman himself.
The killings themselves are alternately comical and dispassionate. There
is none of the frenzied bloodlust of "Natural Born Killers" (another
good film about murderers, but one that is very different in its approach
to the material). In one of the movie's best scenes, for instance, Bateman
is more concerned with keeping his clothes and apartment clean, and with
discussing the merits of Huey Lewis, than with the actual process of
murdering a colleague.
Instead, "American Psycho" works on two levels. First, and most obviously,
it is a character study of Patrick Bateman, a complex and difficult role
played splendidly by Christian Bale. And second, it serves as a scathing
indictment of the 1980s, of the shallow and materialistic values which
were the hallmark of that decade and which still play an all-too-important
role in Western society.
Patrick Bateman is a mid-level executive in his late twenties. His day
seems to consist mostly of "meetings" with other mid-level executives,
which essentially amount to contests of ego (we never actually see them
doing anything work-related). Bragging rights are determined by the
quality of their business cards and their ability to secure reservations
at chic restaurants. Several of them are engaged, but this seems purely
for show; they fool around on one another with only the barest of nods
toward secrecy. Certainly, Bateman's relationship with his own fiancee,
Evelyn (Reese Witherspoon), is cold and loveless. Indeed, Bateman and the
others are so similar that it almost feels as though they have been
churned out on an assembly line. Their slicked-back hairstyles, their
style of dress, their mode of speech -- all are virtually identical. A
running gag is made of the way Bateman is constantly mistaken for others
(he doesn't even bother to correct the error, and just plays along).
But unlike his confreres, Bateman has a secret: he is a murderer, who
has already killed as the movie opens and kills again, many times, over
the course of the picture. "American Psycho" does not concern itself with
the whys of Bateman's psychosis; it is more interested in his mentality
now that he has succumbed to his murderous impulses. Bateman, we learn,
thinks of himself as nothing but an empty, hollow shell, as conveyed
effectively by a number of visuals. Early on, Bateman removes a
transparent moisturizing face mask to reveal the same face underneath:
his flesh hides no further depths. Later, Bateman gazes into a polished
surface, but there is only the barest of reflections. "There is simply
nothing there," he says of himself. Indeed, Bateman does not have a line
of dialogue which is heartfelt or honest. When he does speak, it is simply
to maintain appearances, and it is as though he is regurgitating words
heard or read elsewhere; his favorite subject is popular music, but his
opinions feel lifted out of the latest "Rolling Stone".
Bateman is entirely self-absorbed, seeking to mold the world to his own
preferences without fully committing himself to that world. He instructs
his secretary, Jean (Chloe Sevigny), how to dress, and treats himself with
a litany of body-care products. Indeed, the murders he commits can be seen
as the ultimate extension of this thirst for control. In one telling
scene, Bateman engages in a three-way sex scene with two prostitutes, but
spends the whole time watching his own performance in the mirror; rather
than arousing, the proceedings are perfunctory and emotionless (making it
all the more strange that this was the scene ordered trimmed from the US
release by the MPAA; the Canadian version, fortunately, is unabridged).
"American Psycho" grows increasingly bizarre as the story unfolds. The
reality of the film seems to be influenced by Bateman's own grip on
sanity, and as his psychosis grows, the movie becomes more and more
surreal. Unusually, for a picture with such disturbing subject matter, 
this lends an air of comedy to the whole thing. Some viewers may find this
juxtaposition uncomfortable, but director Mary Harron reaches the right
balance, and the humor only serves to further augment Bateman's dementia.
Apart from Bale's standout performance, none of the other actors are
memorable, mired as they are in vacuous and superficial parts. Willem 
Dafoe occupies a particularly odd role, as a detective investigating one
of Bateman's killings. It seems fairly clear that he knows Bateman is the
murderer, and yet this particular subplot simply peters out. Indeed, some
may take issue with the way the movie as a whole just kind of stops,
rather than reaching some kind of definitive conclusion. But I find it 
hard to take issue with this technique; the movie is, above all else, a
character sketch, and once it has nothing new to say about Patrick
Bateman, it sensibly ends. What kind of ending could "American Psycho"
really have had, without it seeming superfluous?
"American Psycho" is an excellent character piece, marred only by a lack
of supporting material. The look it provides into the mind of a serial
killer is both chilling and sobering -- for, despite Patrick Bateman's
obvious and self-confessed insanity, how far removed is he really from the
rest of us?
Now, if you'll excuse me, I have to return some videos.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/AmericanPsycho.html
--
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|  shannon@morgan.ucs.mun.ca |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Jon Popick
Bret Easton Ellis' novel American Psycho was so disturbing and
controversial that it had to scramble for new publisher at the last
minute when Simon & Schuster backed out after having second thoughts
regarding the murderous tale of an 80s yuppie that adorns his posh
apartment with the body parts of his female victims.  Ellis' book was a
detailed satirization of uninhibited materialism and decadence in
post-Last Days of Disco New York City.  But like Disco, this picture is
tough to enjoy because there really isn't anyone to root for.
Christian Bale (William Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream) plays
Patrick Bateman, a twenty-seven-year-old Wall Street hotshot whose
biggest problems in life are limited to getting a bad table at a trendy
restaurant, discovering that someone has better business cards than he
does, and trying to find a dry cleaner to get the blood stains out of
his sheets. Bateman admits that he is incapable of feeling any emotion
other than greed and disgust, a fact he demonstrates by killing hookers,
the homeless and an occasional co-worker.
Bateman's world is full of name-dropping co-workers and acquaintances
that can barely remember each other's names but have total recall when
it comes to knowing who wears what kind of suit or who ate at what
restaurant last Wednesday.  He has an unfaithful fiancée (Reese
Witherspoon, Election), a sterile white apartment and a job that seems
to consist of reading porn, watching Jeopardy! and listening to his
Walkman.  As the film opens, Bateman gives a detailed list of name-brand
toiletries that he uses to prepare himself for a hard day of murders and
executions (a bimbo mistakenly thinks he says `mergers and
acquisitions').
You may be wondering about the story right about now, but there really
isn't one.  Bateman hops from home to work to bar to restaurant acting
like a jerk and randomly killing people.  The closest Psycho comes to
any semblance of plot is when Bateman offs a co-worker played by Jared
Leto (Black & White) and is questioned several times by a police officer
(Willem Dafoe, eXistenZ).  Much will be made about Bateman's long,
pre-killing diatribe on 80s music, but by the third time he does this,
it's boring.
An overrated actor, Bale does little with Bateman that we haven't
already seen in Michael Douglas' Gordon Gecko or, more recently, Tom
Cruise's Frank `T.J.' Mackey.  But he's much better than Leonardo
DiCaprio would have been (he was originally slated to play the part but,
like Simon & Schuster, backed out at the last minute).  Witherspoon does
a good job at acting like the girl on Stark Raving Mad, who in turn
seems to be doing an impression of Witherspoon.  Leto is as dim-witted
as ever (who keeps casting him?).  Samantha Mathis (Broken Arrow) and
Chloë Sevigny (Boys Don't Cry) co-star, the latter of whom could be
playing the same part as her monotone Last Days of Disco character.
Psycho is a real indie affair, which doesn't help explain why it's
playing multiplexes with a national release date instead of a platformed
art-house run.  Director Mary Harron, who helmed the far superior I Shot
Andy Warhol, as well as episodes of Homicide: Life on the Street and OZ,
doesn't bother to show most of the story's carnage. The film, co-written
by Harron and Go Fish scribe Guinevere Turner, isn't nearly as graphic
as you would think.  Ex-Velvet Undergrounder John Cale (Warhol) provides
a handsome score, and Andrzej Sekula's (Pulp Fiction) camera work is, at
times, breathtaking.
1:37  R for violence, nudity, strong sexual contest and adult language

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review can be found at
http://www.moviereviews.org/american_psycho.htm ---
Rarely has a film so funny, chilling and revealing as American Psycho graced
the silver screen. Mary Harron crosses certain borders in this equally
highbrow and gruesome study of the ultimate Reagan yuppie that few directors
have been brave enough to venture across before. Above all else, it is most
frightening that the film's funniest moments aren't the liquor-drenched
cocktail parties at which we are accustomed to laughing, but rather the
gruesome murders at which audiences have traditionally cringed.
Much like Alfred Hitchcock, Harron chooses to film her love and murder
scenes in an almost identical manner. The protagonist, Patrick Bateman (a
wonderfully eerie Christian Bail), controls these  parts of the movie,
gaining equal pleasure from sexual gratification and terminating life.
Bateman is always more comfortable than the women with whom he is having
sex, or the person he is killing, so he is able to pay meticulous attention
to the details of such acts. He knows which positions are the most arousing
and he knows which techniques make less of a mess than others.
Yet, the film's main character isn't a master at either practice. He leaves
sexual partners in distress and is occasionally conflicted about murders.
Bateman isn't perfect. Rather, he is an egotistical Harvard graduate with
salon quality facial products and a deep envy for those with finer business
cards or a more expensive apartment than his.
American Psycho opens with black credits set against a white background and
what appears to be blood dripping down the screen. The red drops prove to be
something else, yet the illusion remains strong. This sets the tone for a
film where many things are not what they manifest themselves to be, yet
their appearance is oftentimes more convincing than their actual being.
One thing that is very apparent, however, is the picture's setting. Harron's
adaptation of Bret Easton Ellis' novel (which I admit to not having read)
portrays an upper class Manhattan that only has some truths today, but was
very real in the 1980's. It is a place where a person's ability to swing
last minute reservations reflects upon his status, the make of a suit is
often guessed over write-off lunches (paid for, of course, with platinum
credit cards) and sexual harassment is no big deal. Given these definitions,
each member of the crowd is nothing more than Rene Magritte's Son of Man -
except for Bateman who is only unique in the most sick and twisted fashions
imaginable.
Bateman warns his colleagues that he is `simply not there' and `utterly
insane.' Yet, these words fall on deaf ears. As he chases a young girl with
nothing more than a chainsaw to cover his recently used sexual organ, it is
apparent that Bateman is indeed an American psycho. He has moments of mercy,
moments of brilliance and moments when he appears to be no more than that
Magritte painting. The film has similar characteristics. The audience is
saved from viewing even more gruesome and haunting images via several
off-screen murders; some plot devices have grown tired since being used in
Wall Street, Glengarry Glen Ross, Boiler Room, and other like films and
consequently lack the much needed freshness. But, at the end, it is the
moments when the movie achieves brilliance that stand out. Still, to many
audiences not prepared for such an intellectual bloodbath, the image
portrayed may well be that of insanity.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Review by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
"American Psycho" (2000) ** (out of four)
Starring Christian Bale, Willem Dafoe, Jared Leto,
Justin Theroux, Reese Witherspoon, Chloe Sevigny, Cara
Seymour, Guinevere Turner, William Sage, Matt Ross,
and Samantha Mathis.
That was the first question I asked myself after
seeing American Psycho. 
is still my reaction writing this review a few days
later. The ending of American Psycho is so
over-the-top, so unlike the rest of the movie, so
catastrophic, that it just becomes confusing. Neither
me nor the six people I saw it with understood what
the overall message was trying to say. The sloppy
ending disproved any conclusions we came up with.
American Psycho may be fun to watch but its ending
seriously damages all of the characters' introduced
including the protagonist/serial killer Patrick
Bateman (Christian Bale). Surprise endings work
extremely well when the surprise actually makes sense
with the rest of the movie (like Sixth Sense, Fight
Club). On the other hand, they are extremely ruinous
when films use them as an easy way out to end a movie
that is difficult to finish. When American Psycho
ends, it is not over; there are one too many questions
left unanswered. 
What was the point of American Psycho? Does Patrick
Bateman represent all of our gruesome fantasies come
true? As a rich Wall Street type living sometime
during the 1980's who acts as a serial killer on his
off time, Bateman gets away with everything he does.
He doesn't just escape the murders unharmed, he also
cheats on his "fiancée" (Reese Witherspoon) with his
friend's fiancée, pays prostitutes, tortures animals,
and snorts cocaine all during an average weekday. This
all coming from the same man who obsessively takes
care of his skin with a series of lotions, who goes
insane when he stains a blanket, and who idolizes the
music of Whitney Houston. Patrick is like no other
character you have seen before thanks to an incredible
performance by former child-star Christian Bale. Bale
saves this movie from being a total disaster with his
ability to make Bateman into a two-faced character who
loves the sight of blood but can't stand seeing it on
his bed sheets. Thank god Leonardo DiCaprio did not
take the title role, he would have been terrible
miscast. The only problem with Bale's magnificent
accomplishment is that he appears in every scene,
meaning he makes every other actor in the movie look
terrible. It felt like director/co-writer Mary Harron
left every other supporting character underdeveloped.
Several excellent actors are all wasted in their
roles. Witherspoon, Willem Dafoe, Samantha Mathis, and
Chloe Sevigny all have potential to be interesting
characters but, due to the terrible ending and
Bateman's dominance, are never given a chance. We
never learn anything about their lives, who they
actually are, what they hide behind their social
appearance. The beauty of Bateman is that he acts one
way in front of society but another, unbelievable to
his friends, way when by himself. And slowly, as the
movie progresses, his "mask of sanity begins to slip."
Besides Bale's performance, there is not much to
recommend about American Psycho. Rumored to be
extremely controversial and unforgettable, the movie
is far from that. The jokes, sometimes hilarious, are
mostly muted by the extreme violence. Maybe the MPAA
ruined the moviewho knows? 
What was the point of American Psycho? Was it a
clever, satirical examination of the 1980's? Bret
Easton Ellis' novel, which the movie is based on, may
be just that but I don't see why the film couldn't
have taken place during the 60's, 70's, 90's, or the
2000's. Pop culture has affected society as much in
these periods (if not more) than in the 1980's. 
With a decent ending that wrapped up the plot and
expanded the potential of the supporting characters,
American Psycho could have been much more. Bale does
his best to make this movie work but in the end it
just seems like the viewer is being forced to watch a
crazy man kill a bunch of innocent people and get away
with it and nothing else. Overall, American Psycho was
a disappointment.

Author
Walter Frith
Cast - Christian Bale, Willem Dafoe, Chloe Sevigny, Jared Leto, Reese
Witherspoon
Directed by - Mary Harron
Written by - Mary Harron, Guinevere Turner, based on the novel by Bret
Easton Ellis
Produced by - Edward R. Pressman, Chris Hanley, Christian Halsey Solomon,
Ron Rotholz
(Rating) > Motion Picture Association of America - R (Restricted), Rated R
for strong violence, sexuality, drug use and language.  Previously rated
(NC-17).
Running Length - 101 minutes
Distributor - Lions Gate Films
Patrick Bateman (Christian Bale) will deceive you.  To women, his astounding
good looks, fabulous wardrobe and knowledge of mergers and acquisitions will
seem irresistible.  To men, his personality and personal life (at least what
they think they know about it), is one of envy.  Patrick likes to make
mention of the fact that when women ask him what he's "in to" he says:
"Murders and executions, actually".  From a distance across a nightclub
table with loud music playing, it sounds like "mergers and acquisitions".
There is much more to 'American Psycho' than this description and the film's
layers of artsy decorum crossed with bizarre humour and lacerating violence
makes for a film with an extraordinary vision on the part of Mary Herron who
captures the horrors of violence as well as any director praised in the
modern era.  It's an old story, but this is a film mostly for film buffs who
know what makes a good mix in the film industry and the average movie patron
may discard it as sick trash.  This hurts the film somewhat because its
limited appeal will get lost in an ever increasing amount of film
productions and a film like this may end up as a needle in a hay stack, for
lack of a better term.
Patrick Bateman has another passion.  After luring his prey to his yuppie
pad in the heart of New York City, Bateman has the seduction going
perfectly.  Champagne in the bedroom, a pleasant atmosphere and he puts
music on and critiques it in harmonious fashion before killing his victims
through strangulation, the use of sharp instruments or chain saws.....all
done with an intensity to bloody his hardwood floors, muck up his white
walls and clutter up his closet with dismembered body parts.  The film puts
an interesting twist on the "me" generation.  Set in the heart of the 80's
era of greed (1987 to be exact), all of the familiar wardrobes, music and
sets of that time come back to show what times were like and how the human
mind is capable of so many dark and evil things.  We get a sense early of
Patrick's violent tendencies when he goes to pick up his bed linen from a
Chinese laundry and shrieks at the fact that stains haven't been removed and
he bellows out: "I am going to kill you" to the owners of the laundry
facility after his frustration boils over from their inability to speak
proper English.  His over reaction and ability to make a mountain out of a
mole hill make Patrick Bateman a character to be feared and Christian Bale
pulls off the role perfectly and you may recall him as the young boy going
through World War II in Steven Spielberg's 1987 effort 'Empire of the Sun'.
One thing that LOOKS like it will hurts this film is the lack of
participation on the part of the other characters.  Willlem Dafoe plays a
police detective who investigates the murders that Patrick has committed,
Reese Witherspoon is his materialistic and semi-synthetic fiancee and Chloe
Sevigny is Patrick's executive assistant and Jared Leto is a colleague of
Bateman's in the high powered world of finance.  But as shallow as these
characters are, the film works just fine for one reason.  The film is told
from Bateman's point of view and his own obsession with the violent aspects
of his mind and the acts that come about as a result of his fantasies shuts
out all of the character's grasps on his life to the extent of only
rejoicing in his own violent excess.
'American Psycho' was originally intended as a turn for Oliver Stone to
direct Leonardo DiCaprio.  Given the fact that many consider Stone's
'Natural Born Killers' a cult masterpiece, he would have been a good choice
but this film needed a fresh vision from a relatively unknown film maker.
It's one of those subjects that's been done too often to put a familiar name
in the director's chair and the fresher the directing senses are for a film
like this, the more likely it is to rile up people to cause controversy and
talk which will only increase the film's success.
The film has a conclusion that will throw you off key somewhat in terms of
what actually DID happen.  The balance between comedy and horror in this
film is as difficult to pull off as a tight rope walker balancing himself on
a wire hanging over Niagara Falls.  A great deal of the credit for the film
has to be given to editor Andrew Marcus.  He sharply enhances Bale's
performance in the lead by inserting his image routinely like a pop up
target in many scenes to make the audience truly recognize him as a hard
boiled and classic movie villain.
A film must receive a three star rating or higher to be eligible for a
recommendation.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
A watermark -- why didn't he think of that?  The obsessively compulsive
and competitive Patrick Bateman (Christian Bale), a young Wall Street
suit, has been one-upped.  With identical vice president titles, Patrick
and his buddies try to outdo each other with the card stock upon which
they get their business cards printed.  Patrick has the winner until
someone comes in with a watermarked one.  Patrick hates losing, and he
isn't someone you want to get riled.
AMERICAN PSYCHO is a dark, dark comedy that feels like it was directed
by Alfred Hitchcock on overdrive and scripted by the Marquis de Sade for
a late night movie on The Comedy Channel.
Actually the movie is directed by Mary Harron (I SHOT ANDY WARHOL) and
the script, based on Bret Easton Ellis's controversial and popular
novel, is written by Mary Harron and Guinevere Turner.
In a masterful performance, Christian Bale approaches his role with
utter seriousness.  Patrick is a Jekyll-and-Hyde character.  During the
day, he's the ultimate neatnik and a compulsive shopper.  Panic for
Patrick is not being able to get the right restaurant reservation, and
fear comes from worrying that he'll get a bad table.  He is always
concerned about his skin, which he pampers with dozens of expensive,
organic, body care products.
At night, he likes to have women over for drinks while he lectures them
at length on the pros and cons of various recording artists from Phil
Collins to Huey Lewis and the News.  During these soliloquies, he dons a
raincoat and uses some shiny new instrument to hack them to death.  One
of his favorites is an axe with a handle that looks like platinum.
Luckily, the script is quite funny, which keeps the film from becoming
unbearably intense.  At a noisy nightclub, for example, he tells a model
that he is in "murders and executions." She believes he said "mergers
and acquisitions," so she starts discussing them in order to demonstrate
that she's not some bimbo.
A sterling cast nicely complement Bale's marvelous work.  Reese
Witherspoon plays Evelyn Williams, whom he describes as "my supposed
fiancée."  Since they both cheat on each other, his sarcasm is
justified.  Still, when he tries to break up with her, she rejects the
idea out of hand.  After all, she points out, "your friends are my
friends, and my friends are your friends."
Patrick's life is rather like the nightmare dream sequences found in
other movies.  Sometimes, as when he runs naked down a hall chasing a
girl with a chainsaw, you figure that it will turn out to be a dream.
It won't.
To be fair, it should be pointed out that Patrick kills his share of men
as well as women.  The exact body count isn't revealed since Patrick has
long since lost track.
Filmed in cold, steel blues and complementary warm skin tones, the movie
looks great.  The exquisite sets are to die for.
My main problem with the film is a simple one.  Why did they even bother
cutting a few scenes -- sorry about the pun -- in order to get an R
rather than an NC-17 rating?  An NC-17 would have been a much more
honest and appropriate rating for a film with such extremely black humor
and explicit violence.  The studio should have just marketed the movie
as something for adults and bragged in the ads that it had to be an
NC-17.  So what if some movie theaters won't show NC-17 films, and some
newspapers won't advertise them?
If ever there was a movie that isn't for everyone, it is AMERICAN
PSYCHO.  Like VERY BAD THINGS, which featured unabashedly morbid humor,
AMERICAN PSYCHO is a treat for the adventuresome filmgoer.
AMERICAN PSYCHO runs 1:40.  It is rated R for strong violence, sex,
nudity, drug usage and language and would be acceptable for people 18
and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Marty Mapes
***1/2 (out of 4) Greed, superficiality, and selfishness. These are the
traits we associate with the 1980s. Whether or not that's a fair
assessment, that's how the 80s are portrayed in AMERICAN PSYCHO.
This is not a horror film. It doesn't aim to frighten or gross out its
audiences. Instead, AMERICAN PSYCHO is a social satire, a character
study, and a dark comedy. 
Patrick Bateman (Christian Bale) is the quintessential yuppie. He's
rich, good-looking, has great taste. He's also shallow, and proud of it.
At one point he even says that there is no inside, that only the outside
matters.
Bateman is vain. Take his morning grooming routine: first he uses the
cold pack in case his eyes are puffy; then he does his stomach crunches
-- he can do a thousand; then he takes a shower, making sure to use the
half-dozen different cleansers and moisturizers; and finally, he applies
a cleansing facial mask that he puts on and peels off every morning.
Status is also important to him. After work, he hangs out with the other
vice presidents, posturing and playing social chess. For example,
deciding where to have dinner involves a competitive ritual where the
object is to suggest the most expensive and prestigious place you can,
while still being able to get reservations. If your suggestion is too
cheap or if you can't get reservations, you lose face among the other
alpha males. When this competitive group decides to compare business
cards, you can almost smell the testosterone.
Bateman can play social chess, but he's not the best at it, and it
leaves him nervous and insecure. He discovers that he can parlay that
insecurity into power by taking a human life. After just one murder,
he's addicted.
Bale portrays Bateman very well. He captures both the dashing confidence
of Bateman's outer self and the nervous insecurity of the inner man. The
wheels of Bateman's mind always seem to be turning, whether he's
checking himself in the mirror or feeling stress about being found out.
The production design is also very good. Gideon Ponte recreates the look
and feel of the 1980s throughout the movie. Food, clothes, furnishings,
even early-model cell phones, all have the aura of excess and indulgence
about them that is called for in this movie. 
What's best about the movie is the density of its satire. Its wry social
commentary permeates every aspect of the filmmaking. Its condemnation of
the 80s is well thought out and thematically coherent. 
"I'm running a sex orgy, for a couple of freaks, on government funds!" 
-- [the cop], The Thomas Crown Affair(1968)

Author
James Futch
I am not sure what to make of AMERICAN PSYCHO, the film based on the book by
Bret Easton Ellis about a yuppie serial killer named Patrick Bateman.
 I knew what the book was about, or at least I think I did.  It reminded me
quite a little bit of its contemporary BRIGHT LIGHTS, BIG CITY.  The
hedonistic debauchery, misogynistic characters, and conspicuous consumption
that so characterized the mid to late eighties are explored in excruciating
detail.  Oh yeah, and AMERICAN PSYCHO also describes the method by which one
may shove a Habitrail tube up a woman's vagina, force a live (and starving)
rat into her uterus, and then saw her in half with a chainsaw so quickly
that she can see her lower half, legs and all, held up in front of her as
she dies.
 Why the book was passed up for the Pulitzer is still a mystery to me.  What
isn't so mysterious is the trepidation of mainstream publishers to take on
such a book.  The company (I can't remember now who it was) that finally
decided to print it backed out at the last minute and so the book was never
released as a hardcover as was originally planned.  Vintage paperbacks
picked it up after that and put it out in a rather innocuous looking trade
paperback.
 Part of the publisher's anxiety was that every female character in the book
is a "hard body", a sex toy, or a murder victim.  The reduction of women to
objects is so complete that the Edward Lee style methods of torture and
murder lose much of their potential impact.  Perhaps that is the idea.  The
point of view, Patrick Bateman's, is so cold and passionless that when he
describes crucifying a woman with a nail gun and dissecting her alive, he
may as well be talking about putting together a bicycle or a complicated
model of a clipper ship.  This might be the way some serial killers actually
regard their "work".  For Patrick Bateman, murders and executions are as
standard as mergers and acquisitions.
 Despite the attempt to imagine how a true psycho might view the world, the
book was only labeled as misogynist and exploitative.  Trash.  And, most of
all, hated by feminists everywhere.
 Now, with the film, AMERICAN PSYCHO, directed by Mary Harron, the feminists
just might get the last laugh.
 The storyline is basically the same.  Patrick Bateman (Christian Bale)
spends his days on Wall Street, making more money than he probably deserves
considering he doesn't do anything all day except listen to his Walkman and
go to lunch meetings (where the meals are works of art and cost hundreds of
dollars).  By night, he picks up prostitutes, engages in Penthouse forum
style sexcapades, and chases women around with a chainsaw.
 Some of the book's obsession with clothes, toiletries, and trendy
restaurants is effectively explored in the film.  The point is that it's not
whether you are important or famous but rather that you LOOK that way, be it
because of your suit, hair or where you are sitting at the Four Seasons.  In
one of the film's highlights, the conceited yuppies show off their new
business cards and even though to our untutored eyes they all look the same,
Patrick Bateman is silently outraged that his colleagues' cards might be
better than his.
 Christian Bale is pretty perfect in the role of Patrick Bateman.  With his
chiseled features, muscled body, and five thousand dollar suits, he looks
more at home on the cover of GQ than FANGORIA.  Unfortunately, that's about
all of the Patrick Bateman that director Mary Harron gives us.  Hell, she
even gives him compassion and sympathy in a few scenes.  Like I said, I
didn't know what to make of it.
 It's so obvious that a woman directed this movie.  I'm not saying that this
is good or bad, just different.  For example, all of the men in this movie
look like models.  When nude, their bodies are perfectly sculpted with
rippling abdomens and smooth, taut buttocks.  Very sexy indeed.  The women
in the film are just the reverse.  Most of them were not very glamorous, and
most definitely not very sexy.  And none of them are shown in the nude, as I
recall.  Now you know it would have been the complete opposite had a
heterosexual man directed the film.  Yes, Christian Bale would still have
been good looking with a Solo Flex body but the chicks would have looked
like Playboy models and there would have definitely been more gratuitous T
and A.  Now I am not saying that this makes a film better or worse.  I'm
only observing how a point of view can so drastically change a film's look.
Seeing Patrick Bateman through Mary Harron's eyes is almost like looking
through a special lens, which filters out the psychosis and leaves us with
only a conceited, greedy, misogynistic pig, not much different from all the
other male characters in the movie.
 The book's controversial violence also went through that same female
filter.  It was not surprising that the murder of a male character was given
much more set up, pay off, and screen time than the murders of the females,
all of which except one occur off screen.  Would this have also been flip
flopped had the director been, say, Oliver Stone (original contender as
director)?
 I'm willing to bet a toe or two that it would have.
 And I guess, as a male fan of all things horrific, I would have liked the
film more as a result.  The film seems to have lost some things that made
the book such a controversial firestorm.
 Take for example the Habitrail/rat scene I mentioned.  Well, don't look for
it in the movie because it isn't there.  Neither is 90% of the other grim
and gory shit that damn near rivaled THE BIGHEAD by Edward Lee for grossness
and tastelessness.  Nope, it all got edited out.  So those looking for
something shocking, like HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER will be
disappointed.  In fact, if you are reading this review, then that
automatically means YOU, since people that don't appreciate stuff like that
wouldn't be on Feoamante.com in the first place!!
 Yeah, most of us horror fans are likely to feel a tad let down.  The
previews and posters looked great but the film itself is too watered down.
And I felt this odd sinking feeling at the insinuated possibility that the
murders might have all been "just a dream", which, to me, is a really
chicken shit way out!  And Willem Defoe's bit as a detective searching for
one of Bateman's victims seemed rather pointless, since it never went
anywhere.
 But as just an "ordinary film", Harron does a competent job.  Patrick
Bateman's apartment, for example, is beautifully realized from the novel.
The obsessive pursuit of the status quo is effectively done.  There are some
nice parts with laugh out loud black humor.  And the casting is mostly top
of the line.  Christian Bale is perfect, PERFECT as Patrick Bateman.
  Leonardo DeCaprio was actually offered the role at one point during the
negotiations.
 Now THAT would have been true horror.
MPAA: Rated R for strong violence, sexuality, drug use and language.
Runtime: USA:97 / UK:101 / Germany:102 (Berlin film festival)
Country: Canada / USA
Language: English
Color: Color
Certification: USA:R / UK:18 / Australia:R

Author
Jerry Saravia
Patrick Bateman is not your typical serial killer. He is obsessed with
consumerism, and has an affinity for music by Huey Lewis and the News and
Whitney Houston, not to mention Phil Collins. He also happens to work at a firm
in Wall Street. Patrick is a handsome, young man who is ruthless and arrogant -
a yuppie who just happens to love killing people.
I was initially miffed to hear that Christian Bale was going to play the title
role, but then I guess I had forgotten his smugness and arrogance in the
wonderful "Little Women." Bale is the perfect choice because he encompasses the
soulless, excessive period of the 1980's integral to the character of Patrick
Bateman better than any other actor would have.
Bateman's life is not all that exciting. He works in merger and acquistions
(which is slyly referred to as "murders and executions"), though we mostly see
him listening to his walkman in his office. He has a pretty secretary (Chloe
Sevigny) and has a group of friends whose main concern is where they will be
eating dinner and if there are reservations available at any one of the top
restaurants. Bateman's day begins by applying several lotions and creams to his
body while taking a shower, working out by doing a thousand push-ups a day, and
in general, planning his evening with his dates, including a socialite
girlfriend (Reese Witherspoon). Sometimes Patrick picks up some prostitutes and
then kills and dismembers them. Other times he will kill someone he knows, such
as an ex-girlfriend or a rival co-worker (who has mistaken him for someone
else) by using an ax or a nail gun. But who is Bateman really? Is he so devoid
of identity that murder is all he needs to bring spice to his life? Or has he
lost his soul and thinks that his identity is defined by his consumerist
ideals, or the specific type of business card he carries?
I have read the controversial, infamous book by Bret Easton Ellis, though I am
fuzzy on recalling certain details. Naturally, the big shocker of the book was
the relentless, graphic violence against women - how they were dismembered and,
well, you get the idea. For about the first hour of director Mary Harron's
adaptation (she co-wrote it with Guinevere Turner), "American Psycho" has great
fun with all the minute details of Patrick's life and his circle of friends.
There is a classic scene set to the music of Huey Lewis's "Hip to be Square"
where Bateman invites his rival (Jared Leto) to his home while explaining the
brief history of the rock group and their gradual artistic integrity - the
scene is especially tense considering that one can smell murder in the air. But
the film loses its grip after a while mainly because Bateman seems to lose his
mind, and we can't fathom why. Has he realized the errors of his murderous
ways? We are never sure and though I would not expect a motive necessarily, his
reasons can't be any more silly than that he feels his life has become a void -
empty and unidentifiable. Many other Wall Street types may feel the same way
without having to kill anyone. Somehow, this rings false, as in the book, and I
wish that the twist ending was removed. It feels like a cheat and makes the
whole affair more surreal than it should have been. 
"American Psycho" is often fun and at times, surprisingly funny and on-target.
Thanks to Harron's almost monochromatic visuals, such as Bateman's apartment,
there is a Kubrickian coolness to it, detached and grayish, as if life meant
nothing. Even the restaurants look like science-fiction artifacts from "2001" -
this is the alternate reality of the 1980's where money and greed were all that
mattered. But the film also feels cold and remote, and since we follow Bateman
in his violent streak, we never come close to understanding him one bit.
Despite some satirical touches and Bale's superb performance, this "Psycho"
needed a little more savagery to really hit the mark.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Bill Chambers
starring Christian Bale, Chloë Sevigny, Reese Witherspoon, Jared Leto
screenplay by Guinevere Turner, based on the novel by Bret Easton Ellis
directed by Mary Harron
It is the late 1980s, and creature-of-habit Patrick Bateman (Christian
Bale, in a perversely mesmerizing performance), a Master of the
Universe, has it all. He works at the prestigious Manhattan firm of
Pierce and Pierce, smokes expensive cigars, and inhabits a bleach-white
apartment, which used to signify wealth. What's a man who has everything
to do?
Murder, he wrote. Of course we knew that Bret Easton Ellis' sanguinary
satire American Psycho, a novel I devoured many years ago, would be
toned down in its translation to the silver screen. Unfortunately,
director Mary Harron and screenwriter Guinevere Turner have also
de-fanged the non-violent remainder of Ellis' free-floating narrative
and given it a Hollywood horseshit ending.
Such neutering was partially uncontrollable: on the page, first person
descriptions of title character Patrick Bateman's obsessively regimented
life read like a series of product placements, and everything down to
shampoo became a status symbol; Harron could not obtain permission to
mention various brands, and thus Patrick's materialism is no longer so
relentless.
But other changes are less reasonable, such as the by now prerequisite
twist ending, which castrates the film by reducing the Ted Bundy-ish
Bateman to a live-action Milton, the subservient office drone who would
wait until a co-worker was just out of earshot before making ridiculous
threats on his life in a series of Mike Judge cartoons.
The script's new, Fight Club-esque climactic scenario is an empty
gesture of atonement--Harron and Turner have glibly apologized for the
concept itself, literalising a snippet of Patrick's voice-over: "There
is no real me." They've also homogenized Wall Street; while the film
nicely plays up the interchangeable identities of its power-brokers
(they're distinguishable only by their business cards), it doesn't
emphasize their rock star existence. (I recall only one instance of
heavy drug use among the inner circle, whereas Ellis has Patrick
pill-popping every third line to tune his behaviour like a radio.)
I normally don't harp on the differences between a book and its
cinematic adaptation, but we're not dealing with a mass-market
bestseller here. The only reason to shoot American Psycho is to say you
did, not to start a franchise or mount a star vehicle. Harron's American
Psycho is more interested in toying with our desire to see it (witness
the clichéd opening sequence in which we are misled to believe that
raspberry sauce is actually dripping blood) than shedding some light on
the era of conspicuous consumption. (Or, at least, Ellis' take on it.)
The one great, arguably feminist aspect that Harron and Turner have
brought to the project is a sense of paranoid fantasy: the movie
occasionally steps outside of Patrick's P.O.V., which Ellis never did,
to illuminate the fear of his victims.
___
BY THE WAY...
Because I live in Ontario, Canada, I viewed the uncut version of
American Psycho. Harron was forced to trim about one minute of rather
tame kink from a three-way sex scene in order to avoid the stigmatic
NC-17 rating, just another demonstration of the Motion Picture
Association of America's bass ackwards agenda: Patrick butchering a
homeless man and chasing a woman with chainsaw were deemed fit for mass
consumption without any alterations.

Author
Gary Jones
Some outraged self-appointed guardians of public morals have been
getting their knickers in a twist about the very idea of a film being
made of Bret Easton Ellis's novel, with its reputation (apparently well-
deserved) for stomach-turning descriptions of violence, often against
women. Now that we can see the film itself, this outcry seems rather
silly, because instead of a puke-inducing gore-fest, what we get is a
dark satire on the 1980s with not much on-screen violence. Thanks to the
screenplay co-written by Guinevere Turner and director Mary Harron, the
film is also a very funny critique of men and their vanities, while
shaming them for their treatment of women as possessions. American
Psycho is a slasher movie with the slashing taken out and feminist
analysis put in. The audience's expectation of violence is cleverly
exploited in the opening credits, and similar teasing takes place in the
film's use of a clip from The Texas Chainsaw Massacre. Blood-and-guts
fans will be very disappointed.
Christian Bale is very impressive as psycho super-yuppie Patrick Bateman
- a master of the universe who has a fabulous job doing... well... very
little, it seems, except arranging his social calendar. Bateman and his
fellow ubermenschen are not materialists in the sense that they value
possessions, but their lives revolve around appearance and one-
upmanship. Bateman's narration details, with a complete lack of irony,
the various body scrubs and facial creams he uses as he performs his
morning grooming and workout routine. This stuff is important to him.
Rather than comparing penises, these men express superiority over one
another by their relative ability to book a table at this week's
fashionable eatery. The best scene in the film occurs when Bateman and
his friends, if friends they are, compare business cards and the bottom
falls out of Bateman's world when he realises that a colleague's card is
classier than his.
Bateman's scary shallowness is also demonstrated in the scenes in which
he prepares to indulge in murder or joyless professional sex by giving
those he is about to butcher or bed an admiring and pseudo-intellectual
analysis of the music of Whitney Houston, Phil Collins or Huey Lewis and
The News. It's hilarious stuff, but will audiences today get it? Tom
Wolfe satirised the 80s in The Bonfire of the Vanities, but he did it
before the decade was over. A typical movie-goer in his or her mid
twenties would have been ten years old in the mid eighties, so might be
too young to have the appropriate cultural reference points. Too young
to remember the 80s. What a thought.
The film's ending leaves things confused and unresolved. I have no
problem with ambiguous endings, and I do not know whether the ending is
taken from the source novel, but the trick anti-resolution to this
thinly-plotted movie was a big let-down. After my initial confusion at
the end of the film, there is only one explanation that seems to make
sense, and it's a complete cop-out.
American Psycho is a fine satire wrapped up in a mediocre thriller. And
it seems to have a commercial problem: the people who would probably get
most out of it are the very people who would be least likely to want to
see it. The marketing boys have done nothing to address this problem and
if the movie bombs, it's they who should get chopped into little pieces. 
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Author
Bob Bloom
American Psycho (2000) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Christian Bale,
Reese Witherspoon, Jared Leto, Samantha Mathis, Chloe Sevigny and Willem
Dafoe. Directed by Mary Harron. Written by Harron and Guinevere Turner.
 I was uncertain what to expect when the lights dimmed and "American
Psycho" began unreeling.
 But I was pleasantly surprised, no, make that impressed, with Mary
Harron's adaptation of Bret Easton Ellis' notorious novel.
 A bravura performance by Christian Bale as Patrick Bateman, a wealthy
Manhattan stock broker who murders people, is the key to this dark,
disturbing black comedy.
 Yes, I said comedy. For there is no other way to interpret "American
Psycho" other than as a satire about greed, envy and materialism.
 In this respect, "American Psycho" is a first cousin to last year's
"Fight Club," except that the former is set during the heady days of the
Reagan presidency, which inspired young turks such as Bateman to get as
much as they could as quickly as they could.
 The movie contains another parallel with "Fight Club." The line between
what is real and what is illusion is murky.
 The film also brings to mind the disastrous "Bonfire of the Vanities".
There, too, a movie examined a group of self-absorbed individuals who
had forgotten their humanity.
 You first view "American Psycho" as the story of a madman, someone who
indiscriminately kills men and women for no other purpose than he can.
Bateman admits to having no soul, no feelings, so why not kill. `My mask
of sanity is about to slip,' he says at one point during his voice-over
narration.
 However, as you are drawn deeper into Bateman's world you begin to
question whether the killings are literal or figments of his warped
imagination. You never know for sure, and that is the enigma of
"American Psycho."
 Instead of taking the easy road and producing a yuppie-fied "Friday the
13th" slasher flick, Harron has devised a bloody social commentary that
deftly blends wit and gore.
 Be assured, "American Psycho" is not as bloody as the book. Much of the
violence has been toned down, but it remains an intense experience.
 And much of the movie's success can be laid at the feet of Bale, the
former child actor best remembered as the star of Steven Spielberg's
"Empire of the Sun."
 Thank goodness Bale did not lose this role to Leonardo DiCaprio, who
supposedly expressed interest in playing Bateman, but whose asking price
was too high for the producers. While DiCaprio has the acting chops for
the part, he is too soft looking, too baby-faced, to have made a
credible, convincing Bateman.
 Bale's vacant eyes, his taut, hard body, is the perfect personification
of a hedonistic `me-generation' sociopath.
 His matter-of-fact narration as he drones on at the beginning about
what body lotions, shampoos and soaps are best to use perk your interest
in this unusual young man.
 Harron fills the screen with some very comic set pieces. One, timed and
edited like a high-noon showdown, has various young execs whipping out
their business cards to see which one has the most expensive and
tasteful lettering.
 Bateman and his friends are like the living dead. They never seem to
work, just go from one fancy restaurant to another, ordering exotic
meals and drinks simply because they can.
 No one seems to listen to anyone. At one point, talking to some women
who ask him what he does for a living, Bateman says, `murders and
executions.' `Oh, mergers and acquisitions,' the woman replies. This
places the viewer on alert. Did what Bateman say come from his mind or
his mouth? You are left with the ambiguity.
 Underlying all of the proceedings is a sadness and a horror; sadness
for the unfulfilled lives these people adhere to, and horror at their
loss of humanity. They don't interact with each other as much as
verbally spar and practice one-upmanship.
 Beside Bale, the cast includes Reese Witherspoon as his
overly-talkative fiancee. Witherspoon's Evelyn is a bit reminiscent of
her Tracey Flick from "Election," except much more vacuous. Chloe
Sevigny is sweet and caring as Jean, Patrick's mousy secretary.
 Others in the cast include Samantha Mathis and Willem Dafoe.
 "American Psycho" is a surprising film. It will make you laugh, but
uncomfortably, as well as send chills down your spine.
 Harron and her co-screenwriter, Guinevere Turner, may have sanitized
Ellis' novel, but they have not lessened its impact.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
In. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. An associate  member of the Online Film Critics
Society, Bloom's reviews can be found online at
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Mary Harron
Written by: Bret Easton Ellis (novel), Mary Harron
There are generally only two possible opinions one can form of a movie like
Mary Harron's ("I Shot Andy Warhol") "American Psycho". You may walk out of
this movie thinking it is a horrid, disgusting piece of garbage which should
never have been committed to film; or you'll believe, as I do, that this is
a brilliant black comedy the likes of which has not been seen in quite some
time. This may also be the breakout role for Christian Bale ("A Midsummer
Night's Dream"), an actor who displays some amazing, Oscar worthy talent in
this movie. Alternatingly uproariously funny and shockingly violent, this is
the kind of movie which will stay in your mind for days afterwards. I'll
warn you right now, if you don't like your humor black as pitch stay far
away from this movie.
It's the mid 1980's and the yuppie era is in full swing. Patrick Bateman
(Christian Bale) is one of these yuppies who spends his time worrying about
whether he'll get a good table at the best restaurant and how expensive his
apartment is compared to his friends'. He is engaged to Evelyn Williams
(Reese Witherspoon), who he is cheating on with Courtney Rawlinson (Samantha
Mathis), the fiancee of the irritating Lewis Carruthers (Matt Ross). It may
sound like a normal, if slightly soap opera like lifestyle, but Patrick
explains to us in occasional narrative voice-overs that he isn't actually a
regular human. He may have the appearance of a human, and he may follow the
morning and evening routines of your average, everyday person, but he is
really a cold blooded killer. Bateman isn't sure why he does what he does,
but his urge for blood and violence is growing stronger and stronger each
night.
The film may start off looking more like a straight out comedy than a
combination comedy and slasher film, but don't let that fool you. When
things turn violent it is sudden and rather shocking. Yet despite what you
may have heard, "American Psycho" is not an incredibly violent movie. Nearly
all the slaughter and mayhem takes place off screen or in the dark. This
doesn't mean this is a movie for young audiences. We do see the aftermath of
many of Bateman's violent acts, and there are enough sex scenes that this
could easily have earned an NC-17 rating. Mary Harron does an excellent job
of not focusing entirely on the violent acts, but more on the atmosphere
surrounding Bateman and his victims. The atmosphere consists of everything
being filmed in either dark colors or stale whites with weak lighting. This
gives the film an eerie, other worldly feel to it.
I'm sorry this movie was released so early in the year because Academy
members will almost certainly forget about Christian Bale's amazing
performance come Oscar time. Bale manages to make Bateman inhumanly cold and
calculating without turning the character into another typical movie psycho.
Reese Witherspoon ("Election"), a very talented actress, is unfortunately
given nothing to do as Bateman's fiancee. Chloe Sevigny ("Boys Don't Cry")
gives an adequate performance as Bateman's secretary, the only person he
seems to actually care about. The remainder of the supporting cast is
comprised of actors like Jared Leto ("Fight Club") and Willem Dafoe
("Affliction"), who aren't given much to do, but that doesn't really matter
since the focus of the movie should and does stay on Bateman.
"American Psycho" has a few other things going for it besides the acting and
revolting, yet strangely ivoling plot. The soundtrack is a perfect
combination of '80s and classical music and is always used at just the right
moments. Bateman's voice overs, explaining his actions and his state of
mind, never seem out of place and actually give us some needed insight into
his actions and what makes him do what he does. The humor sprinkled
throughout the movie is at times hilarious, especially a scene in which
Bateman and his colleagues compare business cards. The only thing working
against the movie is the rather confusing and ambiguous ending. I think it
was supposed to tie everything up and offer some sort of explanation, but I
had no idea what was going on. "American Psycho" runs a perfect 97 minutes
and not a scene is wasted. I'd recommend the movie to fans of very, very
dark humor and give it four and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it only if you have nothing better to do.
