Title
Review for Hackers (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Joe Clark
You mustn't think Hackers is a craven movie-studio attempt to cash in
on the perceived popularity of la vie online. In fact, the word
"Internet" comes up only once in the film's 105 minutes, and is
uttered hammily at that. No, the film makes an honest attempt to view
the komputer-kid subculture as a group of actual kids who dig
computers, as opposed to geeks without life or love. And as in the
computer biz itself, Hackers is remarkably generous about who can jack
in.
Included in Hackers' fin-de-siecle family is Phantom Phreak (real name
Ramon, played by Renoly Santiago), a Latino dude with hair like Molly
Johnson who befriends the new kid in town, Dade Murphy (Jonnny Lee
Miller). You don't need a rap sheet as long as your arm to be a
somebody in the hacker circuit, and Dade's shutdown of 1,507 computers
in a single day (at age 11!) means his reputation precedes him as he
settles into a surprisingly shipshape New York high school. He's a
godlike figure, one on an inevitable course toward union with the only
grrrl hacker around, Kate Libby (Angelina Jolie).
Funny thing is, Phantom Phreak seems about as attached to
heterosexuality as his handle is to the letter F. As usual, he's not
explicitly queer, but he's certainly not explicitly straight. (This is
1995, and kids today are much less hung up about that gender shit.)
All that matters is ability, and the rainbow cast has that in
abundance. Even the lads with genuinely geeky tendencies have their
day.
Hackers' plot-- about an evil hacker with a lot of corporate toys to
play with who attempts to frame our hero and his posse for an act of
ecological destruction-- strains credulity as much as the hopelessly
inaccurate images displayed on various computer screens. Director Iain
Softley is more interested in playing with surfaces and emphasizing
the fluidity of identity and character in the online realm.
The way Phantom Phreak tags along with-- and nurtures-- Dade and Kate
conjures memories of doting Sal Mineo in Rebel Without a Cause. Razor
and Blade, two Japanese phone phreaks-cum-pirate-TV operators,
cross-dress via smart men's clothes and more make-up than a geisha but
suffer no hit to their street cred at all. There's a standing joke
about wearing a dress, and indeed, the souped-up paramilitary costumes
are another exemplar of the surfacing of fetish gear in pop culture.
Watch Kate's dream sequence for the most heterosexually queer 60
seconds of the year. And look closely at Jonnny Lee Miller as he
stares at his laptop; it's onto his face that Softley reflects some
implausible but beautiful fractal-like graphics. Miller's moles and
scratches and five-o'clock shadow and gloriously mismatched hair and
eyebrow colours are a living canvas of their own.
True to Hollywood form, Phantom Phreak doesn't get to kiss Dade on the
lips, as some of us might like; indeed, only Dade and Kate get to get
it on, in a closing-credits fuck that's both zipless and subaqueous.
The respectful, even-handed treatment of a wide-open culture that old
farts will never understand is what gives Hackers its currency. Here's
hoping for a sequel, in which Ramon's sex life becomes rather less
phantom and rather more phreaky.
Experimental design can pop up in the unlikeliest places, as Iain
Softley's 1995 film Hackers will attest. Art direction and set
decoration and production design are old hat in feature films, but
Softley's corny youth-oriented computer caper is that rarest of
things, a motion picture featuring actual graphic design.
That only makes sense, seeing as how virtually every character in the
flick has his or her eyes glued to a computer screen half the time.
Fading '80s wunderkind [2]Neville Brody designed the various computer
screens visible in the film, all of which vary in implausibility from
modest to hopeless. (Though millions of moviegoers use computers,
Hollywood hasn't figured out how to represent them realistically, even
in computer-centric movies.) Softley uses a few obvious filmic
techniques that show off the movie's graphic design: Unabashedly fake
mattes, like the face of hero Dade Murphy (Jonny Lee Miller)
superimposed on and dissolving into a "data soup" of swirling
mathematical equations, fractals, helices, and amoebas; quick intercut
images meant to link the virtual with the real, like an overhead view
of New York City that morphs into a salmon- and teal-hued circuit
board; a City of Text that models data as a forest of glowing
skyscrapers.
However, the big graphic surprise is Softley's innovative second-order
device of simply reflecting computer screens onto the actors' faces.
We see big fractal blobs ringed by diffuse wiggling flames; snippets
of blank photographic film, sprocket holes and all; sawtooth edges as
though cut by pinking shears; Roy Lichtenstein-style patterns of dots.
Nowhere are these projections more winsome than on Miller's face,
where they mix with his moles and scratches and five-o'clock shadow
and gloriously mismatched dyed hair and natural eyebrow colours to
form a living canvas.
Despite its threadbare storyline, Hackers is a must-see as one view of
a future in which graphics are quite literally a reflection of
computers and popular culture and aren't restricted to the high-class
gulag of coffee-table art books.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     HACKERS is certainly the worst movie I have seen in years and will
rank in infamy for me as one of the worst I have ever seen.  HACKERS
makes you leave the theater angry at everyone associated with the show
for stealing your money and your time with a movie that insults the
audience's intelligence with complete garbage.  HACKERS was directed by
Iain Softley and produced by Michael Peyser, Ralph Winter, and Janet
Graham.  I would suggest writing these names down and avoiding anything
they are ever associated with.  HACKERS is a an MTV style movie that
burst your ear drums with loud rock music and attempts to dazzle your
eyes with flashing images and machine gun style cuts by cinematographer
Andrzej Sekula.
     The movie starts off with a SWAT team the size of a small army
breaking down the door of a modest suburban home with a battering ram.
The police army does not announce its presence since they have to sneak
up on a grade school hacker about 4 feet tall.  We then switch rapidly
to a scene where he is being sentence by a stern judge to never use "a
computer or a touch tone telephone" until he is an adult.  Seems he has
crashed all of Wall Street and hundreds of other places.  Sure.
     Next we get to see our hero, Dade known by the handle of Crash
Override (Jonny Lee Miller), in high school.  He is older now, but he
is still hacking on those computers regardless of what the judge said.
His mom is played as an absolute idiot.  She yells at him and appears
oblivious to what he is doing in his room.  In one of the many trite
lines by first time and lets us hope last time screenwriter Rafael
Moreu, his mom tells Dade she wants him to "stop playing with the
computer and start playing with girls."
     Well at school, Crash Override does meet a strange girl named Kate
whose handle is Acid Burn (Angelina Jolie), but their relationship is
not exactly the traditional boy/girl thing.  Acid Burn starts off the
relationship by tricking him to get locked out on the roof in a
rainstorm.  Later, Crash Override reprograms all of the sprinkler
systems in the building to come on and get everyone else wet.  What
wonderful teenagers these kids are.
     The costumes by Roger Burton are particularly ridiculous.  Crash
Override always hacks on his computer with black color sun glasses on,
and the room is usually light.  Try looking at a computer screen
someday with black glasses on and see what you can see.
     I have liked some of the hacker movies.  I thought THE NET was
fairly good and WAR GAMES was great.  But here, the technical advisor
(Nick Jarecki) was AWOL.  In the first series of scenes as we see Crash
Override hacking away, he types continually, but all that is on the
screens is four columns of blurry images, not text, moving in opposite
directions of each other.  Frequently his screen flashes images of old
movies one after another while he is programming.  In one scene, he
takes control of a television station through an implausible scenario.
Next he has to wrestle with another hacker who is hacking him for
control of the robotic video tape machine that directs what the TV
station is showing its audience.  Right.
     When Crash Override sees people, his mind sees the old movies that
are always flashing on his computer screen.  Do you have the problem
that old movies flash on your screen a lot while you are programming?
So do I, and tiny green men frequently run of my floppy drive and dance
on my keyboard as well.
     One of the "stars" of the show is Cereal Killer (Matthew Lillard).
Let me not describe him other than to give you his first line.  Moreu
has him say to Crash Override, "All great artists have asphyxiated on
their own vomit." One of the other hackers declares in another scene
that "I need to get a handle.  If I don't, I don't have an identity."
     HACKERS runs on forever at 1:45.  It is rated PG-13, but trust me
you do not want your kids to pollute their minds by seeing this drivel.
I hated this show so much it took me several hours to calm down after
seeing it.  I have always had a consistent rating system that goes from
zero to four stars, and I rarely give out the rating on either end of
the scale.  For this movie, I seriously considered giving it a minus
one, but for consistency I will most generously award it zero stars.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 22, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Paul Presley
Having recently applauded the merits of the venerable Sneakers, I 
may be in danger of sounding like a complete technophreak when I
mention that Hackers is also a very enjoyable film. As with Sneakers 
it manages to present an atmosphere that is very unique and one that
continues to grow on you long after the film is over.
What a lot of people may be thinking is that seeing as it is set in the 
world of the computer hacker it's either going to be so choc-full of 
technical mumbo-jumbo and computerese that they won't understand it,
or that it'll simply be another in the long line of action movies that 
treat 
computers in totally unrealistic ways (presenting them either as tiny 
boxes that can control the world or by showing a black and white 
version of Pac-Man and calling it state of the art).
What Hackers actually is, in my eyes at any rate, is a film with plenty 
of humour combined with a fairly accurate look at the lives of typical 
computer phreakers (as I believe the term has it). Okay, the running 
plot of a criminal terrorist plot seemed to be a little tagged on, but 
the 
film is saved from being dragged into the realms of ludicrosity by the 
aforementioned atmosphere that it creates. Everyone gives a very 
energetic performance, no one really jumping too much into the fore and 
allowing for people to play off each other with both style and wit.
The one area that people are going to argue over, quite naturally, is the 
look of some of the computer graphics. For example, when trying to hack 
into the computer of a large corporation we see stunning 
three-dimensional cyberspace vistas and all sorts of stunning imagery 
(when most of us know full well that all we'd really see is little more 
than page after page of scrolling text), but you have to understand that 
beneath the fake graphics, all the events and actions that take place is 
entirely truthful. Since scrolling text wouldn't make for entertaining 
viewing however, I'm perfectly willing to accept the visual 
representations shown. Plus, it all adds to the uniqueness of the 
atmosphere (sorry to be so repetitive).
Hackers is very much a 'youth' film, a piece that's very obviously 
pitched at the cyber-generation (as is evident by the very cool 
soundtrack), but it has a lot to recommend it to a more mainstream 
audience - not least of which being a script containing some of the 
funniest and most natural dialogue I've heard for a long time. Nothing is 
forced, terminology is just accepted and not attempted to explain to a 
typical 'stooge' character. It may paint a slightly more rosy picture of 
computer hackers than some may like, but for entertainment value I can't 
knock it. Sneakers still reigns supreme, but Hackers comes very close.
Paul Presley - prezzer@cix.compulink.co.uk
(Review originally written on the CIX conferencing system - 7th November 
1995)

Author
Joan Ellis
"Hackers" is a landmark movie that has not an ounce of
artistic merit. You will see the worst performance by an actress
in recent memory (Lorraine Bracco as Margo), and you will suffer
a group of unpleasant teenage cretins, who turn, undeservedly,
into unsavory heroes. With an uninteresting script and no plot to
speak of, the movie is one long MTV video set in a computer-
generated landscape.  
Since you will probably not see this film unless you are
sentenced to it, you may wonder why anyone would bother to review
it. It's simple: As grotesque as it is, the film is an
announcement that computer power is passing from nerds to cool
guys, that juvenile hackers are taking over white-collar crime as
surely as street gangs stole neighborhoods. 'Bad Kid' movies have
a way of becoming reality.
Using professional I.D.s like "Zero Cool" and "Razor," this
particular group of young criminals, obsessed with planting
viruses and stealing information, becomes distracted from
everyday crime by an in-house corporate theft that involves Swiss
bank accounts and the possibility of the destruction of oil
tankers, but don't be mislead into thinking these are the
elements of a plot. 
Dade (Jonny Lee Lee Miller) and Kate (Angelina Jolie, in the
single worthy performance), initially seen as petty on-line
thieves, are finally anointed as saviors of the corporation and
the tankers. But the mantle of hero is a very bad fit on these
spoiled, self-indulgent, slovenly, lazy, unsocialized creeps. 
Dressed in various shades of contempo-chic, these
unattractive, wild-eyed high school kids argue over french fries
and ride their roller blades through computerized circuit boards
that morph into cities as fast as a mouse can click. 
Pulling floppy disks from their pockets as crisply as street
kids pull guns, the hackers know that their ability to manipulate
information will allow them to tamper with the infrastructure and
security of the country. The ability to create havoc is a far
headier experience for them than the sex, drugs, or alcohol that
fueled kid cultures of the past. As a path to power, the laptop
makes guns seem almost quaint. 
As bad as it is, the movie is a real echo of the headlines
that have trumpeted the first convictions of hackers who have
already broken into bank accounts and vital statistics. It is not
a stretch to imagine what they could do to airborne planes and
military orders. 
As a landmark, this very bad movie is probably the first
drop from a ruptured pipe that will become a torrent of movies
about the ingenious ways criminals devise to upset society in an
explosion of computer crime. 
Let's hope some towering figures emerge to lead the film
parade that will chronicle this new turf. May they have in their
human brains the imagination and talent to create suspense and
strong characters who move through good plots. May they also be
wise enough to hire good actors.  


Author
David Landers
RATING: * 1/2 out of **** - 3.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Jonny Lee Miller (Dade Murphy / Crash Override), Angelina Jolie
(Kate Libby / Acid Burn), Jesse Bradford (Joey), Matthew Lillard (Emmanuel
Goldstein / Cereal Killer), Laurence Mason (Paul Cook / Lord Nikon),
Renoly Santiago (Phantom Phreak), Fisher Stevens (Eugene Belford / The
Plague)
DIRECTOR: Iain Softley
CERTIFICATION: PG-13 (USA) for mild language and some sexuality
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1995
Ever since WARGAMES, the first real computer hacking movie, Hollywood
has attempted to produce more and more films about hacking.  These
films usually show the audience a look into computers that really is
not impossible and is usually ridiculous.  If it's not this, the
exaggeration about what is real is usually greater than you would expect.
HACKERS is guilty of all of these crimes.  To anyone familiar with
computers and/or the Internet, most of the movie is so incredibly stupid
that you can't take it anymore.  Those of you who frequent one of the
greatest sites on the World Wide Web, the Internet Movie Database, are
probably aware of the section for movies entitled "Goofs".  This is the
section for mistakes in the movies.  Well, IMDb sums up HACKERS extremely
well with the first goof listed: "Generally ill-informed and ridiculous to
the extreme regarding the capabilities of computers and technology".  And
truthfully, this is one-hundred percent correct.
The plot, obviously, centers around computer hacking.  More specifically,
it follows the exploits of Dade Murphy, a young computer hacker played by
Jonny Lee Miller.  Miller should be extremely thankful for the film
TRAINSPOTTING, because if it were not for that, who knows where his career
would be now after HACKERS.  The film opens with a young Dade Murphy being
arrested for hacking computer systems.  He was forbidden to use a computer
until he turned eighteen years old.  The film then picks up at that point,
an eighteen year old Dade Murphy hacking away at the computer.
Dade later meets up with fellow hackers Acid Burn (Angelina Jolie),
Cereal Killer (Matthew Lillard), Lord Nikon (Laurence Mason), and the
Phantom Phreak (Renoly Santiago), who are basically trying to do what is
next to impossible: hack the Gibson computer and not get caught by the
FBI.  Oh, and as a little sub-plot, Dade also tries to woo Acid Burn, the
only female hacker in the film.
Really, I can't think of much more to say about the film's plot aside from
what I've said.  It's just a bunch of computer geeks (no, obsessive
compulsive computer geeks a little too advanced for reality) running
around hacking computers and staying away from the FBI.  Thanks to this
movie, the public unfamiliar with computers now has a distorted viewpoint
of computers and what they can do.  This movie makes computers look a
little bit too advanced for their time, and the frivolous suggestions it
makes are too many to list. 
To sum it up, HACKERS is a terrible computer film.  If you're looking for
a film about computers closer to what goes on in the real world, I suggest
SNEAKERS.  Although at times it too may seem a little far fetched, it
should be much more believable than HACKERS to regular computer users.
Hopefully, this film didn't influence too many young computer users out to
think they can do what is portrayed in this 105 minute waste of time.


Author
Rob Slade, doting grandpa of Ryan and Trevor
One of the review quotes used to promote this film states that it
"[s]ucceeds at just about everything `The Net' failed to."  I'm not
sure what this success is supposed to entail.  "Hackers" does have
better graphics, a more frenetic pace, hackers versus hackers, and a
sense of communal versus singular effort.  Plus a neat semi-climactic
plot twist.  (Which, however, becomes rather foolish if you really
knew what was happening in one of the earlier scenes.  Why bother
recabling phones locally when you can bounce calls through half a
dozen relays?)
Semi-believable: law enforcement sending a SWAT team to break down the
doors and grab a pre-teen cracker.  (One does hope they've learned
something since Operation Sun Devil.)  (Not living there I wouldn't
know, but do Americans really allow that kind of media harrassment of
juvenile offenders?)
OK, let's list the stereotypes.  Crackers are young, evil geniuses
(genii?)  A virus, presumably written and run on a PC, can bring down
a mainframe based transaction system.  Graphical interface instant
messaging systems that work through tape library controllers.  Video
games skills equate to technical skills.  Graphical interfaces for
everything, including ransom notes in viruses.  (The "Leonardo Da
Vinci" virus?  Oh, please ...)  The salami scam.  A virus which, even
when found, is undetectable.
In order to convince us that the movie truly is 'leet, we have what? 
Nice fractals?  And mentions of the cookie prank and virus.  Flu-Shot
(although it doesn't work on mainframes).  Social engineering. 
Dumpster diving.  Arf, Arf and Gotcha (that was a trojan, not a
virus).  Emmanuel Goldstein.
While the movie is fun, the tone is uneven, celebrating anarchic
security breaking exploits without demonstrating the real dangers
involved in "just looking."  Sure, we're told that Wall Street drops
some percentage points, and we see a three car accident, but the
massive chaos and suffering that could result from the electronic
horseplay is nowhere to be seen.  There is an additional level of
unreality in the fact that the bad guy has way too much power, and yet
falls way too easily.
Still, if you completely clear your mind of any vestige of logic, the
graphics are pretty.
copyright Robert M. Slade, 2001   VDHACKRS.RVW   20010308

Author
Christopher Null
     HACKERS is more techno-paranoia from Hollywood, instilling the
fear of rampaging computer geeks into America once again in yet another
take on 1983's WARGAMES.  Twelve years later, the game is a little
different:  the bad guys are big business types instead of the
government, the good guys have dreadlocks and multiple body piercings,
and the computers can do full motion video over a phone line.
     Okay, so some liberties have been taken with technology (an Intel
P6 chip powers an Apple PowerBook), but at least the terminology the
hackers use is essentially right.  The story may sound familiar.  Bad
corporate computer dude Eugene aka Plague (Fisher Stevens) and his
accomplice (Lorraine Bracco) team up for a little multi-million dollar
theft, when a bunch of young punks stumble upon the plan.  The gaggle
of teen-aged of hackers includes Dade aka Crash Override (Jonny Lee
Miller), Kate aka Acid Burn (Angelina Jolie), and the show-stealing
Cereal Killer (Matthew Lillard), among others.  Together, the hackers
have to foil the theft and avoid having numerous felony charges pinned
on them, plus save the world from ecological disaster thanks to a
Plague-written virus that capsizes oil tankers.
     Whatever.  The plot is pretty silly, thanks in part to the
combined efforts of the ridiculous Stevens-Bracco combination, who you
just can't stop laughing at.  And of course, the premise is absurd,
placing technology we probably won't see for another 15 years in the
hands of kids.  Every hacker worth his salt knows that it just isn't
that easy to crack systems.  At least Matthew Broderick had to resort
to a lot of research.
     But this is all beside the point, because the film is actually
worthwhile.  The real draw to HACKERS is that it is so unexpectedly
*funny.*  Really funny.  The comic scenes with the kids (and there are
lots of them) are totally hilarious.  The "serious" scenes are too,
because they are often so ridiculous.  Watching the woefully miscast
Bracco trying to pull off her role as "the sultry executive accessory
to the crime" is worth the cost of admission alone.
     In the end, seeing HACKERS is a lot like watching MTV for two
hours.  There's not a lot under the surface, the music is fast and
loud, the camera shakes around a lot, but it's really colorful and
generally fun.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter & Novelist
-Contributing Editor, Mike's FEEDBACK  /  Film Critic, Texas Business Weekly
-[R]eply to be added to movie review mailing list
