Title
Review for Ai no borei (1978)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
Japan/France. 1978. Director/Screenplay - Nagisa Oshima, Based on the 
Novel `Three Generations to Make the Land Fertile: The Earth' by Itoko 
Namura, Photography - Yoshio Miyajima, Music - Toru Takemitsu. 
Production Company - Argos Films/Oshima Productions.
Kazuko Yoshiyuki (Seki), Tatsuya Fuji (Toyoji), Takahiro Tamura 
(Gisaburo Desa), Takuzo Kawatani (Inspector Hotta)
Plot: In a small Japanese village in 1895, a wife Seki has an affair 
with a younger man Toyoji. On the spur of the moment Toyoji shaves her 
pubic hair and decides they must kill her husband Gisaburo so that he 
doesn't find her shaven. Seki gets Gisaburo drunk, they kill him and 
then dump his body down a well and pretend that he has gone away to find 
work. But three years later Gisaburo returns as a ghost, confused and 
lost. The guilt of his return drives Seki and Toyoji to desperation.
This venture into the kaidan eiga (or Japanese ghost story) was highly 
acclaimed on its release in 1978 but was little seen out of limited 
arthouse release and has been entirely forgotten since. The director 
Nagisa Oshima is highly respected in Japanese cinema, having made some 
forty films, of which the best known in the West is probably `Merry 
Christmas, Mr Lawrence' (1983).
Far more so than Western ghost stories ever do, most kaidan eiga centre 
around themes of guilt and retribution. Oshima's twist on the ghost 
story here is that his ghost isn't so much an avenging spirit as it is a  
sad and confused lost soul whose vague stumblings around drive his 
murderers to guilt and anguish. Oshima's presages the ghost's 
appearances with a genuine eeriness - three years after the body has 
been dumped down the well, a friend dreaming of Gisaburo telling her to 
bring him some clean clothes, he is tired of sleeping in the same ones; 
or his daughter dreaming of him telling her he will be home by New Year. 
Locating of the story in a 19th Century rural peasant setting, Oshima 
employs the style of Japanese post-War neo-realist cinema to 
considerable effect. At times the camera little more than sits 
impassively observing scenes of extraordinarily raw effect transpiring 
before it. Throughout the love scenes and the shaving scene Oshima keeps 
focused on Yoshiyuki's face, watching not the passion or the act but the 
pain on her face and the effect has cuttingly real emotional power. The 
actual murder plot occurs with astonishing casualness - Fuji shaves 
Yoshiyuki's pubic hair and then suddenly announces "We must kill him. 
How can we let him see you shaved ?"

