Title
Review for PCU (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1994, PG-13, 80 minutes [1 hour, 20 minutes]
starring: Jeremy Piven (Droz), Chris Young (Tom), Megan Ward (Katy), Jon
Favreau (Gutter); written by Adam Leff, Zak Penn; produced by Paul Schiff;
directed by Hart Bochner.
Seen December 21, 1997 on home video (borrowed from Shane Rogers).
The screwball college comedy is a long-dead genre, and it's no wonder -
there's only so many ways you can tell the same story about hazing and
partying. Today, college life isn't so much about being popular as it is being
politically correct (PC), and from the title alone, "PCU" invokes the stinging
satirical commentary the genre was missing. Unfortunately, that's also where
the film's wit ends, as it turns out to be just an updated screwball flick
that substitutes PC for fraternity wars and panty raids.
Right from the get-go it's clear how clueless the film is about college as it
presents us with two cartoony extremes: Tom (Young), the clean-cut, jacket-
and-tie-wearing, geeky pre-frosh who's visiting Port Chester University for
the weekend; and Droz (Piven), the seventh-year senior/slacker who's stuck
with having to show him around. When the two meet, Droz tells Tom to get the
1950s college images out of his head, which is amazing, since I would tell the
filmmakers to get the 1990s college images out of their heads! It's as if
they've watched way too much MTV and think all GenXers must be either
outrageously liberal or lazy, and have combined it with the campiness of
"National Lampoon's Animal House."
Case-in-point: Droz leads Tom through a courtyard where all the different PC
groups are camped out such as the "Womynists," the black militants, the pot-
heads, and the people who fight for a different cause each week (this week
it's anti-meat). Within minutes, Droz and his fellow slackers get geeky little
Tom to join in on their prank as they hurl meat at the protesters, and a chase
scene ensues. 
Now, the PC-obsessed nature of the student groups has obviously been
exaggerated as a parody, and does make for some funny jokes, but the problem
is there's no sense of moderation. Had the film been about a longer period of
time instead of just two days (and just plain longer for that matter - 80
minutes is much too short for such a mainstream film), that would have
provided for opportunities for sharp satire instead of just throwing it all at
us at the same time.
About the only thing the film does correctly is establish a conflict for the
protagonists to overcome, and in this case it's Droz's house's efforts to
raise over $7,000 in 24 hours to pay their damages fee or else they'll be
evicted. And what better way to raise money than by throwing a party and
charging admission? Unfortunately, the campus is split into such rigid sects,
is there really any way to get everyone together? Droz believes there is and
explains why with the kind of logic that would work fine in a sitcom, but
seems ridiculous here. 
The ball finally gets rolling as each member of the house goes out to get
someone or something and/or keep others away. This gives the film a good
reason to be all over the map and to constantly switch from character to
character. The wild antics pour in and although some of them are funny (at
first), the film makes the same mistake of packing them too close together. We
get scenes of Tom being chased all over campus by different PC groups which he
has managed to offend (accidentally of course). Meanwhile Droz and company go
looking for kegs and sabotage a party in which the all the school's
administrator's are attending. After a while you have to wonder what's so
funny about watching a bunch of pathetic, unlikable characters go nuts.
It should be noted that the film is not nearly as bad as it could have been.
It does occasionally show signs of promise with its scenes of dialogue, but
those are often trite and contrived. Special mention should be made to Jon
Favreau as Gutter, who, although he is a generic character, is at least
interesting and likable.
There's so much more that could have been done with "PCU," most notably,
focusing more on the PC and less on the U.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe plan#_" in the header (plan 1 - new releases, plan 2 - all
movies reviewed).
