Title
Review for Sinnui yauman II (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
The continuing adventures of a young debt collector in ancient China who
has a real talent for getting into trouble.  This time he encounters
guerillas, a monk who travels underground like a mole, and he fights
monsters and demons using magic.  Wild and very entertaining, though
it's not as good as part I.
Hong Kong (English subtitles), color, 1990, 104 minutes.
Director: Ching Siu-tung.
Producer: Tsui Hark.
     Before discussing part II, it is appropriate to mention part I.  A
CHINESE GHOST STORY (part I) is the story of a young debt collector in
ancient China who stays overnight at a haunted temple.  There he meets
and falls in love with a beautiful vampire ghost.  He battles monsters,
demons and ghosts to give her a chance at reincarnation.  Part I is a
fast-paced horror and adventure film with a strong dose of humor.  It
was relatively popular, and introduced many people to the exciting films
that are being made in Hong Kong.
     Part II begins where part I left off (for people who haven't seen
it, part I is recapped in brief highlights at the beginning of part II).
The debt collector is arrested by the police, on grounds that he may be
an escaped convict.  He is put into a prison cell with an old man, a
scholar, whose dietary preferences include cockroaches.  Just before he
is to be executed, he escapes.
     After escaping, he meets a monk who travels underground by
burrowing like a mole.  They encounter a band of guerillas, one of whom,
Windy, looks exactly like the beautiful vampire ghost he was in love
with in part I.  Together they fight political corruption, monsters, and
demons using magic and martial arts.
     Part II is very much like part I; it is a fast-paced horror and
adventure film.  There are a few differences, though.  In part I, the
emphasis was on ghosts, most of whom were in human form,  whereas in
part II the ghosts and demons that appear are primarily in the form of
monsters.  There is a large "corpse monster", similar to the smaller
ones in part I, and the fight against it is outrageously funny.  Also
appearing is a monster in the form of a large golden Buddha, and a
gigantic flying centipede.
     The special effects are generally very good, though the giant
centipede is clearly a model.  The same actors and actresses appear in
both parts, so there is continuity in the roles.  The major differences
in the two films is that part I has more humor (which I really
appreciate), and part I has a tighter, better story line.
     Although part II is recapped at the beginning of part II, I suggest
that you see part I before part II.  First, the recap is far too brief.
Second, part I is incredibly good, and it is certainly worth seeing!
Thus I suggest seeing both parts, I and II, if you have the opportunity;
very entertaining and enjoyable!
Print Source: Gordon's Films International Inc.; 8 Chatham Square, Room
805; New York, NY 10038.  (Currently in its initial theatrical release
in the U.S.).
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
