Title
Review for Sandlot, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Tom Guiry, Mike Vitar, Patrick Renna, Chauncey Leopardi, 
           Karen Allen, James Earl Jones
Director:  David Mickey Evans
Producers:  Dale DeLatorre and William S. Gilmore
Screenplay:  David Mickey Evans and Robert Gunter 
Music:  David Newman
Released by Twentieth Century Fox
     Eight boys, led by Benjamin Rodriquez (Mike Vitar), make up a
sandlot baseball team in Southern California during the late fifties.
When Scotty Small (Tom Guiry) moves into town, he doesn't know how to
catch or throw, despite the best efforts of his stepfather to teach
him.  That all changes, however, when Ben befriends him.  Now, with
their ninth man, the sandlot group is a full team.  However, although
their little field is a great place to play ball, it has its dark
secret, for beyond the home run fence lurks The Beast, some kind of
fearsome dog about which frightful stories abound.
     Kids and adults will enjoy THE SANDLOT, but for different
reasons.  Children will find in it an adventure with a sense of humor
that they can both relate to and find in an escape from the real
world.  Writer/director David Mickey Evans hasn't forgotten what it's
like to be a boy in the middle of summer with nothing to do but swim in
pools, pal around, and play ball.
     Adults, especially men, will find in the movie a sense of
almost-poignant nostalgia.  The story is told WONDER YEARS-style, with
a modern day baseball announcer looking back on his childhood (the
narrative is at times too reminiscent of Kevin Arnold's ramblings).  As
is frequently the case when we look back on our past, things are tinted
by a pleasant glow that leaves behind only the better parts of the
memories.  This is the feel that THE SANDLOT strives for, and mostly
succeeds in attaining.
     The common theme bridging the age gap in the audience is
baseball.  This is a world where the game means everything.  There is
no arbitration, no salary disputes, no 8 million dollar contracts.  In
the world of THE SANDLOT, baseball is still America's number one
national pastime, and, in the closing scenes with James Earl Jones,
it's easy to get a sense of the greatness that underlies playing ball.
     Those that have a distaste for baseball will probably find little
to like in this movie.  While it isn't necessarily written just for
fans of the game, enjoying baseball--as well as having some memories
of playing on any level--will enhance the pleasure of watching THE
SANDLOT.  Sure, the movie gets silly at times, and the second half
isn't as engaging as the first, but since the entire story is a fond
collage of memories made more grand by the passage of time, it's easy
to forgive such faults.
     To classify this picture as a "male film" is to do it a great
disservice.  THE SANDLOT is no more a movie for men and boys alone than
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES is just for women.  Even though all the main
characters (except Scotty's mom, played by Karen Allen) are boys
doesn't mean that women can't appreciate what happens on screen.
Memories of childhood are frequently gender-independent.  Men might
have the inside track of some elements of nostalgia touched on by THE
SANDLOT, but they don't have a monopoly.  And humor, as well as the
love of baseball, are universal.
     There will be those who will find this film a too-silly fantasy,
but they have either missed or chosen not to feel the magic that THE
SANDLOT weaves.  With the exception of some mild profanity, there's
little in this movie capable of offending.  THE SANDLOT is an excellent
choice for a family night at the movies.  The previews for it may look
bland, but this is one occasion when clips are unable to do more than
scratch the surface of the mood and story from which they have been
extracted. Predictable as the movie is, the FIELD OF DREAMS quality is
not the only thing to like about THE SANDLOT.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The 1993 film THE SANDLOT is a wondrous, true-to-life comedy about
a group of boys about 10 years old.  During the summer of 1962, the
boys play sandlot baseball, dream of older girls, and live in absolute
fear of "The Beast."  Told with heavy narration, the film possesses a
realistic nostalgia blended with the magic of youthful dreams and
tribulations.
     The movie's director is David Mickey Evans, who wrote the script
with Robert Gunter, and together they have created a show that has the
essence of truth as if in a biography but with the liberties of a
coming of age comedy.
     The narrator, Scotty Smalls (played by Tom Guiry as the fifth
grader and by Arliss Howard as the narrator and the grownup), tells of
his life when, two weeks from finishing the fifth grade, his family
moves to a new town.  He meets eight boys in a sandlot playing the most
amazing game of baseball he has ever seen.  The game never ends, they
don't keep score and there are no sides.  They play for the pure
exhilaration of the sport, which they all worship.
     His new acquaintances live and breathe baseball.  History and
their lives are told in relation to famous baseball events.  When
Smalls doesn't know who "The Great Bambino" or "The Sultan of Swat,"
is, his new friends are flabbergasted.
     The adults in the picture have quite brief, but important roles.
Karen Allen is Smalls's Mom and Denis Leary plays Bill, his all too
busy stepdad.  Bill keeps promising to practice catch with him, but has
trouble getting around to it.  When he does, Bill's advice of "keep
your eye on the ball" proves dangerous.  Smalls forgets to put his
glove in front of it, producing a steak-sized black eye.  (Perhaps the
reason I like the story so much is that Smalls's baseball ability or
lack thereof reminds me so much of myself when I was his age.  Balls
would fly past me, going under my legs or over my head but rarely into
my glove.  And like him, I lived in a neighborhood with so few kids
that everybody got chosen for the games.)
     The guys on the sandlot have Smalls pegged as a nerd from the
moment they see him.  The best athlete, Benjamin "Benny" Franklin
Rodriguez (Mike Vitar), taunts him with "You get straight As."  Smalls
corrects him in short order.  "I got a B once," he shoots back.
"Actually it was an A-, but it should have been a B."
     The insults in the movie are true to form for fifth graders
without trying to shock the audience.  When a bunch of kids so rich
that they can afford uniforms show up on their shiny new bikes, the
insults fly fast and furiously.  Typical is that from Phillips (Wil
Horneff), the leader of the spoiled brats, who tries to put down
Hamilton "Ham" Porter (Patrick Renna), the chubbiest member of the
sandlot crew.  "You bob for apples in the toilet," mocks Phillips.
"And that's the way you like it."  Wow, is that an insult or what?
     Chester Kaczenski's sets are so perfect as to be totally
unrealistic but great for nostalgia.  The cars are all brand new as are
the houses.  The wide lawns are manicured to perfection, and there is
not a scratch on anything except for the sandlot area which is in a
genteel state of disrepair.
     Other than the baseball, which is the thread that holds the story
together, the movie has two major focal points: girls and "The Beast."
     Perhaps it is different now, but then girls were something that
fifth grade boys ogled and dreamed about, but rarely had the courage to
do more than flirt with.  And they dreamed not of ones their age, but
those high school girls with fully developed figures.  So it is with
the sandlot boys.
     In my son's and my favorite scene from the picture, nerdy and
bespectacled Michael "Squints" Palledorous (Chauncey Leopardi) creates
the scheme of a lifetime to get the knockdown gorgeous Wendy Peppercorn
(Marley Shelton), the local lifeguard, to kiss him.  It causes all of
the sandlot boys to be banned forever from the swimming pool, but some
punishments are worth it.
     The show's great ensemble cast of unknowns is at its best in the
finale.  Throughout the picture the large dog, known only as "The
Beast," devours any baseball hit over the sandlot into its yard.  Seen
only in glimpses until the end, its roar and reputation are awesome.
Besides having supposedly eaten the one boy who was ever brave enough
to venture into the yard, the dog is owned by a Mr. Mertle (James Earl
Jones), who is known as the meanest man in town.
     The well paced and compelling ending shows how inventive
grade-schoolers can be at solving tough problems.  And how courage is
sometimes essential.  I thought I had the conclusion guessed, but I was
surprised.  The film finishes with a delightful epilogue where we learn
how all of our fictional characters turn out when they grow up.  Since
you grow to love these kids, you'll certainly want to know what happens
to them in later life.
     THE SANDLOT runs a breezy 1:41.  It is rated PG for some 1962
style fifth grade profanity and for the scary scenes of "The Beast."
My son Jeffrey, age 8, had mixed feeling about the movie.  Being a
little too young and therefore taking it too seriously, he was scared
by The Beast.  Overall, he found the show was "kind of boring, kind of
exciting, and kind of scary."  Still I think kids around 9 and up will
love the picture.  Even Jeffrey wanted to go back and see his favorite
parts again -- the swimming pool scene and the long ending.  I
recommend the film to you and give it ***.  I came close to awarding it
even more.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
