Title
Review for Price of Glory (2000)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Steve Rhodes
Carlos Ávila's PRICE OF GLORY is the answer for those who think that the
problem with bad television is that the screen is too small.  With
schmaltz so thick that you could cut it with a knife, this sappy TV
movie-of-the-week is set to open in your local multiplex and not your
living room.
Nominally telling the story of "The Fighting Ortegas," the story is
really about a father, Arturo Ortega (Jimmy Smits), who wants his three
boys to succeed in the boxing world where he failed.  Rushed along too
quickly by an uncaring promoter, Arturo ended up working "on a crappy
assembly line" rather than enjoying the fruits of a championship career.
Devoting his life to training his sons, he relinquishes the job of being
their father in order to concentrate his energies on managing their
careers.  Each of the lads,  Sonny (Jon Seda), Jimmy (Clifton Collins
Jr.) and Johnny (Ernesto Hernández), turn into contenders.
When we first meet the brothers as young children, their father is
already yelling at them and throwing them against lockers for not trying
hard enough in their Silver Gloves competition.  As they grow up, they
will continue to take the abuse with remarkably little rebellion.
The attractive women in the story provide the supporting wallpaper.
They smile a lot and say encouraging things to their men.  Other than
backing the male members of the cast, they have no other reason for
their existence.
As the mildest of villains, Ron Perlman plays a slightly slimy but
extremely successful boxing promoter named Nick Everson.  Nick, who has
the face of a large gargoyle, sports big sunglasses and smokes foot-long
cigars.
The real delight of the movie, since it provides so many unintentional
laughs, is Phil Berger's heavily-clichéd script.  ("The only one that
can beat you is you."  "I want to talk to the man upstairs."  "Do you
think we've got a guarantee?  Do you think any of us here have a
guarantee?")  Although I can't recall them ever saying, "be the best
that you can be," I suspect it was in the script but was removed in the
final editing.
The movie, unlike the recent, disastrous PLAY IT TO THE BONE, ends in a
reasonably decent big match.  The outcome is never in doubt, but at
least it is filmed invitingly and edited lucidly.  The ending of PRICE
OF GLORY isn't exactly memorable, but, compared to the rest of the
movie, it is the only winning sequence.
PRICE OF GLORY runs too long at 1:57.  It is rated PG-13 for violence,
language and brief drug content and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review can be found at
http://www.moviereviews.org/price_of_glory,_the.htm ---
Jimmy Smits' new film, The Price of Glory, a mawkish, overly poignant look
at family and boxing, is more like something a network would produce as
their Sunday night movie than a studio would put into theatres; such tired
clichés and poor dialogue have no business being on the silver screen.
Disclosure: I have never seen NYPD Blue, the show that made Jimmy Smits a
star. Perhaps he is a talented actor after all, but you certainly wouldn't
know that from seeing this movie. As a former boxer who rose too fast and
fell too quick, Smits doesn't look like an athlete. As a father grooming his
three sons for boxing glory with a blistering temper, Smits doesn't seem
mean enough. And as the ruthless manager of the aforementioned three
talents, Smits doesn't seem determined enough. Actually, it is rare that
Smits seems like anything other than an actor reciting lines while
simultaneously cursing his agent in the back of his mind. But that could
well be the fault of the script.
The screenplay for Price of Glory allows such pathetic exchanges as the
following scene between the Smits character and his wife:
All that is missing is a few weeping violins and a father/son conflict.
Oops! There is a father/son conflict. Actually, there are three of them.
Would you believe me if I told you one involved marriage and a fight with
the future in-laws? Rushmore's Max Fisher would be proud.
Fortunately, there is some good to justify this being a decent Sunday night
movie. The boxing footage is amazing. Much like the recent Play it the Bone,
the filmmakers here seem to have put all their efforts into making the
in-the-ring scenes memorable. They succeeded as every blow is exhilarating
and every jab exciting, but there is too much out-of-the-ring action to
justify solely judging the movie on punches and flying sweat.
Ironically, it seems that the only parts of the film properly edited are the
complex boxing sequences. Numerous moments that cut back and forth between
two camera angles have significant continuity flaws. There is no better
example than a mid-film date scene where characters' positions seem to jump
around even though they don't seem to be moving. The only excuse for such
flaws is someone believing they were blocking the scenes with a more
forgiving TV screen in mind.
The film's finale, although certainly no Rocky, is mediocre. But mediocrity
projects an appearance of brilliance when following such poor work as the
film's beginning. Most of the boxing footage finds itself in these last few
moments and the dialogue is limited enough that audiences might actually
exit the theatre with a cheaply placed grin on their face. This doesn't make
up for the clichés, script or Jimmy Smits however. But then again, nothing
could.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
PRICE OF GLORY (2000) 
Rated PG13; running time 117 minutes
Genre: Drama 
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0188160 
Official site: http://www.priceofglory.com/  
Written by: Phil Berger
Directed by: Carlos Avila
Starring: Jimmy Smits, Jon Seda, Clifton Collins, Jr., Maria del Mar, 
Sal Lopez (Hector Salmon), Louis Mandylor, Danielle Camastra, 
Ernesto Hernandez, Paul Rodriguez, Ron Perlman
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsprice.html
I went in to see PRICE OF GLORY with a slight sense of dread: after 
being upset for so long about the havoc Jon Seda's character Falsone 
wreaked on TV's HOMICIDE: LIFE ON THE STREET (RIP), I was sure that his 
character here would just overwhelm everyone else, leaving me with a bad 
Seda taste in my mouth once again.   Boy, was I wrong--in more ways than 
one. 
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Arizona-based Arturo Ortega (Jimmy Smits) coulda been a contenda--until 
his opponent opened up a can of whupass on him in a 1977 boxing match.  
13 years later, Arturo starts to live out his dream of boxing glory 
through his young sons Sonny and Jimmy, both of whom he trains in a 
Mariposa, Arizona gym.  Sonny is the more skilled of the two 
brothers--something that Arturo never lets Jimmy forget--but when Sonny 
and Jimmy do relatively badly at a Silver Gloves tournament, their 
youngest brother Johnny surprises the whole Ortega crew by announcing 
that he's ready to give up street football to become a boxer, saying 
"them two stunk!"
10 years later...17-year-old Johnny (Ernesto Hernandez) intensely 
prepares for his Golden Gloves tournament, and catches the eye of boxing 
scout Pepe (Paul Rodriguez) and promoter Nick Everson (Ron Perlman); 
Everson approaches Arturo with the offer to "relieve" him of his 
managing duties for Sonny (Jon Seda) and Jimmy (Clifton Collins, Jr.), 
"throwing in" Johnny for good measure.  But Arturo has his eyes on the 
prize--the glory days he sees ahead.  The question is, is it glory for 
them--or for him?
The Upshot:
There's a point in this movie where it went from being enjoyable in its 
look at family dynamics from a Latino point of view that is usually not 
seen in mainstream Hollywood, to being a candidate for TV 
Movie-Of-The-Week.  I can't quite pinpoint where PRICE OF GLORY lost its 
slight edge, but it's there.  Maybe I blinked, and it was gone.  Or 
maybe I was just so thrilled to see so many Mexican-Americans portrayed 
on the Silver Screen without the stereotypically scripted behavior we've 
come to expect, that I didn't notice the lack of depth all along.  And 
that, not my assumption of what Seda would be like, is what left me 
wanting more from this movie than it was prepared to deliver.
Early on, though, there were winning performances; Seda, in particular, 
surprised me with his relatively muted turn as Sonny (if you've ever 
watched him chewing the scenery in "Homicide", you'll know why I was 
surprised).  His acting here was aided, no doubt, by the fact that he 
once was a Golden Gloves boxer himself; he definitely looked comfortable 
on the body bag.  Equally good in the early stages was Clifton Collins 
as the put-upon Jimmy, and Maria del Mar as Arturo's wife Rita; I 
cheered when seeing the interaction between Arturo and his wife, as they 
looked genuinely attracted to each other, and dedicated (in different 
ways) to their sons.  And in his feature film debut, Ernesto Hernandez's 
Johnny Ortega didn't quite give an Oscar-worthy performance, but he had 
his Intense Scowl look down-pat.
On the other side of the ring, Ron Perlman was never convincing as a 
boxing promoter; about the only thing he could've promoted was a bout of 
sleep.  I never did figure out what purpose Danielle Camastra's 
character Mariella served; a throwaway role if I ever saw one, her 
introduction to Arturo as Sonny's girlfriend served its purpose  
sufficiently enough, without the need to have her stand around looking 
Sad in the background, taking up frames of film.  And maybe it was Just 
Me, but Louis Mandylor just did not look like he belonged in a boxing 
ring, though his turn as the rather mean-spirited Davey Lane did seem to 
serve as a needed bit of conflict and tension that was missing from most 
of the movie.  After all, what's a title bout without someone talking 
trash?
Above all, Jimmy Smits gives a winning performance as patriarch Arturo 
Ortega.  At times funny (his Thanksgiving prayer and insistence on 
getting a rad green Cadillac convertible, made me laugh out loud), and 
at other times pensive and sad, Smits showed a side of his acting 
abilities that wasn't allowed to come to the fore nearly enough during 
his NYPD-BLUE days.  
So why did PRICE OF GLORY fall so flat?  Beats me; maybe it developed 
wobbly knees from going a round or two too long, and collapsed under the 
weight of Delivering A Message.  The editor could have easily excised a 
half-hour or so with no ill-effects, giving it a tighter focus and less 
repetition on the theme.  Certainly, they could've lost the irritating 
Paul Rodriguez in a pile of film in the trash dump; he used up his 15 
Minutes a lifetime ago.
In the end, there just didn't seem enough there to rally around; by the 
time the Obligatory Title Match came around, enough of the outcome had 
been telegraphed beforehand to make the results all but assured, and 
frankly, by that point, The Point had already been made.  And though the 
movie seemed authentic on the boxing front, from both the writer's 
standpoint as well as the cinematographer's great shots of the 
pugilistic action--one in particular, with young Arturo hitting the 
canvas, tore right through me, it seemed just that real--the spirit 
seemed to drain out of the movie as it rolled on.  What had started out 
as a fun flick, with great Latin sounds and interesting characters, 
wound up as worthy of being a TV Afternoon Special.
Bammer's Bottom Line: 
I wanted to give this one a higher rating, but story-wise, it's more 
suited to a cable TV movie than a feature film release.  Still, Smits 
shows he's got the nalgas to carry a motion picture on his own - if 
Hollywood opens the door for him.  Hmmm...I wonder if I should hold my 
breath...
PRICE OF GLORY (rating: yellowlight): 
More a glancing blow than a knockout, it still gets props for what it 
*didn't* show: stereotypical Latinos, Hollywood-style.  That's worth at 
least an extra point or two on my scorecard.

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Father knows best.  Ex-boxer Arturo Ortega (Jimmy Smits, Bless the
Child) has placed his three sons on the assembly line for success,
manufacturing them into perfect fighting champions.  With his high
intensity training, they'll be given the opportunities he never had. 
When his kids grow up and each decides to pursue opportunities in and
out of the ring, the family unit starts to crumble.  Can they weather
the Price of Glory?
The standard repertoire of confrontation, hope, and tragedy all fall
into place.  Arturo thinks one of his boys doesn't have the makings of a
champion, but maybe he isn't looking hard enough.  Another son (Jon
Seda, Selena) wants to get married, but settling down could ruin his
shot at the big title.  Familiar archetypes emerge and follow their
routes to a traditional grand finale.
Price of Glory speaks from the voice of Latino experience, all too often
ignored in mainstream cinema, and an appealing cast elevates this
made-for-television material.  Jimmy Smits stands out in particular,
bringing an easy charisma and measured patience to the role of coach and
father.  The entire production is slick and well lit, if indistinct from
the glossy Hollywood look of other dramas.  The boxing seems a little
too sanitary for such a violent sport, but the actors throw themselves
into it with appropriate gusto.
While the intentions are good, Price of Glory is never confident enough
to push the boundaries of the sports drama mold.  Small, character
driven moments get swept up in the single-minded mechanism of plot. 
It's those seemingly minor details that separate truly great stories
from those which are merely adequate.  Price of Glory, not unlike Arturo
Ortega, barely misses its shot at the title.
Director: Carlos Ávila
Producers: Moctesuma Esparza, Arthur Friedman, Robert Katz
Writer: Phil Berger
Starring: Jimmy Smits, Jon Seda, Clifton Collins Jr., Ernesto Hernández,
Maria del Mar, Ron Perlman
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Jimmy Smits has a lot riding on this picture; it's the movie for 
which he killed off his character in TV's "NYPD Blue." Written by sports 
columnist Phil Berger and directed by Carlos Avila, who developed the concept at the Sundance Institute, it's the story of a Mexican immigrant, Arturo Ortega (Smits), a pushy retired boxer who is trying to instill the prizefighting spirit in his three sons, Sonny (Jon Seda), Jimmy (Clifton Collins Jr.), and Johnny (Ernesto Hernandez). Like Don Corleone and his three sons in "The Godfather," it's a cultural heritage saga - with boxing 
being the primary way for Latinos to break out of the Arizona barrio.  The film opens with the ill-fated match that dashed Arturo's dreams of being a champion in the late '70s. Then there are glimpses of the boys growing up, being trained to be boxers, so the scene is set for the primary drama, which takes place in the present. According to Arturo's plans, two of his sons will fight; the third will go to college. Only things don't always go as planned.  Jimmy Smits captures the universality of the well-intentioned but ill-advised father-figure ("Everything I've ever done is for you boys!") with Maria Del Mar as a persuasive counter-balance as the mother. In melodramatic, cliche-ridden characterizations, Clifton Collins Jr. is cocky and rebellious, while Ernesto Hernandez is obedient and eager-to-please. But it's Golden Gloves alum Jon Seda (TV's "Homicide") who delivers the knockout performance as a man whose dreams extend far beyond the ring. In supporting roles, Ron Perlman !
is a ruthless promoter with Paul Rodriguez as a greedy insider. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Price of Glory" is a solemn, sweat-stained 6. Essentially, it's an old-fashioned, tough-love family drama set within the realm of boxing.

Author
Jerry Saravia
PRICE OF GLORY - A Film Review by Jerry Saravia
In the last five years, independent films have become more and more like 
Hollywood films in terms of genre, formulas, and general sappiness. Consider 
"The Tao of Steve," a low-budget film that resembles a corny Hollywood 
romance with a neat and tidy happy ending. "Price of Glory" falls under the 
same category: a boxing film full of cliches and a wishy-washy ending. The 
big difference is that "Price of Glory" aims to be something more, and heads 
for a wrongheaded climax with no payoff. 
Jimmy Smits is Arturo Ortega, a former boxer who wants his children to become 
boxers. He wants them to have the life he never had. In the opening 
black-and-white flashback, we see a young Arturo beaten to a bloody pulp in 
what was ultimately a fixed fight. Since then, he lost the passion and nerve 
to continue boxing - he knew when to quit. 
The problem is that Arturo doesn't know when to quit when it comes to his 
sons. Nevertheless, as the boys grow older, Sonny (Jon Seda), Jimmy (Clifton 
Collins, Jr.) and Johnny (Ernesto Hernandez) become the "Fighting Ortegas" 
yet it is Johnny, the youngest and meanest of the bunch, who becomes the 
likely prizefighter to become heavyweight champion. This means a lot to his 
father, and naturally to the Latino community in their hometown of New 
Mexico. But when opportunity knocks, family squabbles take over. Arturo is 
their trainer and their promoter, but an outside fight promoter, Nick Everson 
(Ron Perlman) wants to represent the promising Johnny and the other boys. 
Will Arturo let go, or will the sons follow the glitz from Nick's promotion? 
"Price of Glory" has one major flaw and that is the character of Arturo - he 
is a man trying to live his dream through his sons. The sons know this but it 
takes Arturo a long time to come to this realization. And when tragedy comes 
between them, Arturo continues to be naive and hurtful. Even his wife, Rita 
(Maria del Mar) can't reason with him. Arturo's personality is enough to 
cause the audience to lose their patience. 
"Price of Glory" benefits from the fine, truthful performance by Jimmy Smits 
but the screenplay avoids dealing with some larger issues. Since Arturo 
refuses to sell out his sons, which is really for their own benefit, and 
since he feels he can redeem himself through their success, then why does he 
feel he can still bond with them and make them forget his harmful emotions 
after the tragedy that takes place prior to the climax? In fact, it is no 
suprise that the climax is headed for a "Rocky" finish, but why deny Smits' 
the expected payoff scene where his character can learn the error of his 
ways? The drama and tension peter out to some heavy melodrama that would seem 
at home in any daytime soap opera than in a real film about real people. Even 
the villainous promoter, Nick, seems more sympathetic and understanding than 
Arturo.
"Price of Glory" has some wonderful flavor to it in its cinematography and 
scenery, and I liked the sporadic depiction of a Latino family trying to come 
to terms with their troubles. The boxing fights are also well-directed but 
they do lack the thrust of "Raging Bull," which set the standard for all 
boxing movies. Still, "Price of Glory" is the kind of film that tastes good 
on the surface yet leaves a bitter after taste once you consider how the 
ingredients were mixed. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 New Line Cinema
 Director: Carlos Avila
 Writer:  Phil Berger
 Cast: Jimmy Smits, Jon Seda, Clifton Collins Jr., Maria del
Mar, Sal Lopez, Louis Mandylor, Danielle Carnastra, Ernesto
Hernandez, Paul Rodriguez, Ron Perlman
   What good father doesn't want the best for his kids?  At
times, though, you might have a difficult time separating what
a parent is doing altruistically for his children from what he is
doing to fulfill his own shattered dreams--a way to restore his
self-respect and his prestige with the outside world.  "Price of
Glory," whose sound track features some exciting and
appropriate Latino music such as "Grita de Alegria"
performed by Quetzal and "Cumbia Raza" performed by Los
Lobos, is a hard-hitting, action-packed and drama-filled movie
about a dad who could have been a contender.  Jimmy Smits
inhabits the role of Arturo Ortega, a Mexican-American who
entered the boxing ring in Mariposa, Arizona during his teens
as a way out of the ghetto, but after suffering one particularly
crushing defeat had to give up his wishes.  He gets another
chance to restore the family glory by becoming the trainer of
his three sons, who are introduced to us early on and whose
roles are soon taken by others when director Carlos Avila
moves ahead ten years.
   When Arturo's children Sonny, Jimmy and Johnny Ortega
begin sparring in what appears to be a little league-style
introduction to the sport, Arturo is in his splendor.  Expecting
all three of his boys to become champs, he is especially hard
on Jimmy, who is not as adept or willing to follow the older
man's instructions.  Arturo's differing treatments of his three
sons become largely responsible for the boys' distinct
personalities and as they hit their late teens and early
twenties, Sonny (Jon Seda), comes on as the most promising
of the new boxers, while Jimmy (Clifton Collins Jr.) turns into
the family rebel and Johnny (Ernesto Hernandez) enhances
his dad's image as the most obedient son.
    "Price of Glory," which was written by former New York
Times sportswriter Phil Berger--whose output includes a book
about Mike Tyson and the shaping up of autobiographies by
Joe Frazier and Larry Holmes.  His familiarity with the sport
comes across throughout the movie, as he tackles the roles
of managers, trainers, and referees and gives us a view of
the temperaments of the pugilists, particularly one villainous
opponent, Davey Lane (Louis Mandylor) in a middleweight
title bout that forms the dramatic climax of the tale.  Despite
the excitement generated by the soundtrack and the swiftly
paced action of the drama, the movie lacks virtually any trace
of originality.  The supportive wife, Rita (Maria del Mar) is
there for her man when he needs her, and turns away
dutifully and predictably from the ring whenever her boy,
Sonny is getting hurt, as Sonny's wife, Mariella (Danielle
Carnastra) sheds a tear and leans empathetically on her
mother-in-law's shoulder.  =
   The film is well acted throughout, furthered by the actual
boxing career of Jon Seda, who punches a bag like the
Golden Gloves battler that he was.  Jimmy Smits is
particularly riveting in the role of the father who seems
unaware that his absolute control over the training of his kids
is compensation for his own boyhood defeats.  What is not at
all easy to believe is that the man would turn down an offer
of half a million dollars by the shark-like promoter, Nick
Everson (Ron Perlman) in return for allowing him to advance
the fight, but even discounting the lack of credibility at times,
"Price of Glory" suffers in its shortage of originality.  Absent
the excitement generated by the powerful theater speakers
as they pound out the Latino music, what we have is not
much more than a made-for-TV film.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 118 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Price of Glory may try to look like another kind of Rocky, but it's a
different kind of story -- as boxing movies never really are about
"pure" boxing. This is a father-son story hip deep in broken dreams,
miscommunication and sibling rivalry. At its center is Arturo Ortega
(Jimmy Smits), once upon a time screwed by a manager and pummeled into a
pulp by a better fighter than he. With his wife, Rita (Maria Del Mar),
he is raising three young sons. Two will fight. One will go to college,
or so Arturo plans. We all know what happens to the best laid plans . .
..
While the film moves through the Silver Gloves years quickly, the very
idea of putting single digit kidlets in the ring is brutal and
unappealing and downright unpleasant to sit through. But a boxer has got
to learn somewhere and this film, written by former NY Times sports
columnist Phil Berger, doesn't shy away from detailing the years of
training necessary to lead to the point where a man can fight to be a
champion. More important, these years establish the connections between
parent and child, brother and brother, that will mark their adult lives.
Sonny (Jon Seda) is the eldest son. He has the power but not the
ambition that his father wants to see. While he wants to be champion, he
also wants a wife and an outside life. In short, he wants some control,
which papa isn't ready to give. The middle son is Jimmy (Clifton Collins
Jr.), who's fast and fights furiously but doesn't think his way through
his bouts. He's incredibly jealous of the attention that Sonny gets --
and Sonny gets it because Arturo knows that Jimmy will never be a
champion. With two substantial paychecks in the bank, Arturo tells Jimmy
to hang it up. Problem is, Jimmy doesn't want to retire. The littlest
kidlet is Johnny (Ernesto Hernandez), "destined" for college but
possessing the spark that could make him the greatest champion of all.
The money men see the future in Johnny and while Arturo negotiates with
Nick Everson (Ron Perlman) across the years, an acrimony builds between
the two men that will lead to disaster, in the form of Everson's right
hand man Pepe (Paul Rodriguez).
All three sons will enter the ring. All three will fight in the same
weight class. While your brain, if it's anything like mine, waits for
the inevitable clash between brothers (whether it's in the ring or
outside of it), said inevitable comes about in a surprising manner. That
four strong character stories can play out without infringing on one
another is a good thing. This flick is a good sit.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Price of Glory, he would have
paid...
Price of Glory allows you the satisfaction of watching the "good guy"
win (well, duh) but doesn't provide the same elation found at the ends
of Rocky I and II. As a story of a family shredded by ambition and
misfortune, that rebuilds itself and survives despite all that happens,
it works very well.
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com
