Title
Review for I Went Down (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Some Irish movies travel well across the Atlantic, intriguing
Americans of all ethnic groups as much as they interest the
folks from Dublin to Galway.  "The Boxer" is just such a
picture.  On the other hand there are some movies whose
humor is so quiet, so inaccessible, that you wonder whether
they were made for anyone's enjoyment.  If "I Went Down"
and "Bulworth" opened at the same time in the theater of
Cork and Spigo, which picture do you think the townspeople
would see?
   "I Went Down" is meant to be taken as a cute illustration of
the Irish gift for gab, but the language is far from the poetry of
Sean O'Casey and is no match for the crisp dialogue of a Jim
Sheridan.  A mafia-style road comedy, the story is like a
theater piece for two with assorted oddball characters thrown
in to expand the dimensions.  Git (Peter McDonald), a
handsome, young, taciturn lad whose girl friend left him during
his six-year term in jail, roughs up a couple of gangsters who
are about to crush the fingers of his friend Anto (David
Wilmot).  The gang leader, Tom French (Tony Doyle) will
forgive him and release Anto if Git will gather up some money
for him and kidnap a man who has had an affair with French's
wife.  Bunny (Brendan Gleeson) is assigned to watch Git, and
during their time on the road this pair, at first mistrustful of
each other, become good friends.  Their camaraderie is
greatly aided while they hold Frank Grogan (Peter Caffrey) as
a hostage.  Frank tries to talk his way out of his restrained
position and almost succeeds in convincing his captors that
he is being held for a strictly personal reason, that of having
the affair with the gang boss. "Did you ever make love to a
gangster's wife?" he moans.  "It's like making love with the
angel of death looking over your shoulder..You can't enjoy
yourself."
   This observation is the wittiest in the film, which wouldn't be
so bad if writer-director Breathnach could have sustained the
merriment.  Breathnath portrays Git's appeal in zeroing in on
a one-night stand he enjoys with a local girl in a bar, but
despite the decent acting of the ensemble, "I Went Down" is
an indie that's just too unreachable.

Author
Joy Wyse
This is a film produced in Ireland which was a big hit at the Sundance
Film Festival. For the life of me, I don't know why they liked it.
Most foreign films come supplied with sub-titles, but when the actors are
speaking English, there's no such help, even when they have heavy Irish
brogues.  I heard the same complaint about "The Full Monty", and "Brassed
Off", but the plots of those films overcame the problem.  In "I Went
Down", you miss a lot of the humor because you can't understand them.
The movie involves a small time gang boss and his stooges.  Our Lead has
just gotten out of prison [a term he served to protect his father, I
think?] and he becomes a pawn in a caper to recover a man who has $25,000
pounds of the boss's money, or does he?  By the end of the film, you
finally figure out what's going on, but by that time, you really don't
care.
The sex scenes seem to be in the movie simply because they wanted to have
sex scenes in the movie.  They could have been eliminated without changing
the plot.  It's a sad commentary when you don't remember much about a
movie except for ridiculous things, such as one guy's sideburns and shoes,
and another guy's birthmark on his face.
If this movie comes on free TV some evening and you have nothing better to
do, you might want to watch it, but don't lose sleep over it.  I give it a
D+.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        If Chris Farley had strapped some fake mutton-chop sideburns to
each side of his head, spoken with a thick Irish accent, and tried his
damnedest to play it straight, he wouldn't have been nearly as funny as
Brendan Gleeson in "I Went Down."
        Gleeson, who's not dissimilar to the late "Saturday Night Live"
alumnus in terms of physical attributes, plays a character named Bunny
Kelly in this delightful Irish film.  Bunny is sent to County Cork to
"retrieve" one Frank Grogan for an Irish gangster called Tom French (well
dressed like all good gangsters should be and menacingly portrayed by Tony
Doyle).  Bunny is to accompany Git Hynes (Peter McDonald), recently
released from prison and obligated to Tom for disfiguring one of his
cronies.
        That Tom French is a mean bollocks.  He wants Frank back.  And a
small matter of some Ł25,000 that Tom's wife was supposed to have given to
Frank.  For this he won't break anyone's thumbs.  Maybe.
        Inventively and engagingly written by Conor McPherson and directed
by Paddy Breathnach, "I Went Down" follows the trials and tribulations of
Git and Bunny as they knock around peat bogs, dimly-lit pubs, and seedy
hostelries trying to stay alive and out of trouble.
        McDonald is a newcomer and a promising one at that, but Gleeson has
been in over a dozen movies, most recently as Father Bubbles in another
film with a very Irish accent on hilarity, "The Butcher Boy."  Even if you
can't comprehend half of what they're saying, Gleeson and McDonald together
make "I Went Down" a trip worth taking.
        The film is in many ways reminiscent of another "little"
independent feature, 1991's "Highway 61."  That film, too, was a road movie
and it shares the same kind of wry dialogue and humorous situations as
McPherson's tale: whimsical observations on life, carefully-crafted
vignettes, deadpan conversational asides, and scenes that'll make you laugh
out loud.  Witness the episode in which our good-natured protagonists bind
Frank (played by Peter Caffrey) to a hotel bed, leaving him with only the
TV remote for company.
        What's also charming about "I Went Down" is how the relationship
between Buddy and Git develops.  Their trip becomes an education for both
of them, but the way it's handled is neither sappy nor labored.  The only
thing in the film which approaches clunkiness is the culminating
explanation, via flashbacks, of the relationship between Frank and Tom.
It's a little too Hollywood, and what makes "I Went Down" so refreshing is
the fact that it rarely panders to traditional conventions of Hollywood
gangster movies.  Sure it's gritty--make that grubby--but it's also pretty
goofy.
        Although "I Went Down" emphasizes the comedic elements of
dis-organized crime, there are a couple of fairly brutal scenes in keeping
with the subject matter.  Don't let these deter you, though; "I Went Down"
is a little gem.  It's only playing at one Philadelphia-area theater--and I
suspect it won't be there for long--so catch it while you can.

Author
Joy Wyse
This is a film produced in Ireland which was a big hit at the Sundance
Film Festival. For the life of me, I don't know why they liked it.
Most foreign films come supplied with sub-titles, but when the actors are
speaking English, there's no such help, even when they have heavy Irish
brogues.  I heard the same complaint about "The Full Monty", and "Brassed
Off", but the plots of those films overcame the problem.  In "I Went
Down", you miss a lot of the humor because you can't understand them.
The movie involves a small time gang boss and his stooges.  Our Lead has
just gotten out of prison [a term he served to protect his father, I
think?] and he becomes a pawn in a caper to recover a man who has $25,000
pounds of the boss's money, or does he?  By the end of the film, you
finally figure out what's going on, but by that time, you really don't
care.
The sex scenes seem to be in the movie simply because they wanted to have
sex scenes in the movie.  They could have been eliminated without changing
the plot.  It's a sad commentary when you don't remember much about a
movie except for ridiculous things, such as one guy's sideburns and shoes,
and another guy's birthmark on his face.
If this movie comes on free TV some evening and you have nothing better to
do, you might want to watch it, but don't lose sleep over it.  I give it a
D.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
I WENT DOWN (director: Paddy Breathnach; screenwriter: Conor McPherson;
cinematography: Cian de Buitlear; cast: Brendan Gleeson (Bunny Kelly),
Peter McDonald (Git Hynes), Peter Caffrey (Frank Grogan), Tony Doyle
(Tom French), David Wilmot (Anto), Antoine Byrne (Sabrina Bradley),
1997-Ireland)
This Irish crime charmer has 'the gift of gab.' It's a shaggy-dog type
of story, filled with colorful characters and the color of the Irish
countryside. The film should be valued for its amusing dialogue, despite
the difficulty to understand what is being said because of the thick
brogues.
Just out of prison for a petty crime he didn't do, the taciturn Git
Hynes (Peter McDonald) comes to the rescue of his friend Anto (Wilmot)
in a pub where he is visiting his former girlfriend. Anto is about to
have his fingers smashed by the henchmen of Dublin crime boss Tom French
(Doyle). Why Git comes to the rescue, since his girlfriend from
childhood Sabrina Bradley (Byrne) has left him while he was in prison
for Anton, is not clear. Maybe, he's just a good guy, or a bit naive, or
perhaps he is a bit short on smarts. But this rescue of his friend,
resulting in the severe beating by him of two of Tom's boys, cannot go
unpunished. He is asked by the crime boss to go to Cork and bring back
Frank Gorgon (Caffrey) with the money that he owes Tom. This brings him
together with a gangster in debt to Tom, the flamboyant ex-con Bunny
Kelly (Gleeson). Bunny's wife has left him, which is about the only
other thing he has in common with his much younger partner. The crime
boss explains that the two as partners can keep an eye on each other, so
this way they can blame the other if the job is a bollix.
Bunny is a first-class character and screw up, who pictures himself as a
know-it-all. When he pulls into the gas station he can't open the fuel
cap in the car he stole and gets peeved at Git for watching him, saying
he always gets nervous when someone is watching. Having a craving for
chocolates, he decides to stick-up the gas station.
In Cork, they rescue Frank from a gang that is holding him. This hostage
turns out to be quite a character himself. The boys don't know if what
he is telling them is true or not. Since they have no idea of what is
really going on they decide to do just as French wants and deliver him,
but Git insists that he will not let Frank get killed. But Frank insists
that he teach Git how to use a gun, just in case there's trouble. Of
course, he teaches him incorrectly how to use the gun, but that turns
out to be no big problem for the two lucky Irishmen.
It is mostly a road movie, showing what it's like to bring Frank back to
Dublin. There are a lot of sudden twists in the story that keep you
guessing as to what happens next. The three men try to get to know one
another, but any relationship with the blarney talking Frank is out of
the question. But Bunny and Git form a warm and surprising friendship,
as they are trying to figure out Tom French's plan. The violent
conclusion is done with style and adds to the comic mood the film set.
It is a rather cheerful film-- despite the violence, the lowlife
characters, and all the peat bogs the duo come across. It also has
something to say about being loyal as opposed to being greedy. Its
ethics are blurred by what society considers right and wrong, but by
going over that line of decency, the film gains most of its charm.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
