Title
Review for Albino Alligator (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Christopher Null
     One of a growing list of recent directorial debuts by actors,
ALBINO ALLIGATOR is Kevin Spacey's (Best Supporting Actor winner from
THE USUAL SUSPECTS) baby, and his film is probably the best of the lot. 
Because with this movie, Spacey proves that he can work just as well on
either side of the camera.
     A "box drama" of classic design, ALIBINO ALLIGATOR is a
psychological thriller set largely inside a New Orleans Prohibition-era
bar still open in the 1990's.  Dova (Matt Dillon), Milo (Gary Sinise),
and Law (William Fichtner) are criminals on the run.  After killing
three cops with their car, the trio holes up in Dino's Last Chance Bar
until things cool over, but the cops catch up with them soon enough.  A
game of cat-and-mouse hostage negotiation ensues, with Faye Dunaway,
Viggo Mortensen, Skeet Ulrich, John Spencer, & M. Emmet Walsh as the
victims, and Joe Mantegna as the head cop on the case.
     Christian Forte's script is top-notch, save for a few dialogue
relics leftover from the Prohibition era themselves (I've never actually
heard anyone refer to two dollars as "a deuce").  In fact, the script
does most of the real work in the picture, leaving Spacey plenty of time
to concentrate on building tension and experimenting with some cool
camera tricks, all without getting too heavy-handed with his direction. 
And having all his talented friends act in the principal parts doesn't
hurt, either.
     Spacey does a nice job at getting across some relevant social
commentary along the way, even if the film stays a little inaccessible
due to the lack of any real heroes or very likable characters.  A better
editing job (especially continuity) could have made a big difference
here as well.
     But all is forgiven -- Kevin Spacey adds another title to his long
list of credits, and it might prove to be one of his best.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Although the writer, Christian Forte, was younger than 24 when he
wrote the movie's story, he has fashioned a unique thriller.   You
will be on the well-known edge of your seat as the three robbers, Dova
(Matt Dillon), his brother Milo, (Gary Sinise) and self-styled
sociopath Law (William Fichtner) go through their paces. These consist
of trying to rob an office, have the siren go off and scare them away,
get involved in a police chase in which two cops are killed in a
crash, and end up in  Dino's Last Chance bar.   Boom, boom, boom; it
all happens real quickly and we find ourselves in the bar with a half
dozen hostages.  That is not how the original robbery had been planned
at all.
     The acting is superb.  Janet, (Faye Dunaway and how nice to see
her again) is employed in the bar.  There are also owner Dino (M.
Emmet Walsh), the mysterious Guy (Viggo Mortensen), the young man,
Danny (Skeet Ulrich) and Jack (John Spencer), all being held hostage
while the three robbers figure out how to elude the police who have
surrounded the bar . . . which has no exit other than the front door.
     The film focuses on the hostages (with a couple of neat
surprises) and on the robbers, two of whom (Dave and Milo) do not want
anyone to get hurt whereas Law is eager to kill anyone who may derail
their escape.  Leading the police and the federal Agents is C D
Browning (Joe Mantegna).  In a hilarious scene, he gives a TV
interview to Action News" Channel 7 reporter Jenny (Melinda McGraw).
     I believe there is a blooper.  Dave, angered by the police
phoning him at the bar and advising him to surrender, pulls the phone
from the wall, wires and all, yet later in the film he uses the phone.
 . admittedly a smallish oversight.   I never did figure out what the
film's title meant.
     Tautly directed by Kevin Spacey.  Known for his many theater and
film performances, this is his directorial debut, and a fine one it
is.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996 
U.S. Release Date: 12/24/96 (limited), 1/97 (wider) 
Running Length: 1:43 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
Cast: Matt Dillon, Faye Dunaway, Gary Sinise, William Fichtner, 
      Viggo Mortensen, John Spencer, Skeet Ulrich, M. Emmet Walsh, 
      Joe Mantegna 
Director: Kevin Spacey 
Producers: Bradley Jenkel, Brad Krevoy, and Steven Stabler 
Screenplay: Christian Forte 
Cinematography: Mark Plummer 
Music: Michael Brook 
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films 
     ALBINO ALLIGATOR, the directorial debut of 1996's Best Supporting 
Oscar winner, Kevin Spacey, is a cagey, claustrophobic noir thriller 
highlighted by a few clever plot twists, some nicely-honed dialogue, and 
a half-dozen top-notch performances.  Many will doubtless compare this 
movie to Quentin Tarantino's RESERVOIR DOGS, but, while there are 
similarities in plot, intent, and style, ALBINO ALLIGATOR is a more 
intimate film.  If not for the car chase that opens the movie and sets 
up everything that follows, this could easily be mistaken for the screen 
adaptation of a play. 
     Spacey's picture doesn't feature anything new or startling, but 
it's competently constructed, and, with the possible exception of a 
stale patch in the middle, keeps the tension at a consistently high 
level.  Built around a pyramidal series of coincidences, ALBINO 
ALLIGATOR is rich in irony and occasionally darkly humorous.  The 
characters, who all start out as familiar types, are allowed to grow and 
develop in sometimes-unexpected directions.  Even the viewer who 
recognizes ALBINO ALLIGATOR's flaws is still likely to be intrigued and 
captivated by the increasingly-desperate proceedings. 
     Dova (Matt Dillon), Milo (Gary Sinise), and Law (William Fichtner) 
are three crooks on the run in New Orleans.  A failed robbery combined 
with a police mix-up leads to a high-speed car chase, three dead bodies, 
and a tense situation in a place called Dino's Last Chance Bar.  With 
the police gathering outside, the trio takes everyone in the small joint 
hostage, including the bartender (M. Emmet Walsh), a waitress (Faye 
Dunaway), and several customers (Skeet Ulrich, John Spencer, and Viggo 
Mortensen).  Outside, the cops' actions are directed by a goateed Joe 
Mantegna, who's irritated at the growing media presence on the scene. 
     Most of the film involves interaction amongst the criminals, and 
between them and their prisoners.  Dova, the leader, is uncertain how he 
wants things to proceed.  His injured brother, Milo, advises restraint 
and humanity -- perhaps even to the point of giving up.  On the other 
hand, Law, a borderline nutcase, is willing to start a bloodbath.  He 
espouses the "Albino Alligator" stratagem:  intentional sacrifice for 
intentional gain --kill the hostages to win freedom.  Dova's indecision 
about which course of action to pursue, and the subtle ways in which the 
prisoners attempt to sway him, fuels much of ALBINO ALLIGATOR's 
edginess.  Nothing in this film is quite as inevitable as it first 
seems. 
     Every performance works, although some of the actors (namely John 
Spencer, Viggo Mortensen, and M. Emmet Walsh) don't have much to do.  
Dillon is excellent as the torn Dova.  At times, we believe he's capable 
of murdering everyone in the bar; on other occasions, we can see a 
haunted look in his eyes.  William Fichtner plays the sociopath with a 
mixture of unharnassed rage and oily charm.  As the voice of reason, 
Gary Sinise gives his usual solid performance (he's a much kinder, 
gentler villain here than in RANSOM).  The standout among the hostages 
is Faye Dunaway, whose character runs through emotions from anger and 
contempt to horror and desperation.  And, as the only cop with a 
personality, Joe Mantegna is delightfully hard-bitten.  His technique 
for putting a reporter in her place is one of the film's best moments. 
     The core of ALBINO ALLIGATOR is atmosphere and dialogue.  The 
characters do a lot of talking, and, although few of their lines are 
memorable, almost all of what they say rings true.  There are occasions, 
however, when the film's talkiness eats into the tension, especially 
towards the midpoint.  ALBINO ALLIGATOR doesn't flow as smoothly as it 
might; there are times when it surges forward, and other instances when 
it drags a little. 
     In an era when Tarantino-flavored crime thrillers are becoming more 
commonplace, ALBINO ALLIGATOR manages to distinguish itself.  For the 
most part, Christian Forte's script is smart, even if the characters 
aren't, and Spacey's direction is sure-handed.  There's something darkly 
delightful about watching a movie like this, which, despite occasionally 
falling back on formulaic conventions, still manages to surprise its 
audience from time-to-time.   
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
