Title
Review for Henna (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David M. Arnold
A retrospective review by David M. Arnold
My second foray into the exotic realm of Indian cinema yielded
up a film that really connected with me.  "Henna" is a story of love,
human goodness and sacrifice. It is also a powerful plea for tolerance,
peace and understanding between nations, and it is one of the most
beautiful specimens of cinematic art to have been produced anywhere
in the world.
The story, set on the border between India and Pakistan, follows
Chander Prakash (Rishi Kapoor), a young businessman engaged to
Chandni (Ashwini Bhave).  On the eve of their engagement party,
Chander is called to his company to aid a worker injured in an
industrial accident.  Hurrying to his party afterward, Chander
suffers an automobile accident during a violent rainstorm, and is swept
into the river.  He is found, half dead, by a tribe of Pakistani
peasants.
The tribe is lead by Kahn baba (Saeed Jaffey), a devout Muslim who
guides his life by the words of the Koran, and who believes that
Allah's judgement holds more weight than that of any worldly court.
The peasants nurse Chander back to health only to discover that he has
lost his memory.  Sensing goodness in him, they adopt him into the
tribe.  Kahn baba has a beautiful young daughter, Henna (Zeba Bakhtiar),
who falls in love with the mysterious stranger.  As the months pass,
Chander settles into a simple and idyllic pastoral lifestyle, and he
proves himself to be a decent and loyal member of their community.
Soon, Henna and Chander are to be wed.
On the eve of their nuptials, Chander suddenly recovers his memory.
Henna and her family resolve to return Chander across the border to
India.  The determination and sacrifice that these noble peasants
exhibit in their attempt to send Chander home build to a conclusion
that really packs a whallop.
"Henna" is produced by RK Films, and was the last project of the
great Raj Kapoor, who died in 1988.  The film was completed by his
family and is a fitting tribute to one of the great figures in
Indian filmmaking.  Shot on location, the film is confidently and
competently directed by Randhir Kapoor.  The piedmont of the western
Himalayas (with majestic peaks in the background) provides the setting
for powerful and absolutely convincing performances.  The sequences in
which Henna's love for Chander buds and blossoms are on par with
the best that film can offer, and compare well with, for example,
the ball masque scene in Zefferelli's "Romeo and Juliet" as filmic
realizations of young love.  Add to this fluid and subtle tracking
camerwork and the result is a film  that is much more than the sum
of its parts.
The film conforms to the Indian cinematic tradition of the lengthy
(175 minutes) musical, and contains the obligatory half-dozen or
so musical numbers.  The songs are well woven into the fabric of the
story.  And, the film captures the color and texture of both Indian
upper-class and Pakistani peasant lifestyles.  It accomplishes that
goal that I require in order to consider any film really good:  It is
evocative, it transports the viewer into another realm.
"Henna" is available to Western audiences on DVD from DEI.  The disc
is letterboxed to a 1.85:1 aspect ratio (I am convinced the original
film was shot using a 2.35:1 'Scope process and cropped down to 1.85:1).
The image is exceptionally crisp, clear and vivid, and looks better than
some domestic transfers I have seen.  The only problem with the disc is
a very harsh, clipped and over-driven monaural soundtrack that really
spoiled for me some of the musical numbers, inducing the same visceral
reaction as fingernails on a chalkboard.  That was a great
disappointment to me, since I ENJOY Indian music.  The dialogue is in
Hindi, with optional English subtitles, except during the musical
numbers which are not subtitled (this is a very minor handicap to the
non-Hindi speaking viewer's understanding or enjoyment of the film).
On the whole, I would give "Henna" my strongest recommendation. For
anyone interested in exploring the Hindi movie scene, "Henna" would be
an excellent introduction.
Essay copyright (C) 2000 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
