Title
Review for She's the One (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     After his great success writing, directing, and starring in the
low budget flick THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN, Edward Burns is back.  This
time he has a Hollywood bankrolled film, but he keeps his comedic
sights set on his favorite subjects: Catholic male angst, infidelity,
and most of all, sex - particularly the lack thereof.  Given that most
of the cast leads return, you can excuse the audience if they think the
film is THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN PART 2.  Actually, this time the story is
different and the brothers have changed their last name to Fitzpatrick.
     As the story unfolds, brothers Mickey (Edward Burns) and Francis
(Mike McGlone also his brother in BROTHERS 1, I mean in THE BROTHERS
MCMULLEN) are verbally sparring with their dad (John Mahoney from
PRIMAL FEAR and THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT) on their regular fishing trip.
The dad ridicules them by calling them girls, and they generally trade
one-liners with each other.
     The one-liners are both the strength and the weakness of the film.
Burns has millions of them in his head and having no self-control puts
all of them in the script.  Some work, and some don't.  The ones that
do are terrific and the main reason to see the picture.  Unfortunately,
one-liners do not a relationship make.  The characters are all
interesting individually, and yet none are compelling or involving.
With life reduced to one-liners, they have no way to develop a
chemistry with each other or with the audience.
     Francis is a chain smoking stock broker worth a lot of money.  He
even has a limo to drive him to work everyday.  Poor Mickey is just a
Brooklyn cab driver, but claims to be happy.  Francis taunts him with,
"Big deal, you're happy.  You're never going to make any real money."
     Francis is married to his work.  When his wife Renee (Jennifer
Aniston) wants to have sex, he tells her basically to take a number.
He is too busy right now working in bed with his laptop.  He is also
having an affair with fellow stock broker Heather (Cameron Diaz who was
so great as Jude in THE LAST SUPPER).
     One day, Mickey picks up a fare appropriately named Hope (Maxine
Bahns from THE BROTHERS McMULLEN), and they get married the next day.
Francis thinks this is stupid, and chides him with, "Romance is great,
but I just want to remind you, it don't pay the bills."
     Mostly the show ignores religion other than talking about the
unseen Mrs. Fitzpatrick's daily church attendance.  One time, however,
when their dad thinks something happened that the church would not
approve of, a perplexed Mickey inquires, "Why are you getting so upset
Dad?  You don't even believe in God."  The angry father snaps back,
"That doesn't mean I'm going to stop being a good Catholic."
     All in all, the show is an enjoyable but shallow little comedy
signifying nothing.  The one-liners frequently work, and actors are
good, but trapped in their material.
     My favorite is Cameron Diaz, who has extremely captivating eyes.
Based on her work in THE LAST SUPPER, she is probably the most talented
of the lot.  Mahoney is a fine, but colorless supporting actor.  The
others have promise, but the jury is out.  Here they did an excellent
job of reading their jokes and entertaining me, but none of them were
convincing.
     SHE'S THE ONE runs a fast 1:36.  It is rated R solely because they
use the F word a few times.  This is much tamer show than this year's
PG-13 rated THE NUTTY PROFESSOR which was non-stop foul language, but
used every cuss word except the F word.  In SHE'S THE ONE, there is no
violence, no nudity although there are a lot of missing bras, and no
sex although they do talk about it incessantly.  It would be fine for
any teenager.  I give the show a mild thumbs up as it was funny in
parts and entertaining, and award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Chad Polenz

She's The One
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1996, R, 97 minutes [1 hour, 37 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Edward Burns (Mickey Fitzpatrick), Mike McGlone (Francis
Fitzpatrick), Maxine Bahns (Hope), John Mahoney (Mr. Fitzpatrick), produced
by Edward Burns, Ted Hope, James Schamus, written and directed by Edward
Burns.
        If I had known "She's The One" is about a love triangle between two brothers
and their [estranged] lovers I probably would have seen it as just another
soap opera disguised as a movie. But then again, that's probably why I found
the film to be enjoyable. It knows it's essentially a soap opera but because
it's told realistically with a fair amount of charm and humor it works.
        This is the second film by GenXer Edward Burns who also writes, produces,
and stars here the same as his first feature "The Brothers McMullen." In the
spirit of "Brothers," this film works in the same manner by starting out
simple but gradually becoming more complex by developing characters and
multiple, overlapping storylines which all make for interesting, offbeat
themes. 
        First we meet the brothers (and father) Fitzpatrick. Mickey (Burns) is the
older brother who drives a cab for a living but doesn't care about his income
because he's happy. Francis (McGlone) is the younger brother who makes lots
of money but isn't exactly happy because he's cheating on his wife and
doesn't know what to do. Mr. Fitzpatrick (Mahoney) is the old Irish dad who
tells his sons to do whatever makes them happy but make sure they stay close
to the family. Basically, these guys make up a "close-knit" movie family. 
        One day Mickey picks up a woman named Hope (Bahns) in his cab. She has to
take a plane from New York City to New Orleans but she's afraid of flying and
asks if Mickey would drive her instead. Now this is your generic Meet Cute
scene, but there isn't much chemistry between Burns and Bahns, which is
surprising since the two are a couple in reality. A few scenes later we find
they were married on the road (kind of a crash-course version of "Before
Sunrise" I guess).
        Meanwhile, we've gotten to know Francis who's a real Scrooge-like character.
He's having an affair with a sexy blonde named Heather (Cameron Diaz), who,
not coincidentally, used to be engaged to Mickey (and who is also fooling
around with others besides Francis and has a torrid past). Back home,
Francis's wife Carol (Jennifer Aniston) complains about their lack of a sex
life, and threatens to use alternative measures for pleasure (in one of the
funniest, wittiest discussions about masturbation I've ever seen).
        Most of the film is a rather complicated story of romance between all the
characters, both past and present. Certain things happened in the past that
eventually affect the continuing plot, and it's interesting to watch the
manner in which Burns is able to make everything stay in synch and seem so
breezy. We get subplots of secrets and lies of affairs and passion between
just a few characters, but you never doubt the plausibility of it all. 
        Maybe the instant romance between Mickey and Hope was hard to swallow, but
at least we get some good scenes of interaction and believable dialogue which
in turn push the plot along. Unlike other independent filmmakers like Kevin
Smith and Richard Linklater, Burns is not a master of dialogue, but his
character never talk and act like movie characters. The film doesn't try to
become an overly dramatic love story either, it just puts very down-to-Earth
characters in situations you'd only see in the movies. Sometimes it seems
strange but that's pretty much the point.
        In retrospect, I realize "She's The One" doesn't have the charm of "The
Brothers McMullen," but it does deliver a good theme about how serious and
important modern relationships (especially marriage) really are. It works for
me because it manages to be at least entertaining despite all the things it
has going against it.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old movies reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Edward Burns, Mike McGlone, Maxine Bahns, Jennifer Aniston,
Cameron Diaz, John Mahoney.
Screenplay:  Edward Burns.
Director:  Edward Burns.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     When an independent film-maker gets his first studio deal, the fans
of his or her previous work often worry what will happen when he or she
"goes Hollywood."  There are sound historical reasons for such concern
(think of Lee Tamahori's MULHOLLAND FALLS or Antonia Bird's MAD LOVE, if
you are one of the few people who actually saw them), but in the case of
Edward Burns, such concern would seem to be misplaced.  For an independent
feature, THE BROTHERS McMULLEN was about as mainstream as they come, a
low-key charmer unlikely to offend anyone who wasn't a devout Catholic
with a short fuse.  With a budget about 120 times greater than McMULLEN,
Burns has made SHE'S THE ONE, a film just as unlikely to offend...and,
unfortunately, equally unlikely to entertain.
     Burns and Mike McGlone, who were two-thirds of THE BROTHERS McMULLEN,
again play siblings in SHE'S THE ONE.  Mickey Fitzpatrick (Burns) is an
under-motivated cab driver; his younger brother Francis (McGlone) is an
over-motivated stock broker.  What they have in common are significant
problems with women:  Mickey has never quite gotten over catching his
then-fiancee with another man three years earlier, and Francis is cheating
on his wife Renee (Jennifer Aniston) with Heather (Cameron Diaz), a
business colleague.  When Mickey marries a woman named Hope (Maxine Bahns)
after a whirlwind 24 hour courtship, at least one of the brothers appears
headed for happiness...until he learns what his ex-fiancee has been up to
since they parted.
     If there was any real criticism leveled at THE BROTHERS McMULLEN, it
was that it was simply a testosterone-enhanced version of a female bonding
film, in which the female characters existed primarily to give the men
something to complain about while sharing a beer.  At times, SHE'S THE ONE
feels like Burns' sheepish apology for that aspect of McMULLEN, a piece of
sensitive self-flagellation.  "Look how we men make everything in our
lives -- our jobs, our hobbies, our fantasies -- more important than our
wives," he says sub-textually.  "Don't we deserve whatever we get?"
     It's a nice gesture, this throwing open of the doors to the Boys Only
Club, but Burns doesn't support it with characters who ring true, male or
female.  Burns himself has a pleasant, likeable quality, but we are never
given any insight into why he would be impetuous enough to marry a
near-complete stranger.  His dramatic range appears limited to mild
annoyance and affability, and Burns the actor can't bring to the screen
whatever hidden passions Burns the writer might have put on paper.  Still,
that's at least twice the range of Maxine Bahns (Burns' real-life
girlfriend who also played his love interest in McMULLEN yet for some
reason is billed "Introducing Maxine Bahns" in ads for SHE'S THE ONE).
Let me make this point as subtly as I can:  Bahns did not get this part
because she had a particularly good audition; she reads a line as though
she were going through the script underlining it with her finger.  Mike
McGlone contributes a generic selfish, corporate go-getter, and John
Mahoney tones down his "Frasier" crankiness just a touch as the
Fitzpatricks' dad.
     Much of the pre-release interest, however, will be focused on the
other two main cast members.  Cameron Diaz, the latest Next Big Thing as
of 7:00 p.m. PDT, provides the same punch of smart sexuality she brought
to THE MASK, and works wonders with a part which could have been a
sneering bitch in other hands.  As for Jennifer Aniston, she of the hit
television series and ubiquitous coiffure, don't expect a leading role
just because she is receiving top billing in SHE'S THE ONE; it's
alphabetical.  Her part is actually relatively small, but she gets some of
the best and most poignant scenes.  She has an effective, almost silent
moment in which she slips into bed next to disinterested husband McGlone
in a sexy new negligee, only to have him ignore her completely.  While
Burns seems unwilling to break her of the habit of saying "okay" before
nearly every line, her work is still quite solid.
     There are moments like Aniston's failed seduction which have a spark
either of honesty or humor (a montage in which the cast members try to
decide whether Francis might be gay is cleverly done), but they prove more
the exception than the rule in SHE'S THE ONE.  It's all very casual and
under-stated, but it feels like an extended sit-com -- no character too
deep, no problem too complicated.  I guess you could say that Edward Burns
has indeed "gone Hollywood," in the most unfortunate sense of the term.

Author
James Brundage
She's the One, a movie about love, marriage, divorce, sex, and cheating.
This bizarre love triangle (more like two triangles), centers around the
Fredricksons, a family played by John Mahoney (Frasier), Mike McGlone, and
Writer/Producer/Director Edward Burns (The Brothers McMullen), who are on
some of the worst and some of the best terms that I've ever seen in a movie,
talking about sex almost every day on a fishing boat called "The Fighting
Fredrickson's".
At the beginning of the movie, one of the brothers who plays a cab driver
gets married to someone after only spending 24 hours with her he goes back
to tell his brother and his wife (Jennifer Aniston), who absolutely never
have sex because, although Aniston doesn't know it, her husband Francis is
cheating on her to his brother's ex-hooker ex-fiancée Heather (Cameron
Diaz).
The story gets even more compacted and bizarre as his brother picks up
Heather for a cab ride and ends up taking back the TV he had left at her
apartment when he found her cheating on him. He returns home and begins
having trouble with his wife Hope when he tells her about where and how he
got the TV. She eventually tells him that she probably will go to Paris to
get her pH.D., making matters between them worse.
Meanwhile, Fancis' wife begins to suspect something, and through methods
that I can't mention, discovers about Heather, and a divorce results.
>From there in things go to hell in a handbasket with the brothers being
further split apart and Francis proposing to Heather, and from then in,
well, you'll have to watch the movie yourself.
Now what you should ponder is the possibilities presented in the movie :
Love in first sight, adultery, and honesty to your lover / spouse. The fact
that all of this happens in one movie is something of an oddity, and one of
the things that detracts from the plot is the fact that all of this does
occur, and thus making it an almost inconceivable movie, as funny and
well-plotted as it would be.
There are three sets of shoes you should put yourself in while watching or
after watching this movie : One, if you loved someone upon seeing them,
would you continue to love them and be completely honest with them through
their relationship, and be willing to sacrifice your life as you know for
them. Two, would you feel guilty about cheating on your wife, and, if so,
would you continue to have sex with her should you think that you're in love
with the person your cheating on. Three, would you be completely honest with
your spouse or lover about your past.
First, I would try my best, but I would want to know more about her before I
would give up my life as I know it.
Second, I cannot and will not be sure until, if the event occurs, it
happens.
Third, there are some things people should not know about each other, but
its best to diffuse a bomb before it blows up.

Author
Bradley Null (Bradley Null)
     With his sophomore effort, SHE'S THE ONE, Edward Burns has made
another movie about Irish Catholic brothers that do stupid things to the
women they love.  Like his first film, THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN, this story
is set in and around New York City, and stars Mike McGlone and Burns
himself as the aforementioned brothers (only two this time).  Also in
the mix once again is Maxine Bahns, Burn's real-life love interest, who
again stars as Burns's... love interest.
     This time around, Burns once again plays slacker to McGlone's
uptight business-oriented younger brother.  Burns's Mickey, a contented
laid-back cab driver, falls in love (with Bahns) and gets married on 24
hours notice.  This is ridiculed by his brother Francis (McGlone), who
is experiencing relationship problems of his own in the form of a
deep-rooted affair that threatens to break up his marriage.  The two
brothers' problems are linked together by the fact that Francis's young
mistress, played by Cameron Diaz, is Mickey's ex-fiancee.
     After establishing these relationship problems and throwing in the
love quarrels that Burns's father ("Frasier"'s John Mahoney) is having
with their mother, Burns allows them to unfold in much the same fashion
that similar events unfolded in Burns's first film.  First, the brothers
talk about their relationships; in the next scene one of the brothers
does something impetuous or stupid; as a result, in a subsequent scene,
the brothers have to talk about how *that* affected their
relationships.  All of this makes for a lot of repetition (the story
about why Burns broke up with Diaz is brought up at least eight times),
and inevitably leads to the point where one of the brothers' wives or
girlfriends does something independently impetuous, stupid, or long
overdue, at which point, the brothers are forced to talk about *that*
and maybe get into a fight.  As the movie approaches its inevitable end,
though, both brothers are forced to scramble and try to make everything
work out.
     Despite its strong similarities to Burns's first film, SHE'S THE
ONE reveals that Burns has obviously done some growing since then.  On
the whole, this narrative is much more complex than that of THE BROTHERS
MCMULLEN.  Unlike his first film, the problems of the brothers are
interlinked such that their inevitable brotherly dialogues always hold
some sort of interest for both brothers.  Burns also displays at one
point that his characters do not all have to be completely tactless. 
This is demonstrated in what is by far the film's most powerful and
original scene, a climactic moment between Burns and Diaz in which Burns
the director displays a newfound ability to reveal emotion without
words.  Unfortunately, this is only one brief glimpse of complexity and
true movie magic in a film that for the most part rehashes THE BROTHERS
MCMULLEN.
-Bradley Null is a filmmaker, guest critic, and brother of Christopher
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Edward Burns, Mike McGlone, Jennifer Aniston, Maxine Bahns, 
      Cameron Diaz, John Mahoney, Leslie Mann, Amanda Peet
Director: Edward Burns
Producer: Ted Hope, James Schamus, and Edward Burns
Screenplay: Edward Burns
Cinematography: Frank Prinzi
Music: Tom Petty
U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight Pictures
     The sophomore jinx, the bane of hot, young film makers, has struck 
again.  After claiming the likes of Steven Soderbergh (SEX, LIES, AND 
VIDEOTAPE), Kevin Smith (CLERKS), Robert Rodriguez (EL MARIACHI), and 
Eric Schaeffer (MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND), it has now hunted down Edward 
Burns.  Burns, whose charming, low-budget THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN was the 
toast of last year's Sundance Film Festival, has brought another tale of 
sex, love, brotherhood, and Irish-Catholic angst to the screen, but this 
one isn't nearly as enticing as its predecessor.
     THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN's greatest appeal lies in its quiet, unforced 
portrayal of reality.  It's a small, well-written motion picture with 
modest ambitions.  We can believe that the three protagonists are 
brothers, and that their individual crises are actually happening.  
Nothing in THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN is so outlandish that it strains our 
credulity.  Unfortunately, Burns hasn't translated this quality to his 
latest film, SHE'S THE ONE, which opens with an implausible plot 
contrivance and struggles thereafter to get its feet on the ground.
     That contrivance is every romantic cabby's fantasy.  Mickey 
(Burns), the eldest of the two Fitzpatrick brothers, is driving his New 
York City taxi when he picks up a pretty fare, Hope (Maxine Bahns).  
During the short trip to the airport, they get to know each other, and, 
less than twenty-four hours later, they're married.  News of Mickey's 
sudden nuptials don't go over well with his father (John Mahoney), who 
thinks Hope is either an illegal alien or pregnant.  Mickey's younger 
brother, Francis (Mike McGlone), isn't too pleased with the situation, 
but he's too busy balancing his relationships with his wife, Renee 
(Jennifer Aniston) and his girlfriend, Heather (Cameron Diaz), to take 
much notice.  To further complicate matters, Heather, who was once 
engaged to Mickey, unexpectedly runs into her former beau and discovers 
that she's still attracted to him.
     While the brothers McMullen did their fair share of whining, they 
were still likable guys (even if they were clueless about women).  The 
brothers Fitzpatrick, on the other hand, are petulant, irritatingly 
arrogant, and combative.  They don't seem to like each other, or, for 
that matter, anyone else.  Their relationships with their lovers and 
spouses aren't warm, and there's something strained about the way they 
relate to their parents (despite being mentioned many times, their 
mother never makes an appearance).  None of this leads us to sympathize 
with either Mickey or Francis.
     Acting, like poor character identification, is another area where 
SHE'S THE ONE falls down.  With the exceptions of John Mahoney and 
Cameron Diaz, the performers fail to display significant range.  Burns 
is basically playing the same character he essayed in THE BROTHERS 
MCMULLEN.  Mike McGlone and Maxine Bahns, who were also in BROTHERS, 
don't impress, although McGlone has a better grasp of his role than 
Bahns, who seems confused by any scene requiring an expression of 
emotion.  Her real-life chemistry with Burns doesn't translate well to 
the screen.  Jennifer Aniston, known best for her role in the TV series 
FRIENDS, could generously be described as adequate -- the camera 
certainly doesn't love her plastic posturing.  When Diaz or Mahoney are 
in scenes with the others, the talent gap becomes apparent.
     The best thing about SHE'S THE ONE is the dialogue.  While there 
are juvenile stretches where Burns gets too cute, more than one scene 
features the same sparkling repartee that enlivened THE BROTHERS 
MCMULLEN.  Francis, on Mickey's taxi-driving lifestyle:  "That ain't a 
job -- it's an excuse to avoid reality."  Mr. Fitzpatrick, on his 
youngest son's affair:  "Let me get this straight -- you don't want to 
cheat on your girlfriend with your wife?"  And the old man's take on the 
lives of all three Fitzpatrick men:  "Here we are, crying in our beers, 
while our women are out living their lives."
     I'm sure there's an interesting story of sibling rivalry somewhere 
in SHE'S THE ONE, but Burns has cluttered it up with so much 
artificiality that it never gels.  Who really cares whether Francis and 
Mickey make peace with each other, or who ends up with what girl?  If 
these things mattered to us, SHE'S THE ONE would have been a success, 
but since they don't, it isn't.  Since New York only needs one Woody 
Allen, maybe for his next film, Burns will try stretching his thematic 
and geographical boundaries.  Otherwise, his promising film making 
career may already be in trouble.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Gerald Tan
Directed by: Edward Burns
Written by: Edward Burns
Cast: Jennifer Aniston (Renee), Maxine Bahns (Hope), Edward Burns 
(Mickey Fitzpatrick), Cameron Diaz (Heather Davis), John Mahoney (Mr 
Fitzpatrick), Mike McGlone (Francis Fitzpatrick)
Produced by: Fox Searchlight Pictures
Music: Tom Petty
Running Time: 96 minutes
Rating: ** out *****
A romantic comedy about Irish Catholic brothers living in New York
with skewed life philosophies, screwing up their relationships with 
women. With a $25,000 budget and a bunch of unknown actors, Edward Burns 
wrote, directed and starred in this movie last year and called it THE 
BROTHERS MCMULLEN.  This year, with a $3 million budget and some big 
name stars, he's done the same story and called it SHE'S THE ONE.  The 
first movie was a little home-made masterpiece that charmed with its 
fault-ridden but likeable characters, cynically witty but not smart-ass 
script, and fine acting all around.  SHE'S THE ONE, on the other hand, 
is just a waste of good Tom Petty music.  As Irish Catholic brothers 
who've screwed up their love lives must be wont to say, "What the hell 
went wrong?"
Ostensibly, the story is about the brothers Fitzpatrick, their
women, and their gruff but well-meaning father.  Mickey (Burns) is the
karmically damaged elder brother who after discovering his former fiance
Heather (Cameron Diaz) in bed with another man, gives up on life and
becomes a taxi cab driver, to the disgust of his brother Francis (Mike
McGlone).  
Francis is a successful but discontented Wall Street executive who
is neurotically competitive about everything and doesn't want to have
sex with his wife (Jennifer Aniston) because he rationalizes that it
would be like cheating on his mistress, who happens to be his brother's
ex-fiance Heather.  And as if things weren't bad enough for them, they
also have to cope with their father (John Mahoney, FRASIER's dad on TV),
a veritable font of bad advice and confused logic, and Hope (Maxine
Bahns - Burns' girlfriend in THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN, Burns' girlfriend in
real life), Mickey's new girlfriend, a suspiciously romantic waif who
marries him the day after she meets him, while neglecting to tell him
that she intends to leave for Paris in a few weeks.
Emotional chaos erupts when Mickey finds out about Francis's
affair with Heather, gets mad with him, has second thoughts about his
marriage to Hope, who gets mad at Mickey for getting mad at Francis,
Francis asks Renee for a divorce and proposes to Heather.  Everybody
pretty much gets on each other's nerves and they will get on yours too,
with their self-absorbed whingeing.  
The plot loses both cohesion and momentum about midways through the
show, and if you start losing interest, you might end up hanging on to
the running series of peurile jokes revolving around Francis's
preoccupation with his sexual abilities.  But even on this you'll find
yourself shortchanged because the people on the Board of Film Censorship
have really butchered this one, as according to their own nefarious and
unknowable tenets (the film has a PG-13 rating in America).
If SHE'S THE ONE, like THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN before it is meant to
tell us anything, it is that men, given any event in life more
complicated than drinking beer, fishing with dad, and smoking cigars,
will invariably and without exception act like morons, but forgive them
anyway because they don't know any better.
But while THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN worked because the characters were
believably hung up, and the humour was situational rather than
gag-oriented, SHE'S THE ONE rings hollowly to the very end.  It's mix of
cheap cariactures, smug jokes, smarmy romance and unlikely coincidences
is grating more than anything else.  The final scene, one of the
Fitzpatrick's ritual fishing trips, where Daddy Fitzpatrick lifts the
"no women onboard" rule on his boat to get Mickey and Hope to make up so
that we can have a happy ending is wincingly twee but thankfully brief.
And for those of you who want to watch this show because of
"Friends" star Jennifer Aniston's "debut" performance, you might like to
know that she was previously in a movie called THE LEPRECHAUN, which was
good enough to be a reference in WAYNE'S WORLD II. 
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.

