Title
Review for Love Serenade (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Alex Fung
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
Make no mistake about it, Shirley Barrett's debut feature film, LOVE
SERENADE, is truly a strange one. A number of critically acclaimed
recent Australian comedies have been lauded for their inventive,
offbeat stories -- MURIEL'S WEDDING, THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA,
QUEEN OF THE DESERT, STRICTLY BALLROOM -- but the zany LOVE SERENADE
stands out even among this eccentric group of films in terms of sheer
outlandishness. LOVE SERENADE starts off as simply relatively quirky
but becomes increasingly bizarre as the film progresses, and its
loopiness will certainly not be for all tastes. Nonetheless, Ms.
Barrett's film is generally highly entertaining, with a lot of
offbeat humour and some big laughs.
The setting for the film is a fictional Australian backwards hamlet
in the middle of nowhere called Sunray, where nothing much ever
happens and which time (and technology) seems to have overlooked --
the local one-man radio station is stocked with tunes from the 1970s,
like Glen Campbell's "It's A Sin When You Love Somebody", Van McCoy's
"The Hustle", Dionne Warwick's "What The World Needs Now Is Love",
and Barry White's "Love Serenade". Even worse -- they're on *vinyl*.
Things are about to change in Sunray -- big-shot Ken Sherry (George
Shevtzov), a former Brisbane radio disc jockey of some eminence, is
headed into town, and things will never be the same for the Hurley
sisters, gawky twenty-year old Dimity (Miranda Otto), who spends days
riding around town aimlessly on her bicycle and nights waiting tables
at an empty Chinese restaurant, and plainly desperate 26-year old
Vicki-Ann (Rebecca Frith), who works as a beautician and is seeking
someone to replace her last suitor, who befell an unfortunate
chainsaw accident. Ken Sherry, who fancies himself a suave casanova
(this is established in the film's extremely significant opening
scene, as he mouths along with the Barry White tune playing on his
car radio, and reinforced in any subsequent scene in which he opens
his mouth) could be the man for the job -- his 'celebrity' status
delights Vicki-Ann, and she's all agog when he moves in next door.
Falling just short of throwing herself at him, Vicki-Ann is
consequently aghast when Ken Sherry displays an interest in young
Dimity, and the two sisters spar off in a sibling rivalry over the
affections of Sunray's new disc jockey, oblivious of his manipulative
smarminess and his general indifference to both of them as anything
other than conquests.
This does not even begin to indicate just how strange LOVE SERENADE
is, yet it would be spoiling the film to describe the odd goings-on
in any greater detail. You'd never believe me, anyways.
Suffice it to say that the film's quirkiness is accentuated by the
colourful characters which inhabit it, especially when contrasted
with the bleak drabness of the town of Sunray. Ms. Barrett perhaps
goes a bit *too* far at times in giving her characters little quirks
-- painting a simple character like Dimity's foil, Chinese restaurant
chef Albert Lee (John Alansu) as a psuedo-philosophizing nudist is
stretching it -- but in general proves to be fairly successful; these
characters are interesting, entertaining, and eminently watchable.
The best performance in the cast is that by Ms. Otto, who turns in an
outstanding comic performance as Dimity. She embraces her character's
shy, uncertainty and naivity, assuming awkward, timid body language,
and with her sporting a scrunched-up, baffled, slightly-addled look
on her face for most of the film, she's a delight to watch.
Mr. Shevtzov is terrific as the sleazy Ken Sherry -- his is a tricky
role, for had he not delved unabashedly into his character's smug
persona, Ken Sherry would have come off as merely repugnant. As it
stands, he still *is* repugnant, of course, but also oddly fascinating
and compelling -- it is hard to loathe him and his manipulations of
the two female leads, despite the attachment the audience has grown
for the Hurley sisters, because his transparency of his actions are
so amusing. One watches his mellow faux-worldly on-air psychobabble
with a sense of incredulous disbelief, and the airy, laid-back,
detatched way in which he impresses himself into the hearts of Dimity
and Vicki-Ann is cruel yet strangely bewitching to watch; a
particular nice touch is the cool repetition of any questions
addressed to him in his suave radio voice. Mr. Shevtzov plunges
headfirst into the role without any hint of restraint, and the film
is all the better for it.
Ms. Frith is somewhat less successful than her castmates as
Vicki-Ann, although she has a very good physical scene where she
attempts to shoo away her loitering sister. She is unable to prevent
her character from occasionally slipping into caricature, but it
should be pointed out that her part is not as well-written as the
other two central characters in the film, particularly in LOVE
SERENADE's first half. (For instance, an early scene has Vicki-Ann
telling Dimity that she should leave new neighbour Ken Sherry alone
in peace, for he needs his privacy, and is immediately cuts to
Vicki-Ann insistently knocking on Ken Sherry's front door. Heh.)
Ms. Barrett does go overboard with the fish symbolism in LOVE
SERENADE, and the film's conclusion, which seems to be intended as a
bit of a surprise, ends up being somewhat telegraphed (even moreso
if, like I, you're watching Ms. Otto), but this is a remarkably
original film. Ms. Barrett won the prestiguous Camera d'Or at the
1996 Cannes Film Festival for Best First Feature with LOVE SERENADE,
and it is extremely rare that I see such a singularly peculiar film
as this one. There is a scene in the film where Dimity is being told
by Vicki-Ann that she's odd; the same could be said about this
amusing little film.

Author
James Berardinelli
Australia, 1996
U.S. Release Date: Spring 1997
Running Length: 1:41
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, profanity, sex, brief nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/7/97 & 5/10/97
     Winner of the Camera d'Or at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival, LOVE 
SERENADE, the feature debut of Australian director Shirley Barrett, has 
the kind of nasty, biting wit that juries at film festivals seem to 
appreciate.  For the most part, movies tend to tell the stories of love 
affairs between the "right" people, with romance and fate being an 
integral part of the mix.  LOVE SERENADE is a clear exception -- call it 
an anti-romantic comedy.  And, unlike Ellen DeGeneres' failed MR. WRONG, 
with which it shares a few superficial characteristics, LOVE SERENADE is 
well-written and ably acted.
     There aren't many characters in LOVE SERENADE, which takes place in 
an almost-deserted outback town called Sunray.  We're introduced to a 
pair of sisters, Dimity (Miranda Otto) and Vicki-Ann (Rebecca Firth), 
who share a house.  Dimity, the shy and insecure sibling, is a waitress 
at a local Chinese restaurant.  Vicki-Ann, the brash one, is a hair 
stylist.  Both are, in their own way, looking for love, although the 
prospects in Sunray seem bleak, at best.  That is, until Ken Sherry 
(George Shetsov) moves into the house next door.
     To Dimity and Vicki-Ann, Sherry is a star.  A journeyman radio 
personality who was once on the air in Brisbane, Sherry has come to 
Sunray to take a deejay's job at the local FM station.  The sisters, 
enthralled by his apparently urbane, cultured manner, fail to recognize 
what a slimy person he is.  Sherry has the mannerisms and appetites of a 
snake.  He is cold, calculating, and cruel.  He engages in mechanical 
sex, not because he likes it, but because it's a means to give him 
power.  His dead eyes reflect an equally lifeless soul.  Actor George 
Shetsov does a marvelous job bringing this character to life in all of 
his sinister glory.
     In their own way, the sisters are both innocents.  Dimity, who is 
played with great appeal by Miranda Otto, falls for Sherry when he 
arrives at her restaurant for a meal.  Her clumsy "seduction" of him 
leads to a brief tryst that doesn't sit well with Vicki-Ann, who has set 
her sights on the disc jockey as a potential husband.  As the brazen 
sister, Rebecca Firth's performance is the most broadly comic in the 
film, and occasionally seems a little too over-the-top.
     The first thirty minutes of LOVE SERENADE are nearly perfect.  The 
script is clever, the acting is fresh, and the cinematography is 
interesting.  Thereafter, however, things start to become repetitive, 
leading to several patches where the proceedings drag.  Fortunately, the 
level of humor remains consistently high and the film never loses its 
edge, even when it's spinning its wheels.  And the ending is definitely 
worth staying for.
     As has become commonplace in Australian films, the soundtrack is 
bloated with '70s songs, many of which we haven't heard since they 
stopped playing on the radio two decades ago.  In this film, there's a 
twist -- the lyrics of the songs are matched perfectly to the scenes 
they're used in.  The movie's title comes from a Barry White hit that 
the writer/director calls the "creepiest seduction song" that she has 
ever heard.
     LOVE SERENADE is a sly, quirky offering guaranteed to appeal to 
anyone who is sick of screen romances that always work out for the best.  
In fact, this is one film where we pray that the leads don't get 
together in the end.  Shirley Barrett has done an effective job of 
combining acid humor and parody with a somewhat more serious subtext 
about unrealistic expectations.  The resulting motion picture is 
considerably different from the usual multiplex fare, and all the more 
worthwhile because of it.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Murali Krishnan
Life in the country can be slow and uneventful. For sisters Vicki-Ann and
Dimity, who live by themselves in rural Australia, their time is spent at
their jobs in a beauty salon and Chinese restaurant, and fishing. When an
unsuccessful disc jockey from a larger town, Ken Sherry, moves next door,
Vicki-Ann sees a potential husband in the small town's new celebrity.
However, the emotionally withdrawn Dimity also takes an interest in him and
becomes her sister's rival. The dour, unexpressive, Ken Sherry is often
speaking philosophically about love, and has no problem with being involved
with both sisters simultaneously.
It appeared to me initially that this film was marketed (in previews) as a
romantic comedy. Since that is a genre that I do not like, I had very low
expectations for the film, which may be a factor in explaining why I enjoyed
it so much. This film is really a comedy which explores the interaction of
several quirky characters. Although his screen time is limited, Dimity's
boss and proprietor of the restaurant, Albert Lee, is hilarious. A small
amount of magical realism is introduced in the recurring subtext of fish,
and its limited appearance is just enough to be amusing without being
distracting. The title is a reference to a song by Barry White, and it is
important to know who he is to fully appreciate the film. White was popular
in the 1970's and in his low, smooth voice he sang songs about making love,
which were often cheesy rather than romantic. White's songs are the favorite
of Ken Sherry and are played throughout the soundtrack. It becomes apparent
that Ken Sherry's views on love are limited to only the sentiments reflected
in Barry White songs.
Highly Recommended. This is quite an enjoyable, quirky film.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Ever hear the expression, 'Stop the world'?" intones the sultry
radio announcer.  "Well, my name is Ken Sherry, and I stopped the world
and got off in Sunray."
     Ken Sherry, played by Howard Stern look-alike George Shevtsov, is
the new radio host.  Coming as he does from a big career 900 kilometers
away in the large city of Brisbane, he becomes a demigod to the
residents of little Sunray.  Sunray, Australia with its dried up grass
and small, dusty streets looks more like small town America than small
town America.
     Ken's rocky face, sad and droopy eyes, and melancholy demeanor,
makes a deep imprint even before the deep tones come out of his throat.
Thrice divorced and in his mid-40s, he is a stoic and a philosopher.
("With all its shame and drudgery, it is still a beautiful world," he
tells his radio audience before putting on the next old record --
usually a 70s song about "procreation.")  Ken doesn't ask women to make
love to him, rather he wants them to "ease his loneliness."
     First-time movie writer and director Shirley Barrett teams up with
three talented leads to give the world a wry and intelligent comedy and
character study.  Winner of the Camera d'Or at the 1996 Cannes Film
Festival, LOVE SERENADE weaves a story that is romantic, funny, quirky,
and poignant.  The film is as hard to pigeonhole as it is to guess how
it will be wrapped up.  Although the ending is what people may talk
about, it is character development that makes the story compelling.
     What is especially challenging and successful about LOVE SERENADE
is the way Barrett takes three quite different characters and gives
them equal weight.  Most first-time filmmakers can barely do one
character right.  If they spread themselves and their characters too
thin, they create none with any depth, as in another recent and much
less successful film by another first-time Australian director, LOVE
AND OTHER CATASTROPHES.
     Ken rents a house next door to the two Hurley sisters.
26-year-old Vicki-Ann, played prim and proper by Rebecca Frith, is on
the prowl for a boyfriend, and she thinks Ken would be the perfect
catch.  (The show has many fish metaphors and images.)  She tries
everything, including leaving casseroles on his doorstep, to reel him
in, but she cannot get even a nibble.
     Ever confident Vicki-Ann, who works as a beautician, is a natty
and colorful dresser with complete make-up always in place.  Her
striving for perfection in clothes and coiffure makes her love making
especially awkward.
     Her sister, and surrogate daughter, Dimity is a complete opposite.
Dimity, played by Miranda Otto in the most interesting and funniest
performance of the film, has almost no self-confidence.  She seems to
have lived her 20 years in hiding, lest something awful happen to her.
She works as a waitress at a Chinese restaurant run by a strange
character named Albert Lee (John Alansu).  He practices nudism he tells
everyone, but only in the privacy of his own home.
     Dimity, who wears nerdy and drab clothes, has never kissed a man.
She bites her lip and slouches most of the time.  Her hangdog look
makes her look as unattractive as her sister looks overly made-up.
Dimity has no social graces and commits the faux pas of telling Ken
that her sister is looking for a boyfriend.  She lacks all of the
confidence that Vicki-Ann radiates.
     The lead up to Dimity's love making scene has to be one of the
funnier and more unusual ones on record.  Watch especially how she has
a fixed smile frozen on her face with her teeth clinched together when
the love making starts.
     Towards the end, the show turns bittersweet, but it is in the
story leading up to the end that the picture has its strengths.  Any
one of the three characters would have been interesting enough for most
pictures.
     LOVE SERENADE is a subtle comedy without many big laughs, but with
three touching performances.
     LOVE SERENADE runs 1:40.  It is rated R for brief nudity and sex.
The show would be fine for any teenager.  I recommend this quirky film
to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
