Title
Review for Xiaoao Jianghu (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jeff Meyer
[Moderator's note: I am splitting these reviews up by country, because I
have to split them up some way.  I am not trying to be provincial. -ecl]
I'd like to recommend the first five minutes of this film -- the
cheesy special effects and the awful subtitling really produce a few
marvelous moments.  (As the Daughter of Hell rains fireballs down upon
an archaeological expedition at the South Pole, the screams of the
dying and the panicked scientists are translated as "Move quickly.")
Unfortunately, the rest of the film gets so sugary (with the exception
of a stop-action transformation/metamorphosis scene that is so
overdone that it gets boring after a while) that it peters out about
halfway through.
The latest from Tsui Hark, the man who brought you CHINESE GHOST
STORY, PEKING OPERA BLUES and A TERRA COTTA WARRIOR.  The story deals
with a rather high-spirited swordsman and his classmates, who are
caught up in a power struggle to recover a secret scroll.  In the same
vein as PEKING OPERA BLUES, but better (the male lead plays it pretty
loose) than BLUES or TERRA COTTA WARRIOR.  As usual with films Hark is
involved in (he's co-director here), the story doesn't take itself
entirely seriously, and knows when to throw in a joke when the kung fu
plot is getting a mite ridiculous.  Certainly this is has some of the
best fight-scene gags I've seen in any Hong Kong martial arts flick.
If you're a fan of the genre, this is definitely worth seeing.
Nice premise -- a talented artist enters a small village to paint a
portrait of the Madonna for the local church, but manages to stir up a
storm due to his attributing African features to the Virgin Mary, as
well as his wooing of a local beauty.  The questions of prejudice
never make it past your average TV docu-drama, and for the most part
the picture wallows in a tropical DYNASTY atmosphere.  Avoid.
A young rock musician who is descended from a long line of Buddhist
priests is expected to enter a temple for a year as a novice, so that
he can claim his inheritance.  Well, you can see the possibilities...
The film concentrates on rather droll humor, especially when the
musician starts to like the aesthetics of the job, and some satire of
modern Japanese society (there's a number of jokes I'm sure I'm missed
because I'm unfamiliar with the culture.)  For those who enjoyed films
like LIVING ON TOKYO TIME, I suspect this will be a similar pleasure;
it is not a sprawling spoof like TAMPOPO.
THE VIOLENT COP (Japan, 1990 (US Premiere)):
I need to keep reminding that, when it comes to "dark satire",
Japanese films tend to be pitch-black.  The film features Takeshi
Kitano (Sgt. Hara in MERRY CHRISTMAS, MR. LAWRENCE; he also directed
the picture) as Azuma, a sort of a taciturn, shuffling Dirty Harry.
He is, as the title says, a violent cop; and as case he becomes
involved in, tracking down a gang of monstrous dope dealers, gets more
involved, he becomes more and more violent.
As the film starts off, the title character's breaking-the-rules use
of force appears as almost humorous -- very similar to tough-cop
American films; the hitting and kicking isn't romanticized, but in the
context of the events, it's seems rather droll.  What changes is that
the criminals' level of violence escalates (again, non-romanticized),
and Azuma does the same; guns are introduced, and whatever surface
humor there was vanishes quickly.
This ends in an utterly ridiculous situation at the end, a lampoon of
every tough-guy cop final confrontation scene, that is *so* violent I
felt ill afterwards -- not due to gore, but just the pure brutality of
it all.  The film makes its point clearly and with some humor, but in
the process completely repulsed me.  (HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL
KILLER comes to mind, but it's not *that* horrific.)  I'd recommend it
only to the more hardened black humorists out there.
Looking for some unadulterated, well-done romantic fluff with good
production values and engaging faces?  Try this one.  The film follows
the life of a young, independent romance writer from a section of
China that is invaded and occupied by the Japanese in 1938.  She is
approached, and falls in love with, a fan of hers who is also a
collaborator with the Japanese (he's suitably noble, of course).
Meanwhile, her greatest friend, a student whose absent boyfriend is a
resistance fighter, also comes to live with her, and the three form a
pocket of relative happiness during the war.  But with the ending of
the war and the rise of Mao and communism, their world is thrown into
turmoil.  (My God, I sound like the cover blurb for a Harlequin
Romance novel.)
Anyway, while the plot is nothing above the norm, the acting,
dialogue, and production values are very good, and the film even has a
DR. ZHIVAGO-like ending which lifts it out of mundanity.  Actually,
given the choice between seeing ZHIVAGO and RED DUST again, it'd be a
tough call.  If they had just gotten Alec Guiness in the cast...
ENCOUNTERS OF THE SPOOKY KIND, PART II (Hong Kong, 1990):
Let me just open this review by saying that there are few things which
enhance a midnight film experience more than pogo-hopping kung fu
vampires.  It's the sort of subtle plot element that a good Hong Kong
martial arts film is known throughout the world for, and ENCOUNTERS OF
THE SPOOKY KIND, PART II, is a fine addition to the hall of fame.  It
reminded me of the comic parts of Tsui Hark's A CHINESE GHOST STORY;
while I like Hark's style of comic action-adventure, he usually has
some actual drama running through it; and there are times where I want
my Kung Fu funny and silly and over-the-top all the way through.
Unfortunately, some of them get so silly (like PEACOCK KING) that it
loses its edge; happily, this SIFF comic Kung Fu entry hit things
right on the noggin. ENCOUNTERS is the brainchild of
director/producer/star Samo Hung; Samo resembles a Pillsbury dough boy
with a Moe Howard haircut and the sort of awesome martial arts
abilities (bouncing off walls, leaping hundreds of feet in the air
with a WHOOSH sound) that only come out of Hong Kong studios.
After a hilarious opening sequence (ah, those pogo-stick vampires!),
we open up on Samo trying to make enough dough in his small village to
appease his girlfriend's father.  His rival, a rich geek with a monkey
witch doctor, tries to do Samo out of his girlfriend by various forms
of black magic.  On Samo's side is his mentor, a hilariously droll
master martial artist, and his best friend, a decent comedy relief.
As the conflict escalates, the witch doctor decides to destroy
everyone on Samo's side, leaving you with the a final hour of
high-voltage special-effects monster-kicking fun.  Lots of energy,
lots of fun, lots of guys slapping their wrists together, wincing,
exclaiming loudly and firing explosive bolts from their fingers.
That's entertainment!
