Title
Review for Da hong deng long gao gao gua (1991)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
David Dalgleish
        Two shots recur with the insistence of ritual--or nightmare--in
RAISE THE RED LANTERN.  The first is a close-up of the face of Gong Li,
playing a young woman who is sold to a rich man and becomes his concubine,
his Fourth Mistress.  The second is an overhead shot of the central
courtyard in the rich man's house, a small open space hemmed in by grey
walls, overhung by jutting roofs.  Director Zhang Yimou never quite
superimposes these two shots, but he doesn't need to: the movie is all
about the way the young woman becomes trapped--physically and
psychically--in the rich man's space, until she is merely another feature
of its stark geographies.
        It doesn't seem so bad, when she first arrives.  Servants fetch her
bags in, light lanterns in her honour, lave her feet.  But the privileges
of a new wife are temporary: later, they must be earned.  Fourth Mistress
soon becomes involved in a power struggle with the other three mistresses.
        First Mistress is older, post-menopausal, and so of little sexual
interest to the master: she is not as attractive as the others, and she can
no longer bear children.  She seems to have acceded to her fate with quiet
acceptance, more observer than participant.  Second Mistress, who has only
borne the master a "useless" daughter, seems resigned, even good-natured,
about her fading position in the household; she dissembles well.  Third
Mistress is Fourth Mistress's principal rival.  She is a former opera
singer, still young, coquettish, jealous.  As soon as the new woman
arrives, she tries to wrest the master's affection from her.
        Each evening, red lanterns are lit outside the rooms of the
mistress with whom the master is sleeping that night.  She is the mistress
he holds in the highest esteem, at least for an evening.  The four women
are asked to stand in the courtyard while the majordomo ritualistically
announces where the lanterns are to be raised.  This daily observance has
more than a touch of sadism about it: its purpose is as much the
humiliation of the neglected mistresses as it is the announcement of the
favoured one.
        Much of the film is concerned with similar rituals of power and
humiliation.  Fourth Mistress weeps on her first night in the house, but
soon resolves, steelily, to play the game with the rest of the mistresses.
She is cunning, and tough, but inexperienced; she makes mistakes which
cannot be unmade.  In a tense sequence, Second Mistress, who has been
conniving with Fourth Mistress's sullen maid, invites Fourth Mistress to
her house, and asks that she cut her hair.  The point for Second Mistress,
currently favoured by the master, is to demonstrate her power: she can ask
this of Fourth Mistress, who cannot refuse.  But Fourth Mistress then
"accidentally" wounds Second Mistress with the scissors, a petty act of
vengeance which leads to tragic consequences.  Hell hath no fury ...
        The women's lives are explored with perspicacity and empathy.  They
should, in theory, be united against a common foe, the master, who robs
them all of their dignity and freedom.  But there is nothing they can do to
him that will not lead to dire consequences.  The only dignity to be had is
by currying favour so as to be held in higher regard than the other
mistresses.  And because it is only human to seek dignity, the women
constantly, subtly, vie for power over one another.  They are rigidly
circumscribed in what they can do or say, so their actions take on an added
fascination, as we see them walk the line between the acceptable and the
unacceptable in their attempts to gain the upper hand.
        The master himself is never properly seen: he is vaguely shown in
long-shots, or an arm or leg is seen in close-up, but we never look upon
his face.  The movie depersonalizes him.  This is an intriguing change from
the source material, a novella by Su Tong in which Fourth Mistress is much
more complicit in her own fate and the master is a more vivid, human
character.  The obvious reading of Zhang's approach is to see the master as
a symbol of patriarchy, which he is, but it's a bit more complicated than
that.
        To render the master symbolically would, you'd expect, make him
seem more powerful, more forbidding.  But the effect is precisely the
opposite: he is diminished.  Insofar as he can be excised from a story in
which he wields all the power, he is.  Zhang frequently and effectively
uses close-ups to reflect the complex emotions of the mistresses and the
servants, which gives them a vividness, a presence, which the master does
not have.  This is their story, not his.  They are photographed with the
exquisite, formally beautiful camerawork Zhang has elsewhere devoted to
rural Chinese landscapes, which accords them a significance they are unable
to find in the master's house.  It gives them as much dignity as is
possible for people whose lives are doomed to end in premature death,
despair, or madness.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com):
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)

Author
George V. Reilly
     RAISE THE RED LANTERN is a film directed by Zhang Yimou.  It stars
Gong Li and was nominated for this year's Best Foreign Film Oscar.
     Zhang Yimou is probably best known in the West for his previous
film, JU DOU, which also starred Gong Li as a young woman married to a
rich older man.  There the similarities end.
     In this film set in 1920's China, Gong Li plays Songlian, a young
woman who has been forced to leave the university after the death of her
father and who must find a husband.  She becomes the Fourth Mistress of
Master Chen.  The household is divided into several wings and each of
the Mistresses holds court in her own wing.  Each night, the Master has
the concubines stand in a common courtyard where he chooses the one with
whom he will sleep that night by placing a red lantern in front of her.
As red lanterns are raised all around her house so that mistress goes
into the ascendant.
     The Mistresses are engaged in a never-ending power struggle.  First
Mistress, who has a grown son, is not an active participant: she is
accorded the respect due to her seniority.  The Second Mistress, who has
only a 'worthless' daughter, is sweet and charming.  The Third Mistress,
with a son the same age as his half-sister, is catty and jealous of
Songlian.   Meishan is an ex-opera singer and the Master's former
favourite, and doesn't take kindly to the usurper.  She pretends to be
ill on Songlian's wedding night, so that the Master will come to her
bed.
     Gradually, though, Songlian comes to realize that her real enemy is
the Second Mistress who "has the face of a Buddha, but the heart of a
scorpion."  By now determined to win power over her "sisters", Songlian
pretends to be pregnant.  Eventually, she is found out---betrayed by her
maid upon whom she wreaks vengeance.  The stakes are raised ever higher
and tragedy ensues.
     RED LANTERN has been banned in China as being ideologically
incorrect, presumably because it can be viewed as an allegory about
China.  The household is bound by a unyielding set of rules and
strictures, disobeyed only by the foolhardy.  One of the Mistresses is
discovered in adultery and taken away; another happens upon a group of
the servants taking the adulteress to her death.  When she discovers the
body, she screams "Murderers!", but the Master blandly denies the
accusation, tells her that she is mad and that she saw nothing, just as
the Beijing government denies Tiannamen Square.
     Like JU DOU, RED LANTERN is beautiful.  In particular, Zhang Yimou
makes very effective use of sunlight.  The pace of the film is slow and
assured, like a formal dance, each step proceeding inexorably from what
has gone before.
     Gong Li is excellent as the Fourth Mistress, as are the actresses
who play Second and Third Mistresses.

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
In northern China during the 1920s, a beautiful college student becomes
the fourth wife of an older and very wealthy man.  The four wives
compete with each other for the attention of their husband, "The
Master."  A slow-moving drama centered on the wives and their plots
against each other.  Although the film does make the appropriate social
comment, it does so in a ponderous, rather depressing fashion.
China  (English subtitles), color, 1991, 125 minutes.
Director: Zhang Yimou
     This is the newest film by Zhang Yimou to be released in the U.S.;
his previous films include RED SORGHUM and JU DOU.  Like JU DOU, it is
the story of a young woman married to an older man, and the social and
personal oppression she must face.  The story centers on Songlian, a
beautiful 19-year-old college student (played by Gong Li, who had the
title role in JU DOU) who accepts a marriage offer from an older, very
wealthy man.  The film is set in the 1920s in northern China, a society
where tradition, or perhaps more specifically conformance to tradition,
is extremely important.
     Songlian arrives at the household and is assigned a maid, Yan'er,
who is resentful because she wanted to be chosen as the "Fourth
Mistress."  Each of the wives lives in a separate courtyard.  The
husband, referred to as "The Master" by everyone in the household,
including his wives, is a very wealthy middle-aged man.  The "First
Mistress" is now an old woman; she has produced a son ("Young Master"),
and is no longer of sexual interest to The Master.  The "Second
Mistress" is a jealous, power hungry woman who wants to produce a son
for The Master; she is upset because all she has done is produce a
"useless" daughter.  The "Third Mistress" is a former opera singer.
     The household is ruled by traditions and custom.  Each night the
wives stand at the entry to their courtyard, and The Master chooses
which one he will sleep with that night.  A red lantern, on a tripod, is
set in front of the chosen wife.  The red lanterns in the courtyard
belonging to the chosen wife are then lit.  The film's plot consists
largely of the wives competing against each other for The Master's
attention.  The women plot against each other, and use servants to spy
on each other.
     On the positive side, this film has beautiful photography and sets,
excellent acting, and a good social message.  The problem is that
virtually none of the characters make a measurable emotional connection
with the audience.  Also, the story is very slow-moving and rather
depressing.  Since there is no emotional connection, it is hard to care
what happens to the main characters.
     The film's social message centers on the oppression of women, and
the terrible oppression of social tradition, in "old" China.  Because
the character of The Master is not explored, he is seen as an aloof,
capricious, selfish  totalitarian -- an allusion, perhaps, to China's
present leadership?
     I would not recommend the film to a general audience, as it is too
slow-moving and depressing.  Instead, JU DOU is available on videotape
in the U.S., and is a good alternate.  Fans of Chinese historical films
might find the film acceptable.
U.S. Distribution: currently in its first general theatrical release.
The distributor is Orion Classics, and the film will probably be shown
primarily in "art house" theaters.

Author
Pedro Sena
Aside from Japan's Akira Kurosawa, I had not really seen too many Chinese
film makers up until the time I wrote this review. And, as I sat and watched
this film, I really wondered what I was going to find.
Very powerful story, and way to tell it.
A scathing political film denouncing the feudal lord system, who takes the
law into his own hands.
A style of cinematography, which is not boring, but is really quite
symmetrical.  All the shots are perfectly framed, reminding us of a  David
Lean film.  And the director allows us to feel the space, before he enters
it, much like David Lean did.  No surprises necessary, except for the
unsuspecting actors..... we are on the outside of the 'box' as it is called
in theatre.  In many ways, the style of cinematography is out-dated, which
could have been intentional, since the life of the Master, is also fading.
A nice mix of art and life, which is rarely portrayed as a unity, but as an
entity which interferes with life.
RAISE THE RED LANTERN is an excellent film, and although a bit slow for
American standards and tastes for most film, it replaces the slowness with a
theme, which fits the film.
The story is about a young woman who finally gives in to her mother's
wishes, and becomes another concubine for a rich man.  By doing so, she has
to give up her life, as a student, to become a slave to a past
( literally ) which she despises, but she has little choice.  The mother can
not work enough to afford the education of the daughter, and the father has
recently died.  And by trading in her vows as a concubine, she is
helping the mother with a dowry, which would keep her taken care of for
life.  And so she becomes the fourth mistress of a rich lord.  And no soon
does she enter into the marriage, she discovers that the house is
laden with petty jealousies, and evening politics, to try to entice the
master to one of his wives' beds.  And the competition, as she finds out is
as brutal, as it is vicious.  And the girls will not stand for second if
they can help it, and will go to many lengths to get their desire taken care
of.  The ultimate goal is to bear the master as
many boys as the wife can.  And between them all, they are not doing  very
well.  The last two have only produced one child each, and one of them is a
girl.
It is nevertheless, very soon that the fourth mistress discovers how to deal
with the others.  The third mistress was a professional opera  singer, and
is truly beautiful, but does not have a disposition to deal with competitors
( they say she is spoiled ) and in the middle of the night feigns sickness
and stubborn behavior, until the master leaves whom ever he is with to go to
her.  And the fourth mistress one day says that if he leaves, don't ever
return to her bed.  This time she wins.
The indiscretion of any one of the wives ( the third ) begins to show the
cruel fate of those caught in the act.  The young fourth mistress being
educated, has a knack for curiosity, and walks the immense grounds, and
checks out all she can find.  And one day she finds in one corner a small
place which has been used as an execution room for those who get involved in
bad acting, and get caught.  On one fateful day, when the master is out, the
third wife goes out to have her affair with the house doctor, and the
disappointed fourth mistress, who has been  drinking to celebrate her
birthday, accidentally mentions the indiscretion of the third wife.  In the
next few days, she is hung in that small room, on the far end of the castle.
The fourth mistress goes to check out the room, where she saw them take the
third mistress, and when she comes out screaming, she is changed.  She is
now 'mad'.  And soon, the master has a new mistress, a fifth one, younger
still.
The red lanterns, the central focal point of the story, refer to the
lanterns used to light up the street where the mistress lives, leading up to
her house.  The master likes the lights on, so he can see.  It is also a
custom which goes back many years, used to make sure no enemies of the
master walk in unawares.  Now it has decayed into a  symbol of decadence and
attention which the master uses to get the other wives interested in his
company.  It doesn't work for the first mistress, she has become the wise
old lady, has borne him a son, now full grown.  Despite her wiseness, she
can not seem to control the young ladies and their fierce competitive
spirit, which is so detrimental to them all.  And every evening, in front of
all the mistresses, he announces publicly, in whose house he will spend the
night, whereupon the red lanterns will be immediately lit, much to the
chagrin of the competing losers.
The film's outcome is as brutal as the competitive nature of the three
mistresses, culminating in the loss of two in the end, one to death, and the
other to 'mad'-ness.  In between, is an array of images set up very neatly
 it is the tradition!!! ) which keeps the house alive, and its servants
busy, from the aspiring maid who would like to be one of the mistresses
 the master does visit her once in a while ) in contrast to the fourth
mistress who does not.  She is also accused of an indiscretion and punished
by the matriarch of the family when the master is away.  Her indiscretion
was a desire to be one of the  mistresses, and her fate is that she has to
serve as mistress to the one wife she does not like, the one who is the
exact opposite of her own desire.
The film spends a lot of time, walking out of plot traps, with its favorite
line.... it's the tradition -- and it seems they even try to create new
ones... but it only shows the length to which many feudal lords will go to
keep their families in control, and profit from their own needs and desires.

Author
J. Boyajian
     RAISE THE RED LANTERN is the latest film by the hot, young Chinese
director Zhang Yimou (RED SORGHUM, JU DOU).  It was nominated this year
for the Best Foreign Film Oscar, and like JU DOU, it's been banned in
its home country for being ideologically incorrect.  Quite frankly, I
was never able to figure out what it was about JU DOU that got the
Chinese government so worked up, but with this film it's a bit more
obvious.
     Gong Li (star of Yimou's previous films) plays Songlian, a young
woman in 1920s China who becomes the fourth wife/mistress of a rich man.
Each of the four women occupy their own wing of the Master's mansion,
with their own maids.  Whichever one the Master chooses to sleep with on
a given night has red lanterns lit and placed around her quarters and
gets to be at the top of the pecking order for as long as the Master
sleeps with her.  Not surprisingly, the four women struggle against each
other to be the apple of the Master's eye, and it's these power politics
that form the core of the story.
     On a higher level, though, Yimou's film is and allegory about the
Chinese political and social system.  Like that system, the Master's
house is run with a rigid structure of rules and customs that must be
obeyed at the risk of losing status (at best) or life (at worst).  The
Master himself is painted in rather vague terms: we never see him very
well, he's either in medium or distant shots and/or is turned partly
away from the camera, and his presence is felt more than shown.  The
most pointed aspect of the Master-as-government allegory is when one of
the wives is killed for adultery and another one accuses the household
servants of being murderers after she follows them and finds the body of
the murdered wife.  To her accusations, the Master says, "You saw
nothing," much like the way Beijing denies the Tiannamen massacre.
     Visually, the film is beautiful.  Yimou's composition is exquisite,
and moves the film at a very deliberate pace, so that it seems almost as
if each the film is intended to be a series of paintings.  I was
particularly taken with one sequence where Songlian meets the Young
Master (the son of the First Mistress) after following the sounds of his
flute-playing.  There is also a nice series of overlapping dissolves
just before the closing credits that is simple yet wonderfully done.
     (It should be noted that those with a feminist bent might find this
film hard to sit through.  Not because the film itself is sexist, but it
portrays a highly patriarchal and sexist society, and so the dialogue is
filled with various remarks about women's role in society as servants to
the man.)
     RAISE THE RED LANTERN is a major film from a man who is rapidly
becoming a major figure in world cinema.  I couldn't recommend it more
highly.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
RAISE THE RED LANTERN (DAHONG DENGLONG GAIGAO GUA) (1991) (China,Taiwan,
Hong Kong)  *** Directed by Zhang Yimou. Written by Ni Zhen from the 1989
novel by Su Tong łWives and Concubines.˛ Camera, Zhao Fei. Cast: Gong Li,
Ma Jingwu, He Caifei, Qan Quifen, Jin Shuyan. An Orion Classics release. In
Mandarin with subtitles. 125 minutes. Rated PG. Art Theater.
The first Chinese movie ever nominated for Best Foreign Film in last yearšs
Oscars, łRed Lantern˛ is the work of Zhang Yimou. He is a prize-winning
cinematographer who, within ten years, also established himself, along with
Chen Kaige, as the leading filmmaker of the Chinese New Wave called łThe
Fifth Generation˛of the mid-Eighties. Zhangšs łRed Sorghum˛ received the
Golden Bear at the Berlin Festival, his łJu Dou˛ the Golden Hugo, at the
Chicago Festival, and łRed Lantern˛ won five prizes in Venice, including
the Silver Lion.
łRaise the Red Lantern˛ is set in North China during the 1920s.  19-year
old Songlian (Gong Li, Zhangšs fetish actress), drops out of the University
after one semester and her fatheršs death.  Trapped by the lack of money
and the impossibility for a woman to become something, she can either marry
a poor man or become the fourth concubine of a wealthy one. She opts for
the latter.
The man is always anonymously referred to as The Master and the fact that
he is never photographed in close-up, underlines his psychological distance
from the women.  The non-family lives in a geometric compound where each of
the concubines has her own house around an inner courtyard.
The filmšs title refers to the red lanterns that, like the light outside a
studio where recording is in progress, are lit before the house in which
the Master chooses to spend the night. The mistress elected is prepared for
this by, among other ceremonies, a foot massage that presumably enhances
her libido.
The womenšs numbers correspond to their age. The First Mistress is an older
woman who is out of the sexual rivalry. The Second is relatively younger.
The Third is a pert, capricious, ex-opera singer.
Number Four, Songlian, is immediately immersed in intrigue. The łraison
dšetre˛ of the mistresses is solely the competition for the Masteršs
favors.  In opaque, devious ways, the women, who call each other łSister,˛
compete for this distinction with manoeuvres, schemes, temporary alliances
and realignments.  Songlianšs sullen, disappointed young maid, who had
hoped to become Number Four, adds to the tension.
There is a terrible emptiness in this household. Life is a void that,
paradoxically, has an epicenter. This is nightly sex , alluded to but never
seen graphically, but even so, sex without any hint of sensuality, feeling
or  pleasure. Everything revolves around  rank, status, the pecking order.
No one  really does anything. We see no books. We get minimal music, a
gramophone, some flutes, a game of mah-jong.  The women do eat regularly,
yet even the ordering of food is  another weapon yet in this war of
one-upmanship.
The claustrophobia is visually symbolized by the look of the place. The
courtyard is rectilinear and its geometry is repeatedly photographed from a
static, impassive point of view. The rooms have a strangely anonymous
lavishness which leads to depressing sterility, similar to the non-person
nature of the characters.
On the contrary, when the camera takes to the criss-crossing roofs of the
compound, it follows their sinuous, bisecting lines, in a way that
corresponds to the convoluted game that the łsisters˛ plot and play, a game
that leads to tragedy.
The moviešs deliberate pace and color coding oddly stress its implacable
łNo Exit˛ theme. The feudal Masteršs mates are also his inmates, locked up
in a stockade of gilded cages, and prisoners too of their own narrow,
inescapable mentality.
In passing, the film shows the touching Chinese respect for education.
Songlianšs single semester at the University gives her prestige. Says one
mistress to guests: łShe was a University student, I was just an opera
singer.˛ Another łsister˛ asks Songlian : łPlease cut my hair.˛ łBut I have
never done it.˛ łYou went to the University, youšll do it better.˛
łRaise the Red Lantern˛ takes place well before China raised the Red flag.
The Revolution, however, replaced one kind of tyranny with another. This
explains why the movie, like Zhangšs earlier łJu Dou,˛ (also about the
oppression of women), is a łpictura non grata,˛ unreleased in China.
It was made with devious, face-saving financing from Taiwan (via Hong
Kong), to a large degree thanks to Hou Hsiao-Hsien, Taiwanšs premier film
director. He is listed in the credits as executive producer and may well
have influenced the filmšs esthetics.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel
