Title
Review for Fools Rush In (1997)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Somewhere along the line, the makers of romantic comedies stopped
caring about whether their lead characters had any business being
together.  Perhaps in response to the complex ritual late-20th-century
courtship has become, audiences began to embrace film romances which had
as much to do with sorcery as chemistry -- SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE, FOUR
WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL -- and film-makers have been only too happy to
provide more of the same.  The fairy tale, a perfectly enjoyable
expression of our dreams, is no longer simply a supplement to realistic
love in the movies; it practically has replaced it entirely.  FOOLS RUSH
IN is the next logical step in the transformation of screen romance into a
celebration of fate.  Where SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE asked you to root for a
couple who didn't meet until the final scene, FOOLS RUSH IN asks you to
root for a couple after you have spent over 100 minutes observing in grim
detail that they have absolutely nothing in common.
     Matthew Perry stars as Alex Whitman, a field representative for a
chain of nightclubs based in New York City.  Alex is supervising the
construction of a new location in Las Vegas when he meets Isabel Fuentes
(Salma Hayek), an aspiring photographer with a deep belief in destiny, in
a local bar.  The two share a one-night stand, but Isabel ducks out the
next morning before Alex wakes up.  Their destiny seems to be never to
meet again, until Isabel shows up three months later at Alex's door with a
startling revelation:  she is pregnant, and Alex is the father.  Though
Isabel is willing to keep and raise the baby on her own, Alex becomes
convinced that they should get married immediately.  That is what they do
at a Vegas chapel, but the honeymoon is extremely short-lived.  As the
newlyweds actually get to know each other, they find a host of obstacles
in the way, perhaps more than their instant family can withstand.
     Perhaps more than the audience can withstand, as well.  FOOLS RUSH IN
scripter Katherine Reback doesn't provide one really interesting conflict
between Alex and Isabel -- she provides a dozen moderately diverting
conflicts, with characters who are on screen barely long enough for you to
remember their names.  The couple quarrels over whether they will live in
New York or Las Vegas; they disagree over a religion for the baby.
Isabel's police officer ex-boyfriend (Carlos Gomez) scowls at Alex and
helps get him drunk on tequila; Alex's sort-of-ex-girlfriend (Suzanne
Snyder) meddles by calling Alex's parents.  Both sets of parents fret over
the hasty marriage; Alex frets over juggling career and family.  There is
so much quarreling and scowling and meddling and fretting going on from so
many different directions that you might find yourself wondering if you
have forgotten how perfect they are supposed to be for each other.
     Don't worry, you haven't forgotten.  All evidence suggests that the
only thing right in the relationship between Alex and Isabel is really
great sex, and I am not discounting the value of really great sex when I
say that it's not nearly enough.  FOOLS RUSH IN belongs to that class of
romantic comedies which demands that you accept the central pairing as
celestially foretold, and curse you for a fuddy-duddy with no sense of
romance if you object, as John Cleese once did in a classic "Cheers"
episode, that the only thing opposites attract is divorce.  The essential
change in Alex's character turns out to be that he "gets religion"
regarding fate, seeing signs everywhere reminding him of Isabel after the
two separate.  The happy ending doesn't seem to recognize that these
people need some serious counseling; apparently the Psychic Friends
Network will suffice.
     What makes FOOLS RUSH IN all the more frustrating is that there are
plenty of moments when it is tremendously entertaining.  You don't need to
be a fan of "Friends" to appreciate Perry, who can fire darts of sarcasm
and do reaction takes with the best of them.  He can be both funny and
warm, as he is in an appealing sequence at a Fuentes family gathering, and
it is easy to feel sympathetic towards Alex despite his near-sighted
careerism.  Salma Hayek is also quite good, conveying conflicted emotions
and frustration, and there is certainly heat between Perry and Hayek
(although, let's face it, Hayek could generate heat in a room full of
asbestos).  But FOOLS RUSH IN needs more than heat.  It needs a heart, a
sense of connection which comes from friendship as much as fantasy.  In a
film which throws so many problems and situations at the screen that
nothing sticks together, it is ironic that the only thing which does stick
together -- Alex and Isabel -- probably shouldn't.

Author
Ben Hoffman
This could have been just another lightweight bit of
romantic fluff.  Instead, the story has much more going for
it than most films of that genre and, aided by some fine
acting, turns this into a very entertaining romantic comedy.
Alex (Matthew Perry) is a nice-looking young executive type.
He meets up with Isabel (Salma Hayek) a stunningly beautiful
yet wholesome-looking Hispanic woman from Mexico and, after
a one night stand, Alex awakes to find Isabel has left him
without a word or forwarding address.    That is where their
relationship would have ended except that three months
later, Isabel shows up at Alex's place to inform him that he
is the father of the baby she has been carrying.
Isabel is a great believer in Fate.  Alex is a believer in
"doing the right thing."    Based on these two beliefs,
despite their backgrounds being very far apart (Alex is a
WASP and Isabel is a Catholic of Mexican heritage), there is
no question but that they must get married.    There are the
de rigueur meetings of each other's parents and family.  The
WASPs are unhappy (John Bennett Perry . . . Matthew's
real-life father and Jill Clayburgh as the mother).  On the
Hispanic side, there is Isabel's  very protective  father
(Tomas Milian) who still is angry that the U.S. confiscated
Mexican territory, and the mother (Anne Betancourt)  AND
Isabel's five brothers who are suspicious of Alex's
intentions. Also there is the unhappy policeman Chuy (Carlos
Gomez) who was once Isabel's fiance.
As in all romantic comedies, there is the boy meets girl,
boy loses girl, boy gets girl back for the inevitable happy
ending.   Here it is done with humor and charm and leaves
you with a nice feeling, wishing the adorable screen's
couple will live happily ever after.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Fools Rush In (1997) **1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Matthew Perry, Salma Hayek,
Jon Tenney, Siobhan Fallon, Jill Clayburgh. Directed by: Andy Tennant.
Running Time: 107 minutes.
An odd attempt to make a romantic comedy based upon a one night stand.
Sucessful businessman Perry is assigned to a project in Las Vegas. One
night, while waiting in line to use the bathroom at a mexican restuarant, he
meets Salma Hayek (who by the way is one of the most beautiful actresses
working today) and the two end up in bed together that night. I guess
nothing says lovin' like a toilet in a greasy taco joint.
Anyway, cut to three months later. Hayek pops up at Perry's house to tell
him that she's pregnant. A quick series of comic misadventures later and the
two are married. Now here's where the film lost it's comedic potential, even
though it fully understood that potential, gave it a shot, and then
immediately threw it aside. After they get married, Hayek starts to get on
Perry's nerves, redecorating his home in a complete mexican motif for
example.
Now had the film stayed true to itself, having Perry realize that 1) he was
a fool, and 2) he rushed into the situation (as the film's very title
suggests) therefore exploiting every potential comedic moment possible,
"Fools Rush In" could have been a hilarious movie. Instead it just gets
sickeningly sappy, dropping the comedy altogether in favor of attempted
romantic scenes which aren't believable for a moment. The cast does it's
best though, with Jon Tenney as Perry's best friend getting many of the
film's best lines, and Hayek plays just about the most attractive pregnant
woman I've ever seen. [PG-13]
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     FOOLS RUSH IN is a romantic comedy about the clash of the Mexican
and Anglo cultures.  Director Andy Tennant (IT TAKES TWO and THE AMY
FISHER STORY) has two attractive, young leads, Salma Hayek and Matthew
L. Perry with whom to work.  The basic ingredients are present, but it
takes more than good looks to make a love story and more than tacky
sets to create a comedy.  Although after seeing it you may think the
title FOOLS RUSH IN refers to the audience's entrance, it actually
refers to two people getting married quickly without thinking through
the consequences.
     Perry plays Alex Whitman.  Poor Alex has a flock of miniskirted
lasses who want to take him to bed.  Alex's buddy and coworker Jeff
(Jon Tenney) has already been divorced, and he preaches the advantages
of a single life to Alex.  Alex is in charge of nightclub construction
projects, and his boss has given Jeff and him a big club to build in
Las Vegas.  Although he had hoped for the Tokyo assignment, he leaves
his beloved Manhattan for Vegas.
     On one of his first nights in Vegas, he meets Isabel Fuentes
(Hayek) in a line for the restroom.  With typical 90's movie morals,
the next scene has them waking up in his bed the following morning.  We
have a quick cut to three months later, and one-night-stand Isabel is
back to see Alex.  She tells him she is pregnant.  He then runs through
the usual excuse that it was only one night and other reasons why what
has happened, couldn't.  When she tells him she knows what she has to
do, he is relieved.  "I always believe in a woman's right to choose,"
he righteously reassures her.  "That's good", she says, "because I
choose to keep the baby."  He is reduced to an, "Oh."
     Soon we have the obligatory scene where she takes him to meet her
parents.  "Whatever you do, don't tell them I picked you up outside a
restroom," she admonishes him.  There is never any genuine chemistry
between the leads, and the movie goes further downhill when they get to
her parent's house.
     The meeting setup is a cornucopia of cliches.  The house is
decorated with the tackiest collection of Mexican artifacts I have ever
seen in a film.  There is enough food to feed an army.  There are loud
Mexican folk singers who stop singing when they arrive.  Worst of all
is the pseudo-anger the men express against the gringo.  If it were
either genuine or if they have tried for parody, it might have worked,
but as delivered, the jokes fell like stones.  "They're great," Alex
says when he and Isabel leave.  "I had no idea that families talked at
dinner."
     He instantly decides that her lifestyle is so wonderful that he
wants to get married.  They do this in a tacky wedding chapel complete
with an Elvis impersonator.
     The script by Katherine Reback relies on ideas that are retreads.
A typical scene finds Alex being taken on a trip to go shooting with
the men of his new family.  After many ominous glares at him as they
all ride in the back of a truck, they arrive in the desert.  Once
there, Alex finds himself standing in a colony of rattlesnakes.  The
men tell him to hold still as they start shooting their rifles at his
feet.  This causes him to dance and then fall into a cactus.  When he
gets back to his house drunk, he pours the tequila on the rug and licks
it up with his tongue.  My reaction to this scene and, indeed to most
of the film was to stare in disbelief.
     The picture does have two unique features.  It is the first film
that I can remember in which the characters in Vegas are smart enough
to leave that most plastic of cities and take a day trip to one of the
great natural wonders of the world, the Grand Canyon.  Consistent with
the quality of the rest of the picture, however, it is also the first
film that manages to make the Grand Canyon look unimpressive and dull.
They accomplish this feat by overexposing the image and by rushing the
shooting and not waiting for the proper natural light.  The filming of
the Grand Canyon sequence yields another possible interpretation of the
film's title.
     FOOLS RUSH IN runs about an hour and a half.  It is rated PG-13
for some profanity and for sexual situations.  The show would be fine
for kids 10 and up.  I found little fresh or funny material in the
show, so thumbs down from me.  I give it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Chad Polenz
** (out of 4 = fair)
1997, PG-13, 108 minutes [1 hour, 48 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Matthew Perry (Alex), Selma Hayek (Isabel), Jon Tenney (Jeff),
written by Katherine Reback, Joan Taylor, produced by Doug Draizin, directed
by Andy Tennant.
As good as Hollywood is at making movies and television programs, when they
combine the two it never works. "Fools Rush In" is a mediocre romantic comedy
that acts like a 2-hour sitcom, complete with predictable jokes, zany
overacting, and gags that don't work. 
Matthew Perry stars as Alex Whitman, an architect from New York who is
transferred to Las Vegas for a "temporary" project. I think Perry is the
funniest cast member on "Friends" but this film proves he is only capable of
playing one character - young yuppie slackers who spew forth wisecracks and
one-liners at every given opportunity. Sometimes characters like these can be
funny, but Perry's performance is so dry and the script is so shallow we
never get a sense of his character.
And then there is Selma Hayek as Isabel Fuentes, a sexy Mexican-American
straight of the stereotype vaults. She claims to be a devout Catholic but is
quite a hypocrite; one minute she is swimming in sin (premarital sex,
drinking, etc), and the next she is wrapped in charity and tradition (going
to church, confession, family gatherings). She believes fate controls every
action of life, and when she meets Alex, she says destiny brought them
together and it appears as if she is about to marry him. Justification for
love through fate is one of the worst cop-outs, films like this use it to
make up for lack of chemistry.
Alex and Isabel have a one-night stand only to meet three months later and
find out she's pregnant with his child. Then there is the awkward moment, the
fighting, the chase scene, and finally the realization they're perfect for
each other. If this wasn't predictable enough, there is even a
fish-out-of-water scene as Isabel drags Alex to her weekly family gathering,
saying he is her boyfriend of two months (which makes no sense because if she
sees her family every week, wouldn't the boyfriend issue have come up
already?).
For some strange reason the two decide they are in love and get married at a
typical Vegas chapel, and now they can finally be together and get to know
each other. This idea of a reverse romance story is pretty creative, but the
film doesn't know how to use it in any original manner at all.
The final act really lost me, it makes the mistake (nearly all romantic
comedies make) of splitting the lovers up and concentrating more on drama
than comedy. But these two are so incompatible, so selfish, and so shallow,
it's hard to care if they make up or not. Of course we get the
Cinderella-type ending and everything's just peachy by the closing credits.
"Fools Rush In" seems like a date movie for the sake of making a date movie,
and therefore all the jokes and plot devices are plugged in. It had a lot of
good ideas, but it's just too much of a drawn out sit-com to be taken
seriously. 
(2/28/97) (6/13/97) [see also: "Singles"]
please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Walter Frith
     I don't care how many times a certain premise has been exploited in
Hollywood because there are some stories that find a way to reach you by just
being well made films. 'Fools Rush In' isn't necessarily well made in a lot
of areas but it is a heartfelt romantic adventure with the right doses of
comedy and drama mixed together.
     Matthew Perry and Salma Hayek are two strangers from wildly different
backgrounds who have a one night stand and she shows up three months later to
tell him that she's pregnant!  After rushing into marriage a lot of things
such as religion, living arrangements and dealing with the in-laws are to be
sorted out as things begin to unfold in the life of this young couple who
have many hurdles to overcome.
     I laughed in all the right places and felt sentimental at other times
and this is a movie that remains faithful to its central characterizations
but does fail to develop its supporting players who could have added a lot of
zest to the story.  
     One of the problems I encountered with 'Fools Rush In' was the tempo
with which the story unfolded.  It basically tells you everything up front in
the first half hour, makes its point but then seems to get lazy before
redeeming itself later on.  It is an uneven and slightly aloof movie which is
pleasant enough and is unquestionably a great date movie.  It's one of those
movies that in many ways has to be accepted for what it is because extreme
criticism of a good natured film can be pushing the boundaries of escapism
and 'Fools Rush In' is acceptable escapism.

Author
Dan Kim
Doug Draizin and Anna Marie Davis, co-producers of "Fools Rush In"
manage to put together a spirited and beguiling romantic comedy based
on a true story; apparently their own.
Whether their meeting happened exactly as the movie shows is probably
the least of the concerns of the average moviegoer, who probably won't
even know this little tidbit, which, incidentally might serve them well
in the next movie trivia pursuit they partake in. What they will be
aware of is the chemistry between the two leads, as well as the lively
banter between their best friends, and the overall sweetness and fluid
direction of "Fools."
"Friends" fanatic will immediately recognize Alex Whitman as Matthew
Perry, though the more devout Perry fan will no doubt see him as
"Chandler Bing" on on the big screen. That's not a bad thing, since He
often has the funniest moments in the sit-com. Perry's character is
little more than Chandler on the big screen but the antics and dry
sarcasm that make him the most popular male on the TV show works well
in this movie. He is well supported by the sensual Salma Hayek, whose
presence bellies her otherwise petite frame (she's 5'2").
The fun starts in New York where we're introduced to a career-driven
Whitman, who works for a NY-based night club construction firm, who
ends up with a gig to oversee construction of a ritzy night club right
on the Vegas Strip. The viewer gets an inital taste of his quick wit
which is the source of much of the entertainment throughout the movie.
It's this style of verbal humor that allows Perry to pull off seemingly
innocuous lines into amusing zingers. The film is riddled with lines
like "gee that sounded so much prettier in Spanish." Lines that would
sound otherwise ordinary with any other actor.
During his first few nights in Vegas, while standing in line for a
unisex bathroom is where he comes across the spunky Isabel Fuentes, a
beautiful photographer of Mexican decent. After their initial
encounter, the director cuts immediately to the morning after of their
one-night stand where we see her wake up next to a dozing Alex and gets
that all-too-familiar "Oh my God" look.
Therein lies the turning point. Three months later, she shows up and
tells Alex she's pregnant, with his child. We're treated to a short yet
amusing spiel from Alex about a condom's reason for being. Distraught,
she leaves, he chases her wanting to help and ends up that same evening
eating at her parent's place for a family dinner. Apparently her idea
of "family" involves cousins, aunts, uncle and probably the Mormon
Tabernacle Choir. Alex on the other hand, visits his parents only
during "holidays and stuff."
Alex manages to enjoy himself immensely, so much so that he decides he
and Isabelle should get married. The proposal itself is a riot, with
him proclaiming "you're everything I never knew I always wanted." Both
poignant and hilarious, even Isabelle displays amusement, albeit a
slight bewildered smile. In typical Vegas fashion, they get married in
a chapel with Elvis as a witness.
More hilarity ensues when Alex's parents (played by Jill Clayburgh and
John Bennet Perry, Matthew's real  father) decide to make a surprise
visit. Being the quintessential New York WASP-ish type, they initially
mistake Isabel for a housekeeper. They do find out and she's actually a
wife, and agree to a parent meeting. The cultural difference issues
that seem to be so prevalent throughout the movie is shown here with a
deft touch by Tennant, the most entertaining being the back and forth
between the two fathers.
As with most marriages there will be conflicts, the fights and make-ups
are also done in ways that are easily believable. And while all this is
going on, we're treated to a bit of insight about the two leads from
the goings on around  them. Whether it's Alex's job, old crushes,
construction difficulties, jealous ex-boyfriends, or being surrounded
by snakes in the desert. Jon Tenney also provides some moments of humor
as Alex's libidinous, recently divorced best friend.
"Fools Rush In" is clearly blessed by the expert casting of the
romantic duo. You can almost feel the chemistry between Perry and Hayek
throughout the entire movie. Their acting and charm is what makes the
entire movie seem so real. Their relationship is well paced and
developed in a manner that is plausible considering their near-shotgun
wedding. Both are shown as real people having a real depth and
substance.
Tennant deserves a bit of the credit for his skilled direction. We're
treated to quite a few musical montages, as well several sweeping views
of Vegas, the Hoover Dam, and especially stunning scenes of the desert.
He does an especially good job of letting Hayek radiate through the
lens. The slow-motion shots of Isabel looking lovingly at Alex is
subtle yet but go so far in showing Hayek's sensuality. You can truly
read what's on her mind just by looking at her face.
"Fools" is an immensely enjoyable film, perfect for those romantic
evenings with a significant other. Its Valentine's Day release earlier
this year could not have been more perfect. Few romantic comedies
contain such a well-blended combination of humor, passion, and
believability. Check it out.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Matthew Perry, Salma Hayek, Jon Tenney. Screenplay: Katherine
Reback. Producer: Doug Draizin. Director: Andy Tennant.
Condoms must have a success rate of about 99.95%. So when a gifted
architect (Perry) temporarily moves to Vegas, and meets an out of sorts
photographer (Hayek), whilst queuing to use the toilet, sparks fly.
Their night of intense passion results in a bundle of joy carrying the
same probability of 0.05%. This leaves us with the basic premise of our
story - the unwed mother, the confused father, and the unborn child.
"Away in a manger, no crib for a bed...."
Fools rush into thunderstorms carrying golf sticks, and fools also rush
into love. The question here is did he marry her because of the baby, or
did he marry her because of love? Our Court Jester answer is - 'What's
Love got to do with it?'  That's right, we're talking about fools aren't
we? Sure thing.
The truth of the matter is this movie really shouldn't have happened.
What is Matthew Perry of 'Friends' fame doing in a movie about fools? Of
course, he's decided to join the rest of his 'Friends' co-stars in their
fleeting fiasco with movie stardom. Now who were they? Oh yes, one ended
up playing the sidekick to a chimp, another ended up in bed with the
dead man's mother, and the third was called either Romy or Michelle. I
begin to see the trend - join the long line of make fun of me movies.
In view that this movie is termed a romantic comedy, a few comments must
be mad to clarify that it is not all that romantic or all that funny. It
is difficult to laugh or feel warm and fuzzy, when within the first half
hour of the film, the couple are in bed, with child and married in the
eyes of 'Elvis'. This is soon followed by the all too familiar
post-marriage problems. Matthew Perry has great difficulty breaking out
of stereotypic nice guy 'Friends' persona, and Hayek always plays here
sultry women roles with enough spice to set the Mexican dip on fire.
Still this movie does point out some salient issues concerning the
difficulties of inter-racial marriage, unsympathetic parents, and
overprotective brothers. Those first few months after you just get
married can be the most happy and also the most difficult -  when you
are still getting use to your partner's pace, and needing to find the
middle ground on which the both of you agree. This is the major problem
that these fools (Perry\Hayek) face when they rush into marriage - when
push comes to shove, they only shove each other harder.
Fool Feel Scale:
0% Jack of Hearts / *HUMPTY DUMPTY* / Little Miss Muffett 100%
