Title
Review for Snake Eyes (1998)
Number of Reviews
31

Author
Michael Dequina
_Snake_Eyes_ is less a description of the film it titles than the manner
in which director Brian DePalma wields his camera--like a serpent,
slithering its way through the halls and over the walls of an Atlantic City
casino.   The title takes its cue from the differences in people's visual
perception from what really happens, and DePalma runs with the idea.  A
seamless 20-minute shot opens the film, following cop Rick Santoro (Nicolas
Cage) through the labyrinthian walkways of the casino's arena before and
during a championship boxing match.  Later, there's a flashback where a
subjective, point-of-view camera suddenly becomes objective without a
jarring break.  That's just one in a series of instances where DePalma uses
a subjective camera to enable the audience to see through characters' eyes,
which is a clever gimmick when assuming the fuzzy perspective of a woman
who has lost her glasses.  Then there's the use of a split screen to
document simultaneous action, a trick DePalma used to great effect in
_Dressed_to_Kill_.
I tend to meet a director's decision to juice up the visuals with a raised
eyebrow, for it generally signifies that he or she is trying to distract
the audience from a problematic script.  And that is certainly the case
with _Snake_Eyes_, a pro forma conspiracy whodunit written by David Koepp
from a story he devised with DePalma.  The U.S. Secretary of Defense is
assassinated during a boxing match, and out to solve the crime is Santoro,
along with best friend Kevin Dunne (Gary Sinise, in a role originally
pegged for Will Smith), a Navy commander who was in charge of security.
Somehow figuring into the mystery is a mysterious blonde-wigged woman
(Carla Gugino) who took a seat in front of the Secretary seconds before the
shooting and caught a bullet herself.
DePalma guides the audience through overlapping flashbacks and a flurry of
plot points with a rapidly-paced yet clear-eyed finesse.  But craftsmanship
is all anyone will get a sense of, from the direction to the strong acting
by Sinise and especially Cage, who adds another oddball characterization to
his resume with the fast-talking, Hawaiian shirt-wearing, morally
questionable Santoro.  The twists are thoroughly predictable, but even if
any tension and suspense were generated, it would all be squandered by the
film's contrived fizzle of an anticlimax, which is not only disappointing
but makes little sense.
For all its metaphoric meanings, the title _Snake_Eyes_ is derived from a
line of dialogue.  One character tells another, "You have nothing.  Snake
eyes."  With his bottomless bag of stylish visual tricks, DePalma does have
"something" to offer in _Snake_Eyes_, but, ironically, it is that
"something" that points up just how much "nothing" lies underneath.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Brian De Palma's SNAKE EYES stars Nicolas Cage's evil twin, who
confusingly uses the same stage name as his talented brother.  Like a
foreign tourist who screams his lines in English to ensure that he will be
understood, Cage yells with the ferocity of a man with a bad case of
caffeine overload.
     De Palma, whose last great film, THE UNTOUCHABLES, was crafted over a
decade ago seems to have lost his magic.  In SNAKE EYES, he manages to
elicit some of the worst performances possible out of a skilled cast.  Only
Gary Sinise rises slightly above the hackneyed material.  The rest of the
actors become caricatures in this by-the-numbers thriller.
     Ryuichi Sakamoto's atmospheric and melodramatic music dominates almost
every scene.  Heavy on the long violin notes, its rhythm is punctuated by
thunder.  (The script by De Palma and LOST WORLD's David Koepp sets the
action during a hurricane in an attempt to pump up the adrenaline level and
the noise.  Only the latter is achieved.)
     Cage plays Rick Santoro, a corrupt Atlantic City cop who shakes down
criminals to get betting money.  The movie takes place over a single
evening when a world championship fight is being held.  With a flashy, bad
wardrobe and a gold cell phone, Rick is an obnoxious cop who doesn't know
when to shut up.  Spouting cliched and ridiculous dialog, he screams such
lines as, "I was made for the sewer, Baby!"  Actually the line is more
apropos for the movie as a whole.
     Sinise plays Kevin Dunne, a naval officer who is in charge of the
security for the Secretary of the Navy, who has come to watch the fight. 
But most people in the film are not who they seem to be, and the thin
script makes all of them easy to guess.
     The plot, which is told in endless flashbacks, concerns the
assassination of the secretary through a scheme set up by some malevolent
businessmen  that adjective is, of course, redundant in Hollywood
thrillers.  The flashbacks become repetitious with the same scene shown
again and again, sometimes from a different perspective and sometimes not. 
Although a Brian De Palma film requires a certain amount of gratuitous
violence, this one is remarkably tame for the man who became famous when he
made CARRIE.
     The movie's outline has some promise, but the movie itself is leaden. 
The film takes itself all too seriously.  At best, it is a 1940s-style B
movie.  A little humor would have helped the script some, but a complete
rewrite would have been better.  And, although I hate to say it, a
different director would have been the biggest improvement.
     SNAKE EYES runs 1:39.  It is rated R for violence and would be
acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Brian De Palma will never be a truly great director. He's had over 20
years to prove himself and while some of his films are fluidly filmed
and make for very interesting entertainment, the majority of his films
are mediocre at best.  De Palma likes to pay tribute to Alfred Hitchcock
every time he sets out to make a film and likes to throw in as many
macabre scenes as the script will allow.  De Palma's use of repetition
to make a point is often tedious and his use of slow motion is very
tiresome at times.  I loved 1987's 'The Untouchables' more for Sean
Connery's Oscar winning performance and David Mamet's tense and
classical script and while the baby carriage scene on the train station
stairs worked to perfection, De Palma should have quit while he was
ahead because he almost ruined the film by stretching out the rooftop
climax scene beyond belief.  How many times can you play a swelling
music score and zoom in slowly on someone's eyes?  1976's 'Carrie' is a
good film and has Oscar nominated performances from Sissy Spacek and
Piper Laurie but De Palma stretches out the scene at the prom after
Carrie is crowned prom queen just a bit too long before the famous
soaking in pig's blood.  De Palma ruined 1983's 'Scarface' by allowing
every second word in the film to be f***.  De Palma's masterpiece (a
term used loosely in his case) is 1980's 'Dressed to Kill'.  That film
had a truly eerie tone and genuine chills and despite some large plot
holes, 1981's 'Blow Out' is a pretty good runner-up to 'Dressed to
Kill'.
In 'Snake Eyes' Nicolas Cage is Rick Santoro, a mildly corrupt Atlantic
City police officer attending a much hyped boxing match which is being
filmed for television's pay per view format.  The U.S. secretary of
defence is in attendance at the fight and is guarded by standard secret
service protection and is accompanied by Major Kevin Dunne (Gary Sinese)
who also acts as a bodyguard.  Distracted at the fight by a beautiful
tart in a red dress, Sinese leaves his post and the secretary is shot
and later dies in the hospital.  The shooting causes pandemonium and the
14,000 people at the event are sealed in as the building is ordered
shut.  Central to the plot and a key player in the whole scenario is a
nearsighted young woman named Julia Costello (Carla Gugino) who tries to
flee the building after the assassination for a different reason than
everyone else.
'Snake Eyes', if anything, makes one important point.  In the age of
electronic media, a political assassination cannot be concealed in a
public place.  Someone is bound to pick it up.  No more public
executions like the conspiracy (don't write me back saying there wasn't
a conspiracy because I'll laugh in your face and you'll get a nasty
response) that killed JFK.  The perpetrators of that crime would be
caught today if they tried that in public, either on film or videotape.
I admire the film for that but De Palma's latest attempt at suspense is
disappointing because the solution to the film is revealed too early and
De Palma fails to find any sub text to make the second half as good as
the first.  The film falls apart after about 45 minutes and never picks
itself back up.
Also, at a running time of only 98 minutes, the film resolves itself too
quickly without a sense of academic depth.  I often complain that films
are too long but this one is too short.  This is the kind of film that
needs to be over two hours in length but only if the set and plot points
can be expanded and they are not.  'Snake Eyes' was filmed largely in
Montreal, Quebec, Canada and is set inside the boxing arena for 99% of
its running time.  Some necessary scenes were actually filmed in
Atlantic City, New Jersey and oddly enough, another film, 1981's
'Atlantic City' with Burt Lancaster and Susan Sarandon combined Montreal
and Atlantic City to tell its story in the famous U.S. city of the
famous boardwalk.
Nicolas Cage is excellent in 'Snake Eyes' and Gary Sinese is a good
character but a predictable one and doesn't take full advantage of the
darker sides in his character's personality.  The female characters are
a throw away as they often are in De Palma's films and if Brian De Palma
could use actors and story lines the same way he uses his camera, he
might have an Oscar or two in his collection but for all the right
reasons, De Palma has never even once been nominated for the Academy
Award but he has been nominated 5 times for the Razzie award for the
worst that the film industry has to offer.  His peers are as unforgiving
as his critics.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
David Sunga
Ingredients: Hurricane, assasination, conspiracy, honest cop. 
Starring: Nicolas Cage, Gary Sinise, Carla Gugino
Synopsis: 
A boxing heavyweight title fight is held in a stadium in Atlantic City,
NJ as hurricane winds and rain rage outside. The fight is attended by
the US Secretary of Defense and his entourage of Navy men and industrial
associates. The Secretary of Defense has heard rumors of corruption, and
intends to meet a secret contact who claims to have information, but he
is assassinated by a sniper during the title fight, leaving 15,000
people to be detained as police witnesses during the tropical storm.
The policeman in charge of the overall investigation is Rick Santoro
(Nicholas Cage), a flamboyant cop of dubious morality who wears loud
clothes, gambles incessantly, and reaches for his cellular telephone
more often than a bookie or agent. Santoro may be corrupt and
well-connected, but he's also a competent investigator, and soon smells
a murderous conspiracy. Trouble is, all the suspects keep winding up
dead, until only one is finally left, and the final confrontation
begins.
Opinion:
Nicholas Cage fans will enjoy this movie, because Cage does a masterful,
if slightly over-the-top job of playing the intriguing main character,
Officer Santoro. In fact, Cage bails this movie out.
With a director like Brian De Palma you know automatically that the
movie's cinematography will be tight, that the movie will not be boring,
and that it will feature neat visual angles and suspense. That's
probably why the setting is a hurricane: so we can have lots of
lightning flashes and suspenseful shadows, De Palma style.
But the weak script of Snake Eyes creates a problem: basically the story
is too predictable to be a whodunit since we can all guess who the bad
guy is after only two seconds. Given a weak and somewhat unbelievable
story line, how do you prevent boredom and revive suspense without
resorting to ridiculous special effects, action stunts, and extraneous
car chases?
SNAKE EYES solves the problem by shifting its focus from whodunit to
character sketch. For example, instead of the big question being, "Who's
the murderer?" the movie focuses heavily on Cage's intriguing character,
and then pops the question, "How will poor Nicholas Cage react when he
finds the murderer's identity?" And so we sit through the movie as Cage
does his investigations all the way until the final confrontation, just
to see how poor Cage reacts. This new focus - - with emotional suspense
substituting for action-based suspense - - combined with strong acting
and snappy dialogue keeps us sufficiently hooked. Somewhat predictable
and fakey, Snake Eyes nevertheless entertains. 
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Nicolas Cage, Gary Sinise, Kevin Dunn, Carla Gugino, Luis Guzman,
John Heard, Stan Shaw
Director: Brian De Palma
Screenplay: David Koepp
Cinematography: Stephen H. Burum
Australian theatrical release date: October 1 1998
Snake Eyes is a perfect example of a cinematic roller coaster: the film
rises to an all time, thrilling high and then plummets right down into
dull and monotonous scenarios.   In fact, the only thing that director
Brian De Palma proves with this rather tame who done it is that he is a
better scene maker than he is a filmmaker.  Make no mistake - the first
half-hour or so of Snake Eyes is dynamite cinema.  And most of the rest
is absolute trash.
Nicholas Cage, one the screens most pleasing performers, and Gary
Sinise, a man who often brings third dimensions into 2D characters,
should have been together on screen a long time ago. It came as a
massive disappointment to me that these two fine actors - who share
between them such titles as The Rock, Face/Off, Forrest Gump and
Ransom - have chosen such a bumpy and inconsistent vehicle for their
first joint effort.
Cage is Rick Santoro, a gleeful American cop whose morals are easily
corrupted at the sight of dollar bills.  At a heavyweight championship
fight, Santoro is having a night off, and his best friend Naval
Commander Kevin Dunne (Sinise) is guarding the US Secretary of Defense.
Shots are fired from somewhere in the stadium - seconds after one of the
boxers gets knocked out - and Dunne is off chasing a suspicious red
head.  Another mysterious woman is at the scene, and gets showed by the
blood of the now shot Secretary.
De Palma begins the film with a lengthy sweeping shot of the stadium;
the cameras following Santoro everywhere as he moves around the venue.
Cinematographer Stephen Burum captures the atmosphere of the sports
arena perfectly, and De Palma never lets the excitement drop before
introducing the mystery.  And what a disappointing mystery it is, since
the screenwriters - De Palma and David Koepp (Jurassic Park, Men in
Black) - haven't written the film smartly enough to maintain a high
amount of tension, but smartly enough to add an occasional glimpse of
tension.  It's all pretty frustrating to watch, since Snake Eyes
constantly changes its pace and style; at one time being a heart-pumping
thriller and another a bland and predictable "thriller".
Perhaps the most daunting of all flaws in this film is its unsatisfying
and apathetic ending; where something as stupid as a change in weather
determines the fate of one particular character. Another commits
suicide, having spent the entire duration as a potentially interesting
character but still seems distanced from the audience.
If people are going to insist on continuing to compare Brian De Palma to
the late and great Alfred Hitchcock, they must remember that it takes a
great director to build a genuinely suspenseful, thrilling and exciting
scenario.  To keep that up for the entire film - now that would be
something special.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
Curtis Edmonds
If Snake Eyes were a dog, you'd put it to sleep.  If it was a couch,
you'd put it out on the sidewalk, where it would sit for a week.  If it
were your child, you'd be reading military school catalogs.  If it were
a ship -- no, it wouldn't be the Titanic, that would imply glamor and
tragedy -- it would be the Exxon Valdez.
(Personal side note:  I saw this movie on the road during a Houston
business trip.  For whatever reason, my hotel's cable system wasn't
showing the Astros-Braves game, which featured a Randy Johnson-Greg
Maddux matchup.  This forced me to pay full price for Snake Eyes instead
of watching a perfectly good baseball game for free -- so the invective,
deserved as it is, should be seen in that perspective.)
Snake Eyes is supposed to be a mystery movie, and good mystery movies
are supposed to leave you asking yourself questions on the way out of
theater.  Snake Eyes is not a good mystery movie, but I had some
questions:  Where's the manager, and how do I get a re-admit pass?  If I
fall asleep on the drive home and wreck my rent-a-car, can I sue Brian
De Palma?  Is it too late for the Academy to revoke Nicolas Cage's
Oscar?  Will someone please (I'm begging you) give Gary Sinise a role
worthy of his talents?  And how, exactly does Cage end up wearing the
exact same shirt and tie as Sinise does?
The first and most glaringly wrong thing with Snake Eyes is the
trailer.  If you've seen the trailer without seeing the movie, consider
yourself fortunate.  The trailer is a work of sheer genius.  It manages
to convey everything worthy of the movie -- the noteworthy Steadicam
work, the exuberance of Cage's performance as a thoroughly corrupt
Atlantic City policeman, the essential elements of the marginal plot.
The expert craftsman who pieced together a fairly good trailer out of
snippets of a wretched movie deserves praise and a percentage of the
gross.  (Is a Best Trailer category at the Oscars that far-fetched,
after all?)  But all it does is set us up for an overwhelmingly
disappointing movie.
The trailer sets up what should have been a promising plot:  Detective
Ricky Santoro (Cage) must solve the mystery of who shot the Secretary of
Defense at an Atlantic City pay-per-view boxing match.  Unfortunately,
there are multiple problems afoot.  The trailer gives away much, too
much of the story.  The shooter is killed instantly, so the story
revolves around why the Secretary was killed and who is involved in the
conspiracy.  The film's secret is ho-hum at best, and anyone who has
watched the trailer and is aware of the Law of Economy of Characters can
figure out who the top conspirator is.  Without an interesting plot,
without interesting dialogue, and without much of a reason to care about
the characters or the story, Snake Eyes is a failure on almost every
possible level.
As much as I hated this movie, I must give Brian De Palma one tiny bit
of credit.  De Palma is maddeningly inconsistent.  He can, on his day,
create amazingly well-done movies (The Untouchables, Carlito's Way).  On
off-days, he can be, well, just horrid (The Bonfire of the Vanities,
Raising Cain).  Snake Eyes falls into the horrid category, but there are
a couple of moments that are worth seeing strictly for their film-school
degree-of-difficulty value.  The Steadicam opening scene does a good job
of introducing the Cage character and is a virtuoso technical job by
both the director and the actor.  There is a split-screen chase scene
that looks pretty good, and it's followed by a God's eye view of a bank
of hotel rooms that's imaginitively done.
This is what's called giving the Devil his due.  But the technical skill
doesn't even come close to making up for the sheer evil of this movie.
Placing plot holes to one side for a moment, Snake Eyes features easily
the worst boxing match in cinema history (George Foreman is in better
shape than the movie boxers), a hurricane that exists for no other
reason than to punctuate significant plotlines with portentuous
thunderclaps, and perhaps the worst, most overly drawn out ending in
years.
Snake Eyes is a criminal act, an evil waste of time and talent.  Cage,
Sinise, and yes, even De Palma deserve better.  The audience deserves
better -- but no refund, no re-admit pass, no free popcorn coupon, can
ever restore to us the time we've spent or wash the awful images from
our mind.  However, we are left with one consolation, that we were
warned by the movie's title -- because Snake Eyes is nothing more than a
roll of craps.
Movie Reviews: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Curtis+Edmonds
Hollywood Stock Exchange: http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"Tabasco sauce is to bachelor cooking what forgiveness is to sin."

Author
J.K. Salisbury
Asking a movie critic to name his favorite movie is paramount, to me, to
asking a chef his favorite food.  It is hard to pick one, when there are so
many types out there, and there are favorites in each one.  Now, asking a
favorite type is a different story.  I like to watch all kinds of movies, but
if I have a preference, I'd have to say that mystery/suspense would be the
section of the video store that I'd wander towards first.  So you can see my
intrigue in Brian DePalma's Snake Eyes, a pseudo-mystery suspense thriller
(or so the previews and buzz would make you think) from the man who knows how
to make them (Blow- Out, Body Double, Dressed To Kill).When I go into movies
like this, I cannot help but have a comparisons to my favorite movie from
this genre 1995's The Usual Suspects, a masterpiece in intrigue, suspense and
surprise. Unfortunately, it is unfair even to mention that movie, with this
one, because the similarities begin, and end, with the genre.
The tagline for Snake Eyes say "Believe everything, except your eyes" or
something like that.  Well, I got news for the makers and marketers of this
one.  I didn't believe my eyes, my ears, or any other part of my body that was
in the theater while this movie was on.  I felt cheapened, cheated, used, and
manipulated.  This movie was nothing that it pretended or advertised to be.
Let me elaborate a bit before I get off on a Dennis Miller-esque rant.
The story concerns an assassination at an Atlantic City boxing match during a
hurricane.  Nicholas Cage plays a detective who begins to find out that all
may not be what it seems, and everyone has an angle, and a story.  A
potentially riveting whodunit, and whyfor.  Now, my problem comes from the
fact that, for a movie that professes mystery, intrigue and suspense...all is
revealed, and known about 45-50 minutes into the movie. This leaves another
half of the movie as a will-he find out in time, save the girl, fall in love,
cat and mouse chase movie.  Even that isn't very interesting to watch either.
 Because, in my eyes, you have to have an effectively suspenseful reason for
all this to be occurring.  You don't, and so you just sit in the theater and
wait for the inevitable, hoping that there's another secret out there.        You
hope that he doesn't go the obvious, cop-out route.  But alas, he does There
are no red herrings, no mysterious people from the shadows, no shocking
revelations left. All the cards are on the table, all the suspects and facts
are in full light, all that is left, is the obvious.  When will the bad guy
catch the good guy, and how long before the obvious hero, heroine rescue and
kiss.
It saddens me to see a premise wasted like this,  The idea was good, I was
intrigued about the story, and with DePalma at the helm, I was hooked. 
Giving credit where credit is due, DePalma makes a nice looking movie, he can
use the camera to create tension with the best of them, using flashbacks, and
split screens to tell the same story from various perspectives.  I loved the
manic non-stop action of the opening sequence, and, the "over-the-wall" cam,
used to go above hotel rooms as if the camera was sliding on the roof,
oblivious of walls.  I have no problem with how this movie was made, and how
it looks The problem is, he simply runs out of story and gives up..  The
performances?  Gary Sinise is good, as usual, but that's it.  Cage seems to
have found the sleazy stereotype cop handbook, and lives every chapter.  Even
normally reliable supporting characters such as Anthony Heard (as a powerful
tycoon) and Stan Shaw (as the boxer), fall flat, once the rabbit is out of
the hat.  Also, can someone tell me what purpose that hurricane held?  A big
deal was made in the pre-release info, yet it only seemed to me to exist as a
backdrop.  I felt no sense of urgency, or panic amongst the people (there
were people just mingling around the casino, cavorting in hotel rooms, yet, a
storm is about to wipe them out??) I'm confused.
Like I've said, I know that DePalma knows how to make this movie, however
here, he played it like that hyper kid with a secret who just cannot wait to
tell someone.  Finally, he ends up just blurting it all out, and ruining his
leverage.  DePalma had a good idea, I liked where the plot went, I just wish
it would've built up some suspense getting there, and had an ending that
didn't look like he just threw up his hands and said "How about this?" This
movie just doesn't miss the boat, it misses the whole ocean.  Wait for cable,
or even a TV- movie of the week for this one.  On a ratings scale Snake Eyes,
doesn't even score that..($1/2)

-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Steve Kong
For the last two weeks, on the drive to work, I passed a Snake Eyes
billboard. There's a large picture of Nicolas Cage and in big letters below
"Cage Snake Eyes." That is some good advice from a studio trying to promote
this film.
Detective Rick Santoro (Nicolas Cage) is a guy who is loud and obnoxious.
He's a guy who wants everyone's attention, and during the rainy night in
Snake Eyes, he'll get it. Santoro is attending a big boxing match at a
large Atlantic City casino with his longtime friend Major Kevin Dunn (Gary
Sinise). Dunn is there providing protective services for the Secretary of
Defense.
During the fight, the Secretary is assassinated. All hell breaks loose and
Santoro heads up the investigation, finding that there might be a
conspiracy. He spends his time chasing after a woman in a blonde wig and
another woman in a red wig. He thinks that there are others involved in the
conspiracy, and since this is Hollywood, he's right.
If you understood the conspiracy in Mission: Impossible, you will probably
understand the conspiracy in Snake Eyes. I didn't even bother with trying
to understand why the Secretary was killed; I just looked at the wonderful
camera work by cinematographer Stephen H. Burum.
After being engrossed by the whodunit of last week's The Negotiator, I was
disappointed that the head of the conspiracy is revealed so quickly in
Snake Eyes. Writer David Koepp (Men in Black, Lost World, Mission:
Impossible) pens the film in an inventive manner, but the weak point of the
script remains; we get to find out who the bad guy is too quickly. 
But that is not the weakest point of the film; it has one of the worst
endings I've ever seen. It is plain awful and so unbelievable that I felt
cheated after sitting in the theatre for two hours.
However, the first 90 minutes of Snake Eyes is very interesting. The way
that DePalma shows us the story from different points of view is
entertaining. Just keep in mind that one of these points of view is that of
the killer and is the wrench thrown into the well-oiled machine -- a view
point that serves only to confuse an already confused audience.
DePalma also shows off with Snake Eyes. Some of the camera movements,
angles, and setups in Snake Eyes are beyond belief. This includes the long
opening sequence. The sequence follows Nicolas Cage for about 15 minutes
and seems to be uncut, though there might be one or two cuts during some
swish-pans. This opening left me saying, "Wow, now that was cool!" Snake
Eyes should be a film shown during cinematography classes; there are quite
a few setups that make for good studying.
As for acting, no one does anything new. Nicolas Cage revives his Castor
Troy from Face/Off and melts in some of his Cameron Poe from Con Air for
his part as Rick Santoro. He's loud, brash, and too over-the-top to be
enjoyable. His character has a sudden attack of conscience during the film
that doesn't ring true. The other lead actor, Gary Sinise, has played this
type of part enough to be typecast. Sinise is awful in Snake Eyes; he needs
to find a different type of role to play.
Snake Eyes is the worst of bad movies it starts off really well, builds up
a lot of good story, then hits you with an improbable and laughable ending.
Skip Snake Eyes in the theatres. As the billboard says, the movie Snake
Eyes should be caged. No one needs this kind of disappointment. I wonder
who let it out of the cage.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Snake Eyes (1998)
Nicolas Cage, Gary Sinise, Kevin Dunn, Carla Gugino, Luis Guzman, John 
Heard, Stan Shaw. Screenplay by David Koepp. Directed by Brian De Palma. 
100 minutes 
Rated R, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
"Snake Eyes" employs split screens, shots from various characters' points 
of view and a nifty scene where the camera moves overhead to where the 
ceiling should be and glides from room-to-room, providing aerial shots of 
the people below. Oh, and the movie also features a murder mystery. It's 
sad when a director's camera techniques are more memorable than the film 
they should be serving, which is exactly what happens in Brian De Palma's 
latest thriller. 
De Palma, who directed such fare as "Carrie," "Dressed To Kill," "Body 
Double," "The Untouchables," "Bonfire of the Vanities" and "Mission 
Impossible," is well-known for his in-your-face approach to storytelling. 
He's also renown (or infamous, depending on who you talk to) for "paying 
homage" to various directors through his filmmaking methods. He certainly 
directs "Snake Eyes" with high style, although he appears to have been so 
busy with flourishes that he neglected to build a solid film beneath them.
The makings for a great thriller are there. Set in an Atlantic City 
casino, where a pay-per-view boxing match has begun while a hurricane 
rages outside, the story centers around the murder of a high-ranking 
government official. As heavyweight champion Lincoln Tyler (Stan Shaw) 
struggles to defend his title, shots ring out in the vast auditorium and 
the Secretary of Defense falls dead to the floor.
Two men take charge of the situation, sleazy local cop Nick Santoro 
(Nicholas Cage) and his best friend since childhood, Major Kevin Dunne 
(Gary Sinise), who was assigned to protect the Secretary. As they seal 
off the huge building to begin their investigation, a terrified young 
woman with blood on her clothing desperately tries to find a way out of 
the casino. The men marshal their forces and the chase is on.
De Palma begins the story with a nod to Alfred Hitchcock's "Rope," using 
camera tricks to make the first few minutes of the film look like one 
extremely long continuous shot. Sure, the effect is striking, but while 
De Palma was occupied creating eye candy, a lot of bad acting slipped 
through the lens of his magic camera.
Nicolas Cage is the worst culprit, hamming it up terribly as the smarmy 
boardwalk cop. Whooping and mugging in the opening scenes like a coked-up 
version of "Ernest Goes To Camp's" Jim Varney, Cage is flat-out 
embarrassing. No one behaving this way would have any credibility as an 
officer, even in Atlantic City. To add insult to injury, we're told this 
boob aspires to the office of mayor. Fat chance, Vern.
>From his first appearance in a open-collared Hawaiian shirt, with gold 
chains floating on his mat of chest hair (actually, Cage's body hair has 
now grown thick enough to officially qualify as a pelt), it's obvious 
that the Oscar-winning actor has decided to turn in a performance that 
makes his work as the villain in "Face/Off" look subtle. To be fair, he 
tones it down as the film progresses, but by then the damage is done. 
Meanwhile, Gary Sinise plays yet another fiercely intensive, control-
freak leader. In interviews, the gifted actor says he accepts films like 
"Snake Eyes" to fund his theatrical projects. That's wonderfully candid, 
but doesn't excuse wasting his skills with tiresome stereotypes like this.
Despite Cage and Sinise's failings, the investigation of the murder is 
very intriguing...for a while. De Palma shows the incident from several 
characters' points of view, each adding a little more insight into what 
really happened. He even examines the security camera recordings. It all 
leads to a major revelation that most viewers will have figured out 
minutes earlier.
Particularly annoying is De Palma's decision to reveal the villain 
relatively early in the film. After presenting lead characters who aren't 
likable, then prematurely spilling the beans on the identity of the bad 
guy, it's hard to remain interested in what happens during the remainder 
of the story, even with all of De Palma's inventive camera work. It's 
like watching somebody else put together a picture puzzle. When you're 
not personally involved, viewing the assembly process grows awfully 
tedious.
Adding insult to insult, De Palma wraps the picture up with an 
outrageously bad ending. Reportedly, a huge special effects shot was cut 
from the climax of "Snake Eyes" due to poor reactions from audiences at 
test screenings. It couldn't have been worse than what we see in the 
edited version. After more than an hour and a half of watching the forces 
of good and bad fight it out, De Palma resolves the elaborate battle with 
an act of pure chance. Ending the cat and mouse game with a burst of 
ingenious thinking would have been fine. Closing the story with a triumph 
of the human spirit over adversity would have been acceptable. But pure 
dumb luck? That's a hack ending from a director who should know better. 

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Paul Thomas Anderson's "Boogie Nights" wow-ed the critics last
year, and rightfully so: the film's frank portrayl of the pornographic
industry/drug culture of the late seventies was highlighted by a great
script, virtuoso acting, and some of the most innovative cinematography
ever seen in a low-budget film.  Virtually every review mentioned its
incredible opening shot, in which a "God's-eye-view" camera swoops down
from the sky, pans over the exterior of a popular night-club, then drifts
inside.  We then "walk" through the club, meeting our primary characters
as we dodge the dancers and waitresses.  This description may not sound
terribly impressive, but look closely: the shot was filmed in ONE
continuous four-minute take, with no cuts or edits.  The effect is
subtle, but it effectively draws us into the twisted world of the movie
by removing the cinematic devices (including edits) that tend to distance
audiences from the action.
        Director Brian De Palma, probably best-known for his famous film
adaptation of Stephen King's "Carrie," does Anderson one better with his
new movie "Snake Eyes."  In the opening scene, we meet Rick Santoro
(Nicholas Cage), a New Jersey police officer in charge of security at a
championship boxing match.  We follow Cage as he places a bet on the
match, fights a criminal, chats with both his wife and his mistress on
the telephone, hangs out with his best friend Kevin Dunne (Gary Sinise),
notices two suspicious women, watches the fight... and witnesses
a murder.  That's a lot to absorb in the opening scenes of ANY movie,
but get this: De Palma shoots it all in a single unbroken take, lasting
nearly twenty minutes!  It's a flawless performance from all involved, and
the actors never falter as the camera works its magic.  No matter what the
critics may think of the movie, this scene is going to get attention.
        The murder victim is an influential politician, heavily involved
with a secret government project (is there any other kind?) designed to
produce a new type of missile.  Santoro knows two things: other people
will die if the killer is not apprehended, and if he doesn't get to the
bottom of the case before the FBI arrives, his friend Dunne (who was away
from his post at the time the shooting occurred, violating the orders that
he'd received) may be blamed for the murder.  A tropical storm will
prevent the arrival of the FBI for ninety minutes, and the two men begin
their investigation.  The exits to the arena are sealed, and 14,000
people, one of whom is a killer, watch and wait.
        The film uses a creative technique to get us involved in the
mystery: we, the audience, never witness certain important events (such
as the boxing match, which contains an important clue) for ourselves.
Instead, we must rely on the recollections of the various characters, who
disagree with each other as often as not.  What really happened?  Who's
right?  This is the mystery that Santoro (and we) must find out.
        One of the many wonderful touches in this film is the passage of
time: one minute of screen-time equals one-minute of real time, so when
Santoro announces that they have ninety minutes to solve the crime, you
can set your watch by his word.  The film's attention to detail does not
rest there: one of our characters has very poor eyesight, and when she
loses her glasses early in the film, her subsequent scenes are shot out
of focus, giving us a window into her confusion.  The intelligence of the
movie is clearly shown via shots like this; De Palma clearly is a master
of drawing an audience into his world, something he demonstrated equally
well in "Carrie."  Our characters are consistently interesting, their
urgency is communicated, and the air of mystery is so high that when one
of our characters turns out to be something other then he/she initally
appears, we simply accept it.  We're too lost in this world to argue.
        Although we're not privy to everything, De Palma does allow us
access to certain information that the onscreen characters don't have.
In one scene, Sinise's character stands outside of a door, listening,
trying to decipher what he's hearing on the other side.  De Palma does
not leave us in suspense, though: the camera, initially behind Sinise,
rises, hovers over him, then gives us a peek over the wall and into the
room beyond.
        Another effective shot occurs later in the film, in which Cage's
character compares notes on the shooting with one of the "suspicious
females" he saw at the outset.  We get a "split-screen" display, in which
Cage's memory of the shooting is displayed in the left half, and the
woman's in the right.  They run tangent, in perfect synch, with only very
slight differences which reflect their own conflicting memories.  The
scene is brilliantly edited, and offers new insight into the crime.
Stylistic touches such as these make it impossible not to get drawn in.
        Sadly, it all comes undone in the film's final moments.  A major
plot problem: a murder has been committed, and the staff of the arena
knows that the police want to see all the security tapes that were shot
during the fight.  All of them are viewed, but the information they need
is not there.  Then, towards the end of the movie, an employee suddenly
remembers that he just installed a NEW, SECRET security camera that
very morning!  Sheesh, how do you forget about something like that?
        But the film's biggest offense is the final confrontation between
Cage and the villain.  It's an absolute joke: the outcome is decided not
by the chess-like strategy that the story has shown us thusfar, but by
dumb luck: imagine if, in the final lightsaber battle between Vader and
Luke in "The Empire Strikes Back," a giant asteroid had appeared from
nowhere, crashed through Cloud City, and knocked Vader down the exhaust
shaft.  That's the same ballpark as the plot-twist used to resolve "Snake
Eyes."  After being riveted by the movie up until this point, it was
impossible not to feel a bit cheated.  Pardon my crassness, but if this
film were a woman, she'd make out with you for two hours, rip off all
your clothes, then suddenly announce that she has to leave.  Sure, it's
fun at the time, but ultimately unsatisfying.
        Nonetheless, there's much to like about "Snake Eyes."  I'll
probably see it at least once more, if only for the flawless opening
scene and the other stylistic touches that typically mark De Palma's work.
I doubt I'll stay for the final fifteen minutes again, though.
This review was written: August 8, 1998
Copyright (c) 1998 by Joe Barlow.  This review may be freely distributed
as long as ABSOLUTELY NO CHANGES are made and this disclaimer remains
attached.  It may not be reproduced for profit without the written consent
of the author.  If you have comments or questions, please send them to:
jbarlow at earthling dot net (substituting the appropriate symbols, to
discourage spam).
-----
  "Average Joe" Barlow * MiSTie #73097 * Writer/musician/aspiring filmmaker
       jbarlow@YOURearthling.PANTSnet http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow
              {Remove YOUR PANTS to e-mail me.}        

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 SNAKE EYES  (director: Brian De Palma; cast: Nicholas Cage, Gary
Sinise,Carla Gugino, Luis Guzman, Stan Shaw, Kevin Dunn, John Heard,
1998)
After a brilliant, stylish opening sequence, this film begins to unravel
and by the time it ends, it is a misfire. Cage and Sinise play well off
each other: Sinise reserved (just right for the part), Cage frenetic
(over - emoting but still very effective). Cage is the free - spirited,
corrupt Atlantic City cop and childhood friend of Sinise, who is the
naval officer in charge of security for the secretary of defense.
He is in Atlantic City to protect the secretary while he attends the
heavyfight fight, that turns out to be fixed; Cage is his guest, he is
only there to watch the fight, but in some ludicrous way becomes in
charge of the investigation after the assassination.The assassination
taking place in the crowded boxing venue is masterfully done, and well
worth the price of admission, as De Palma goes crazy with his cameras
offering numerous shots from all different angles of the crowd and the
casino.
We are witnesses to this assassination from many different perspectives.
We soon learn who the villains are, so the picture that so brilliantly
set - up an interesting set of conflicts between the characters such as:
loyalty, corruption, sense of duty, patriotism, and one's own personal
dilemmas begins to go off in another direction, in the direction of
where the film - makers think it can draw in the box office crowds, that
is, it turns into a flat action movie, where things are easily
predictable and we are cut off from any emotional involvement with the
characters.
The camera is the only star of this film. In the end, this became a
very annoying  picture that promised so much and only delivered what
could be best described, as superficial entertainment.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' Movie Reviews"    http://www.sover.net/~ozus
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Quick!  You're out of time, over budget, and there's no ending on your
film!  What do you do?  Well, you think of the dumbest, most ridiculous
coincidence that could never happen in any galaxy, and then you spend
more money to film it with the futile hope that your audience will not
notice how utterly stupid it is.   Unfortunately, it turns out that
everybody notices how stupid it is.  But hope is not lost!  You can now
tack on an 11th hour romance between two people who spent most of the
film screaming and running away from one another.  
Actually, I'm just speculating.  I don't know what Brian De Palma was
thinking as he pieced together the last twenty minutes of Snake Eyes. 
Here is a film that starts off so well, and continues to hold interest
well into its story, and then falls completely apart with what is
perhaps the silliest ending to a good film I've ever seen.  Somewhere
out there, I am certain, there is an appropriate ending for Snake Eyes. 
But the ending that is present came inches away from completely ruining
the film for me.
The film stars Nicolas Cage as Rick Santoro, a semi-crooked cop.  We
meet him on fight night in an Atlantic City casino; we know he's really
happy to be there because he's smiling widely and shouting joyfully at
every person he meets.  He encounters a few of his friends, most notably
his best friend, Kevin Dunn (Gary Sinise), who is a military guy
escorting a senator.  Well, a few rounds into the fight, the senator
gets shot, and his blood is spattered all over Santoro.
It's now up to our obnoxious protagonist to solve the mystery of the
murder.  It seems so easy at first, since Dunn has already killed the
alleged sniper.   Soon, however, it turns out there's a conspiracy:  a
woman (Carla Gugino) had also been targeted for assassination, but she
got away.  The conspirators wanted her dead because she found out that
US missile tests were being rigged so a new kind of missile could be
released despite its lack of safety.  And so on.
The only real problem with Snake Eyes is the existence of the last
twenty minutes.  Other than this rather conspicuous issue, Snake Eyes is
a fantastic and intelligent thriller.  De Palma is a visual genius; his
style in this film feels fresh and original (and arguments that he's
derivative of directors like Hitchcock don't hold water).  He's a master
with the camera, and the result is a film that excites you with its
nearly uncontrolled energy.  
Take, for instance, the first shot.  This must be the longest steadicam
shot of all time.  It goes for nearly twenty minutes, from the first
moment all the way through the assassination of the senator.  The way De
Palma weaves this is astoundingly smooth, and I can only imagine how
difficult it would be to shoot a sequence like this.  I also liked the
way the assassination is shown from several different points of view; De
Palma uses this technique to drop hints as to who the conspirators may
be, which is an interesting trick.
Cage is a magnetic, eclectic actor, and he's perfect for this role.  
There's not a whole lot of acting beyond his personality as an actor,
although there are character developments later in the film that give
him something to do aside from his shouting.  Sinise is also excellent,
although I fear that he may be typecast in roles like this.  Sinise has
a way of making every line of dialogue convincing, with a kind of
confidence that few supporting actors manage.  Cage and Sinise work well
together here, and the film raises interesting questions about the bonds
and boundaries of friendship.
But it all breaks apart at the 80-minute mark.  I'm not going to
describe the climax, but you will know it when it arrives.  It's the
scene that doesn't make a shred of sense.  And then we're given a
minor-yet-overlong epilogue which is more depressing than interesting. 
Finally, De Palma force-feeds us a chance meeting that ends in a silly
promise and an exchange of phone numbers.  Don't get me wrong:  I
recommend Snake Eyes for the first two acts.  It's just the wretched
third act that keeps me from enthusiastically recommending what is
otherwise a terrific thriller.  I wouldn't be surprised to find out that
someone clubbed De Palma and finished the film without his input, for I
don't understand how a man with such good instinct in the realm of
visual presentation could have conjured up a conclusion so profoundly
dissatisfying.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Brian DePalma
Writer: David Koepp (story by Brian DePalma and David Koepp)
Starring: Nicolas Cage, Gary Sinise, Carla Gugino, Stan Shaw, Kevin Dunn,
John Heard, Joel Fabiani, Chip Zien, David Higgins, Luis Guzmán
"Snake Eyes" is the most aggravating kind of movie: the kind that shows so
much potential then becomes unbelievably disappointing.  It's not just
because this is a Brian DePalma film, and since he's a great director and
one who's films are always greeted with at least some fanfare.  And it's
not even because this was a film starring Nicolas Cage and since he gives a
brauvara performance, this film is hardly worth his talents.  It's worse
than that.  It's aggravating for the sole reason that its story could be so
much more, could be totally intelligent, and it opens up with absolutely no
subtlety that it will be handled complexly and intensely...then at one
point in the movie makes on wrong turn that leads it to the Hall of Fame of
Half-Assedness.  Or more deservedly, the Hall of Fame of the
Eighth-Assedness.
In certain circles, "Snake Eyes" was being advertised as a kind of modern
day version of Kurosawa's classic "Rashomon," where a crime is told from
the four different (and I mean different) perspectives, and it looks as
though it may actually be just like this with the opening, which, I might
add, is superb.  In one very very very long steadicam shot, we meet the
protagonist, crooked Atlantic City detective, Rick Santoro (Cage), and
follow him before a boxing match as he talks on his cell phone with his
wife, interupts a pay-per-view event on TV, chases down a gambler, enters
the arena all pumped up for the fight, sits down and talks with his bud,
Kevin Dunne (Gary Sinise, who's character should not be confused with that
of actor Kevin Dunn, who's also in this), and watches as it happens.
There's a big name in the crowd, and that's the Secretary of Defense,
Charles Kirkland (Joel Fabiani), who's sitting behind Rick, and who gets
shot a second after the Heavyweight Champion, Lincoln Tyler (Stan Shaw), is
knocked out.  This all happens in the opening shot, and it creates so many
red herrings and possibilities of what happened that it opens this scene up
for close examination and total deconstruction.  What really happened, this
film asks, and it sets this film up extremely well for when Rick begins to
question people and get different perspectives on the scene...and discovers
there's a very good possibility it was a conspiracy.
As we follow Rick trying to learn of more information, we also meet a woman
who was talking to Kirkland before he was shot (Carla Gugino), and who
flees the scene in a panic, and tries to hide from the cops in the arena
and the adjacent casino/hotel since the cops have blocked off the doors so
they can get witness' takes on what happened.  
This is all going pretty fine and dandy, and it's extremely interesting to
watch...then it takes one wrong step.  We follow the wrong character, and
we learn of the answer to the mystery too early on, and way before Rick can
find it out.  But that's not the worst part of it: it's that it's the one
person you didn't think it would be because he was too obviously supposed
to be the red herring, the one you didn't think did it because it would be
stupid and cliched of that person to be behind it.
It only gets worse: the film turns into a chase film about half way through
the film, and since we already know what happened, we can't rely on Rick's
investigation to be all that interesting.  It's as if the film ran out of
the guts to be really complex and original about a third of the way in, and
decided to just fall back on an easy way out, and that just happens to mean
that it has to become less and less credible.  Events become more and more
proposterous, and by the end, the film has decided to rely on the worst
offender in mysteries like this: the deux ex machina.  That's where some
outside intereference brings the film to a sudden conclusion and makes
everything okay.  This time, it's a hurricane, an out-of-control police
car, and a big round ball that adorned the arena.
What went wrong?  DePalma and the screenwriter, David Koepp, are extremely
credible people in their respective fields, and have been known for
bringing life and complexity to mysteries such as this.  DePalma, who
idolizes Hitchcock to death, has done many a film like this, such as his
masterpiece, "Blow Out," where a movie soundman uses movie elements to
uncover a conspiracy piece by piece.   But granted, DePalma at least makes
it intriguing to watch, what with his over-the-top shot set-ups, notably
the beginning and a sequence where the camera pans over top of a bunch of
rooms in the hotel, forgetting anything about boundaries.  At least his
direction makes up partly for it.
Then there's Koepp, who showed such great ability at making a character's
flaws come to life like he did in DePalma's earlier "Carlito's Way," a film
that dove right into the life and past of its character and examined him
extremely well.  He can write a flawed character, but his Rick Santoro
seems to be just a half-assed effort.  He's flawed, and we can see
redemption if the story wasn't so formulaic.  A scene towards the end where
he has to make a fatal decision is cheapened by the fact that his answer
has no emotional buildup.  He may as well have said the opposite of what he
says; it would have at least gone with what the character was like.
This is the most disappointing kind of film because it promises
intelligence and complexity, because it promises disection of a flawed
character and perhaps even redemption, then pulls the rug from under us
just as we were about to be convinced it would be able to go all the way. 
As I was watching the first half hour, I couldn't wait to see how the
mystery would be unearthed, how many different perspectives he'd be given,
and perhaps he'd have to make a choice between who's he has to believe. 
Now there's a film.  Unfortunately, the film has two major deux ex
machinas: one in the disasterous ending; the other, about a half hour in
when the film goes into autopilot and becomes a stale and recycled piece of
crap we've seen all too much before, but never from someone like DePalma.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jeff Ignatius
Cinema's biggest show-off has a grand time in Snake Eyes, a fairly
straightforward (and largely uninspired) political-thriller plot
enlivened (and cheapened) by its director's need to impress film
students the world over. 
Brian De Palma, whose work I generally abhor, takes a standard story
and pumps it up with a perspective-shifting treatment, only to hurt
the work by not knowing when to stop his gimmicks and, finally, not
having enough material to sustain the movie. 
At a high-profile fight in Atlantic City, the Secretary of Defense is
assassinated not three feet from corrupt cop Rick Santoro (Nicolas
Cage), who dives into the case blindly, not realizing how fully it
will entrap him. 
The single, extraordinary shot that sets up the film, running at least
ten minutes, descends into beautifully orchestrated chaos as the
camera follows Santoro through the arena, placing bets, shaking down
drug dealers, talking on his gold cell phone, and watching the main
event, ending with gunfire just after his fighter goes down. What sets
Santoro off is the boxer's reaction. He's just been knocked out, but
when shots ring out, his eyes snap open. Santoro thinks the hulk threw
the fight and approaches him. 
The boxer's narrative (shown literally through his eyes, a technique
that is fun, interesting, confusing, and irritating all at the same
time) sets the cop on the trail of his best  friend, Major Kevin Dunne
(Gary Sinise), who set up security for the bout. The case actually
involves little police work, though, as the boxer and a mysterious
woman (Carla Gugino) tell Santoro all he needs to know, and security
cameras back up their stories. The simplicity of the case affords De
Palma the opportunity to show the same ten minutes that opened the
movie from several characters' perspectives. Those sequences have a
nice kick to them, and make it easy to forget how pedestrian the 
story is. 
But De Palma achieves a strange goal of film direction here, in which
the means are not nearly as important as the end. The images of Snake
Eyes are themselves not terribly exciting or interesting. The artistry
comes from the pains the director took to capture them, and only
people who love the craft of making movies will properly 
appreciate the work involved. 
In its last half hour, too, the movie settles into a bland drama, with
Santoro and Dunne facing off. It seems that once De Palma has
dispensed with his tricks, he simply wants to tie up the plot and
theme loose ends. Will Santoro turn in his best friend? Or will he
take the money and turn his head, the way he always has? 
In another movie, these questions might have generated some interest.
But with all the style of Snake Eyes' first hour, the end is
disappointing and dull.
Review by Jeff Ignatius. jsign@fgi.net
This and more than seventy other reviews can be found at Flush:
http://www.fgi.net/~jsign/index.html
Flush is a free, personal site dedicated to the intelligent criticism
of film and also includes fiction and various essays.

Author
Matt Williams
Brian DePalma once again revisits his favorite genre:  the Hitchcockian
thriller. Borrowing a trick from Rope, he films the opening twenty
minutes as one (nearly) seamless scene.  However, soon after this
bravura opening, the film loses all cohesion and begins to fall apart.
Rick Santoro (Nicolas Cage) is a cop who's just as happy to shake down
small time criminals as he is to pursue justice.  He's right at home
among the petty thieves and gambling addicts in his hometown of Atlantic
City.
Snake Eyes takes place during one night, when Hurricane Jezebel is about
to hit the city just as the heavyweight boxing championship is on the
line.  Thanks to Rick's pal Kevin Dunne (Gary Sinise), he has scored
ringside seats.  You see, Kevin is arranging security for the Secretary
of Defense, who is attending the match.
However, when there's an assassination attempt on the secretary's life,
it is up to Rick to unravel the conspiracy.  Suddenly, all 40,000
members of the crowd become potential witnesses, or potential
conspirators. This becomes Rick's one true shot at greatness...but is he
willing to gamble it all?
He may be a crooked cop, but it's hard not to like Rick Santoro. Nicolas
Cage goes the extra mile when infusing Rick with energy and pizzazz.  He
does everything possible to keep the film from bogging down, but in the
end, he just can't help it.
The supporting cast is colorful, but pale next to Cage.  Gary Sinise
plays his role a bit too obviously.  Carla Gugino isn't terribly
tempting as a mysterious woman who is wrapped up in the proceedings.
The minor actors actually fare better, with intriguing turns from Stan
Shaw, Luis Guzman and Kevin Dunn.
The opening "shot" of the film is spectacular.  There are a few
computer-blurred transitions, but otherwise it is one continuous scene.
It lends an immediacy to the proceedings that a traditional shooting
technique might have missed. There's lots of background detail...some
important (which is flashed back upon later in the film), and some red
herrings.  It's a great start for a thriller.
But then everything falls apart.  After such a strong buildup, the
critical piece of evidence ends up being an incredible series of
coincidences. Then, the film's finale is an editing nightmare, filled
with other bizarre coincidences and non sequiturs.  It's a very crude
way to end a film that began with such good portents.
It's a shame, and seems all the worse in retrospect.  It's like being
one card short of a royal flush.  Snake Eyes has the strong central
performance, and some good direction...but in the end, a weak script
brings it all tumbling down.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Brian Takeshita
It was a dark and stormy night.  A hurricane was making landfall and
whipping the shores of Atlantic City, a town known for the bright
lights which belied its dark, seamy underside.  The rain came down
like a gesture from God, trying to wash away the murkiness, the
corruption, the evil.  But taking shelter inside of one of the
so-called jewels of the city's thorny crown were the sinners, gathered
around a boxing arena and eager to watch the ensuing pugilistic
contest like the Romans of old, frenzied in their thirst for blood,
drawn of their fellow man.
That's how I envision the first paragraph of the screenplay for SNAKE
EYES, in which director Brian De Palma attempts to deliver a film noir
for the present day.  It's got all the ingredients:  A cop on the
take, a villain with money and power, a damsel in distress, a boxer
paid to take a dive, a murder, and a storm outside to provide an
ominous backdrop.
The main character is Rick Santoro (Nicholas Cage), an Atlantic City
police detective who is king in his sector of the boardwalk area.  He
knows everybody, is well connected, and gets regular payoffs by the
local would-be felons.  It's obvious he runs a pretty tight ship, one
that serves his own purposes nicely.
Atlantic City is a big boxing town, and Santoro is a big boxing fan.
On this particular night, he gets to watch the fight of the century
from the front row, courtesy of his best friend, Navy Commander Kevin
Dunne (Gary Sinise), who is handling security for Defense Secretary
Charles Kirkland (Joel Fabiani).  Kirkland's attendance is partly a PR
ploy to show solidarity with the arena's owner Gilbert Powell (John
Heard), who's also the head of a defense contracting company
developing the Airguard, a controversial new anti-missile system.
When, in the middle of the fight, Kirkland is shot to death mere feet
away from Santoro, he becomes embroiled in the investigation into who
killed the Secretary and why, attempting to reconstruct the chain of
events leading up to the assassination through eyewitness accounts,
surveillance footage, and his own recollections.
The problem with film noir as a genre is that it doesn't give us very
many surprises.  There have already been a lot of films before this
one that have set the series of events we expect - that's why it's a
genre.  It is for this reason that SNAKE EYES doesn't really impress.
De Palma treats us to some interesting (although not innovative)
camerawork, great use of light and shadow, and the way he plays out
the same scenes from different perspectives is refreshing, but as a
film there isn't a lot that's original. We can anticipate the plot
twists, and we know what the outcome will be.
This is why it is perhaps even more disappointing that there are some
rudimentary points which were not given enough attention, signifying
some sloppy screenwriting and direction.  For example, Julia Costello
(Carla Gugino) is the person seen talking with Kirkland when he is
shot.  Disappearing into the crowd after being grazed by a bullet
herself, she is sought after by both the good guys and the bad guys as
the one person who might be able to identify the motive behind the
murder.  Principal role, right?  Important to the plot, right?  It
wasn't until the credits came up that I even knew the character's
name.  Was the part where her name is revealed left on the cutting
room floor, or was I just seriously not paying attention?  I wonder
how she is even able to "disappear" when security is crawling all over
the arena, detaining people left and right, and here's a woman,
covered in blood, and apparently no one takes notice.
There are other disappointments, too, such as when Santoro is being
trailed by the film's villain, and recognizes he is being followed
when lightning from behind causes an unmistakable shadow.  De Palma is
successful in mounting some serious tension by focusing on certain
parts of the villain's shadow, and utilizing Ryuichi Sakamoto's
dramatic score.  However, there is zero payoff as Santoro simply turns
around and faces his antagonist, rather than pull some fancy move and
commence the final struggle.  Unfortunately, the film's climax, when
it does occur, depends so much on coincidence it's laughable - or at
least would be laughable if it weren't such a sorry excuse for
wrapping everything up.
Luckily, we are given two good performances by the male leads.  Cage
is engaging as the over-the-top Santoro; he's up on energy through the
first half hour of film, and it's fun to watch him.  It would be
difficult to take it for the full running time, however, so his
character is graciously toned down as the sobering reality of the
assassination takes hold.  Cage also plays well off of Sinise, who's
Dunne is straight man to Cage's Santoro for the first part of the
movie, but who soon enough gets to distance himself and command his
own scenes.  I sometimes wonder if Sinise can play a role badly.
SNAKE EYES is a film that starts out with a lot of potential, but
founders along the way to a decidedly unsatisfying finish.  Cage and
Sinise save portions of the movie, but in the end the screenplay does
not rise above the level of ordinary, and occasionally dips below
that.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) The opening shot of Snake Eyes is great. It lasts for about
ten minutes, uninterrupted. Its geographic range is increased by the careful
use of video monitors receiving signals from elsewhere.  
The technical skill required to pull off the long shot at the beginning is
formidable. Such a carefully planned and executed shot leads one to expect
the same from the script. At first the script IS tight and twisty, but its
resolution is a mediocre anticlimax. 
Rick Santoro (Nicolas Cage) is a crooked Atlantic City cop, "covering
security" at one of the biggest boxing events of the year. In the big
introductory shot, he freely takes money in exchange for favors and
schmoozes with the powerful, rich, and sleazy elements of the city. 
The only unusual thing about security at this match is that the Secretary of
Defense is attending. Escorting the Secretary is Kevin Dunne (Gary Sinise),
an old friend of Nick's. The fight moves on, and at the knockout punch, a
shot is heard. The Secretary has been hit. Another shot rings out, a woman
in a wig is hit as Nick throws her to the ground. 
Before the cops arrive, Dunne breaks down in front of Nick. He failed in his
assignment to protect the Secretary and is worried for his job and his
family. Nick suggests they get their stories straight before any
investigators show up. 
Eventually Nick and Dunne split apart to investigate the crime, starting
with the mystery woman. Given enough time alone, Nick starts to piece
together the mystery. 
The setup and investigation are interesting and well-told. De Palma uses
flashbacks to tell the same story from different points of view. With each
flashback, another piece of the story falls into place. This part of the
film is very good. 
Then it becomes clear what happened, or at least who is responsible. At this
point, the movie stops being so interesting. Instead of tantalizing clues
and a clever villain, we have slow chase scenes and a conventional killer.
The resolution of the film is anticlimactic, a ho-hum mix of guns and lucky
timing. 
In order to allow for De Palma's elaborate camera movement, there needs to
be lots of light, which means it can't be controlled as tightly. As the
movie's tone darkens, the lighting seems to get brighter and more even. In
JACKIE BROWN, the bright lights and solid colors seemed to be an ironic
twist, but in this movie, it seems like a cost-cutting compromise. 
Also, Sinise was the wrong choice for Commander Dunne. He never really
filled his uniform with the qualities demanded by the role. Granted, it was
a hard role to fill, with lots of acting-within-acting going on. But Sinise
just never had me convinced of anything. 
Cage, on the other hand, was very good. He's a crooked cop, taking money
wherever he can find it. As long as he's getting his share, his morality
threshold is low. The perfect example of his idea of ethics is brought out
when a whistleblower comes forward and asks for his protection. This cop's
first reaction is not to help her, but to verbally abuse her for breaking
her boss' trust, for violating the code of the good-ol'-boy network, for
expecting the world to play by the rules. But there is a glimmer of morality
left in him and by the end, his faith in the network is really put to the
test (in one of the movie's more clever developments). 
Two minor characters turned in great performances too. In the ring, the
boxer had such a look of humility and fear that one couldn't help but feel
sorry for him, even as he beat his opponent senseless. And Carla Gugino, a
relative newcomer, held her own on the screen with Cage and Sinise. 
De Palma's last film was MISSION IMPOSSIBLE, a great movie, well-written and
tightly executed. SNAKE EYES has similar aspirations, but it doesn't come close.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Michael Redman
Personal morals live in a foggy area. Sins for one person are virtues for
another. What would be wrong at one time becomes acceptable under different
circumstances. Our youthful idealism is often compromized as life goes on.
Stealing is dishonest, but there's that proverbial loaf of bread and starving
family. And so it goes. Situational ethics can be a slippery slope and
sometimes there's a deciding moment where a decision must be made.
Atlantic City police detective Nick Santoro (Nicolas Cage) has slid down that
slope about as far as he can. The archetypal corrupt cop, he doesn't just look
the other way, he is the other way. He shakes down a drug dealer, puts big
money on a prize fight, accepts thousands of dollars in bribes and has a
girlfriend that his wife doesn't know about. Strutting about in a Hawaiian
shirt like the loud fast-talking cock of the walk, his ambition is to become
mayor of his "sewer"  of a town. He's not worried about consequences, because
"If there's one thing I know, it's how to cover my ass."
 Clean-cut Navy Commander Kevin Dunne (Gary Sinise) has invited his old buddy
Santoro to the heavyweight fight where Dunne is head of security for the
Secretary Of Defense who is also in attendance.
The action is fast and furious. Hurricane Jezebel rages through the streets
while boxer Lincoln Tyler (Stan Shaw) is defending his title.Dunne is
distracted by a red-head with deep cleavage who doesn't seem "right" and
leaves to follow her. A buxom (this attribute seems as common as poker chips
in the city) blonde sits next to Santoro and turns to talk to the Secretary.
The champ is felled by a phantom blow. Shots ring out from across the arena.
The Secretary is hit. The blonde catches a bullet in the shoulder and flees in
a blood-splattered white blouse. More shots and the assassin falls, dead,
through shattered glass.
Dunne and Santoro take charge of the investigation after bullying the state
officials and lock 14,000 people in the building. It seems that the killer is
a lone gunman, a nutcase political terrorist with a history of making threats. 
It all falls into place quickly but it's a little too easy for the detective.
Something just doesn't make sense to him. He has hung out with enough of them
to know exactly what a rat smells like. Things are not what they seem. People
are not what they seem. Even the blonde is not what she seems.
Most of the actors over-play their roles, but that's part of the
entertainment. Cage is enjoyable in his bigger than life character. He's been
this person before and has the part down. Sinise does well although Dunne is a
bit too stiff to believe. Carla Gugino plays the mysterious faux blonde with a
quirky style that is easy to warm up to.
Taking place in almost real time, the movie doesn't give us a chance to
breathe. If you look away for a few seconds, you're likely to miss important
details. But don't worry, not watching is the last thing the audience will do
as the action jumps off the screen. The film never stops moving.
Veteran director Brian DePalma knows how to set a mood. Beginning with a
single twenty-minute shot of Santoro swaggering through the arena, the camera
is definitely the star of the show. Liberally using a subjective point of
view, he shows us the events through the eyes of several of the participants.
Each gives more clues as to what actually happened. There's a magnificent shot
from the ceiling that slowly moves from hotel room to hotel room. We see empty
rooms, an out-of-control party, intimate moments and finally a blonde washing
blood out of a white top.
There is an interesting point where duty, loyalty and personal ambitions come
into conflict. One of the characters knows the right thing to do. He also
knows the best thing for him. Unfortunately these are not the same. If there
is a theme to the film, this is it. When do you put aside your personal
interests for the benefit of others and the salvation of your own soul?
The scenes are so well constructed and the energy so frenzied that it's easy
to overlook the film's flaws. Until the ending. There are problems before
this. Although the true killer is revealed too soon, it's still great fun But
then there's that last ten minutes.
Without giving too much away, the film completely falls apart. The situation
is dire. Santoro is so beat up he can hardly walk, but he's attempting to save
the damsel in distress. The real killer is following him to eliminate his last
few witnesses. She's locked in a storage room and can't get out. The storm is
worse and explosions from the sky overwhelm the sound track. Electricity
sputters in the wet streets. The situation is tense.
And then? And then, events occur that have nothing to do with anything that
has happened previously and solve everything. Deus ex machina is a technique
used in poor novels and it doesn't work any better in films.
To make matters worse, there's another ending tacked on: a "several days"
later where one of the bad good guys gets his just desserts. If that's not
enough, there's yet another ending after that to provide the happy resolution
that Hollywood thinks audiences need.
Like far too many films, this could have been excellent with just a little
care. As it is, you'll have a good time during ninety percent of the movie,
but you'll leave saying "What were they thinking?"
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years and finds that he
still is capable of being disappointed when something goes wrong. Email your
cinematic frustrations to redman@bvoice.com)
[This appeared in the 8/13/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "SNAKE EYES" (Paramount Pictures)
Brian DePalma's a brash master of suspense and he tackles
David Koepp's story with cinematic gusto. Set in a glitzy Atlantic
City casino called the Millennium on the night that a tropical
hurricane named Jezebelis bearing down on the New Jersey coast, the
action revolves around a live, pay-per-view heavyweight championship
boxing match. Nicolas Cage plays a manic, sleazy detective whose
motto is: "If there's anything I know, it's how to cover my ass."
He's ringside, watching the bout with his bestfriend, Gary Sinese,
the naval officer in charge of security for the visiting Secretary
of Defense. As the fight begins, in the midst of the cheering crowd,
there are two, mysterious, out-of-place people. A woman wearing a
tight, white suit and cheap blonde wig plops down next to the Secretary
and hands him an envelope, while a buxom redhead positions herself
a short distance away. Gunshots blast the government official before
the knockout and pandemonium prevails as 14,000 terrified patrons
stampede for the exits. And this all happens at the beginning of the
movie - in one, technically awesome, uninterrupted 20-minute
take. After that, unfortunately, everything else pales. Carla
Gugino, as a nearsighted, blood-spattered young woman, holds the key
to the truth. Obviously, there's a conspiracy and, inevitably,
corruption is the underlying cause. It's all quite implausible and
the mindless, contrived ending is infuriating. One interesting
sidelight, however, is the massive, computer-controlled casino
surveillance equipment that can find anyone, no matter how well
they're hidden. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Snake Eyes"
is a stylistic, exhausting 4. This wannabe mystery-thriller misses
the mark by a wide margin.

Author
Andy Phillips
Starring: Nicolas Cage, Gary Sinise, Carla Gugino
Directed by: Brian DePalma
MPAA Cert: R  (UK equivalent: 15)
Review by Andy Phillips (aphillips@ma.man.ac.uk)
        SNAKE EYES, the latest thriller from director Brian DePalma,
centres around a high-profile heavyweight boxing match. Corrupt cop Nick
Santoro (Cage) has been invited by best mate Commander Kevin Dunne
(Sinise), who also happens to be in charge of security. With a hurricane
raging around the hotel where the fight is being staged, things turn nasty
when the US secretary of defence attending the fight is assassinated.
Santoro is placed in charge of investigating the shooting, and uncovers
all the usual conspiracy-type dodgy goings on in the process.
        There are many moments in the movie where the relatively good
direction can do little to hide the deficiencies in the screenplay,
notably one sequence showing birds eye views of the rooms in the hotel.
With a better script, this could easily have set up a suspenseful scene,
but here it seems to have little purpose other than to fill up a few more
seconds. 
        Even the terrifically done opening, a twenty minute continuous
steadicam shot, is lost amidst near unintelligable dialogue. Nick
Santoro's seeming inability to anything other than to go around yelling
quickly becomes irritating. One scene in particular, where he
confronts one of the boxers (Stan Shaw) over match rigging, degenerates
into nothing more than a contest to see who can shout the loudest.
        Occasionally, there are flashes of inspiration that do just about
enough to keep the viewer interested. The eyewitnesses' different
views of events leading up to the shooting, told in flashback, are more
than competently handled and work well. 
        Another fault that keeps the excellent premise from becoming the
bookend to an equally good thriller is the premature unveiling of the
villain. Although the enormous lack of potential suspects make the
revelation more than a little obvious, the suspense completely evaporates
afterwards, leaving us with inferior cat-and-mouse antics supported by an
unimmersive soundtrack. The ending is a seriously silly anticlimax,
strongly supporting theories that it was very different from what DePalma
had in mind.
        The movie, like so many thrillers, is also riddled with plot holes
obvious even to viewers of average intelligence -- spectators returning
to a normal life moments after witnessing a cold-blooded act of supposed
terrorism, nobody seeming to notice one of the witnesses' blood covered
clothing -- to name but a few. 
        Despite its shortfalls, SNAKE EYES isn't the worst film of its
type you'll ever see, and may entertain some people, though it might be
best to wait for the video.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Did you ever get the feeling that Brian DePalma designs entire films
around set pieces he thinks would be really cool?  Think about MISSION:
IMPOSSIBLE -- can you recall more than a few scattered seconds aside from
the computer room break-in and the train tunnel finale?  Even DePalma's
strongest efforts like CARRIE and THE UNTOUCHABLES hit their stride when
he was showing off bravura bits like the prom night apocalypse and the
train station steps shootout, respectively.  The trivial business of
building a story between cool sequences frequently seems to bore him; if
there were a directorial equivalent for "script doctor," he'd probably be
all over it.
     SNAKE EYES opens with a typically flashy piece of DePalmannerism, a
20-minute, single-take Steadicam shot following Rick Santoro (Nicolas
Cage) as he makes his way through a sporting arena on the night of a
heavyweight championship fight.  Santoro is a gleefully corrupt Atlantic
City police detective, invited to the fight by Naval Commander Kevin Dunne
(Gary Sinise), Santoro's old school buddy and the head of security for the
Secretary of Defense (Joel Fabiani).  But something goes wrong in the
first round:  two mysterious women cause distractions, the champ (Stan
Shaw) goes down, a sniper takes out the Secretary, and the crowd goes
crazy.  The only question is what really happened, and whose perspective
on the events can be trusted.
     That opening reel is a nice piece of work, and an ideal showcase for
Cage at his bug-eyed, manically-grinning finest.  Santoro glides through
the arena like an animal protecting his turf, DePalma watching him get
anything and anywhere he wants with a strut, an attitude and the flash of
a badge.  There's a kinetic artistry to the scene as DePalma captures the
excitement at the event, the shark-like constant motion of our
protagonist, and the unstable nature of the events about to occur. We
recognize instantly that for every pie in Atlantic City, there's Rick
Santoro with his fingers deeply immersed or doing his best to dip them in.
We also recognize that somewhere in the dizzying scene are the clues to
what will come next.
     What will come next is an investigation of the shoting which often
feels like an afterthought.  The story's arc is clearly designed to lead
Santoro towards a redemptive choice -- cash vs. The Right Thing -- but it
seems to take an awful lot longer than 90 minutes to get there.  And
that's not to say that SNAKE EYES doesn't move.  In fact, DePalma rarely
stops moving, mixing up extended point-of-view sequences with
tautly-edited pursuits, throwing in a drifting overhead pan through a
series of hotel rooms for good measure.  SNAKE EYES has technical
virtuosity and sheer forward momentum to spare.  What's missing is heart,
a reason to care about stringing DePalma's shiny individual baubles
together into cinematic jewelry.
     By the climax, DePalma seems to have lost all focus on making SNAKE
EYES a redemption thriller, hinging a pivotal sequence on a turn of the
weather.  Between that stormy sequence, the extended speeches in which the
villains explain their motivation, and the tagged-on romantic coda, you
may find yourself wondering what the point of it all could be.  Then the
answer comes back:  it was an opportunity for Brian DePalma to film a
20-minute single-take Steadicam shot.  I suppose SNAKE EYES could satisfy
an audience as a display of craftsmanship, but that really defines why so
few of DePalma's films satisfy as stories.  He's not really a film-maker.
He's a scene-maker.

Author
Bob Bloom
 Snake Eyes is like an Atlantic City casino: a complex, gaudy array of neon
and designs that mask the trappings for one very simple recreation -
gambling.
 Brian DePalma's newest thriller is a structurally complex, gaudy movie
that overlays a flimsy and simplistic murder mystery.
 As a filmmaker, DePalma has always been more technician than storyteller.
To him the placement of the camera is more interesting than the placement
of his actors.
 Rick Santoro is an Atlantic City homicide detective. He's not above
shaking down a drug dealer, accepting a bribe or cheating on his wife. He's
not who you would consider cop of the year material.
 Rick has front-row seats at a heavyweight championship fight courtesy of
his oldest and best friend, Navy Commander Kevin Dunne, who is heading the
security team guarding the Secretary of Defense, a guest at the fight.
 During the bout, the secretary is gunned down. Santoro, to help his buddy,
takes charge of what appears to be an open-and-shut political
assassination.
 Soon, Santoro is over his head, involved in a murky conspiracy involving
defense contractors and weapons systems.
 The entire affair really doesn't make much sense. It seems a lot of people
went to a lot of trouble and a lot of expense to pull off a simple
assassination. And why do it in a sports arena filled with 14,000
spectators? Aren't there any lonely back roads in the Washington, D.C.,
area?
 DePalma's fancy camera work obscures the film's many lapses of logic and
implausabilities.
 For instance, where are other members of the Atlantic City Police
Department? Could it be Santoro is the only one with the night off who
could get a ticket to the fight?
 And why does DePalma make a big deal out of Santoro's decision to seal the
complex and detain all 14,000 spectators without utilizing the situation in
any manner whatsoever?
 And why doesn't DePalma take advantage of the Atlantic City locale? The
movie is mostly set indoors, so it's as if the city was a random selection
as a plot site.
 DePalma uses a Rashomon-style story technique, showing the same action
from different perspectives to advance the plot. And while it works, it
also defuses what little suspense the film has to offer.
 DePalma's overuse of his point of view shots, especially his out-of-focus
sequences with his nearsighted damsel in distress, adds nothing to the
proceedings.
 As Santoro, Nicolas Cage is hyperactive. He seems to rely more on
intuition and street smarts rather than intelligence to solve the case. And
he really doesn't solve it as much as the weak conspiracy merely unravels
around him.
 His Ricky is gauche, cynical, but in his own strange way, honorable.
 Gary Sinese is enigmatic and slimy as Dunne, while Carla Cugino merely
squints as the whistleblowing heroine.
 In all, Snake Eyes comes up craps for DePalma and crew. It's among this
uneven director's weaker efforts.
  Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
Ind. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: August 7, 1998
Starring: Nicolas Cage, Gary Sinise, Carla Gugino, John Heard, Stan
Shaw, Joel Fabiani
Directed by: Brian De Palma
Distributed by: Paramount Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (violence, language)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/snake.htm 
The sort of post-Cold War espionage suspense that Brian De Palma
cultivated in MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE was a vivid brand, designed to excite
and engage. And for the most part, it worked. American moviegoers,
reluctant to accept the end of tensions with the former Soviet Union,
search for new shady characters on an internation scale. New neo-Nazi
states for our operatives to go sneaking into with gear that might well
be found on an episode of STAR TREK. Unfortunately for De Palma, the
energy and charisma of such settings are so far removed from an Atlantic
City casino-hotel, that SNAKE EYES never has a chance to be top-notch
suspense. 
De Palma, along with screenwriter David Koepp (both JURASSIC PARK
features), are heavy on the present-day sci-fi, and so its
understandable that they might attempt to sneak a bit of it into a
common murder mystery. In fact, it seems that everyone - cast and crew -
except for Nicolas Cage has it from that angle. Cage, on the other hand,
stubbornly plays policeman Rick Santoro as a man with a bit of change
and an addiction to gambling on fights. The good detective goes to the
heavyweight title fight, in the company of his friend, Commander Kevin
Dunn (Gary Sinise, who is sinister as ever), as well as the Secretary of
Defense. As the knockout punch whistles across the ring, though, so does
a killer's bullet - winging the woman next to Santoro and killing the
Secretary. Suddenly Santoro is sitting at a murder scene, surrounded by
14,000 suspects. 
With little or no work, Dunn finds the shooter and kills him in the
struggle. Santoro's not happy, though, for two reasons: the woman next
to him ran off too soon, and the supposedly KO'd boxer's head jerked up
at the sound of the shot. Santoro's ensuing detective work leads him to
find scandal in the ring and in the Department of Defense. The first of
the two might be a plausible path for the story to follow, because for
the first thirty minutes the hyped-crowd atmosphere surrounds the entire
thing. But instead, Koepp takes it a different direction, trying to
squeeze in a muddled and confusing plot about faulty test missiles and
their financial benefit to the casino's new owner. It's during the
revelation of this plot that the movie spins unreasonably far from its
opening path and loses quite a bit of the steam it had built up. 
Playing out on the screen, though, the movie looks and feels a lot
better than it sounds. De Palma chooses an interesting style of
photography, in which events coinciding play out side by side. This
gives SNAKE EYES a much more dynamic real-time feel that helps the
audience through the tangled-up plot. Finally, the second plotline - the
Department of Defense scandal - makes the murder mystery much deeper
than it has to be, causing the audience to become disinterested. This
disinterest runs deep enough so that by the time the ending comes - no
less than twice - everyone watching has lost appreciation for why the
characters are there or even what their motivations are. Overall, SNAKE
EYES' intent was in the right place, but was simply misled by adding too
many ingredients to what should have been a simple mix.
FINAL AWARD FOR "SNAKE EYES": 2.5 stars - an enjoyable movie.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Director Brian De Palma has finally done it - he's made the first empty
stylistic exercise of his career. Sure, there are bravura camera moves,
superbly edited climaxes and an astounding opening sequence that can stand on
its own as a classic, but what else is there?
"Snake Eyes" stars Nicolas Cage as an unctuous, loud, obnoxious cop named Rick
Santoro (wearing what appears to be the same snakeskin leather jacket from
"Wild at Heart") who always accepts bribes from cops and crooks, and strolls
through his Atlantic City casino turf as if he owned it. During a championship
bowling match, the U.S. Secretary of Defense is assassinated, and all chaos
ensues. Santoro takes charge of the investigation. But who killed the Secretary
of Defense? And who was the blonde sitting next to him? Was the boxing champ
who went down behind it? Or was it Santoro's best friend (Gary Sinise)? If
you've seen one conspiracy film, you've seen them all. 
"Snake Eyes" is an often visually inventive film - the extraordinary opening
sequence is one seemingly 20-minute long take (there is one match cut that I
caught) that introduces us to the main characters and everything leading up to
the assassination. And yet for all the tricks "Snake Eyes" has up its sleeve,
there is nothing for us to chew on afterwards. The unusually simple plot
(lazily written by David Koepp) relies on various implausibilities - e.g., how
could 14,000 eyewitnesses and various police and security officers not notice a
blonde woman with a blood-covered white dress? And I guessed who the
perpetrator of this assassination was before it took place. 
"Snake Eyes" is the type of film that is nice to look at, but you can
anticipate its every preconceived move.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Brian De Palma's new political thriller, "Snake Eyes," has
just the sort of plot the ancient Greek tragedians would have
loved.  Its hero, played by Nicolas Cage, is a deeply flawed
character who, you would expect to meet his comeuppance at
the very moment that he is exalted.  His antagonist, whose
identity will not be revealed here, is a man who does evil but
who does it not for selfish motives but to save the lives (or so
he thinks) of the people he works with.  Closer to home,
"Snake Eyes" is just the sort of movie that could revive talk
about Who Killed Kennedy, as it highlights a conspiracy to kill
a high-level government official that leads the conspirators to
erase all traces of evidence--including the accessories to the
crime.
   Brian De Palma, whose direction is anything but subtle,
shoves his camera everywhere and anywhere, obliterating
walls as though they were made of gossamer to zoom from
hotel lobby to elaborate bed chambers.  He encircles the
boxing arena in an Atlantic City casino as though his camera
were on the wings of an eagle.  Reproached by film critic
David Thomson as "the epitome of mindless style and
excitement swamping taste or character," he nonetheless
gives an audience eager to be electrified for an hour and a
half a steady dose of adrenalin, having portrayed startling
characters in films like "Carrie," "The Fury," "Body Double,"
and one of the great past potentates of mayhem and
bloodletting, "Scarface."
   His special technique this time around is to view a murder
and its investigation virtually in real time.  He begins by
introducing an off-the-wall detective, Nick Santoro (Nicolas
Cage), who establishes his character early on by shaking
down a drug pusher, placing a $5,000 bet on a fight, and
strutting about a boxing arena like a drunken sophomore at
an untamed fraternity party.  You'd think that a cop on the
take would play low profile but in the one major directorial
error, De Palma goes overboard in confusing Detective
Santoro with Castor Troy or Cameron Poe.  De Palma makes
good on the tension once the assassination plot takes hold
and maintains the tautness throughout, effortlessly making up
for this strange introductory gaffe.
   The setting is a casino in Atlantic City on a stormy evening. 
Lincoln Tyler (Stan Shaw), heavyweight champ, is defending
his title as a 10-1 favorite.  When he apparently takes a dive,
a shot rings out: the Secretary of Defense is hit in the throat,
as his chief bodyguard, Commander Kevin Dunne (Gary
Sinise) plunges into the investigation together with his best
friend, Santoro.  Just prior to the shooting, a 26-year-old
woman, Julie Costello (Carla Gugino), had slipped the
secretary an envelope containing a document questioning the
reliability of a new weapons system.  Spattered with blood,
she tries to disappear into the adjacent casino and is pursued
by those who need to silence her.
   During the course of the story we learn much about casino
security, particularly about the 1500 surveillance cameras
which can hone in on individuals suspected of "counting" or
engaging in other activities detrimental to the profits of the
casino.  The computerized TV surveillance can even survey
the halls of the massive hotel, quickly identifying guests by
picture and room numbers.  The principal technique used by
De Palma is a Rashomon-like series of flashbacks to the
shooting from different angles and distinct points of view,
each time teasing the audience with another piece of the
puzzle.
   David Koepp's screenplay is a complex one which takes
time to sort out as he throws quite a few particulars into the
story.  We see the action from Santoro's point of view, that of
a cop with ambitions to be the mayor of Atlantic City but with
no higher goals than to be chief in a town he calls his sewer. 
We observe a boxer who is confronted with evidence of a
fixed fight, and note that boxing is nothing if not a business. 
(The defeated heavyweight champ is attended by a lawyer.)
We inspect the self-serving of various people in the media
and government, not surprised that one TV reporter, Lou
Logan (Kevin Dunn), offers Santoro $5,000 for exclusive
rights to interview some of the 14,000 witnesses to the
shooting.  We observe the escalating fear and panic in
the eyes of Julie Costello, a young woman who is so
nearsighted that without her glasses all is a blur but who is
otherwise the most farsighted character in the movie.  
   "Snake Eyes," which represents the single circle on the
face of a pair of dice, is so named because "the house
always wins."  The picture is itself a winner in most respects,
flawed only by an overly rambunctious characterization by
Nicolas Cage.  De Palma has successfully ventured back to
his Hitchcock phase, which he borrowed while at the helm of
"Sisters" in 1973, but still employs a style all his own with his
bold and dazzling visual flair.

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
Nicolas Cage stars as Rick Santoro, a corrupt cop lucky enough to get
front row seats to a pay-per-view boxing match in Atlantic City.  He is
also unlucky enough to be sitting in front of the Secretary of Defense,
who gets shot by some sniper.  But who did it?  Why?
So Santoro and his close friend Kevin Dunne (not to be confused with the
actor who plays a newscaster), played by Gary Sinise, work hard to
unravel the mystery, to find out who is behind it and why.  And yes, a
massive conspiracy unfolds; people aren+t what they seem to be; twists
and turns are promised.
Promised, but not delivered.  I knew going in who the Very Bad Guy was;
it+s that predictable.  Follow the hidden Hollywood rule: in a cast full
of mostly unknowns, the bad guy is most likely the biggest star who
seems to have a redundant role.  Even so, I will attempt to not give it
away here.
The cast and director are game. The directing is fantastic, and the two
leads do not disappoint.  Which is all the more counterproductive to the
film.
For example: Cage has a very good scene where he comes to grips with who
the Very Bad Guy is.  And he struggles.  He knows this person, and
cannot believe what he is hearing.  And this goes on for a minute.  All
and well, except this is twenty minutes after the script reveals who the
VBG is, which is about an hour after the audience knows.  Nice tears,
but you+re too slow, pal.
Another example:  Sinise in one scene is walking down a hallway with a
terrifying scowl on his face.  When Sinise gets angry, chills run down
my spine.  His eyes bulge out, his arteries appear on his neck.  Great.
But the logistics of the situation would compel him to cool it off a
little, to play it safe, to look cool but determined, somewhat like
Kevin Spacey.  He shouldn+t have to risk losing his composure to a
certain character in the film, which could ruin everything up to that
point.
And then the direction:  the opening sequence is a stunner: we follow
Cage around for about fifteen minutes non-stop, as he casually makes his
way to his seat, somehow runs into every major character in the film,
and then watches the fight.  The fight is an essential element to the
conspiracy plot; all and well, but we only see Cage+s reactions to
what+s going on.  Which is confusing, and which also cheats the
audience.
There+s another scene where the camera pans above, playing God+s eye
view through several hotel rooms.  A wonderful shot.  But so what?
There+s no tension in the scene, just a voyeuristic excursion outside of
the script.  Did we need to see what was going on in rooms of extras who
walked in off of _Casino_?
How about another scene, where Cage is walking towards where the Key
Witness is hiding; and the killer is right behind him?  Cage needs only
to turn around to prevent his mistake.  He doesn+t.  Even so, the killer
could only prevent such a blunder by hiding behind a corner, and then
jumping out when the Key Witness is found.  But that would make too much
sense.  Further, that would prevent the beautiful shot of having
lightning strike, and the shadow of the killer, gun in hand, appearing
before Cage.  (DePalma likes this shot so much, he uses it twice).
I heard DePalma on a radio interview say that he isn+t that interested
in plot as he is in camera technique and new ways of filming something.
It shows.  I+m happy to report that the plot moved along, and that the
conspiracy had a few gems in its formula.  But it+s the same old
formula, over-hyped and over-played, repackaged but not fresh.
_Snake Eyes_ has both good acting and great direction.  Yet this is the
first time in a review that I cannot recommend this film _because of_
these elements, not in spite of them.  It+s the screenplay, stupid.

Author
David Wilcock
Brian De Palma, the director who bought us Carrie, Dressed To Kill and
Mission:Impossible is back, and has bought all his technical expertise with
him. Sadly, he forget to bring a good story and believable characters. Nic
Cage plays Rick Santaro, a fast talking cop who is watching a boxing match
with his friend Commander Kevin Dunne (Sinise.) An assassination takes
place, and Santaro tries to peace together how it took place, trying to work
out the roles of the people involved in this conspiracy. The film uses
flashbacks and video cameras to bring the mystery together.
However, the film doesn't keep the mystery for long, and once the big
'secret' is out concerning Kevin Dunne, the film is at a dead end. Although
there are some fantastic shots by De Palma, including a 15 minute Steadicam
shot at the start of the film, halfway through the film drops dead. The
problem is that De Palma doesn't have a strong story or characters to work
with. He tries to offshoot this with flashy camera techniques, but pretty
soon this has no effect on the audience, and I quickly got bored. Nic Cage
and Gary Sinise try to inject some life into some poorly realised
characters, but it's no use. They are boring, faceless, and completely
unlikeable. Yes, another problem with the film is that there's no-one to
root for. We're supposed to be on Cage's side, because his character becomes
nicer throughout the film. However, his change is sadly unbelievable. Poor
Gary Sinise's character is terrible, who completely changes throughout the
start, the middle and the end, in an appalling way.
The film's use of flashback quickly gets boring. While clever and
interesting the first few times, it quickly becomes apparent that flashbacks
are being used because the film has nowhere to go. They certainly don't
increase the tension or suspense of the movie. There is small thread of
suspense running through the film, but it certainly doesn't make this film a
powerhouse thriller, rather just a slightly below average one. The script is
lousy and contrived, the characters flat and two dimensional. Certainly not
good factors for a film passing itself off for a thriller.
The most depressing aspect of the film is that it had potential. There's a
good story buried in Snake Eyes, it's just bogged down in razzle dazzle and
flashbacks. It also gives itself away far too quickly, rather than leaving
the big twist for the end. While the performances are intriguing, especially
by newcomer Carla Gugino as a sexy 'number cruncher' wrapped up in the case,
there's no way of altering the fact that Snake Eyes is a terminal case of
style of substance, and unless you're a big fan of either Cage or flash
directing, should be avoided.
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!
"You know, for kids"- Norville Barnes

Author
Berge Garabedian
Brian DePalma returns to his directorial seat after his last commercial
outing in 1996 with Tom Cruise in MISSION IMPOSSIBLE (8/10). Last
summer, Brian, Nicolas Cage and Gary Sinise were the talk of my
hometown of Montreal, as they took over the sporting alma mater of the
Montreal Canadians, the Forum, for a period of three months over the
summer. Anybody who was anybody, including anybodies who weren't
anybody, got parts as extras on this set, including my brother and my
good friend The Arrow (Neither of whom can be clearly identified in the
finished product.)
PLOT:
Richie Santoro (Cage) is a crooked beat cop who works the dirty streets
of Atlantic City. His childhood friend Major Kevin Dunne (Sinise) has
moved on with his life, and now works as the right hand man of the US
Secretary of Defense. The night is "fight night" in Atlantic City, with
everyone in the crowd, and a raging hurricane gasping outside. During
the boxing match, the Secretary of Defense gets shot in the neck by a
sniper. Santoro becomes the investigating cop of the shooting, as
evidence of a conspiracy to kill the man comes to light. The mystery
behind the shooting is the focus of the rest of the film.  
CRITIQUE:
Highly stylized, extremely talkative, generally actionless, and lightly
entertaining mystery from the man who has made pick-pocketing from one
of the greatest directors of all time, Alfred Hitchcock, part of his
own legend. This film does not maintain many moments of extreme thrills
or surprises. It does put together a decent mystery plot by way of
flashbacks (Written by David Koepp, the man who also penned MISSION
IMPOSSIBLE, the two JURASSIC PARK's and DePalma's CARLITO'S WAY
(7.5/10)), with some typically slick styling from DePalma, all the
while running in real time, but the overall framework of the film
leaves little to get excited about. The montage used during the final
credit crawl is also one of the worst and most boring of all time. 
Nicolas Cage does a decent job of over-acting his over the top
character here, and so does Sinise as the ambiguous friend from the
day. Juliette Binoche look-alike Carla Gugina from TV's "Spin City"
also turns in a fitting performance as the girl in distress. I must
admit that my recent viewing of THE NEGOTIATOR (7/10) might've set my
standards for thrills a little higher for this one, but either way,
this movie's plot does little to innovate the genre, while continuing
to homage the genre that made DePalma who he is today.
Admittedly, I was impressed with another one of DePalma's classic
one-shot-camera opening sequences, this one lasting at least 20
minutes, and many of his other camera tricks, but overall, the movie
seemed flawed in its attempt to enrapture the audience's imagination,
and deliver on a solid ending. The parts after the official denouement
were actually some of the funniest scenes in the movie, while the final
scene just seemed like another Hollywood demand gone acknowledged. All
in all, I guess you should go see this film, if you really like
DePalma, his style and his mysteries (Or if you know somebody who may
have played an extra in the audience.) If not, you could easily wait
for the video version of this film, which will surely appetize your
visually demanding gut and fill any 100-minute gap that's needed in
your life. 
Little Known Facts: 
Originally, Al Pacino was slated to play the role of Major Kevin Dunne
(Now played by Gary Sinise.)
Nicolas Cage received a salary of US$16,000,000 for his role in this
movie.
Gary Sinise's character name in this film is Kevin Dunne. The main
boxing reporter's real-life name from this movie is Kevin Dunn (Brother
of famed Saturday Night Live alumnus Nora Dunn.)
Carla Gugino began a modeling career at the tender age of 15.
In 1976, Gary Sinise co-founded Chicago's Steppenwolf Theatre with his
friend, and fellow Oscar nominated actor, John Malkovich.
Brian DePalma's middle name is Russell. He is the son of a surgeon, and
once directed Bruce Springsteen's "Dancing In The Dark" music video.

Author
Bill Chambers
SNAKE EYES ** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers; wchamber@netcom.ca
(Now with TRIVIA; film, DVD, LD reviews; a section where YOU can
recommend movies;
fabric softener; and much more!
FILM FREAK CENTRAL
http://www.geocities.com/~billchambers
New address. New attitude. Same crappy writing.)
starring Nicolas Cage, Gary Sinise, Carla Gugino, Stan Shaw
screenplay by David Koepp
directed by Brian DePalma
What a strange life! A mere seven hours after returning from Orillia's
CasinoRama (I actually came out ahead!), I was off to see a movie
basically about, as the title suggests, gambling: SNAKE EYES. This is
also the second film (after The Gingerbread Man) I've sat through this
week in which a raging hurricane provides a backdrop for the
shenanigans.
SNAKE EYES' plot is deceptively simple; don't let multiple-viewpoints
trick you into believing this assassination tale is more complex than
the average episode of "Vega$." A major casino/hotel: Homicide Detective
Rick Santoro (Cage) excitedly attends a big heavyweight showdown-fighter
Lincoln Tyler(Shaw)'s championship title is on the line-with his best
bud, Major Kevin Dunne (Sinise), a Washington sycophant assigned to
protect the Secretary of Defense, Charles Kirkland (Joel Fabiani), who
has a second row seat. A gorgeous, big-breasted redhead is suspiciously
situated nearby-when Dunne tries to check her ticket, she takes off. He
follows. Pow! Bam! Oomph! In Dunne's place sits a gorgeous, big-breasted
blonde (Gugino); as she quietly converses with Kirkland, Tyler is
knocked down for the first time in his career, and sniper shots are
fired at the crowd. An assassin is immediately caught, but not before
Kirkland has been killed and the mysterious blonde (who is actually a
brunette, and blind without her newly-crushed specs) escapes in a
stampede. Santoro, a gambling sleazebag with a checkered past, begins an
investigation, relishing the opportunity to gain some respect. His
detective work mostly consists of screaming at people until they become
so annoyed they talk. (It's as if he's envious of the boxers, who get to
pummel one another into submission.)
SNAKE EYES has numerous flaws, perhaps countless. For starters, Cage is
not playing a character here: his personality shifts from scene to
scene, even moment to moment, but this time out he's not playing a drunk
(Leaving Las Vegas) or a psychopath (Face/Off); he's an actor paddling
without a raft in a toneless performance. As for all that hooey about
"believe everything but your eyes," SNAKE EYES reveals its major baddies
early on, but flashbacks and long-winded exposition continue: we're
shown the solution to the puzzle and then asked to suffer through the
construction of the puzzle. Start at the conclusion of SNAKE EYES and
work backwards and the result is pretty much the same, a film
intricately but not intelligently structured. Characters who figured
heavily into the conspiratorial equation vanish without explanation
throughout the story. (And no, the hurricane has almost nothing to do
with the climax, but implausibility does.)
DePalma's virtuoso style (my apologies for resorting to such a worn out
praise) is a character in its own right here, and it is because of his
mastery of technique (rather, mastery of someone's-Hitchock's?
Godard's?-technique) that SNAKE EYES is a thousand-times more enjoyable
than it has any right to be. The opening set-piece is brilliantly
crafted, a long take that bests all his previous attempts (by now,
watching a DePalma movie includes the anticipation of his next edit-try
it as a drinking game) by snaking around corridors, through hotel rooms,
up and down stairwells, and finally, into the arena. SteadiCams were
invented for filmmakers like DePalma and cinematographers like SNAKE
EYES' Stephen H. Burum. DePalma also employs nifty split-screen
effects-his use of two simultaneous frames in one particular sequence is
terrific. DePalma may be the only MovieBrat whose seventies
sensibilities have remained utterly at his disposal. (I also liked how
he showed very little of the fight-the majority of the seven-round
battle happens off-camera; Dolby-ized punches clue us in to the action.)
The outcome of SNAKE EYES is a curious one. I find it hard to dismiss,
based on the director's aesthetic garnishes, for lack of a better word.
The movie is better than the sum of its parts, I guess, and it clicked
along pleasantly. But the script is weightless, and it's a shame DePalma
had to use up all these talented resources for the sake of screwing
around and exercising his filmmaking biceps.

Author
Homer Yen
Detective Rick Santoro (Nicholas Cage) is the kind of detective that,
when you look at him, would seem to go out of his way to give 'law and
order' a bad name.  Sleazily dressed, taking secretive payoffs, and
unfaithful to his wife, he actually aspires to be the mayor of his
hometown of Atlantic City.  But what fuels his days and nights are the
pandemonium of fight night and the wicked atmosphere of Atlantic City.
And wicked it is for an assassination is about to take place.
But Detective Santoro is no slouch when it comes to his keen sense of
observation. What's so suspicious about that voluptuous red-haired girl?
How did a drunk get a front-row seat?  Did the heavily-favored
heavyweight boxer just take a fall?  Who was that woman with the wig?
To piece together the events that occur up to the shooting, he questions
several people.  Each describes their own version, and we relive their
moments through flashbacks.  I liked this form of storytelling which
allowed the audience to view a familiar situation from different points
of view.  After some nifty detective work, Santoro focuses in on one
person that could hold the key to this investigation and he begins to
comb the arena and the adjacent casino in hopes of find that one
important witness.  Santoro is joined in his search by his good friend,
Kevin Dunne (Gary Senise).  Dunne was on the security force assigned to
protect the victim of the assassination.  He also wants to locate this
witness to ask some questions...maybe.  Santoro discovers some
hard-to-swallow truths and has to choose whether to continue to help or
not. The premise is interesting, but even after a mild revelation that
should send the movie into high-gear, it actually begins to slow down at
an incredible rate.
"Snake Eyes" shows flashes of brilliant sequences like the opening 10
minutes that focuses on Cage and his every nuance (from talking on his
cell phone and using call waiting to switch between his wife and
girlfriend to shaking down a thug so that he can take his money and bet
on the fight).  There are some neat ideas such as the witness that loses
her glasses and must run for her life virtually blind.  I also enjoyed
Senise's touch of bottled anxiety.  He projects this delicious mix of
calm and brewing franticness.  But like throwing dice, the payoff
happens only now and then.  Here's a movie that starts off with a
thrill, but ultimately winds up leaving a bad taste in your mouth.  You
keep hoping that you'll re-experience some of the excitement that you
first tasted.  But it only seems to get worse.  What really struck me as
odd (and almost a crime) was that after all of the thought that went
into the structure of the story and after all of the good dialogue that
was exchanged between Senise and Cage, the denouement seemed like a
haphazard happenstance.  I liked enough of it to give it a marginal
recommendation, but you're probably better off taking a chance with
another movie.

Author
Kevin Patterson
Many of the reviews of SNAKE EYES have labeled it a disappointment, and in
some ways I can understand why: the previews promised an intricate, stylish
murder mystery thriller, and it doesn't quite deliver that, at least not as
well as it could have. The plot is complex and interesting, but the mystery
evaporates within the first forty-five minutes and the thrills, while
effective, are mostly of the fairly ordinary "is the good guy going to get
out of the room before the bad guy opens the door" variety. What it does
deliver, however, is an interesting inner conflict for a character who
realizes it's time to clean up his act and may have to risk everything if
he doesn't want an innocent woman's death on his conscience.
That character is Rick Santoro (Nicolas Cage), a corrupt Atlantic City
police detective who routinely shakes down criminals for bribes. His
longtime friend, Navy Commander Kevin Dunne (Gary Sinise), is in charge of
security for the Secretary of Defense at an Atlantic City boxing match, and
he gets Rick a front-row seat. In the second round, Dunne gets up to
question a strange woman sitting across the arena. A drunk stands up and
yells at the fighters. The defending champ goes down. Then suddenly shots
are fired, the Secretary is killed, and the woman who was talking to him
stumbles away, wounded and afraid for her life. Director Brian DePalma is
showing us the pieces to an intriguing puzzle, and in a way it's a shame he
decided to put them back together before the 45-minute mark.
In any case, Rick starts investigating the murder, at first because it
seems like a good PR opportunity. He eventually tracks down the wounded
woman (Carla Gugino), who has information about the case that Rick quickly
wishes he hadn't found out. He hides her in a basement room in the casino
complex and is soon intercepted by the killer, who offers him a handsome
cash reward in return for dropping the case and supplying the location of
the woman. And we sense that while he has let the guilty go free quite a
few times in his career, he still plays fair with the innocent. He doesn't
want to betray the woman, even though his refusal to do so might lead to
his death in the worst-case scenario and exposure of his past wrongdoings
in the best-case scenario.
Most of the harshest critics of SNAKE EYES have panned the film on the
grounds that the ending, which involves damage to the casino building by an
approaching hurricane and a police van that arrives at a convenient moment,
is a deus ex machina  that erases the impact of what has proceeded it. For
my money, they're right on the first count--it *is* a rather unlikely
contrivance--but wrong on the second. This wasn't the best resolution that
SNAKE EYES could have had, but the confrontation was still brought about by
the characters' internal motivations. Had Cage's character made a different
moral choice, neither he nor the villain would have been anywhere near the
police van at the end.
SNAKE EYES is certainly not a perfect film, but on the whole it does more
things right than wrong: the plot could have been handled a little better,
but the suspense works most of the time, and DePalma adds some inventive
direction to the mix, such as when he keeps the opening SteadiCam shot
going for nearly twenty minutes without a cut, or shows the same scene from
several different subjective viewpoints. And, most importantly, the Cage
character is well-written and well-performed enough to pick up the slack
whenever the storyline starts to wobble.
