Title
Review for Nekromantik (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Jorg Buttgereit.
Cast: Daktari Lorenz, Beatrice M, Harald Lundt, Susa Kohlstedt, Heike Surban.
1988 - 68 minutes (in German w/ English subtitles)
Not Rated (equivalent of an X for extreme violence, sex, nudity, profanity, 
massive gore, and graphic depictions of necrophilia, with an emphasis on 
bodily functions).
Reviewed June 21, 1999.
WARNING! Due to the nature of the film, this review may offend some readers. 
Read with caution.
You'd be surprised how many movies I've seen. Everything from high-class 
brash to low-rent trash, to the unimaginably gory and disgusting. There's 
nothing I could have watched, however, that could possibly have prepared me 
for the German film, "Nekromantik," which is just about the most repugnant, 
vile piece of garbage to pass itself off as a kosher feature-length motion 
picture that I'm sure has ever been made. There doesn't appear to be any 
rhyme-or-reason behind director Jorg Buttregeit's extremely low-budget 
production, aside from to be shocking. And that it is, so I guess he achieved 
his goal, in a morbid sort of way.
Rob (Daktari Lorenz) is a young morgue attendant who lives with his 
girlfriend, Betty (Beatrice M). You see, they like to steal decomposing 
corpses, take them home, and have a manage a trois with them. When Rob is 
fired from his job, Betty gets fed up with her dead-end existence and leaves 
him (taking the skeletal remains with her!). On his own, and not having the 
access anymore to deceased bodies, Rob turns to murder to achieve his 
necrophilic urges.
If you are not already repulsed, there is more! Necrophilia can be treated in 
a serious, thoughtful manner (just rent the effective 1997 drama, "Kissed," 
for proof), but this isn't one of those instances. "Nekromantic" is so vacant 
of ideas, and cohesive storytelling techniques and characters, that to write 
a review in the normal way wouldn't be doing justice to the film at hand. 
Therefore, a list seems more appropriate, and here are just some of the 
things you view in this lovely piece of "art."
1.) Right at the beginning, there is a freak car accident, and afterwards we 
see the remains of a woman thrown from the car and torn in half, her insides 
oozing out onto the grassy knole.
2.) The cruel slaying of a rabbit (which is real footage that Buttgereit 
happened to obtain, and thought it would be a nice, little addition to this 
picture, even though it has nothing to do with anything). He seems to be 
laughing, saying, "Watch as I show you a bunny getting his throat slit, and 
then see the blood drain out onto the ground as the bunny twitches and 
breathes his last breath! Watch as the bunny is hung upside down and is 
skinned! Watch as the bunny's eyes are torn out of the remains of his head! 
Watch as the insides of the bunny are pulled out!" I do not get grossed out 
easily, but this scene (coming at around the 15-minute mark) had me putting 
my hands over my face, as I peaked out from behind my fingers.
3.) A protracted soft-porn sequence in which Betty, Rob, and the cadaver have 
sex. As a pleasant bonus, Betty sticks some sort of pipe down where the dead 
body's private parts have rotted away and literally *&%$! it!
4.) Another scene in which Betty reads to the corpse and begins making out 
with it, even going as far as licking it up and down.
5.) Rob brings a cute cat home with him to surprise Betty with as a gift, 
only to discover she has left him. So does Rob take the cat back to the 
animal shelter? Not a chance! He puts it in a bag, and forcefully hits it up 
against the walls and tables.
6.) Next, Rob is taking a bath, with the dead cat lying above the tub on a 
shelf, his tail leaking blood into the water. Getting lonely, I guess, Rob 
reaches up, pulls out the cat's insides and begins rubbing them all over his 
face and body as some sort of mourning ritual. 
7.) The strangulation and rape of a prostitute (in that order!).
8.) The next morning, a man almost catches Rob with the street urchin. To get 
rid of the possible witness, he grabs a shovel and chops off the man's head. 
Well, almost. Actually, he chops off the head from the mouth up. This way, he 
can fall to the ground and twitch a little before his heart stops.
9.) To reach the height of fantastic delight, Rob decides to murder himself 
while reaching orgasm! He achieves this by coming as he stabs himself in the 
stomach with a large knife. Soon, his bodily fluid (you know what I'm talking 
about) turns to blood, as it squirts out all over everything.
10.) Finally, we see Rob's grave, freshly buried. But here's the zinger! 
Right before the fade-to-black, a shovel comes down on the dirt, with the 
sight of a high heel pushing the shovel into the ground, signifying that a 
necrophilic woman (perhaps Betty?) was going to do the same thing to his body 
as he did to everyone else's.
There. I gave away practically the whole film, in gory detail. I did this for 
the simple reason of repulsing you, the reader, so that you will not, under 
any circumstances, venture to rent this movie. "Nekromantik" is a sickening 
excursion into the twisted life of a necrophiliac, but the treatment of the 
subject is both severely exploitative and offensive, and there is absolutely 
no talent involved in any of it. The film, if you can call it that, actually 
goes beyond the state of bad taste into a shameful, meaningless, extreme 
realm all its own. At least now I can safely say I've seen it all.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
