Title
Review for Next Best Thing, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
James Sanford
         Despite 15 years of experience in movies, Madonna has rarely
seemed as comfortable on the big screen as she has on MTV, on a concert
stage. She effortlessly vamped her way through such steamy videos as
"Erotica" or "Bad Girl," but froze up when she was called upon to play a
maneater in the 1993 thriller "Body of Evidence," and she's often witty
in interviews, but that sense of humor has often deserted her in such
comedies as "Who's That Girl" and "Four Rooms."
 To date, Madonna's most effective film work has come from
playing either larger than life icons (the indomitable Eva Peron in
"Evita," the voluptuous nightclub singer Breathless Mahoney in "Dick
Tracy") or non-conformists with a sense of humor about themselves (the
New Wave gypsy Susan in "Desperately Seeking Susan," the saucy baseball
player Mae in "A League of Their Own").
 But whether it's due to a new-found maturity as an actress or
her off-camera role as a first-time mother, Madonna has rarely seemed as
much at home with a part as she does in the seriocomic "The Next Best
Thing," in which she's cast as Abbie, a woman speeding toward 40 without
a husband (which she might like) or a child (which she truly wants).
Despite her career as a yoga instructor, Abbie still finds fault with
her looks and her body. Gazing at herself in the mirror, Abbie raises
her breasts and whispers "1989," then lets them droop and murmurs
miserably "1999."
 What Abbie does have, however, is a best friend, Robert (Rupert
Everett), who's always there to mop up her tears or mix up an emergency
margarita when she needs it most. The tenderness of the relationship is
completely believable because of the easy and affectionate way Everett
and Madonna play off of each other. If they ever decided to dip their
toes in the talk show pool, Madonna and Everett could make a sensational
replacement for Regis and Kathie Lee.
 Anyhow, back to our story: Robert would be the perfect man for
Abbie, except that he's gay ("He definitely falls into the 'What a
waste' category," one of Abby's friends sighs). But one sizzling
Independence Day weekend, when both are feeling particularly low, Abbie
and Robert down too many drinks, dance themselves into a frenzy and end
up getting much closer than they ever have before. Their one-time-only
tryst ends in confusion, regret and, to everyone's shock, pregnancy.
 Although it initially sets itself up as a comedy, "The Next
Best Thing" slowly evolves into a surprisingly thoughtful study of
family life, and it moves easily from lighthearted romp to poignant
drama under the guidance of John Schlesinger, the British director who
often seems to take a personal interest in projects which examine
American values in a changing society ("Midnight Cowboy," "The Falcon
and the Snowman," etc). If Abbie can't have everything she wants, she's
willing to settle for an unconventional arrangement in which she and
Robert can live in the same house and bring up their son together. But
the situation becomes increasingly complicated as the years go by and
Abbie becomes involved with Ben (Benjamin Bratt), a kind man who could
provide the stability she's always searched for.
Commendably, Thomas Ropelewski's screenplay refuses to villify
or sanctify any of the principal characters, all of whom make some
mistakes and say things they later regret as the stakes become higher.
 Even as the movie becomes progressively more serious,
Ropelewski's dialogue remains peppered with barbs, most of them aimed at
the ignorance of the well-meaning people around Abbie and Robert. A
concerned young woman asks if Abbie's baby will be gay, and Abbie
responds, "Will your kids be stupid?" When one uncouth little boy uses a
politically incorrect term to refer to Robert's love life, a girl
quickly chastises him. "You're supposed to say 'same-sex partner'!" she
notes.
 Although its subject matter is decidedly contemporary, "The
Next Best Thing" has the ravishing production design of a vintage
Technicolor extravaganza. The colors are vibrant, from the teal curtains
in Abbie's house to the startlingly red flowers in the garden, and
Elliot Davis photographs Everett, Madonna and Bratt lovingly, bathing
them in golden candle glow or warm blue lights. If every film looked
this good, going to the movies would be a whole lot easier on the eyes.
James Sanford

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: The Next Best Thing
Rated [PG-13]
Starring Madonna, Rupert Everett, Benjamin Bratt
Screenplay by Tom Ropelewski
Directed by John Schlesinger
website: www.nextbestthingmovie.com
IN SHORT: A lightweight modern comedy
Cranky truly was not looking forward to The Next Best Thing, after
reading the movie summary that crossed his desk. The straight woman /
gay man make a baby scenario sounded like something soon to be seen on
Will and Grace (who apparently got down to doing the nasty in last
week's episode). The Next Best Thing, thankfully, doesn't go that route.
Madonna talks about the evolution of the script over in CrankyCriticŽ">http://www.crankycritic.com/qa/madonna.html">CrankyCriticŽ
StarTalk, which also explains the reasoning behind her cover of Don
McLean's "American Pie". I'll come back to that.
So, what exactly is The Next Best Thing supposed to be? As a raw idea,
it's a workable one. Abbie (Madonna), a single, straight woman in LA --
where "there are no straight men" -- has another relationship collapse
under her and hears her biological clock ticking ever louder. She calls
on her best friend Robert (Rupert Everett), for solace (They are best
friends in each other's lives, though we don't see what exactly brought
them together or what they have in common). One really drunken Fourth of
July night they acknowledge what they've known all along, that were it
not for the preferences problem, they'd be a perfect couple. Alcohol
being what it will, twenty four hours later they wake up hungover in
each others arms. Nine months later, after much discussion as to what
role he is going to play, there is a blessed event. Being a perfectly
90s couple, the pair decide to raise the kidlet together, but not get
married (so there won't be any messy legal separation problems if either
on falls in love).
That's just the first half of the flick, which includes Everett doing a
rave up flaunting every Queen-ish stereotype imaginable, and the funeral
of an AIDS victim whose family won't acknowledge the cause, or the
deceased's request to have "American Pie" sung at his funeral. It's
deadly serious stuff versus raucus comedy and it feels like the
proverbial kitchen sink. To be fair, both Madonna and Everett's
characters lovingly sling mud at each other's lifestyles, and those
elements demonstrating their relationship are funnier than everything
else. But if you don't buy the relationship from this first half of The
Next Best Thing, the second half is going to be difficult.
That half is seven years down the line, with a beautiful boy named Sam
and a relationship holding its own, right down to the separate rooms and
beds (kind of like my grandparents. hmm.) Robert maintains a regular
dating life, Abbie raises Sam and doesn't seem to be looking for love in
any place whatsoever. Until investment banker Ben (Benjamin Bratt)
mistakenly wanders into her yoga joint one day. Ping. Quickly, a lesser
continuation of My Best Friend's Wedding turns into a lesser version of
Kramer vs. Kramer. Lyrics from "American Pie" pop up incessantly and
annoyingly in this second half as well.
We also get to see Abbie and Rupert's other friends comment on the
relationship. Abbie's are all straight, Robert's gay, which makes the
how and why of their relationship all the more intriguing. While the
film tries to put all the pieces together, it feels like a number of
story ideas stapled together rather than one solid story.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to The Next Best Thing, he would have
paid...
Lightweight date flick. Cranky watched the flick with and without an
audience. The Next Best Thing works much better with a crowd -- laughter
being contagious and all that. If you're going to go, go with a crowd.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Ross Anthony
In your past, were you ever an international pop icon? Or maybe you
accidentally made love with your best gay friend in a drunken stupor and
woke up pregnant? If so, then you can relate to "The Next Best Thing."
Or maybe you've gone to a multi-screen theater to see a movie, but after a
half-hour of viewing discomfort you snuck into another film to try your luck
at that show? "The Next Best Thing" recreates the experience and you don't
even have to get out of your seat. Because it is really two films - count
'em - two films in one. Not interwoven, but one right after the other. A
whimsically racy comedy starring Madonna and then a child custody drama
starring Rupert Everett.
Remember "My Best Friends Wedding" with Julie Roberts? Well, you may recall
that her best friend is a gay man with whom she vents her messy relationship
woes via cell phone. In an absolutely sparkling scene at the end of that
film, the gay friend comes to her rescue with style, comfort, and the
perfectly devilish hint of romance. "Next Best Thing" sets out to snatch
that moment while changing the sensual hint into a rude reality. In both
cases the gay friend is played by Everett; I've been told Madonna's role was
first offered to Roberts. And of course, there are the similar sounding
titles.
But while Everett was marvelous in "Wedding." He can't save a picture
ironically entitled "The Next Best Thing." Every gay stereotype is utilized,
along with one-liners that fall winceably short building a cheap imitation
of "Wedding's" charm. Fortunately, somebody must have realized that it just
wasn't working because a third of the way through the film, they start a new
film.
Basically, Madonna and Everett accidentally conceive a child. They decide to
raise the boy as their mother and father under the same roof, but not in the
same bed. Everett continues to date, but Madonna doesn't - until she meets
Benjamin Bratt who delivers a strong performance as the perfect marriage pro
spect. Everett's reaction is uncharacteristically selfish, and Madonna's
response to that is even more out of character.
Feeling betrayed by both leads' motivations, the rather lame excuse for a
climax is made lamer. However, the premises established are indeed
interesting. The film could have been improved by 1) dropping the entire
comedy preface, 2) drawing just a bit more out of Everett's relationship
with his own father, 3) more diplomatic dialogue between he and Madonna
prior to the legal battle. Also the interactions between Ben and Rupert
grace this seldom graced film - perhaps more could have been done there. An
earlier funeral scene was nearly very special - needing only a little
tweaking to pull it from the theatric.
Madonna's acting performance is not more or less than average.
The Next Best Thing. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Rupert Everett, Madonna, Benjamin Bratt, Malcolm Stumpf.
Directed by John Schlesinger.
Written by Thomas Ropelewski.
Produced by Tom Resenberg, Leslie Dixon and Linne Radmin at
Lakeshore/Paramount.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Matt Rettenmund
Paramount Pictures/Lakeshore Entertainment. Director: John Schlesinger. Writer:
Tom Ropelewski. Cast: Madonna, Rupert Everett, Benjamin Bratt, Kimberley
Davies, Illeana Douglas, Stacy Edwards, Neil Patrick Harris, Lynn Redgrave.
In the interest of full disclosure, I'm a Madonna fan. That said, I go to all
of her movies with a sense of apprehension. After more than her fair share of
atrocious movies (SHANGHAI SURPRISE, WHO'S THAT GIRL, FOUR ROOMS, GIRL 6 and
BODY OF EVIDENCE spring to mind), Madonna's film career had at one point taken
on the same "save me" quality that Marilyn Monroe's life had for fans and
admirers.
But after acing EVITA with an almost-but-not-quite-Oscar-worthy deathbed scene
as her greatest achievement, Madonna seems to have finally realized that it's
better to wait for good material and well-tailored roles, a realization that
rewards viewers in THE NEXT BEST THING.
John Schlesinger directed MIDNIGHT COWBOY. This is no MIDNIGHT COWBOY. He also
directed EYE FOR AN EYE. Thankfully, this is no EYE FOR AN EYE.
THE NEXT BEST THING is a timely, warmly felt, sweetly funny film that offers a
slice of life view of a contemporary friendship that suffers-but ultimately
endures-some missteps. The friends are the yoga-teaching Abbie and the
construction-working Robert. She's fabulous (but doesn't know it) and he's gay
(but is tired of living stereotypically).
After a weak opening featuring Madonna's Abbie being dramatically dumped by her
woefully miscast snake of a boyfriend (Michael Vartan), the bulk of the movie
glides by with charming comic scenes that evoke smiles and also flesh out the
main characters until they are like members of your own circle of friends. 
Most delightful-and most artfully played and directed-is the drunken night the
friends spend together in a picture-perfect showhome Robert's minding, trashing
the place and getting trashed and having a ball. The direction here is
haunting, as if you're viewing this as one of the best memories of your life.
Madonna and Rupert make an excellent Fred and Ginger.
When Abbie winds up pregnant, the pair decide to live together and raise the
child, which they do successfully until he's school-age.
At this point, Abbie meets a sexy yuppie played by Benjamin Bratt, and her
priorities change. Now, she would like to follow him in marriage across the
country, a move that would render Rupert a father in name only.
In what could have become a mess of complicated loyalties, THE NEXT BEST
THING's single greatest asset is Rupert Everett, whose performance allows both
Abbie and her future husband to be simultaneously sympathetic and also selfish,
totally real. He accomplishes this by over-reacting himself, by being jealous
and threatened, and by making one tragic mistake that threatens to push them
all past the point of no return.
The courtroom scenes are perfunctorily directed, and yet the leads summon
heartbreaking emotion before a slightly rushed conclusion.
In all, this is Madonna's most consistently entertaining film since A LEAGUE OF
THEIR OWN and is yet another reason to think of Rupert Everett as one of
today's most gifted performers.
Gripes? Would have been wonderful to have seen more of the talented but wasted
supporting cast...would have been even better to have heard the soundtrack put
to practical use.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Pictures/Lakeshore Entertainment
 Director: John Schlesinger
 Writer: Tom Ropelewski
 Cast: Madonna, Rupert Everett, Benjamin Bratt, Kimberley
Davies, Illeana Douglas, Stacy Edwards, Neil Patrick Harris,
Lynn Redgrave
   When you come down to it, "The Next Best Thing" looks at
first like a glorified, big-screen soap.  Custody battles are the
warp and woof of daytime TV dramas.  But there's a dollop of
originality to John Schlesinger's take on the issue and Tom
Ropelewski's screenplay avoids most of the cliches and
predictable dialogue that you might find on Channel 7 on a
rainy weekday at tea time.  What "The Next Best Thing"
really has going for it that you won't find anywhere on the
tube is some darn credible and compelling acting, featuring
genuine chemistry between Madonna, one of the most talked-
about figures in Hollywood, and Rupert Everett, who is in real
life an out-of-closet homosexual and one who cannot do
wrong in any movie that casts him.
   Productions with gay themes that are essentially divided
into two halves--the first comic, the second tragic--are not
new.  They've been around at least since Mart Crowley
penned the wonderful play "The Boys in the Band"--in which
a man's roommate confesses his love not to the man he was
expected to, but rather to the roommate's wife.  While the
power of that play is the way it peels away its characters'
pretensions, the energy of "The Next Best Thing" is evoked
by the great love its principal gay character has for the child
he believes he has fathered.  
   A pivotal aspect of the movie is that while the opening half
hour is filled with ordinary, feather-light comedy, pratfalls and
the like, one is pleasantly surprised when the buffoonery
turns serious and the performers (particularly Everett) are
given their heads to evoke audience empathy.  Abbie
(Madonna) opens the tale as she is being dumped by her
boyfriend, Kevin (Michael Vartan) who--considering her warm
personality and shapely form makes Kevin a harebrained 
gentleman indeed.  Luckily for Abbey she has an
understanding gay pal, Robert (Rupert Everett), a terrific
shoulder to lean on.  When Robert--who is housesitting for a
rich, aging gay couple--enjoys some drinks with Abbie and
they go into a Fred Astaire-Ginger Rogers act in the spacious
living room of the house, they somehow end up together in
bed.  Nine months following, a baby arrives.  The
unconventional couple live together for five years, with
Robert's connection to young Sam (Malcolm Stumpf) a loving
one indeed, until complications arrive.  Abbie begins dating a
rich and handsome investment banker, Ben (Benjamin Bratt),
and as Ben and Abbie's thoughts turn to the prospect of
marriage and a permanent move 3,000 miles from the home
shared by Abbie, Robert, and Sam, the earnest drama kicks
in and continues relentlessly until the final resolution of the
story.
   Compelling though the second half is, director Schlesinger
errs on the side of soap opera conventions by
melodramatically turning Abbie's fiance and Abbie herself into
villains who, about to frustrate Robert's natural desire to see
Sam with some regularity force the poor man to take a
desperate legal action against them.  Nor can Schlesinger
resist a final, melodramatic flourish during the custody
hearing involving a knight in shining armor bursting
breathlessly on the scene.  
   Though some of the initial, comic half is of the cookie-
cutter type--gay friends fooling about during the funeral of
one of their own and ridiculing the pomp and circumstance of
the proceedings--one comedic scene is a winner, involving
Robert's entry to Kevin's recording studio in full gay attire
allowing the rap group in attendance to assume that Kevin
was Robert's gay boy friend.  In short, a story which (absent
the unusual nature of Robert and Abbie's household) is
conventional but is redeemed by some of the finest acting
this year so far--matching even the performances of Michael
Douglas and Tobey Maguire in "The Wonder Boys."
Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 107 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
There are a few ways I considered mocking the new film The Next Best
Thing.  I could have chosen to go with a hilarious send-up of the title
and say that Madonna's new project is The Next Best Thong, a riveting
expose about how she chooses which underwear to purchase at Victoria's
Secret (`Show me the next best thong, dah-ling').  I could have gone
with the Rupert Everett gay angle and said something pretentious like
`The Queen of Pop and the Queen of England.'  Or I could have said that
The Next Best Thing to slamming your head in the car door would be to
see this film.
The beauty of The Next Best Thing is that it's not necessary to mock
it.  It mocks itself for you.  The film starts out mildly interesting at
best, before taking a very unexpected turn and spinning completely out
of control.  After the sixty-minute point rolls around, the person
sitting next to you may politely ask you to stop checking your watch
every five minutes because the blue glow keeps waking him up.  After
that, the only reason you might choose to stick around is the challenge
of trying to figure out how they're going to end the stupid movie
without it seeming like a really bad sitcom pilot.  But that's where
Thing really steps up to the plate, ending the film with absolutely no
resolution.  Hey, as long as it ended, I didn't much care.
Thing attempts to capitalize on America's undying love for
homosexualsas long as they're either well-chiseled or funny and sing
show tunes.  Madonna (Evita) plays Abbie, a successful thirtysomething
yoga instructor with a biological clock that's about to overheat thanks
to being dumped by her current beau (Michael Vartan, Never Been
Kissed).  Her best friend Robert (Everett, Inspector Gadget) is a
successful thirtysomething landscaper and prefers hot dogs to donuts.
After Abbie laments the mandatory `There aren't any good straight guys
left in L.A.,' the two get drunk on the fourth of July and knock boots
as the fireworks explode in the background.
Of course, their one sexual encounter impregnates Abbie, who ignores
Robert for weeks before finally dropping the bomb.  `You can be the
baby's father or the baby's uncle,' she says, and, predictably, he
chooses the former, as the two plan to live together and raise the kid.
The pregnancy lasts for about three minutes (Madonna just doesn't do
morning sickness), and from the way the film is edited their offspring
Sam (Malcolm Stumpf) appears to be born a theatrical, buck-toothed
first-grader that's just old enough to know that something is definitely
rotten in Denmark.
To make matters worse, Abbie starts dating an investment banker
(Benjamin Bratt, Law & Order), which is when Thing begins to display all
of the jealousy that you would expect from both your typical hetero/homo
romance and a script from the guy that wrote Look Who's Talking Now
(Thomas Ropelewski).  Thing is so uneven, I heard that they're
considering using it for women's gymnastics in the upcoming Olympic
games.
Thing also features the most annoying lighting since The Mirror Has Two
Faces.  Madonna is not only perpetually backlit, but also has a constant
source of light shining on directly on her face.  It's like a
combination of Doris Day and Anjelica Huston's Morticia Addams, and it
grows more and more disturbing as the film progresses.  One has to
wonder if Ms. M demanded slick cinematographer Elliot Davis (Out of
Sight, Forces of Nature) light her that way, so as not to reveal that
she's a craggy old woman.  On the plus side, she does a pretty good job
of hiding her suspicious British accent.
An interesting note, actor Michael Vartan is only in the film for about
five minutes, but manages to have another Ferris wheel scene, a la his
ride with Drew Barrymore in Never Been Kissed.
1:47 - PG-13 for sexual content, brief nudity and adult language

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE NEXT BEST THING
(Paramount)
Starring:  Rupert Everett, Madonna, Benjamin Bratt, Malcolm Stumpf,
Michael Vartan, Illeana Douglas, Lynn Redgrave.
Screenplay:  Thomas Ropelewski.
Producers:  Tom Rosenberg, Leslie Dixon and Linne Radmin.
Director:  John Schlesinger.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, profanity, brief nudity)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     You can be sure that THE NEXT BEST THING will find plenty of viewers
unsympathetic to its message in support of unconventional family structure
-- the Christian Coalition, for example, or the Utah State Legislature. We
may have come a long way, baby, in matters of social tolerance, but we
haven't come _that_ far. Still, you would expect the people involved in
making THE NEXT BEST THING to have the passion to turn it into a
compelling story. Rupert Everett is perhaps the only openly gay actor
playing leading man roles. John Schlesinger is one of the few openly gay
directors making Hollywood films. And Madonna  well, I saw TRUTH OR DARE,
so I get the impression she's fairly familiar with alternative lifestyles.
     What, then, is the excuse for THE NEXT BEST THING turning out so
generally dreary and uninspired? It starts with a provocative premise
involving two L.A. best friends: yoga instructor Abbie Reynolds (Madonna) 
and gay gardener/landscape architect Robert Whitaker (Everett). The pair
share all their relationship traumas with one another, and spend many
nights crying on one another's shoulders. Then, one drunken evening,
crying on shoulders turns into something more complicated: a one-night
stand that results in a pregnancy. Abbie and Robert decide that their best
friendship could make them wonderful parents, so they move in together and
become mother and father to their son Sam. And all is well until six years
later, when Abbie's desire for a more conventional relationship threatens
to come between Robert and Sam (Malcolm Stumpf).
     As with many films, so far so good in the general concept department. 
It's only in the execution that THE NEXT BEST THING becomes an ordeal to
endure. The character of Abbie is the heart of the disaster, and I'd be
inclined to blame screenwriter Thomas Ropelewski (more on his faults to
come) if not for the screen performance tragedy that is Madonna. Once upon
a time she had a sassy edge, the quality that made her leap off the screen
in DESPERATELY SEEKING SUSAN. These days, it's impossible to notice
anything but that deliberate, affected speech pattern of hers. Abbie does
some pretty unsympathetic things over the course of the film, so it's
crucial that she be played with some energy and charm. Madonna can only
manage attitude, turning Abbie into a straight-up witch just when she
needs to be confused and conflicted. It's a performance so leaden it drags
every single thing about THE NEXT BEST THING down along with it.
     With such a horrendous casting mistake at the heart of THE NEXT BEST
THING, sapping it of any possible resonance, it's easy to tune out and
spend great heaping chunks of the film mulling over its other faults. 
Like, did Ropelewski think there was a rule that any film featuring a gay
character must have an AIDS-related sub-plot, no matter how irrelevant to
the rest of the story (hint: it could have been more relevant had there
been an attempt to connect the question of surviving partners' rights to
gay parents' rights)? Why did usually reliable cinematographer Elliot
Davis light the whole film as though we were in a cave, except for the
Morticia Adams Memorial Eye, Nose & Throat Spotlight used on Madonna? And
what was with Schlesinger's frequent use of fish-eye point-of-view
perspectives that merely served to make a serio-comic tale occasionally
border on the grotesque?
     It's obvious that THE NEXT BEST THING wants to make a statement about
inequities in the adjudication of custody matters, and question what it is
that makes a parent. The statement and question are both valid, but that's
all there is to this clumsy concoction. Rupert Everett is solid both
comedically and dramatically, providing virtually all of the film's 
worthwhile moments, but he's the only thing about THE NEXT BEST THING that
doesn't inspire far more head shaking than righteous indignation. Sure,
everyone involved was probably telling a story about which they felt
deeply, and their hearts were certainly in the right place. When you're
making a film, however, heart just isn't always enough. The real question
to everyone involved is where their heads were. 

Author
Frankie Paiva
How many times have you saw a well-known model or music star try their hand 
at acting? It happens quite often, and usually has disastrous results. Even 
though Madonna has made several film appearances, I still don't find her that 
good of an actress. This picture will probably do nothing to forward her (or 
Rupert Everett's for that matter) acting career. The material presented here 
is just way too soapy and extremely sad to do anything good for the two of 
them, or anything good for the audience.
Abbie (Madonna) is one hip forty year-old chick. She has her own yoga studio, 
friends, and a good life, but she wants more. Her husband Kevin (Michael 
Vartan from Never Been Kissed), is leaving her and she's afraid that she lost 
her only remaining chance to have a baby. Her biological clock is ticking. 
Seeking support and refuge, she spends the night at Robert's (Rupert Everett) 
house, her gay best friend. During a wild night, they consume one too many 
drinks, and the two of them have sex. Abbie discovers that she's pregnant and 
they decide to raise the baby together.
Things go well with their son Sam (Malcolm Stumpf) for several years. Then 
Abbie meets Ben (Bratt), a charming businessman from New York who decides to 
take a yoga class when he gets wrong directions to a gym. He asks her out for 
dinner and while at first Robert seems excited for Abbie, he starts doing all 
he can to sabotage the relationship. Since Abbie and Robert never married, he 
never had legal rights to the child, but when Ben proposes, what does that 
mean for the future of him and Sam?
I have divided this film into two halves. The film changes pace very quickly, 
just when things get going someone has to stop the thing for some added and 
unneeded drama. What starts out as a mildly funny comedy turns itself into a 
vicious custody battle drama, and to tell you the truth, none of it is all 
that interesting. I was drawn to Robert from the beginning, and he gives the 
audience someone to root for, but Abbie is a complete mystery. She's 
uninteresting from the start, and especially gets annoying when she starts 
caring more about herself, than about her child. The performances are pretty 
bad, considering Everett and Lynn Redgrave is in the cast. Madonna is god 
awful for beyond reasons I could list in this review, Bratt does nothing but 
look good and smile, and Everett is surprisingly duller than usual. The 
script does little to help, and shifts genres too quickly as I mentioned 
before. The movie does make great use of Don McLean's song "American Pie," 
it's featured twice in the movie, and Madonna did a cover of it for the 
credits. It is probably the only highlight of the movie.
This is just another Hollywood drama that goes all out to make people cry. 
I'm sure it will succeed. For people looking for a little happiness that the 
film's marketing promotes, you're better off renting Everett's An Ideal 
Husband. He's much more charming and funny in that picture, and the 
supporting cast is all there as well. This movie is in no way good, fun, or 
interesting, and it's not the next best thing to any of those either.

Author
Jon Popick
     Can it really have been 2 long years since THE OBJECT OF MY
AFFECTION made us laugh and cry with its tale of two best friends (an
unlucky in love gal and her gay male roommate) and how they decide to
have a baby together?  Er... so we didn't laugh.  And we didn't cry.
And THE NEXT BEST THING takes us there once again, with an even lamer
attempt at making "The Oddest Couple Has a Baby."
     Fortunately, THE NEXT BEST THING covers very different ground than
AFFECTION.  Unfortunately, that ground turns out to be providing a
platform for Madonna to sing, to show off her yoga skills, and To Show
You How Much She Can E-Mote During Her Di-A-Logue, all while affecting a
slight (yet very pretentious) British accent.  Get outta the way,
people, Madonna's gonna act!!!  And it isn't going to be pretty.  (See
also: EVITA.)
     Rupert Everett tries to be a good sport, but he mainly serves as a
punching bag for Ms. Ciccone and ends up being the butt of his own gay
jokes.  The movie insults his prodigious acting skills and makes a
mockery of his ability.
     What's worst is that viewers probably expect a romantic comedy out
of this, judging from the subject matter and the trailer.  Not so.
While a few early scenes throw you a few bones of decent comedy, THE
NEXT BEST THING rapidly turns into the least funny of scenarios: The
child custody battle.  Believe me, this is *not* KRAMER VS. KRAMER.
     What is it, then?  It's a sloppy mess of a star vehicle that will
leave only Madonna's awful remake of "American Pie" as its legacy.  And
as Don McLean said in his song, boy is this levy dry.
Director: John Schlesinger
Producer: Leslie Dixon, Linne Radmin, Tom Rosenberg
Writer: Tom Ropelewski
Starring: Rupert Everett, Madonna, Benjamin Bratt, Michael Vartan, Josef
Sommer, Lynn Redgrave
http://www.nextbestthingmovie.com/
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE NEXT BEST THING" (Paramount Pictures)
  Madonna's fans will be lining up to see The Material Girl
tackle this timely, thoughtful dramatic comedy, directed by John
Schlesinger. What they don't realize is that America's first openly
gay leading man, Rupert Everett, steals the show, just the way he did
in My Best Friend's Wedding.  Madonna and Everett play best
friends. They're both bright, unconventional and impulsive - with
lousy taste in choosing lovers. One evening, after a few too many
drinks, they wind up in bed together - and, soon afterwards, she
discovers she's pregnant. Eager for motherhood, she offers Everett a
choice: he can either stay uninvolved, be the baby's "uncle," or
assume the role of father. He opts for fatherhood, so they decide to
live together and raise their son (Matthew Stumpf).  Theirs may not be
the perfect family - but it's the next best thing. Everett proves to
be an ideal father, putting the child's interests first and foremost,
refusing to develop other attachments in his life. Their good-natured,
non-traditional arrangement works superbly for several years - until
Madonna meets the man of her dreams (Benjamin Bratt) and ends up in a
nasty fight for custody of the boy. That's when Thomas Ropelewski's
character-driven script gets serious. Keep in mind, this is not a
controversy about homosexuality. It's about significant human
emotions, ties that bind, and commitment. Unfortunately, Bratt's
underdeveloped role is less sympathetic, particularly since the
audience has formed a compelling attachment to Everett, making the
courtroom scenes anticlimactic. And don't miss Madonna's rendition of
Don McLean's American Pie over the final credits. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, The Next Best Thing is a thoroughly enjoyable,
enigmatic 8 - asking: What is a father? What is a family?

Author
Steve Rhodes
John Schlesinger's THE NEXT BEST THING, starring Rupert Everett and
Madonna, goes all the way from being a light-hearted comedy to a tragic
tear-jerker.  But, since none of the sentiments ever seem genuine, the
film is never funny or moving.  Our audience stared silently at the
picture with all of the emotional outpouring of someone who had
mistakenly walked into the funeral of a stranger.
Madonna plays Abbie, a beautiful Yoga instructor whose biological clock
is running out.  Convinced that she'll never find Mr. Right, she decides
that she'd like to have a child with her best buddy, Robert (Everett),
who is a gay gardener.  The cliché-ridden script reinforces her notion
of hopelessness by having her proclaim that all of the men in LA are
gay.
Among the film's many annoying aspects is the lighting.  Like the halo
that follows an angel, the center of Madonna's face is constantly bathed
in the warm glow from a spotlight.  This gives the movie the feel of one
long photo shoot and reinforces its lack of reality.
In the story's middle act, we witness the world's most perfect family,
as Robert and Abbie take care of their 6-year-old son, Sam (Malcolm
Stumpf).  Sam is the most plastic of all of the characters.  He's
perfectly happy, healthy and unaffected, even when the adults around him
scream and threaten awful things.  Even in the morose last act, Sam's
negative emotions are AWOL.
The mean-spirited and ugly concluding segment tries hard to be KRAMER
VS. KRAMER, except that it can't.  The characters in that film were
genuine.
"You're embarrassed, aren't you?" Abbie asks Robert at one point.
"Embarrassment is the understatement of the year," he replies.  One
hopes and suspects that that is exactly how Madonna and Rupert Everett
feel for foisting this travesty upon their fans.
THE NEXT BEST THING runs 1:45.  It is rated PG-13 for mature thematic
elements, sexual content, partial nudity and language and would be
acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Bob Bloom
The Next Best Thing (2000). 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Rupert
Everett, Madonna and Benjamin Bratt. Written by Thomas Ropelewski.
Directed by John Schlesinger.
 Cinematically, what is considered the traditional `nuclear' family -
mom, dad and kids - all living under one roof is as scarce as Pat
Buchanan at a gay rights rally.
 And lately, we've experienced a slew of movies in which non-traditional
families abound.
 Think "Object of My Affection," "Big Daddy," "Cruel Intentions," just
to name a few.
Add to that list "The Next Best Thing."
 "The Next Best Thing" should be an easy movie to like. It contains an
attractive cast, led by Rupert Everett, Madonna and Benjamin Bratt.
 Yet something about the movie is unsettling, almost condescending. 
 Despite its messy plot contrempts, the movie is too tidy, too orderly.
 The story is somewhat similar to "Object of My Affection." Abbie
(Madonna), an attractive, successful single woman is continually unlucky
in love (her latest flame dumped her because she is too complex - i.e.,
she's intelligent).
 Her best friend is Robert (Everett), a handsome, successful landscaper,
who also happens to be gay. Robert is the one Abbie goes crying to
whenever one of her romances dies.
 On the Fourth of July Abbie and Robert have too much to drink while
celebrating and wind up in bed. And before you can say diaper service,
Abbie is a mom.
 Abbie and Robert decide to live together  - but not marry - and raise
their son, Sam.
 This works for a few years until Abbie meets Ben Cooper (Bratt). The
two fall in love, decide to marry and Robert founds himself odd man out.
 No need to tell you the rest. Anyone with a fundamental knowledge of
how these movies work can figure it out.
 On the surface, "The Next Best Thing" is a glossy examination of the
complexities of today's modern family in which mom and dad are not
married, and the two may even have diverse sexual orientations.
 And while Robert presents a positive gay role model, he is too perfect,
too clean. He's the exemplary father, model house mate, consummate
friend. He's just too darn perfect. He's a heterosexual's fantasy of the
perfect, non-threatening gay man.
 I know nothing of screenwriter Thomas Ropelewski's sexual politics, but
his script, while not condescending toward gays, seems to take great
pains to present them as good people - make that extraordinary - loving,
doting, unselfish and giving.
 And while this may be true, flashing it across the screen in capital
letters calls to mind the line from "Hamlet," `the lady doth protest too
much.' It is as if he is overcompensating for making his protagonist
gay.
 That said, though, "The Next Best Thing" is a pretty movie. Everyone
has such pearly teeth.
 Everett gives a strong, solid performance as Robert. He is wise, witty
and wonderful, yet also vulnerable. He carries the movie and is the
center of attention when on-screen, even against Madonna.
 The actress-singer's Abbie is more problematic. She's sharp and
beautiful, yet seems lacking in confidence and self-assurance. It's
difficult to reconcile, making her character contradictory.
 Bratt is compassionate and tender as the new man in Abbie's life. He
only wants what is best for all concerned, including Robert, and refuses
to try to usurp Robert's place in Sam's life.
 Overall, "The Next Best Thing" is an engaging, but sanitized movie.
Putting a few smudges on the main protagonists wouldn't have hurt, and
neither would being a little less politically correct.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
James Sanford
Despite 15 years of experience in movies, Madonna has rarely seemed as
comfortable on the big screen as she has on MTV or on a concert stage.
Perhaps having to follow a script cramps her creativity. She
effortlessly vamped her way through such steamy videos as "Erotica"
and "Bad Girl" but froze up when she was called upon to play a man
eater in the 1993 thriller "Body of Evidence." Although she's often
witty in interviews, her sense of humor has often deserted her in such
comedies as "Who's That Girl?" and "Shanghai Surprise."
To date, Madonna's most effective film work has come from playing
either larger-than-life icons (the indomitable Eva Peron in "Evita"
and the voluptuous nightclub singer Breathless Mahoney in "Dick
Tracy") or nonconformists with a sense of humor about themselves (the
New Wave gypsy Susan in "Desperately Seeking Susan" and the saucy
baseball player Mae in "A League of Their Own").
But whether it's due to a newfound maturity as an actress or her
off-camera role as a first-time mom, Madonna has rarely seemed as much
at home in a movie as she does in the seriocomic "The Next Best
Thing." She has a few awkward moments here and there, but she's
otherwise well-cast as Abbie, a woman speeding toward 40 without a
husband (which she might like) or a child (which she truly wants).
Despite her career as a yoga instructor, Abbie still finds fault with
her looks and her body. Gazing at herself in the mirror, Abbie raises
her breasts and whispers "1989," then lets them droop and murmurs
miserably "1999."
What Abbie does have, however, is a best friend, Robert (Rupert
Everett), who's always there to mop up her tears or mix up an
emergency margarita when she needs it most.  The tenderness of the
relationship is completely believable because of the easy and
affectionate way Everett and Madonna play off of each other. If they
ever decided to dip their toes in the talk show pool, Madonna and
Everett could make a sensational substitute for Regis and Kathie Lee.
Anyhow, back to our story: Robert would be the perfect man for Abbie,
except that he's gay ("He definitely falls into the 'What a waste!'
category," says one of Abbie's friends).  But one sizzling
Independence Day weekend, when both are feeling particularly low,
Abbie and Robert down too many drinks, dance themselves into a frenzy
and end up getting much closer than they ever have before. Their
one-time-only tryst ends in confusion, regret and, to everyone's
shock, pregnancy.
Although it initially sets itself up as a comedy, "The Next Best
Thing" slowly evolves into a surprisingly thoughtful study of family
life and moves easily from lighthearted romp to poignant drama under
the guidance of John Schlesinger, the British director who often seems
to take a personal interest in projects that examine American values
in a changing society (such as "Midnight Cowboy" and "The Falcon and
the Snowman").
If Abbie can't have everything she wants, she's willing to settle for
an unconventional arrangement in which she and Robert can live in the
same house and bring up their son together. But the situation becomes
increasingly complicated as the years go by and Abbie becomes involved
with Ben (Benjamin Bratt), a kind man who could provide the stability
and romance she's always sought.
Commendably, Thomas Ropelewski's screenplay refuses to vilify or
sanctify any of the principal characters, all of whom make some
mistakes and say things they later regret as the stakes become
higher. Even Robert, who's initially the most sympathetic of
characters, gets progressively more defensive when he feels threatened
by Ben and Abbie's plans, and Everett, one of the most disarming stars
currently working, doesn't shy away from letting us in on Robert's
insecurities and anxieties.
Even as the movie becomes progressively more serious, Ropelewski's
dialogue remains peppered with barbs, most of them aimed at the
ignorance of the well-meaning people around Abbie and Robert. A
concerned young woman asks if Abbie's baby will be gay, and Abbie
responds, "Will your kids be stupid?" When one uncouth little boy uses
a politically incorrect term to refer to Robert's love life, a girl
quickly chastises him.  "You're supposed to say 'same-sex partner'!"
she scolds.
Although its subject matter is decidedly contemporary, "The Next Best
Thing" has the ravishing production design of a vintage Technicolor
extravaganza. The colors are vibrant, from the teal curtains in
Abbie's house to the startlingly red flowers in the garden, and Elliot
Davis photographs Everett, Madonna and Bratt lovingly, bathing them in
the golden glow of candles or the cold blue lights of the city. If
every film looked this good, going to the movies would be a whole lot
easier on the eyes.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by John Schlesinger.
Cast: Rupert Everett, Madonna, Benjamin Bratt, Malcolm Stumpf, Michael 
Vartan, Lynn Redgrave, Josef Sommer, Neil Patrick Harris, Illeana Douglas, 
Stacy Edwards.
2000 - 107 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and brief partial nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 4, 2000.
If "The Next Best Thing" had come out prior to 1998's remarkably similar "The 
Object of My Affection," it still wouldn't be a good film, but in comparison 
with that picture's thoughtful nature, smart writing, and intelligence, it 
especially flounders. On nearly every level, "The Next Best Thing" is an 
inferior piece of work, which is all the more surprising considering the film 
feels like a recent film school graduate is at the helm making his debut, 
rather than Academy Award winning director John Schlesinger (1969's "Midnight 
Cowboy"). Calamitously moving at a snail's pace, apparently edited by an 
octogenarian, and with more amateurish performances than usual in a studio 
picture, "The Next Best Thing" is bad filmmaking.
Abbie Reynolds (Madonna) is a single yoga instructor approaching 40, and who 
still hasn't found that special someone in her life. She wants to have a 
child, but feels that it should only be something to share with that person 
she loves. As usual when anything happens to her, after being dumped yet 
again by her sometimes boyfriend Kevin (Michael Vartan), she seeks solace in 
her very best friend, Robert (Rupert Everett), a gardener. Robert is the most 
wonderful, most understanding man Abbie knows, and it is sensed that they 
would be perfect for one another if not for him being gay.
Following the funeral of one of their close friends, who has died of AIDS, 
Robert and Abbie decide to spend the night together to keep each other 
company, but in the process consume just a little too much alcohol, have sex, 
and in a few weeks, like clockwork, Abbie discovers she is pregnant. He very 
much wants to be a father to the child, so Robert and Abbie move in together 
and decide to live platonically, thus providing a healthy family life. 
Switch forward six years, their son, Sam (Malcolm Stumpf), is a caring, happy 
young boy, and Abbie and Robert have been able to maintain their pact. Then a 
complication arises: Abbie meets Ben (Benjamin Bratt), in California from New 
York City on business, and they instantly hit it off. With a new man in 
Abbie's life, Robert begins to sense that their happy existence together, 
thus far, is about to come to an end.
The premise for "The Next Best Thing" sounds amiable enough for it to likely 
be an enjoyable film, but so much of it is flawed, or a missed opportunity, 
that it is amazing the people involved in its making didn't realize there 
needed to be some serious changes, both in the sloppily underwritten and flat 
screenplay, by Thomas Ropelewski, as well as in the basic filmmaking 
approach, which is unprofessional at best.
The first hour, which is about as alive as a three-day-old corpse, does not 
move as much as it slinks depressingly slow across the ground. You sit there, 
watching as one misdirected scene after the next shows up on the screen, and 
you long for something substantial, or at least vaguely interesting, to arise 
from the proceedings. 
Sitting through the opening sixty minutes is one of the biggest endurance 
tests in a film so far this year.
Once the action moves to the present day, when Sam is 6-years-old, things 
thankfully become more tolerable. The light, yet painfully dull, tone of the 
first half is replaced by more serious matters, including a vicious custody 
battle that ultimately leaves Abbie and Robert on opposing sides. Issues of 
fatherhood, biology, and the bearing that homosexuality does, or does not, 
have on caring for a child, are touched upon, and while this section of the 
picture works somewhat, it is all thanks to Rupert Everett's powerhouse 
performance. You feel the pain and betrayal that Robert is feeling, thanks to 
Everett's realistic portrayal, and therefore, you end up finding yourself 
rooting for him, and getting involved in how everything will turn out for him.
Less appealing is Abbie. This is the sole case, however, in which it is not 
the writing that should be put to blame, but the actress. Whereas Madonna was 
exceptionally vibrant in 1996's "Evita," here she is surprisingly stiff, 
delivering her lines in a stilted manner that does not feel real, and suffers 
noticeably more when sharing scenes alongside the vastly more talented 
Everett. If there is a bright side, it is that as the film progresses, 
gradually so does Madonna's performance. That is not to say, though, that she 
is ever good.
All supporting players either try valiantly, or don't know what to do when 
given such unsatisfying roles. Benjamin Bratt is not written as the "bad 
guy," but as a compassionate man who sympathizes with Robert, and he equips 
himself nicely. Lynn Redgrave is warm and memorable as Robert's mother, but 
she has very little time to create a well-rounded character, and ultimately 
never gets to. Likewise for Neil Patrick Harris, as one of Robert's gay 
friends who is given an AIDS subplot that is so undernourished one wonders 
why it was even included in the film. There is no payoff, and it adds nothing 
to the central storyline. As Sam, Malcolm Stumpf may be one of the few kid 
actors in recent memory who didn't drive me up the wall, and his performance 
was stronger and more assured than even Madonna's. Finally, the usually 
reliable Illeana Douglas, as Robert's attorney, is so unconvincing that it 
seems as if she is doing nothing more than playing dress-up.
Characters and minor plotlines are brought up and dropped without a moment's 
pause throughout, while Robert and Abbie remain the star attractions. 
Unfortunately, Everett is the only individual who makes us care about the 
fate of the story, and without him, the film would be even more of a failure. 
As is, "The Next Best Thing" is a depressing, lugubrious film experience, and 
Everett deserves much better.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I've heard some people blow this movie off as just another "Madonna" or "gay
is chique" flick, but obviously none of those people have seen this film,
which talks about love, touches upon romance and most importantly, speaks
about the acceptance of families which aren't the same as our own. In a
nutshell, this movie is an interesting, funny and emotional slice of life in
the new millennium.
PLOT:
A single, pretty girl who can't seem to find the "right guy" ends up
spending a drunken, sexual evening with her gay best friend (both agree that
it was a mistake), only to end up with a baby nine months later. The two
friends must then decide how they are going to raise the child, and
eventually have to deal with what will happen when either one of them finds
their real true love of their life.
CRITIQUE:
Funny, emotional, dramatic, goofy, preachy and open-minded all wrapped in
one, this movie is probably the best romantic "platonic" movie that I've
ever seen. Okay, before I move on, let's answer the question that everyone
reading this review wants to know...yes, Madonna is pretty good in the
movie! Can I go on now? Thank you. I liked this movie mostly because it
actually rung original despite already having seen a few similarly themed
"gay/straight friends liking each other" movies over the past few years. I
think that the leads might've had something to do with that, since Madonna
and Rupert Everett really seemed to love one another platonically in the
film, and it worked! Perhaps their true off-screen friendship benefited the
duo. Of course, you don't really want them screwing in the movie, but their
sincere charm as a couple, makes you want to see everything work out in the
end. And boy, do things ever get sticky!
For a movie that does a good job of balancing the humor and drama for the
first hour or so, prepare yourself for some tissue-time in the last half
hour, when things get kinda rough. Of course, I don't like to admit that I
cry at films (although I will admit to crying as I watched the horror that
was HANGING UP (3/10) a few weeks ago), this movie strung a nice, emotional
tale to which everyone should be able to relate. In fact, the film has more
to do with friendship, love and the acceptance of people's differences, than
it does homosexuality. Don't get me wrong, the film obviously uses this
reality as its basis of narrative, but in the end, the film succeeds in
offering us a funny, emotional look at an atypical, or typical if you will,
American family, in all its glory! Madonna is actually pretty good in it,
and totally believable as a yoga teacher (that was probably her idea :), as
is Rupert Everett, who may want to begin branching out after another great
gay, friend role, since I'm guessing that there is a ceiling for such roles.
I will admit that I didn't truly buy into a couple of scenes that had
Madonna crying, but overall, she certainly did a great job of having me
appreciate her as this adorable, lonely girl just looking for the right guy
(as opposed to the real "Madonna" that she is). And let's not forget
Benjamin Bratt, who also looks great in this film (you go, Julia!) and
delivers his scenes with charm. And even more importantly, what about the
bodies on these guys, eh? I mean, is it just me, or were Rupert and Ben
competing for the best six-packs here? Wow. I am Jack impressed.
All in all, a very good movie that does a decent job of balancing its humor,
its drama, its love and its romance. Go in, enjoy it and if you're one to
shed a tear or two every now and then, I suggest you bring some tissues. Now
allow me to go put on some "Frank".
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Madonna's full name is Madonna Louise Veronica Ciccone. She recently dropped
out of the lead role for the 1999 movie MUSIC OF MY HEART, a part which
eventually went to Meryl Streep and nabbed her another Oscar nomination.
Rupert Everett is gay in real life and has twice been nominated for a Golden
Globe award. The first one was for his supporting role in MY BEST FRIEND'S
WEDDING, and the more recent one was for his performance in AN IDEAL HUSBAND
(7.5/10).
Benjamin Bratt is probably best known of late as being Julia Roberts' better
half, but he's been in the biz since around 1988. His mom is a Peruvian
Indian from Lima, but he grew up in San Francisco.
Actor Michael Vartan was born in Normandie, France and speaks both English
and French fluently. He began his professional movie career in French films,
his first was called "Un Homme et deux Femmes" (One man and two women). He
also turned down a role in SCREAM 3 (7.5/10) because he wanted to take his
career in a different direction.
Director John Schlesinger was born in London, England and is probably best
remembered as the director of the 1969 film MIDNIGHT COWBOY, which earned
him an Academy Award for Best Director.
Neil Patrick Harris also plays a gay man in this movie. Doogie Howser, M.D.
'Nuff said.
Screenwriter Tom Ropelewski was last credited as writer/director of the film
LOOK WHO'S TALKING NOW.
This working title for this film was THE RED CURTAIN.

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Next_Best_Thing_ (PG-13) no stars (out of ****)
Best friends may make the best mistakes, but Madonna makes the absolute
worst, at least in terms of her film career, which has been a comedy of
errors or a horrible tragedy, depending on how one looks at it.  After
the surprisingly impressive anomaly that was _Evita_ (which won her a
Golden Globe), the pop music diva is back to her infamously poor projects
and even poorer performances with _The_Next_Best_Thing_--which, as the
title states, is not the best, but it's hardly that close to it.  In
fact, this awful mess is more like the absolute worst.
One can understand Madonna and co-star Rupert Everett's decision to make
this film.  The two are longtime friends, and it gives them an
opportunity to work together in roles that are "like" themselves--or,
rather, how _they'd_like_ to see themselves: a witty everyman (Everett)
who just happens to be openly gay, and--more notably--a "normal" woman
(Madonna).  But, as her nearly two-decade-long stint in the spotlight has
shown, being "normal" is hardly natural for Madonna.  What is natural to
her, it seems, is that strange British-or-whatever accent this Detroit
native has adopted in recent years.  And that affected speech pattern
always gets in the way; while she does have a few uncharacteristically
relaxed moments (perhaps due to her ease with Everett), the funky accent
eventually creeps in and ruins it.
Then again, with one big exception, Madonna's voice has always been
grating in her screen efforts, long before she fancied herself a
foreigner.  That exception, of course, is in the entirely sung-through
_Evita_, and that's no coincidence.  Singing is something that she is
clearly comfortable with and--crucially--confident in doing, and that's
what made the difference in her justly-lauded performance.  It was not so
much the indisputable fact that she's a much better vocalist than
thespian, but that she was considerably calmer and thus more natural, not
trying so hard to prove her "acting ability."  Without a musical crutch,
however, she overcompensates--as she again does in _The_Next_Best_Thing_.
It must be said that there's so much deficiency in the film that one can
almost understand the need to make up for it with overkill.  In
_Next_Best_, Madonna's Abbie and Everett's Robert--two
generically-written characters--are best friends living in L.A.  Coming
off of a nasty breakup (hers) and the death of a close friend (his), the
two drown their sorrows one night and end up doing the dirty deed.  She
gets pregnant, and the two decide to raise the child (a son, named Sam)
together.  Light stuff, all done with a light touch, but so light as to
make one wonder if director John Schlesinger was ever in the room when
the film was shot.  Madonna is always clueless as an actress, so it's no
surprise that her formless, flavorless portrayal of Abbie cries out for
guidance.  The big shock is how bad the usually reliable Everett is.  His
ability to toss off bon mots is less smooth as smug, often peppered with
some ill-advised mugging and other sorts of physical gags.  The biggest
botch of all, though, is Schlesinger's, with the centerpiece night: while
the aim is not to be romantic, there should be at least some sense of
warmth and affection; these are, after all, best friends.  But there's no
tenderness, just some would-be funny instances of furniture being broken
(ha ha), glimpses of the two doing drunken dance steps, and closeups of
liquor being poured into goblets.
_Next_Best_ would be bad enough as a comedy; once the film flashes
forward six years, tired cute kid humor is added into the mix.  Yet for
some reason screenwriter Thomas Ropelewski, who doesn't come close to
meeting his modest initial goals, decides to aim even higher.  Abbie
meets and falls for a New York-based businessman (Benjamin Bratt,
boring), and then the film takes the left-field turn into a heavyhanded
custody battle drama.  As feared, this shift brings out the worst in
Madonna, who cannot hold her own with Everett, who is indeed a capable
dramatic actor.  But she's not the only one at a loss as to what to
do--so are Ropelewski and Schlesinger, who open up a can of worms and
then just toss it aside.  Many films use text cards to divulge the fate
of their characters, but I have never seen a film rest its entire
resolution on them.  The film fades out, with no sense of closure--or
even a sense of things coming together for a close--then states in print
how it all turns out.  What the hell?
There other flubs in _The_Next_Best_Thing_ (such as a line where Robert
mentions it's the 21st Century in a scene that, in the film's time frame,
should be set around 1993; or the fact that Robert's sole love interest,
a cardiologist, has no name and is rather comically listed in the closing
credits as "Cardiologist"), but to go over them would be as pointless an
exercise as the entire film is.  One should just not make a flub oneself,
and avoid this _Thing_.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

