Title
Review for Glimmer Man, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Steven Seagal, Keenan Ivory Wayans, Bob Gunton, Brian Cox, 
      Michelle Johnson, John Jackson, Stephen Tobolowsky
Director: John Gray
Producers: Julius R. Nasso and Steven Seagal
Screenplay: Kevin Brodbin
Cinematography: Rick Bota
Music: Trevor Rabin
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     There's something very comfortable about reviewing a Steven Seagal 
film.  Except for the odd aberration (UNDER SIEGE), all of his movies 
have been pretty bad.  And there's the similarity aspect to consider -- 
Seagal's heroes are all interchangeable, as are most of the plot lines 
and action sequences.  Regardless of whether he's masquerading as a 
ship's cook, a fire fighter, or an LA cop wearing love beads, Seagal is 
always Seagal, which is exactly what his fans want.  In fact, the 
sameness of these films is such that, if I wanted to, I could take an 
old review, change the names, and have a reasonably accurate take on the 
new movie.  Not that I'd ever really do that...
     There is a certain, undeniable entertainment value in watching the 
exaggerated Seagal-kicks-butt scenes.  However, after a few cracked 
skulls, broken bones, and near emasculations, that type of fun starts 
getting dull.  It always amazes me how tough villains are in these 
movies.  It takes at least a dozen vicious blows to the head before 
Seagal finally topples an enemy in THE GLIMMER MAN.  Actually, my 
favorite scene doesn't involve a one-on-one confrontation.  It occurs 
during a particularly nasty car crash.  Once the vehicle has flipped 
over, but is still moving, Seagal (who isn't wearing a seatbelt) escapes 
through the smashed back window, then gets up and starts running away.  
It's a moment that Superman would envy.
     Seagal plays Jack Cole, a homicide detective with a mysterious past 
and a penchant for wearing love beads (they're an unsuccessful reminder 
that violence is against his religion).  As it turns out, he was once a 
special operative for the U.S. government.  In his capacity as a trained 
assassin, he was known as "The Glimmer Man" -- as in, you see a glimmer 
of him, then you're dead.  Now, Cole's past has come back to haunt him 
while he's tracking a serial killer.  A wealthy businessman, Frank 
Deverell (Bob Gunton), has teamed with Cole's former boss, Mr. Smith 
(Brian Cox), and, together, these two are planning an illegal chemical 
weapons deal that will make them very rich.  Meanwhile, Cole has to 
convince his new partner, Jim Campbell (Keenan Ivory Wayans), that he's 
not nuts when he starts talking about high level conspiracies involving 
the Russian mob.
     The buddy angle is the only remotely new twist for a Seagal movie.  
For short stretches, Keenan Ivory Wayans is a useful antidote to 
Seagal's blandness (although I swear I saw the notoriously stone-faced 
star change expression once or twice during this film), but it never 
lasts very long.  All of the intentional humor goes to Wayans, including 
at least one line that's very funny.  (I won't mention it here -- if 
you're unfortunate enough to see THE GLIMMER MAN, I wouldn't want to 
ruin the best part.)  There's also a gag regarding Campbell's crying 
during CASABLANCA that, while juvenile, is nevertheless amusing.
     There are more pyrotechnics in THE GLIMMER MAN than in any non-
UNDER SIEGE Seagal outing.  Everything seems to be exploding.  And, in 
addition to all the shootouts and martial arts battles, there's even 
time for a gadget or two, including a lethal credit card that functions 
like a Ginsu knife.  (Anyone know where I can get one of those?)  All-
in-all, what we have here is "classic" Seagal.  And that means, for 
anyone who isn't an admitted fan, an uninspired outing.  As a result, 
perhaps this review is redundant.  After all, how many different takes 
can there be on a Seagal movie unless (gasp!) it somehow manages to be 
good.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
Jamie Peck
Warner Bros. / 1:32 / 1996 / R (violence, gore, language, Steven Seagal, 
corpse nudity)
Cast: Steven Seagal; Keenan Ivory Wayans; Brian Cox; Bob Gunton; Michelle 
Johnson; John Jackson; Stephen Tobolowsky
Director: John Gray 
Screenplay: Kevin Brodbin 
Steven Seagal's last few movies have actually bore the distinction of being 
not too bad, with the exception of his 1994 botched directorial debut, "On 
Deadly Ground." Both "Under Siege" movies were, I suppose, mildly amusing, 
and his brief turn in last spring's "Executive Decision" was actually -- 
gasp! -- something of a welcome. (That could be because he was killed off so 
quickly.) But whoever he's recently pleased will be unhappy now, because 
"The Glimmer Man," Seagal's latest action flick, is an ugly return to form 
for the star, a horrid invoking of nearly every cop movie cliche that 
results in one of the dumbest films of the year. 
Seagal plays Jack Cole, a governmental special operative-turned-Buddhist 
homicide detective. Cole dons prayer beads and silk jackets, chants, speaks 
Chinese and refuses to engage in combat unless he's goaded -- and because 
people go to a Steven Seagal movie to see the him mop the floor with 
assorted baddies, it's a safe bet that he will be provoked plenty of times 
before "The Glimmer Man" is over. 
Cole is on a case to catch the mysterious killer known as "The Family Man" 
(Stephen Tobolowsky), called thus due to his penchant for murdering Catholic 
households through crucifixion. He is reluctantly teamed up in his 
investigation with a partner by the name of Jim Campbell (Keenan Ivory 
Wayans). It's the first time Seagal is allowed a sidekick, and maybe the 
last. The faux-comedic banter between the two covers cheap, juvenile 
territory -- Campbell tries to mask his sad tears as he views
"Casablanca" with his new pal. He watches in amazement as Cole dispatches a 
couple villains with a credit card (don't ask). And as if all this weren't 
enough, Cole introduces Campbell to a Chinese allergy cure ... which turns 
out to be powdered deer penis! Oh, please stop, guys! My sides are hurting, 
I'm laughing so hard! 
Still, however lame the buddy-buddy gags are in "The Glimmer Man," the plot 
is always one step worse. What starts out in shades of "Seven" ends up 
veering off in a strange direction after Cole becomes the  investigation's 
prime suspect when his ex-wife falls victim to "The Family Man." All of a 
sudden, the movie's about powerful political figures -- one of whom is 
Cole's old boss (Brian Cox) -- who are trying to pull off a smuggled 
chemical weapons deal involving the Russian mob. This, of course, after a 
ludicrous scene where Seagal claims a nude female corpse on an autopsy table 
is from said country -- and then cuts open her breast and pulls out the 
implant to prove so. 
By the way, this movie is called "The Glimmer Man" because Seagal's 
character is allegedly so skilled at sudden death that you only catch a 
"glimmer" of him before he kills you. Of course, I'm praying the title takes 
on a double meaning, as "The Glimmer Man" should hopefully run through 
theaters faster than diahrea. 
Š 1996 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
The Flying Inkpot
I am a Steven Seagal fan. I only say this now because "Mufti Splenetik"
isn't my real name and because I probably need to explain why I went into
this film expecting great things.
Any proud Seagal fan worth his beans will tell you that the Seagal formula
is something you can depend on. Seagal films can always be counted on for
minimal dialogue, heaps of expendable baddies with extemely crunchable
bones (which we'll always hear when Seagal does his limb-twisting thing),
rarely a female co-lead in sight (unless it's a real-life model-wife who
hasn't worked since WEIRD SCIENCE) and, usually the worst possible titles
you can imagine. Not to mention very straightforward plots, generally
all-round bad dialogue and Mr Implacable Leather-Face himself in that same
black outfit he's been in since NICO doing his "my hands are sharp, nimble
knives" thing, Seagal the Stoic, Sir Petrified Ponytail, Duke of Dull.
In THE GLIMMER MAN, Seagal breaks out of this formula: he gets a *sidekick*,
attempts to banter, and puts on a new vest. He's also put on quite a lot of
weight. Small potatoes, you may say, a man should be able to accessorize
and banter if he wants to, but damnit, if it ain't broke, why fix it? (more
on this disappointed person's dashed expectations later).
As Jack Cole, Seagal is a homicide detective with a Questionable Past. While
he and his partner (played by Keenen Ivory Wayans) are investigating a
series of ritual killings, Cole himself becomes a suspect, especially when
a background check run by Campbell reveals practically nothing on Cole.
It turns out that Cole is a former trained government assassin (you just
can't trust these homicide detectives), someone whom victims used to catch
just a glimpse of in the jungle before he pounced on them, and hence, well,
you know, that "glimmer man" thing. An increasingly fishy homicide
investigation in the present soon leads to the gradual uncovering of a
larger, more threatening conspiracy that involves a crooked businessman
(Bob Gunton), Cole's former CIA boss (Brian Cox) and deals involving
chemical weapons.
THE GLIMMER MAN plot is pretty standard stuff, drawing (as with his other
films) elements from the hotter films of the year (eg, SE7EN). It's the
other changes that disappoint.
For example, although there's a fair amount of violence in this movie,
there's also the disastrous pairing of Seagal with Keenen Ivory Wayans,
probably the best known of the Wayans tribe (how many are there, exactly?)
from television's "In Living Colour." Wayans plays whiney straightman to
Seagal's bead-adorned and brocade-draped Cole, keeping up his "are you
crazy" part of the dialogue with wasted zest. As Campbell, Wayans confines
himself to bemoaning his new partner's eccentric habits, but the chemistry
between the two is minimal, and Seagal's wooden comebacks make for painful
watching.
A cook in UNDER SEIGE 2, Seagal is now a Buddhist who speaks Chinese and
wears prayer beads and intricate silk jackets over his normal black
ensemble. He chants, refuses to fight unless truly provoked and introduces
Campbell to powdered deer penis to cure his allergies. Again, a benign (if
trite) plot device except for the fact that these new character traits
require Seagal to speak more than usual. Heck, he has to deliver punchlines
and carry a steady conversation with someone other than himself for a large
part of the film. Is that a lot to ask of the Seague? Too much.
Seagal's best characteristic used to be that he knew his purpose in this
already complicated world of movies: to crunchily snap off bad guy
appendages, and to do it silently, and alone. Not for Seagal, the snappy
one-liners of Arnold and Stallone, nor the attempts to show that he can
act, much less think. No KINDERGARTEN COP, no OSCAR, just simple,
unadulterated deathblows. That's really how it must have started:
like-minded fans who knew what they wanted streamed in to watch The Seague
do his thing, knowing that never in the Seagal universe would they ever
have to see him do anything else. We trusted him. We got to know him. Now, 
betrayal.
I don't know if I can watch another Seagal movie without that little
niggling doubt that he's going to try to be funny again. I'll try, but it
won't be easy. If you haven't watched THE GLIMMER MAN yet, you might want
to wait for the video to come out. It's easier to just fast forward the
dialogue parts and linger on the action sequences. After all, if we can't
depend on our fantasies, what can we depend on?
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
  
Mufti Spelenetik is still a Steven Seagal fan. Everybody makes mistakes once
in awhile.


Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Steven Seagal, Keenan Ivory Wayans, Bob Gunton, Brian Cox,
Michelle Johnson, John Jackson, Stephen Tobolowsky Director: John Gray
Screenplay: Kevin Brodbin
101 Dalai Lama brownie points, and full marks for donating some of the
proceeds of this movie to the Tibetan cause - earning Segal the title of
'Tulku' (reincarnated lama); but all that glitters is not gold, and the
only glimmer in this movie is sadly a fish out of water.
He has chosen the oriental look, dresses like a monk with a pony tail,
has put on a bit of weight, but beneath all his exterior show of
Buddhism is Steven Segal. It was hard to picture him as the same man who
had played the knife wielding chef of 'Under Siege.'
The plot is even more difficult to comprehend. What is the possibility
that an ex-mercenary, turned cop, now becomes involved with a serial killer
who crucifies his victims including Segal's ex-wife; but in truth there
are two killers, also a wealthy business man trying to murder his step
son, and a partner (Wayans) who cries every time he sees 'Casablanca'
and eats 'deer penis' for his allergies.
