Title
Review for Children of the Revolution (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Richard Roxburgh, Judy Davis, Sam Neill, Geoffrey Rush, 
      Rachel Griffiths, F. Murray Abraham, Paul Livingston, Paul Lyneham
Director: Peter Duncan
Producer: Tristan Miall
Screenplay: Peter Duncan
Cinematography: Martin McGrath
Music: Nigel Westlake
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     Quite a few recent North American imports of Australian films have 
been mediocre, feel-good comedies like HOTEL DE LOVE, COSI, and LOVE AND 
OTHER CATASTROPHES.  CHILDREN OF THE REVOLUTION, the latest offering 
from down under, is superior to its tepid '97 predecessors in several 
ways.  Not only is it based on a fairly original premise, but the humor 
exhibits a distinct edge.  
     The film starts out much like STRICTLY BALLROOM, with a faux 
documentary format that lapses into a more traditional narrative version 
of storytelling.  This style persists throughout the entire film, with 
talking head commentary and "archival footage" occasionally interrupting 
the flow.  The most biting wit comes during these "interviews," and 
first-time writer/director Peter Duncan's atypical approach allows the 
movie to end with a recursive twist.
     CHILDREN OF THE REVOLUTION opens in 1951 Sydney, where die-hard 
communist Joan Fraser (Judy Davis) is drumming up support to defeat a 
ballot referendum that would outlaw the party.  Joan's mantra, which she 
utters at every possible opportunity, is taken directly from Marx:  
"From each according to his capacity to each according to his means."  
One of her fellow communists, a conventional fellow named Zachary Welch 
(Geoffrey Rush), proposes marriage, but Joan refuses, claiming that 
she's not in love with him.
     Every week, she writes a new letter to her hero, Joseph Stalin (F. 
Murray Abraham).  When the dictator finally gets around to reading her 
missives, he is so touched by her enthusiasm that he arranges for her to 
visit Moscow for the 1952 Communist Party Conference.  There, on the 
night that Stalin dies, she sleeps with both him and an 
Australian/Russian double agent (or perhaps triple agent) named David 
Hoyle.  Nine months later, when Joan is back in Sydney and married to 
Zachary, she gives birth to a baby boy.  But is the child, Joe Welch 
(played by Ben McIver as a youngster; Richard Roxburgh as an adult), the 
offspring of Stalin or Hoyle?  
     Smartly written and adroitly developed, CHILDREN OF THE REVOLUTION 
fires verbal and visual volleys at multiple bullseyes, from communism 
and Stalin to the news media and McDonalds.  Not all of the satirical 
jabs hit their mark, but there are so many of them that most of the 
misses go unnoticed.  And several that do work are just short of 
brilliant.  One of the more absurd scenes, which calls to mind Mel 
Brooks' "Springtime for Hitler" (from THE PRODUCERS), has Stalin singing 
and dancing to "I Get a Kick Out of You".  There's also a sequence that 
details a "macabre and barbaric" means of breaking a hunger strike:  
blow the scent of sizzling bacon into the cell of the striking prisoner.  
     One testament to the strength of Duncan's film is the cast he was 
able to assemble.  International star Judy Davis is in fine form as 
Joan.  Geoffrey Rush, who just won a Best Actor Academy Award for SHINE, 
plays her husband.  Sam Neill is a dashing, debonair spy.  Rachel 
Griffiths (MURIEL'S WEDDING) is a sexy constable.  And Richard Roxburgh, 
a relative unknown with impressive range, is Joe, the possible son-of-
Stalin.
     If there's an obvious fault with CHILDREN OF THE REVOLUTION, it's 
that there's very little subtlety.  Some of the satire is broader than 
seems necessary.  And many of the parallels between Joe and Stalin (such 
as the dark, vault-like office where both of them "hold court") are 
rather obvious.  Nevertheless, there's enough solidly entertaining, 
occasionally thought-provoking material in the film to make it worth a 
trip to the theater.  The barbs directed at the manner in which the 
media disseminates information, while not as vicious as those delivered 
by Gus Van Sant's TO DIE FOR, are among the movie's strengths, and the 
aspects of political parody are universally comprehensible.  CHILDREN OF 
THE REVOLUTION uses a fresh approach to take aim at a broad range of 
targets, and the result is both decisive and incisive.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ben Hoffman
While it is being billed as a "black Red" comedy, it is, despite some
funny moments, more of a black Red satire than comedy.  For those like
writer-director Peter Duncan's father, a card-carrying Communist who
never was able to believe the horror stories about Stalin, this film
will be most difficult.  But for the rest of the world, the film's
story is indeed way out, as satire should be, and fiercely
entertaining at the same time.  This, in large part, is due to the
fabulous actors who bring the movie to life.
Heading the cast is Joan Fraser (Judy Davis) as the Australian Red
revolutionary whose whole life in 1949 is the Party.  She is an
activist who brooks no diversion from her party line as she sees it and
"knows" one day her communists will take over Australia.  She is
enthralled with her leader and writes to Stalin (F Murray Abraham) to
tell him she is his Australian right arm.  One day she is surprised to
receive an invitation to visit him in the Kremlin..
Things really take off when she spends the night with Stalin and he
suffers a fatal heart attack but not before Joan has become
pregnant.  Back home again, she induces her husband (Geoffrey Rush)
to never reveal he is not the father.  Little Joe (Richard Roxburgh)
will grow up.  A mother's dream come true . . . a little
revolutionist . . . or so you would think. . . while the film takes a
new and exciting turn.  You have never seen anything like it.
Also supporting the cast is Sam Neill who despite a wealth of roles is
probably best remembered as the paleontologist in Jurassic Park.
Written and Directed by Peter Duncan.

Author
Jun Yan
        It's Australia, 1953.  A young, attractive college student Joan
(played by Judy Davis) is a passionate communist firmly believes in the
Soviet Union and the world-famous figure Joseph Stalin.  Although without
much support in her own world, she stands by her faith and writes letters
to Stalin with all her admiration.  They somehow get to catch Stalin's
eyes (Stalin played by Murray Abraham, who in no way reminds me of Stalin
at all in his appearance despite his chunky nose).  The next thing we
know, she's on her way to Moscow and has a one-night-stand with him which
both kills him with a heart attack and inpregnated her.  Back to
Australia, Joan marries her puppy lover Zackery Welch (played with ease by
Geoffery Rush) and makes him swear never tell anyone he's not really her
boy's father. 
        The boy, Joseph Welch, grows up with a strange interest in going
to jail, and he does finally, for refusing to register in the army to go
to Vietnam.  Although brain-washed by his mother all his life about the
greatness of Communism and Stalin, he does later recognizes the ugly truth
of his father.  He seems to be a sweet natured kid at first. However, as
time passes by, he slowly develops an appetite for power and dominance and
becomes alarming like one certain famous historical figure.  
        As a political satire, the film definitely shows its weakness in
dealing with the reality of the Soviet Union and Stalin.  All the scenes
in Moscow with Stalin and his guards/followers fall into the level of
forced comedy that's not very funny.  But the parts with Joan and people
surrounding her and her passion for Stalin as well as Communism are quite
amuzing -- at least to me, who grew up in a Communist country yet am never
convinced and converted of the idea.  She is more of a comical and pitiful
figure than a force that persuades anyone.  
        Other characters in the film are less one-dimensional and more
interesting.  The passive, good-hearted husband Welch, the secretive (at
least trying hard  to be secretive) KGB/Secret Service Man and double
agent David (played with understated humor by Sam Neil) who has a crush on
Joan and fantacizes being Joe's father, and  Joe's police officer wife,
Anna, who gets into dating him by repeated arresting him in anti-Vietnam
war protests.  This is probably the funniest and most genuine part of the
film and gains much chuckles from the audience.  They are not simplified
personalities that we've seen in other films and they keep me interested.  
        The plot itself is not that intersting and engaging.  The writer
does not seem to have made up his mind as to what would be the theme or
central issue of the film.  Ideas are not developed and story lines
scatter all over the place without a clear destination.  A clear example
is the transformation of Joe Welch as his hunger for power and control
grows.  He is a sweet kid when he grows up and dates Anna.  He clearly
recognizes Stalin's brutality and cruelty.  He even saves a prison
officer's life risking his own.  Even as he slips down the slope into the
like of his father, he still tells his mother that all her faith is
meaningless and useless.  However, the filmmaker never makes clear just
what his ultimate intentions are.  He said it's a "revolution." But his
own cynicism and disbelief in Communism hardly support that claim.  And
the finale is strange and illogical.  

Author
Edwin Jahiel
CHILDREN OF THE REVOLUTION *** 1/4. Australia (1996) Written & directed by
Peter Duncan. Producer, Tristram Miall. Photography, Martin McGrath.
Editing, Simon Martin. Production design, Roger Ford. Costumes, Terry Ryan.
Music, Nigel Westlake. Cast: Judy Davis (Joan), Sam Neill (Nine), F.Murray
Abraham (Stalin), Richard Roxburgh (Joe),Rachel Griffiths (Anna), Geoffrey
Rush (Welch),Russell Kiefel (Barry),John Gaden (Dr. Wilf Wilke), Ben McIvor
(young Joe), et al. A Miramax release. 99 minutes. NR.
COTR justifies doubly its being a mockumentary: it is fiction in
documentary clothes and it mocks its subject all the way. It stars Judy
Davis, who was launched internationally in her second film, My Brilliant
Career --a title that turned out to be prophetic for Miss Davis.
In COTR she plays (and I mean plays, as she is a unique performer rather
than just a star), over a span of four decades, an Australian woman called
Joan. She has no private life but is a dedicated believer in Communism, in
the Revolution and in Stalin,  once the Uncle Joe of so many people around
the globe. She has painstakingly learned to write Russian in order to keep
writing letters to the Soviet dictator.
The missives are unanswered, but one day, as they are being read by Kremlin
apparatchiks, all those flunkies-in-uniform are touched to tears. Like
other scenes, there is broad humor here, a la Mel Brooks. The result is
that Stalin learns about Joan and invites her to Moscow.
The man is played (also broadly and amusingly) by F. Murray Abraham as an
aging, horny goat, doubly irascible because he is trying to stop smoking --
another clever touch for those who remember Stalin's eternal pipe.
In Australia, Joan has always looked frumpy, with the kind of  bad hair day
that extends to years -- a touch that  is true of a certain type. In the
USSR she looks gorgeous in sexy red, from dress to accessories, but the
hair remains the same, like Joan's fanatical beliefs.  Stalin is aroused.
Stalin makes passes. Stalin has congress with virginal Joan during the
night of March 4 to 5, 1953. Uncle Joe dies.
In Australia, Joan had met Nine (a name that parodies James Bond's 007) an
investigating Aussie Government spy. In Moscow, he reappears in the regalia
of a KGB Colonel. He coolly explains: "The Australians think you are a spy
for the Russians. They want me to kill you. The Russians brought me over to
look after you. Frankly, it's a bit of a tangle. I'll have to make it up as
I go along." Delightfully, the film too makes itself up as it goes along.
The night Stalin rejoined his Georgian ancestors, a panicky Joan tells Nine
" I killed him." In the ensuing consolation, Joan and Nine sleep together.
The next day, Comrades Beria, Krushchev and Malenkov whom Stalin, ever the
lover of Hollywood flicks, derisively called his Three Stooges, feast Joan
with flowers and song.
Returning to Sydney pregnant, our heroine finally marries her longtime
suitor Welch whose Red politics are mostly a way to stay with Joan.
Geoffrey Rush of "Shine"  does him in a quiet, minor key and sometimes
reminds me of James Woods.
Nine months later, a son is born to her. He is named Joe. The kid grows up
properly indoctrinated, and with a love of jails, something that starts out
as a child's a game --with the assistance of friendly, amused policemen.
As young Joe grows up, the movie, with its knack for the unexpected, slyly
treats his kinky prison complex as a form of bondage. It leads to a
wonderful love affair with arresting, leather- and-handcuffs-bearing
mounted constable Anna. (She reminds me at times of Juliet Lewis). There
are hilarious scenes of touchy-feely sex through the prison parlor's glass
and wire.
Madly inventive details chronicle Joe's career, from learning in prison
about Stalin's crimes to being "tortured" by the authorities with
industrial strength frying bacon smells that are supposed to break him. Joe
becomes a hero during a jail fire, grows a mustache (intelligently, not
exactly like Stalin's) to cover his burned lip, goes on to amassing
political power, but not in the direction that Mom expected.
Joan is not only let down by her flesh and blood, but by the Gorbachev
years  which will lead inexorably to the horror of a Macdonalds in Red
Square and "the end of civilization as we know it." All the while, Joe is
solicitously looked after by  his now-wife Anna, his nominal father Welch,
and by a weirdly sweet and loving Nine who suspects that Joe may be his own
son.
Writer-director Duncan rewrites Australian history with an  uncompromising
courage for unrealistic fantasy. (Note, among other aspects, how some
principal characters hardly age). Duncan treats events and characters as
wildly fabricated history and with bits wildly borrowed from movies.
Duncan's two BAs (1989)-- in Arts and in Laws --were followed by a period
of legal practice. He then switched to a three-year degree from the
Australian Film, TV and Radio school, made short films while at the school
and co-wrote the excellent documentary series Faces of War.
COTR, his grand slam feature debut, began as a discussion he had about
Christianity. This led to thinking about twentieth century passions, and to
remembrances of his own grand-father, a card carrying communist party
member who never wavered in his faith in  Stalin.
The resulting movie goes well beyond socialism and communism. Its subtext
is what longshoreman-philosopher Eric Hoffer (1902 -1983) wrote so sharply
about in books like The True Believer ( on mass movements), or The Ordeal
of Change (on reactions to major  sociopolitical upheavals). Whether or not
Duncan knew those works, their principles underlie his film. Political and
other  -isms are interchangeable. Whether fanatics or opportunists, the
believers can switch to other camps.
Filmically, COTR deals with Marxism in a Groucho Marxian way. Characters
are exaggerated, break into American movie songs ( ("I Get a Kick Out Of
You." "You're the Top"), even dance, at the drop of a cap. The fabricated
facts go into seeming incoherences and non sequiturs as they break the
rules of orderly scripting. Film buffs will find many (but not obvious)
cinematic touches. Such as a parody of the already parodied commissars in
Ninotchka , or as when Joe, gradually alienating himself from others, is
seen isolated  in his large, "inhuman" office that echoes visuals of
Citizen Kane.
There may be too much packed in the movie, although  a second viewing will
sift through the components and makes the film even more coherent and
enjoyable for those who are aware of history and film history. The paradox
here is that this work about the masses is     not a film for the masses.
