Title
Review for Getting to Know You (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Murali Krishnan
Bus depots are not cheerful places. Often the people found inside are
down on their luck, running away, or just poor. It is appropriate that
a bus station is the setting for this film. It is a story of people
towing their emotional baggage through the dreary way-points of their
lives, trying to reach a better destination.
Siblings Judith (Heather Matarazzo) and Wesley (Zach Braff) are in
transit, both literally and figuratively. They have just returned from
a visit with their uncommunicative, institutionalized mother Trix
(Bebe Neuwirth). Now they are waiting at the depot for buses that will
take them to different destinations. Wesley is starting college, but
Judith is still in high school. Their father Darrell (Mark Blum) has
severed all ties with them, so they are virtually orphans. As the
story opens, it is clear that Wesley and Judith have had a difficult
family life, although the nature of their problems is not initially
specified. It is clear that the two of them have provided the support
to each other that has been denied by their parents.
While waiting for the buses, Judith is approached by Jimmy (Michael
Weston), who claims he went to high school with her. Since her family
has moved so many times, Judith cannot recollect if she has ever seen
Jimmy before. She initially tries to avoid him, but due to boredom and
the desire to distance her from the studious and dour Wesley, she
begins talking to Jimmy. Mostly she listens because it is difficult to
out-talk the loquacious Jimmy. He says he likes to travel, and at the
very least he demonstrates this by going to different places in all
the stories he tells. He talks of some of the regulars in the station
and also constructs the stories of other travelers whose conversations
he has overheard.
The film is an adaptation of short stories by celebrated modern
American author Joyce Carol Oates. It is based on three separate
stories from the collection "Heat". Although in the book the three are
not connected, screenwriter and director Lisanne Skyler weaves them
together by having the characters voice them to each other. This
clever technique allows the stories to be told in a context where they
are relevant, and it also allows the characters to reveal themselves
in the process of telling and interpreting the stories.
The story begins opaquely as the characters are wrestling with a past
that is unexplained. However, as the narrative progresses, the events
that shaped the individuals form. Through flashback, Judith and
Wesley's family life is reconstructed and understood. Judith (and the
viewer) slowly connects with Jimmy by listening as he reveals himself
in the stories he tells, and as other characters in the bus station
contribute their own stories about him. The siblings are at an
important time in their lives. As children they have always been
together and relied on each other, but they are becoming adults, they
are going their separate ways. The film captures the essence of their
struggle, how people cope with difficulty, and how life experiences
shape them and influence their decisions.
The film is not flawless. The drama is sometimes forced, and it
sometimes feels the need to explicitly reveal events and situation
that have already been implied. This is especially true as Jimmy is
understood. Everything that needs to be understood about Jimmy is
revealed indirectly in the stories and other conversations, so when
his character is explicitly uncovered, it feels redundant. However,
these flaws are easily forgivable because so much of the story is done
right. One of the main themes is about using storytelling as a means
of traveling, not to distant places, but to the interior of both the
storyteller and the listener.
Highly recommended. The film is both well written and well acted. The
narrative adeptly cuts between multiple stories and flashbacks without
feeling disjointed or obtuse. Although it is not a cheerful film, it
is compelling and engaging, and well worth seeing.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"When things go bad in a family, they go bad quickly," teenage daughter
Judith (Heather Matarazzo) says with a fatalistic acceptance.  "Like
fruit, it can be good and then be rotten in an hour."  The problem with
Judith's home life is that, no matter how much she might like to think
otherwise, it has always been in a state of decay.
Writer and director Lisanne Skyler, whose background is in
documentaries, gathered her material for GETTING TO KNOW YOU from
several of Joyce Carol Oates's short stories.
Judith's brother, Wesley (Zach Braff), is about to leave for college.  A
bright, hard-working kid who could recite the periodic table backwards,
he has become Judith's surrogate parent.  Due to a family quarrel gone
bad, the mother is in a mental hospital, and the father just got out of
jail and doesn't want to talk to either of his two kids ever again.
In a telling flashback, the two teenagers look through the family photo
album, which is filled with pictures taken mainly before they were born.
Judith allows as how her mom's camera has been broken.  Of course, over
a decade is a long time in the shop.
Called "The Marvelous McIntyres" in their heyday -- to the extent that
they ever had one -- their parents were wannabe stars who went from one
low-paying temporary job to another, each of which was a subject of
derision.  This forced the family to live an itinerate lifestyle, moving
from town to town.  Sometimes they'd move just because the parents felt
like it.
As Judith, Heather Matarazzo gets her first meaty role since 1996's
WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE -- my absolute favorite film that year.
Matarazzo is a master at the reaction shot, but she still hasn't quite
learned how to setup scenes on her own.
The movie is set mainly in a seedy bus station inhabited mainly by a
cross-section of the lower economic strata.  Some hang out there,
semi-permanently, but others are actually there to catch a bus.
While Judith and Wesley wait for their respective buses, they meet Jimmy
(Michael Weston), who was a high school classmate of Wesley's.  Or was
he?
Jimmy is the local eavesdropper.  Ask him about anyone, and he'll tell
you the story he overheard them telling.  But like a screenwriter in the
making, he just needs to overhear a single sentence, and he can concoct
an elaborate story for them, which the movie shows as a flashback.
One of Jimmy's stories is about a woman who meets and falls for a flashy
gambler at an Atlantic City casino.  Another concerns a woman who can't
have children and the religious zealot and his son with whom she goes to
live.
Always kind of interesting, but rarely compelling, GETTING TO KNOW YOU
never quite gels.  It drags frequently, probably because the director is
still learning her craft.
Although it has some charm and poignancy, the story never quite draws
you in.  The premise of a character who makes up stories was done
recently and better in THE CHAMBERMAID.  Only in the sad tale of the
dysfunctional family does the movie deliver much emotional payoff.  But
this is a well-traveled theme in modern movies, and GETTING TO KNOW YOU
doesn't break any new ground.  A pleasant but predictable film, it does
contain likeable performances by the talented Weston and Matarazzo.
GETTING TO KNOW YOU runs 1:36.  It is not rated but probably would be
PG-13 for mature themes, language and a little violence.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
