Title
Review for Sara (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
behnam@argo.rice.edu
[Excerpt from the museum newsletter follows; includes reviews of 5 films]
     The museum's first presentation of post-revolutionary Iranian
cinema in the Fall of 1993 was a revelation, comprising a strong and
diverse group of films dealing with issues reflecting the complexity of
life in Iran today.  Well-produced and psychologically compelling,
these films encourage an awareness of Iranian customs and sensibilities
through the travails of a procession of engaging characters and
circumstances.
     During 1994, several new Iranian films have garnered awards and
international acclaim.  Abbas Kiarostamis's THROUGH THE OLIVE TREES was
enthusiastically received at the Cannes Film Festival, and will be the
first Iranian film to receive a wide commercial release in the United
States.  THE JAR (directed by Ebrahim Foruzesh) and THE ABADANIS
(directed by Kiyanush Ayyari) took the Gold and Silver "Leopards" at
the Locarno International Film Festival.
     The five films in this series represent the latest efforts of some
of Iran's most talented directors, confronting the matters of family
(SARAH, THE BOOT, FROM KARKEH TO RHEIN), tradition (DESERT SYMPHONY),
and artistic angst (THE ACTOR).  Transcending the cliche of offering a
"window on a world," these films exemplify an energetic and
sophisticated national cinema.
The first feature film by director Haghighi, who began making
films in 1975 ...  DESERT SYMPHONY is a powerful story of
isolation and reunion.  An old singer-musician who was the
sole witness to a murder has isolated himself from his village
for 20 years.  Two friends from the same tribe are planning
on marriage to each other's sisters, but according to the will
of the deceased father of one of the men, the old singer must
be present at the wedding ceremony.  He must be found and brought
back to the village, risking opening old wounds and revelations 
about a long ago murder.
The idea of adapting Ibsen's "A Doll's House" to Iranian society
seems a strange one, but director Mehrjui, whose earlier films
THE COW, THE POSTMAN, and THE CYCLE, condemned social injustice, has
always been agile enough to suggest connections which are not always 
immediately apparent.  Hessam, a bank manager, becomes ill and requires
treatment in Switzerland.  He believes the money his wife Sara provides
for his expenses is her inheritance, but in fact she has borrowed it,
and in the intervening years she sneaks down to the basement nightly 
to create intricate embroidery, which she sells to repay her creditor.
The domestic bliss she has painstakingly constructed is shattered when
she is blackmailed and Hessam discovers the truth, with devastating
results.  Niki Karimi gives a multi-layered performance as Sara, who
must defy subjugation and make her own decision about her future.  The
film is well-rooted in details of everyday Iranian life as it is in
thousands of ordinary, middle-class households.
Essentially a sprightly moral lesson for tots, THE BOOT presents a 
smart, sweet and crisply concise parable that adults will get a kick
out of too.  Struggling to keep in line her capricious moppet, a doting
but frazzled seamstress (presumably a war widow) shells out for a new 
pair of red boots.  But when the kid's euphoria subsides, and she
nods off on the bus, one boot slips off and is lost.  The boot's tortuous
path around the city is amusingly tracked.  Scriptwriter/director Talebi
colors the warmly human yarn with gently infectious humor.  
                                                   -David Rooney, VARIETY
The most recent film by director Katamikia, best known for his award-
winning war films, FROM KARKHEH TO RHEIN tells the story of one victim 
of the Iran-Iraq war.  Two years after the end of the war, Saeed (Ali
Dehkordi), a former [war] volunteer arrives in Germany to seek medical
care for his eyes, which have been damaged by chemical attacks on the
Iranian troops.  While Saeed is in the hospital, his sister who lives
in Cologne with her German husband, visits him, stirring up memories
of and wistful longing for their common past.
