Title
Review for Van Gogh (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Jacques Dutronc, Bernard Le Coq, Alexandra London, Gerard Sety,
        Corinne Bourdon
Director:  Maurice Pialat
Producer:  Daniel Toscer du Plantier
Screenplay:  Maurice Pialat
Released by Sony Pictures Classics
French with English subtitles
     VAN GOGH is the story of the last sixty days of the famous
painter's life, focusing not only on van Gogh himself (Jacques Dutronc),
but on the people around him.  Special care is taken to portray van
Gogh's relationships and mental state, as well as the events which led
to his death.
     I walked out of VAN GOGH wondering where the rest of the movie was.
At one-hundred fifty-seven minutes, some might argue that the film was
long enough, but there are at least three key connecting scenes missing.
Whether these were filmed and edited out, scripted but never filmed, or
never written, I have no idea, but their absence gives VAN GOGH a
decidedly unfinished feel.
     The choice for included scenes is almost as curious as the choice
for excluded ones.  There are several scenes, perhaps totalling about
ten minutes, that serve no obvious purpose in this movie.  They neither
advance the plot nor show anything significant about any of the
characters.  They simply are there, taking up screen time.
     Most of VAN GOGH, however, is relevant, and there are several
moments of rare and heartfelt power.  While not the equal of Robert
Altman's VINCENT AND THEO, VAN GOGH presents a credible study of the
final days in the life of a great talent whose ability was ignored until
after his death.  By not making the mistake of CHAPLIN and seeking to
chronicle the artist's entire life, the final product is neither rushed
nor condensed.
     The best-portrayed relationship in the movie is that between
Vincent and his model-turned-lover Margerite Gachet (Alexandra London).
Although intelligent writing and adept directing play a part, most of
the strength of these scenes must be attributed to the performances of
the actors.  Ms.  London gives a striking portrayal of a character who
is given a too-limited treatment by the script.
     The relationship between Vincent and his brother Theo could have
been better developed.  Some of the scenes between the two don't work
particularly well, and the inclusion of Theo's wife Jo (Corinne Bourdon)
in so many scenes is difficult to fathom.  Rather than defining the
relationship of the two van Gogh brothers, she serves to dilute it.
     Another problem with VAN GOGH is an unwillingness to properly
introduce characters.  At times, it can take entire scenes to figure out
who someone is.  Perhaps those intimately knowledgeable about van Gogh's
life wouldn't have this problem, but the average movie-goer is likely to
be confused from time-to-time.
     In any biography, equally the most difficult and the most important
thing to get across is the motivation of the main character.  HOFFA and
MALCOLM X succeeded at this; CHAPLIN did not.  VAN GOGH lies somewhere
in between.  While we are made aware of the forces that drive the
painter, too often the manifestations of these inner demons appear more
suddenly than is desirable.  The final and most critical of those
moments, where Vincent shoots himself, is not even shown.
     Ultimately, the biggest fault in VAN GOGH is its pacing.  Many of
the scenes are engrossing, but the film is unable to sustain the magic
throughout.  The presence and absence of certain events creates a sense
of incompleteness.  As a biography, VAN GOGH is insightful and
interesting, but as a piece of entertainment, it is imperfect.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
