Title
Review for Drowning by Numbers (1988)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Frank Maloney
     DROWNING BY NUMBERS is a film by Peter Greenaway.  It stars Joan
Plowright, Juliet Stevenson, and Joely Richardson, with Bernard Hill and
Jason Edwards.
     DROWNING BY NUMBERS was just seen at the Seattle International Film
Festival and is currently being released to U.S. theaters, despite the
fact that it predates THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, & HER LOVER, which
was such a succes de scandale last year in this country.
     DROWNING BY NUMBERS is beautiful movie to watch, filled the touches
that we have learned to expect from Greenaway.  Nearly still lives of
rotting fecundity -- gorgeous, painterly compositions -- charm and alarm
us.  Elaborate, opaque gamesmanship, death, sex, nudity, obsessive
characters in a self-contained and dangerous world leave us amused,
involved, troubled.
     Here we have three women all named Cissie Colpitts who may be the
most charming murderers in the films at least since ARSENIC AND OLD
LACE.  It is almost a pleasure to be done in by them.  The three women
principals are superb actresses and play their Cissies to the hilt.  Are
they the three Fates, the three Graces, are they the same person, as
Madgett (Bernard Hill) the coroner asks them.  They are in harmony with
each other, in synch, and somewhat out of synch with our quotidian
world.
     Hill is wonderful as their tool, their lusting accomplice.  Jason
Edwards plays Madgett's son Smut.  Smut is at the heart of the movie, I
think, he is the gamemaster; his voiceovers give the preposterous and
hilariously black rules for his elaborate games.  Like the angelic
dishwasher in THE COOK, he falls victim to mutilation.  He is obsessed
with death as is the film.  So be warned.
     I might as well tell you now, too, there is frontal nudity of both
sexes here, lots of sex, and lots of dying.  DROWNING BY NUMBERS is not
as extreme in this regard as THE COOK, but I would not say it was for
the squeamish either.
     Look for the numbers 1-100 throughout the film.  It becomes an
hilarious game for the audience.  There is a lot about this film that
reminds me of Monty Python, too.  Insane non-sequiturs, running jokes, a
grave digger, joggers everywhere.  Folks that are better up on their
Python will be much employed here, I think.
     It is my understanding that this was Plowright's film debut.  Since
I'm seeing this film out of all sequence, it's hard to believe.  She has
become a regular presence is last two years or so and a welcome one.
     The cinematography was by Sacha Vierny and the result is a kind of
lushness one seldoms sees outside of old-fashioned three-strip
Technicolor.
     I recommend DROWNING BY NUMBERS most highly.

Author
David N. Butterworth
     Following the release of his highly controversial THE COOK, THE
THIEF, HIS WIFE & HER LOVER this time last year, the Roxy Screening
Rooms in Philadelphia presented a retrospective of films by eclectic
British film director Peter Greenaway.
     Included in that retrospective were the Art House hit THE
DRAUGHTSMAN'S CONTRACT, the film which put Greenaway on the map in this
country, and two Philadelphia premieres -- A ZED AND TWO NOUGHTS (which
prior to that time had only seen a limited run on the Bravo cable
channel) and THE BELLY OF AN ARCHITECT.
     Conspicuous by its absence was Greenaway's 1988 movie, DROWNING BY
NUMBERS, a film which is only now making its much-belated Philadelphia
debut.  This city, it seems, has saved the best until last.
     DROWNING BY NUMBERS is another visually striking essay by Britain's
master of the cinematic put-on.  Brimming with absurdist wordplay and an
exacting eye for detail, it's a very Tall Tale of murder, mathematics,
and misdirected love.
     From the opening scene, you know you are not watching any ordinary
film, or dealing with any ordinary filmmaker.  A young girl, bedecked in
an outrageous, fairy godmother-like party dress, jumps rope whilst
reciting the names of the stars in the constellation.  The lighting
casts giant shadows on the building behind her, an imposing Regency
edifice fronted by pom-pom-shaped trees.  A dead bird hangs from a pole
in the foreground.   It's like something out of Lewis Carroll.
     Three generations of women, each named Cissie, drown their husbands
out of passionate detachment.  They are played by Joan Plowright, Juliet
Stevenson (who can currently be seen in TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY) and
Joely Richardson.   This maternal camaraderie is incisively drawn, a
refreshing change after the misogynistic flourishes of A ZED AND TWO
NOUGHTS.
     A willing ally to their sanctimonious crimes is a local coroner
named Madgett (Bernard Hill).  Madgett, along with his son, Smut
(newcomer Jason Edwards), is an obsessive game-player, much like
Greenaway himself.  In love with all three women, Madgett pronounces
each death an accident.
     But Greenaway appears to be less concerned with plot than he is
with color and composition.  The writer/director uses Madgett's
indulgent preoccupations with contests and counting as an excuse to
exercise his own exuberant imagination, layering on the details like
oils on a canvas.
     In fact, many of the sequences in DROWNING BY NUMBERS -- the scenes
with the apples, the white beach house against a blackening sky, the
angular symmetry of the swimming pool -- are shot with a painter's eye
for beauty, like a Constable landscape or a Ruebens' nude.
     The numbers 1 to 100 run throughout the film like a chronometer,
marking time.  They start out obvious enough -- pinned to trees and tin
baths, painted on buildings, cows and passers-by -- but wind up being
woven into the overall fabric.  It's a rich and colorful tapestry, a
sumptuously crafted and richly textured experience that is at once
wicked, wry and thoroughly entertaining.
     If DROWNING BY NUMBERS is "about" anything, then it is about the
way in which women conspire together, choking the life out of those who
have disappointed them sexually, emotionally or otherwise.
     A darling of the British Film Institute, Peter Greenaway made his
mark in the late '60s/early '70s with a string of independently produced
short films.  His big break came in 1982 with the BFI-funded THE
DRAUGHTSMAN'S CONTRACT, an erotically charged murder mystery set in
17th Century England.  But it wasn't until the release of last year's
THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE & HER LOVER that American audiences were
once again treated to the cinematic excesses of this extraordinary
talent.  
     In keeping with the film's mood, Michael Nyman's score is somber
and atypically melancholic, not the sawing strings that have punctuated
his other collaborations with the director.  And Sacha Vierny's
photography is no less exquisite than the picture-postcard perfect views
of Rome and its surrounding countryside that graced THE BELLY OF AN
ARCHITECT.
     The themes which populate most of Greenaway's films -- sex, death
and decay, puns and punning, religion, numerology, entomology and
ornithology  -- are also very much in evidence here.
     In DROWNING BY NUMBERS, Greenaway's most accessible film to date,
these collective themes add together to form a bizarre jigsaw puzzle
with few straight edges, a delineated, looking-glass world in which
numbers count for everything and love is often left dead in the water.


Author
Jim Pellmann
     Peter Greenaway, who gave us the most intriguing film of last year
(THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, AND HER LOVER) is back with DROWNING BY
NUMBERS.  (Actually, DROWNING was made in 1988, two years before THE
COOK, but is only now being released in the US.)
     This very black comedy is the tale of three generations of women
(all named Cissie Colpitts) whose love for, and solidarity with, one
another leads them to drown their husbands.  Each woman, in turn, uses
sexual wiles to convince the local coroner, Madgett, to record the death
as an accident, as the relatives and friends of the deceased get more
and more suspicious.
     As Greenaway fans know, he uses some visual device as a running
theme in his films (drawings in THE DRAUGHTMAN'S CONTRACT, colors in
THE COOK).  In this case, it is numbers.
     The film opens with a young girl playing a skip-rope game in which
she counts a hundred stars as the introduction to a 1-to-100 count which
runs throughout the film, charting its progress until the numbers run
out and the drama is complete.  The numbers appear unexpectedly in the
foreground and background of various scenes.  Some are hilariously
obvious, others are quite subtle.
     As to why he chose numbers to define the film, Greenaway says he is
intrigued with numbers and games, and he used the counting device "to
deliberately indicate the artificiality of the film.  We progress the
number count as well as the narrative count.  They very neatly finish
simultaneously.  You know the film is over, and you can all go home."
     The running count is only one set of numbers in the film.  The
preponderance of items appearing or happening three times only begins
with the three sisters.  The film could easily be called DROWNING *IN*
NUMBERS.
     One reviewer suggests that the film "takes murderous aim at our
obsession with gamesmanship and the semblance of order, through lists
and rhymes and formulas that have more to do with ancient superstition
than science.  It's all a sham anyway, Greenaway reminds us.  To impose
what we call logic on the illogical only points up how pathetic and
insecure we are."
     Like Greenaway, the characters of Madgett and his young son, Smut,
are obsessed with games and are always creating new ones, the rules of
which are narrated offscreen by Smut, as we watch the various characters
play them.  At a wedding, the 75 guests participate in "Hangman's
Cricket," for example.  
     And Smut is always counting something: hairs on a dog, leaves on a
tree.  One of Smut's solitary games is to discover, count, and label
animals throughout the local area which have met a violent death.  He
commemorates each by setting off fireworks.
     (Note: DROWNING does not contain the same type of graphic
violence seen in THE COOK, and is much lighter and more humorous in
tone.  Several have called it Greenaway's most accessible film.
Nonetheless there are some scenes that some might find objectionable.)
     As in THE COOK and THE BELLY OF AN ARCHITECT, Greenaway uses his
training as a painter and his love of the great Dutch painters of the
Golden Age to create lush, detailed, and impossibly elaborate scenes.
No one ever made the windblown English seashore look so appealing.
Every frame provides an incredible tableau of color and texture.
     Greenaway comments, "East Anglia--Norfolk and Suffolk--where we
filmed, is as close to the country of Holland as you can get across the
channel.  It has wide-open skies, long flat horizons, beautiful golden
light.  A lot of my excitement for that part of the English landscape is
very much written into the film."
     And as in past Greenaway films, Michael Nyman provides the
Mozartian chamber music score (some of which you will recognize from the
other films)--its repetitiveness provides an appropriate counterpart to
the detailed visuals.
     The level of symbolism used is mind-boggling: insects, pieces of
fruit, sheep, fires, joggers, and Biblical names appear throughout the
film; one jogger runs through scenes tossing multicolored ribbons in the
air; the town grave-digger always seems to be hanging around; and of
course, the ubiquitous numbers (a friend points out that numerologists
will have a field day with this movie).  What does it all mean?  Only
Greenaway knows.
     He hints that he has attempted to create a world that "mirrors
life"--at least his own personal view of it: "I think as in life, the
good do not get rewarded, the bad do not get punished, and the innocent
always get betrayed."
     One reviewer added: "Most of all, it suggests that a conspiracy of
women is unbeatable."  To be sure, the themes of blackmail and
unrequited love are also well represented.
     You may leave the theater scratching your head, but it's doubtful
you'll leave bored.  Greenaway fans or those with a taste for the
unusual (and especially puzzle lovers) should be sure to catch this one.
Jim Pellmann (jpellmann@rational.com)

Author
Lon Ponschock
     If THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER is a
necessity to see (which I think it is,) then DROWNING BY
NUMBERS is a diversion.
     Take a bit of Fellini and a bit of Agatha Christie and
you get DBN:  three generations of women plot to and
eventually do destroy the men in their lives.  But this isn't
the fun part.
     The fun part is in the detection necessary on the part
of the viewer to find the numbers embedded in the scenes.
But bear in mind that on a video rental, much detail will be
lost and also the copy I saw was not letterboxed, so portions
of the frame were missing from time to time.  It is also a
distraction to be sure, but the film _is_ about games. [After
viewing it a second time, I still missed quite a few numbers,
including #1 !]
     DROWNING BY NUMBERS is a game and a good game at that.
It's a combination of TEN LITTLE INDIANS and JULIETTE OF THE
SPIRITS.  If you follow Greenaway's work you'll want to catch
up on this if you haven't seen it before.
     I am drawn into these works and am glad I have made the
effort to see all the Greenaway films of which I am aware. It
seems that much of the superior filmmaking these days is once
again being done by Europeans (Vincent Ward, Wim Wenders, and
Greenaway.)  And if it weren't for vid. stores we more than
likely wouldn't have a chance to see any of them.

Author
Pedro Sena
I have vowed several times I would never see another Peter Greenaway film.
And several times, I have fallen prey to his films.
DROWNING BY NUMBERS is a very hypnotic film in that you don't really know
what is going to happen, but you get the feeling that the women will all
win, and get all the men done away with.
This is BLACK COMEDY at its best, much like any of Peter Greenaway's films,
which have a tendency to appear very philosophical and intelectual, though
in actuality, they are just fun, and weird.
The three women are representatives of three generations.  The matriarc of
the bunch ( Joan Plowright ) does what she says, and the film starts by her
drowning her drunken husband who is having an affair with the maid.  And
soon, the daughter has also drowned her husband, and later the young girl
also drowns her lover, because he isn't man enough.
The premise of the film might just be that men, in general, abuse, and do
not care for women.  They like women when it is in their best interest, but
at any other time, the women are secondary, and relegated to the roles of
maid and matron.  And in this film, they take charge and play juror, judge
and executioner.
While this film could be considered threatening to the male ego, it really
is also an attack on the female ego, and the lack of communication both
sexes have almost at all times.  They use each other for their own means,
ways and ideas, and when they are finished, they are discarded.  Men are
notorious for doing that to the fairer sex.  Well, that's not to say that
the women don't do the same.  In the film, both younger women do allow
themselves to be loved by the male counterpart, but they are not all that
happy with the  loving, which is undoubtedly the underlying cause.  When
there are subjects
and servants, there is disdain.

Author
Kevin Patterson
Drowning By Numbers (R, 1987)
Directed and written by Peter Greenaway. Starring Joan Plowright, Juliet
Stevenson, Joely Richardson, Bernard Hill, Jason Edwards.
        Peter Greenaway's Drowning By Numbers  is such an odd film that I am
not sure how to write a review for it. I can start, I guess, by describing the
film's basic storyline: three women, all named Cissy Colpitts (Joan Plowright,
Juliet Stevenson, Joely Richardson), drown their husbands for various reasons
and convince the coroner (Bernard Hill) to declare the deaths accidents by
offering the possibility of later sexual favors.
But the story really seems like nothing more than a backdrop for all
the film's weird idiosyncrasies. Most notably, the numbers 1 through 100 all
appear in the film somewhere. Sometimes they appear in appropriate contexts
such as on a calendar or a piece of paper; sometimes they seem wholly out of
place, such as when they are painted on cows. The characters also play games
involving numerics and combinations throughout the film; these games are often
introduced with narration from a young child named Smut (Jason Edwards). There
are recurring images of insects crawling on rotting food. And it is a safe bet
that almost every scene will include at least one dialogue reference to
numbers, counting, water, sex, or death.
Director/writer Greenaway does seem to know what he is doing here;
Drowning By Numbers  is not a case of directorial incompetence, nor is it even
a David Lynch-style film in which a story is told through abstract images.
Rather, it seems to be a flat refusal on Greenaway's part to play by any
established rules of narrative realism. The film exists at a totally detached,
intellectual level; Greenaway doesn't seem to want us to really care about
what happens as much as he wants us to notice the patterns in the dialogue and
admire the photography and color schemes, which often evoke Renaissance
painting. As best as I can tell, there is no hidden meaning behind all this,
and if there is, then I must say that Greenaway has hidden it a little too well.
Does it work? It's tough to say. Greenaway does stick to the bizarre
rules he has set up for himself, so it is at the very least executed
correctly. And there were certainly things that I liked about the film. The
number sequence was clever and at times hilarious, and it was fun to watch for
the numbers and for the recurring patterns in the dialogue in each scene. The
imagery was skillfully crafted and many of the scenes possessed a wonderfully
surreal quality, particularly those in which a young girl jumps rope outside a
house counting the stars while pink lights fade in and out and a deep,
spectral sound hums in the background. And Smut's narrations are often amusing
in a scratch-your-head kind of way, such as when he explains that "Tuesday is
the best day for violent death, because on Tuesday a violent death is marked
with yellow paint whereas on all other days it is marked with red paint,
except Saturday," at which point he is seen painting yellow streaks around a
dead animal on the road.
Yet there was something manipulative about Greenaway's albeit original
and distinctive style. It was as if his intellectual detachment backed the
audience into a corner, that it would somehow be out of bounds to "dislike"
anything in the film because that would be approaching it the wrong way. For
example, I would normally criticize a film as emotionally empty as Drowning By
Numbers  for all its violence and graphic sexual content, but the fact is that
the entire film is mostly arbitrary and shies away from the psychological
implications of any behavior-violent, sexual, or otherwise. There were a few
graphic scenes which seemed like they were probably unnecessary both to the
story and to the repeating motifs, but even now I find myself hesitating to
criticize them directly because I wonder if Greenaway's film is simply over my head.
Assuming, then, that Drowning By Numbers  was nothing more than an
attempt to take the bare bones of a linear plot and use it for what amounts to
more of a filmed intellectual and artistic exercise than a story with
realistic plot and character development, it works most of the time. It is
difficult to evaluate this kind of film since it refuses to play by any
established rules of moviemaking, but I am tentatively giving it an A-,
awarding it points for its well-crafted imagery and the cleverness of the
recurring pattens and taking away a few for its borderline-manipulative style.
Be warned, however: if I do ever find out that there was supposed to be some
deep symbolic meaning underneath all this cinematic strangeness, it stands to
lose a few more.
Grade: A-

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Peter Greenaway
Starring: Joan Plowright, Juliet Stephenson, Joely Richardson, Bernard
Hill, Jason Edwards, Bryan Pringle, Trevor Cooper, David Morrissey, Kenny
Ireland, Michael Percival
Explaining the plot of "Drowning by Numbers" almost makes it seem like a
high-concept film: one that can be explained in about one sentence (if
that).  In fact, my one film book has one very short sentence explaining
the film, as well as their thoughts on it: "Three women decide to drown
their husbands."  This is essentially what goes on in this film, making it
easy to explain to anyone who asks what it's about.  The weird thing is
that behind the simplicity of the concept, the film is one of the most
engagingly frustrating films to watch.  You watch it once, maybe even
twice, and you're suddenly set off on a cinematic puzzle, desperately
trying to figure out what you've just seen and comprehend it.
"Drowning by Numbers" tells the story of three generations of women, a
delightful trio all named Cissie Colpitts:  there's the mother, played by
Joan Plowright (who has the ability to give a unique droll dignity to any
film she's in); her older daughter, played by Juliet Stephenson (from
"Truly, Madly, Deeply"); and the younger, spunkier daughter, played by
Joely Richardson, daughter of Vanessa Redgrave.  Over the course of the
film, they all drown their respective husbands, starting off with the
mother, who starts the trend when she catches her husband with another
woman, realizes she's had enough of him, and pushes his head underneath the
water level of a bath tub his wading in.
Their shananigans is easily covered up by the local coroner, Madgitt
(Bernard Hill, perhaps known to American audiences as the Captain in
"Titanic," although you wouldn't recognize him here), who lies on his
statements, and requests that his payment for his crooked deeds be that
he's given some sex from each of the women, none who fully cooperate.  All
the while, the film introduces us to games that Madgitt and his son, Smut
(Jason Edwards), play constantly, with Smut narrating the rules of how to
play them.
Just to make things more frustrating for the audience, as well as more fun,
the film gives us numbers throughout the film that are marked either
conspicuously (the film shows a copy of Joseph Heller's "Catch-22" as one
of the numbers) or blatantly (on the rump of two cows), but nevertheless
are shown in order for the audience to count up as the film goes along. 
While this may seem like just a fun thing to do throughout the film, to
count your way until the ending, for others, it intoduces a bizarre mix to
the story, further complicating it as to why it, as well as the references
to numerous games, is included in the context of the film, and how it
relates to all the other elements.
The film was directed by Peter Greenaway, who directed one of my all-time
favorites, "The Cook, the Thief, His Wife, and Her Lover," a film that is
as fascinating story-wise as it is visual-wise.  I have once said that he
is probably the best director of mise-en-scene ever, or at least working
today.  "Drowning by Numbers" is no exception.  It's a gorgeous-looking
film, almost coming off as a living Rembrandt painting.
Greenaway often works with many of the same crew members for his films, and
it's obvious why: they're so damn good at what they do.  Sacha Vierny, the
Director of Photography, and who's worked with Resnais and Bunuel on some
of their films, definitely has an eye for making a shot look absolutely
beautiful, so much that most of the frames in this film, and some of
Greenaway's other films, could be framed and sold as artwork.  Another one
of his members is Michael Nyman, the film composer (who's also worked on
"The Piano" and "Gattaca"), who's beautiful background music effortlessly
gives every scene the right tone that Greenaway is going for, even if much
of it is redundant (and recylced in or from other Greenaway films).  Give
Nyman a couple years and I'll easily say that he's the best film composer
since Bernard Herrman.
One of the resons I like Greenaway's films so much is because not only are
they gorgeous piece of art, but they stimulate the mind, making it work
hard to understand not so much what's going on, but why they are placed
together in the first place.  "Drowning by Numbers" is basically a living
puzzle.  We struggle to look at every shot as a piece in the puzzle,
wondering why things are happening, and why they are included in this film.
 At first glance it seems like a mixture of a bunch of different puzzles,
where some pieces fit together but don't make up the same thing.
This approach is often criticized for distancing the audience from the
film, looking down at them and laughing at them for not being able to
understand what's going on.  This is because the ambiguity is so high, and
it's almost impossible to understand Greenaway's intentions for placing so
many weird devices together in one film.  Why are there numbers throughout
the film?  Why are game rules introduced?  Why did he make it?  All of this
is anyone's guess.
My theory?  The film is making fun of order and trends, and showing them
for what they are.  The first drowning is almost understood, as the husband
had been cheating on her for years, and it's almost like he received his
just desserts for being such a bastard.  But the following ones have a
gradual descent into obscurity, being done possibly as a trend of what the
first one was, and lacking the reasoning and intensity that the first one
had.  There's also other kinds of trends in the film, like Smut who follows
all sorts of rules of games to a T, and does whatever a little girl, who
jumpropes throughout the film, says (like circumsising, for instance). 
There are the games that are introduced that show rule-following at their
peak.  And, of course, there are the numbers, that give the film a sense of
order and duration, that it will only last as long as there are 100 numbers
(after 100, everything becomes bland, as the film points out).
What I got out of the film was a sense of order and trends becoming stale
after awhile, and a loss of originality and passion lacking after awhile. 
The numbers, at first intriguing and fascinating, become redundant, and
soon lose the luster they once had.  He seems to be saying that traditions
cause people who honor them to forget why they were started in the first
place, and instead do them because they just think they ought to.  At least
that's what I got out of it.
Is this what Greenaway was going for?  I have no clue.  But such is the fun
of ambiguity.  We can try and make up explanations of films like this,
never knowing if we're right or not, but intrigued as to whether we are or
not.  It's one of the reasons I like Greenaway's films so much.  As he's an
aquired taste, many people may be put off by his lack of an
easy-to-understand message.  But even if you can't understand this film at
all, and have no clue what he was going for, "Drowning by Numbers" is still
incredibly entertaining.  It has a playful, humorous nature, filled with a
giddy kind of tone, and is endlessly fascinating, never becoming boring,
probably because it's so complex and at times frustrating.  That's why
Greenaway gets away with this film, which would be a big disappointment for
probably any other director.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
blj@mithrandir.cs.unh
     Three women, all named Cissy (Joan Plowright, Juliet Stevenson,
Joely Richardson), end up drowning their husbands.   The local coroner,
Bernard Hill, covers up the drownings, but wants sexual favors in
return.
     Earlier this year, I saw the film PROSPERO'S BOOKS, also by Peter
Greenaway, and, because I disliked it, I decided I would never see
another of Greenaway's film.  A reader of my review of PROSPERO'S BOOKS
recommended DROWNING BY NUMBERS, so when it came to my local art theater
I decided to see it.  I am glad that I did, DROWNING BY NUMBERS is
everything that PROSPERO'S BOOKS could have been.  After seeing this
film, my opinion of Peter Greenaway has changed, and I will be trying to
see other films of his to see if they are as good as this one.  I highly
recommend that you go see this film.  I can't promise that you will like
it, but if you don't give it a chance you'll never know.  On a scale of
zero to five, I give DROWNING BY NUMBERS a four.   DROWNING BY NUMBERS
is rated R for female nudity, male nudity, adult situations, adult
humor, and explicit language.
     DROWNING BY NUMBERS, even though it is on videocassette, will lose
some of its beauty off the big screen.  I recommend if you are tempted
to rent DROWNING BY NUMBERS instead of seeing it in the theater in order
to save money that you reconsider.   DROWNING BY NUMBERS is different
from most of the films on the market today.  It is not pulled down by
cliches, nor is it out to please everyone.  I feel that it is safe to
say that not everyone will like DROWNING BY NUMBERS.  I recommend that
people who are already fans of Peter Greenaway go to see this film along
with anyone willing to give the film a chance.  I even advise that the
people who disliked PROSPERO'S BOOKS see this film, for it is very
different from PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  Peter Greenaway, as usual, was
obviously not worried about whether some people would be offended by
this film.  There is complete frontal nudity of both males and females,
sex, and black humor related to killing one's husband.  The story line,
itself, is black in nature and sure to offend some people.  I highly
suggest that anyone who is bored with today's cinema or has a taste for
the bizarre venture to see this film -- for Peter Greenaway's film can
certainly not be described as "the same old thing."  The use of nudity
was very different in this film than in PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  In PROSPERO'S
BOOKS it was just there.  In this film it is used in an erotic fashion.
In fact, the entire film has erotic backing to it.
     The plot to DROWNING BY NUMBERS, I feel, is not very important to
the film.  Mostly the beauty lies in the photography and scenery that
was used.  I found the characters in DROWNING BY NUMBERS much more
interesting than in PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  In PROSPERO'S BOOKS the
characters seemed to almost be cardboard.   In DROWNING BY NUMBERS the
characters have more life added to them; they are interesting, and you
get drawn into the film.  Not all the characters in the film are
likable, but each is itself.   None of the characters is held down by
standard Hollywood cliches that harm some films.
     Throughout the film the numbers one to a hundred are placed.   Some
are very obvious and some are intricately woven into the scenery.  The
number one may be the easiest for it is just placed on a tree.  For
others you really have to be observant.  For the few slow spots, one can
count the numbers, but for the most part you will probably either be
enjoying the scenery or the acting.
     The scenery used for the film was quite good.  It seemed to have a
sort of magical presence to it.  It is like the very end of GONE WITH
THE WIND where Scarlet is silhouetted with the tree and the sun in the
background.  It has a charm to it, but is not tacky.  Something should
also be said about the props used in the film.  Some of them were very
imaginative I feel.  The whole look of the film is refreshingly
different.   It is a welcome change in the movie industry, and I hope
that Peter Greenaway continues to make films more like this one, and
less like PROSPERO'S BOOKS.
