Title
Review for Bend of the River (1952)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Bend of the River" is a good Western, with well-developed
themes of loyalty and redemption, with revenge thrown in
for good measure.
"Bend of the River" stars James Stewart, who has the enormous
task of leading a team of homesteaders, first across the
country in conestoga wagons, and then securing them needed
suppiles after the settlement has been founded.  Of course,
many troubles await the hapless settlers, who seem wholly
dependent upon Stewart for their aid.  
Both Stewart and his sometime partner Arthur Kennedy have 
been on the wrong side of the law in the past.  Patriarch 
Jay Flippen, figurehead leader of the expedition led in fact 
by Stewart, does not believe that a person's moral character 
can change.  While we know that Stewart will be loyal to the 
homesteaders to his final breath, can Stewart convince Flippen 
of this when he learns of Stewart's past?  More important, will
Kennedy, who repeatedly saves Stewart's life, remain loyal to
the cause despite temptations to profiteer the supplies?
Stewart's first Western was the comedy "Destry Rides Again" 
in 1939.  Looking to extend his range, he made his next,
more serious, western, "Winchester '73" in 1951.  It was 
an excellent movie. "Bend of the River" is generally a good 
movie, but it has some faults that help keep it short of 
the quality of its predecessor.
Early in the film, Stewart and Kennedy hunt and kill 
raiding Indians who communicate by imitating bird calls.  
These scenes are practically lifted from the great western 
"Red River" (1948).
There are derogatory stereotypes of blacks.  A white riverboat
captain has a black assistant (Stepin Fetchit) that is dim-witted 
and has slurred speech.  There is also a sassy housemaid with 
a strong Southern accent.  Intended as comic relief, to modern
eyes it just looks like racism.
Universal studios was promoting the career of then-unknown 
Rock Hudson.  His gratuitous good-guy gambler character 
appears to have been inserted by force into the film, and
he is out of place.
Stewart's obsession with obtaining suppliers for the settlers
leads to a gunfight with considerable carnage.  Stewart never
questions whether obtaining a few barrels of grain and meat
is worth the lives of a half-dozen men.
Look for Henry Morgan, who would much later play Col. Potter
on the TV show M*A*S*H, in a minor supporting role.
Faults aside, "Bend of the River" is an intelligent western,
filled with action and tension, with nary a dull moment.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
