Title
Review for Love Field (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Michelle Pfeiffer, Dennis Haysbert, Stephanie McFadden, 
           Brain Kerwin, Louise Latham
Director:  Jonathan Kaplan
Producers:  Sarah Pillsbury and Midge Sanford
Screenplay:  Don Roos
Music:  Jerry Goldsmith
Released by Orion Pictures
     John and Jacqueline Kennedy meant different things to different
people and, like many Americans in the early 1960s, Lurene Hallett
(Michelle Pfeiffer) was enamoured with the first couple.  Living in
Dallas, Lurene just misses an opportunity to shake the President's hand
as he disembarks from his plane on November 22.  Shortly thereafter,
he's dead and Lurene is devastated.  Ignoring explicit instructions
from her husband to the contrary, she sets out for Washington D.  C.
and the President's funeral.  Along the way, she meets Paul Cater
(Dennis Haysbert) and his quiet little daughter Jonell (newcomer
Stephanie McFadden).  From then on, her life will never be the same.
     Films such as JFK and RUBY examine the assassination from the
inside, presenting theories of how and why things happened as they did.
LOVE FIELD looks at things from the outside, presenting the perspective
of an ordinary Texas woman.  For those old enough to remember the
Kennedy assassination, this movie will doubtless stir a sense of deja
vu.  For those too young, it may help to convey some sense of what
things were like during that bleak week in November of 1963.
     Nevertheless, despite a realistic depiction of how America reacted
to the assassination, the first half of LOVE FIELD doesn't have much
else going for it.  The movie meanders for almost an hour without
direction.  We know it's going somewhere, and we sense the direction in
which it's headed, but it seems to be taking an awful long time to get
there.
     The central theme of LOVE FIELD is not explored until the second
half of the film.  It's then, as the relationship between Lurene and
Paul becomes better-defined, that the question of racial intolerance
rears its head.  Superficially, this picture might seem to be a
romance, or even a story about people on the run, but the fundamental
issue addressed by LOVE FIELD is one of bigotry.
     When we look at race relations today, we have to wonder if they
have improved that much from 1963.  As outdated as some of the
attitudes in LOVE FIELD are, there are disturbing parallels with
today's headlines.  In one of this film's most electrifying moments,
Paul screams at Lurene that being white and miserable isn't the same as
being black--the two don't compare.  Although he soon apologizes for
saying that and other things, the words of his impassioned speech
provoke a deep reaction.
     As far as the story goes, it's relatively straightforward.  Once
LOVE FIELD finally gets on track, it holds the viewer's interest.  Most
of the second half is solid drama, although the brief epilogue is
feeble.  There seems to be some indecision about whether to make the
ending happy or poignant, and it ends up being neither.
     Michelle Pfeiffer does a solid job in a thankless role.  Lurene is
not a particularly likable person, and it's always a challenge for an
energetic, charismatic actress to give a sensitive portrayal of someone
with such an abrasive personality.  Dennis Haysbert may have the easier
job, but his performance is equally impressive.  Stealing scenes from
both veterans is young Stephanie McFadden.
     LOVE FIELD is definitely not an unqualified success.  There's too
much wasted screen time and it takes longer for the main thrust of the
story to get underway than it should.  The issues that the film raises
are not unique, nor is their presentation new, but they are important
and timely, and one of the strengths of LOVE FIELD is that it manages
to get them across without making them seem tired or trite.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
