Title
Review for Tetsuo (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ralph Beard
Rated  for Medium Level Violence (Not to mention gore, sex scenes etc.)
(1988)
Written and Directed by Shinya Tsukamoto
Black and white - Subtitled
Running time - 80 minutes.
**** out of five or 8 out of ten (You decide)
Short plot outline - Japanese business man runs over pedestrian, who
retaliates by turning him into walking metal scrap monster with a rotating
drill for a penis. Much zany-ness ensues.
More long-winded review -
        If you've seen the video clip for the Tool song "Stinkfist", then
you have a good guide as to the visual style of  Tetsuo. Now just make that
a little more gory and extend it  75 minutes longer and you've got this
movie.
        When you boil this movie down, it really is just your average
revenge film - an everyday guy (Taguchi )and his girlfriend (Fujiwara)
accidentally run over a pedestrian (Tsukamoto), and, rather than report it
they opt to get rid of the body. Of course the guy ain't dead and he exacts
his revenge on >said couple in a terrible way. So far, ho hum.
        Here comes the twist, the pedestrian turns out to be more than he
seems, slowly turning the everyday guy into a bizarre metallic monster,
killing his wife and sending the man mad. It all seems run of the mill,
doesn't it? Luckily Iron man is done with more imagination and flair than
any other film I've seen recently.
        Shot in striking black and white (It couldn't have been done in any
other way) and using a dizzying amount of stop motion filming, Tetsuo is a
bizarre ride that should only be watched late at night in a dark room, any
thing less would ruin the atmosphere. However it definitely not for all
tastes.
        Tetsuo is violent, disturbing and gory. Ranging from a man cutting
into his own leg and inserting a metal coil to a woman being drilled to
death as blood spurts and soaks everything nearby. Let me put it this way,
this is for people who thought Urosukidoji: Legend Of The Overfiend was
rollicking good fun. (i.e. me)
        Acting-wise there's not a whole lot to talk about, Tetsuo has less
dialogue than Arnie in Conan, Tomoroh Taguchi twitches and looks worried
enough to convey what's needed, the rest do their best to look deranged and
succeed. 
        Tsukamoto's direction is the key, actually I should say Tsukamoto's
scripting, art direction, lighting, editing, photography, special effects
and direction is the key. Yes, he did it all, I didn't say it looked like a
million dollar production, it's it look that is it's allure - imagine
Eraserhead era Lynch on speed. He creates a dirty metallic world that pulls
you in and repels you at the same time. The editing and camera work is fast
and grainy and the Einsturzende Neubauten-like score fits in perfectly.
Just remember however, that this kind of stuff is polarising, for every
person who likes it, like me, there's three who won't get past the opening
credits. I found it to be very unusual experience, bizarre repulsive and in
the end quite fun. I recommend it, just don't say I didn't warn you.
Ralph "Leechboy" Beard

Author
Joseph Brenner
     A Japanese, arty flick, which supposedly uses horror movie tropes
to make some sort of cyberpunk comment on modern culture.  It's got some
moments, but it's mostly just dull and stupid.
     To understand the plot of this movie, it helps a lot to read one of
the newspaper reviews that are floating around.  There's nothing
particularly deep about it, but the movie isn't very good at
communicating what's supposed to be happening: a "metal fetishist"
inserts a piece of rusty metal tubing into his leg, freaks out and runs
in front of a car which is being driven by a "salary man" and his girl
friend.  The salary man then seems to be infected with some sort of
disease that progressively transforms him into metal.  The thankfully
black and white look of this movie, involves various disgusting looking
chaotic masses of old machine parts protruding from peoples bodies (like
VIDEODROME, but not done as well).  
     In the only scene that's worth anything in the movie, the "salary
man" undergoes the bulk of his transformation into metal while making
love with his girlfriend.  At first it seems like they might do
something interesting with it (she says something like "No, show it to
me.  I don't frighten easily."), but it degenerates into the usual
horror movie hysterics (a suggestion for directors: prevent the actors
from screaming, using gags if necessary).  Anyway, he emerges from
hiding covered in metal, his penis transformed into a huge power drill.
They spend some time running around, fighting.  While she has him
briefly subdued, there's a hint that she's turned on by his new body,
but he kills her with his cool new tool.  It isn't clear if she meant
for this to happen, but if you believe the reviews she "dies in
ecstasy."
     I might excuse the excesses and clumsiness of this movie if I
thought they really had something worthwhile to say, but they just
don't.  This whole business about the transformation "just happening"
like some sort of disease is dumb any way you look at it.  Cyberpunk is
about turning yourself into a monster *on purpose*, not by accident.
And this general theme of technology being out of control, an
implacable, inhuman force ... it isn't just wrong, it's old and stale
too.
     (Oh, the music is pretty good though.  If you're into moody
industrial music, you might want to check out the sound track.  For that
matter, this movie would probably be okay as a dance club light show).  
