Title
Review for Insomnia (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Stian M. Landgaard
INSOMNIA (Norsk Filminstitutt, Nordic Screen Production A/S, 
Norsk Film A/S)
INSOMNIA is the typical psychological thriller where someone
did something very bad, and is haunted by the deed.
A young girl has been murdered, and two homicide detectives, 
Jonas Engström (Skarsgĺrd) and Erik Vik (Ousdal), are sent to
conduct an investigation. Later on, the detectives discover a 
cabin where the suspect might be hiding. A fog covers the area, 
and during the operation one of the detectives shoot and kill 
the other by mistake. The local police believes that the suspect
was responsible, and the remaining detective must do whatever
he can to support that theory. But sinners don't sleep ...
INSOMNIA is Skjoldbjćrg's first directing job, and he does it
quite well. The scenes are eerie, the psychological aspect is
always with us, and the pacing of the movie is excellent.
However, we sometimes find it difficult to fully understand
what is going on. This is not a movie where one can ask a lot
of questions; way enough trouble attempting to figure out what
is happening, rather than why.
The actors perform with great panache; there is nothing much to 
discuss there. Skarsgĺrd has recently appeared in GOOD WILL 
HUNTING and AMISTAD. He certainly carries some creepiness and 
depth of character with him whereever he goes.
INSOMNIA is a tense and mildly violent thriller, and it
does well in the genre. I rate it 4+ out of 6.
Reviewed by Stian M. Landgaard, March 31st, 1998

Author
Dennis Schwartz

INSOMNIA (director: Erik Skjoldbjćrg; cast: Stellan Skarsgĺrd (Jonas
Engström), Sverre Anker Ousdal (Erik Vik), Bjřrn Floberg (Jon Holt),
Gisken Armand (Hilde Hagen), Maria
Bonnevie (Ane), Marianne O. Ulrichsen (Froya), Bjřrn Moan (Eilert),
Maria Mathiesen (Tanja), Norway-1997)
A pretty 17-year-old girl Tanja (Maria Mathiesen) is murdered in the
land of the midnight-sun, in a remote northern town of Norway, where the
sun never sets in the summer. Two expert homicide detectives arrive to
help in the case. What makes this story different from others of this
ilk, aside from the rarity of such a film coming out of Norway and being
seen in America, is that one of the detectives, the brilliant Jonas
Engstrom (Stellan Skarsgard), an exiled Swedish policeman, now working
in Oslo, has charges against him that he had very intimate conversations
with a key witness. He is still handicapped with untreated psychological
problems. What happens to him here is even worse, as he accidently
shoots his partner Erik Vik (Anker Ousdal) when a trap they set goes
awry, and he spends the rest of the film trying to cover-up this
fatality.
The story follows the brooding detective, who seems to be deeply
troubled about personal matters and suffers from lack of sleep. How he
performs as a detective is chillingly played out in the company of the
Norwegian police, who look up to him for his professionalism and the
emotionless manner in which he handles the assignment. That is, except
for a women investigator, Ane (Bonnevie), who intuitively suspects that
he is not all that he is supposed to be.
It is a bizarre murder since the killer washed the girl's hair and
clothes and left no fingerprints, and did not sexually assault her. Two
suspects are investigated by the police. The former boyfriend Eilert
(Bjřrn), who happened to break up with Tanja the night of her murder, at
a party they attended. When the police are questioning him, clues arise
pointing to another suspect, a writer (Jon Holt), who the detective
believes is the older man she was seeing. When examining her wardrobe
the detective finds dresses that he is sure she couldn't afford to get
on her own or from Eilert.
A trap is set for the killer when the victim's knapsack is found in a
remote shed. But the killer eludes the trap through police incompetence,
by knowing that there was a trap door in the shed and fleeing into the
foggy fjords before the police can apprehend him. This is where Engstrom
shot his partner.
The murder mystery itself turns out to be no great mystery, as the
expert detective quickly zeroes in on the killer. But the detective's
strangely aggressive behavior with young women is frightening to behold,
something that he can't seem to control. In one incident the flirtatious
girlfriend of Tanja's, Froya (Ulrichsen), is sexually groped by him.
This is something the killer understands that he has is in common with
the detective, as they conspire to frame the innocent suspect in the
crime.
Skarsgard's chilling performance does a pyschological number on his
character, and the mysterious and soberly colorful Norwegian atmosphere
gives this film an appealing flavor, allowing it to appear as if were a
noir film. This more than makes up for the less than appealing story
line. It is worth a look, if for no other reason, than to see how a
murder is handled in a beautiful and idyllic country such as Norway. But
this film has more to offer than that; it seriously questions police
conduct and authority, as it leaves a very damaging message, something
that is hard to ignore about authority figures the world-over:
questioning if the police are mentally fit for the work they do.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
The land of the midnight sun can be tough on a detective trying to solve
a murder case.  Near the arctic circle at a time when the sun never
sets, it's hard for the detective to get much sleep, especially when he
has accidentally made himself part of the case.
As economically directed by Erik Skjoldbaerg, INSOMNIA, the lean and
atmospheric tale written by Nikolaj Frobenius, is not compelled to
explain everything.  Although it's not hard to follow, the story happily
leaves the actions and motivations of many of the characters ambiguous.
A film without much dialog like INSOMNIA requires a strong leading actor
to carry it.  Stellan Skarsgard from BREAKING THE WAVES, GOOD WILL
HUNTING and RONIN delivers a masterful performance as Jonas Engstrom,
the Swedish cop with a reputation for doing whatever it takes to crack a
case.  Skarsgard's acting temperament makes him a perfect choice for the
role of the stoic policeman.
Jonas has been called to the far north of Norway to solve the case of a
murdered 17-year-old girl.  The methodical killer had cleaned the body
afterwards and even washed her hair so that no clues would be left.  The
girl had had a big fight with her teenage boyfriend the night of the
murder, and he doesn't have an alibi.  She had also been seeing an older
man who gave her expensive clothing.  These two are immediate suspects.
When the case goes horribly wrong, Jonas begins to fear that he will be
arrested, so he creates an elaborate web of deception.  With his lack of
sleep and his palpable exhaustion, Jonas becomes increasingly paranoid
as he chases the killer.  Several scenes are set in his hotel room
during the bright night as he tries in vain to cover his windows
effectively so he can get some much-needed sleep.
Racked with guilt for his mistakes and fearing the worst, Jonas pushes
his body past its level of endurance, causing himself, more than once,
to almost fall asleep at the wheel.  Erling Thurmann-Andersen's
penetrating cinematography shows every pore and line in Jonas's troubled
face.
The director pays careful attention to the small details.  The
background sounds, for example, are so low that even a kiss sounds like
a small explosion.  This lack of ambient noise allows him to emphasize
the minutia of the case that might otherwise have been missed.
To say that a movie makes you sleepy is generally the ultimate insult,
but not this time.  Skarsgard delivers such an emphatic performance that
audiences may begin to feel just as fatigued as Jonas.  And with that
drowsiness comes a heightened appreciation for exactly what he is having
to endure.
INSOMNIA runs just 1:37.  The film is in Norwegian with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but would be an R for brief intense gore,
sex, nudity and profanity and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
