Title
Review for Shining Through (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     During World War II the sort of spy film that was made had generally
normal sorts of people with normal sorts of goals.  People like James Cagney
would be normal, everyday Americans shocked by what they saw in Germany or
Japan.  The sort of thing we got was FOREIGN CORRESPONDENT or BLOOD ON THE
SUN.  When the war was over, Hitchcock added some gloss and star power with
films like NOTORIOUS.  By the early 1960s, however, the personal sort of
behind-the-lines spy story, such as THE COUNTERFEIT TRAITOR or TORN CURTAIN,
was rare and the spy film was giving way to the more spectacular sabotage
films such as THE GUNS OF NAVARONE.  When James Bond came along, there was
much more gloss and in addition, the spy had become the infallible super-
spy.  Even then the stakes could be as small as a decoder.  But that was not
true for long.  Soon Bond had to fight bigger and bigger threats.  The
villains threatened Fort Knox, Miami, the space program.  The stories got
more and more tongue-in-cheek.  In MOONRAKER the plot was to destroy the
whole world.  Then our agents started being people like John Rambo, who
knows that you don't need brain power--you need fire power.  THE HUNT FOR
RED OCTOBER restored some of the need for brain power, but it was brain
power together with fire power.  Now there is SHINING THROUGH and it is a
story that Hitchcock might have done in 1946.  We have relatively normal
people who make mistakes and get hurt and feel.  Producer/director/writer
David Seltzer seems to have forgotten everything we have learned about the
spy film since 1950.  Gee, I hope he makes a bundle.
     We are told the entire story from a regrettable framing sequence (more
on that later).  Linda Voss (played by Melanie Griffith) is being
interviewed by the BBC about her experiences in World War II.  In flashback
we see the young Linda as a romantic who loves movies, particularly about
Germany.  Her father is a German Jew who fled because of the oppression.
But Voss still dreams of visiting Germany to bring the rest of her family
out.  With her quick mind and a general high efficiency she becomes a legal
secretary and is assigned to lawyer Ed Leland (played by Michael Douglas).
There seems to be more to Leland than meets the eye, however.  He seems to
disappear on mysterious missions for the government.  Voss is intrigued by
both the man and his job.  In the first hour there is a romance between the
two, but the film takes off in the second hour when Voss gets her
opportunity to go to Germany to rescue her family and at the same time do
some spying for the government.
     The technical aspects of SHINING THROUGH are for the most part well-
executed.  The recreation of the streets of Berlin during the war feels
particularly realistic.  David Seltzer was both executive producer and
director; as director, he could see what was needed to make a street look
authentic and then as holder of the purse strings he could allot himself the
budget to create the effect he wanted.  The script is witty and suspenseful
though occasionally it stretches credulity a bit.  There are some far-
fetched coincidences (Hitchcock films often have the same problem).  But the
biggest flaw is a framing sequence which robs the story of much of its
suspense.  As the story is related by Voss years after the war, there is no
doubt that Voss will survive all the events.  The old age makeup,
incidentally, is not nearly as good as it is in FOR THE BOYS.  Perhaps that
is the only area where that film is better than this.  The framing sequence
does give Seltzer a very clever excuse to have the German sequences shot in
English.  Michael Kamen provides a score including an interesting piano
theme under the opening credits.
     Besides Douglas and Griffith, SHINING THROUGH features Sir John
Gielgud, generally considered to be one of the greatest living actors.  This
film does not sufficiently show off his talents, though it is hard to
imagine any film that would.  Liam Neeson, best known for the title role in
DARKMAN, plays a Nazi officer and Joely Richardson plays an attractive high-
born German woman who befriends Voss.  (Richardson is the daughter of
director Tony Richardson and actress Vanessa Redgrave.)  Overall a very
enjoyable--I would rate it a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Very mild spoiler:  Seltzer might have done well to study his history a
little better.  Peenemunde is not a town in central Germany as it appears on
the map in the film.  It is an island at the north-east tip of Germany at
the mouth of the Peene River.  I could be wrong about this, but I do not
believe that there were factories at Peenemunde.  The V-1 and A-4 (a.k.a.
the V-2) were launched from Peenemunde but the A-4 (at least) was built at
Nordhausen, which may well be the place Seltzer called "Peenemunde."
Nordhausen was at least inland some distance and might have been in that
position on the map Voss saw.  One more comment about the framing sequence:
it almost certainly was an after-thought to make the film more commercial
and to give it a much happier but less realistic ending.

Author
Sandra J. Grossmann
Cast:        Michael Douglas, Melanie Griffith, Liam Neeson, Joely Richardson, 
             John Gielgud
Screenplay:  David Seltzer, based on Susan Isaacs' novel
Director:    David Seltzer
Length:      2 hours 10 minutes
     Let me put it this way.  I didn't pay to see this film, and I had
an enjoyable pre-film conversation with the person who sat next to me.
Those were the highlights of the evening.
     The film does have entertainment value, but probably not what
Seltzer had in mind.  Oh, it's stylish, all right, the look of the
forties is well- produced, and occasional images remind you it's a
big-screen movie.  But the characters? the dialog? the *plot*?  Who
could've conceived of anything this stupid?
     Melanie Griffith forgot to play a new character, but it doesn't
matter.  She plays the same Working Girl except her hairstyle is
different and her name is Linda.
     Her boss is Ed (Michael Douglas), who may or may not be a spy for
the U.S.  Oh, hell, of course he's a spy.  And of course she falls in
love with him.  Anyway, once Pearl Harbor is attacked, he moves on to
more important work while she is shunted into the typing pool until he
returns, in full uniform, at which time Linda works for him again.  
     This time, though, Ed has a problem.  One of his agents in Nazi
Germany can't exactly work any longer.  What is Ed to do?  *Who* can
replace this agent?  Why, Linda has an idea.  Since she speaks
"perfect" low-class  German (compliments of her Berliner grandparents),
Linda suggests to Ed that she can infiltrate the very heart of Berlin's
Nazi society by becoming a cook for a high-ranking Nazi officer so that
she can photograph secret plans and smuggle the microfilm out of Nazi
Germany.  And Ed, a full colonel in the OSS, agrees that she's his best
bet, so he makes the arrangements and off she goes.  Wait.  Did I
mention she's "half Jewish?"  (Her very words...)  And did I tell you
she only has a week or two to (a) infiltrate, (b) take advantage of an
unguarded moment, (c) get the stuff, and (d) slip out of Germany before
her papers will "expire"?
     If you think the plot up to now sounds preposterous, well, you
ain't seen nothin' yet.  I won't go into all the details (I've already
tortured you enough), but suffice it to say that the latter part of the
movie makes the first part sound reasonable.
     OK, so the plot's ridiculous.  Movies are more than mere plots,
though.  How about the cinematography?  It's very nice--good work by
Jan de Bont.  How about the sound?  It's fine, nothing special, but
fine.  How about the acting?  Uhm...
     Michael Douglas actually does a nice job for more than half the
movie, and it's really not his fault that his character is totally
impossible and stupidly written.  And John Gielgud is on-screen for no
more than about four minutes total, so I doubt this will tarnish his
reputation.  Joely Richardson does a good job all the way through.
Liam Neeson (who plays a high-ranking Nazi) does an OK-but-nothing-`
special job.  But Melanie Griffith sets new lows for mediocrity.
     Aside from the fact that she has no feeling for the 40's style and
conducts herself in a strictly modern fashion, she simply fails to
convey emotion.  Her voice is flat, her face is flat, and her delivery
makes Clint Eastwood look like Olivier.  Even worse, the film is told
in flashbacks, and guess who narrates.  Fortunately, some of the
narration is so bad that the film accidentally becomes entertaining.  
     If ever a budding screenwriter wanted lessons on why flashback is a
dangerous device, well, here's an instructive movie.  Another lesson
this film carries is that relying exclusively on mood and style is
unprofitable.  So this movie isn't a total waste: it teaches what not
to do.  The studios, though, will probably interpret the audience's
lukewarm acceptance as a sign that no one is interested in period
pieces, and it'll be that much harder for a good "retro" screenplay to
get the go-ahead.
     I recommend not seeing this film until it reaches video.  It's
instructive enough (and pretty enough) to warrant a rental, but it's
not even worth matinee prices now.
Sandy Grossmann          sandyg@sail.labs.tek.com
