Title
Review for When Harry Met Sally... (1989)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
David N. Butterworth
     If imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, then Woody Allen should
feel sincerely flattered by WHEN HARRY MET SALLY..., Rob (THE PRINCESS BRIDE)
Reiner's latest romantic comedy.  The comparisons between this film and Allen's
ANNIE HALL are inevitable -- Reiner almost seems to be inviting them in fact.  
But, whilst it doesn't quite match that film stylistically, it does come
awfully close on occasions.  
     The film stars Billy (RUNNING SCARED, MEMORIES OF ME) Crystal and Meg
(INNERSPACE, D.O.A.) Ryan in the title roles.  They are two mismatched
individuals -- she an aspiring journalist, he a successful political consultant
-- who meet and fall in love, yet don't fully realize it until twelve years
afterwards.  
     Prior to that revelation, the two of them bump into each other on two
separate occasions and end up discussing love, sex, and marriage.  Harry's
philosophy on life is that a man can never be friends with a woman to whom he's
attracted because "the sex thing always gets in the way."  Nevertheless he
finds Sally "empirically" attractive.  What follows is a love/hate relationship
in which the hate often outweighs the love.  
     When Harry and Sally meet for the third time in twelve years, it's in a
book store.  "There's a man staring at you in Personal Growth," comments
Sally's girlfriend Marie.  She's played by Carrie Fisher of Princess Leia fame
and, together with Bruno Kirby as Harry's best friend Jess, provides the two
leads with staunch acting support.  
     The screenplay, by Nora (HEARTBURN) Ephron -- who also serves as the
film's Associate Producer -- is well-structured but misses some of the insight
and astuteness which garnered ANNIE HALL an Academy Award back in 1977, the
year this new film opens, ironically.  Nevertheless, it remains consistently
funny, with writing of the "In a city of 8 million people, I have to run into
my ex-wife!"  calibre.  
     But the nicest surprise is Meg Ryan's performance as Sally.  Frankly, it's
a gem.  Although not known for her comedic talents, director Reiner certainly
brings them out in this movie.  Working shoulder-to-shoulder with Crystal, a
comedian of considerable skill, Ryan is never out of her depth and often
outshines him.  
     Crystal's rendering of the smug, know-it-all Harry often drifts into some
of the characterizations which populate his stand-up routines, and it's
distracting at times.  His character doesn't develop much throughout the course
of the movie.  In fact, one of the few things that does change about Harry is
the length of his sideburns.  
     Sally, on the other hand, develops significantly.  The scene in which she
learns that her ex-boyfriend has recently married is a joy to watch.  Ryan's
red-eyed, rag doll hysterics are spot on and beautifully realized.  And there's
a scene in a sandwich bar which is an absolute riot.  
     WHEN HARRY MET SALLY... opens with a bouncy, nostalgic jazz tune
reminiscent of Woody Allen's later films.  Reiner also intersperses the action
with documentary-style interviews -- a common Woody Allenism -- between married
couples.  Seated against a pastel backdrop, they discuss how they met and how,
after all these years, they're still together.  And the film's subject matter
itself -- New Yorker's neuroses about sex, marriage and relationships -- is
prime Woody Allen territory.  
     Moviegoers who don't particularly like Woody Allen, but enjoy his brand
of humor, might get a big kick out of WHEN HARRY MET SALLY....  At its worst,
the film is simply derivative.  But at its best, it holds its own against some
of that director's finest work. 

Author
James Brundage
It was the 80s, the time when acid washed jeans went, the Ephrons could
turn out a decent script, Rob Reiner could direct something worth
watching, and Billy Crystal hadn't succumbed to the sequel curse.  And
Meg Ryan?  Well, Meg Ryan's still pretty much Meg Ryan: sickeningly Top
40, an actress who seemingly lives in fear of picking a role that could
be too controversial (never mind her recent marital scuffle).
When Harry Met Sally... closed out a decade fondly remembered by Grosse
Pointe Blank and Romy and Michele's High School Reunion and darkly
satirized by Bret Easton Ellis' American Psycho.  It's a romantic comedy
that has spawned a plethora of knockoffs so terrifying that, like its
counterparts in all other genres, it may have been better if the script
were never penned, if only to save us from the aftermath.  But still, we
have to give When Harry Met Sally... credit for what it did: Make one of
the few romance films that bears any kind of truth without also being a
dark comedy.
Two people who want absolutely nothing to do with each other in the
beginning of the story, Harry Burns (Billy Crystal) and Sally Albright
(Meg Ryan) end up driving together to move into separate apartments in
New York City after they both graduate from college.  By the time they
reach the Big Apple, they're talking about their disbelief that
friendship and sex can coexist, and as we all know from experience (and
now cliché) they eventually hook up -- it's unavoidable.
Rather than make the mistake that countless copycats have by making
their tryst a quick cut away from a sex scene to appease the MPAA, When
Harry Met Sally... takes its time to the inevitable end.  And I mean
takes its time: For 10 years Harry's and Sally's paths weave back and
forth like Robert Downey Jr. trying to walk the white line.  At
years-long intervals they befriend each other, drift apart, befriend
each other again, and, at long last, find themselves testing their own
theory (to the inevitable happy ending).
As for why When Harry Met Sally... still contains cinematic merit a
dozen years after its initial release, it actually has all of the
strengths that make a movie last.  Nora Ephron's dialogue is sharp,
witty, and intelligent, Billy Crystal shows us a movie in which he
(mostly) acts instead of does a stand up routine with other actors
present, Rob Reiner directs a simple story instead of trying to preach
on God-knows-what-tangent, and even run-of-the-mill Meg Ryan takes a
huge risk with her squeaky clean image by faking an orgasm in a deli (a
now-legendary scene worth the rental alone).  And don't forget Harry
Connick Jr.'s stellar soundtrack.
While to this day it is a mark of masculine shame to admit to actually
liking the movie, I personally am not afraid to give it my seal of
approval.  And I'm awfully manly.
[Editor's Note: The new DVD release features a ton of extra footage,
commentary track, and a making-of documentary.  Worth checking out.]
Director: Rob Reiner
Producer: Rob Reiner, Andrew Scheinmann
Writer: Nora Ephron
Starring: Billy Crystal, Meg Ryan, Carrie Fisher, Bruno Kirby
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Rob Reiner is one of the few current major directors that most
Americans can recognize by sight.  He has put on a little weight since his
ALL IN THE FAMILY days, but he is still recognizable.  But more than just
having visual recognition, he is also recognized as being a major directing
talent.  After THIS IS SPINAL TAP, THE SURE THING, STAND BY ME, and THE
PRINCESS BRIDE, one tends to expect a lot from him as a director.  One looks
forward to a Rob Reiner film.  However, this one was really disappointed by
WHEN HARRY MET SALLY..., a film that seems to assume it has a wonderful warm
and winning story, but somehow just does not have a story to match its
expectations.
     The story is punctuated by interview insets, much like Warren Beatty's
REDS, but here we have older couples who love each other and obviously have
had successful marriages, reminiscing about how they first met.  And as far
as that goes the film is warm.  These insets take up only about six or seven
minutes od the film and unfortunately it is in these insets that we find
most of the characters we end up liking.  The main line of the story is
about how Harry got coupled with Sally, but since these people are more
superficially cute than lovable (and not always even cute), there is
something really missing in the connections between the insets and the plot.
Harry and Sally first meet after graduation when Harry was something of a
male chauvinist and Sally was just a little cold.  They fail to hit it off.
Flash forward five years.  Harry is now something of a male chauvinist and
Sally is now a little cold.  They run into each other in an airport and fail
to hit it off.  Flash forward another five years to 1987.  Harry is now
something of a male chauvinist with a better sense of humor, and Sally is
now a little cold and has self-doubts.
     From there we follow the two trying to be platonic friends, wondering
if they should have sex, discussing if sex partners are sincere, discussing
Harry's promiscuity, ad nauseum.  Do we care?  Sure, there is some
voyeuristic appeal to hearing people talk about their sex lives.  Do we care
any further about these people as people?  I did not.  I had the feeling
that when these people walked off camera they winked out of existence.
Harry is a political consultant.  I'm not sure what a political consultant
does, but Harry's friends don't seem to be political consultants, and Harry
never so much as reads a newspaper.  This is not creating a character.  Nora
Ephron, the script writer, just filled in a blank labeled "Occupation"; she
did not create a character.
     Billy Crystal as Harry and Meg Ryan as Sally are attractive, engaging
people, and I was willing to find out about their characters' sex lives
while they were going well.  It did not make for great cinema, but it is
watchable.  When their relationship starts to sour, both characters are
pretty tiresome.  WHEN HARRY MET SALLY... is all right as a piece of
entertainment for a little while, but it is by far reiner's worst film.  I
give it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     (One final note:  Nora Ephron (a female) has a male character express
the philosophy that a male cannot just be friends with an attractive woman
without wanting sex with her.  I can just hear a lot of women saying, "Ah-
ha!  I knew it all along!"  In fact, the woman who lived next door to me in
my first apartment said pretty much the same thing, eyeing me suspiciously.
I will tell you what I should have told her.  It is a paranoid myth and is
false.  You can go through life believing the worst of people and nobody
will be able to prove you wrong.  But for the record, women, it simply is
not true of all men.  If you use myth to rationalize negative behavior
toward men, it is you who are in the wrong.)

Author
Randy Parker
        Harry says "tomaytoe."  Sally says "tomahtoe."  Harry says men and
women can't be friends because sex inevitably gets in the way.  Sally says
nonsense!  And that in a nutshell is the premise of WHEN HARRY MET
SALLY..., starring Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan.  Director Rob Reiner has hit
pay dirt with WHEN HARRY MET SALLY...; the movie is a masterpiece, one of
the finest romantic comedies I have ever seen.  Like DEAD POETS SOCIETY,
it's the kind of movie that leaves you high and restores your faith in the
magic of motion pictures.
        Harry Burns and Sally Albright first meet in 1977 after graduating
from college.  They share a car from Chicago to New York and discover they
really don't like each other.  Their feelings haven't changed five years
later when they run into each other on a plane.  However, after another
five years have passed, Harry and Sally meet once again just as Harry's
wife has left him and Sally has broken up with her boyfriend.  This time
they click and a deep platonic relationship blossoms; they become best
friends.  The movie explores their tumultuous relationship as they
unwittingly fall in love.
        Reiner (SPINAL TAP, THE SURE THING, STAND BY ME) frames the story
within a series of recurring pseudo-documentary clips in which old,
long-married couples describe how they met and fell in love.  The people in
the clips are actors, but the stories they tell are real and range from the
absurd to the charming to the compelling.  The funniest husband and wife
talk simultaneously as they tell their love story.  Neither one will shut
up while the other is talking.  The documentary couples and their stories
provide timely commentary on the developments in Harry and Sally's
relationship.
        At the heart of WHEN HARRY MET SALLY..., crucial to its success,
are the exceptional performances by the two leads.  The biggest surprise is
Crystal, whose subtle performance looms head and shoulders above everything
else he has ever done.  For a change, Crystal makes his character much more
than a cardboard cut-out.  In the tradition of Woody Allen, Harry is
self-conscious and sees both the absurdity and tragedy in life.  His dark
side makes him pessimistic and cynical, but it also gives him a biting,
sarcastic sense of humor.  Crystal is extraordinarily adept at conveying
both the pathos and humor within Harry.
        Ryan, also delivering her finest performance to date, is equally
engaging as Sally, whose compulsive, structured personality tends to cut
her off from other people.  Like Harry, Sally is a full of quirks and
idiosyncrasies which make her seem genuine.  For instance, when ordering
from a menu, Sally drives waiters and waitresses crazy with her detailed
instructions about how her food should be prepared.
        Both of these characters are complicated, confused, and also
irresistibly appealing.  Their authenticity is refreshing, their motives
and behavior thought provoking, enough so to inspire inner reflections of
our own.  Watching Harry and Sally grow and mature and their relationship
develop is fascinating and moving.
        WHEN HARRY MET SALLY... is the consummate mix of humor, romance,
and human nature.  The movie is more than the sum of its parts--a true
collaborative effort.  Everyone involved in the film is in top form,
including Carrie Fisher in a supporting role as Sally's best friend.  You
know a movie is great when even Fisher delivers a good performance.  Bruno
Kirby, who plays Harry's best friend, also deserves mention for bringing
depth to his small role.
        Reiner's direction is authoritative and imaginative yet
unobtrusive.  He breathes new life into the technique of splitting the
screen in half during phone conversations; he takes it even one step
further and splits the screen into thirds in one ingenious scene.  The
story of Harry and Sally's relationship spans 11 years, and Reiner uses the
documentary clips to punctuate each chapter of their friendship.  The
passage of time in the film is unusually smooth and fluid.
        The screenplay by Nora Ephron (SILKWOOD, HEARTBURN) is wonderfully
clever.  Her dialogue is witty and frank; the characters talk and behave
like real people.  One small, seemingly insignificant bit of dialogue is to
me indicative of the film's greatness.  Sally starts to tell Harry, "All my
married friends with children say that..." but then she corrects herself,
"Actually, my one friend who has children tells me that..."  We all censor
and edit ourselves in every day conversation, but how many times do you see
a character do it in a movie?  In my mind, this one tiny moment reflects
just how closely the film has captured the human condition.
        Production designer Jane Musky has taken advantage of New York's
picturesque scenery (the browns and reds of autumn, the snowy white of
Christmas) to help Reiner capture the city's beauty.  The movie's
romanticized version of New York is refreshing after the disturbing
depictions we have seen recently in DO THE RIGHT THING, GHOSTBUSTERS II,
and even BATMAN.  The soundtrack of classic jazz standards--featuring Ella
Fitzgerald, Louis Armstrong, and Harry Connick, Jr.--always evokes just the
right mood.
        WHEN HARRY MET SALLY...  is so true to life that it cuts almost too
close to the bone as it shifts effortlessly between uproarious comedy and
poignant drama.  In exploring the possibility for platonic friendship
between men and women, Reiner has hit a nerve.  He has shed light on those
fundamental similarities and differences that unite and divide the sexes.
In case you're wondering, I haven't offered any criticisms of the film
because I don't have any.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
One way to determine how great a movie is, would be to calculate its
re-watchability quotient. I have seen this film over thirty times since its
inception, and have no qualms about watching it another hundred times in my
lifetime. It's a classic romantic comedy that is impeccably written,
wonderfully acted and beautifully shot under a fantastic musical umbrella of
love, fate and supreme friendship.
PLOT:
After College, two strangers named Harry and Sally drive from Chicago to New
York together and garner very little interest in each another. Five years
later, they meet again in an airport, with even less sparks flying this time
around. It isn't until another five years goes by, that Harry, now divorced,
and Sally, just getting off a five-year relationship, become friends, and
ultimately...much better friends.
CRITIQUE:
This film is the ultimate romantic comedy for all those people who don't
think that they will ever find anyone that is right for them. It isn't based
on the notion of the proverbial "love at first sight", but rather about the
more typical love that grows between two people who spend a lot of time
together, support one another through thick and thin, depend on each other
as best friends, and ultimately care more about each other than anyone else
in the world. Reminiscent of Woody Allen's ANNIE HALL (8/10), this is the
movie that sent Meg Ryan into cute, romantic, comedy movie star heaven, and
confirmed Billy Crystal as a viable romantic lead. The script is an
excellent breakdown of timeless conversations between the sexes ("Can men
and women ever be friends without sex getting in the way?" and "Will a
one-night stand with your best friend ultimately ruin your friendship?"),
witty repartee between the two leads, and a beautifully constructed love
story that is carefully assembled over time, and gently eases you into the
wonder of that thing called love.
This movie also offers one of the most romantic soundtracks that you'd ever
want to hear via a career-launching effort by Harry Connick Jr., an endless
array of picturesque scenes featuring the wonderful world of New York
Christmas at its best, quotable dialogue galore, and solid supporting
performances from Bruno Kirby and Princess-Leia-for-life, Carrie Fisher. The
only complaint that I have about this movie is that it is only ninety
minutes long. Other than that, it delivers a timeless tale of a charming
couple falling in love, intercut with various couples relating their own
accounts of l'amour de leur vie, with humor laced through every scene, and a
tangible sense of hope for all those who still believe in great friends,
fate and love.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
The lady who says "I'll have what she's having" in the infamous Meg Ryan
"faking an orgasm" scene is none other that Estelle Reiner, director Rob
Reiner's own mom. Rob's daughter with former wife and director in her own
right, Penny Marshall (Laverne from TV's "Laverne & Shirley"), also stars in
this film as Emily. She is dating Harry in one scene at Jess and Marie's
home. Penny Marshall and Rob Reiner were married for eight years from 1971
to 1979.
Screenwriter Nora Ephron went on to write and direct two very similar, but
not nearly as good, romantic comic tales called SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE
(6.5/10) and YOU'VE GOT MAIL (5.5/10). Her script for WHEN HARRY MET SALLY
nabbed her an Oscar nomination for Best Original Screenplay at the 1989
Academy Awards. It lost to Tom Shulman's script for DEAD POET'S SOCIETY.
Notice how the last names of the two main characters are reflective of their
attitudes in life. Billy Crystal as Harry BURNS, and Meg Ryan as Sally
ALBRIGHT.
There is one scene in which Billy Crystal's character can clearly be seen
reading Stephen King's MISERY, which would ultimately be director Rob
Reiner's next picture.
This film surprisingly grossed close to $93 Million at the box-office, and
was one of Barry Sonnenfeld's last as a cinematographer as he went
on to direct such films as the two ADDAMS FAMILY flicks, GET SHORTY
and MEN IN BLACK (7/10).
The "real-life" couples featured in the intercut scenes telling their
stories of love, are actually actors.
