Title
Review for Azúcar amarga (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ben Hoffman
          Writer-Director Leon Ichaso, who came to the U.S. when he
was 14-years-old, says "Every character in the film is a composite of
different people.  This is the story of many people in Cuba," . Maybe
it is and maybe it is not.
          BITTER SUGAR is an unrelenting attack on Castro and the
Cuban Revolution.  Anyone who believed that the revolution was viable,
that Castro was for the people, was a dupe.   The film's propaganda
never lets up, never mentions any of the harm that our own country has
visited on Cuba when 5 of our presidents have continued the unabated
onslaught on this tiny island in the Caribbean with embargoes and
Radio broadcasts to the island long after Castro had stopped trying to
bring the revolution to Central and South America.
          This is not to say that the condition of the people is not
bad.  Nor do I contend that Castro is not a dictator.  But a film that
wants to be fair should mention the embargoes we have visited on Cuba
so that no country, much less a tiny one, could survive, and then we
say, "Look what Castro has done to his people."  No mention
is made that millions of people in Cuba still admire, rightly or
wrongly, Castro; that illiteracy has been all but wiped out.
          What the film's main theme is that "everyone" wants to leave
Cuba and go to Miami.  No mention is made that Miami is THE most
dangerous city in the U.S.   It is presented as if it were Heaven.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BITTER SUGAR (AZUCAR AMARGA) *** 1/2 .  Directed by Leon Ichaso. Written
by Ichaso & Orestes Matacena. Story , Ichaso & Pelayo Garcia. Photography,
Claudio Chea. Editing, Yvette Pineyro. Production design, Liliana Soto.
Additional editing, David Tedeschi. First Assistant Director, Tito Rosario.
Music, Manuel Tejada. Additional Music, Jose Ferro, Jr. Songs,  Vergilio
Marti & Victor Victor.  Cast: Rene Lavan (Gustavo), Mayte Vilan (Yolanda),
Larry Villanueva (Bobby),  Miguel Gutierrez (Dr. Tomas Valdez), Mr. Garcia
(Luis Celeiro), Belkis (Teresa Maria Rojas), Claudio (Orestes Matacena),
Soraya (Caridad Ravelo), Yiyo (Jorge Pupo), Security Guard (Hotel) (Augusto
Feria), Security Guard (Beach) (Flex German). A First Look Pictures
release. In Spanish with subtitles. In black & white.  102 min. Not rated.
"Bitter Sugar" was made by Havana-born Leon Ichaso  ("El Super" and others)
who left Cuba and came to the US at age 14. It is such a bitterly
anti-Castro movie that it is bound to be execrated by Fidelistas, loved by
anti-Castrists, and disliked by sympathizers of the Cuban Revolution. But
the latter should note that the Revolution is not in question.What its
idealism eventually became is.  True, the film never mentions the
continuing Cuban policy of the US Government, but then, this is a movie
limited to internal affairs.
Those points  are moot however, since the film seems to have had a low
distribution profile. This is sad as "qua" film, "Bitter Sugar" is
excellently made and, for me, fascinating.
The setting is Havana, in fairly recent times not specified except for the
fact that the Soviet Union had not yet dissolved. Economically, Cuba's
living standards are awful. Gustavo, a good-looking, bright University
student is the son of psychiatrist Dr.Valdez and the brother of hirsute
rock musician Bobby. The boys' beautiful mother had died in accident some
years back.
Gustavo, an idealistic product of Castroism, is the "Hombre Nuevo" (the New
Man) of the Revolution, though, with his sense of humor he is no rabid
fanatic. He wins a scholarship to study aeronautics in Prague -- which, as
someone later tells him mockingly, is a useless skill in Cuba.
Gustavo meets Yolanda, a pretty dancer with a great figure. They fall in
love. But their affair is enormously complicated and affected by most
apects of life in Cuba: the lack of many basic necessities, censorship,
taboos, repression. The government is desperately trying to bring in
tourists whose dollars-only beaches and hotels are closed to Cubans other
than personnel. It is also on a frantic search for foreign investors,
while, ironically, Castro harangues the crowds about the Revolution
sweeping out capitalism. There are additional, personal complications, like
the "rockero" brother getting into trouble with the authorities, or
Yolanda's mother disapproving of "Communist" Gustavo.
The young people's relationship is touching though never saccharine. Both
are charming and intelligent. Rene Lavan and Mayte Vilan portray them to
perfection, subtly convey sensitivity with none of the expected (especially
from Latins) soap opera theatrics. Affectionate and friendly too is the
rapport between Gustavo and his humorously cynical, politically
disillusioned father.
I noticed that Cubans address their parents as "viejo" or "vieja" (old man,
old woman) which makes the father and son banter all the nicer. At a party
to celebrate the scholarship, Dr. Valdez unveils a cake, a rarity in this
land of tremendous shortages. He describes humorously how the "Socialist"
ingredients were obtained. Miguel Gutierrez, who plays him, is marvelous, a
major screen and stage actor in Cuba which he left in 1991. He could teach
others more than a thing or two in nuances, conveying a lot with a little,
and more...
I will not detail the plot which is quite complex yet never confusing.  The
film achieves a difficult multiple blend of excellent character portrayals,
a moving love story and the discussing, unveiling and criticizing Cuba,
especially how its politics stifle aspirations and limit  the lives of
younger people.
The story involves several people : the defiant musician Bobby (in a
devastating development which comes from a real event); Dr. Valdez who has
no clients, even though
"in Cuba everybody is crazy," and who starts a new career; Yolanda's
family; the scholarship kept dangling before Gustavo with advice "to play
the game"; an Italian investor woven in both as an individual and as
emblematic of the "new colonialists" of Cuba. Even minor characters have
impact.
You could swear that the whole thing was filmed in Havana. Yet, except for
some establishing and other shots, the filming took place in Santo Domingo.
I've seldom seen a more convincing job of substitution -- I can't even
bring myself to call it faking. On top of some undoubtedly genuine street
scenes of Havana, the recreation is exemplary. Black and white also adds
authenticity to the documentary feeling, and melds seamlessly with what
must be older black-and-white footage of the city's life. Within the film
there is also footage of older home movies and of current videotapes made
by the characters.
(The black-and-white print reminds me that some years ago, a university
student taking an Introduction to Film course, loudly protested that he
hated, and would refuse to watch, any black-and-white movies. I hope no one
will miss this film for this reason!)
The editing is masterful in its blend and variety. Lavishy and
intelligently incorporated music is well played,  from  good rock to nice
old tunes. The subtitles are of high quality and the recording catches
clearly the characteristic Cuban accents that tend to eat consonants.
A final thought on film and politics. Many classics, such as Eisenstein's,
were partisan and could even lie blatantly -- which "Bitter Sugar" does not
-- yet these are still great films.
Note :This review and others can be found at :
http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Pedro Sena
SUPER FEATURES:  Awesome story. Beautifully told.
 I don't know that there are too many films that know how to attack a failed
system so well as this one does.
 Yes, it is easy to take a love story and blame its tragic consequences  on
the youthful exuberance of the kids, or whatever. But few films have done it
with an unbelievable style and dedication that this film shows. And if the
Cuban system thinks it has done something for its people, maybe it should
wake up and realize that if is failing miserably, and that it is going to
destroy its own revolution if it does not do something about it.
 Like so many other cultures, the hope is always away from home and Cuba is
no different. Except that a few people admit that they stayed because they
thought things would get better, only to find out later that they didn't get
better at all. Most of it was deception. Or perhaps the system did not have
the resources to do the things it promised and can not find a way to tell
its own people that it does not know how to do things, and is trying to
figure it out. No. Instead we hear a yet another political speech about the
great success of the revolution, and how the imperialist powers have not
won. Yes, says Fidel in the end, things are tense, but he is not offering a
solution, just marking his time in power.
 Wether this is true or not is not for me to say, but one thing is clear. It
has affected the lives of many in the streets, and prevented them from
living to the best of their abilities. It has curtailed educational chances,
and potential gains in that system, by not providing chances, and instead,
infusing these hopes with lies and deceit.
 Gustavo, one night meets Yolanda, at a rock concert, where his brother's
band is playing their version of Metallica hard rock. The concert gets
busted and broken up, of course, but Yolanda and Gustavo have met. And they
seem to be falling genuinely in love. He is considered the "new man" in the
cuban revolution, and his teacher has hopes for him. Alas, these hopes are
false, and it takes a while before Gustavo wakes up to it.   They do agree
on one thing. To not discuss politics. Gustavo believes in the system,
since it has done him good, while Yolanda is less interested in these
things, although we are not told why at the time.
 What ensues is a tangled mess, a web of destruction of the human spirit in
every form imaginable. Gustavo's brother is on a war path, and decided that
injecting himself with aids tainted blood is his solution to the motto that
he abhors. And Gustavo is seeing his own beliefs in the system crumbling
moment by moment.  His own father, a psychiatrist, ends up playing piano in
a bar, where he makes ten times his wage.
 But the pressures of every day are getting to Gustavo. Yolanda is beginning
to take on to others, since her boyfriend is not interested in her  any more
than he is in his ideals, everything he was brought up to believe. And this
gets Gustavo to go and discuss things with his brother, who is in an aids
camp. And the unbelievable moment in the film happens here... Bobby says
that he must be in paradise talking about life to people that are dead.  The
outcast, have a life after all, and it is not bad. It may not know how to
say it too well, but it has a point. And this is the turning point of the
film. Gustavo decided to go and marry Yolanda. But there is a problem, now.
Gustavo's main reason for not marrying Yolanda before was that he was going
to Prague to school, a promise that his teacher had made at his graduation,
a reward for his scholastic achievements. But now, Yolanda has found a way
out with her mother. If he wants to marry her, he has to do it in Miami,
because she is leaving in the early morning.
 She leaves. And he is seen at a rally where Fidel Castro is delivering
another of his notable addresses to the country. Gustavo's hopes are gone,
nothing that he has been promised has ever come true, and he sees the
emptiness in Fidel's words. He undertakes to do something about it. He
happens upon a security guard's gun, and goes after Fidel, and a
sharpshooter kills him on the way to the podium. The film ends with the note
that he was said to be a "traitor to the revolution" and that Yolanda and
her mother got intercepted by the US Coast Guard and are now living in New
Jersey..... and we are sitting here crying and stunned.
 There are not many films that can speak so much, in so little time as this
one does. It keeps the story simple, and hopeful, until all the hopes
becomes shattered one by one.... not just Gustavo's, but everyone else's
including the lying teacher, whose own family is in Miami. His own father
had been asked by his wife to leave before the revolution but he thought
things would get better... here they were, steeped in lies, and shit.
 While this film flows, it does not let on early that it is the political
causes that are hurting people, but it ends with a massive bang, and closes
the curtains before you can say anything. It is brilliantly directed, and
shot in black and white, which is an interesting statement in itself. B&W is
the "old" style and film. And by doing this, Leon Ichaso, can easily say
that YES, the revolution may have had a few good points, but the days of the
good points are gone, and it is time a system wakes up. With a film like
this, one could hardly disagree.
 Excellent film, with unbelievable music all over, it really deserves a
larger audience, so people can get a better idea of what closed political
systems really do to their people. The middle east is full of these kinds of
situations.... I like it in the black and white it was shot.... but would
have loved to see it in color...
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Ygdrasil's Film Newsgroup
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1997. All Rights Reserved.
