Title
Review for Bez konca (1985)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Gareth Rees
     Antek is dead, but his ghost lingers on to watch his wife Ulla and
their son Jacek grieve for him.  The parallels with Kieslowski's later
film BLUE are striking.  Both films focus on a woman whose husband has
died in a car and who leaves behind unfinished business--in BLUE, the
"Song for the Unification of Europe," in NO END, the legal defence of a
strike organiser (it is 1984, and Poland is under martial law)--which
his wife initially resists but eventually becomes involved with.  She
discovers evidence of her husband's lover.  She befriends another
woman.  And the music that dominates NO END is the moving funeral march
that is attributed to the fictitious composer "van den Budenmayer" in
BLUE.
     The treatment of this subject in NO END is grittier, more
realistic, less optimistic.  There is no suggestion that Ulla will find
fulfilment in her new-found liberty.  All struggle seems futile--sex
is joyless, even hypnosis cannot make Ulla forget, and even though the
striker is freed, everyone knows that this is because he gave in to the
system instead of fighting it.
     In BLUE, the presence of Julie's husband Patrice is hinted at
through Julie's memories of his music.  In NO END, Antek's ghost looks
on unhappily as people's lives unravel.  The title may refer to the
unfinality of death, but it also seems to suggest that the painful
struggle of life is unending.  This is the most fatalistic of
Kieslowski's films.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

NO END (BEZ KONCA) (director/writer: Krzysztof Kieslowski; screenwriter:
Krzysztof Piesiewicz; cinematographer: Slawomir Idziak; cast: Grazyna
Szapolowska (Ula Zyro), Maria Pakulnis (Joanna), Aleksander Bardini
(Labrador), Jerzy Radziwillowicz (Antek Zyro), Artur Barcis (Darek
Stach), 1985-Pol.)
NO END takes place in Poland during the early '80s, it is at a time
Martial law was in place, and when any kind of minor resistance against
the government (political graffiti or striking) was met with a few years
of jail time. Kieslowski (Blue, Red, White, Decalogue) deals with this
from the humanistic point of view of a young, politically aware lawyer
Zyro (Jerzy), who dies from a heart attack and returns as a ghost to
watch all the sorrowful events that take place after his death. The film
focuses on three people whom he was concerned about: 1) Ula (Grazyma)
plays his widow, who can't get over loving him. What startles her is how
she didn't know how happy she was with him when he was alive. 2) His
client, the political activist Darek (Artur), who is now on trial for
being a union striker. Darek ideologically refuses to compromise his
position, even for a lenient sentence. 3) And the lawyer who takes
Zyro's place in defending Darek, his old mentor, a  much more wary and
pragmatical lawyer, Labrador (Bandini). Labrador takes the case only
after he learns that he is being forced to retire because he has reached
the mandatory age of 70, and decides he wants to make this controversial
case his swan song.
This film is bubbling over with passion for the Solidarity Movement, as
well as for the sensuousness and passion the widow feels for her
departed husband, so much so that she sees her husband in another man's
strong hands and makes ecstatic love with him in a one time stand.
The political argument of the times, is best seen through the eyes of
the idealistic, uncompromising Darek, who has a wife and child to
support, but still thinks he is "selling out" if he is set-free,
something his lawyer can get for him if he accepts "the gift horse of
freedom." While his lawyer works hard for his case, proud of his
client's integrity, but is convinced that there is no real choice, the
only choice is the more rational position, that he is better off not
going to jail. The "realpolitik" of this dilemma is powerfully
presented, as is the emotional state of Ula, internally wrestling with
her memories and conscience, trying desperately to find a way out of her
emotional entrapment.
The film was powerful enough in its political jibes to have made the
state and the church and the opposition party condemn it.Though this is
not the director's top-of-the line artistic work, it does fit positively
into his opus. His only failing moments, seemed to be in trying to get
the ghost involved with what was going on in the lives of those around
him. It seemed awkward and out of place in this straight forward film,
whose darkened cameras captured enough of the sobering mood of Poland
for the story to be a compelling one, a story about the unfinished
business of the struggle for freedom. The title seems to signify for the
director an unending search for political justice, something he was not
optimistic in achieving in such a repressive country.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Grazyna Szapolowska, Maria Pakulnis, Aleksander Bardini,=20
      Jerzy Radziwillowicz, Artur Barcis
Director: Krzysztof Kieslowski
Producer: Ryszard Chutkowski
Screenplay: Krzysztof Kieslowski and Krzysztof Piesiewicz
Cinematography: Jacek Petrycki
Music: Zbigniew Preisner
U.S. Distributor: New Yorker Films
In Polish with subtitles
     NO END, the first collaboration between writer-director Krzysztof=20
Kieslowski and lawyer-turned-screenwriter Krzysztof Piesiewicz, takes=20
place in a Poland that is under the cloud of martial law.  More than any=20
of the director's other internationally-screened features, this one=20
requires some (however rudimentary) knowledge of the political situation=20
in Poland during the early-to-mid eighties.  Martial law was declared in=20
late 1981, and, in the resulting climate of uncertainty and tension, the=20
courts began to pass two-to-three year sentences on anyone caught=20
painting graffiti, found in possession of an underground newspaper,=20
breaking curfew, or participating in strikes or other resistance=20
activities.  One of Kieslowski's objectives in NO END was to explore=20
potential ramifications of this situation from a noncritical=20
perspective.=20
     Although NO END garnered Kieslowski more overseas recognition that=20
he had attained for CAMERA BUFF, things weren't as pleasant at home. =20
According to the director, this film was not at all well-received during=20
its initial run.  Discussing the Polish reaction to NO END, he said, "It=20
was received terribly by the authorities; it was received terribly by=20
the opposition, and it was received terribly by the Church.  Meaning, by=20
the three powers that be in Poland.  We really got a thrashing over it. =20
Only one element didn't give us a thrashing, and that was the audience=85=20
they went to see it=85 Never in my life have I received as many letters or=
=20
phone calls about a film=85 And all of them, in fact -- I didn't get a=20
single bad letter or call -- said that I'd spoken the truth about=20
martial law.  That that was the way they experienced it, that's what it=20
was like."
     NO END is really three stories in one, all of which revolve around=20
people connected to a lawyer, Antoni Zyro (Jerzy Radziwillowicz), who=20
dies just before the film begins.  There's Ulla (Grazyna Szapolowska,=20
who later appeared in DECALOGUE 6, A SHORT FILM ABOUT LOVE), the=20
lawyer's widow.  Only after his death does she realize how much she=20
loved her husband and how little meaning her life has without him.  The=20
there's Dariusz (Artur Barcis), Antoni's client, who has been jailed for=20
leading a labor strike.  After Antoni's death, Dariusz is forced to=20
employ an older, more cautious lawyer (Aleksander Bardini), who believes=20
in compromising with the state to obtain a lenient sentence.  Finally,=20
there's the ghost of Antoni, who silently haunts his friends and family,=20
watching as they continue their lives.
     Pre-echoes of BLUE abound in this film.  Ulla's grief over her=20
husband's death is like Julie's in the 1993 feature.  Both women=20
discover their husbands' secrets, and both turn to available men for=20
sexual satisfaction.  Adding to the similarities, Zbigniew Preisner's=20
haunting score for NO END can be heard often during BLUE as a=20
composition by "Van Den Budenmayer".  However, while Ulla's story is NO=20
END's most powerful element, the emotional impact here is less than what=20
Kieslowski achieved with the first installment of his THREE COLORS=20
trilogy.
     From a purely intellectual perspective, Dariusz's story is probably=20
the most intriguing.  His dilemma is simple:  accept his new lawyer's=20
strategy of compromise and go free, or retrain his integrity and go to=20
prison.  Dariusz agonizes over the choice.  He has a wife and child to=20
feed -- something he can't do if he's in jail.  Yet he believes=20
passionately in the rights of the workers and the unfairness of martial=20
law, and it makes him feel like a fraud to consider "selling out." =20
Kieslowski carefully balances both sides of the predicament, presenting=20
them to the audience almost as if asking us to render a verdict.  In the=20
end, Dariusz' decision is perhaps inevitable, but it gives him no joy. =20
Kieslowski uses this sort of ethical and/or moral dilemma frequently in=20
his movies.  CAMERA BUFF, BLIND CHANCE, and DECALOGUE all explore=20
similar situations.
     The metaphysical element of NO END, while intriguing in concept,=20
doesn't work all that well on screen.  We never get much sense for what=20
Antoni's ghost is feeling.  He's only in four scenes, and remains=20
something of an enigma -- an impotent watcher who occasionally attempts=20
to communicate with the living by leaving unexpected signs.  Kieslowski=20
uses Antoni's ghost as a metaphor for the average person constrained by=20
martial law -- possessing a clear conscience yet unable to do anything=20
to affect change.
     The three motifs of NO END frequently cross and occasionally=20
entwine.  Kieslowski doesn't always handle these interconnections well;=20
in fact, there are times when the different stories mesh clumsily. =20
Nevertheless, the film is so packed with ideas that there's never any=20
shortage of material worth pondering, and Ulla's emotional torment=20
touches the heart.  Even though elements of the whole don't blend=20
seamlessly, NO END still leaves a lasting impression.  Looking back on=20
the full body of Kieslowski's films, NO END can be viewed as an=20
important entry, because, despite its flaws, we can observe embryonic=20
forms of several themes that the director explored more fully in=20
DECALOGUE and THREE COLORS.  Thus, NO END functions both as a compliment=20
and a precursor to the director's most lasting works.
Kieslowski quotes are from KIESLOWSKI ON KIESLOWSKI, Faber and Faber,=20
1993.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
