Title
Review for Coming to America (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Let me not mince words.  I have liked some of John Landis's films, but
too many have seemed like extended comedy sketches.  He is generally weak on
characters and weaker on storyline.  Eddie Murphy is a standup comic who can
be funny but whose films have had little of quality beyond his jokes.  His
acting range is dwarfed even by John Wayne's.  Both Landis and Murphy are
symbolic of what is going wrong with screen comedy.  The only current comedy
I wanted to see less than John Landis's Eddie Murphy comedy COMING TO
AMERICA was ARTHUR 2 ON THE ROCKS.  Then I heard that COMING TO AMERICA was
supposed to be a departure for Landis and Murphy.  It got good reviews on
television.  So I tried it.  COMING TO AMERICA is to date the high-water
mark for Landis's directorial career and it is the best film Eddie Murphy
has ever been in.  Even more than BULL DURHAM, it is a throwback to earlier
comedies.  Watching it, I was reminded of comedies by Lubitsch and Capra,
and of stories by O.~Henry.  The storyline is simple and predictable like an
O.~Henry story, but it is told with warmth.
     Prince Akeem of Zamunda--played by Murphy without a lot of smirky
highjinks, but with dignity and sincerity--objects to the wife his father
(regally played by the great James Earl Jones) has chosen for him.  Instead
he decides to go to America and find someone he wants.  He wants someone
with a mind and a will of her own who wants him for himself.  This ploy is a
familiar one: he will pretend to be a poor man and find a wife like
commoners do.  With him he takes his faithful servant Semmi.  Arsenio Hall
plays Semmi so well one wishes the two roles had been reversed.
     Landis has assembled a very good cast for this story with Hall, Jones,
Shari Headley (very appealing as the woman Murphy wants to marry), and John
Amos as her father, who runs an imitation McDonald's restaurant so close
that the McDonald's corporation is going to sue him any day.  In addition,
there are a raft of minor characters who add depth and texture to the film.
The liberal sprinkling of minor characters is a characteristic of the good
classic comedies but in recent years we see less of it because they take
good writing and they take away screen time from the major stars.  In COMING
TO AMERICA they do away with that problem by having Murphy and Hall play
many of the minor characters in Rick Baker's heavy makeup.
     Just to show I was not totally bowled over by this film, I will say
that there were problems with the scenes in Zamunda.  It should be a never-
never land, but Zamunda seems more never-never than most.  Perhaps my
geography is bad, but for a heavily forested African kingdom, the vegetation
seemed all wrong.  It is a very wealthy kingdom in which baby elephants have
the big ears of African elephants, but the adult elephants have the small
ears of Indian elephants.  On top of all this, the matte work to show the
African palace is abominable.
     These are definitely quibbles, but they are noticeable and still I give
COMING TO AMERICA a strong +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.  Landis and Murphy, how
about more of the same.  (Oh, and you will have no problem finding the
reference to SEE YOU NEXT WEDNESDAY.)

Author
James Mork
     If you are a Murphy fan, *definitely* see this one.  Eddie's character is
substantially tamer than usual in this new comedy/romance, but it was still
non-stop humor and action.  The African Palace related scenes very much
reminded me of a 1940s' movie (like the ones Alice Faye, Betty Grable, and all
of that crew did).  Remember the ones where the props were *obvious* facades
and the landscapes *obvious* paintings--*but* you didn't care because the
costumes and dances were so eye-catching....
     One comment about the movie:  The movie is incredibly Black.  Sure the
movie is about an African prince, but the theme, 99%!!! of the cast, the
jokes, and nearly every quality about the film seems to have been pulled out of
JET or EBONY magazines.  I can't say if this really hurts or helps the film.
In fact, pay attention and you will even catch a glimpse of a Black version of
a famous French painting (somebody help me out here...the one with the French
girl staring forward, dressed like a maid/waitress...Manet? or Monet?)  There
is quite a bit of background humor to watch for in this one.  If someone could
send me a note explaining the "Mortimer's money" joke...I'd be grateful (went
over my head...and the entire theater was clapping and cheering wildly.)
[Moderator's note: The two bums were the businessmen from Murphy's earlier
film, TRADING PLACES.]
     Murphy does an excellent job of retaining his "Eddie Murphyesque" within a
persona that is not his signature street-wise-foul-mouthed-wise-guy.  His
character is markedly naive to the ways in the "big city" this time.  Often I
saw his BHC smile on the screen and I had anticipations of his Axel Foley
character jumping out at any minute.
     The movie's "Ebony Magazine" setting pokes fun of countless Black
stereotype--countless.  There is a nice, pseudo-insult directed at Whitney.  A
lot of nice slams directed in the direction of McDonald's restaurants....
     If you like any Eddie Murphy flicks at all, this is a must to see, but
keep in mind that although he does bend his character a little here and there,
he is an African prince in this one.
