Title
Review for Untouchables, The (1987)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring  Kevin Costner, Sean Connery, Robert Deniro, Andy Garcia, Charles
Martin Smith, Billy Drago, and Patricia Clarkson.
    The ultimate match up between good and evil, "The Untouchables" is an
excellent movie because it looks deeper into an already examined rivalry. Based
on the 1959 television show of the same title, "The Untouchables" may be an
exaggeration of the real life events that took place, but it fits together
perfectly with some beautifully filmed action sequences, some excellent acting,
a memorable score, and a clever script. The film takes place in Chicago during
the prohibition era where mobsters led by the ruthless Al Capone run an
underground market of liquor to the demanding public. Elliot Ness and a small
force of men known as the untouchables attempt the impossible by trying to stop
Capone and trying to maintain peace and order. However, as Ness soon learns, in
order to stabilize peace, you have to bend a few laws. 
The fact that Capone is evil is very apparent from the first few scenes. The
film begins with Capone, played perfectly by Deniro, declaring that he is not a
violent man and he is a firm believer in following all laws. The film then
quickly transfers to the next scene in which one of Capone's men bombs a
restaurant that contains many innocent people including a little girl. From
this point we know Capone is evil, not only because he kills without
hesitation, but also because he is a lying bastard. Right from the first five
minutes of the film, De Palma has created a hatred towards Capone and he shows
that this man must be brought down at all costs. This developed hatred is
before the film's hero, Ness, is even introduced. I found this approach to be
very clever because in a small duration of time there is a great amount of
admiration for Ness and an equal amount of hatred for Capone. The film only
gets better from this point. 
With the formation of the untouchables, there is a group of men wearing long,
dark overcoats and hats. They walk in unison and they only look forward. As
they walk down the streets they are observed and feared by citizens. Holding
shot guns and pistols in their hands to stop criminals, this image of
vigilantes must have influenced future films. One that comes to mind is "The
Matrix" when Neo, Morpheus, Trinity, and the rest of the gang first come into
the virtual world. Wearing more futuristic outfits of the same 1930's style,
the similarities between these two are countless. "The Untouchables" has some
of the hippest, bravest heroes in any action film. The four members were the
only ones willing to go against Capone's army. 
Each member of this special group also had their own characteristics that
separated them from others. Elliot Ness, played with perfect ingenuity by Kevin
Costner, is a character that surely grows during the course of the film. He
begins as a man who is determined to follow all laws no matter how unfair they
may be. However, as the film develops so does Ness. His beliefs involving the
law are shattered when he realizes that those he trusted are actually members
of the other side. He also begins to lose his stability when his adversaries
begin to murder his friends. His anger becomes so thunderous that he can no
longer hold it in. Sean Connery, who won an Academy Award for best supporting
actor in his role, plays Malone, an aging cop who decides to make one final run
as a member of the untouchables. Malone acts as a mentor to Ness. He teaches
him "the Chicago way" to do things; when they attack with a knife, you attack
with a gun. Connery plays his character with the exact amount of wit and
experience needed. Andy Garcia does a wonderful job as George Stone, a young
man who is just becoming a police officer. As Ness grows, he begins to teach
Stone some valuable lessons that Malone once taught him. Charles Martin Smith
is also fantastic as the final member who attempts to use an income tax offense
against Capone. Smith is perfect for his role as he adds some valuable comic
relief to the film.
The action scenes are also some of the most beautifully choreographed I have
ever seen. Also very similar to "The Matrix," they are exciting and intense.
>From a Western-like battle to the famous confrontation at the train station
steps, the scenes are well thought out and well executed. The score during
these scenes ingeniously adds to the excitement. Its pounding drum beats act as
a rhythm for the actors. The combination of image and music is very impressive
and also very effective. 
Although the real life untouchables may have been excessively glorified, this
film is pure entertainment and contains a unique blend of great acting, great
directing, and great action. Some scenes (Capone and the baseball bat, the
train station) have stuck in my mind for years and seeing them again will only
make them more vivid.
http://www.angelfire.com/ny3/larsattacks

Author
Steve Upstill
      5) Do you appreciate a script which NEVER makes you wince, and which
         consistently concocts novel, interesting approaches to pedestrian
         material and manages to take several surprising turns?
      9) Can you tolerate realistic bloodshed in the service of terrific action?
     10) Do you respond to a little food for thought subservient to action?
     If you answered positively to the majority of these questions, have I got
a movie for you.  Not a film, mind you, a MOVIE.  Where the story is brisk and
important, where the killings are mean, where the scenery is from another
world, where the characters are bigger than life, where the actors are stars.
If you just got lost in thought thinking about the last time you saw something
like that, then have I got a movie for you.  The story: Al Capone is running
Chicago.  Elliot Ness comes in to stop him, forms the Untouchables, and gets
his man.  This is probably Brian DePalma's best movie.  Not his most daring,
perhaps, but the one in which he matures into a director who puts his talent at
the service of the picture instead of his visual ego.  He gets support in all
departments ranging in quality from first-rate to brilliant: Kevin Costner
finally gets the lead role he deserves, and performs to perfection in a
difficult characterization which must humanize a man who in our cynical times
we can only describe as a crusading supercop.  Sean Connery, as a member of
his team, inhabits his role completely as an aging beat cop who signs on with
Ness.  Robert DeNiro is once again perfect as the publicly genteel, privately
brutal Capone.  Ennio Morricone's score does it again, with just the right
touch of bombast.  Whoever was in charge of the production design also
deserves a round of applause for a consistently evocative, detailed 30's.  And
the cinematographer captures it all beautifully.
     Finally, David Mamet's script has to be singled out.  It absolutely puts
the run of Hollywood writing to shame, recalling the days when screenwriters
were writers first and Hollywood deal-chasers second:  His story is solid, his
turns of plot surprising, his dialogue crisp and right, his characters walking
perfectly that thin line between interesting complexity and mythic stature.
Best of all, he manages to insert one of the most compelling subtexts in some
time, underlining with three or four clever juxtapositions the presentation
and willing, even eager, public acceptance of a face of witty gentility on a
reality of horrid brutality.  The public's eagerness to believe in Al Capone
as a kind of public servant provides much of the underlying dramatic tension
in Ness's efforts, but leaves the viewer with much to think about.
     But that's all too serious.  When you come right down to it, THE
UNTOUCHABLES is terrific entertainment.  The tension starts early, and reaches
a feverish peak in a train station shootout that is DePalma's greatest
set-piece, which is saying a lot.  How successful is it?  Put it this way: it
contains a blatant steal from Eisenstein's Odessa Steps sequence in POTEMKIN,
and DePalma GETS AWAY WITH IT!!  In spades!
     All in all, a piece of Hollywood magic that reminds you of what Hollywood
is really capable of when it is of a mind to do it.  A clear +3 on the Leeper
scale.
     Caveat: you should know that DePalma's affection for bloodletting is in
evidence here, though in comparatively restrained measure.  That is, it's
nothing like that in SCARFACE.  But if the sight of blood makes you ill, don't
say I didn't warn you.

Author
Timothy Costello
Paramount Pictures, 1987
Directed by Brian De Palma
Screenplay by David Mamet
Cinemetography by Stephen H. Burum
Film Edited by Jerry Greenberg and Bill Pankow
Music Composed by Ennio Morricone
Production Designed by Patrizia Von Brandenstein
Art Direction by William A. Elliott
Costumes Designed by Marilyn Vance-Straker
Produced by Art Linson
MPAA Rating: R (for graphic violence, profanity including racial slurs, 
and lots of Brian De Palma-style bloodletting)
Tagline: Al Capone. He ruled Chicago with absolute power. No one could 
touch him. No one could stop him. Until Eliot Ness and a small force of 
men swore they'd bring him down.
Eliot Ness.................................Kevin Costner
Jimmy Malone..........................Sean Connery
Al Capone................................Robert De Niro
George Stone...........................Andy Garcia
Oscar Wallace.........................Charles Martin Smith
Mike........................................Richard Bradford
Walter Payne............................Jack Kehoe
George....................................Brad Sullivan
Catherine Ness........................Patricia Clarkson
Frank Nitti...............................Billy Drago
Ah, yes, The Untouchables. I do not believe that I am exaggerating when 
I say that Brian De Palma's grand 1987 cops-'n-robbers epic is one of 
the best films of the 1980s, as well as one of the best movies ever to 
be based on a TV show, and one of the best entries in this director's 
canon. Sure, it plays fast and loose with the historical record of its 
time and place like nobody's business, and sure, there's not exactly 
much in the way of plot, but boy oh boy, is this great entertainment.
Which is good, because considering the caliber of people involved in 
this project, I don't think it unreasonable to expect something a little 
better. Don't get me wrong. De Palma defied all my expectations with 
this picture, delivering something truly inspired. His able cast and 
superb technical crew have also outdone themselves. But I have to say 
that the performance by Robert DeNiro and the screenplay by David Mamet 
leave something to be desired. I don't know. Maybe they were saving 
themselves for their extraordinary collaboration in John Frankenheimer's 
masterful Ronin, ten years later. But The Untouchables packs such a 
punch that ultimately it's very easy to gloss over their -- I can't 
believe I'm writing this -- inadequacies.
We are in Chicago, in the year 1930. Al Capone (DeNiro), a punk from New 
York, has risen to a postion of undisputed power over the city's 
bootlegging trade. And he enforces his rule with an iron fist; no one is 
safe from his reign of terror, not even a pretty little girl who gets 
blown to shreds when Capone's top gun, Frank Nitti (Billy Drago) plants 
a bomb in a tavern whose owners won't play ball with Capone. The federal 
government, responding to a plea from Chicago's legitimate city 
government, sends in Treasury Department special agent Eliot Ness (Kevin 
Costner) to oversee a program that will bring down Capone. Ness's 
initial efforts don't meet with much success; saddled with a legion of 
corrupt cops and the recipient of a bad tip, his first raid is an 
embarrasment that lands him on the front pages, for all the wrong 
reasons.
A chance meeting with a honest veteran street cop, Jimmy Malone (Sean 
Connery) convinces Ness that he's going to have to change his tactics. 
Deciding to work from outside the thoroughly rotten Chicago police 
department, he recruits his own strike team; himself, Malone, 
mild-mannered accountant Oscar Wallace (Charles Martin Smith), who 
thinks that he might be able to nail Capone on tax evasion charges, and 
George Stone (Andy Garcia), a rookie policeman from Chicago's South Side 
who's the best shot in the Academy. Quickly dubbed `the Untouchables' by 
friends and enemies alike, they set about decimating the Capone empire 
any way they can. But Capone's not going to give up his absolute power 
without a fight...
I'm going to state right up front that this is not, repeat not, the way 
it happened in real life. For one thing, Capone's downfall didn't happen 
until 1931. There really was an Eliot Ness, and he really did have a 
squad of agents called the Untouchables, but their efforts were 
exaggerated by newspaper accounts of the day -- I think, to convince 
Capone that things were worse than they actually were and thereby cause 
him to make a mistake which Ness and his crew could use against him. And 
yes, Capone was brought down by a mild-mannered accountant, Elmer N. 
Irey, but he was not, to the best of my knowledge, on Ness's team. 
However, the version of this story presented to us in the classic Robert 
Stack TV series from the late 50's, the rather short-lived but enjoyable 
revival in the early 90's, and this picture, is infinitely more 
entertaining. It's like a classic 30's Warner Bros. gangster movie, only 
one in which the good guys not only win, but are the stars of the show.
Unfortunately, the film doesn't have a script quite as good as those 
epics of yesteryear. Mamet's screenplay here is not one of his best; it 
doesn't have the sort of plotting that have marked his best outings as 
screenwriter and director -- House of Games, The Spanish Prisoner -- and 
it depends on cliche and contrivance. Events necessary to give the 
Untouchables the opportunities they need to nail Capone just sort of 
happen, without any real rhyme or reason, and are explained by having 
Malone say something like `If you want to keep a secret, don't tell the 
boss.' It also doesn't have the staccato dialogue we've come to expect, 
and maybe even demand, from Mamet in peak form. Maybe he figured that 
his usual style would be off-putting to a mainstream audience that's not 
all that familiar with his work. But when you see `Written by David 
Mamet' in the opening credits, it's not unreasonable to have certain 
expectations, and the script doesn't fulfill them.
There's another problem with the film, and Robert DeNiro is its name. 
It's bad enough that Mamet has drastically underwritten the role of 
Capone and that we never really get to know him (as if we really wanted 
to get to know somebody like Al Capone), but DeNiro, who in trying to 
look like Capone ends up looking in my mind like Robert Duvall, doesn't 
exactly apply himself, despite having done his usual 
let's-gamble-with-my-own-health-by-gaining 
-a-lot-of-weight-in-order-to-look-the-part bit. He's also too old for 
the role. One of the aspects of the Capone legacy that I find both 
fascinating and frightening is that Capone was born in 1899. The St. 
Valentine's Day Massacre, which occured when Capone was at the peak of 
his power, took place in 1929. That means that Capone had built a 
staggering empire of crime and corruption by the time he was thirty 
years old; the most powerful gangster of the Prohibition era was still a 
relatively young man when he rose to dominance. De Niro, who was about 
forty-three when the film was made, was, and looked, too old to play 
Capone. Don't get me wrong. I am not one to argue with De Niro's 
reputation as perhaps the greatest American film actor of his 
generation, because I agree with it. And if this had been made in, say, 
1977 instead of 1987, De Niro's being too old for the role wouldn't have 
been an issue. But in casting De Niro for his presence, which happened a 
lot back in the mid- to late-80's, the filmmakers made something of a 
miscalculation.
They did not make a miscalculation in hiring Brian De Palma to direct 
this picture. In spite of his (undeserved) reputation as a Hitchcock 
ripoff artist, a cynic, a misanthrope, and a misogynist, and in spite of 
the drubbing that his new film Mission to Mars is about to take, De 
Palma remains my favorite director of all time, and I was reminded of 
why when watching this film. I haven't been able to find out what 
attracted De Palma to the project -- whether he saw it as an artistic 
challenge, or Paramount paid him a king's ransom, or he originated the 
project himself -- but it doesn't matter, because he has turned out one 
of his best films. It may not have the emotional resonance of previous 
pictures like Carrie or Blow Out and later pictures like Casualties of 
War and Carlito's Way, which together comprise his all-time greatest 
hits, but for sheer entertainment in the De Palma oeuvre, you can't do 
much better than The Untouchables (wait, didn't I say the same thing 
about De Palma's The Fury? Well, The Untouchables is even more 
entertaining). It may be that Mamet's script is actually an asset -- in 
paring it down to essentials, minimalist that he is, Mamet has given De 
Palma the ability to make a film that's consistently exciting, because 
without the excess fat of such niceties as character development and 
intricate plotting (which of course are always an asset, but sometimes, 
yes, you can do without them), De Palma can get down to business. 
Specifically, `sequences.' De Palma's films always have elaborate action 
and suspense sequences, long stretches of film, sometimes without 
dialogue, in which the emphasis is on pure filmmaking. The Untouchables
 has several such sequences -- the shootout at the Canadian border, the 
stalking of Jimmy Malone in his apartment by a Capone operative, and the 
legendary slow-motion gun battle in the LaSalle Street train station, 
with its ingenious homage to, or flagrant ripoff of, depending on your 
perspective (I'll go with the former), the famed Odessa Steps sequence 
in Sergei Eisenstein's The Battleship Potemkin. I haven't seen Potemkin, 
and so I won't do what every other critic in America by now has done, 
which is either extol or excoriate De Palma for this little stylistic 
touch. But I will say that it is one of the most exciting action 
sequences I've ever seen in a movie. The tension in this scene is so 
thick, you could cut it with a knife. And it leads to an incredibly 
suspenseful moment in which the entire outcome of the picture depends on 
whether or not Andy Garcia's character is as good a shot as he's 
supposed to be.
But all is not sequences in De Palma's films, and indeed, the entire 
film is a masterpiece of virtuoso filmmaking. There are nifty tracking 
shots, brilliantly composed matte shots that capture the essence of the 
Prohibition era, sumptuous period production design by Patrizia Von 
Brandenstein, and a dynamic, emotionally rich score by Ennio Morricone. 
And it has a number of striking performances. Even if Kevin Costner's 
career doesn't survive the unholy fiasco that was The Postman, he can 
always be proud of his performance in this film. Simple goodness, as one 
critic has pointed out, is one of the hardest traits for an actor to 
embody, and yet Costner is able to do so. And it's interesting how 
Ness's fundamental decency, as played by Costner, is what's standing in 
the way of his getting the job done. `Didn't you hear what I said?' he 
frustratedly thunders at the corpse of a mobster he's just blown away, 
after the man ignored his entreaties to surrender. `What is this, a 
game?' Even as he's violating the law he swore to uphold, there's still 
a part of him that wants to stay by the book -- and expects the bad guys 
to do the same. Sean Connery, in his Academy-Award-winning role, applies 
all of his charisma, gusto, energy, and wit to Jimmy Malone, and while I 
might have preferred to see him given such an award for performances 
like The Man Who Would Be King, The Offence or The Russia House, his 
work here is more than worthy of the honor. Rounding out the 
Untouchables themselves, Charles Martin Smith provides solid, appealing 
comic relief, and Andy Garcia is a likable presence as Stone, the voice 
of reason (within obvious limits) on Ness's squad (a precursor to his 
role in Ridley Scott's Black Rain, perhaps?). And DeNiro, for all my 
griping earlier about his being too old for the part, is dynamic and 
villainous as Al Capone. Too bad Mamet didn't give him a meatier role.
The Untouchables is a superb crowd-pleaser, a guilt-free shoot-'em-up 
that never fails to entertain. It's also an example of a great director 
at the height of his powers. Brian De Palma has made some fine films 
since The Untouchables, but none that provide as much sheer fun as this. 
After ten years, it still holds up amazingly well, and even if De 
Palma's career doesn't survive the debacle that I fear Mission to Mars
 is about to become (though I haven't lost hope yet), he can always 
count this film as one of his true masterpieces.
E-mail to: costt8k0@elon.edu
Visit The Critic Who Came In From The Cold at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Land/4265

Author
Dragan Antulov
Some films are remembered for quite unexpected reasons. Few
months before THE UNTOUCHABLES would come into former
Yugoslavia cinemas in 1988, soundtrack album by Ennio
Morricone was released in music stores. The themes from that
soundtrack became very popular among music supervisors for
different radio and TV shows. Almost all of those shows
dealt with mounting economic and political problems of the
crumbling federation, and Morricone's disturbing music
corresponded with a anxious atmosphere in the eve of bloody
break-up. Notably cheerful exception was a TV broadcast when
the old Communist was interviewed about his past; Al
Capone's theme was playing in the background, which was very
subtle way for the show's creator to express their opinion
about dying Communist regime.
The plot of the movie is set in dark moments of another
federation which, unlike former Yugoslavia, survived hard
times. The year is 1930, and America pays heavy price for
its experiment with Prohibition. Illegal, yet lucrative
business of bootlegging made Al Capone (Robert de Niro)
undisputed leader of the Chicago underworld and most
powerful man in the city. However, despite his public
businessman personality, Capone keeps his supremacy by
brutal violence, not caring about the lives of innocent
people. After small girl died in one of such incidents,
Federal government decides to stop the violence by creating
special task force. The force is led by Eliot Ness (Kevin
Costner), Treasury Department official whose zeal is in
great contrast with his inexperience in law enforcement. His
debut raid on Capone's warehouse ends in embarrassing
fiasco, and Ness now knows that he can't rely on notoriously
corrupt local police. The rare exception among Chicago cops
is old Malone (Sean Connery), who lost career because of his
honesty. Ness gets the idea to create unit of few, yet
capable and reliable lawmen that would battle Capone's
all-powerful organisation. He and Malone recruit two more
men - Treasury accountant Oscar Wallace (Charles Martin
Smith) and Chicago rookie policeman George Stone (Andy
Garcia) - and they become hitting Capone's operations hard,
earning the nickname 'The Untouchables' by the press.
When the film originally appeared in cinema, expectations
were quite high, partly because of very effective
soundtrack, partly because of Sean Connery finally getting
his long-deserved "Oscar", and finally because all major
critics praised creative genius of director Brian de Palma.
Unfortunately, the final product was good, yet far bellow
the expectations. As years went by, THE UNTOUCHABLES began
fading into oblivion, and newer generations of viewers would
probably have some problems in understanding its original
success. Same can be said for some old viewers, especially
the fans of TV series UNTOUCHABLES. The series, although
based on non-fiction book by Oscar Fraley and Eliot Ness,
was a great departure from the historic truth and offered
one-dimensional picture of Prohibition-era Chicago, by
confronting virtuous law enforcement supermen with soulless
gangster scum. Thirty years did almost nothing to connect
THE UNTOUCHABLES myth with history, and the screenplay by
Pullitzer Prize winning playwright David Mamet went even
further from established facts.
In David Mamet's vision Eliot Ness is embodiment of all
American virtues - upholding law, dedicated to the job,
loving husband and father. Kevin Costner, with his Gary
Cooper image, was perfect for that role and it shouldn't
surprise anyone that THE UNTOUCHABLES launched his career of
major movie star. Unfortunately, Robert de Niro wasn't so
good in the role of his archenemy and despite all his
efforts (even buying and wearing the identical underwear
that Capone used to wear) he fails to capture the true
spirit of Capone on screen. Instead of vicious gangster, we
got a bad caricature of Benito Mussolini. The notorious
bludgeoning scene, obviously incorporated to give Capone's
character some viciousness, doesn't improve such
impressions. The only really developed character in the
movie is Malone, brilliantly played by Sean Connery. Motive
of policemen who must break the law in order to uphold it,
hinted by Mamet's script, would probably be unnoticed in the
movie if it weren't for Connery.
Director de Palma, on the other hand, didn't care much about
the characters and story. For him, this was just another
exercise in mannerist film-making and another victory for
those who prefer style over substance in art. The movie
looks great, thanks to production designs of Patrizia von
Brandenstein and William A. Elliott, costumes by Giorgio
Armani and  Stephen H. Burum's photography and all the other
that took great care to capture the period details. Yet,
most impressive and most memorable part of the film is the
famous Showdown at the Steps scene, de Palma's intentional
homage to Einstenstein's BATTLESHIP POTEMKIN. The scene is
visually stunning, de Palma's manages to go over the top, by
featuring couple of sailors only to make his reference even
more obvious. All in all, THE UNTOUCHABLES can be seen as
conventional and satisfying period thriller, and failed work
of art in the same time.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     It strikes me as appropriate that THE UNTOUCHABLES comes out approximately
ten years after STAR WARS opened, because this film belongs to a tradition that
began with George Lucas's classic space opera, the high-charged "Summer
Spectacular" (nit-pickers could argue that Spielberg's JAWS began it all, but
there was too many lackluster summer seasons between JAWS and the next
blockbuster hit, STAR WARS, for me to set the origin at that point).  This is a
film that is purely entertainment, with elements and composition that brings
viewers back for that most essential blockbuster ingredient, repeat viewings.
Since STAR WARS, studios and filmmakers have tried, like cinematic alchemists,
to come up with the proper incantations that will give them another summer
megahit on their hands.  THE UNTOUCHABLES is the latest attempt, and may very
well be the film that manages to get the ring for this summer.
     Which is fine, from my perspective, because THE UNTOUCHABLES is a pretty
good film, and is certain to entertain you, unless you MUST see something
original and touching every time you visit the theater.  I think the best way
to think of this is that you're going to see a 30's Warner Brothers crime film,
updated with modern violence, cinematography, dialogue (very good dialogue),
and a moral dilemma to keep those of you who need that kind of conflict happy.
     The film opens with Elliot Ness, Treasury Department agent, coming to
Chicago with orders to work with the Chicago Police to tear down Al Capone's
"criminal empire."  Due to corruption and lack of enthusiasm by the police,
Ness decides, under the counseling of an older cop named Malone, to form a
small strike force which will take Capone on.  And for the rest of the movie,
they do....  As I said before, since this is almost a homage to the gangster
pics of yore, the ingenuity of the plot isn't what's going to enthrall you,
it's the atmosphere--how well does the filmmaker bring you into the genre
without moments of self-consciousness about what's going on.  Brian DePalma has
done a magnificent job in that category, from the script to the cinematography
to the music to the shot-by-shot composition of the sequences.  David Mamet has
come up with the sort of pithy, witty dialogue that bubbles only out of movie
characters' mouths.  The cinematography is some of the best I've seen all year,
with wonderful point-of-view shots that swoop down on Capone's meetings and
sweep into beautifully restored Chicago streets.  The film has just the right
amount of sepia color to it, giving the feeling of period without making you
feel that the movie is encased in amber.  The Ennio Morricone music is perfect
for carrying the enthusiasm and suspense that is appearing on the screen.  But
most of all, DePalma's direction is tight, yet full of imagination; there are
sequences here which really carry you along with the plot, that get you excited
simply from the way that they're shot.  It is really refreshing to see after so
many films that use boilerplate composition.  The camera serves the plot, but
it also serves the purpose of film--to see in ways that we don't normally see.
     The acting is adequate, if not inspired; the roles are played effectively,
but none stands out as a knockout performance--the story comes first, and the
story calls for villains and heroes, not complex characters.  Ness himself is
the only person in this movie who questions what he is doing; but his emotional
turmoil over doing what is right without letting "the end justify the means"
takes a back seat to the action of the film.  Costner does not play Ness as a
bright man--he is serious, somewhat lacking in a sense of humor, and has a
righteous attitude which sometimes sounds like something out of the BATMAN TV
show ("Let's do some good!").  The supporting characters, while being even less
three-dimensional, are supplemented with more of the outstanding, highly
entertaining dialogue and actions.  Vincent Canby is right, I think--Sean
Connery hasn't had this good of a role in years, and his lines are by far the
best.  Charles Martin Smith plays the accountant-turned-gangbuster with his
usual youthful exuberance.  Robert De Niro, who seems to be specializing in
great villains of late, turns Capone into a charismatic brute; he often sounds
like one part politician mixed with two parts successful regional sales
manager--until a quick snap of violence reveals him for what he really is.
     But the credit here has to go to DePalma, for producing such an utterly
riveting action/suspense entertainment.  Very well done....  B, $5 film.
P.S.  Yeah, I recognized the Eisenstein sequence, too--I was chuckling as I saw
it build up (as did the rest of the audience--I guess film classes are de
riguer in Seattle).  Every film critic in the country has seen fit to mention
it in their column; after all, they don't want anyone to think they've never
taken a basic film class.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There are lots of ways to make a gangster film.  You can make it as
realistic as THE GODFATHER or as romanticized as A POCKET FULL OF MIRACLES.
You can do a BONNIE AND CLYDE where the crooks are giants and the cops are
midgets, or you can make the crooks vermin and the cops squeaky-clean
personifications of purity and virtue as was done in THE FBI STORY and the
TV show THE UNTOUCHABLES.  Brian DePalma did one gangster already with tiny
cops and giant hoods, his violent but engrossing remake of SCARFACE.  He has
returned to the gangster film with a movie based on the UNTOUCHABLES TV
series and the book by Elliot Ness and Oscar Fraley that the TV series was
based on.  His approach is romanticized to the point of being mythic.  The
hoods are big and the cops are giants.  Even a mousy accountant for the
Treasury Department who is impressed into service turns out to be a giant.
And a film adaptation of a TV show surprisingly turns out to be giant too.
     The story should come as no surprise to anyone.  An ambitious Treasury
agent,Elliot Ness (played by Kevin Costner), comes to Chicago to bring down
an oily Al Capone (played by Robert DeNiro).  When he realizes he is still
wet behind the ears, he calls for the assistance of one  good Irish cop
(played by Sean Connery) and, with the help of a few friends, they set about
hewing down the biggest tree in the underworld jungle.  When the film works
best, mostly in the first half of the film, it is a positive joy.  Toward
the second half, I started to realize what I was enjoying is a story about
the groovy side of the Secret Police and that Connery's honest and pure
philosophy of law enforcement was actually a pretty scary thing.
     But David Mamet's screenplay captures the fun of the TV series.  When
Ness drives a huge snowplow through warehouse doors to smash up shipments of
illegal booze, you know you're watching the real thing eight times bigger
than life.  Though, admittedly, the film's most exciting sequence harks back
more to Westerns than to gangster films.  And the whole package is done to a
score by Ennio Morricone, sometimes tense, sometimes flamboyant, sometimes
arrogant.
     Now, as for the film's accuracy, yes, there really was an Elliot Ness
and he was a Treasury agent.  There really was an Al Capone and a Frank
Nitti and they were crooks.  And Al Capone really was indicted for income
tax evasion.  Of course, most people knew all that already, and Mamet and
DePalma are counting on most people knowing no more than that, because just
about everything else is wrong.  Ness's accomplishments were exaggerated by
newspaper accounts of the day and much more so by his autobiography and by
the TV show.  Nobody has ever portrayed Frank Nitti accurately in anything.
Nitti was one of Capone's lieutenants whom the newspapers thought ran
Capone's gang when Capone went to jail.  That squares with neither the TV
nor the film version.  Capone's representation is neither accurate nor
inaccurate.  We just don't see much of his strategy in the film.
     But with all its faults, THE UNTOUCHABLES is a big film, an exciting
film, and it will likely be the big film of the summer.  Rate it a +2 on the
-4 to +4 scale.

Author
Ryan Davis
To look back at a movie after ten or so years and see how it looks then.
That is a sign of true greatness. The best of movies are the ones remember,
or talked about after 10, 20, 30, 40, or even 50 or more years. I believe
that "The Untouchables" will be one of the movies that last at least 30
years, maybe more. Cause as of now, it's aged like wine.
Many would stand here and praise Brian De Palma, the director, for it's
place in film history. I won't. Sure, De Palma has done movies considered
great, for instance: Scarface and Carlito's Way. But in his greatest films
he has only functioned as director, never writer. And this pattern stays
true in "The Untouchables", which was written for the screen by David Mamet
(Wag The Dog).
The story involves the legendary bootlegger, Al Copone(Robert De Niro). Al
runs the city with his violent and explosive methods. Eliot Ness(Kevin
Costner) wants to stop Capone and put an end to his organization. Problem
is, Capone has people everywhere, and his conspirators are far reaching.
Eliot, not being able to trust his own army of men, turns to three other men
that have not been coerced by Capone. The group includes a trio of fine
actors: Sean Connery, Andy Garcia, and the lesser known Charles Martin
Smith. The rest of the story involves Eliot & Companies struggler to beat
Copone, not matter what they risk even their lives or their families.
All the performances are great. And who else better to play Copone than
Bobby De Niro? Connery turns in a great performance as the older mentor,
which won him an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.
De Palma's direction is fine, and he has several great scenes. Including,
a gun fight scene that takes place in slow-motion, and involves a falling
baby carriage.  Its sad to see how he has deteriorated with his latest
"Snake Eyes", in which he feels the need to be ultra stylish and just forget
about the story. The story is really what makes this movie so strong, and
"Snake Eyes" so weak.
All and all a great film. And one that if you haven't seen yet, you better
check out.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum
