Title
Review for Rome Adventure (1962)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Rome Adventure" is a romantic fantasy targeted to young women
and armchair tourists.  The cast is lovely and the photography
of Rome is interesting.  However, the pace is deadly slow,
and the two hour length is too long for the skimpy story.
Suzanne Pleshett, in her film debut, plays an American
librarian who decides to quit her job and take an extended
vacation in Rome.  Apparently her parents are wealthy and
obliging and pay for the associated bills.  Once there, she
must choose between handsome and interested suitors, and
find her one true love.
Pleshett is a capable actress, but in this role she may
as well be perfect.  Let's see, she's educated, gorgeous,
intelligent, young, of wealthy parentage, and relentlessly
normal.  As a result, she's also impossible to identify with.
There's not much drama in which paramour she will choose,
since any one of them is a reasonable choice.  Anyway, it
isn't revealing much to state that Troy Donahue is her
favorite.  They later wed in real life, just in time for
his career to falter.
More trivia: The song "Al De La" featured here became
a top ten pop hit in 1962.
Pleschett and Donahue spend many romantic and photogenic
moments among Rome's ancient ruins, elaborate churches
and fountains, and art museums.  Curiously, although the
weather is fine, they are always about the only people
there.  But when they are in a nightclub, it is always 
crowded.
Romans, who built and preserved the featured landmarks,
are in this film reduced to the role of deferential
servants.  Tourists and foreigners have apparently
taken control of Rome.
Jazz trumpeter Al Hirt has a cameo.  His character is
supposed to provide comic relief, but it just doesn't 
work.  He's no actor, and he's not helped by the stupid 
lines he must deliver.
Despite all its faults, the film is not awful.  What
strength it has comes from the cinematography and the
attractive cast.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
