Title
Review for Ship of Fools (1965)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Ship of Fools" was nominated for eight Academy Awards,
but has since fallen into relative obscurity.  It is
chiefly remembered for being Vivien Leigh's final film
(she would die two years later).  While an excellent film,
its strange combinations (1930s politics and 1960s
hairstyles, soap opera-ish romantic subplots and telling
cultural/political insights) manage to reduce its impact.
I last saw the film three years ago, but before seeing it
a second time I could remember only one scene: Lee Marvin
sexually assaulting Leigh.  And I remembered it wrong: she
assaults him!
The story takes place in 1933 on a cruise ship on a voyage
from Cuba to Germany.  The passengers are of mixed
nationalities but mostly wealthy, except for a large
contingent of deported menial Spanish workers.  (It isn't
made clear why they would be going to Germany instead of
Spain, or why a cruise ship would allow them on board).
There is much prejudice shown towards these workers
as well as the Jewish passengers.
"Ship of Fools" tries to be many things: a 'Love Boat'
with multiple love interests and subplots, a character study,
and a satire.  The comedy is provided by outrageous Nazi
Jose Ferrer and punch-drunk washed-up athlete Marvin.
Their exaggerated racist opinions match their exaggerated
characters.  More interesting is the ingratiating Jewish
merchant Lowenthal (Heinz Ruhmann), who is returning to
Germany blissfully indifferent to the cultural changes
occuring there.  There are aging, bitter women (Leigh and
drug-addicted socialist Simone Signoret).  There is a
dwarf (Michael Dunn) who is otherwise an everyman and the
most normal character on board.  The ship's doctor is
played by Oskar Werner, whose chronically depressed
character falls for Signoret.  Other unhappy romances
include those of painter George Segal and Elizabeth Ashley.
Also onboard are a group of predatory Spanish entertainers
led by Jose Greco.
Still, the film is much better than this description
would indicate.  Based on Katherine Anne Porter's novel,
the Abby Mann script was Oscar nominated, and manages to
make the characters ironical and deep despite the discontinuities
of serving an ensemble cast.  Ernest Laszlo's black & white
cinematography (most of the best films up to 1965 were
filmed in B/W) won an Academy Award, as did the sets.
"Ship of Fools" was nominated for Best Picture and
received three acting nominations as well (Werner,
Signoret and Dunn).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
