Title
Review for Wonderwall: The Movie (1969)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
This 60s 'head' movie flopped when it opened in theaters and would have 
vanished into obscurity had it not been for the instrumental soundtrack by 
George Harrison which kept it known for several years (a re-edited version, 
including a restored opening track by Harrison, was released in cinemas 
three decades later).  In keeping with the Beatles connections, Dutch design 
group The Fool (who also painted the wondrous wall on the Apple Boutique 
building) was hired to create artwork and fashions for the film.  WONDERWALL 
also has writer Gerard Brach (a longtime favorite of Polanski) and 
actress/singer Jane Birkin on board to help it earn cult status.
Jack MacGowran stars as a mousy professor (coincidentally, he had played a 
professor in Polanski's/Brach's THE FEARLESS VAMPIRE KILLERS the previous 
year) who analyzes water samples and lives in a cramped apartment which 
looks like it is made up mostly of walls.  The monotony of his daily routine 
changes when he discovers a small hole through which he can peer into the 
apartment (a great set!) of neighbor Birkin.  The images he sees intrigue 
him and soon all his time is spent watching the room next door.  WONDERWALL 
is less concerned with a story than it is about an event and observes it 
with as much detachment as MacGowran studies the bacteria under his 
microscope.  The characters are as two-dimensional as the wall that 
separates them, their only purpose being to play out the film-makers' ideas. 
  But if this is so, then what is the idea being conveyed in WONDERWALL, if 
any?  Is it that old 60s saw that we all build barriers around ourselves 
that need to be broken to attain total freedom?  Does it suggest that drugs 
can enlighten one's consciousness? (one character, who appears in a fantasy 
sequence as 'LSD' is quite happy to discover that MacGowran has sugar cubes 
he can borrow).  I don't think filmgoers need to dig for a message to 
endorse WONDERWALL - it's enough that the film was pretty much overlooked in 
the era it was made and the cultural capital invested in it years later 
reclaimed it iconographically.  In other words, the main reason to see 
WONDERWALL 'now' is because it is a film that could only have been made 
'then'.
That's the extent of my affection for WONDERWALL, but I would have preferred 
to see the film go further than it does.  Why not let MacGowran demolish the 
wall with a vengeance so he can launch himself into the alternate universe 
he sees behind it?  In spite of its trippy feel, the basis of the storyline 
is surprisingly conservative.  MacGowran's visions look like photo shoots, 
which don't seem out of place when you remember that Birkin's character is a 
fashion model.  In fact, the whole thing is more than likely hallucination 
on his behalf.  Even something like a small hole in a wall becomes an avenue 
of escape from his dingy apartment - through it he hears music, inhales dope 
and entertains all manner of fantasies.  The early PSYCHO reference (stuffed 
birds, the appearance of 'Mother", and a guilty MacGowran crouched at the 
peephole spying on a girl) serves little point unless it's meant to tip us 
off that MacGowran is unhinged from the outset.  Interestingly, because what 
MacGowran sees is fanciful we don't think of him as a voyeur.  And besides, 
we don't really see him getting any gratification - at the end of the film 
he's just where he was at the beginning, making the whole exercise seem 
pointless.  I think, however, that like any scientist (quantum physicists 
excluded) MacGowran's character  knows that to achieve true results he is 
permitted only to observe, and nothing more.  At the point in the story when 
he finally stops viewing and starts interfering, the consequences are 
significant.  In short, he has broken a precept that has been fundamental to 
his work routine - in fact, his life - and that is enough to create some 
form of liberation, even if it is one that can't be seen outwardly.  It 
might not be our idea of a happy ending, but it's good enough for him.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
