Title
Review for Dam Busters, The (1954)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
In 1980s I used to spend a lot of free time playing various
games on my ZX Spectrum home computer. Among them was THE
DAM BUSTERS, one of the rare computer simulations based on
the real historical event. The event in question was perhaps
not the important military operation of World War Two, but
it was definitely one of the more spectacular. Its dramatic
potential was, of course, recognised by the filmmakers and
some three decades before being turned into computer game,
and twelve years after the event itself, THE DAM BUSTERS
became feature film, directed by Michael Anderson.
The plot begins in spring of 1942. Hitler's war machine is
wrestling with Red Army deep in the Russian heartland, while
the rest of Europe is firmly under Axis control and it would
remain so for the time being, since Allied ground forces in
Britain are still unprepared to mount invasion. The best
Allies can do is to send hundreds of bombers over Germany
and other occupied countries in order to attack industrial
facilities, communications and infrastructure and thus
weaken Hitler's war potential. British scientist Barnes
Wallis (played by Michael Redgrave) is convinced that the
strategy isn't working and that many raids on individual
factories won't significantly shorten the war. Instead he
dreams of a single strike that would knock out entire Ruhr,
industrial heart of Germany. Ruhr is dependant on water
supplies stored by three huge dams - Oeden, Moene and Sorpe
- and if they are destroyed, the factories should
permanently stop working. Destruction of these dams requires
huge quantity of explosives, completely new bomb design and
quite new method of delivery. Wallis has solved those
problems in theory, but he would have to wait almost a year
before he receives necessary funds, resources and personnel
from military and civilian bureaucrats. While the project
enters in the final stages of R&D, RAF has picked up a
select group of best pilots and formed Squadron 617, led by
Wing Commander Guy Gibson (played by Richard Todd). Before
they carry out the attack, they must spend months in
rigorous training, because the operation requires low-level
night flying, extremely precise speed and altitude. Finally,
on May 16th 1943, Gibson and his men begin the mission,
called Operation Chastise, that would be remembered as one
of the most spectacular and daring air raids of World War
Two.
When R.C. Sheriff began writing the script for this film, he
probably thought that the event itself was interesting
enough, and that the film didn't require melodramatic
subplots or character development. It was very fortunate,
because many similar films based on true stories sometimes
suffer because of the scriptwriters' need to make them
dramatically appealing. The ascetic plot of THE DAM BUSTERS,
however, has some interesting elements - Wallis' struggle
with technical problems and red tape in the first part of
the film is nicely contrasted with Gibson's training and the
raid itself. Those two characters also have a good
interaction - veteran British actor Michael Redgrave plays
Barnes Wallis as very emotional man, extremely dedicated to
his job to the point of near madness; Richard Todd, on the
other hand, plays Gibson as the embodiment of British
"stiff-upper-lip" ideals and pragmatism. Gibson and Wallis,
however, have more in common that they are ready to admit;
Gibson's inner feelings and dilemmas are only hinted, but
that doesn't make those scenes less powerful.
The thing that put THE DAM BUSTERS in the annals of the
seventh art is the raid scene that would decades later
inspire George Lucas for the final battle in STARS WARS: A
NEW HOPE. The inevitable comparisons between those two
scenes are rather bad for Anderson's film; special effects
are unimpressive, even for 1950s standards, and the darkness
and black-and- white photography make it even less
appealing. The impression is somewhat improved with scenes
that feature some nice aerial photography and authentic
Lancaster bombers. The latter were provided by RAF, which,
in the end, received hagiographic treatment by Anderson and
other filmmakers. THE DAM BUSTERS ends with raid, being
portrayed as successful; controversies of its overall
success and true effectiveness of the Operation Chastise, as
well as the effectiveness of the entire strategic bombing
campaign, were left to future historians.
Another controversy surrounding this film came out of
filmmakers' need to make this film as historically accurate
as possible. Gibson had a black dog named "Nigger", and the
dog is not just featured and often being referenced in the
film, but its name was used as code word during the raid
itself. US version later had the objectionable word dubbed
with the word "Trigger", and some scene featuring it were
edited out, making some of the scenes incomprehensible.
Whether Gibson was genuine racist or not, we would never
know, since he got killed later in war. This little detail
could remind the 1990s audience about the fact that the
notions of political correctness we take for granted today
weren't there only few decades ago. And we could also be
reminded that even the people we consider to be the heroes
aren't always perfect.
