Title
Review for I Love Trouble (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Cindy Bale
Starring Julia Roberts and Nick Nolte.
     I tried hard not like this movie without succeeding.  It contains
parts of BRINGING UP BABY, any Hepburn/Tracy film, part of the plot of
WAR GAMES, Cary Grant and Rosalind Russell in HIS GIRL FRIDAY, elevator
shaft action, train action, and murder.  It is cute, funny, suspenseful
(a little bit), sexy (a little bit).  One of the bad guys was a
surprise.  The pace is fast enough, there are some "action" scenes.  I
think that this is a reasonable family summer movie for families with
older kids who have already seen MAVERICK.
     Julia Roberts and Nick Nolte are fine separately and together.  I
really identified with the Julia Roberts character (wishful thinking, I
know!), but I do have better hair!  Her hair, a very dull dark brown,
has no color.  She could use some highlights.   They both do fine with
their roles:  he's a bored columnist with the Chicago Chronicle and
she's a hotshot "cub" reporter with the Chicago Globe.  They have great
fun trying to out scoop each other to solve one case throughout this
movie.  I like the one story focus.
     Other actors include Charles Martin Smith as Roberts' boss,
Olympia Dukakis as Nolte's coworker, Nora Dunn also with the Chronicle,
and Marsha Mason as a congresswoman.
     Basically this movie is reasonably fun.  There is a serious
mystery to solve, and I enjoyed following a fun couple solving the
mystery.  It is a pleasant change of pace from movies that take
themselves seriously.  I do give successful comedy high marks.

Author
Jon Ridge
CAST:  Julia Roberts, Nick Nolte, Saul Rubinek, James Rebhorn, Robert Loggia
DIRECTOR:  Charles Shyer
SCREENPLAY:  Nancy Meyers and Charles Shyer
CINEMATOGRAPHY:  John Lindley
RUNNING TIME:  2:01
RELEASE:  June 29, 1994
     Julia Roberts walks into this film like a dream.  Dressed in suit
and skirt, her long legs and hips moving in perfect rhythm with a
confident stride, she strolls smoothly through the cite of a train
wreck, sparks a-flying, and into the life of rival reporter Peter
Beckett (Nick Nolte).  She's just what he envisions in a
woman--beautiful, sexy and, more importantly, insecure enough to know
less about what she does for a living than him.  It's a tidy, engaging
introduction to a movie that, unfortunately for these two talented
stars, has no involving story to tell.
     Writers Nancy Meyers and Charles Shyer have given Roberts a
character she can really sink her teeth into.  She plays Sabrina
Peterson, a cub reporter for the Chicago Globe, whose only apparent
goal in life is to out-scoop the famous Peter Brackett.  Perhaps it's a
way of getting ahead in her own publishing firm, getting a reputation,
or proving her independence--that she isn't just a pretty face on the
job--that gives her such ravenous interest in a case involving some
sort of hormone designed to make cows produce milk earlier than they
need to.  I LOVE TROUBLE isn't really about the investigation these
columnists pursue--and shouldn't treat it with the importance this film
does--but a subtle, light romantic comedy about two people who would
seem to have absolutely nothing in common but the work and wind up more
intimately involved than expected.  The dialogue given them is
sporadically snappy banter, and Roberts and Nolte breeze through it
with the smiles and batting eyes of two veterans.  What they do not
need is a moronic, recycled subplot with murderers that will put them
in danger at the film's apex.  And yet, I LOVE TROUBLE is another in
the long, long, long line of movies to emerge from Hollywood in recent
years featuring potentially talented writers who naturally assume
(based on what they've seen before them) they must give an audience
what the industry can't seem to do without.
     The clash between comic duo and suspense subtext couldn't work
less than it does here.  The continuous report being executed is
uninteresting; the villains are helplessly un-written; the
peril--including an elevator shaft and unsteady platforms--is boring.
But all the while there is Julia Roberts (who looks great in a knit
sweater and jeans).  Having returned to the screen after two hectic
years of personal unease, Roberts seems to have found an understanding
of herself, and what it is that makes her a charismatic persona.
Director Charles Shyer definitely knows what it is, and captures it in
the best part of his picture:  the grin, the eyes, the legs.  We get a
lot of it, as Nolte gazes at her in the beginning and never seems to
take his eyes off her; a scene in which he peeps through a keyhole at
Roberts' slender legs lets you know exactly what his character thinks
of her own, and what we should all concentrate on more than anything.
Even during PRETTY WOMAN and FLATLINERS, I can't remember ever enjoying
watching Roberts talk in a movie more.
     Nolte is his suave self, but he too cannot escape the irreparable
doom this film has made for itself.  It's completely predictable fluff,
with mild comic touches here and there and barely a thing to remember
it by.  Julia Roberts is beautiful to look at, but that alone does not
a movie make.  Take note, you future screenwriters.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Julia Roberts, Nick Nolte, Saul Rubinek, James Rebhorn.
Screenplay:  Nancy Meyers and Charles Shyer.
Director:  Charles Shyer.
     If you're making a list of movie terms you don't hear all that
often, "caper" has to be right up there.  It puts me in mind of
light-hearted mystery with a generous helping of romance, beautiful
people in danger but not hard-core danger; NORTH BY NORTHWEST comes to
mind, or the THIN MAN series.  I LOVE TROUBLE is an attempt to
resurrect the caper, and you've got to hand it to Nancy Meyers and
Charles Shyer for trying.  They've put two appealing stars with great
chemistry in a fast-paced film.  They just forgot to give them anything
to do.  As much as I found myself wanting to enjoy I LOVE TROUBLE, it
barely managed to divert me.
     Nick Nolte stars as Peter Brackett, a columnist for a Chicago
newspaper loved both by readers and by the ladies.  Due to a staffing
shortage, Brackett is sent out to cover a train derailment.  There he
meets Sabrina Peterson (Julia Roberts), a young reporter for a rival
paper who resists his advances.  When Peterson scoops Brackett on a
lead, his competitive juices start flowing, and the train story turns
into a good-natured game of one-upmanship.  However, it soon begins to
appear that the train wreck was no accident, and when bullets begin to
fly Brackett and Peterson form a reluctant and competitive
partnership.  Along the way, antagonism naturally turns to attraction.
     Shortly after I LOVE TROUBLE started, something began to become
clear: there were no characters.  Meyers and Shyer had thrown two
reporters of opposite genders into a movie without giving them
personalities.  At least there was an attempt to do something with
Brackett; he is shown as a self-plagiarizing narcissist who has
forgotten what real reporting is.  The problem is that that
characterization vanishes after the first fifteen minutes (easily the
film's best fifteen minutes).  Peterson is written as a good- looking
prop, a sparring partner who seems to have been born a minute before
the movie started.  Nolte and Roberts struggle admirably to generate
some kind of life for their characters, but all they can do is flash
their thousand watt smiles and hope for the best.  And they go farther
than they have any right to, purely on the strength of their charm.
When they smiled, I frequently smiled right along with them.
     It sort of makes you wonder what they could have done with a
remotely interesting story.  The big conspiracy at I LOVE TROUBLE's
center is...unique, to say the least, but it's fairly tedious stuff.
The identity of the villain is apparent from minute one, and I LOVE
TROUBLE takes far too long to get into its main plot.  In fact, I might
go so far as to say that the plot never gets going, nor is it designed
to.  It's just a device to take Nolte and Roberts from situation to
situation quickly, allow their romance to blossom, and give them a
chance to exchange witty banter.
     Only there isn't any witty banter.  All told, I have to wonder
exactly what it is that Meyers and Shyer did to earn their
screenwriting paychecks.  Their dialogue earns chuckles at best, their
sense of pacing is extremely suspect, and their characterizations are
wooden.  Like their BABY BOOM and FATHER OF THE BRIDE, I LOVE TROUBLE
seems designed only to move along affably, without spark or
inventiveness of any kind.  The fact is, there is nothing truly
off-putting about I LOVE TROUBLE.  Nolte and Roberts make an appealing
tandem, and Roberts' performance in particular is extremely energetic,
perhaps her best work to date.  But since a movie like I LOVE TROUBLE
is inevitable in its outcome--the two reporters *will* end up
together--getting there has to be more interesting.  Without any
excitement in the suspense storyline, and with two bland characters
contributing to a singularly vanilla romance, I was left watching two
beautiful people be beautiful.  It just wasn't enough.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Every now and then, reviewers are faced with the films that
are hard to be properly reviewed. Most of the time it
happens with films that leave so overwhelming impact, either
good or bad, that in the end reviewers must work hard to
express his thoughts or feelings. But, sometimes it can
happen for rather trivial reasons. I LOVE TROUBLE happened
to be one of such occasions for the author of this review.
The impression left by the film wasn't overwhelming - on the
contrary, there were hardly any impression at all, since I
had real trouble keeping myself awake while watching it.
Which surprise me to this day, because the movie theatre was
full, I was close to sound speakers, the show wasn't late
and I didn't lack sleep before the show. Such things happen
very rarely to me, and, after many years, the closest thing
to solution to this mystery is probably the quality of the
film itself.
The plot revolves around two rival Chicago reporters - old
Peter Brackett (Nick Nolte) and young, aspiring Sabrina
Peterson (Julia Roberts). Two of them are assigned to cover
the train collision. As soon as they meet, they start
scooping each other, but during the process they both
discover sinister plot involving cancerogenic milk, and also
the romantic feelings they have for each other. The plot in
this film is rather secondary to its real raison d'ętre -
romantic pairing reminiscent of classical screwball comedies
starring Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn. Movie author,
director and screenwriter Charles Shyer, who had some
experiences with turning the screwball spirit into modern
setting with FATHER OF THE BRIDE, tries again, this time
pairing old Nick Nolte with young Julia Roberts. However,
although there is some chemistry between the two, soon it
stops to arouse any interest. It probably happens due to
poorly executed genre mix, that collides light-hearted
romantic comedy with rather uninteresting plot suitable to
pure action thrillers. Shyer as director fails to make the
proper transition between the two, and fails in both areas,
making the story cliched and predictable. The end result is
rather forgettable effort, which convinced me not to watch
movie again. I'll give it the benefit of the doubt, though.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Julia Roberts, Nick Nolte, Saul Rubinek, James Rebhorn, 
           Robert Loggia, Olympia Dukakis, Charles Martin Smith
Director:  Charles Shyer
Producer:  Nancy Meyers
Screenplay:  Nancy Meyers and Charles Shyer
Cinematography:  John Lindley
Music:  David Newman
Released by Touchstone Pictures
     I LOVE TROUBLE is a perfect example of a truly lightweight motion
picture.  With its preposterous plot and MTV-like camerawork, this
movie survives--and occasionally even thrives--on the likeability of
its performers and the unexpectedly frothy chemistry between them.
This is a watchable film for those who don't expect or demand much from
their summer entertainment.
     Peter Brackett (Nick Nolte) has Chicago eating out of his hands.
As the star columnist for THE CHICAGO CHRONICLE, he can recycle
nine-year old pieces and still earn the plaudits of his numerous fans.
Thanks to his newly-published detective novel WHITE LIES, Brackett is
at the apex of his career.  His life and job have become soft and
easy--until Sabrina Peterson (Julia Roberts) comes along.
     Peterson is only in her second day of work for THE CHICAGO GLOBE
when she meets Brackett.  Their rivalry starts almost immediately, with
her scooping him.  Thus begins a duel of one-upsmanship that leads to
the pair entering into a tentative partnership in their pursuit of the
ultimate story:  who is behind the derailment of a train that caused
five deaths, and why did they do it?
     Taking this film at face value, one might be tempted to say that
the mystery elements are merely plot devices around which to build the
Peterson/Brackett relationship.  This certainly seems to be the case
early on.  However, somewhere along the way, screenwriters Meyers and
Shyer apparently decided that they had the makings of a decent thriller
on their hands.  As a result, far too much time is spent expanding upon
an element of the plot that makes very little sense and has almost no
audience appeal.
     I LOVE TROUBLE ends up being about 30 minutes too long.  The last
half-hour especially drags, as the interaction between Brackett and
Peterson is curtailed in favor of shoot-outs, chases, and a lot of
idiotic exposition.  We have yet another example of a villain holding a
hero at gunpoint and gleefully explaining his entire crime.
     When I LOVE TROUBLE is focusing on the interplay between Nolte and
Roberts, it's generally enjoyable, despite some atrocious dialogue.  A
lot of the so-called "witty repartee" between the two principals ends
up sounding horribly contrived.  The actors, however, hold things
together.  They're like Bogart and Becall or Tracy and Hepburn sparring
with each other good-naturedly, sexual tension crackling between them.
Stick a pair of mismatched, marginal performers in the roles of
Brackett and Peterson, and I LOVE TROUBLE might have been very, very
bad.
     Nolte rarely gives a subpar performance, and this is no exception
as he lends the full force of his not inconsiderable talent into
playing Brackett.  Julia Roberts generally does her best work in
lighter roles (even though it has elements of a thriller/mystery, I
LOVE TROUBLE is, at heart, a romantic comedy), and her Peterson proves
an apt foil for Brackett.  The pair work well together, regardless of
what they're doing or saying, and it's a credit to them both that
they're able to overcome so many of the script's faults and still keep
the audience interested.
     Alas, screen charisma and chemistry can only get you so far, and
that's the problem with this sort of film.  The dubious premise is not
well-executed, and the final product too often emphasizes its
weaknesses rather than its strengths.  The sad truth is that whenever I
LOVE TROUBLE relies on something other than its two stars, it's in
trouble.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     No amount of nostalgia can bring back the past, but, oh, how
TROUBLE tries.  Spousal scribes Charles and Nancy Shyer--who remade
FATHER OF THE BRIDE in 1991--have returned to reinvent the screwball
comedy.
     Nick Nolte and Julia Roberts play rival Chicago reporters.  He's a
veteran columnist, she's a cub reporter.  They meet at the scene of a
train derailment--a fitting metaphor for their first impressions. (He
hates her guts, she thinks he's a sleaze.)  They sniff around the
wreckage, scoop each other's story, and, finally, pool their resources
to work as a team.  That is, a team that happens to file separately.
     Rival reporting is a tried-and-true Hollywood tradition and, in
the beginning, the film has the feel of one of those great, old
newspaper classics like THE FRONT PAGE.  Somewhere around the hour
mark, though, TROUBLE transforms into a thriller, complete with bodies,
bullets, and half-baked McGuffins.  Which is too bad, because the
plot--some nonsense about missing microfiche--shoots the film in the
foot.
     Nolte and Roberts have more chemistry than the film deserves, but
not enough to keep viewers awake through the sitcom situations that the
characters wind up in.  The script's lack of snappy patter doesn't help
much, either.
     (The age discrepancy is almost worth noting, until you remember
that Nolte and Roberts are the same age as when Tracy and Hepburn
were doing the same thing.)
     Technical credits are surprisingly superb.  Charles Shyer's
direction, Dean Tavoularis' production design, and John Lindley's
lensing are all worth watching.  If nothing else, I LOVE TROUBLE is one
of the better-*looking* films of the summer.
