Title
Review for Capricorn One (1978)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
     The details are sketchy but I seem to recall watching an interview on
television news a couple of years back where a Hubble telescope analyst was
asked when we'll see pictures of what American astronauts left on the moon.
The astronauts left the American flag, a space cart and a plaque to
commemorate the historic event which is visible at the beginning of 1996's
'Independence Day' as the menacing mother ship from an alien world makes its
way towards Earth.  The analyst mentioned something to the effect that
because of the curvature of the moon and the angle of the telescope's
placement that seeing pictures of the American souvenirs left behind would
not be possible.  Many have speculated without evidence that the moon
landing in 1969 was a hoax, a mission carried out on a sound stage much like
the ones prepared for motion pictures using a pressure chamber to simulate
the lack of gravity that comes with a moon walk but the evidence in support
of the moon landing appears to be overwhelming but after seeing the effects
of the 'Apollo 13' mission in reality and in Ron Howard's 1995 film and the
constant
glitches experienced by NASA which remain to this day, it is a question that
lurks in the back of many minds.
     Major conspiracies in movies have been present long before Oliver Stone
made 1991's 'JFK' and frankly I'm sick of all the criticism Stone takes
every time he puts a movie out where conspiracy jokes ran wild in view of
his selected subject matter.  Director Peter Hyams ('The Star Chamber',
'2010', 'The Relic') displays a major conspiracy by the American space
program in which some will kill to protect their sinister secret of a faked
mission to Mars.  I'm talking about his 1978 film, 'Capricorn One'.  
     Three astronauts (James Brolin, Sam Waterston and O.J.Simpson) are hand
picked to lead America's next venture into outer space.  They are informed
by a bureaucrat and conspiracy participant (Hal Holbrook) before the mission
to Mars takes off that it won't work.  The trio are threatened if they don't
go along with the cover-up and their lives, their futures and the future of
their families is indirectly threatened.  They are expected to present a
false senses of hope that the space program can reach unlimited success even
if it means creating lies that will sell.
     The three astronauts decide at the last minute that they will pull the
plug and expose the entire thing and their efforts take a turn for the worst
when they end up in the desert chased by government assassins who intend to
kill them.  The entire story is picked up and followed by an investigative
reporter (Elliott Gould) who also becomes a target for elimination when he
gets too close to the truth.
     'Capricorn One' moves like an infectious and hypnotizing thriller as it
develops a somewhat familiar path into Hitchcock territory but although its
characteristics are heightened by movie making choosing to enhance the
theory of suspension of disbelief to a maximum effect, it still is an
entertaining ride with a great final sequence that you've never seen before. 
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm
