Title
Review for What's Eating Gilbert Grape (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE is a
     delicate story which combines pathos and humor and which
     manages to avoid cliche while saying something about unsung
     nobility.  Johnny Depp plays the modern equivalent of a
     Capra-esque hero.  Rating: +2 (-4 to +4)
     The American film industry has the capital resources to attract some of
the best international directors to make what are essentially American
films.  Often these directors see the U.S. through the eyes of an outsider,
and let the viewer see his own country with a fresh perspective.  It is this
sort of freshness that directors like Louis Malle bring to films like
ATLANTIC CITY.  Lasse Hallstrom, who made the charming MY LIFE AS A DOG
about one character with low self-esteem, now has made an American film with
an older, but similar character.  In filming Peter Hedges screenplay based
on Hedges's own novel he gives us his view of a very small American town and
a sort of people who rarely are depicted in films.
     The setting is the fly-speck town is Endora, Iowa (though WHAT'S EATING
GILBERT GRAPE was actually shot in Texas).  A major town event occurs each
year when the local Airstream Trailer club drives a convoy of the aluminum
campers past the town.  Gilbert Grape (Johnny Depp) always brings his
mentally retarded younger brother Arnie (Oscar-nominated Leonardo DiCaprio)
to watch the campers go by.  Arnie is usually a real handful--nearly 18, he
is a wild animal requiring constant attention.  Among Arnie's distressing
habits is climbing the town's water tower from which he needs to be rescued
by the police.  Gilbert has had to control Arnie and be the de facto father
of the family since his own father committed suicide many years earlier.
Gilbert's mother is hyper-obese--in the range of 500 pounds--and she too
needs more care than she is able to give.
     Gilbert himself is an unassuming man, a clerk at a tiny grocery that is
dying from the competition of a huge supermarket nearby.  Like a George
Bailey in IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE, he is without realizing it the person on
whom many depend and whom few seem to appreciate.  Everyone seems to rely on
him and take him for granted.  On top of that he lets himself be used in an
affair with a bored and unstable housewife (a thankless role for Mary
Steenburgen).  With the constant need to corral his brother, avoid the
husband of the Steenburgen character, handle a sister jealous of attention
given to Arnie, protect his mother from embarrassment by doing things like
secretly reinforce the floor weakened by her weight, Gilbert gets little
pleasure from life.  Enter Becky (Juliette Lewis of CAPE FEAR and HUSBANDS
AND WIVES) who is temporarily stranded in Endora when her grandmother's
camper has engine trouble.  Becky has a friendly but worldly nature that
allows her to see the nobility in Gilbert that others overlook.  While the
ending is a false step, the rest of the film more than compensates.
     WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE is a story that could easily have been
mishandled by making Gilbert too sugary noble, but Hedges and Hallstrom
create characters of depth and resonance.  And he is able to get some
impressive performances, especially from DiCaprio.  In his films Depp has
been a sort of modern James Dean who gets some sympathy from the audience
playing hurt and confused people.  But Depp's acting has never been the high
point of any of his films.  Here, at least, he is better than usual and
creates a character with some credibility.  But even better is DiCaprio
whose retardation is so well portrayed my wife was unsure if perhaps
DiCaprio himself isn't actually retarded.  (Though some thought tells one it
is extremely unlikely.)  Darlene Cates, in her first performance, gives real
humanity to the obese Momma.
     WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE reminds one of settings like those of
TENDER MERCIES and characters out of Capra.  I give it a +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Jon A. Webb
     WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE is a sensitive, honest portrayal of
what would be called a "dysfunctional" family: grossly overweight
mother, retarded son, two daughters trying to get past it all, and the
older son, played by Johnny Depp, who is trying to hold everything
together.  The main point of the film is that such a family is not as
dysfunctional as it seems, when you look below the surface.
     The most outstanding things about this film are the performance by
Leonardo di Caprio of the retarded son--had I not seen him in THIS
BOY'S LIFE I would have thought he must be like that, somehow--and
the portrayal of the mother in the screenplay and on the screen by
Darlene Cates.  I never have seen a woman with a physical deformity
shown in as loving, though non-sentimental, a light.  This alone is
reason enough to see the film.
     I thought the film was only good on the whole, though, because of
inconsistent quality in the direction.  The romance between Depp and
Juliette Lewis was never completely convincing for me, and Mary
Steenburgen's character was too cartoonish.
     I liked the meeting between Gilbert and the insurance man, as
being surprisingly real, and thought Crispin Glover stole every scene
he was part of (he plays a too-enthusiastic mortician.)  The resolution
of the conflict in the film is also very believable and compelling.

Author
Chad Polenz
What's Eating Gilbert Grape?
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1994, PG-13, 117 minutes [1 hour, 57 minutes]
[lighthearted drama]
starring: Johnny Depp (Gilbert Grape), Leonardo DiCaprio (Arnie Grape),
Juliette Lewis (Becky), Mary Steenburgen (Betty Carver), Darlene Cates (Mrs.
Grape), produced by Meir Teper, Bertil Ohlsson, David Matalon, written by
Peter Hedges (based on his novel), directed by Lasse Hallstrom.
The American Family is an institution slowly deteriorating, especially in
Hollywood. What makes "What's Eating Gilbert Grape?" so good is the way it
shows how a family who you assume would be the most dysfunctional turns out
to be the just the opposite. It's not a sappy family movie, it's a wholly
original and enjoyable picture.
Johnny Depp stars as Gilbert Grape, a 20-something GenXer who lives with his
family in a small town way out in the country. He works at a "Mom and Pop"
grocery store to help support his family, as his 500-pound mother (Cates) is
unable to work. Gilbert also has a full-time job of taking care of his
brother Arnie (played wonderfully by Leonardo DiCaprio). There isn't one
specific plot to the film, it is just a tale of this young man's life that
can seem like Heaven and Hell at the same time.
Gilbert isn't exactly happy, perhaps it's his desire to take care of his
family that keeps him going. He is having an affair with a local married
woman (Mary Steenburgen as Betty Carver), but even this doesn't do much for
him, probably because he's deathly afraid of her husband who constantly
encourages Gilbert to "see him."
One day a girl named Becky (Lewis) who is Gilbert's age with the same
maroon-dyed hair arrives in town. She is traveling with her grandmother
across the country and their camper breaks. The two meet, flirt, and you can
tell where it's going. We don't exactly get a passionate love story, but just
the subtlety to their relationship, and the realistic dialogue and
interaction is fascinating. 
But the story does not drift, it focuses on Gilbert's commitment to his
family and we learn a lot about their situation from his interaction with
Becky. When she asks him what he wants, he says what he wants for everyone
else, but not for himself, which is one of the best scenes in the film. Not
only is Gilbert becoming closer to Becky but he is also becoming closer to
his family when he looks at them from afar.
Arnie is also quite a character. He's about to turn 18 but he has the
maturity level of a 5-year-old. There are some hilarious scenes resulting
from Arnie's ignorance, and we can laugh because he's not  portrayed as a
victim, he just doesn't know any better. Gilbert cares for Arnie with all his
heart, we constantly see him endangering himself in order to save Arnie from
predicaments he gets himself into (such as climbing to the top of a water
tower).
There's no one specific plot to this film, although many conflicts do arise.
What makes it so good is the interaction between characters and the unique
dialogue. Stories about small towns tend to be dry and boring, but there's
more atmosphere here than any other commercial film set in a big city.
Even though the family and the characters in "What's Eating Gilbert Grape?"
might be strange, they seem like real characters with real emotions. Perhaps
if everyone had a family this close, the world would be a better place. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Johnny Depp, Leonardo DiCaprio, Juliette Lewis, 
           Mary Steenburgen, Darlene Cates 
Director:  Lasse Hallstrom 
Producers:  Meir Teper, Bertil Ohlsson, and David Matalon 
Screenplay:  Peter Hedges from his novel 
Music:  Alan Parker and Bjorn Isfalt 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
     WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE, from renowned Swedish director Lasse
Hallstrom (MY LIFE AS A DOG), is a grim tale about being trapped in
Endora, Iowa, the self-proclaimed "End of the Line."  Recounting the
unhappy life of Gilbert Grape, the movie is not the kind of experience
that many viewers are likely to find enjoyable.  Even the humor--what
little there is of it--is of the gallows variety.
     Gilbert (Johnny Depp) has the weighty responsibility of assuming
the role of father-figure in a dysfunctional family.  His real dad is
long dead, the victim of a suicide, and his exceptionally obese mother
(Darlene Cates) is generally incapable of moving from the sofa where
she spends most of her life.  Gilbert's brain-damaged younger brother
Arnie (Leonardo DiCaprio) has to be constantly watched lest he climb to
the top of a watertower and throw himself off.  Away from home, Gilbert
works in the local grocery store, hangs out with his friends, and
carries on an affair with Better Carver (Mary Steenburgen), the wife of
a local insurance salesman.
     If you want to see someone who has it worse off than you, take a
look at Gilbert Grape.  Virtually nothing goes right for him, and
that's the reason why, while the film is well-written (albeit a little
too long) and competently acted (with one exception), GILBERT GRAPE is
often an unpleasant experience.  This is the kind of motion picture
that can get a viewer squirming in his or her seat.
     Gilbert is trapped, and this comes across with deafening volume
through the wonderfully understated performance by Johnny Depp.  We can
see the walls of his life threatening to crush him--the grinding
monotony of his job, the desperation of his affair, and the lack of
freedom demanded by his home life.  He is George to Leonardo DiCaprio's
Lenny, and it doesn't take a literary genius to recognize the OF MICE
AND MEN similarities.
     Into all of this gnawing monotony comes a fresh face in the form
of Juliette Lewis' Becky.  Of course, Gilbert falls in love with her,
and Arnie develops his own sort of crush.  Like most of the characters
in the film, what we see of Becky is vividly drawn, but there's not
much depth to her.  It's a full-color snapshot, but there's no way to
tell what lies beyond the borders.
     Part of the problem with Becky is Juliette Lewis.  The young
actress, who was so impressive in CAPE FEAR, has continuously turned in
one-note performances since then.  There's not a whole lot to
differentiate any of her characters from the others, and it's becoming
increasingly apparent that what we saw in her debut was the apex of her
abilities.  Since then, it's been all downhill, and GILBERT GRAPE
represents a new low.
     Leonardo DiCaprio is convincing as Arnie, even if his performance
is, of necessity, over-the-top.  For a more subtle and telling example
of his skills, see THIS BOY'S LIFE.  The rest of the cast handles their
roles with aplomb, especially Mary Kate Schellhardt, who makes the most
of limited screen time as Gilbert and Arnie's youngest sister, Ellen.
Judging by the job she does here, Ms. Schellhardt has a lot of
promise.
     If you're in the mood to be cheered up, WHAT'S EATING GILBERT
GRAPE?  isn't the movie for you.  The claustrophobia felt by Gilbert as
his world slowly suffocates him is effectively translated to the
audience.  Had the film been a little better-focused, this could have
been a devastating character study.  As it is, it rambles a little too
much.  This leads to an uneven, albeit stark, examination of the life
of one man trying desperately to escape a prison whose bars have been
fashioned by fate out of responsibility.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE is a movie popular with the critics.
Johnny Depp stars as the son of a 600 pound mother (Darlene Cates).  He
has two sisters (Laura Harrington and Mary Kate Schellhardt) plus an 18
year old brother (Leonardo DiCaprio) who is retarded and spends most of
his time climbing the local water tower thereby bothering the police.
Also in it are Juliette Lewis as the girlfriend and Mary Steenburgen
terribly miscast as a married woman with whom Depp is having an affair.
     First, the good part.  There is a 20 second clip of an
architecturally interesting courthouse.  The rest of the show is either
boring or unbearably depressing.  The first 60 minutes of the show took
at least 3 hours.  If I had been by myself, I would have walked out
after 30 minutes tops.  I felt the movie actually get worse as it went
along.
     Let me see if it is possible to chronicle some of the things I
hated about this movie.  Depp slept through it.  [Wish I had!]  He was
clearly under heavy sedation at all times.  He reminded the audience
again and again about how lovely his mother used to be before she got
to be a "beached whale" as he described her.  He would take the local
kids over to see his mother from a window like a barker at a side show.
What a great kid!
     A lot of the movie was devoted to the boy with a body of an 18
year old but the mind of a 3 year old and whether he would live to see
his next birthday.  The way it was handled ranged from fairly
depressing to very depressing.
     I did not care about any of the characters and got to hoping for a
swarm of locus to sweep the plains and kill them all off so we could
get a fresh set of actors.  Sad to report that no such swarm appeared.
     WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE runs an exhausting 1:58 due to sloppy
editing by Andrew Mondshein.  It is rated PG-13.  For an excellent job
of acting by DiCaprio I generously award the show one half of a star,
give it a big thumbs down.  People who suffering from depression should
have their medication close by if they do decide to see it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Johnny Depp, Leonardo DiCaprio, Juliette Lewis, Darlene
Cates, Mary Steenburgen.
Screenplay:  Peter Hedges.
Director:  Lasse Hallstrom.
     Tone alone cannot sustain a film, but it can go a long way.  If I
can find myself lost in the time and place of a story, it scores
immediate style points.  When that tone is backed up by an outstanding
story and great acting, the effect can be described best by an
adjective I do not use lightly:  "literary."  WHAT'S EATING GILBERT
GRAPE? is such a film.  It's a rich, memorable and stunningly acted
story of desire colliding with responsibility, staged in a manner which
many viewers might find too prosaic, but which insinuated itself into
my imagination with its confidence.
     Gilbert Grape (Johnny Depp) is a young man living in rural Endora,
Iowa, facing incredible responsibilities.  As the man of the house
since his father's suicide, Gilbert must support the family by working
at the local grocery store.  He also must watch over his mentally
handicapped brother Arnie (Leonardo DiCaprio) and help care for his
extremely overweight mother (Darlene Cates).  Gilbert seems destined to
spend the rest of his life in the small town until the arrival in
Endora of Becky (Juliette Lewis), a free spirit passing through with
her grandmother when their truck breaks down.  As he spends time with
Becky, Gilbert begins to think about all the things he is missing.
Slowly his resentment builds, until he realizes that he can no longer
live his entire life for other people.
     Director Lasse Hallstrom (MY LIFE AS A DOG) and legendary
cinematographer Sven Nykvist create a magnificent visual backdrop for
Peter Hedges' screenplay, based on his own novel.  Endora is a town on
the edge of the world represented by the giant FoodMart, a tiny insular
community where everyone knows everyone else.  The midwestern sunsets
and sprawling fields are beautifully photographed, and the atmosphere
of the town is intensely real.  Minor characters, like Crispin Glover
as the town's mortician, are vividly realized, and there are echoes of
THE LAST PICTURE SHOW in Mary Steenburgen's desperately unhappy
housewife.  One of the most perfectly realized scenes focuses on the
grand opening of a burger franchise, attended by the entire town and
accompanied by the off-key high school band.  Not a single note in the
depiction of Endora rang false.
     The same can be said of the character of Gilbert.  It's testimony
to the precision involved in his creation that he came together
completely with one perfectly placed line, when Becky responds to
Gilbert's description of his father with, "I knew someone like that
once."  Gilbert is a man harboring an ever-growing bitterness about
where he finds himself in life, a bitterness which reveals itself in
moments of surprising cruelty.  In one scene, he allows local children
to look at his mother through their window, displaying her like a side
show attraction.  His entire life seems to be mocked by Arnie's
repeated chants of, "We're not going anywhere," but instead of
expressing his dissatisfaction he lets his anger simmer, and it becomes
clear that he is following in his father's footsteps in this regard.
Johnny Depp expertly demonstrates the tension central to Gilbert by
playing everything below the surface, but he never gives in to
one-dimensional blankness or simply regurgitates his naif roles in
BENNY & JOON and EDWARD SCISSORHANDS.
     Depp's performance is overshadowed, however, by Leonardo
DiCaprio's astonishing Oscar-nominated supporting work as Arnie.  He
puts to shame such big name actors as John Malkovich and Dustin
Hoffman, whose mentally challenged characters never seemed completely
real.  DiCaprio is perfect to the last twitch and squeal, and anyone
who has ever spent time with mentally challenged kids will be
hard-pressed to spot a flaw.  Darlene Cates, a first-time actor, brings
real pain to her scenes as Gilbert's tortured mother, and Laura
Harrington and Mary Kate Schellhardt are solid as Gilbert's sisters.
Only Juliette Lewis doesn't quite click, playing a critical role with
her now familiar dopey drone and too little genuine spark.  GILBERT
GRAPE does seem to drift into its conclusion, but it never lost me.
Thanks to a lovingly created setting and a marvelous cast, this 1993
release proves well worth the wait.
