Title
Review for Homicide (1991)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: One of David Mamet's most underrated and unseen movies; a
blunt-nosed and memorable story about a man waking up to the sound of his
own soul.
The criminally underrated HOMICIDE is one of David Mamet's best movies. It
is not as clever or devious as HOUSE OF GAMES or THE SPANISH PRISONER, but
it strikes markedly different notes than either of those films. Among many
other things, it's also one of the few recent movies that deals
intelligently with the notion of ethnic identity and the subordination of
same -- and the consequences of that subordination.
HOMICIDE features a cop, Bobby Gold (Joe Mantegna), who has tried to keep a
great deal about himself on the back burner. He is a Jew, but he has
developed a whole arsenal of reasons for closeting that part of himself
away. Case in point: when another officer calls him a "kike", he flinches
and cocks his fist, but we get the feeling that he's doing it more out of a
sense of obligation. Someone calls you fighting words, you fight. HOMICIDE
is not about the fight per se, but about the motives.
The plot centers around a candy-store murder. An old woman, the proprietrix,
was shot dead in a robbery, and her son, a doctor, more or less drafts Gold
into investigating the killing. The doctor assumes that Gold will give a
damn by dint of his own Jewishness, but he doesn't. Or, more accurately, he
tries not to, and has it blow up in his face. This is interwoven with
another case that Gold is trying to work on -- a drug dealer on the run --
and, like Gold, we don't realize that he can't resolve either case without
getting a few issues about himself straightened out. 
The dialogue is vintage Mamet: fast, sharp, spattered with invectives and
expletives, but always at the service of the story and the characters.
There's one scene that perfectly dramatizes how ugly dialogue can be made to
serve the larger purposes of a movie: Gold is on the phone, ranting about
the fact that he's been yanked off the drug bust and put on this pathetic
candy-store shooting. Out of his mouth emerge words that he would consider
vile coming from anyone else, and it isn't until he's shown up later on that
he realizes what he has done.
Mamet fills the production with a gallery of actors he's familiar with and
lets them do their stuff, like jazz musicians who are in a tight ensemble
together: William H. Macy, long one of my favorite actors; Mantegna; J.J.
Barry, Ving Rhames. They all work, and they all convince us that there's a
lot more going on here than is only hinted at on the surface. Especially in
the case of Bobby Gold, who is a classic case of a man trying very hard not
to know who he is. Then one fine day, he catches up with himself.
syegul@cablehouse.dyn.ml.org                 EFNet IRC: GinRei / ICQ: 934998
http://cablehouse.dyn.ml.org/serdar                another worldly device...
you can crush me as I speak/write on rocks what you feel/now feel this truth

Author
Chad Polenz
Homicide
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1991, R, 100 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes]
[crime/drama]
starring: Joe Mantegna (Detective Bobby Gold), William H. Macy (Detective Tim
Sullivan), Natalija Nogulich (Chava), Rebecca Pidgeon (Miss Klein), produced
by Michael Hausman, Edward R. Pressman, directed by David Mamet.
        "Homicide" suffers from one of the worst cases of cinematic schizophrenia
I've ever seen. First it's a crime film, then it's a mystery, then it's a
drama, then it's a thriller, etc. What's really the topper is the fact the
film often seems as if it's going to lead to some kind of terrific payoff...
and then it doesn't happen.
        Joe Mantegna stars as Detective Bobby Gold, your typical New York
City-crime/mystery-movie 'tect who, along with his partner Detective Tim
Sullivan (Macy), is about to bring down a man on the FBI's 10 Most Wanted
list if only the feds would back off. The first few scenes are typical of
such mainstream cop films - there's the raid, the shootouts, then the
arguments between the cops and the feds over jurisdiction and the like which
almost turn into small race riots and we have no idea why!
        Initially I was intrigued, even though the generic cop atmosphere got old
quick, Gold and Sullivan seem like interesting enough people to care about.
There's a good sense of camaraderie here without (thankfully) one-liners and
slapstick. It seems as if this is going to be a straight crime film, but
suddenly everything changes due mostly to coincidence. 
        Gold finds himself helping out some rookies at the scene of a homicide of an
old Jewish shopkeeper. Gold is a Jew and doesn't think much of the case until
he finds himself forced into solving it. When the family of the woman
approaches Gold about the case and tells him it was an act of hate, Gold
starts to pity both the family for being so jumpy and religious, and himself
for the apathy he can't help feeling, especially since he knows it's
self-destructive.
        Here is where the film radically changes course. What had just been an intere
sting mystery story suddenly turns into a novel-like melodrama as Gold argues
with his fellow Jews over the honor he is supposed to have for both his
people and the badge. We get scenes of soul searching disguised as detective
work, but nothing seems to be adding up to anything. A sub-plot of another
possible hate crime begins to form, and although some attempt is made to
resolve it, nothing seems to exist for a reason.
        Gold does some investigation into the homicide of the old woman and it
appears she used to be a gun runner during WWII, but why would anyone want
her dead now? When he stumbles upon a secret Jewish militia, they don't
provide many answers, only more conflicts. And if the film had not already
descended on a major tangent, it continues to skew as Gold seems to drop
everything to get some kind of revenge, and even this act doesn't make much
sense.
        It's a shame the last act turns the film into another Hollywood thriller,
and a lame one at that. It's complete with shootouts, explosions, cliffhangers
, dead supporting characters, and last-minute confessions, and yet the film
still fails to provide any sense of closure for Gold nor any sense of
resolution for the plot.
        "Homicide" is one of the few films whose title alone provides for a major
flaw. Not only does it sound generic and boring, it's as misleading as the
film - you think it's going to be an intricate crime story and it turns into
a standard drama (and then some). It's as if everything is a big prelude to
nothing.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old movies reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Bobby Gold (beautifully played by Joe Mantegna) is a respected cop on
the homicide squad who has reacted to police department anti-Semitism by
struggling to assimilate and to ignore his Jewish roots.  Early on we see
him be the butt of a totally unreasonable tirade from a bigoted black
superior who gets his jollies calling Gold a "kike."  Gold is already
involved in a case trying to find a black cop-killer before the FBI can find
and kill him.  He is getting enthusiastic about this project and its
prospects for him to redeem himself in the department's eyes.  Then, by
accident, he becomes involved in another case and is told he must take
charge of this case also.  An elderly Jewish woman who ran a candy store in
a black neighborhood has been murdered.  The last thing he wants is an
assignment that will tie himself in with the Jews, and it does not help that
the woman's family seems to think that there is a deeper conspiracy
involved.  But then evidence starts appearing that may point to an anti-
Semitic conspiracy.  That and an unmasking of Gold's own self-hatred as a
Jew start pushing him to value this case more and to neglect the other.
     HOMICIDE is just a sort of typical David Mamet.  That is, there is a
fair amount to say about it, but most of it falls under the classification
of spoiler.  Any review that does not ruin some of the surprises of this
marvelous puzzle of a film will be so general as to be nearly pointless.
David Mamet, like the Coen Brothers, specializes in crime films with a sort
of unexpected spin.  I first became aware of Mamet through a radio play
called "The Water Engine" which had a marvelous 1939 period feel and dealt
with one of the great American myths, the engine that runs on water for fuel
and that the insidious auto companies have hushed up.  Mamet wrote DePalma's
UNTOUCHABLES, but also has directed his own screenplays HOUSE OF GAMES and
THINGS CHANGE.  Both were good; HOMICIDE is better.  HOMICIDE lacks BARTON
FINK's visual style and craftsmanship, but its story is better and a case
could be made that the two are thematically linked.  They are the two of the
best films I have seen this year and they would be very interesting seen as
a pair.
     Mamet's excellent screenplay is a grabber from the very first scene.
The film is already tense and suspenseful before the first word of dialogue
is spoken.  Most enigmatic is Joe Mantegna's Bobby.  Does he suddenly feel a
solidarity with the Jewish community or is he reacting from guilt and to
prove something.  How real was his anti-Semitism earlier; how real was his
reversal?  Was he doing what he believed or was he first professing not to
like Jews in order to win approval from his buddies, then reversing to prove
something to the Jews he met through the case.  There is a lot to this film.
I give it a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Mamet's story is an amazing orchestration of smoke and mirrors.  Like
THE DAY OF THE JACKAL, we follow the reasoning each step of the way to its
logical conclusions.  But in THE DAY OF THE JACKAL at least we feel we know
our logic was wrong earlier.  At the end of this film we do not even have
the security of knowing anything.  We have no idea to what degree Bobby was
right, to what degree he has misled himself, and to what degree he has been
intentionally manipulated.
     In a bad James Bond film, such as MOONRAKER, the clues are all laid out
for Bond.  He gets into a fight in a factory, knocks into a crate, finds an
address on it, and goes to that address only to get into another fight and
find another clue.  Bond never goes off in the wrong direction.  In HOMICIDE
the clues seem a little too easy to find.  It is almost as if they were left
lying around intentionally.  Bobby never stops to reason, for example, that
organizations like 212 do not put their addresses on stationary.  On the
other hand, it is a tenuous chain of events that brought Bobby to that clue.
If Bobby were intentionally being brought to 212, there were a lot of people
in on the plot.  How could they have been sure Bobby would could to that
yeshiva and overhear the mention of 212.  If the finding of 212 was just
chance, how did the organization know so fast what it wanted from Bobby?
     It seems almost impossible that there was not a Jewish conspiracy.  But
if there was a Jewish conspiracy to get back the names, the question is why?
The law is not going to go after people who ran guns to the Israelis forty-
five years ago.  There might be a revenge plot going on against the
gunrunners that would explain the murder.  And we did catch a glimpse of
someone on the roof.  But that implies there are two opposed conspiracies.
That seems a little far-fetched, particularly since the police think they
know who committed the primary murder.
     Then maybe there was no conspiracy at all.  Except that 212 did seem to
know they wanted Bobby's list.  The plot is constructed like a bedsheet that
you can tuck in only three corners on.  If you try to tuck in the fourth
corner, one of the other corners pops out.  There is no consistent
explanation of what we saw.  And in the middle of this confusion is Bobby,
who would be betrayed by his own people, much like Randolph was.

Author
Frank Maloney
     HOMICIDE is a film directed and written by David Mamet, produced by
Michael Hausman and Edward Pressman.  The film stars Joe Mantegna,
William H. Macy, and Natalija Nogulich.  Rated R for language and
violence.
     HOMICIDE is David Mamet's third film (HOUSE OF CARDS, THINGS
CHANGE) and has many fine qualities to recommend it.  However, it does
suffer in several areas, too, and can only be considered a qualified
success, at best.
     Joe Mantegna plays a Jewish cop, Bobby Gold, in New York City.
Mantegna has earned directors' and audiences' respect in a long string
of solid performances, including Woody Allen's ALICE, Francis Ford
Coppola's THE GODFATHER III, and (reportedly) Barry Levinson's BUGSY
(which will be opening soon in the Seattle area).  And Mantegna has a
history of working with playwright Mamet going back to their days in
Chicago's Organic Theater Company, as well as parts in Mamet's earlier
films.  Despite that, or perhaps because of it, Mantegna fails to give
us a convincing performance.
     Perhaps the lead character and the script itself are too heavily
invested with irony and the sense of the cosmic joke to not weigh us the
audience down with confusion and ambiguous reactions to Bobby Gold's
identity crisis.  More likely, neither the actor or the writer is able
to convince us that this detective, who has lived in New York's ethnic
olla for forty years, would suddenly suffer the conflicts of interest
and identity his is supposed to undergo.  He has to choose between his
partner (William H. Macy) and the beautiful woman (Natalija Nogulich,
who reminds me of Anglica Huston, between the fraternity of cops and
"being a Jew" as it appears to be defined within this context.  In one
night, we have a vast, desperate attempt to right the wrongs of a
lifetime.  But we have no idea where the energy for all this angst is
coming from.
     Beyond the motivational hole, we still have a wonderfully
atmospheric cop drama, shot by Roger Deakins, who was also the cameraman
for BARTON FINK.  Character parts are filled mostly by New York stage
actors and are suitably unfamiliar and eccentric.  The dialog is
hard-boiled cynicism, although one scene between Mantegna and Macy
sounds way too much like DRAGNET.  The film opens with great suspense
and violence and surprises; the subplot started there carries the film
forward with emotional and professional conflicts, as well as providing
chases and more violence.  Mamet shows great skill in this genre.
     I can recommend HOMICIDE, but matinee prices might make the
problems more palatable.
