Title
Review for Kiss of Death (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Christopher Null
     Ever get the feeling that no matter what you do, you're screwed? 
That basically sums up the life of Jimmy Kilmartin (David Caruso), an
ex-con trying to go straight in the new feature, KISS OF DEATH.
     Jimmy, his wife Bev (Helen Hunt), and their daughter live an
inner-city dream, trying to make ends meet.  When Jimmy's cousin Ronnie
(ZEBRAHEAD's Michael Rapaport) shows up, begging for a driver for his chop
shop caravan, all hell breaks loose.  Jimmy is busted, and his descent
back into the pit of crime, prison, betrayal, and the government begins. 
Soon, Jimmy and his family are hounded by cop Calvin (Samuel L. Jackson),
asthmatic psycho kingpin Little Junior (Nicholas Cage), and a host of
other unsavory players.  We are invited to watch and see how Jimmy
extricates himself from the mess.
     As you may well expect, KISS OF DEATH is loaded with violence.  I
didn't expect it to be so funny, though.  It's worth the price of
admission just for a certain hilarious twist in Little Junior's strip
joint.  Cage's Junior gets all the best lines, but Caruso owns the picture
with his dynamic and striking portrayal of a man with a past and little
hope for a future.
     On the minus side, director Barbet Schroeder flubbed the first
half-hour of the picture, which deals with the dull tale of Jimmy vs.
Ronnie, before the guts of the action, Jimmy vs. Junior, begins.  Hunt's
talent is wasted as Jimmy's estranged wife, and it appears that a big
chunk of her screen time was left on the cutting room floor.  PULP
FICTION's Ving Rhames also has a few great lines as another deviant
could-be criminal but is otherwise squandered.
     Despite all that, once you cross that half-hour hurdle, KISS OF DEATH
becomes a powerful thriller not quite like anything I've seen recently. 
Nothing too original or flashy, just a gritty story that rings completely
true.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 4/21/95
Running Length: 1:40
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, language, nudity)
Starring: David Caruso, Nicolas Cage, Samuel L. Jackson, Stanley Tucci, 
          Katherine Erbe, Ving Rhames, Helen Hunt, Michael Rapaport
Director: Barbet Schroeder
Producers: Barbet Schroeder and Susan Hoffman
Screenplay: Richard Price
Cinematography: Luciano Tovoli
Music: Trevor Jones
Released by Twentieth Century Fox
     There are about as many sublassifications in the thriller genre as 
there are TV talk show hosts.  There's the noir thriller (BLOOD SIMPLE), 
the action thriller (DIE HARD), the "cop" thriller (anything starring 
Clint Eastwood), the "twist and manipulate the audience" thriller (BASIC 
INSTINCT), the "artsy" thriller (PULP FICTION), the exploitation 
thriller (anything with Shannon Tweed), and the "nothing much happens" 
thriller.  1995's version of KISS OF DEATH (the script is based on a 
1947 screenplay) deserves placement in the last category.
     This is the second consecutive lackluster film delivered by 
REVERSAL OF FORTUNE director Barbet Schroeder.  Like his last effort, 
SINGLE WHITE FEMALE, KISS OF DEATH boasts an interesting cast; lush, 
atmospheric cinematography; and a hole-riddled plot.  Despite a one-
hundred minute running time, the movie fails to resolve several obvious 
hanging threads, and the climax is so weak that the only real clue that 
the credits are about to roll is a slow pull back and pan by the camera.  
     The film opens with Jimmy Kilmartin (David Caruso, late of NYPD 
BLUE) enjoying the rigors of everyday family life with wife Bev (Helen 
Hunt) and baby daughter Karina.  Jimmy is recently out of prison, having 
served a term for car theft, and is willing to do just about anything to 
keep on the good side of the law.  But when an old buddy, Ronnie 
(Michael Rapaport), fears for his life if he doesn't get help pulling 
off a massive car heist, Jimmy reluctantly agrees to accompany him.  Not 
unexpectedly, things go badly.  Ronnie gets away, but Jimmy is busted 
and a cop (Samuel L. Jackson) is shot in the face.  DA Frank Zioli 
(Stanley Tucci) wants to make a deal with his lone prisoner/potential 
informant, but Jimmy won't talk about the others involved and, while his 
silence earns him extra time in Sing Sing, it buys the gratitude of 
wiseguy Little Junior Brown (Nicolas Cage), a nutcase who likes beating 
people to death with his bare hands.
     KISS OF DEATH generally meanders, taking quite a few unnecessary 
and ultimately pointless detours.  The basic storyline probably wouldn't 
satisfy half the running time, making it necessary to find something to 
pad out the film.  The result is a great deal of running around, 
meaningless and unconvincing attempts at character and relationship 
building, and a horribly manipulative "child in jeopardy" scenario.  A 
pair of fine performances (by Helen Hunt as Jimmy's wife and Katherine 
Erbe as his babysitter) are wasted.
     There are the expected double-crosses and revelations, but KISS OF 
DEATH's twists are neither momentous nor surprising.  The entire film is 
rather low-key, which might be an asset if the script wasn't in need of 
at least one more rewrite.  The somber tone and New York setting recall 
Robert DeNiro's 1992 remake of NIGHT AND THE CITY, another motion 
picture that failed to live up to expectations.
     The acting is very much a mixed bag.  David Caruso, who gets top 
billing after leaving TV's NYPD BLUE for a "motion picture career" 
(although this is by no means his first feature role), is unspectacular, 
bringing little to a largely underdeveloped role.  Stanley Tucci is 
suitably slimy as the prototypical self-serving politician in a three-
piece suit, and Nicolas Cage (who must have put on about forty pounds of 
pure muscle for the part) is at his over-the-top, vicious best as the 
main villain.  Samuel L. Jackson, who has fashioned a reputation as one 
of today's finest actors, turns in another on-the-mark performance as a 
police officer trying to resolve conflicting emotions about his quarry.
     KISS OF DEATH fits in well amidst the mostly-bland crop of releases 
clogging theaters this spring.  With a theatrical trailer far better 
than the actual picture, Schroeder's film delivers little more than a 
healthy dose of disappointment.  The picture is watchable, but nothing 
about it will linger, except perhaps the feeling that, with a more 
polished script, it might have been significantly better. 
-James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Strangely uncomplelling but still compulsively watchable modern
Brooklyn noir tale. Caruso's good, Cage is over the top, Jackson is worth
the price of admission.
KISS OF DEATH bears little to no resemblance to the hard-boiled classic that
it takes its name from. It's almost entirely an invention of Richard Price
and Barbet Schroeder, the writer and director, and it's an odd animal to be
sure. Maybe a more over-the-top directing style would have suited the
material, which is by itself convoluted as all hell.
David Caruso (steely and very watchable) stars as a former crook who's gone
straight after a stay in prison; he's got a wife and kid now. One night his
cousin, still crooked, comes banging on the door: they need someone to drive
some carriers full of stolen cars for them. Caruso's character takes the
job, but for his trouble, he gets shot through the hand, and a cop (Samuel
Jackson, very good) almost dies from that bullet. He would've died for sure
if Caruso's hand hadn't been in the way, but some people just have no damn
gratitude.
Caruso goes to jail, but manages to get some time shaved off by helping the
cops. They want to put away Little Junior (Nicholas Cage), the son of a
bigtime hood who's looking to inherit his daddy's power. Caruso goes back in
to infiltrate Junior's crime circles, but then things get far more
complicated than anyone expects. Junior himself is one strange character --
one of those people who's full of vocabulary words but at the same time is
not quite as smart as he thinks he is. He takes a peculiar shine to Caruso
-- why, we're never quite sure, but we get the impression that Jumior is
impressed with the other man's workmanlike attitude. Cage hams it up playing
Junior, which in retrospect may have been better than trying to play the guy
*totally* straight.
Or something like that. The movie has its hands full with its tricky plot,
and hasn't got much time left to give Junior real motives. And yet, somehow,
the movie finds the time to do some nice things. The scenes between Caruso
and Jackson start off ugly, but then the two men learn they have a lot in
common -- and have scenes where they actually *talk* to each other instead
of exchange token insults or complements. It's nicely done.
Unfortunately, all of that gets flushed away in the movie's climax, a mess
of thriller/chase cliches that wraps things up a little too neatly. What
this movie needed was for Price to sit down and do a more heartless version.
Hell, based on having read THE WANDERERS and CLOCKERS, maybe that was the
one he originally wrote. Sad.syegul@ix.netcom.com                                       EFNet IRC: GinRei
http://www.io.com/~syegul                          another worldly device...
you can crush me as I speak/write on rocks what you feel/now feel this truth
=smilin' in your face, all the time wanna take your place, the BACKSTABBERS=

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  David Caruso, Nicolas Cage, Samuel L. Jackson,
           Stanley Tucci, Michael Rapaport, Helen Hunt, Kathryn Erbe,
           Ving Rhames.
Screenplay:  Richard Price.
Director:  Barbet Schroeder.
     To answer the most obvious question first: no, David Caruso's
naked posterior does not appear in KISS OF DEATH, although it might
have been appropriate.  After one highly-publicized season on "NYPD
Blue" which included even-more-highly-publicized dorsal nudity,
Caruso left the series in a yet-more-highly-publicized squabble over
salary and time off to make movies, which had fellow cast members
suggesting that he not let the door hit his bare backside on the way
out.  Caruso's first opportunity for an "I told you so" comes in
KISS OF DEATH, but he might be advised to postpone any self-
congratulation.  In a film that is erratic but frequently intense,
his casting in the lead role is the most glaring flaw.
     Caruso plays Jimmy Kilmartin, a car thief trying to straighten
out his life after a stint in prison.  Unfortunately, he is pulled
back into another job by his bad-news cousin Ronnie (Michael
Rapaport), a job that goes bad and lands Jimmy back in prison.
While inside he agrees to become a state's witness for District
Attorney Frank Zioli (Stanley Tucci), but the one deal Jimmy makes
isn't good enough for Zioli.  As Jimmy comes up for parole, he is
pressured into going undercover into the crime organization run by
Little Junior Brown (Nicolas Cage), a psycho with a very short fuse.
Caught between Little Junior, Zioli and a cop with a score to settle
(Samuel L. Jackson), Jimmy realizes that his only way out is to take
matters into his own hands.
     The screenplay for KISS OF DEATH, written by Richard Price
based on a 1947 film noir of the same name, is a dense piece of
plotting, but an extremely confident one.  Like a novel, KISS OF
DEATH unfolds in well-developed pieces, building towards a solid
conclusion with very little extraneous material.  The plot's twists
are both relevant and unexpected, and director Barbet Schroeder
keeps a steady hand on the pace.  Yet somehow, in the middle of all
the clockwork plotting, gaping flaws in logic and flat-out
sloppiness appear.  In one sequence, Kilmartin's family is supposed
to be under police protection, but his daughter is allowed to play
on a swing along what is apparently a main thoroughfare with only
one guard, while earlier two agents with high-powered rifles stood
watch while she played near a secluded cliffside.  Then, near the
end of the film, one of the big payoff revelations is spoiled by an
unnecessary establishing shot.  It sometimes seems that Schroeder is
so busy painting the trim on the house that is KISS OF DEATH that he
fails to notice it's missing a wall.
     It's a good thing that so many of the people in that house are
so interesting.  Samuel L. Jackson turns in one of his now-routine
dynamite supporting turns as Calvin, the wounded cop who develops an
unexpected connection with Jimmy.  He is mis-used in the conclusion
for a gimmicky applause moment, but otherwise turns in stellar work.
Michael Rapaport, still growing his hair out from his role as the
skinhead in HIGHER LEARNING, is fantastic as the sleazy Ronnie right
through to his brutal comeuppance, as is Anthony Heald in a small
role as Little Junior's slick and savvy attorney.  Add Stanley
Tucci's duplicitous D. A. and Helen Hunt as Jimmy's recovering
alcoholic wife, and you have one of the best supporting casts since
PULP FICTION.
     Unlike PULP FICTION, however, the lead performances are not of
the same caliber.  Nicolas Cage is an actor who has shown the
ability to play everything from romantic leads to villains, but
there is no center to Little Junior.  One second he is brutal but
shrewd; the next he is simply off his nut.  As for Caruso, he is
given a role that would be a challenge to make sympathetic by an
actor with much greater range.  Caruso is unable to give Jimmy any
humanity, delivering every line in the same hushed,
primed-to-explode manner.  Only he never does explode, and it is
particularly telling that Jimmy's one big emotional outburst occurs
behind a closed door.  We need to see Jimmy as a charater reacting
to what is happening to him, but by playing him with an omnipresent
hangdog resignation, Caruso might have been the KISS OF DEATH for a
potentially engrossing thriller.
