Title
Review for Silence of the Lambs, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Anton J. Panagos
     Jonathan Demme creates a horrifying and gruesome story of two
serial killers.  One is an imprisoned and demented psychiatrist,
Hannibal "the cannibal" Lecter and the other is a serial killer on the
loose, Buffalo Bill.  
     Lecter is visited in his maximum-security cell by a young FBI
agent-in-training, Clarisse (played by Jodie Foster).  Clarisse had been
sent by her boss and trainer (played by Scott Glenn).  Lecter was jailed
for committing heinous crimes including cannibalism, hence the
nickname.  Clarisse's objective is to retrieve information from a
psychopath like Lecter in order catch Buffalo Bill.  Lecter is helpful,
at first.  But Clarisse is dealing with a highly intelligent and clever
criminal.
     On the other hand, Buffalo Bill is a serial killer who skins his
victims.  He kidnaps the daughter of a senator in West Virginia.  The
minute the news hits the FBI agency in Washington,DC, Clarisse offers a
"vacation" plan to Lecter as a supposed bribe.  The chase for Buffalo
Bill goes on from here.  Meanwhile problems occur with  Lecter after he
is transferred to a temporary cell ordered by his  officer-in-charge.  
     There are some explicit scenes of victims and of extreme violence
in this film.  The film lets us look into the mind of a serial killer.
There are many surprises and a heart-pounding ending in this
well-executed and mind-numbing movie.  The cinematography and music help
set the dark mood.  Anthony Hopkins performs  Hannibal Lecter to the
hilt.  It is the best acting performance of 1991, so far.  Hopkins
should be a shoo-in for a nomination for next year's Oscar awards.
Jodie Foster does a competent job as a FBI agent who learns very quickly
how dangerous her job can be.  Overall, "Silence of the Lambs" is
definately one of the best thrillers in a few years.  

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Since 1959 the psychopathic killer has, perhaps unfortunately, become a
staple of popular film.  Most films that had psychopaths before that point
really blurred the distinction between your garden variety murderer and the
actual psychopath.  Perhaps one notable exception was THE BAD SEED, which
suggested that there could be something like a "congenital evil."  Extreme
criminality and madness were very much equated.  That was very much what was
meant with "mad scientists" of the old horror films.  There was an urge to
deny the existence of evil or to relegate it to the supernatural.  How many
people even today deny the culpability of Adolf Hitler and say instead that
he was simply mad.  There were some films that suggested that there was
something more to criminal insanity than just extreme criminality, but it
was Alfred Hitchcock's PSYCHO that turned the cinematic view around.  Norman
Bates was himself a victim as well as the perpetrator of his acts.  Bates
was a normal person twisted by his past and driven by forces he could not
control.  This is a marvelously egalitarian view of the criminally insane.
It assumes that all men (and women) are created equal.  This is probably an
equally invalid view of the criminally insane.  When John Hurt played
Caligula in I, CLAUDIUS, he described his character as "congenitally
bonkers."  In all probability that was fairly accurate.  It is at least my
belief that Caligula was genuinely insane and Hitler was not.  This view of
the pitiful victim-psychopath became the dominant view in films with PSYCHO
and it has remained dominant.  With John Carpenter's HALLOWEEN (1978) there
was a new view, or perhaps an old view harkening back to medieval beliefs,
that the psychopathic killer is a supernatural force.  Fortunately, few
films have picked up on this idea and most that have have large Roman
numerals in their titles.
     Thomas Harris has a different concept of the psychopathic killer which,
if no more credible than the supernatural force, s at least more intriguing.
He created the idea in his novel RED DRAGON, which Michael Mann adapted into
his 1986 film MANHUNTER.  The idea was expanded in his SILENCE OF THE LAMBS,
which has been adapted into a film by Jonathan Demme.  Harris's concept is
that psychopaths have a distinctly different form of intelligence.  Their
reasoning power is consistent and logical, but alien to our own.  If you
cannot bridge the gap and think like a psychopath, you are at a distinct
disadvantage in dealing with them.  In addition, the psychopath often has
superhuman sensory powers.  For example, Harris's Hannibal Lecter, in
addition to a super-intellect, apparently has a heightened sense of smell.
I believe these are ideas that owe their origin more to Poe's "Tell-Tale
Heart" than to actual case histories.  But where Harris is really superb is
in being able to make Lecter's reasoning really seem brilliant.  It is
extremely difficult to write a character who is supposed to be brilliant.
To see how poorly it can be done, try going back and listening to Lex
Luthor's reasoning about Kryptonite in SUPERMAN (1978).  Lecter's reasoning
is at once perverted and brilliant.
     MANHUNTER and THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS are two of what have to be at
least four stories involving Hannibal Lecter.  And they are probably the two
least interesting.  When RED DRAGON begins, Lecter has already been captured
by Will Graham, who made himself into a psychopath in order to catch Lecter
in the first place.  Graham needs Lecter's help to capture another
psychopath.  In THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, fledging FBI agent Clarice
Starling (no pun intended) (played by Jodie Foster) similarly must enlist
Lecter's (Anthony Hopkins's) help to find a killer.  This time, however,
Lecter thinks he can work his own deal.  While this story does conclude,
there is still a major loose end that really demands yet another story.
     In this story the primary villain is a killer whom the press has dubbed
Buffalo Bill.  The killer not only murders his victims, he later skins them.
Starling is chosen to talk to Dr.~Lecter about the crimes with an eye toward
getting his unique insight into how to capture Buffalo Bill.  Starling,
however, has her own personal demons inside and Lecter is just the person to
turn those demons against her.  In the book the main story is how Starling
catches the killer, with the Lecter story being a major subplot.  The film
reverses the importance of the two plots by leaving the Lecter plot intact,
if not actually expanded, and cutting drastically the Buffalo Bill plot.
     The character of Lecter seems calculated to play off every anti-
intellectual prejudice in the audience.  The man is an ice-cold, emotionless
intellect.  He listens to ice-cold, emotionless music.  Even when he kills
we are told that he is ice-cold and emotionless.  In one chilling detail the
character is defined.  We are told that he attacked and partially ate a
victim without his pulse ever going over 80.
     Stylistically the film is well handled generally.  At times the music
is a bit overly dramatic in underscoring the mood as if Howard Shore, the
composer, did not trust Hopkins's acting to convey a mood of menace.  If
that was the case, the composer was misguided, since Harris's villain will
probably be as memorable as Norman Bates and Michael Meyers.  The
photography uses a filter to subdue the colors.  If that was not downbeat
enough, Starling is really the only sympathetic character in the whole
story.  She seems to go from one man to the next who tries to bed her.
     For the sake of completeness at least two nits should be mentioned.
Starling is first seen climbing a steep hill in the rigorous FBI training
school.  When we see her in close-up, she is wearing earrings.  For her own
safety, at least, you would think they would insist on no jewelry.  Also,
certain scenes are supposedly seen through an infra-red snooperscope and at
least one time the subject is in total darkness.  As seen through the scope,
even items that do not emit heat are easily seen.  In the total darkness
scene the subject can not only be seen, but also to be seen is the subject's
sharp shadow on the wall.
     THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS is as unpleasant and hypnotic as watching a
cobra.  This is one heavy thriller.  I give it a high +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS is Jonathan Demme's adaptation of a novel
by Thomas Harris and it knocked my socks off.
     It is a thriller about serial killers, one known and in
high-security detention, one unknown and on a bloody rampage.  The
former is played by Anthony Hopkins, who has created the creepiest, most
disturbing villain I have ever seen in a movie.  He is totally
convincing as "Hannibal the Cannibal," alarming, charming and vile,
intelligent, perceptive, a human animal.  If Hopkins doesn't get a
best-actor nomination next year, it will be because the film was
released too early in the year, although how anyone who sees his
performance can ever forget it is beyond me.
     He forms a bizarre alliance with an FBI agent-in-training played by
Jodie Foster.  Foster turns in an excellent performance that ought to
establish her as a creditable adult actor.  Her performance isn't as
flashy as Hopkins, but it's thorough and convincing throughout.
     I have only one cavil: the other, on-the-loose killer is a gay man.
Okay, there are probably a proportionate number of gay people among
killers and psychopaths as in the world at large.  But I can see no
particular reason why this one has to be gay.  Because he thinks he's a
transsexual the film seems to say.  Hogwash!  I think the real reason is
that a stereotype and a prejudice is being exploited and I say shame on
Demme and company.
     One of the things I like about SILENCE is the way the film plays
with who are good guys and who are bad guys.  Hopkins, for instance, is
presented as exactly what he is and yet at the end we like him, knowing
full well the evil he does.  Another character, who is on the right side
of the bars, the director of the asylum where Hopkins is kept, is
clearly marked from the beginning as a villain and we cheer his final
fate.  The other killer, "Buffalo Bill," is presented without any
ambiguity--all bad, but interesting.
     There are consistently good characterizations of the major players,
all too rare a quality in contemporary scripts.  In particular, we learn
a lot about Foster's character--even though she is a woman, contrary to
such movies as THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS and RUSSIA HOUSE.  Also, I was
pleased that no one had to fall in love with anyone else, although two
intriguing friendships develop for Foster.
     The film is ably photographed without particularly drawing attention
to itself or making any obvious contribution to the meaning of the film,
unlike a film such as L.A. STORY where the camera's love affair with Los
Angeles is a substantial part of the film.
     One WARNING: this film is a very tense affair with blood, violence,
and mutilation.  Most of the worst happens out of the range of the
camera, but enough is shown and the rest talked about so it may disturb
some viewers excessively.  Several people in my audience clearly
couldn't take it any more and exited after one particularly grueling
scene.  There is also strong language and some nudity.

Author
Dave Jones
     The story would have worked great as a straight documentary, but
they tried to play it as a "monster-in-the-house" thriller.  As a
result, there were more loose ends than you see in a Deal-a-Meal
commercial.
     The biggest flaw, a real whopper, was that the main bad guy
(Anthony Hopkins), after a lengthy escape sequence, simply removed
himself from the plot about two-thirds of the way into the film, not to
figure in the climax and resolution at all.
     In an attempt to smooth this over, the main character (Jodie
Foster) *announces* gratuitously to a minor character that the bad guy
will not be heard of again, and goes off to deal with bad guy number
two.
     All the main conflict was based around the heroine trying to get
from bad guy number one information about bad guy number two, whom we
did not even meet until well into the film.  Once she had as much info
as she was going to get, about half way into the film, the lengthy
escape-sequence contributed absolutely nothing to the plot.  The only
excuse, a poor one, is that it really happened that way.  Of course, I
didn't know that, and since he was the genius at psychology, and she the
talented beginner, I kept expecting Jodie to be proven wrong -- for the
main bad guy to show up when we least expected him.  The other shoe
never dropped, and I felt very dissatisfied: Wait a minute!  Is it
over???  Whaaa???
     Well, he did get a joke cameo at the very end, after Jodie had
vanquished the bogeyman, which she somehow accomplished despite her
utter incompetence in the "monster-in-the-house" scene.  I still don't
know how she offed him in a pitch-dark room, with him wearing infra-red
glasses, and carrying a pistol, while she was flailing around helplessly
on the floor.  Some people in the audience apparently thought it was
scary, but I thought it was just dumb.  She's supposed to be one of the
brightest recent grads of FBI school, and she doesn't know the first
thing about hostage situations.  Oh well, the monster gave her a second
chance to get it right.
     Jodie Foster did not turn in nearly as good a performance as she
usually does.  The high points of the film were Anthony Hopkins's
portrayal of the demented psychologist and the creepy images of the
insane asylum, although those scenes were marred by an "auditory cue," a
deep rumble in the sound-track, which was no doubt intended to make the
audience uncomfortable, and which, in my case at least, succeeded.  I
wonder what Orion Pictures will come up with next: audience thumb-screws
to heighten anticipation?

Author
Mary V. Burke
Starring Jodie Foster, Anthony Hopkins, Scott Glenn, Ted Levine, et al.;
directed by Jonathan Demme.
     I had the great pleasure of attending a sneak preview of THE
SILENCE OF THE LAMBS here in Boston last night, courtesy of Premiere
magazine, and let me not mince words--it's one of the best
horror/suspense movies I've ever seen, and you should go see it the
moment it opens.  Period.
     For the benefit of those who are not familiar with the novel by
Thomas Harris on which the film is based, the plot centers around the
search for a serial killer called Buffalo Bill who has been leaving a
trail of partially flayed women's bodies.  The FBI Behavioral Science
Unit is on the case, and is hoping to enlist the aid of another serial
killer currently in custody, the brilliant psychiatrist Hannibal Lecter
(the old "Set a thief to catch a thief" tactic).  Clarice Starling, an
FBI trainee, is assigned to talk to him, and they develop an eerie sort
of partnership in which he trades his insights on Buffalo Bill for
glimpses into Clarice's soul.
     I went into this movie with very high expectations, having read the
book several times (and it is one hell of a good one), along with many
others dealing with serial killer syndrome, factual and fictional.  And
I must say that, even though I knew what was going to happen and how
everything would end, Demme's treatment was thoroughly gripping,
suspenseful, and *scary*.  There are some scenes that are rather
disturbing, albeit not terribly graphic in the sense of large amounts
of blood spraying around the room--just grim and gritty.  There are
some alterations to the story, but not really material ones; generally
it's quite faithful to the novel, and hangs together very well.  One
moment in the search that seems like a complete anticlimax proves to be
anything but that, and Demme engineers it so skillfully that you don't
know for sure until the very last instant ... I don't want to give away
any more about this bit, though.
     The performances are uniformly fine.  Jodie Foster gives us a
character who is ambitious, smart, and strong, but is still working to
gain mastery of herself, and to keep it in the company of a spiritual
vampire like Lecter.  I was a bit leery of Anthony Hopkins as Lecter,
having seen Brian Cox's portrayal in MANHUNTER (based on Harris's
previous novel, RED DRAGON), but he doesn't disappoint at all.  His
version of Lecter captures very well the creepy elegance of a brilliant
but utterly twisted mind that thrives on reaching into other people's
souls and finding where they hurt.  There are a couple of places in the
script where he lapses into cruelty laced with a crudeness that was a
little jarring for me, as this isn't quite in keeping with Harris's
portrayal of the character, but these weren't seriously detrimental.
The scenes between him and Starling are full of tension, psychological
sparring carried on through the glass or barred walls of Lecter's
cages; the places where he is imprisoned are very medieval-looking,
and while he sits quietly inside, Starling paces and prowls on the
outside, looking for a way in ... it's all very engrossing.
     I guess my only real complaint about the film would be that we
don't get to see as much of Jame [sic] Gumb, the man who is Buffalo
Bill, as I would have wished.  Part of the fascination of serial
killers is learning what the private fantasy is that makes them do what
they do, in the particular way they do it; we don't get to see very
much of Jame Gumb's world, although the glimpses we get are tantalizing
and spooky.  And I was a little bit annoyed that the last words he
speaks in the book are omitted here, as they have the effect (to my
mind, at least) of forming another of these weird bonds between killer
and captor.  But this is a minor cavil.
     To summarize, this is a generally faithful and thoroughly effective
treatment of an excellent novel, and sure to please anyone who
appreciates suspense, psychological drama, and the type of horror that
can only come from the real world.  (And by the way, there are also
some laughs in it--humor as black as you would expect under the
circumstances.)  Don't miss it.

Author
Jerry Saravia
When I first saw "The Silence of the Lambs" on Valentine's Day in 1991, I found
it chilling and intense but not much more than a sophisticated slasher film
"with a little taste." Now, in the year 2001, ten years later after its release,
I find it is far smoother and tighter than I thought. This is more than a
chilling, intense thriller - it is a psychological thriller and character study
that often resembles an unusual love story. Let me explain further. 
As the film opens, we are introduced to a young, virile woman running in the
woods, training to be an FBI agent. She is Clarice Starling (Jodie Foster), an
ambitious woman eager to study criminal psychology and behavioral science. FBI
Section Chief  Jack Crawford (Scott Glenn) wants Clarice to run a test on Dr.
Hannibal Lecter (Anthony Hopkins), a psychiatrist who also happens to be a
cannibal and is being held in a Baltimore prison surrounded by thick glass
walls. 
Crawford: "Do you spook easily Starling?"
Clarice is determined to question Dr. Lecter and decipher any knowledge he might
have about a serial killer on the loose known as Buffalo Bill aka Jame Gumm (Ted
Levine). This killer likes to skin the humps of heavyset girls and may possibly
be a transsexual. Apparently, Lecter knows him very well. 
The initial meeting of Lecter and Clarice is enough to give people goosebumps
and nightmares for weeks. We enter a cavernous prison underground surrounded by
some obscenely red lighting and red gates, as if we were entering Hell (a heavy
murmur that gets louder and louder is heard on the soundtrack). She meets Lecter
who stands motionless in his cell whispering, "Good Morning." Their conversation
is so memorable that it stands as one of the most classic introductions of evil
characters to grace the silver screen since Bela Lugosi's Dracula. Lecter
analyzes Clarice to the fullest, fully aware of her second-rate shoes, the
disguising of her West Virginia accent and knowing she would do anything to keep
away from her homely existence by going so far as to join the FBI. In this
scene, we see how Jodie Foster's Clarice works - she maintains her cool and
composure without crying, though she wants to. Then she turns the tables on
Lecter, asking if he has the temerity to look at himself and analyze his own
behavior.
 This gets to Lecter who has finally met his match in the form of an ambitious
FBI trainee, who also happens to be a woman. 
Based on Thomas Harris's novel, "Silence of the Lambs" involves and engages us
from the start, closing in on an investigation of murders in the midwest of
women found in ditches or lakes with their skins removed. It is all part of the
Buffalo Bill murder spree and Clarice needs Lecter to provide crucial details,
such as Buffalo Bill's real name and whereabouts. An exchange has to occur as
she fools Lecter into thinking he can be moved from Baltimore to a pleasant
island known as Plum Island where he can roam the beach freely "under Swat team
surveillance, of course." But the film is not just interested in grisly details
of murders or scamming jailed killers. Each passing event and sequence invites
us to see how Clarice Starling is affected and changed by them. And we also see
how she is affected by Lecter and how he gets inside her head. After their
initial meeting, Clarice walks to her car, reminded of memories of her father
and cries. 
Clarice Starling is also the focus of "The Silence of the Lambs" as we see how a
woman lives and breathes in a man's world, and how she copes with her slain
father who was a cop killed on the line of duty. We see two brief flashbacks of
her as a child, one where she is greeted by her father and another where she is
at his funeral. They pinpoint to a woman who has her emotions in check but is
unable to forget her past thanks to Lecter's intervention in her psychological
makeup. 
And how can a short, ambitious, sincere woman survive in a man's world? Several
scenes indicate that her every encounter with a man results in romantic
interest. For example, there is her initial encounter with Dr. Chilton (Anthony
Heald),  Lecter's psychiatrist, who reminds Clarice that the town of Baltimore
is fun "if you have the right guide." One entomologist asks her to go out for
"cheesburgers and beer." 
More often than not, Clarice is reminded that she is a minority. There are
several examples such as when Clarice enters an elevator of tall, imposing men.
At the mortuary where a slain victim of Buffalo Bill's is being autopsied,
Crawford tells the sheriff that certain elements of the sex crime should not be
discussed in front of Clarice. Yet she maintains her cool and shows
determination and persistence, no matter who gets in her way. It is doubly
ironic that Hannibal Lecter is the only man who shows her some level of respect.
The film is directed by Jonathan Demme ("Beloved," "Melvin and Howard") and he
has a fascinating device in the film that is also used sparingly in
"Philadelphia." He shows us mostly close-ups of his characters and shifts in
reverse angle shots by showing another character off-center. Often the
characters seem to be looking straight at us - a subjective device that would
often seem distracting is cleverly used in the film, particularly the meetings
between Clarice and Lecter. The subjectivity forces us to study their faces and
understand what they are thinking and feeling. 
The casting is impeccable. Jodie Foster is unequivocally seamless as Clarice
Starling - tender, tough, sincere, argumentative, vulnerable. She has her flaws
but shows fierce ambition and all the characters in the film know it. Anthony
Hopkins (thankfully not typecast, though he might have been) is sheer excellence
as Lecter. He has remarkable stillness and a quiet, calm voice that carries a
sense of understated malice - he has a way with words and can tell what kind of
fragrance a woman wears. More than that, he can get inside your skin and rattle
your nerves. Lecter also has a way with biting people's cheeks while listening
to Bach's "Goldberg Variations." Amazingly, Hopkins is only on screen for twenty
minutes but his presence looms large throughout. Both actors won deserved Oscars
for their roles.
There are so many memorable moments in its 118 minute running time that remain
etched in one's memory. Clarice's meetings with Lecter are all exceptionally
shot and edited. I love her story of the screaming lambs and the one lamb she
tried to save (not to mention the priceless shot of Lecter's tears after hearing
her story). The moment when Clarice shakes Crawford's hand after getting her
official FBI badge. The intricately shot scene at a building where Lecter makes
his extraordinary escape while FBI agents circle his cell. The unquestionably
suspenseful climax where Clarice hunts for Buffalo Bill in his subterranean lair
(look closely at shots of moths and swastikas). The autopsy scene of the slain
girl which is quite heartbreaking to watch, thanks to Foster's controlled yet
emotional observations. And there is so much more. 
Another exceptional aspect as to why "The Silence of the Lambs" works is because
it chooses to be uniquely disturbing without showing much gore. A film about a
cannibal and a serial killer with a predilection for skin could very well show
plenty of gore and bloody executions. Instead, director Demme implies as much as
he shows, forcing us to imagine certain unseen events. My favorite moment is
when Dr. Chilton shows Clarice a picture of what Lecter did to a helpless nurse
- a close-up of her reaction to the photo says so much more than what is
actually in the photo.   
At heart, "The Silence of the Lambs" is really about the relationship between
Lecter and Clarice, resulting in a love story of sorts between a monster and his
mate. "People will say we are in love," says Lecter. Of course, it is more of a
mutual respect for one another, not a literal love story of a sexually
attractive couple. Clarice and Lecter both test and size each other up, and
continue being personal and up close. It is only fitting that this film was
released on February 14th. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
The Phantom (The Phantom)
     The Phantom has always wanted to do a TV-style two-word review,
suitable for prominent display on a theater marquee.  So how about,
"'SILENCE' IS GOLDEN!"  Truly, the Phantom feels like Roger Ebert
already.  But in fairness, Jonathan Demme's new thriller, based on the
novel by Thomas Harris, is a knockout, better even than the Phantom
himself had hoped for.
     Good reviews are always the most difficult kind for the Phantom to
write; it's as difficult to be clever when the Phantom is praising
something as it is for him to be fair when he's casting another horrible
horror film to the wolves.  Reviewing a turkey like POPCORN was easy;
reviewing SILENCE will be much more difficult.  But let's give it a try,
starting with the script, based on Thomas Harris' excellent
psychological thriller.  Harris does psychological thrillers about as
well as anyone, and in THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS he brought back one of
his most memorable characters, Dr. Hannibal Lecter, the brilliant but
insane psychiatrist who we first met in RED DRAGON (which was also
turned into a fine, though largely overlooked, film called MANHUNTER by
the talented and stylish director of Miami Vice fame, Michael Mann).
     Dr. Lecter has the knack of getting inside of people's heads --
and also the rest of their bodies; he wasn't nicknamed "Hannibal the
Cannibal" for nothing.  Although Lecter was not the focus of RED DRAGON,
SILENCE spends most of its time exploring him and his relationship to
Clarice Starling, a young FBI trainee sent to get Lecter to help an
investigation into a series of brutal murders by someone the press has
dubbed "Buffalo Bill."  Harris' novel spent about as much time with
Lecter as it did with Buffalo Bill, and in turning it into a film,
Demme's decision to concentrate on Lecter and relegate the scenes
involving Bill to the obligatory "final confrontation" at the film's end
is an inspired one.  Adapting any novel is difficult, if only because it
involves reducing what might be a week's worth of entertainment for the
average reader to a script which can fit comfortably inside of two
hours.  But it's even more difficult when the novel spends so much time
with three very compelling characters.  Given the need to distill
Harris' novel down to its essence and yet make SILENCE more than just
another run-of-the-mill thriller, Demme chooses to use Buffalo Bill more
as a convenient excuse than as a character; although he doesn't ignore
Bill altogether, he exists as little more than the subject of Lecter and
Starling's conversations -- and the reason they keep having
conversations -- until quite near the very end of the film.
     Had Demme had lesser actors with which to work, or had Harris'
novel been less literate and more exploitative than it was, this
decision might well have backfired, since it forces a change in tone --
from exciting manhunt to scenes of static conversation -- that is risky
at best.  When Michael Mann directed MANHUNTER, he chose to make a
straightforward adaptation of Harris' RED DRAGON.  In the process, he
created a gripping, scary, and effective thriller, but at some level it
differed little from the hundreds of other thrillers that had come
before it.  In that film, an FBI investigator is recalled to help track
a serial killer because the FBI knows that he has a knack for thinking
like the sociopaths he tracks.  Harris spent more time on this theme
than did Mann, and as a consequence MANHUNTER is a much more ordinary
thriller than is SILENCE.  This is not to say that MANHUNTER isn't worth
seeing or that it's boring or predictable; on the contrary, Mann
fashioned a supremely enjoyable and stylish film from Harris' very good
source material.  But the focus of that film was very much on the hunt;
although Mann spends some time exploring what it means to be able to
think like a serial killer, the theme is largely discarded once the film
gets going and Mann gets into the heat of the chase.
     Demme, however, very nearly discards the heat of the chase in favor
of what might be called a very warped MY DINNER WITH ANDRE.  Realizing
that in Jodie Foster and Anthony Hopkins he had two exceptional actors,
Demme opts to concentrate on their relationship.  And from the very
first meeting, it's obvious that he made the right choice.  Stories
involving pretty young investigators and brutal killers are nearly as
common in the theaters as they are on television; but thrillers that put
a camera motionless in a cell and record the conversations between
someone as intense as Hannibal Lecter and someone as determined as
Clarice Starling are rare to the point of nonexistence.  It occurred to
the Phantom that not since John McNaughton's HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL
KILLER has a filmmaker had the talent and the courage to assume that his
audience wasn't full of drooling PREDATOR 2 fans (though the Phantom has
yet to meet one, he assumes that they must exist somewhere).  To do what
he did, Demme had to assume instead that there were real, thinking
people out there who would find the tension in the scenes between Lecter
and Starling as intense and scary as any standard issue "killer stalking
helpless woman through dark basement" scene.  Of course, in the end
Demme does hedge his bets a bit, but by the time the film changes its
focus to Buffalo Bill, everyone in the audience feels lucky to have been
able to spend some time with Hannibal and Clarice.
     Of course, the best script in the world won't help a film if its
actors have less range than their guns.  Fortunately, both Jodie Foster
and Anthony Hopkins give all-out performances that are exactly right for
what Demme wants to do with the film.  When the Phantom first read
Harris' novel, he didn't have clear mental pictures of either Clarice
Starling or Hannibal Lecter; now that he's seen the film, however, it
will be as difficult to picture them as anyone other than Foster and
Hopkins as it is to picture anyone other than Alec Guinness as George
Smiley when reading John Le Carre's novels.  Jodie Foster has the
toughest job of it, which is why her performance is so much more
impressive.  Starling's role throughout the story is very reactive, and
she spends much of the film providing a foil for Lecter.  But although
much of her character development is excised in the film, Foster gives
Clarice Starling real substance, and she manages to make Starling not
just sympathetic, but a real person to whom the audience has no trouble
relating.
     Anthony Hopkins, on the other hand, gives a truly brilliant and
captivating performance as Hannibal Lecter, one that is every bit as
good as Jodie Foster's; it is as much to his credit as it is to Harris'
that by the end of the film we feel we "know" Lecter and maybe even like
him a little bit.  Hopkins stares at Clarice -- and at us -- with a
hunger and an intensity that's more than a little unsettling.  As Harris
wrote the character, Lecter is supposed to be incredibly smart, fast and
cool, and Hopkins' Lecter more than lives up to Harris' description.  He
always looks to us like a coiled spring or an brilliant and
self-possessed snake, ready to strike at the first opportunity.  And
when Demme gets the camera right up into Hopkins' face, we see what
Clarice sees -- the slicked back hair, the expressionless face, the dead
and unblinking eyes -- and we feel what she feels: that perhaps the
thick, bulletproof plastic separating her from Lecter might not be as
effective as it first seems.  From the very first moments of their first
meeting, Lecter gets both Starling and the audience under his spell, and
whenever the film returns to Lecter, all thoughts of the rest of the
plot or even of any other characters melt away as we become completely
absorbed in Hopkins' performance.
     That, however, also points out a problem with the film, for as much
as we would like to linger with Lecter and Starling and learn more about
what makes each of them tick, Demme must inevitably return to what is,
after all, the film's plot.  Demme is able to pull off these shifts
between Lecter and the investigation (using Starling as the link between
them) until the film's end, at which time he becomes a prisoner of the
need to resolve everything one way or another.  As unusual as SILENCE is
as a thriller, it is ultimately a mass-market Hollywood film -- once all
is said and done, SILENCE is not another HENRY.  But the need to return
to Buffalo Bill and to provide the film with a satisfactory resolution
is but a minor problem, and one that we only notice because the film up
until that point had been so exceptional.  In MANHUNTER, such resolution
seemed perfectly in character, since the film is really about a manhunt;
but in SILENCE, the 20 or 30 minutes that Demme needs to force-feed us
the shaky plot points and fairly incredible coincidences and
contrivances necessary to end the film seems like time stolen from the
wonderful, intriguing, and startling Hannibal Lecter -- and from Anthony
Hopkins' show-stopping performance.
     But that is truly a minor nit to pick.  On the whole, SILENCE
succeeds both as an adaptation of a well-known and widely-read novel and
as a film in its own right.  In fact, it's not clear to the Phantom who
will enjoy SILENCE more: people who have read the novel or people who
haven't.  Although the former may enjoy the last half of the film more
than the latter -- if only because they won't have to rely on the
overly-rushed explanations and the too-brief character sketch of Buffalo
Bill -- they will also be at a disadvantage in knowing what to expect
from Dr. Lecter.  People who see the film first will be going in cold
and will be able to enjoy both Hopkins' and Foster's performances
without any preconceived ideas or expectations.  In any event, at the
performance the Phantom attended, it seemed that none of the seven or
eight hundred people in the audience was disappointed with the film, and
more than a few gave it a round of applause as the credits rolled.  The
Phantom himself looks forward to seeing it again in the coming weeks; as
much as he enjoyed Harris' novel, he thinks he enjoyed Hopkins'
performance even more.
     What more is there to say?  The film is simply excellent and well
worth seeing.  For phans who haven't yet read Harris' novel, the Phantom
recommends that they first see the film, then wait a while and give the
novel a try.  But if you've already read the novel, see the film anyway,
if only to enjoy the film's beautiful and stylish look, Demme's tight
and effective direction, and of course Foster and Hopkins' stellar
performances.  SILENCE is a film to be savored, a true rarity: an "A"
picture in a "B" movie genre.

Author
Chad Polenz
The Silence Of The Lambs
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1991, R, 118 minutes [1 hour, 58 minutes]
[mystery/thriller]
Starring: Jodie Foster (Clarice Starling), Anthony Hopkins (Dr. Hannibal
Lector), Scott Glenn (Jack Crawford), written by Ted Tally, produced by
Edward Saxon, Kenneth Utt, Ron Bozman, directed by Jonathan Demme, based on
the novel by Thomas Harris.
There have been a lot of mystery movies over the years, but none so grim and
calculated as "The Silence Of The Lambs." This is one of the most suspenseful
films I've ever seen, as we are placed into the investigators' shoes and try
to put the pieces together. The film also adds a strange, but powerful
element of taking us inside the mind of one psychopath to study another. The
fact such difficult storytelling devices are used as well as they are here is
a sign of genius.
Jodie Foster stars as Clarice Starling, a potential FBI agent who is about
to complete her training. Because of her impressive records she is called in
to help out on the case of serial killer known as "Buffalo Bill." Her
superior, Jack Crawford (Glenn), informs her of the facts surrounding the
case, and right from the get-go it seems like a scary and dangerous project.
But the film does not have a straight "thriller" mood to it, its hook is its
off-camera graphicness. Just hearing what Buffalo Bill has done establishes
everything. Not only does this create a great desire for justice, but it also
makes for a subtle Gothic mood.
Starling is sent to interview the infamous Dr. Hannibal Lector (Hopkins), a
psychiatrist who has a fetish for cannibalism. The way Hopkins portrays him
is very frightening because it is so believable. The atmosphere itself adds
to the drama, as we are just as afraid of him as Clarice is. Lector analyzes
the case and sends Clarice away with hints and clues. He is purposely making
her do more work than she has to do just to experiment with her mind.
Most of the film involves detailed detective work by Starling and the FBI.
We do meet the killer, but he does not become a vital character because he
isn't nearly as cunning or vile as Lector. It's interesting to watch Starling
track down clues and sources, and most of those on slim leads and hunches. 
Starling thinks Lector knows who Buffalo Bill is, but in order to get him to
talk she must tell him about her own life. Lector gets inside her mind by
analyzing all the details of her life. If anything, the film works as a great
character study and terrific interaction between these two actors and their
characters.
Although the film had been a great drama and mystery, the actual ending tops
it off and and defines the genre of "thriller." Of course justice is
ultimately served in the end, but perhaps something even worse than Buffalo
Bill happens...
"The Silence Of The Lambs" works so well because of its mood factor alone.
Films that can be this emotional, disturbing, and exciting by using typical
mainstream mystery elements don't come along everyday. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz
