Title
Review for Fled (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Kevin Hooks
Writer: Preston A. Whitmore II
Starring: Laurence Fishburne, Stephen Baldwin, Will Patton, Salma Hayek,
Robert John Burke, Robert Hooks, Victor Rivers, David Dukes, Brittney
Powell, Bill Belamy, Ru Paul
What's the coolest thing about these little "Free Weekends" of premium
channels like "HBO," "Cinemax," and all those other ones is that you get
to see (usually) uncut films for free that you would never pay more than
a quarter to see.  I watched "Fled" mainly because I knew it wouldn't be
great at all, but might offer some kind of entertainment.  I was sorta
right.
"Fled" is basically your run-of-the-mill cheapo action pic which
features two guys feuding with one another and running from the law and
the mafia (either italian, russian, or cuban - this time it's the
latter), using cliches from films you've seen way before and liked way
better, and ends in the two guys becoming friends at the end after
defeating the main villain, although being belligerent friends.  Yes, I
told you the whole story, but you've seen it before anyway.
What makes "Fled" just a little bit different is that it kind of
embraces the cliches it uses.  Like "Scream" it rips off films, and just
gets off on that, as one of the two protagonists says "Didn't you see
[place film name here]?" after each rip-off.  But, of course, there's no
reason for this other than to be cute and kinda witty, which it is, but
that doesn't mean it's a good film.  But we do get references from "The
Fugitive" to "Deliverance," and even a pretty funny final reference
which is even funnier if you know the filmography of Fishburne.
In fact, the plot of "Fled," at least in the first half hour or so, is
inescapibly reminiscent of the film classic "The Defiant Ones," where
Tony Curtis and Sidney Poitier were escaped convicts handcuffed
together.  The two guys in this are, again, black and white, and are
played by the suave Laurence Fishburne (named Piper) and the kinda dorky
but trying to be cool twentieth Baldwin brother, Stephen (named Dodge -
love these names), and are again escaped convicts, but unfortunately are
de-chained about 40 minutes or so in the film, right about the time the
film becomes redundant and boring.
As the film goes on, we learn of conspiracies on top of conspiracies on
top of more conspiracies, as well as some police corruption, and a
couple cops connection to the cuban mafia.  The film tries to unfold in
a cool manner, with twists in the story coming about because all the
truth is witheld at first, but they instead feel cheap instead of great
like they did in, say, "L.A. Confidential" (why am I mentioning this
film in THIS review?!).  For instance: we never know why Dodge is in,
but we find out he's a computer hacker, and he hacked 25 million bucks
from some people who want it back.  Funny: I thought Stephen Baldwin
looked like a hacker too!
In these kinds of films, we have to get the obligatory chicks for each
of these guys, and we do: one who is not really necessary but
interestingly played, and one who is boring but at leasy she's topless. 
Salma Hayek (who reportedly hated doing the nudity in "Desperado") plays
the former, and, as I said, does it pretty well, although she's not
really essential or anything.  And the second one (played by Brittney
Powel) is even less essential, needed just for some nudity.
The film has lots of action sequences, which range from fun to boring
and redundant, as it is a chase movie (yea).  Director Kevin Hooks
("Passenger 57") creates every action scene to be a shock, but I swear
you can smell each one coming 10 minutes away.  There's one of these
every couple minutes, and the final one, which is small compared to all
the others, seems extremely anti-climactic.  They're not very well done
either, never realy garnering any excitement, but occasionally prompting
a snicker.  John Woo Hooks is not.
Fishburne does give a pretty commanding performance though (big shock
there), while Baldwin sinckers occasionally, but never really garners
any likability for his role.  I mean, what's he doing playing a hacker? 
Hayek is pretty okay, while the other chick is boring and pretty un-sexy
for a stripper (another fault: a hacker dating a stripper).  Will Patton
is pretty good though, even though he has way too many horrific lines
("when you spit into the wind...it may come back!" or something like
that).  And we get some distracting cameos from Bill Belamy and Ru Paul,
I guess added for cuteness as well.
Bottom line: "Fled" is semi-entertaining, and won't you to watch it, but
it's too boring to pay to see.  But even if it's for free, you still
have to waste about an hour and a half of your life watching it.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Laurence Fishburne, Stephen Baldwin, Salma Hayek, Will Patton, 
      Robert John Burke, Victor Rivers, Robert Hooks, David Dukes, 
      Brittney Powell
Director: Kevin Hooks
Producer: Frank Mancuso Jr.
Screenplay: Preston A. Whitmore 2d.
Cinematography: Matthew F. Leonetti
Music: Graeme Revell
U.S. Distributor: MGM/UA
     There's nothing particularly deep or challenging about this movie.  
The title, FLED, says it all.  For most of its one-hundred minute 
running length, this is one chase after another.  When the film keeps 
moving, and doesn't dwell on things like character development or plot 
plausibility, it offers a certain minimum entertainment value.  
Unfortunately, there are lulls when attempts are made at exposition, 
and, during those periods, FLED becomes unbearably dull, not to mention 
incredibly stupid.
     Actually, Kevin Hooks' energetic direction, coupled with Laurence 
Fishburne's commanding presence, makes this picture more watchable than 
it has a right to be.  Aside from occasional, clever quips (such as 
tongue-in-cheek references to THE FUGITIVE and Fishburne's Oscar-
nominated performance in WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT), there's nothing 
remarkable about the creaky script, which does everything it possibly 
can to keep the two leads on the run from good guys, bad guys, and 
everyone in between.  Logic and intelligence have little part in these 
proceedings.
     Since the film opens with a black guy, Piper (Fishburne), and a 
white guy, Dodge (Stephen Baldwin), chained together and on the run, 
it's reasonable to connect FLED with Stanley Kramer's 1958 feature, THE 
DEFIANT ONES, which starred Tony Curtis and Sidney Poitier.  The 
similarities are purely superficial, however.  THE DEFIANT ONES was a 
multi-layered film; FLED is pure escapism with nothing under the 
surface.  It's stock bits of LETHAL WEAPON, THE FUGITIVE, and 48 HOURS 
rolled into one.
     Piper and Dodge are working on a Georgia prison work gang when all 
hell breaks loose.  A prisoner gets a gun and starts shooting, killing 
guards and inmates indiscriminately.  Piper and Dodge, who are chained 
together, escape.  Apparently, however, someone on the outside has 
orchestrated their break-out.  Dodge, a top hacker, possesses a computer 
disk containing incriminating information about a major figure in the 
Cuban mob.  Now everyone wants Dodge and his disk, including the mob's 
class-A hitman, the police, and crooked federal agents.  (Bad Feds again 
-- haven't these guys been the villains in every other movie this 
summer?)  During the course of the flight for life, the fugitives are 
helped by Dodge's exotic dancer girlfriend (Brittney Powell) and a 
pretty divorcee (Salma Hayek) who shows interest in Piper.
     Stephen Baldwin, one of the interchangeable acting Baldwin 
brothers, is adequate, and Salma Hayek (DESPERADO) is attractive, but 
FLED's attention magnet is Fishburne.  A consummate professional, he has 
never turned in a sub-par performance, regardless of the quality (or 
lack thereof) of his role.  He's a good friend of Hooks', which explains 
his presence here, but those who sit through this movie won't care why 
he appears -- they'll just be glad he does.  Otherwise, enduring the 
film would be far more difficult.
     There's not much else to be said about FLED.  It's not a complete 
entertainment wasteland, but this is definitely not the time of year to 
distribute such a routine, unspectacular action feature.  It probably 
would have played better against less imposing competition.  So, 
although FLED hints at the promise of its director, who previously
made PASSENGER 57, it's not the kind of picture that will get 
people racing to theaters.  When the movie's over, you're likely to
be left feeling that, despite all the running around, you really 
haven't gotten anywhere.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
W. Graves
I did exactly what the title suggests when this film ended, but for a good 
reason.  Is it me, or is the "disk" plot getting extremely tiresome?  I 
literally shook my head when the story turned out to be just like the dreary 
disk-chasing story lines of "Eraser" and "Mission:Impossible."  When disks are 
brought into the picture, it's useless to chase someone that can just copy a 
1.4 meg floppy in seconds or send it out to thousands of internet users' E-mail 
boxes....don't you think?  It's not the 80's anymore, and this plot needs to 
die with the decade.  Period.  The movie actually had potential, and Baldwin 
was entertaining, but the script should have been modified for 1996.  I thought 
at first that it may have been a cheap "Fugitive" rip-off, but Baldwin's 
character made a comment about Harrison Ford's escape tactics in the film, and 
that was humorous enough to end that idea.  The action sequences were awesome, 
especially the motorcycle chase scene during the climax of the film.  These I 
enjoyed, and most of the acting as well.  The theory that the action takes over 
when the plot lacks, ie Twister, couldn't be applied here because it wasn't 
fast enough to be a summer blockbuster, and the plot was a
typical disk-chasing shoot-em-up.  Hollywood: out with the old writers and in 
with the new generation...and I'll be the first to volunteer.  The story 
follows a fugitive, Baldwin, that hacked into and transferred money from a 
company which turns out to be the Cuban mafia.  He transfers vital data onto a 
floppy, which becomes the hot item needed to nail the head of the 
company with all the necessary charges.  After all the testimony hopefuls 
against the head of the mafia are killed, a fake chance for an escape is setup 
in order to get Baldwin to run....while he is cuffed to another person, 
Fishburne, he thinks is a fellow fugitive.  This is all in hopes that Baldwin 
will take them to the last alternative, the disk, which he has left with a 
friend.  The rest is predictable.  For myself, it  was worth seeing this for 
Salma Hayek alone.  Other than that, wait the storm out.  There will be plenty 
of clear skies for the drive to the video store.
AS SEEN AT: http://www.txdirect.net/users/aaron/toad/movie.html
The ALTERNATIVE page.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Laurence Fishburne, Stephen Baldwin, Salma Hayek, Will Patton,
Robert John Burke, Victor Rivers, Robert Hooks, David Dukes, Brittney
Powell Director: Kevin Hooks Screenplay: Preston A. Whitmore 2d.
I don't know about you, but if two convicts (Fishburne and Baldwin),
handcuffed to each other jumped into my car, and ordered me to take them
home at gun point, I'd be wetting my pants. However, we have to hand it
to Salma Hayek for handling the situation very calmly, before
nonchalantly staring them in the eye and agreeing to their demands with
only the slightest of fuss. By the end of the short trip home, she has
these lawless men carrying groceries into her house, politely asking for
a shower in her bathroom, and wearing her ex-husband's baggy clothes.
What next? A marriage proposal?
That's right, a marriage proposal. Except the exchange of wedding vows
is between our two escaped convicts\heroes. It's an unofficial wedding,
with no guests except the police, and the cuffs symbolize the wedding
bands. There is no one to witness this binding contract except for God,
but who cares about the finer details when 5 million dollars is
involved. So this is vaguely how the vows go from memory.
'You see these chains, it means we're married.' Fishburne.
'Oh, yeah.' Baldwin.
'Yeah. For Better or worse. In sickness and in health. So you better do
what I say or I'll hit you.' Fisburne.
Baldwin punches Fishburne. Fishburne punches Baldwin back harder.
'Please don't hit me.' Baldwin.
'Why not?' Fishburne.
'Because I've got five million, and I'll give you one million.' Baldwin.
'Okay, stop hitting me. I'll give you half. It's settled then.' Baldwin.
'Till death do us part.' Fishburne punches Baldwin. 'Now it's settled.'
Sigh. They sure don't make romantic comedies like they use to.

Author
David N. Butterworth
FLED is a composite of so many other, better movies that watching it is
like sitting through a montage of clips at the Oscars.  You know, the kind
they slap together to honor the cinematographer or costume designer or
actor of the moment.  While not an altogether unsatisfying experience, it
leaves the viewer yearning to see the originals instead.
The obvious video rental alternative in this case is Stanley Kramer's 1958
classic THE DEFIANT ONES, which starred Sidney Poitier and Tony Curtis as
black 'n' white chain gang escapees on the lam in the beautiful South.
Manacled together, Curtis and Poitier were a marriage made in Hollywood
heaven, with both actors receiving Academy Award nominations for their
pains.
This time out, the monochromatic stars are Laurence Fishburne and Stephen
Baldwin.  After escaping from a Georgia prison work detail, convicts Piper
(Fishburne) and Dodge (Baldwin) are hounded by a no-nonsense, by-the-books
U.S. Marshall (Robert John Burke), a local county sheriff (Will Patton),
and the mob (nameless, collarless toughs dressed in black) as they race to
recover an incriminating computer disk that could bring down the Cuban
mafia.
As a fast-paced actioner, FLED is competent but little more than routine.
Director Kevin Hooks seems to have seen a few too many John Woo movies, as
he strives for the same kind of explosive action sequences--in a hotel
room, in a massage parlor, in a domed amphitheater--with bullets exploding
through walls, pillows and people with ballistic artistry.  It might be
intended as homage but, like everything else about FLED, it only whets your
appetite for the real McCoy.
As a snappy, rough-and-tumble buddy flick, Hooks' film isn't exactly
explosive in the chemistry department.  Larry Fishburne chained to all four
Baldwin brothers in the "land of CNN and co'cola" ... now THAT would have
been a movie to talk about!
As it is, the film's attempts at humor are largely confined to the running
gag of Dodge's constant movie references: "Didn't you see 'The Fugitive'?"
he observes, for example, when Piper's instinct is to head for the state
line.  "The first thing Tommy Lee Jones did was to set up road blocks along
the border."  Subsequent self-referential allusions seemed to please the
captive audience but aren't any wittier.
Salma Hayek (DESPERADO) puts in an untaxing appearance as a lonely divorcee
who appears to welcome the intrusion of two estranged fugitives into her
house.  In fact, she gives Piper her phone number before he can even get
his 'cuffs off!
Executive Producer and Writer (always a bad sign) Preston A. Whitmore, II's
screenplay is a hodgepodge of themes and ideas borrowed--to be kind--from
THE FUGITIVE, "48 HOURS, MIDNIGHT RUN, and the LETHAL WEAPON series to name
but a few.  As a result, FLED is a movie whose whole is significantly less
than the sum of its parts.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Director Kevin Hooks's FLED is a fast action movie that appears to
be about two convicts on the lam, but is actually a highly contrived
and ridiculous conspiracy on top of conspiracy plot.  This is one of
the those movies that requires you to check your brain in the lobby.
Don't even try to count the implausibilities in Preston Whitmore's
script.
     What saves the film is two fine pieces of acting by its stars,
Laurence Fishburne as Piper and Stephen Baldwin as Luke Dodge plus the
excellent performance by Wil Patton as the southern good old boy and
smartest cop of all Matthew Gibson.  FLED is needlessly violent as
well, but all of this notwithstanding, I liked the show as did the
audience.  A fast paced bit of entertainment that will make you laugh,
sometimes when you are not supposed to, and will pump up your
adrenaline.
     As the show starts, a witness who is to testify against Frank
Mantajano, the head of the Cuban Mafia, is killed thus causing the
Senate investigating committee to be without its star witness.  The
show quickly shifts to a chain gang in Georgia where new convict Dodge
and old hand Piper escape while chained to each other's wrists.  Soon
U. S. Marshall Schiller appears out of nowhere and kills another
escapee with his hands up trying to surrender.  It seems there are big
conspiracies brewing, and Schiller, among others, is involved.  Officer
Gibson is the only one that can see the obvious so he follows the
"good" guys and the bad.
     The reason for all of the chasing is that Dodge hacked into the
computer of Brigantine International.  This is okay because he
determined that the company was greedy.  Moreover he stole $25,000,000
and gave $20,000,000 of it to charity.  He explains all of this to
Piper and tells him, "On the Internet my code name is CyberThug."
     The show is quite funny.  One small thing that is fun is that when
they get in a jam, one will say to the other, "didn't you see" and then
name some movie title as if all knowledge is found in some movie.
Among movies so referenced were: THE GODFATHER, DELIVERANCE, THE
FUGITIVE, and SHAFT.
     My favorite character is the wise but unassuming Officer Gibson,
whose accent is so thick you could cut it with a knife.  He reminded me
a lot of the pregnant lead detective in FARGO.  Gibson advises
Schiller, "I think you are just spitting in the wind, and you know what
they say about spitting in the wind.  It may blow back in your face."
     The chemistry between the two leads is quite good.  I think
Laurence Fishburne is a great talent, and it showed here.  Without him,
I don't think they would of had a show, but they do have him and so for
me it worked.
     Which scene did the audience like the least?  Baldwin's love
making scene! It is so overdone and with such cliches, i.e., done in
front of a roaring fire, that they were laughing at it, and it is not
supposed to be funny.  When the Piper and his girlfriend, Cora, well
played by Salma Hayek, have an erotic bread kneading scene, it works
much better.
     Let me not dwell on this implausibility thing, and rather than get
into the intricate conspiracy maze, let me give two small examples.  If
you were being chased by people with big guns and helicopters while you
were chained to a large man who was running with you, would you keep
trying to knock him out and thereby run the risk of having to run while
dragging him?  Also, why is all the key data stored one little floppy
and without any duplicate?  I could go on, but I will not.  I was able
to put my brain in neutral so perhaps you will be able to as well, and
this stuff not bother you.
     FLED runs a little over an hour and a half.  It will certainly be
an R for sex, nudity, and most of all gory violence of the type where
many people die with large bullet holes and blood spurting everywhere.
It would be probably be okay for teenagers if they are mature.  I hated
the story, but I had a good time, laughed some, and liked the acting,
except for pathetic overacting by Schiller and the whole Cuban Mafia
crowd, so I am giving it a thumbs up and rating it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
