Title
Review for Bai fa mo nu zhuan II (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
THE BRIDE WITH WHITE HAIR 2 (Bai fa mo nu zhuan II)
Hong Kong. 1993. Director/Screenplay - David Wu, Producer - Ronnie Yu. 
Production Company - Mandarin Films.
Sunny Chun (Fung Chun Kit), Brigitte Lin (Lien Ni Chang), Joey Memg 
(Lyre), Christy Chung (Ling Moon Yee), Leslie Cheung (Cho Yi Hang), Ruth 
Winona Tao (Chen Yuen Yuen)
Plot: After her betrayal by Cho Yi Hang, the white-haired witch Lien Ni 
Chang has obtained revenge by slaughtering her way through all of the 
Eight Clans. She abducts Lyre, the bride of Fung Chun Kit, the last 
surviving member of the Wu Tang Clan, on their wedding night and takes 
her to her castle of men-hating warrior women. As Kit gathers a ragtag 
fighting force to storm her castle, Lien Ni Chang drugs Lyre so she will 
hate and kill Kit.
As Hong Kong's Wu Xia Pan (fantastic martial arts/swordplay) cycle went, 
Ronnie Yu's `The Bride with White Hair' (1993) was a fairly slapdash 
effort, directed with some style but also undeniably uneven. With 
director Yu having departed for the West and films like`Warriors of 
Virtue' (1997) and `Bride of Chucky' (1998), the reins of this sequel 
have been turned over to David Wu who actually makes the sequel a far 
more satisfying effort than its predecessor was.
The plot is definitely slight (even as Wu Xia Pan goes), but director Wu 
crafts it all with a much more pleasing roundedness. The heroism and 
swordplay all comes marvellously posed. And with the granny and tomboy 
warrior characters there comes a delightful undertow of comedy that was 
lacking in the more sombre original. The film takes awhile to build a 
full head of steam but once it gets underway into the familiar wild and 
crazy mid-air sword battles and impossible martial arts flips it is a 
good deal of fun. Wu does overdose with a little too much in the way of 
arty slow-motion camerawork but otherwise the film is quite satisfying.

