Title
Review for B*A*P*S (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Frank Ochieng
starring: Halle Berry, Natalie Desselle, Martin Landau, Ian Richardson
directed by: Robert Townsend
Actor-director-writer Robert Townsend first made a big splash with his
lampoon hit HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE several years back. Of course this film
showcased satirical bits about how Hollywood has ridiculously portrayed
black folks in Tinseltown over the decades. You name it and Townsend
cleverly spoofed it: black pimps, hookers, drug 
addicts, gang members, etc. HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE was a breakthrough hit
because...well, it was funny, revealing, and sadly true. Now with
Townsend's latest film B.A.P.S, one wonders whether or not Townsend got
the message of his own treasured HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE 
because BAPS (black American princesses) looks like it stems from one of
those sorrowful "SHUFFLE" skits. Halle Berry and Natalie Desselle ("SET
IT OFF") play two black Southern girlfriends who travel to California in
order to appear in a music video. What appears so unusual about these
boisterous black "soul sisters" is that they are so loud and obnoxious
in their gigantic blonde wigs, gold teeth, five inch finger-
nails, and tight-fitting clothing that one would think these two fashion
delinquents mugged RuPaul on the way to their audition. Because of some
rather awkward circumstances, the two fearless fashion plates end up
staying with a dying wealthy white millionaire (Martin Landau) and his
stuffy and sensible butler (Ian Richardson) only to start enjoying the
plush life that these two "fish-out-of-water" never experienced back in
Decatur, Georgia. Soon the film resorts to the degrading trials 
and tribulations by having these two sassy sweethearts "conform" within
the realm of wealth and its wonder. Who will get their comeuppance?
   Will it be the B.A.P.S or the rich establishment that judges them?
Better yet, maybe these Georgia gals can bring some understanding and
insight to the folks outside their world. Or maybe I should begin by
proclaiming BAPS as the first major flop of the 1997 movie season?
B.A.P.S is an insufferable, hackeyed embarassment of a movie. Its 
vapid approach to showing these loud uninteresting dressed-up dimwit
dolls in this wasted comedy of errors is too much to say the least.
Halle Berry's movie career hasn't exactly been fireworks as of lately 
(witness her in the lame RICH MAN'S WIFE for example) and Natalie
Desselle has the dubious task (besides being in this movie) as
portraying the rotund and ridiculous BAP, especially in comparison to
Berry's svelte 
self. And one has to wonder why in the world is Academy Award winning
Martin Landau doing in such a drawback of a movie? He simply stands
around looking like a fossil who recently escaped from the local museum
archive. And I'm sure BAPS is a long haul from the coveted halls of the
BBC for Ian Richardson. The only thing Townsend accomplished by
assembling B.A.P.S was to show that he had a big budget to work with,
hence the casting of Landau and Richardson. Otherwise, this film has no
direction or redeeming 
qualities other than being offensive, aimless, and having its young
black female leads all dressed up in silly garb with no place to go. 
But there is a place to go---out the exit doors! B.A.P.S---Beware of
Asinine 
Picture that Stinks!!!
E-mail:  qnfr98a@prodigy.com
Website:  http://www.vgt.com/atmovies.html

Author
Jamie Peck
New Line / 1:30 / 1997 / PG-13 (language, crude humor, big hair)
Cast: Halle Berry; Martin Landau; Natalie Desselle; Ian Richardson; Jonathan 
Fried; Luigi Amodeo; Troy Beyer 
Director: Robert Townsend 
Screenplay: Troy Beyer 
A fish-out-of-water movie where the fish have bigger fingernails than Barbra 
Streisand herself, "B.A.P.S." offers up some pretty funny moments before 
self-destructing in its second half. What starts out as a sly, nasty comedy 
takes its story a little too seriously, and serves up a earnest ending 
oozing with false sentiment. It's a good thing "B.A.P.S." has a solid 
comedic team in stars Halle Berry ("Executive Decision," "The Rich Man's 
Wife") and Natalie Desselle ("Set It Off"), or the final stretch of this 
movie would be near intolerable. 
Berry and Desselle are respectively cast as homegirls Nisi and Mickey, two 
greasy spoon waitresses from Decatur, Georgia, who have big ideas and bigger 
hair -- not to mention the gold teeth and unsightly wardrobe. After learning 
that MTV is looking for the "Video Dance Girl of the Year," and that the 
winner will be awarded $10,000, the dynamically-dressed and -tressed duo 
drop everything and catch a flight to Los Angeles. After their dreams are 
shattered when they lose the contest, a chauffeur takes them to a swank 
Beverly Hills mansion, where a plan is hatched. The estate's owner, Mr. 
Blakemore (Martin Landau, here perhaps to pick up a paycheck?), is 
terminally ill, and his nephew (Jonathan Fried) offers Nisi the same amount 
of cash to stick around for a week and impersonate the granddaughter of his 
long lost love, hoping to lift the old man's spirits during his final days. 
No bonus points for guessing Nisi and Mickey are going to reform Blakemore 
and his home with their sassy, snappy ways -- that development is 
telegraphed from the movie's get-go. Still, the predictability wouldn't have 
mattered as long as "B.A.P.S." understands it's a spoof first and foremost. 
Unfortunately, the plot, as scant as it is, turns into something solemn, 
throwing silliness out the window for dumb twists and a finale that actually 
asks us to emote. "B.A.P.S.," which stands for black American princesses, is 
much more successful when it stays far away from fairy tale territory. 
There are quite a few good moments to be salvaged from the eventual mess, 
though. Nisi and Mickey's arrival into high society is amusing, as are their 
misadventures with his crusty, no-nonsense English butler (is there any 
other kind?) Manly, a character foil played marvelously by Ian Richardson. 
Even when the going gets tough, the on-target acting by Berry and Desselle 
is pleasant enough to keep you from dozing off. "B.A.P.S." ain't quite 
C.R.A.P. (oh, come on -- I couldn't resist), but thanks to confused 
storytelling, it comes a little too close to banality. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
James Berardinelli
     In his last film, 1993's THE METEOR MAN, director Robert Townsend 
(THE FIVE HEARTBEATS) simultaneously paid homage to and satirized comic 
book superheroes.  This time out, he's attempting to do much the same 
thing with fairy tales.  Or, more precisely, with one fairy tale -- that 
of "Cinderella."  Only here, instead of glass slippers, horse-drawn 
carriages, and prince charming, we have stiletto heels, Rolls Royces, 
and a genial, terminally ill gent played by Oscar winner Martin Landau.
     B.A.P.S. (which stands for "black American princesses") is a 
lightweight, minimally entertaining piece which represents a marginal 
improvement over THE METEOR MAN.  The film is severely flawed (due 
primarily to a shocking lack of imagination and creativity), but it is 
more watchable than this year's other would-be modern-day fairy tale, 
Fran Drescher's awful THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST.  In B.A.P.S., at 
least some of the jokes are funny and the serious moments aren't 
galling.
     The premise of this film is, as you might expect, rather thin.  The 
main characters are two young black women of little note whose dreams 
are wasting away in their home town of Decatur, Georgia.  Nisi (Halle 
Berry with blonde hair and gold-capped teeth) and Mickey (newcomer 
Natalie Desselle) hope one day to be able to open a combined beauty 
salon/restaurant, but, in order to do so, they need a lot of money.  So, 
when they spy an ad for the "Video Dance Girl of the World" contest 
(first prize: $10,000), they ditch their do-nothing boyfriends and hop 
on a plane to L.A.  But, although they lose the contest, they catch the 
eyes of a couple of con men who offer them $10,000 plus room and board 
in an East Beverly Hills mansion if they'll be nice to dying Mr. 
Blakemore (Martin Landau).  The butler, a crusty British type named 
Manley (Ian Richardson) is suspicious of them, and watches their every 
move like a hawk.
     While I realize that the plot of B.A.P.S. is designed as nothing 
more than a frame for jokes and gags, it still annoys me when any film 
proceeds along such dull and predictable lines.  Would it have been that 
difficult to inject something new or moderately adventurous into the 
film?  Instead, what we get is a double variation of the fish out of 
water scenario folded into the "Cinderella" envelope.  While Nisi and 
Mickey struggle to find their footing in the aristocratic world of 
Beverly Hills (there's an obligatory bidet scene that's supposed to be a 
lot funnier than it actually is), butler Manley learns to let down his 
hair.  We've seen it all before.
     At least the cast is mostly solid.  Martin Landau's abilities are 
sorely wasted here, but the other three principals are used to good 
effect.  Halle Berry, despite the distracting hair color, is her usual 
affable self, making Nisi a great deal more likable than she probably 
was on paper.  Ian Richardson, the terrific British actor whose career 
role was that of the deliciously despicable Francis Urquhart in three 
mini-series (HOUSE OF CARDS, TO PLAY THE KING, and THE FINAL CUT), is 
perfectly cast as the snobbish butler.  The humor in the Manley-goes-
shopping-for-rap-CDs is due entirely to Richardson's no-nonsense 
performance.  Finally, there's first-timer Natalie Desselle, who has the 
comic energy and physical presence of a young Nell Carter.  
     Townsend elected to shoot the entire film using a soft focus 
technique that creates an omnipresent glow.  While this emphasizes the 
fairy tale quality of the story, it does little to hide the deficiencies 
of Troy Beyer's flimsy script.  An interesting cast is only half the 
battle, and, from the moment he chose such a derivative screenplay, the 
director lost the other half.  The best Townsend can do with B.A.P.S. is 
go for cheap, easy laughs (the aforementioned bidet scene being a good 
example of this).  Paying movie-goers deserve more, especially from 
someone who has previously shown signs of genuine comic aptitude. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
