Title
Review for Crossworlds (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Tim Voon
Directed by Krishna Rao Cast: Rutger Hauer, Josh Charles, Stuart Wilson
(II), Andrea Roth
On occasion I have a strange urge to watch a B-Grade science fiction
thriller which makes a quicker entrance onto a video rental shelf, than
one can exit the cinema. Crossworlds is no exception to the rest of the
dime a dozen killer robot, mad alien, time travelling flicks that
already swamp the Sci-Fi section at your local video store. If you look
at what's available, one begins to realise that Sci-Fi movies are either
exceptionally good like Star Wars, Star Trek, or exceptionally bad like
Crossworlds. There doesn't appear to be any middle ground.
What begins as an interesting, though not original concept for a movie
plummets to the ordinary and mundane within minutes. The movie is based
on the theory that there are several dimensions to our universe, and if
one has the key, one can travel through space and time. This idea will
not be too unfamiliar for anyone who watches the weekly episodes of
"Sliders". So the villains who threaten earth on this occasion are known
as "Warlords". They have already conquered several other dimensions, and
have their greedy eyes on puny earth. The catch is that they need the
key, which comes in the form of a gem and a staff.
We are thus introduced to the guardians of the key. Rutger Hauer of
"Blade Runner", and Josh Charles of "Threesome" and Andrea Roth of
"Robocop" the series. Unfortunately, this threesome don't quite hit the
right notes in bed with their perpetual arguments, bickering and
indecision. However, the real disappointment comes at the hands of the
director himself. His lack of imagination suggests that the way to cross
to another dimension is to stamp your feet on the ground, wait for some
wind to blow across your face, and when it stops, turn around and you
have just crossed worlds. Somehow, I think I would have better luck if I
sprinkled a bag full of Pixie dust over myself, before following the
second star to my right, then going straight ahead. "I can fly, I can
fly, I can fly."

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1996. Director - Krishna Rao, Screenplay - Krishna & Raman Rao, 
Producers - Rupert Harvey & Lloyd Segan, Photography - Christopher 
Walling, Music - Christophe Beck, Visual Effects Supervisor - Wendy 
Grossberg, Visual Effects - Todd-AO Digital Images (Supervisor - Brian 
Jennings), Digital Effects - Digital Drama Inc (3D Animation Supervisor 
- Mark J. Smith) & Pure Light Images Inc (Supervisor - Mike Fernster), 
Digital Visual Effects - Shockwave Entertainment Inc (Supervisor - Jody 
Levine), Mechanical Effects Supervisor - Frank Ceglia, Production Design 
- Aaron Osborne. Production Company - Trimark Pictures.
Josh Charles (Joe Talbot), Rutger Hauer (A.T.), Andrea Roth (Laura), 
Stuart Wilson (Ferris), Perry Anzilotti (Rebo), Jack Black (Steve), 
Richard McGregor (Stu), Ellen Geer (Mrs Talbot)
Plot: After meeting a beautiful girl at a party, average business 
student Joe Talbot is suddenly dragged into aiding a resistance movement 
trying to prevent an invading warlord who is intent on conquering a 
multiverse of alternate realities. Joe becomes a key player in the 
struggle when it is discovered that a crystal left by his father is 
really a valuable artifact capable of opening doorways between worlds.
`Crossworlds' from the face-value look of it seems to be nothing more 
than another direct-to-video action film but instead confounds 
expectation to become a surprisingly worthwhile effort. Director Krishna 
Rao takes a newly familiar theme - parallel world hopping - one that has 
been slaughtered in the most unimaginative way possible by tv's 
`Sliders' - but conducts it in an original and interesting way. Straight 
into the film one's attention is immediately captured by a dizzying 
series of spins - hero Charles meets a beautiful girl at a party who 
happens to know his name; wakes to find her in his bedroom sitting over 
him with a knife and runs only to open his bedroom door and find he is 
looking out across a desert plain with an approaching rider; they are 
pursued and shot at with still no idea what is meant to be happening; 
seek refuge with Rutger Hauer at a seedy motel where an ordinary motel 
room mysteriously opens into a building the size of an airplane hangar; 
followed by a subtle attempt by villain Stuart Wilson to take over 
Roth's mind at a museum. Rao is capable of quite effectively suggesting 
the immediately otherworldly by a subtly disquiet shifting of the 
everyday - Roth vanishing at the party in the moment Charles turns his 
back; the sense of eerieness that is created in a perfectly ordinary 
museum garden when Hauer suggests that people are watching them.
Unfortunately it becomes a less effective film once it explains what is 
going on and all the building mystery is brought out into the open. Here 
the ordinariness that Rao is trying to suggest as being otherworldly 
becomes a little too apparent - a corridor between worlds is simply a 
desert canyon filmed through a blurred lens, the movement between worlds 
is conducted by people simply turning their backs in the desert. Nor, 
bar a brief visit to a rebel camp at the end, do we get to see anything 
of the other worlds talked about. Here sadly the film's medium budget 
has gotten in the way of the clear scope of imagination that the film 
promises - it would have been a far better film on an A budget. 
Nevertheless despite this there are still a number of highly effective 
scenes in the latter half - a last minute salvation from a fall from a 
skyscraper by shifting between worlds; an excellent scene where the 
protagonists are caught in an illusion where it appears the lift they 
are descending in is by pieces disappearing around them until they are 
left hanging from one another's shoes. Josh Charles gives a rather good 
performance as an ordinary average guy propelled into bewildering 
circumstances.

