Title
Review for Johns (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
I saw JOHNS at the press screening.  It opens Friday, January 31.
It will be playing at one of the Camera Cinemas in the San Jose area
and at the Lumiere Cinemas in San Francisco.
     "I am not a prostitute," says young prostitute Donner, played with
naivete and sensitivity by Lukas Haas (WITNESS).  "I am an entertainer.
I do not go in for violence."  Life on the street is tough and weird.
Today's "date" is an eighty-year-old pervert who gets off by spanking
boys.
     JOHNS is a frequently shocking, intensely real, and always
poignant look at the lives of young hustlers.  First time director and
writer Scott Silver makes many of the mistakes of newcomers but,
nevertheless, shows much promise with his troubling, touching, and
sometimes humorous view of homeless kids.
     Silver's background is as a documentarian, and it shows.  In the
press kit he says he got the idea during his first Christmas in
Hollywood where the temperature was in the 90s, and "I felt utter
desolation, despair, and depression."  His approach to developing the
story for the movie was to interview young hustlers, paying them $20
each to hear their stories.  From these ideas, acknowledged in the
credits, he derived the script.
     JOHNS happens on the day before Christmas.  John, played quite
believably by David Arquette (SCREAM), is sleeping in the park when his
expensive, lucky shoes and his money in them are stolen.  The camera
focuses in tight for close-ups as his long dirty feet go running in
vain after the thief.  John gets some golf shoes with cleats from his
first trick of the day, Danny Cohen, played by John C. McGinley (from
THE ROCK).  John clanks along with these golf shoes through the rest of
the picture.
     Tomorrow is John's 21st birthday, and he has long had plans to
stay one night on vacation at the fancy Park Plaza Hotel.  Now he is
broke.  But it gets worse.  Because he took money during a drug deal
gone bad, Jimmy Warlock (Terence Dashon Howard) is looking for him to
collect the money -- one way or another.
     Donner is John's happy-go-lucky friend.  Donner has the innocence
of someone new to the street.  His parents disowned him because he was
gay, and now he is picking up tricks to make ends meet.  Although there
are some similarities to MIDNIGHT COWBOY, John and Donner are much more
clean-cut looking.
     Although I did laugh a few times, mainly I felt sorry for these
two kids.  The best parts of the show are the musical interludes where
they go about their everyday business while some dreamy tune is
playing.  The songs have all the happiness that the prostitutes lack.
     The supporting cast is strong, except for Alanna Ubach (from the
delightful DENISE CALLS UP) who plays John's girlfriend.  Ubach's
performance is unbelievably strident.
     Arguably the best performance is by an actor in the minuscule role
of hotel registration desk clerk Paul Truman.  Richard Kind takes what
has all of the markings of being the most cliched part in the film and
gives Paul great warmth and compassion.  I cannot say more or I would
give away some of the most precious moments in the film, and poor John
needs his few good times to preserve his dignity.
     Much is wrong and infuriating with JOHNS.  The cinematography has
an intentional low budget look in the constant outdoor scenes.  The
background is so overexposed that you feel like you will be blinded.
Although the film has a good narrative drive, it is too predictable.
The ending seems obvious from the start.  Nevertheless, the characters
are sympathetically drawn so that every time their predictable
tragedies arise, they touch your heart.
     JOHNS runs a fast 1:36.  It is rated R.  There is explicit sex,
drug usage, strong profanity, sadomasochism, violence, and quite adult
themes.  I do not think they show is for kids, even teenagers, but if
teenagers do go, they need to be quite mature.  I give the film a
thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(First Look)
Starring:  David Arquette, Lukas Haas, Terrence Dashon Howard, Keith
David.
Screenplay:  Scott Silver.
Producers:  Beau Flynn and Stefan Simchowitz.
Director:  Scott Silver.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, adult themes, profanity, violence)
Running Time:  100 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There are moments in the course of performing this job that I wish I
had the director in front of me so I could just shake him.  It isn't the
terrible films which get me so worked up, because there is no amount of
sense I could shake into directors in those cases.  Rather, it is the near
miss which frustrates me most, when I see a potentially fine film
disappearing into a fog of pretension.  Apparently the subject of street
hustling is particularly conducive to sending directors into fits of
artistic incontinence.  Gus Van Sant had MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO soaring
until he decided to get iambic on us with an extended riff on HENRY IV,
PART I, and Scott Silver tackles a similar premise in JOHNS with similar
results.  There is an affecting human drama in there, if you can wade
through the symbolism to find it.
     JOHNS shows us one day (Christmas Eve, to be specific) in the lives
of two street hustlers on L. A.'s Santa Monica Boulevard:  John (David
Arquette), an edgy veteran of the streets, and Donner (Lukas Haas), his
inexperienced protege.  John has plans to spend his birthday the following
day living it up at the Park Plaza Hotel, but those plans hit a snag when
someone steals away John's lucky sneakers, along with the $300 he needs
for the hotel room.  With only a few hours left to scrape together the
necessary cash, John takes on clients both old and new -- each one a
potential danger -- and also tries to get help from Donner.  That might be
the easy part of the day, as John and Donner also need to stay one step
ahead of Jimmy the Warlock (Terrence Dashon Howard), the drug dealer from
whom John stole the original $300.
     Anyone who has seen MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO is going to find elements of
JOHNS familiar, including the relationship between the two protagonists
(one has an unrequited crush on the other), and the upper class background
of one of them.  There is, however, something pleasantly unfamiliar about
the authenticity of JOHNS' setting.  Silver creates a world of
fringe-dwellers who know each other but are too busy trying to stay alive
to care about each other.  John's acquaintances, like his girlfriend Nikki
(Alanna Urbach) and a twitchy paranoiac named Eli (Christopher Gartin),
drift in and out of the narrative, and Silver often shoots them from a
distance both to keep us from getting to close to them and to suggest the
distance we probably would keep ourselves.  These people don't form a
protective family, although the more innocent Donner is willing to do so;
for the most part, they have more pressing concerns.
     The unique dynamics of these characters' lives should have been
enough to sustain JOHNS, but Silver isn't satisfied with telling his story
in a straightforward manner.  It isn't enough that we realize John's
birthday is Christmas day; John also gets a chain whipped across his
forehead so he looks like he has been wearing a crown of thorns.  It isn't
enough that an enigmatic homeless man (Keith David) returns one good deed
with another; he has to turn into a hymn-crooning, all-seeing wise man.
>From the repeated use of clocks and watches as a motif to the repeated use
of John as a name for characters (there are three in addition to
Arquette's character), Silver keeps giving you pokes in the ribs which are
merely unnecessary when they aren't actively distracting.  There are
plenty of moments when Silver doesn't seem aware that, sometimes, less is
more.
     It is a particular shame when distractions interfere with a
performance as uniquely compelling as David Arquette's.  We know he is
doomed from the moment he reveals that "nothing bad ever happened to me
while I was wearing my lucky sneaks," but Arquette refuses to make him a
lost soul/victim of society.  John has no sense of a future, so he takes
any action assuming that he won't have to deal with the consequences, and
he uses people with a similar disregard.  There is something almost
unlikeable about John, but we come to care about the moment of respect and
splendor he wants from his night at the Park Plaza.  This dream leads to a
surprisingly touching moment involving the hotel's desk clerk (Richard
Kind), one of several sparkling scenes Silver gives to his supporting
characters; another clever bit finds Jimmy the Warlock becoming a bit less
menacing as he struggles with basic subtraction.  Silver had great actors
working with great characters, so it is disappointing that JOHNS is only a
good film instead of a great one.  With time, I hope Scott Silver learns
what a great chef understands:  presentation should complement a fine
meal, not overwhelm it.  You don't serve up a filet mignon just to smother
it with parsley.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: David Arquette, Lukas Haas, Wilson Cruz, Keith David, 
      Christopher Gartin, Elliott Gould, Terrence Dashon Howard, 
      Richard Timothy Jones, Arliss Howard, John C. McGinley, 
      Richard Kind
Director: Scott Silver
Producers: Beau Flynn and Stefan Simchowitz
Screenplay: Scott Silver
Cinematography: Tom Richmond
Music: Charles Brown
U.S. Distributor: First Look Pictures
     Despite exploring a fascinating and lurid American subculture that 
rarely gets film exposure, JOHNS is consistently underwhelming.  The 
movie, brought to the screen by first-time director Scott Silver, would 
have been better served by attempting a low-key character study a la Gus 
Van Sant's similar, superior MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO.  Instead, what we get 
is a modern-day version of a Greek tragedy with some unnecessarily 
intrusive and irritatingly obvious religious symbolism thrown in for 
good measure.  If you haven't guessed the film's heavy-handed ending by 
the half-way mark, you aren't paying attention.
     JOHNS takes its name very seriously.  Not only is the movie about a 
pair of male prostitutes roaming the streets of L.A., but it seems that 
half the characters are named "John," including one of the two leads.  
The film is an episodic, "day in the life" account of John (David 
Arquette) and his best friend, Donner (Lukas Haas).  Many of the 
incidents are supposedly drawn from real-life stories, but Silver's film 
making never attains the level of gritty realism that would have made 
them believable.  His world is sanitized and idealized, and, while life 
on the streets isn't presented with the rosiness of PRETTY WOMAN, being 
a homeless prostitute doesn't seem like the worst career choice.  
     To give meaning to their lives, John and Donner are always working 
towards a goal.  At the beginning, John is trying to earn enough money 
so that he can spend his twenty-first birthday, which happens to fall on 
December 25, in a posh hotel.  He wants twenty-four hours of heaven.  By 
the end of the film, the objective has changed.  Now, it's an East Coast 
amusement park called Camelot, where the two have been offered jobs by 
one of Donner's relatives.  But the trip, like the hotel room, costs 
money, and that's something neither man has much of.  Plus, even if he 
did come up with the cash, John has a more serious obligation -- if he 
doesn't pay off a drug dealer (Terrence Dashon Howard, doing his best 
Cuba Gooding Jr. impression) he "borrowed" from, he won't survive this 
Christmas Eve.
     David Arquette (the deputy in SCREAM, and a sibling of Roseanna and 
Patricia) presents an effective portrayal of an aimless drifter.  His 
John doesn't expect much out of life, and his low expectations aren't 
disappointed.  The film opens with his "lucky sneakers" being stolen; 
after that, nothing seems to go right.  He has aspirations of "going 
somewhere," but both we and he recognize that he'll never amount to 
much.  We know far less about his past than we do his future.  When it 
comes to personal details, all we're told is that John is nominally 
straight, has an unbearably shrill girlfriend (Alanna Urbach), and is 
willing to do just about anything for a buck.  As JOHNS progresses, it 
becomes clear that John is a Christ-figure.  If the date of birth 
doesn't tip this off, the crown-of-thorns scarring on his forehead is a 
dead giveaway.
     The most compelling performance is turned in by Lukas Haas 
(EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU), whose sincerity and optimism as Donner is 
heartbreaking.  With his almost-feminine features, Donner appears very 
much the innocent, set adrift in Southern California when his parents 
disowned him after he confessed to being gay.  He's hopelessly in love 
with John, and, no matter how grim things look, he never stops dreaming 
that someday the two of them can be together in Camelot.
     The supporting cast is peppered with familiar faces.  David Keith 
plays a mysterious stranger who wanders around offering a helping hand 
and a bite to eat to people in trouble.  Elliot Gould is wonderfully 
amusing as a family man who wants to keep his "dark" sexual life a 
secret, TV veteran Richard Kind is a sympathetic desk clerk at the Park 
Plaza Hotel, and John C. McGinley is a hard-bitten Hollywood producer 
who offers the barefoot John a pair of golf shoes as payment for 
services rendered.
     Perhaps the essential theme of JOHNS is summed up in one of John's 
lines:  "People come and go.  The only thing that stays the same is the 
Boulevard."  With varying effectiveness, JOHNS chronicles changes to two 
of the individuals who wander this immutable strip.  In the end, 
however, the film gets caught up in trying to tell a grandly 
melodramatic tale, when a simple, down-to-earth story of broken dreams 
and lonely characters would have been more engrossing.  Too often, the 
naturally-effective elements of JOHNS are swamped by the forced, 
scripted ones, and that curtails the movie's power and appeal.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Scott Silver.
Cast: David Arquette, Lukas Haas, Keith David, Arliss Howard, Elliott 
Gould, Christopher Gartin, Terrence Dashon Howard, Nicky Katt, Wilson 
Cruz, Alanna Ubach, Richard Kind, John C. McGinley.
1997 - 96 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, blood, profanity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed November 21, 1998. 
"johns," an independent film from Scott Silver, making his directing 
debut, is a gritty, bleak drama that seems accurate about its decidedly 
downbeat subject matter. It is written with intelligence and realism, 
and yet, when it ended, I felt that the film didn't particularly add up 
to much, even though there is no doubt that it is brimming with talent.
The film, which also could have been called, "One Day in the Life of a 
Male Hustler," is about two very good friends living on the streets of 
Hollywood's Santa Monica Boulevard. John (David Arquette), an 
experienced male prostitute, starts his day, which happens to be 
Christmas Eve, as well as the eve of his 21st birthday, off badly. He 
wakes up to find his "lucky sneakers," missing from his feet, which also 
happened to hold all of his money that he was planning to spend on a 
ritzy hotel for the night. His friend, who is more of an amateur, is 
Donner (Lukas Haas), whom David often teaches about the right way to 
hustle, which is to first ask if the client is a police officer. "If 
they aren't, then it's legal," John matter-of-factly states. Throughout 
the day, we follow these two characters from client-to-client, some of 
which are very shady characters, and from meal-to-meal, and they 
struggle to make a life out of their rather desolate existence. 
"johns," is a film that relies heavily on symbolism to bring some of its 
points across. Not only are the clients referred to as, "johns," but 
almost all of the people John meets is named John, from a mystical 
homeless man (Keith David), who always seems to show up at just the 
right time to help people in their time of need, to a peculiar, 
frightening man (Arliss Howard) that picks John up during the 
unpredictable, and yet, inevitable, climax. Another bit of symbolism is 
that not only is it Christmas, but John was born on that holiday, and 
when his sneakers are stolen at the beginning, it is as if his luck 
vanishes.
Certainly, the most striking element of "johns," is David Arquette's 
unforgettable performance. Ever since the original, "Scream," came out, 
Arquette has been on a roll, delivering one strong role after another, 
most notably in 1997's "Dream With the Fishes." With his character of 
John, we are shown an insecure person who is hustling day after day, but 
knows deep down that it isn't what he was supposed to make of his life. 
Also of note is Arliss Howard, as the previously mentioned concluding 
customer of John's. Howard manages to be so creepy that he leaves a 
lasting impression.
Where "johns," misses the mark is in the brief subplot about John's 
fast-talking girlfriend (Alanna Ubach), which doesn't feel finished, and 
especially in the climactic moments. As simply a study of male 
prostitution, then it is fine, but after the end credits started to 
roll, it just didn't feel like it had much of a point, except that this 
underground business that isn't very well known, is meaningless and 
leads nowhere. I don't exactly know what I expected, but during the last 
scene, I think something else should have happened with Donner to add 
more of a finality to the conclusion.
The flaws of the ending can easily be overlooked, however, because, 
"johns," is a memorable, naturalistic drama, superior to the similar 
1997 indie, "Star Maps," which ran into trouble by feeling overstuffed 
with different story threads. The characters in, "johns," gained my 
sympathy, I liked them, and I found myself hoping that they would 
somehow find their way out of the abyss that they had buried themselves 
in. Although far from perfect, "johns," is an edgy and powerful motion 
picture.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
