Title
Review for In the Name of the Father (1993)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Every time I saw the previews for IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, I
wanted to see the show even more since it had some of my favorite movie
components: a true story, courtroom drama, detective work, and some of
the best acting talent around.  The short version of the story is that
there was a pub bombing in Guildford, England subsequent to which the
police arrested, tortured, and insured the conviction of the wrong
people by illegal means.  After 15 years, a smart lawyer with good
detective skills got them freed.
     Sad to say that I only kind of liked this show.  The start in
Northern Ireland (5%) was fascinating, the trial scenes (5%) were
excellent, and the amazing detective work (2%) was great.  The other
88% of the show was set in prison and the director (Jim Sheridan),
screenwriters (Terry George and Jim Sheridan) , and especially the
editor (Gerry Hambling) did a wonderful job of making us feel the
tedious live of the prisoners.  This 88% itself was slow and tedious.
They accomplished their goal.
     The acting was good especially by Daniel Day-Lewis although he was
not near as good as in THE AGE OF INNOCENCE.  Pete Postlethwaite did a
moving portrayal as his father.  Emma Thompson, as the
lawyer/detective, was not in the show near enough.  The writer was much
more interested in the minutia of prison life than in courtroom scenes
or detective work.  Finally, the original prosecutor was played by the
boy friend (Daniel Massey) from "The Golden Bowl" for you PBS fans -
still love that series.
     One final note, I believe that they got the wrong people, I
believe that some of the police (played in the movie by Corin Redgrave,
et.  al.) did illegal activities (which a later jury did not), but I do
not buy the massive scale portrayed in the picture.  20+ police
officers all observing or actively participating?  I don't think so.
     IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER runs too long at 2:12.  The
scriptwriters and the editor should have given us a lot more courtroom
drama and detective work and less retreats about prison life.  This is
an overly earnest movie about an important subject.  It is easy to
review the subject rather than the movie.  Nevertheless, for me, the
film only had a few good parts, but these were so outstanding that I
give it thumbs up, and rated it ** 1/2.  It is rated R for serious
violence.  Only mature teenagers should see it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Old saying about "life imitating art" has a rather sinister
meaning for the author of this review. Reason for that is IN
THE NAME OF THE FATHER, 1993 film directed by famed Irish
director Jim Sheridan. Due to some bizarre, hardly
believable and now totally forgotten circumstances that
dealt with internal politics of his country, the author of
this review, in rather short, but extremely unpleasant
period of his life, had to endure the ordeal in some
frightening details similar to the one experienced by the
movie protagonist. To make things even more sinister, my
ordeal had practically coincided with the production of the
film and later, while IN THE NAME OF FATHER reached Croatian
cinemas, I had to wait for the video distribution in order
to come to grips with the dark and traumatic subject of the
movie. The most sinister fact remains that this film was
actually based on the true story.
The movie begins in 1974, during the peak of IRA terrorist
campaign. Gerry Conlon (played by Daniel Day-Lewis) is a
young petty thief from Catholic portion of Belfast who
doesn't care about politics, but that doesn't stop him from
getting into trouble, both with British police and IRA. In
order to save his life, his estranged father Giuseppe (Pete
Postlethwaite) sends him to London where Gerry continues his
life of squatting, doing drugs and comitting petty crime. In
the meantime, IRA bomb exploded in Guilford pub, leaving
five innocent people killed, and police is given broad
authorities in order to bring the perpetrators to justice.
For the task force led by Robert Dixon (Corin Redgrave),
Gerry, his countryman Paul Hill (John Lynch) and couple of
their friends represent the ideal suspects. They are all
arrested, and threatened, harassed and tortured until they
finally confess the crime they didn't commit. That
confession sends not only Gerry to the prison for the rest
of his life, but his own father is implicated and forced to
share the prison cell with him. At first, Gerry is
embittered and full of self-pitty, but seeing the stoical
and moral example of his father, he begins to change and
actually fight for his freedom. The defence lawyer Gareth
Pierce (Emma Thompson) begins long legal battle in order to
overturn the conviction.
Although the movie was based on Gerry Conlon's
autobiographical book, and although his premiere coincided
with the first major breakthrough in Northern Ireland's
peace process, IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER actually is not the
political film in the strictest of sense. The Troubles and
real life tragedy of the innocent people who were caught in
the crossfire serve only as a background for more intimate,
universal and apolitical story about two Conlons. Screenplay
by Terry George (that actually took many liberties with real
life for dramatic purposes) puts the real emphasis on the
relationship between Gerry and his father Giueseppe - and
the great emotional gap between them, the gap that would be
bridged under the cruellest of circumstances. Unfortunately,
politics does play a role in this film, and in that regard,
screenplay is somewhat weaker than when it deals with
Conlons. Sheridan does indeed give a sense of sad Northern
Ireland's reality in a very energetic and powerful riot
scene in the beginning, but the rest of this two hour film
barely rises to that standard. The second part of the film,
that actually covers Conlon's prison years, is more
formulaic and sometimes even cliched. The only exception is
the "fire tears" scene, but, although powerful, it doesn't
carry the film.
What actually carries IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER are the
superb acting perfomances. Daniel Day-Lewis is simply
splendid in the very demanding role of the careless, stupid
and unsympathetic youth that actually changes into strong,
intelligent crusader for his own cause. But the real gem in
this movie is powerful and unforgettable performance by Pete
Postlethwaite, character actor whose moving portrayal of
Giuseppe as quiet, simple but morally strong man is actually
overshadowing Lewis. Other actors are also good, including
Emma Thompson, whose role of defence attorney should have
been expanded.
The main problem I have with IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER,
problem that, I must admit, has something to do with my
experience, is in the fact that movie doesn't actually
tackle some important and universal question. For example,
story of Gerry Conlon could be used to illustrate how frail
are such noble concepts like "human rights" and "due
process" even in countries that pride themselves with
centuries of democratic standards. It could also illustrate
how powerless individual can be when he is picked by
all-powerful state, and that, under the certain
circumstances, even the Western democracies can be as mean
towards the people as totalitarian regimes. IN THE NAME OF
FATHER, by concentrating mostly on an interesting, but in a
global scale rather local issue of Northern Ireland, and on
other level, personal issue of Conlons, failed to explore
such areas. Which is pitty, because this film, although
still being good, had capacity to be really great.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Daniel Day-Lewis, Peter Postlethwaite, Emma Thompson.
Screenplay:  Jim Sheridan & Terry George.
Director:  Jim Sheridan.
     Any time you put together a ten best list right after the first of
the year, you leave yourself open to potential embarrassment.  There
are usually three or four big Oscar contenders which go unseen outside
Los Angeles and New York until late January, meaning that a ten best
list compiled on January 1st might be notable for its oversights.  IN
THE NAME OF THE FATHER was one of those potential trouble spots, but as
it turns out I still consider my list complete.  Don't misunderstand
me; FATHER is impeccably acted and efficiently directed.  It simply
never gripped me the way it should have.
     IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER is the true story of Gerry Conlon
(Daniel Day-Lewis), a Belfast native and petty thief who finds himself
on the wrong side of the Irish Republican Army in 1974.  At the
suggestion of his father Guiseppe (Peter Postlethwaite), Gerry leaves
Ireland for London.  There he and friend Paul Hill (John Lynch)
discover their timing could not have been worse.  In the middle of an
I.R.A. bombing campaign, Gerry and Paul become scapegoats, arrested
with two other friends and tortured into confessing to the bombing of a
pub in Guildford.  When Guiseppe comes to London to help, he too is
implicated as a conspirator.  The two Conlon's end up sharing a cell,
and eventually sharing a hope that attorney Gareth Peirce (Emma
Thompson) can win them an appeal.
     There are really two stories working in IN THE NAME OF THE
FATHER:  one, the railroading of the "Guildford Four" by the British
government; the other, the developing relationship between Gerry and
Guiseppe while the two are imprisoned.  Each of these stories would
have made a taut and fascinating film, but combined both suffer.  In
particular, the father and son theme never quite clicked.  Director and
co-scripter Jim Sheridan makes some questionable choices in the early
stages of their relationship, the most notable being a lack of insight
into their interaction before their incarceration.  A voiceover
narration as Gerry leaves for London tries to explain emotions best
demonstrated, a flaw later exacerbated in a tirade by Gerry towards
Guiseppe that comes of as overwrought and lacking in necessary
background.  The later scenes, as the two men come to a grudging
understanding, are much better, but they would have been stronger still
with a more carefully crafted backstory.
     The legal story of IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER is clearly secondary,
but it provides most of the film's best moments.  Gerry's interrogation
is well-handled, including disconcerting scenes of police officials
watching the torture in silence.  Perhaps the most effective sequence
is the sentencing of the Guildford Four and several members of Gerry's
extended family, each excessive and unjust sentence punctuated by the
slam of the judge's gavel.  However, with the emphasis on Gerry and
Guiseppe's relationship, the injustice of the situation really doesn't
take hold, and the character of the chief detective on the case, played
by Corin Redgrave, is too pat in his villainy.  As an examination of
the potential for bloodlust in English jurisprudence, Peter Medak's LET
HIM HAVE IT is much more effective, a leaner and more focused story of
a truly criminal proceeding.
     The performances in IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER deliver its greatest
strengths.  Daniel Day-Lewis, building his already impressive and
diverse resume, turns in impressive work as Gerry Conlon.  His
character is not as fully written as it could have been, but Day-Lewis
fills in the cracks with his intensity and attention to detail.  Peter
Postlethwaite, as the physically frail but morally strong Guiseppe, is
a powerful presence, providing a tough counterpoint to the mercurial
Gerry.  Emma Thompson, in an extremely small role, manages to be cool
and determined but little more as Peirce; the script just doesn't ask
much more of her.
     IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER has garnered tremendous critical praise
and a handful of Golden Globe nominations, and while I found it a good
film I wonder if some of the accolades aren't a bit excessive.  With
the exception of Daniel Day-Lewis' performance, IN THE NAME OF THE
FATHER is solid but not spectacular, an example of taking two great
films and turning them into one good one.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  12/29/93 (NY, LA); 1/14/94 (elsewhere)
Running Length:  2:12
Rated:  R (Violence, language, mature themes, brief nudity)
     Sometimes it's only through the greatest of tragedies and the
gravest of injustices that human beings learn to relate to each other
honestly and openly.  Nowhere is this more apparent than in Jim
Sheridan's searing motion picture, IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, where
father and son come to an intimate understanding of each other through
the shared sufferings that bind them.
     At eight o'clock in the evening of October 5, 1974, in a pub in
Guildford, England, an IRA bomb explodes, killing five people.  As
public demands for justice grow to a fevered pitch, the police force,
headed by Robert Dixon (Corin Redgrave), is forced to turn to the most
likely suspects without regard for their guilt or innocence.  Gerry
Conlon (Daniel Day-Lewis) and Paul Hill (John Lynch), a pair of
squatters recently arrived in London from Belfast, become prime
targets.  When Gerry's father Giuseppe (Pete Postlethwaite) arrives
from Ireland to help his son obtain a lawyer, he is charged with
participating in an IRA support network.
     In a trial high on speeches and rhetoric but low on facts, the
"Guildford Four," including Gerry and Paul, are sentenced to life in
prison because the judge can't find a reason to hang them, and Giuseppe
is given fourteen years.  When, after sentencing has been carried out,
the police find incontrovertible evidence of the Conlons' innocence,
they keep it carefully buried--until Gareth Peirce (Emma Thompson)
ferrets out the truth in attempting to get Gerry and Giuseppe's
convictions overturned.
     As much as IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER is about the true facts
surrounding the conviction and eventual freeing of Gerry Conlon and his
three innocent friends, the movie's primary aim is more intimate and
personal:  to show the development of the relationship between an
estranged father and son.  When Gerry and Giuseppe arrive in prison,
they are virtual strangers, distant and cold.  Years later, both have
confronted their hidden demons and made their peace with themselves and
each other.
     IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER is about victims--those who do and
don't fight back, and the different forms in which those battles take
place.  For the IRA, human life is cheap, and all targets are
legitimate.  For the police, it doesn't matter who's convicted, as long
as the perception is that they're doing their jobs.  And for the
"Guildford Four," and those accused of aiding them, justice is as
unlikely as it is nebulous.
     Jim Sheridan skillfully interweaves a myriad of subplots and
themes together into a fast-paced, cohesive whole.  He tells of the
setup, the corrupt police investigation, the first trial with its
various perjuries and cover-ups, fifteen years of prison life, and the
second trial.  Each character is remarkably realized, and no situation
is presented without the shades of gray that differentiate potent drama
from its weaker imitations.
     It would be hard to find a more dissimilar character to THE AGE OF
INNOCENCE's Newland Archer than Gerry Conlon, but Daniel Day-Lewis
brings IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER's irrepressible protagonist to life
with the same believability and strength of personality.  Many of his
scenes with veteran British character actor Pete Postlethwaite, who
presents a memorable Giuseppe, are remarkable for their simple
intensity.
     In a supporting role, Emma Thompson turns in her best performance
since HOWARDS END, with a passionate interpretation of Gareth Peirce, a
woman who invests more than mere time and effort into Gerry Conlon's
case.  Ms.  Thompson's court speech alone is worth the price of
admission, and represents one of the most stirring moments in recent
cinema.
     Visually, IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER is impressive.  There are no
grand vistas for the cameras to pan over, but two scenes among many
illustrate the level of photographic quality.  The first is the stark
and chaotic presentation of the Belfast riot.  The camera puts the
viewer into the streets in the midst of all the confusion and strife,
creating a sense of immediacy that many action pictures fall short of.
The second occurs much later in the movie, and is more serene and
poignant image, as the windows of Gerry's prison cry "fire tears" to
match his own manifestations of grief.
     Trevor Jones creates a score perfectly wedded to the atmosphere of
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER.  At times brooding and thoughtful, at others
violent and dissonant, Jones' orchestrations here are as distinctive as
they are unlike his grandiose LAST OF THE MOHICANS work.
     For a movie that is so politically-charged, IN THE NAME OF THE
FATHER manages to sharpen its focus on the individuals rather than the
bigger historical tapestry into which their lives are woven.  It's
impossible to lose sight of the police cover-up, or the IRA's casual
views on killing, but the brilliance of Jim Sheridan's motion picture
is that we come to view every event from the perspective of how it
impacts on the relationship between Gerry and his father, in whose name
the final struggle is fought.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Katherine M Wickiser
Based on the true story of the Conlon Four
Starring:  Daniel Day-Lewis and Emma Thompson
Rating:  9.9999999999999999999/10
     This movie was INCREDIBLE!!!!!!  American Express has been showing
previews of movies for their loyal card members and I just happen to
know one of them who couldn't go to the show.  So, you guessed it, I
went in his place.  And it is something that I will be eternally
grateful for.
     This movie is based on the true story of the CONLON FOUR who were
wrongly accused of the bombing of a London pub.  The movie starts out
in Belfast, Northern Ireland and shows the British military occupying
the city.  Daniel Day-Lewis plays Gerard (Gerry for short), a young man
struggling to live with the military watching his every move (the
British vs. the I.R.A.).
     I haven't cried so hard and for so long in a movie.  The movie is
a gut-wrenching tale of innocent people sentenced to prison for a
bombing that was done by the I.R.A.
     The acting was fantastic.  As usual Daniel Day-Lewis submerged
into his character so much in fact that I kept on asking my self is
that him????
     I am sorry that I am so sketch on details but PLEASE go see this
movie it is definitely worth seeing more than once.
     Since I am so "not gifted" in writing this if you have any other
questions you can e-mail me at kw2m+@andrew.cmu.edu.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  This is the true story of the victims
     of a conspiracy by British police to scapegoat eleven
     innocent people, many from a single family, for an IRA
     bombing.  The main character spent fifteen years in prison
     before an enterprising lawyer uncovered the conspiracy and
     was able to overturn the conviction.  Pete Postlethwaite is
     particularly effective as the main character's father who is
     imprisoned in the same cell as his son.  Rating: low +3 (-4
     to +4).
     In 1974 eleven people from Belfast were sentenced to prison for an IRA
bombing of a Surrey pub--four charged with the bombing itself, seven with
complicity.  Fifteen years later that conviction was proven in court to be a
gross miscarriage of justice.  Though this conviction could not have been
obtained without a conspiracy to subvert justice and knowingly to scapegoat
innocent people, the British government has yet to acknowledge wrong-doing.
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER tells the whole story of one of the men falsely
imprisoned from his background several months before the bombing to his
eventual exoneration.  Daniel Day-Lewis plays Gerry Conlon, a petty thief
who was in the wrong place at the wrong time and is railroaded to prison
along with several members of his family.  Gerry, who has never been able to
get along with his stern father Giuseppe (Pete Postlethwaite), finds he now
must share not a house but a small cell with that father.  Where the film
could have bogged down as standard prison movie fare we find an engrossing
father-son relationship that gives more meaning and poignancy to the court
proceedings that will eventually clear the names of both father and son.
The insertion of this father-son theme would seem contrived in a fictional
account, but since it is true, the film uses it well.
     It almost goes without saying that Daniel Day-Lewis's performance turns
in a good performance.  He is a first rank actor.  Surprisingly, Emma
Thompson is considerably less memorable in a script that does not use her
considerable acting ability.  The real surprise is Pete Postlethwaite as
Guiseppe.  He had roles in ALIEN 3, HAMLET, WATERLAND and with Day-Lewis in
THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, but none was particularly memorable.  This film
may be a breakthrough for him as a man of character and older values trying
to impart those values to his son.  The relationship that the two are able
to forge only when locked in together is one of the most moving features of
the film.
     Jim Sheridan, who previously directed Daniel Day-Lewis in MY LEFT FOOT,
both directed and co-wrote the screenplay.  Even though the film is 132
minutes, it tells a complete story and never bogs down.  Instead it gets
more engrossing as we come to see more of the pain inflicted by the
miscarriage the degree of wrong-doing on the part of the police.  By the end
of the film Sheridan has really roused the passions of the audience.
     This is a well-crafted film in all regards.  While self-critical
British films are not really a rarity, this is probably among the most
powerful.  I would give this film a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale and will
almost definitely include it among the top ten films of 1993.

Author
Brian Koller
"In the Name of the Father" is an excellent drama
that tells the story of Gerry Conlon, an Irish
petty criminal who finds himself framed, along with
friends and entire family, for an IRA bombing that
he had nothing to do with.
Conlon is played by one of my favorite actors,
versatile Daniel Day-Lewis, with the same intensity
and credibility that he had in his Oscar winning
role in "My Left Foot".  The film makes it clear
that Conlon is more irresponsible than innocent, but
the same cannot be said for his family, especially
disapproving father Giuseppe (Pete Postlethwaite).
The relationship between Gerry and his father is
extensively explored.  They love each other, but
Gerry is frustrated because he cannot meet the
expectations of his father.  Still, Giuseppe believes
that his son is innocent of the bombing.  Emma
Thompson plays a British lawyer who is convinced
of the injustice of their case and seeks to free them.
IRA terrorist (and fictional character) McAndrew
(Don Baker) is inserted to make obvious a cover-up
by British policemen.  When both Conlons end up
rejecting McAndrew's methods, "In the Name of the
Father" finally repudiates terrorism as a method
of achieving political independence.
The film scores points when rebuking martial law,
allowing suspects to be held indefinitely without
counsel and subject to torture and intimidation.
Judicial injustice is an under-rated movie theme,
greatly increasing the audience's sympathy
and identification with the oppressed.
The film's pro-Irish sympathies are expressed
in the soundtrack as well, which features Irish
acts such as U2 and Sinead O'Connor.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Chris Loar
Starring Daniel Day-Lewis (Gerry Conlon), Pete Postlethwaite (Giuseppe   
Conlon), Emma Thompson (Gareth Peirce)
Directed by Jim Sheridan
Written by Terry George and Jim Sheridan, based on PROVED INNOCENT by   
Gerry Conlon
One of the ironies of the late 20th century -- when the news of the world   
is only a click of the remote away and politics is in our living room   
every night -- is that all that information threatens to drown us.  The   
news can come to seem meaningless, and the political events that affect   
the lives of millions of people often seem frighteningly abstract.  One   
function art can serve -- even in such a pop art form as film -- is to   
humanize those events for us, to make them real, to restore our ability   
to care about them.
That's what IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER does for us, beginning with its   
opening sequence -- the explosion in a Guildford pub that sets the story   
in motion.  The camera shows us some young men and women entering the   
pub, chuckling and laughing.  We linger on this happy scene for a   
heartbeat -- and then, just as the explosion tears the
place apart, the camera cuts to a shot of a young woman's purse.  An   
ordinary object in the midst of extraordinary events, that purse   
humanizes the explosion and sets the tone for the entire film.
The film then skips ahead fifteen years to Gareth Peirce (Emma Thompson,   
in a small but important role), an attorney handling an appeal for the   
Irish convicted of that bombing.  We begin to get the story as told to   
her by Gerry Conlon (Daniel Day-Lewis), who has already served fifteen   
years of a life sentence.  Gerry's story is told to us in flashback,   
beginning with his late adolescence in Belfast, circa 1974.  The   
political climate is hot in the city, with tanks in the streets and   
soldiers everywhere.  Gerry is just a kid (looking a little old for his   
age -- makeup and fine acting can only go so far) who, exposed to more   
bad influences than any rebellious youth could resist, has turned to   
petty crime, stealing scrap metal, trying to dodge both the British Army   
and IRA militias.  After Gerry inadvertently provokes a minor riot and   
seriously irritates the IRA, his father, Giuseppe (Pete Postlethwaite),   
decides it's time to send the boy away -- to London, away from the   
horrific scene that is Belfast.  Gerry isn't troubled by this -- it's a   
chance to score some dope, meet some hippies, and hang out.
Gerry is definitely in the wrong place at the wrong time, however.   
 London is turning into a hot zone in its own right, and it's Gerry's   
misfortune to leave London to return to England shortly after the   
Guildford bomb explodes  -- which, to the British, makes him the obvious   
suspect.  He, his associates, and his family are arrested and convicted   
of the bombing -- despite their protests that they are "not political."   
 Gerry takes up residence in a maximum security cell with his father.
It's this time dwelling in prison that takes up most of the film and that   
packs the real emotional and narrative muscle.  Day-Lewis and   
Postlethwaite both deliver phenomenal performances and generate some   
extraordinary screen chemistry.  Of course, they have a good scenario and   
script to work with; for what makes this film unusual is its willingness   
to step back from the political heat that places these two in prison and   
take a serious look at their relationship, which is complex, as   
father-son relations often are.  Gerry loves his father and yet hates him   
for his frailty; Giuseppe loves his son but is angered and disappointed   
by his rebelliousness and immaturity.  What makes this film distinctive   
is that it is not really a political or legal thriller, although it has   
the makings of either, or both.  Instead, director Jim Sheridan (who also   
co-adapted the screenplay) puts the emphasis on Gerry's development from   
a hippie teenager into a full-grown man.
It's rare to see real character development in a film, and a lesser actor   
than Day-Lewis might not have been able to pull it off.  Lewis went to   
extraordinary lengths for the role, (as he always does); he starved   
himself and had himself interrogated by a real police officer to prepare.   
 How much these antics really help I'm not sure, but I do know that   
Day-Lewis is one of the finest craftsman-actors going; rather than   
allowing his presence and charisma to carry him through (and he has   
plenty of both), he manipulates his face, his voice, and his posture to   
show us what it's like for a young Irish thief to be forcibly politicized   
and aged.  Postlethwaite's role is somewhat less demanding, but is   
handled with equal skill; with his portrayal of Giuseppe he shows us a   
man who claims his dignity in spite of his weakness, and makes us ask   
legitimately what it means to be a coward, and what it means to be a   
hero.
And yet, the film never forgets its politics.  In fact, the very human   
drama in the cell could be taken as an endorsement of a certain kind of   
political rebellion; of righteous anger tempered by reason and the rule   
of law.  But thanks to the skill of the directors and the cast, that sort   
of metaphor is swamped by the human-scale story at the center of the   
film.  It's a fine piece of work; don't miss it.
