Title
Review for Rien ne va plus (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 New Yorker Films
 Director:  Claude Chabrol
 Writer:  Claude Chabrol
 Cast: Isabelle Huppert, Michel Serrault, Francois Cluzet,
Jean-Francois Balmer, Jackie Berroyer, Jean Benguigui, Mony
Dalmes, Thomas Chabrol, Greg Germain, Nathalie
Kousnetzoff
   Americans are not comfortable with age differences. If an
older man with a hint of gray in his sideburns dines with a
much younger woman, the public is likely to say, "Aha: boss
having a fling with his secretary."  The French are different. 
A man and woman may have a relationship filled with gaiety,
earthy romance, and game-playing, while outsiders peering in
may not necessarily guess the nature of the affiliation. 
Claude Chabrol plays with this idea in his fiftieth film, one
which takes a marked departure form his recent, bloody
works like "La Ceremonie."  The politics is still there.  The
great sixty-eight-year old French director still likes to disturb
the complacent bourgeoisie, but with "The Swindle" he is
more interested in power balances within couples, specifically
between the youthful and earthy Betty (Isabelle Huppert) and
the considerably older Victor (Michel Serrault) to whom she is
intensely loyal and loving.  Money, that is, capitalism, has a
way of interfering with pure connections like theirs, turning
heretofore devoted human beings into manipulative beasts,
each now willing to use the other as prey.  This time around,
Chabrol plumbs his characters for comic depth rather than
homicidal passions: his 50th film is in no way the epic which
the public had expected of him but is instead a delightful,
feathery comedy.
   The story opens as the two grifters, Betty and Victor, take
on another victim in their role as middle-range swindlers, one
which has provided the with a comfortable living and a
considerable amount of fun.  A woman of many disguises and
fluid identity, Betty has donned a long black wig to seduce a
conventioneer in the gaming room of a French hotel.  Having
previously drugged his whiskey, she waits until he passes out
on the bed and then, together with her partner goes through
the man's wallet, leaving him enough cash to think that
nothing criminal has happened.  She does, however, manage
to capture his signature and with it writes a sizable check to a
dummy company.
   Weary of such moderate, low-key exercises, she
announces to Victor that she has been planning a much
larger sting, one which would result in their snatching of five
million Swiss francs from a young and handsome man,
Maurice (Francois Cluzet) who is ripping off the mob.  After
romancing him in the breathtaking Swiss ski resort of Sils-
Maria, she flies with him and his fortune to Guadeloupe
where she may or may not have been scheming to double-
cross Maurice and/or Victor.  Chabrol keeps us guessing,
making us marvel at Betty's ability to orchestrate the
relationship between the two men in her lives.  Just when we
are sure she has make a genuine romantic attachment with
Maurice we are spun around, positive that she remains loyal
to her long-term partner.  What happens when Victor and
Betty go off the deep end--get into a racket that's out of their
traditional territory of middle-level wheeling and dealing--their
connection and their very lives are at stake.
   Chabrol, I believe, would like us to accept this congenial
work on various levels, while even on the simplest plane it is
a charming story.  We love to watch Victor seething with envy
at noting the affection that Betty is showing to the younger
Maurice.  For all his professionalism, Victor is unable to get
this woman out of his mind, which makes us wonder all the
more just what they are to each other.  On yet another
surface, Chabrol wants to show us what happens when
people abandon the ancient Greek ideal of moderation: when
they carry on to excess because of greed and envy they are
tampering with the gods.  On the highest level, he appears to
be making a transcendent statement about the nature of
people.  They are fluid, changeable--especially women.  Just
as Betty throws off one wig to take on a wholly new identity,
so can women in all their mystery keep us poor men in the
dark about who they really are.  Chabrol fans will have a fine
time guessing at the allusions the director makes to some of
his many previous films, works he began in 1958 with "Le
Beau Serge," and "Les Cousins" and continued for the next
forty years, including "The Story of Women," the not very
successful "Madame Bovary" and the violent "La Ceremonie."
   Michel Serrault has been acting since 1954 and Ms.
Huppert since 1976.  The  seventy-year-old actor is known to
American audiences best for his poignant portrait of the
effeminate Albin in Edouard Molinaro's "La Cage aux Folles."
He and the forty-three year old Huppert have never before
performed together, yet they mesh luminously.  "The
Swindlers" illustrates the way that comedy is serious
business, divulging remarkable intelligence to viewers about
the human condition.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SWINDLE, THE (RIEN NE VA PLUS)(director/writer: Claude Chabrol;
cinematographer: Eduardo Serra; editor: Monique Fardoulis; cast:
Isabelle Huppert (Betty), Michel Serrault (Victor), Francois Cluzet
(Maurice), Jean-Francois Balmer (Monsieur K), Jackie Berroyer
(Chatillon), 1997-France)
This is one of Chabrol's poorer films, the fiftieth one for the
68-year-old French director. It has the look and script of a B-film
(even though it was written expressly for the two stars). Chabrol is
playful here, but his lifetime of running gags against the bourgeoisie
and his attempt to make this a giddy film, just didn't hold up. Though,
there are some delightfully coy moments, as a pair of small time scam
artists, the wily, 70ish Victor (Michel Serrault) and the 40ish, sex
pot, Betty (Isabelle Huppert), work their nonviolent schemes in a casino
and at a dentist's convention. Their relationship is one of longtime
friends, business partners, and possibly, at one time, they were lovers.
But it was never clearly spelled out what their intimate relationship
was, as Chabrol likes to keep one guessing. Betty, even sardonically,
calls Victor daddy throughout much of the film. It wouldn't surprise me
if they were related that way. The heart of the film, even more than
their con games, becomes this precarious relationship between the older
man and much younger woman, as it becomes anyone's guess what their real
relation is and how they really feel about each other, and whether they
are capable of swindling each other.
Betty picks up a fellow gambler at the casino's baccarat table and takes
him to a bar, where she tells him she is a director of an insurance
company and then slips a sleep inducing narcotic into his drink and
takes the romantically inclined lawn mower businessman back to his room
in the hotel. Undressed in her black slip, she seductively waits for him
to conk out and for her partner Victor to come in and go through his
belongings, cleverly stealing a small percentage of money in the rich
man's wallet and forging his signature on a check, while leaving his
credit cards untouched, so that when he awakes he won't even realize
that he's been robbed.
They next head separately for a Swiss resort Sils Maria (where Nietzsche
wrote Thus Spake Zarathustra), near St. Moritz, to work one of their
schemes on a dentists' convention. But when he arrives a bit later,
using the pseudonym Colonel Emmanuel Victor, retired, a role which he
plays with proper panache, and with Betty, now impersonating a Russian
blonde named Sissi, who has swooped down onto a dashing young
businessman courier, Maurice (Francois Cluzet). This relationship makes
Victor jealous. But she tells him that he's their pigeon, he is carrying
5 million in Swiss francs in his attache case and is up to cheating his
firm out of it. Victor is upset that she has switched the original plan
he had for working a scam on the dentists, thinking this one is too big
for them and too dangerous.
Maurice is scheduled to bring the money to Guadeloupe to be exchanged,
and Chabrol adroitly uses all his many years of filmmaking skills to
show double-crosses and switches of bags, and how things can go
violently wrong with even the best of schemes. But, it is mostly a story
about the two characters, their needs and how they relate to each other.
Each character becoming unpredictable to the other one. That forms most
of the wry comedy. There is also interest as to how and if the swindle
can be pulled off by the couple, who, at times, have not told the other
what they are up to.
This caper story seemed stale to me, even though it has a certain amount
of charm. But it did not splash across the screen with verve and
audacity as much as Chabrol intended it to. The director seemed to try
too hard to relive his past with many allusions to characters and inside
jokes from his many films, with the old master pulling out his tricks of
the trade from a hat with too much ease to be believable.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
