Title
Review for Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1990)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
David M. Jones
     This is a somewhat rambling review of the TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES
movie.  Be warned that though there are no particularly grievous spoilers in
this article, there may be enough to remove a little of the joy of seeing the
movie from an unspoiled perspective.  The most important thing to learn from
this article is that the movie is well worth seeing, at least if you like the
comic book.  Now that you know that, maybe you want to hit 'n' now.
     Last night I was privileged to attend the world premiere of TEENAGE MUTANT
NINJA TURTLES, hosted by MIT's Lecture Series Committee.  I was tempted, upon
getting out of the movie at about 2:45 AM, to rush directly to my terminal and
send a review off, but luckily the call of my bed was too great, so I went home
to sleep instead, I say "luckily" because this extra time has allowed me to
give the movie the consideration it deserves.  Here, then, are some of my
impressions of the movie.  I've tried to keep spoilers to a minimum, and to
warn you when they are coming.  However, I haven't felt the need to be too
diligent in this regard, since anyone familiar with the comic books won't find
the plot too surprising.
     Overall, I was quite impressed with the movie.  I found it to be a
reasonably faithful adaptation of the comic book.  In particular, they left the
characters largely intact.  Raphael's uncontrolled rage and loner tendencies,
Leonardo's leadership (particularly his concern for the team as a team, as well
as individuals), and Casey's sometimes warped quixotism are all apparent in the
movie.  There are differences, of course.  April is reworked into a gutsy and
intelligent investigative reporter, but I can't help but think the changes are
for the better.  Then, too, I didn't get much of a sense of Micheangelo and
Donatello as individuals.  In fact, now that I think of it, I'd say their main
function was as comic relief to offset the heavier interaction between the
Raphael-Leonardo and April-Casey pairs.  For example, with one questionable
exception, there is no indication of Donatello's considerable technical
prowess.
     Unfortunately, one character doesn't come off very well at all, namely
Splinter.  The movie industry has made yet another attempt to portray
"inscrutable oriental wisdom," and they've failed yet again.  In fact, I'm
tempted to say that Splinter comes across as a bit of a buffoon.  Part of this
was due to technical failings.  For example, the only parts of the movie I can
remember cringing at were the flashback scenes describing Splinter's life with
his Master and his discovery of the turtles.  The stop-action animation (if
that's the term I want) was ill-suited to the ostensibly serious tone of
Splinter's narrative.  In particular, the scenes showing him learning the
martial arts by mimicking his master from his cage were absurd.  All in all,
the movie would be improved if these scenes were replaced by straight narrative
without the visual aides.  However, a bigger part of the problem was the
approach they took to the character.  Two symptoms of the problem come to mind:
(1) Splinter had a goatee, and (2) he spoke with a stereotypical Japanese
accent.  Given the inherent problems in making a believable character out of a
giant talking rat who is also a martial arts master, I think that including
these particular cliches was a lamentable mistake.  Among other things, this
approach made his character far too rigid and inflexible.  But enough of that.
Let's move to a more positive note.
     The turtle costumes were quite satisfactory (even if the faces,
particularly the mouths, did remind me a little too strongly of Kermit the Frog
occasionally :-)).  The costumes weren't so unwieldy as to interfere with the
movement of the actors.  (In fact, the only thing I can remember being
distracted by is that the shell on their stomachs seemed too flexible.  I
distinctly saw it bend once or twice.)  Nor were they so garish as to distract
the eye from the movie.  In short, if you can suspend your disbelief enough to
accept the presence of the turtles in the comic books, you shouldn't have any
trouble accepting them in the movie.
     I was quite impressed with the screenplay.  They managed to rearrange the
plot without doing gratuitous damage to the the comic book.  In fact, if
anything, I'd say the movie is more tightly plotted than the comic book.  Also
noteworthy is the fact that many scenes are lifted from the book with
practically no change.  However, there were major changes in the arrangements
of the scenes.  If anyone is interested in knowing what some of them are, drop
me a line.
     One thing that might bother purists is that it is apparent that the
violence of the book has been toned down considerably, probably in order to
appeal to younger viewers.  For example, Splinter's master does not kill his
rival in love; instead, he and his lover flee to America, where they are hunted
down and killed by the rival himself.  (Thus, Shredder is the rival himself,
not the rival's younger brother.)  Similarly, Splinter does not send the
Turtles to kill Shredder, as he does in the book.  I suspect that both of these
changes were made to avoid sticky questions about the morality of Splinter, the
Turtles, and Splinter's master, and to keep the overall tone of the movie
light.  Similarly, the fight scenes lacked the intensity of the book.  There
was no blood dripping off sais in this movie.  (Incidentally, I'll let someone
else comment on the authenticity of the fight scenes.  I'm not qualified to
judge.)
     Purists might also be concerned about the portrayal of the Turtles.  Yes,
there is one scene where one of the Turtles is riding a skateboard.  And yes,
they are obsessed with pizza.  However, neither of these things is obnoxiously
handled.  A more serious flaw is the attitude they take toward Splinter and the
art of the ninja in general.  I can't speak for the TMNT cartoon or for the
"Adventures of the TMNT," but I feel confident in stating that the Turtles I am
familiar with would not wander off to order a pizza while Splinter was
attempting to teach them.  I'm also not entirely satisfied with their behavior
during the fights.  They're too cocky, too showy, not grim enough.  I suspect
this was also intended to keep the mood of the movie from getting too heavy.
However, on the whole these are the same wise-cracking adolescents, stewed in
the popular culture of the day, that I know from the books.  I must admit that
their voices were a little higher that I had expected, but then again, they are
supposed to be 15 years old.  (I'm going to gloss over the difficulties
involved in such analogies between the TMNT and human adolescents.)
     So, in summary, I was impressed by the movie.  The failings I've noted
occupy a relatively small amount of screen time and should do little to
interfere with your enjoyment of the movie.  This is a faithful adaptation of
TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES, a well-done movie, and all-in-all a great way
to spend a couple of hours.  Most importantly, this is *not* a movie aimed only
at 5-year-olds.  If you enjoyed the comic book, you should enjoy the movie.

Author
Chad Polenz
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1990, PG, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
[adventure]
starring: Judith Hoag (April O'Neil), Elias Koteas (Casey Jones), Josh Pais
(voice of Raphael), Corey Feldman (voice of Donatello), Robbie Rist (voice of
Michelanglo), Brain Tochi (voice of Leonardo), produced by Kim Dawson, Simon
Fields, David Chan, written by Todd W. Langen, Bobby Herbeck, directed by
Steve Barron, based on the comic book and characters created by Kevin Eastman
and Peter Laird.
Now this is a first. For once, Hollywood was able to make a movie based on a
popular [children's] trend that is not total stupidity. In fact, "Teenage
Mutant Ninja Turtles" is really quite original as it combines some of the
gritty elements from the comic book with storylines from the animated series
to tell a lighthearted, campy story.
The setting takes place in New York City where some kind of invisible crime
wave going on. As we hear the voice of journalist April O'Neil (Hoag)
describe the situation, we see for ourselves just how masterminded the
criminals are. Surprisingly, they are teenagers with the stealth and other
abilities of ninjas. As April leaves she is mugged by some of the thieves,
but they become victims themselves  when someone puts out the lights and
disarms them. Of course we know it's the turtles and we then proceed to
follow them home and learn a bit about them. 
The TMNTs are four, huge, mutated turtles who wear masks and are obviously
ninjas. They live in the sewers with their mentor, a mutated rat named
Splinter. The only problem is the story tries to counter the turtles'
hyperness with the serious, metaphoric words of their sensi. One minute
Splinter is giving an important analogy or proverb (a la Yoda in "The Empire
Strikes Back"), and the next minute the guys are partying... but then again,
they are teenagers.
Through some good cop-out devices, April finds herself warned by the Foot
Clan (the perpetrators of the crime wave) to "shut it." She then meets the
turtles after Raphael comes to her rescue. We also learn about the Foot's
secret headquarters through a character with ties to April. There isn't much
here in terms of explaining the genius of the criminal organization or why
they are committing so much theft, just the fact they are ninjas, and
therefore invisible, seems to be reason enough.
The Foot learns about the turtles, and kidnaps their master, and thus fight
scenes ensue and a plot of sorts begins to form. We get good characterization
of the turtles though, they are quite human in their personalities and
actually likable because they don't seem like big cartoons. In fact, the
general attitude of the film works like this as a whole. Yes, sometimes the
script provides for fight scenes but there is actually a story and a fun
spirit to it all. 
If the film succeeds in any way, it would have to be the cleverly scripted
and well choreographed fight scenes. They are hilarious because of the way
the turtles fight, using household objects and all the while exclaiming
wisecracks and one-liners. The violence isn't even graphic, but portrayed in
such a way that we know who's winning.
I don't have to tell you how the film ends, it's typical but somewhat
suspenseful. Considering all the elements that make up and surround the film,
this is really quite an accomplishment.
Even if "Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" is  just an exploitative children's
film, the fact remains it has a decent story to tie it all together. Its
lightheartedness gives it the charm those other adventure flicks miss. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings or quick capsules.
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Author
Randy Parker
        "Teenage mutant ninja turtles."  It's nearly impossible to say it
with a straight face; the concept is inherently funny.  Unfortunately,
watching the mutant turtles is not nearly as much fun as talking about
them.
        TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES is not, thank goodness, another HOWARD
THE DUCK, but then again, it's not BATMAN or SUPERMAN either.  TURTLES is a
strange and ultimately unsatisfying mixture of whimsical humor, gritty
action, cute puppetry, and somber violence.  The movie just never finds its
niche.
        For those of you unfamiliar with the ninja turtle legacy, some
background history is in order.  The Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles first
appeared in a black and white underground comic book by Kevin Eastman and
Peter Laird.  Then, the turtles went mainstream and got their own Saturday
morning cartoon program and a second line of comic books, this one in color
and aimed at children.  TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES is the live-action
film adaptation.
        The protagonists are four teenage turtles who as babies were
exposed to some radioactive slime which caused them to mutate.  They each
grew to the size of a human, learned to love pizza, and gained the ability
to walk upright and to talk in surfer jargon.  Like, gnarly man, these
dudes sound like Bill and Ted (from EXCELLENT ADVENTURE) and Spicoli (from
FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH).  Every other word they utter is something
like "cowabunga," "excellent," or "radical."  The turtles were raised by
Splinter, a mutant Japanese rat, who taught them the art of ninjitsu and
gave them names: Raphael, Leonardo, Michaelangelo, and Donatello.
        The film is set in New York and tells the story of the turtles'
battle against The Shredder, an evil crime lord who is training the city's
teenagers as ninja thieves.  The turtles team up with a pretty TV news
reporter (Judith Hoag) and a renegade street vigilante (Elias Koteas) to
rid New York of The Shredder and his goons.
        Sound like BATMAN?  Well, the movie also LOOKS like BATMAN.
TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES is surprisingly gloomy and grim.  Its dark
film noir production design brings to mind both BATMAN and BLADE RUNNER.
So does the violence.  TURTLES is far too intense and frightening for young
children.  The film, however, is too juvenile for adults.  That leaves
teenagers and pre-teenagers as the only people on the planet who may have
an appetite for TURTLES.
        Ralph, Mikey, Leo, and Don are brought to life by puppet-master Jim
Henson, who claims that the creatures are the most advanced he has ever
created.  To get an idea of what they look like, imagine Arnold
Schwarzenegger in a Kermit the Frog costume, with a shell on his back.  The
turtles look okay, but they certainly don't live up to the magnificent
creatures from THE DARK CRYSTAL and LABYRINTH.  Furthermore, the four
turtles are virtually identical; it's hard to distinguish them as
individual characters.  Only Raphael, the temperamental, independent loner,
stands out as a distinct personality.
        Unfortunately, the human characters are just as artificial and
rubbery.  Hoag is kind of stiff as the TV reporter, but then again she is
not exactly performing Shakespeare.  Koteas, who comes off as a hybrid of
Mel Gibson, Robert De Niro, and Sean Penn, does what he can with his
cliched role as the dumb street-fighter.  The Shredder (James Saito) is a
shameless Darth Vader rip-off, complete with helmet and raspy, sinister
voice.
        Most of the movie is condescending, but thankfully, every so often
a clever sense of humor creeps into the story.  Screenwriters Todd Langen
and Bobby Herbeck come up with several snappy one-liners.  My favorite: one
of the turtles has just seen the movie CRITTERS and he mutters, "Where do
they come up with this stuff?"  Where indeed!

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: Judith Hoag (April O'Neil), Elias Koteas (Casey Jones), a
bunch of guys in turtle suits
Directed by: Steve Barron, Written by: Todd W. Langen, Based on a story
by: Kevin Eastman, Peter Laird, and Bobby Herbeck
Rated PG by the MPAA for violence and mild language.
Well folks, last week I went to go check out THE REPLACEMENT KILLERS. 
Not a bad flick, thanks largely to Chow Yun-Fat.  However, when I saw
it, I also saw the trailer for WILD THINGS with Kevin Bacon, Neve
Campbell, and Denise Richards.  I fell ill at this.  I have never seen a
more idiotic-looking film trailer in all my life.  This is worse than
BATMAN & ROBIN's trailer.  This film looks like the total scum of the
movie world.  If it grosses dollar one in its opening weekend, I'll have
to fear for humanity.
Naturally, this turned me off to going to the theater for a little bit,
in fear of seeing it again (cue cold chill running down my spine here). 
I'll go back for DARK CITY, but right now it's just stay home, watch tv,
yadda yadda.  And lo and behold, what's this?  Why it's 1990's TEENAGE
MUTANT NINJA TURTLES film.  And you know what?  I'm going to shock you
all by saying this, but it's not a bad film at that.  In fact, it's
pretty fun.
I remember seeing these turtle flicks before.  This would be the good
one.  A nice, dark vision of New York (quite the cool production
design), and of course, four turtles and a rat.  If you don't know the
old story of the "green machine," it goes like this - a glass jar with
four baby turtles fell into the sewer and shattered, leaving them to
crawl around in some radioactive ooze that was coming out of a nearby
cannister that also fell down there.  So, when a rat from Japan (whose
owner had recently been killed after moving to America, leaving him to
crawl through the sewer) comes across the turtles and decides to take
care of them, it gets some ooze on himself, too, and of course, they all
grow and become intelligent.  The rat teaches the turtles the martial
arts and he saw his previous master practice so many times before, and
gives them all names of renaissance artists: Lenardo, Raphael,
Michaelangelo, and Donatello.  Oh, and the rat's named Splinter.  I
don't know why.  In the course of this movie, they also become friends
with a Judith Hoag who plays the new reporter April O'Neil, and with
another avenger of justice, who happens to have a fetish for sports
equipment, named Casey Jones.  That's Elias Koteas.  And of course,
there happens to be this huge crime wave sweeping New York, crimes
committed by the Japanese Foot Clan, which is led by the mysterious man
known as The Shredder (James Saito, voiced by David McCharen).  Who's
gonna stop this?  I'll give you three guesses, and the first two don't
count.
This whole thing sounds like a bad Troma (TM) film, but it turns out to
be pretty fun.  The turtles all have discernable personalities, and
they're fun ones at that.  They tend to make a lot of jokes, and just
about all of the wisecracks hit home.  It's not just a bunch of
now-old-news pop culture references, as I remember the third film being
chock-full of.  This is stuff that could actually still seem funny years
from now.  Koteas makes a memorable role himself here, if not an
entirely fulfilling one - he could've used more screen time.  Hoag is
also good in her part, doing a fine job at portraying the disbelieving
friend of the large reptiles.
But the real stars here are the turtles, and rightfully so.  The
technical expertise on display in the turtles' (and Splinter's) suits is
still impressive now, eight years later.  The facial expressions they
get out of these animatronic outfits are amazing.  To this day, the only
thing to top this or come close would be the Mangalores in THE FIFTH
ELEMENT.  This was all done thanks to Jim Henson's workshop of
puppeteers.  Henson died two months after this film was released. 
Though his family and many others still work to make his legacy live on,
this movie is just another reason why he will be missed.  
Another great thing about this show?  It's so damn loyal its roots.  The
original (four?) issues of Eastman and Laird's dark Teenage Mutant Ninja
Turtles comic book are replicated pretty faithfully by the movie's plot
- now there's something you don't see very often in comic films today. 
This sure kicks the pants off of a comic-based movie like BATMAN &
ROBIN.  Sure, the blood is gone, and there's more humor - and the
turtles wear different colored masks - but otherwise, this follows that
original series nicely down to the big finish.
So go on, don't be afraid, I don't care how old you are - if you have
the time, check out TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES.  You might want to
avoid the sequels unless you really love the turtles.
Incidentally, what was with Tatsu's (Toshirô Obata, voiced by Michael
McConnohie) funky hand signals when he said "Go, play" to that one kid
in the warehouse?  That just killed me.  Unintentional comedy there, I'd
say.
If you can never watch any film with such a premise, refuse to accept
it, or just hate these turtles, then you can drop my rating down about
1/2 a star or maybe a full star.  If you're a huge turtle fan (I don't
think there's any of those left... hello?  Hello out there?) then you
can add on another 1/2 star.  But if you're like me, and you're in the
mood for a weird, fun time...
