Title
Review for It's a Wonderful Life (1946)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
James Brundage
It figures that we'd have to go back to the 1946 Best Picture winner in
order to end up with a truly optimistic film. A film in which the characters
are not simply cardboard cutouts and the dialogue isn't used-before cliché.
This isn't the first time I've had this opinion: I think the same thing as a
general rule -- old movies are almost always better than new ones.
I won't bother with the why. The answer lies in the question in the fact
that the normal movie has to ask why it shouldn't use a thing that worked.
They never take risks (studio films, that is. I think an old film and an
independent are on equal footing), they never do anything new, and its all
money, money, money.
Then again, a man who has friends is always rich.
Cliches like that happen to comprise the idea behind on of the least cliché
movies in history, Frank Capra's "It's a Wonderful Life", the most famous of
his works and the one that coined the term Capraesque.
It's a Wonderful Life is a story about hope. Hope for life, hope for people,
hope for humankind. It shows us how we affect people in ways we never
imagined, and how we make things better by being in it. It does what an
artist should do, make the mundane important. And in making the mundane
important, in giving the meaningless meaning, it helps us all.
It's a Wonderful Life is one of the top fifty of all time, probably one of
the top ten: a cinema masterpiece with a message.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I know what I'm going to do tomorrow and the next day and the
next year and the year after that," says James Stewart as the exuberant
and supremely confident new high school graduate George Bailey.  "I'm
going to shake the dust of this crummy little town off my feet.  I'm
going to see the world then I'm going to build things."
     In the great Frank Capra's classic 1946 movie IT'S A WONDERFUL
LIFE, George will never get to follow any of these dreams.  Like his
father (Samuel S. Hinds) before him, George is genetically incapable of
thinking of himself first.  No matter how bad he wants something, he is
so selfless that he will give up everything to help his fellowman.
Although his father seems content with his charitable life, George has
places he wants to see and bridges he plans on building.  None of this
is ever to be for George, but by the show's conclusion George will come
to realize what a wonderful life he has anyway.
     Set mainly in a cold and snowy environment and with the show's
conclusion at Christmas Eve, IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE is a great film for
the holidays.  Although sometimes bordering on the maudlin, it remains
a beautifully uplifting story and a sweet little comedy as well.
     When his father passes away suddenly, George is called to take
over his father's shaky savings and loan (called a buildings and loan
back then).  George had his bags packed, but gives up his world trip to
help the town.
     The town of Bedford Falls is controlled by the nefarious Mr.
Potter, played with convincingly evil overtones by Lionel Barrymore.
He is "the richest and meanest man in the county" and a slum landlord
that rents at exorbitant rates the only places in town.  George's
buildings and loan provides low cost loans that the townsfolk use to
become home owners rather than renters.  There is a constant battle
with Potter trying to take over the whole town including the buildings
and loan.  Although Potter is already "so rich he can never spend it
all," he wants more.  He wants to own every inch of Bedford Falls.
     James Stewart's Academy Award nominated performance is what most
people remember from the movie, but there is so much more.  Donna Reed
gives a radiantly lovely characterization of his wife Mary.  Just as
unselfish and hard working as George, she is the love of his life.  The
lighting shines on her face in such a way that you will swear her face
is lit from within.
     There is a scene in the film when they are dating where her robe
gets pulled off and she hides naked in the hydrangea bushes.  This
scene has a wonderfully innocent sensuality to it without ever showing
any flesh or using any provocative language.  Film makers today are
incapable of anything this subtle when it comes to romance.
     Uncle Billy, played charmingly by Thomas Mitchell, is George's
unreliable second-in-command.  Uncle Billy keeps strings tied around
his fingers so he will not forget things, but then goes and neglects to
notice the strings.  One day this causes George's business to start to
go down the tubes.  It at this point in the story that George snaps,
and what was a pleasant comedy is transformed into a great film.
     After George's outburst of anger, he considers suicide, but is
saved by his Guardian angel, Clarence (Henry Travers).  To make George
become himself again, Clarence shows George what the town would be like
if George had never lived.  As Clarence puts it, "You've been given a
great gift, George.  A chance to see what the world would be like
without you."  Bedford Falls is now Pottersville.  No peaceful Normal
Rockwell hamlet anymore.  It is closer to Sodom and Gomorrah with
garish neon signs and loud music announcing all the bars and other
lucrative dens of iniquity.  Mr. Potter is richer than ever and the
town poorer.
     The show ends in a miracle as true as the human spirit that the
film embodies.
     IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE runs 2:09, and I loved every minute of it.
It is not rated but would get a G.  There is no sex, nudity, or
profanity.  The violence consists of one punch thrown in anger.
Suicide is contemplated so there is a small chance that very young kids
might get scared. "It was an okay movie," said my son Jeffrey, age 7
1/2. "The only part I really liked was when they were kids."  He gave
it a thumbs sideways.  To enjoy the film kids probably need to be a
little bit older than Jeffrey.  This simple story full of old
fashioned, but nevertheless, relevant values is exceptional.  I
recommend it strongly to you and give it a full ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1946
U.S. Release Date: 12/20/46 (limited), 1/30/47 (wide)
Running Length: 2:09
MPAA Classification: NR (Nothing offensive)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.33:1
Cast: James Stewart, Donna Reed, Lionel Barrymore, Thomas Mitchell, 
      Henry Travers, H.B. Warner, Gloria Grahame, Frank Faylen, 
      Ward Bond, Todd Karns
Director: Frank Capra
Producer: Frank Capra
Screenplay: Frank Capra, Frances Goodrich, Albert Hackett, and 
      Jo Swerling based on "The Greatest Gift" by Philip Van Doren Stern
Cinematography: Joseph Walker and Joseph Biroc
Music: Dimitri Tiomkin
U.S. Distributor: Liberty Films
     Every year around Christmas, there are two stories guaranteed to 
show up somewhere, sometime on television:  A CHRISTMAS CAROL (of which 
there are several good versions) and IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE (of which 
there is only one).  After its copyright was inexplicably not renewed in 
1974 and the film tumbled into the public domain, IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE 
could be found on the air literally dozens of times every holiday 
season, with versions as varied as crisp, black-and-white prints to 
murky, colorized bastardizations.  Only recently (1994, to be exact), 
when NBC obtained exclusive rights to the film, has the Christmastime 
tide of broadcasts been stemmed.
     There's no doubt that IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE is one of today's most 
popular Christmas films, easily surpassing other favorites such as A 
MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET and the aforementioned A CHRISTMAS CAROL/SCROOGE.  
Of the many myths surrounding Frank Capra's 1946 film, the most often 
repeated one involves the movie's initial reception.  Contrary to common 
belief, it was not an immediate hit.  Nor was it a complete critical and 
popular failure.  Back in 1946-47, IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE received mixed 
reviews, ranging from a lionization in THE HOLLYWOOD REPORTER to a 
vicious trashing in the NEW YORKER.  Although nominated for five Academy 
Awards (including Best Picture and Best Actor, in what Stewart called 
his favorite role), the movie was shut out at the ceremony.  And, 
despite Capra's popularity at the box office, IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE 
barely made back its cost.
     In fact, it was the expiration of IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE's copyright 
that transformed it into a Christmas staple.  Once the film began 
showing with such frequency during the month of December, a whole new 
generation of movie-lovers discovered (and fell in love with) the 
previously-obscure release.  Critics of the '70s and '80s took a look at 
the movie, and the reviews were almost unanimously positive (one notable 
exception being that of Pauline Kael, who called it "doggerel" and 
"patronizing").  IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE achieved its deserved 
recognition, albeit four decades after it was first released.
     What is it about this film, an uplifting, sentimental fable about 
the importance of the individual, that strikes a responsive chord with 
so many viewers?  Some might argue that it has something to do with the 
season, but I don't buy that reasoning.  IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE is just 
as good in July as in December -- the time of the year has little to do 
with motion picture quality.  Rather, I think IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE has 
earned its legion of followers because it effectively touches upon one 
basic truth of life that we all would like to believe -- that each of 
us, no matter how apparently insignificant, has the power to make a 
difference, and that the measure of our humanity has nothing to do with 
fame or money, but with how we live our life on a day-to-day basis.  
IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE asks and answers a question that all of us think 
of at one time or another:  "What would this world be like if I had 
never been born?"
     There's no doubt that IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE is a "feel good" movie.  
In fact, at the time of its initial release, it was dubbed "Capra-corn."  
Yet the film's manipulation is intensely skillful and sincere in a way 
that is rarely apparent in any recently-released, "uplifting" title.  In 
today's cynical climate, I doubt that a picture like this could be made.  
The last Capra-esque fantasy to reach screens was the Nicolas 
Cage/Bridget Fonda romance, IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU, and that sunk like a 
rock at the box office.  Despite being brought to life during the '40s, 
IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE offers a timeless story with a universal message.
     As almost every avid movie-lover knows, IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE tales 
the story of George Bailey (Stewart), the unsung, beloved hero of 
Bedford Falls.  As a child, George was selfless, risking his own life 
(and losing his hearing in one ear) to save his brother from drowning.  
As an adult, he gave up his dreams of traveling the world and going to 
college to stay home and manage the Bailey Building and Loan Society 
after his father passed away.  Throughout his life, George lived by a 
creed that always placed human need above riches, and, as a result, his 
only wealth was in his friends and family.
     The film's villain is a miserly old man named Potter (played with 
consummate nastiness by movie great Lionel Barrymore), who uses his 
considerable wealth to bleed the citizens of Bedford Falls dry.  The 
Bailey Building and Loan Society is the only institution in town that he 
doesn't own, and he's willing to do anything to get his hands on it – 
lie, cheat, bribe, steal…  There's no end to the schemes that Potter 
devises to destroy George.  Yet the Baileys always seem to end up on 
top.
     The first two-thirds of IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE recaps George's life 
during the span of years from 1919, when he's a child dreaming of 
becoming an explorer, until 1946, when he is firmly established as the 
rock of Bedford Falls.  The film has romance (George's courting of Mary, 
who is played by Donna Reed), comedy (an unexpected swim at a high 
school dance), and tragedy (the death of Peter Bailey).  And, although 
the predominant tone is upbeat, Capra effectively captures the darkness 
of George's mood as his mounting personal and financial troubles plunge 
him into an abyss of despair.  Those who mistakenly think of IT'S A 
WONDERFUL LIFE as all light and sunshine forget the grimness of certain 
later scenes, especially those that culminate in George standing on a 
bridge, contemplating suicide.
     Enter Clarence (Henry Travers), George's lovable, bumbling guardian 
angel, who has come to Bedford Falls to prove to George that his life is 
worth living.  To defend his position, he grants George one wish:  to 
see what the world would be like if he had never been born.  As he and 
George travel through the nightmarish alternate reality, they observe 
how much worse off many people would be.  Mary is a lonely spinster; 
George's brother, Harry, is dead; George's uncle, Billy, is in an insane 
asylum; and Potter owns the entire town.
     It's this often-copied segment of IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE that 
reminds us of the film's kinship with Dickens' A CHRISTMAS CAROL.  In 
both stories, the visions supplied by supernatural beings convince their 
subjects of the value of life and the importance of the contribution of 
the individual.  Despite the apparent difference in the nature of each 
story's protagonist, both popular Christmas tales strike similar chords 
with audiences.  Watching IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE is truly an enriching 
experience.
     Capra not only had a knack for superior storytelling; he was a 
master of casting.  From the beginning, he always envisioned Jimmy 
Stewart as George.  Although the role had originally been developed 
under another producer for Cary Grant, when Capra took control of the 
project, he began rewrites with Stewart in mind.  It would be both mens' 
return to the screen following war service.  And, although Capra never 
regained the popularity he had attained during the '30s, Stewart became 
more in demand than ever.  His ability to show a darker side of himself 
– something he did for the first time in IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE – led to 
him being accepted in roles that demanded an element of moral ambiguity, 
such as that of L.B. Jefferies in Alfred Hitchcock's REAR WINDOW.  To 
his dying day, Stewart would be known as an icon of small-town American 
values, but it's worth noting that the actor was capable of expanding 
beyond that stereotype.
     Even though Donna Reed was not Capra's first choice for Mary (Jean 
Arthur, who co-starred with Stewart in two of the director's previous 
efforts, MR. SMITH GOES TO WASHINGTON and YOU CAN'T TAKE IT WITH YOU, 
was otherwise committed), it's hard to imagine anyone else in this role.  
Reed embodies the independence and sweetness needed to capture George's 
heart.  And who can forget the romantic electricity in George and Mary's 
first kiss, while Sam Wainwright waits on the other end of the phone 
line?
     The supporting cast is both excellent and memorable.  Lionel 
Barrymore's Potter makes Scrooge seem like a genial gentleman.  Thomas 
Mitchell plays Uncle Billy, George's lovable-but-incompetent partner in 
the Bailey Building and Loan Society.  Henry Travers is Clarence, the 
second-class angel trying to earn his wings.  Frank Faylen and Ward Bond 
are Ernie the taxi driver and Bert the cop, respectively (the SESAME 
STREET duo of Bert and Ernie got their names from these two).  And 
Gloria Grahame is Violet, Bedford Falls' "bad girl", who has a soft spot 
for George.
     Technically, IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE is impressive.  A huge, 300-yard 
long representation of Bedford Falls' main street was constructed, with 
over 80 stores and buildings, and 20 transplanted oak trees.  Since the 
film was shot in the middle of summer, the copious amounts of snow used 
during the winter scenes had to be man-made (3000 tons of shaved ice, 
300 tons of gypsum, 300 tons of plaster, and 6000 gallons of chemicals 
were utilized).  Through the unique magic of motion pictures, it's 
impossible to tell that not one flake of snow is genuine.
     Combine the characters, the story, the message, and the acting, and 
it's easy to see why IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE isn't just a holiday 
favorite, but a great movie by almost any standards.  There are a few 
cynics who will disparage this film, but, in a "feel good" genre clogged 
with imitators and inferior features, IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE stands high 
above the rest.  Whether you view this film in the middle of the summer 
or at Christmas, Capra's greatest film represents one of the most 
transcendent and joyful experiences any movie-lover can hope for.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Max Scheinin
Near the end of Frank Capra's holiday classic, Its A Wonderful Life, George
Bailey (Jimmy Stewart) is feeling down. He has devoted his life to others,
and never fulfilled his dream of leaving his small supburb town, Bedford
Falls. Standing upon a bridge above stormy waters, he looks down,
contemplating suicide. He has potential he hasn't fulfilled -- yet, he has
done so much for others. As a young chap, his ambition was to leave his
hometown of Bedford Falls. But times and ambitions change. Things happen,
and he's stuck. His guardian angel is there, and shows him that...It's A
Wonderful Life. In a whirlwind tour of the town, George sees what life
would be like without him. He learns the moral lesson, that to live is a
gift. His earthly problems are solved. The climatic scene is a marvel.
Frank Capra's film is a centenial classic -- watched and re-experienced by
every generation. Wonderful Life is one of the few pictures of times gone
by that seems as fresh, maybe fresher, then it did when it was first
released. Many films of the thirties through seventies have aged poorly.
But this one is a near flawless example of how well a perfect script and
timing can mesh with first-rate acting, wit and suspense, glorious music,
and terrific set peices. The only even slightly dated scenes are those at
the begining in which God has a long chat with Clarence, George's guardian
angel. They aren't all that bad, but they remain corny and a little out of
place. Nevertheless, this is one film that deserves its place in time,
cinema history, and our hearts. It can be equally appreciated by anyone of
any age. Here is one genuine masterpeice, a classic that reaches heights
and ambitions near perfection. This crackling good mixture results in a
film which is at once funny, exciting, moving and uplifting. The film
itself is almost a reversal of the life of George Bailey -- there isn't too
much to it, but Capra and the gang (various screenwriters, composers,
actors) plumet the material to its fullest potential. The result is a film
-- though not at first intended to be pigeon-holed as a holiday film --
that will always be remembered, celebrated, and loved. 
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an regular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"We all go a little mad sometimes."
- Anthony Perkins @ the Bates motel.

Author
Sridhar Prasad
    One of the sweetest tales to ever be made, IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE 
isn't perfect, but its good natured charm and beautiful performances 
light up the screen with glorious results.  Probably the greatest 
"feel-good" film of all time, IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE aims for the heart, 
and strikes with a golden arrow.
On Christmas Eve, George Bailey (Stewart) is being prayed for by 
many in the small town of Bedford Falls.  You see, George is in trouble, 
and he has always helped others who needed it.  This one time, however, 
God answers his prayers, and sends down the lovable Guardian Angel 
Clarence (Travers) to try and save George.  Clarence has got his own 
problems, however.  Clarence is an angel without his wings, and each 
time the bell rings, the wings pass him by.  The Bailey case is a way 
for him to earn those magical wings and become a true angel.
But before Clarence can save George, he first has to go through a 
Cliffs Notes version of George Bailey's life.  We see George sacrificing 
his hearing to save his brother's life, sacrificing his college 
education to save the family business, sacrificing his dream of living 
far away to support his brother, and even sacrificing his life to make 
sure his brother is happy working somewhere else.  When the bank his 
family owns is in trouble, George gives away his honeymoon money to make 
sure the bank isn't sold to the evil Mr. Potter (Barrymore), who wants 
nothing less than to get the Baileys out of Bedford Falls.  One 
Christmas, Potter gets his chance.  Uncle Billy Bailey (Mitchell) loses 
$8,000 of the bank's money.  Without the money, the bank must close 
down.  George is stuck in a tremendous bind, and contemplates suicide.  
Clarence, the faithful servant, is there just to pick him up, and to 
show him what Bedford would be like without George.  This is all a 
lead-in to the very famous last scene, where George finally sees what 
true happiness is about.
IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE does have its faults.  The movie is beginning 
to feel dated in the details, especially in the treatment of women and 
men.  The sex roles in the film are weirdly out of place in the 90's, 
like something out of a revisionist look.  All the men drink too much 
and slap their wives too much during some portions of the film.  There 
are, however, endearing moments in all of this.  Capra puts in just 
enough humor mocking the sex roles of the 50's to make the movie 
remarkably enjoyable.  The story is hackneyed, and the ending feels, 
well, a little too sugarish.  There's this uneasy feeling of sugar over 
everything, especially the sequences where George is either in trouble, 
or helping somebody.  It's a little too nice for my liking, at times.  
There is, however, enough humor, enough wit, and enough of Jimmy Stewart 
to get the movie through the middle part, which would be the most 
difficult.  But watching IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE is never boring or 
difficult: it's always interesting, right until the finale, which, for 
all its sugar, makes delightful sense and is beautifully done.
Capra does have his monumental cliches, but the actors relish them 
and overplay everything to perfection.  Donna Reed is perfect as the 
loving, obeidient wife, and Lionel Barrymore is gloriously grump as Mr. 
Potter.  Everyone else is magnificent, including Bert and Ernie (Ward 
Bond and Frank Faylen).  There is a general sense of goodness, as if 
everyone in the film knows that they are making a great film, and they 
relish that.  Stewart, however, is the king of all of this.  He is 
sometimes awkward, especially when saying "Merry Christmas" to all 
objects, animate or inanimate.  But he is James Stewart, and he's 
lovably delightful throughout the film.
Have I complained?  I shouldn't have.  This is a really good movie.  
No, this is a great movie.  Better yet, this is a phenomenal movie.  
There is a reason classics are invented: to make sure that people will 
always have great movies to aid them in their quest for living life.  
This is one of those films.  It is a "feel-good" movie, something people 
complain a little too much about.  But Capra's reworking of "A Christmas 
Carol" is the greatest Christmas movie of all time.  There, I've said 
it.  I have to admit, the first time I saw this, I saw it with my 
family, including my 11 year old kid sister.  They all loved it.  They 
loved George, his wife, his troubles, and the beautiful ending.  Is it a 
little too sugar-coated?  Maybe.  No matter.  This is a film that should 
be watched time and time again, with families around a coffee table, and 
eggnog on the plate.  It is a film that just makes you feel good about 
life, family, and hope.  It is the perfect Christmas film, flaws and 
all.  It is Frank Capra's greatest acheivement, and that really does say 
a lot.  For about 121 out of 129 minutes, this movie is flawless.  The 
rest can be excused: no film is perfectly flawless.  I can't get over 
how much I love this movie, and how much you will, after watching it, 
digesting it, and sitting with your family, appreciating how special 
life really is.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
With our first glimpse of Bedford Falls, the idyllic, snow-kissed
setting of Frank Capra's It's a Wonderful Life, we know something is
amiss. It's Christmas Eve, but there's no joy in the air--only a sense
of tension and foreboding. There are voices in the night; from every
home we hear the prayers of townsfolk, requesting salvation for one of
their own--George Bailey, the beloved secretary of the town's Savings
and Loan office. His name is chanted like a mantra, hovering on the
lips of every resident.  "Please, Lord," they plead, "help George
Bailey." 
Bailey (James Stewart) is a man whose life hasn't turned out the way
he envisioned it. He's no longer the wide-eyed boy who dreamed of
travel, exploration, and--most importantly--making a difference in the
world; now in his late twenties, he's deeply entrenched in a job he
despises. George is kind to everyone, a trait responsible for his
current predicament. He simply can't say no. To anyone. For any
reason. He loans money to friends when he can barely afford to buy
clothes for his children. He finds himself deaf in one ear after
risking his life to save his brother from drowning. He abandons his
dream of going to college when his father's business needs him.
Everyone, it seems, owes at least a portion of their well-being to
George's selflessness.
To see the complete review, please visit:
http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/cc101.htm

Author
Martin Rich
Two events - the fiftieth anniversary of the film being made and the 
death of Jimmy Stewart during 1997 - prompted the re-release, in a new 
print, of 'It's a Wonderful Life'.
This seasonal fable by Frank Capra, set in a snow-covered American 
small town, has become a staple of Christmas television in the US.  It 
isn't quite as familiar in Britain, but it's a good enough film to 
repay seeing in a cinema.
Jimmy Stewart plays George Bailey, the local hero of the small town of 
Bedford Falls.  He rejects offers of foreign travel and an exotic 
future to run the family business, a philanthropic savings bank, and to 
preserve it from the attentions of Potter, a callous millionaire played 
by Lionel Barrymore in a truly evil manner.  All goes well until one 
Christmas, when Bailey's world starts to collapse around him, and 
divine intervention is called for in the way that only a film can 
portray.
Of course it's dated in places: in particular the assumption that the 
worst fate that could have befallen Donna Reed's character, had she 
never met her husband, would have been to become an unmarried 
librarian, looks very strange in 1997.  The division between the heroes 
in the small-town, caring, bank and the villains looks quaint and 
over-simple today.  And if somebody as virtuous as George Bailey, who 
had saved his brother as a child, and built up the family business 
against the odds, only deserved a second class guardian angel, what 
hope is there for the rest of us?
But some of the film's strength is actually in its sense of period.  
Straight after the second world war, it didn't just satisfy a need for 
a feel-good movie, but it also mirrored a society intent on 
reconstruction, and one where each community's war hero was feted.  
It also resists the temptation to show its hero as perfect.  George 
Bailey doesn't just contemplate suicide (never the easiest topic to 
deal with), but he arrives home irritable when his children are 
preparing for Christmas, he gets into fights, and he even makes life 
difficult for the angel who is trying to help him.  Drama this good is 
always worth watching - even fifty years after it was filmed.
