Title
Review for Won't Anybody Listen (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
     Dov Kelemer's look into an aspiring rock band in the L.A. music
scene is as stomach turning as a movie can get without showing any blood
and guts.
     Instead, the blood and guts can be found in the eyes of the six
members of the-band-you've-never-heard-of NC-17, a sort-of harmonized
post-grunge combo with a violinist and a gravelly-voiced lead singer. 
Having moved from rural Michigan to Los Angeles based on the promise of
a record deal, brothers Frank and Vince Rogala and Robin Canada (then
known as Exude) thought everything was going their way.  Said record
deal evaporated, though, and the band found itself more unknown than
ever.  Ten years later, they're still at it, now with five members
(including the violin), a new name, and nothing to show for a decade of
work.
     Documentary film doesn't get more desperate than this.  As Kelemer
put in an introductory note to me, "it is similar to Hoop Dreams... and
it is Leaving Las Vegas depressing....  Hopefully... you won't shoot
yourself after watching it."  I didn't, but I wanted to.  As a writer, I
know rejection, for sure.  But the career of musician is undoubtedly the
worst when it comes to an utter lack of recognition for your work,
ranking below independent filmmaker and aspiring actor.
     The members of NC-17 face everything from estranged wives and
uncaring A&R reps to greedy concert promoters and IRS audits.  And
Kelemer's got it all on film.  It's a truly unforgettable movie,
light-hearted at times, but devastating on the whole.  While the film
has its flaws (notably a filthy lens used in shooting the bulk of the
black and white video footage and some scenes that tend to repeat
material too much), Won't Anybody Listen is a picture that any fan of
documentary will adore.  And if you think you know what went into that
$16 compact disc, just you wait....
     Won't Anybody Listen premieres at the Independent Feature Film
Market in September 2000.
Director: Dov Kelemer
Producer: Dov Kelemer
Starring: Art Aviles, Robert Aviles, Roxanne Aviles, Lori
Graves-Bartolini, Mark Billes, Hugo Burnham, Robin Canada, C. Tucker
Cheadle, Kieth Dean, Bob Diamond, Bruce Duff, Len Fagen, Lonn Friend,
Danny Goodwin, Rich Heaton, Nina Heller, Chuck Hohn, Lance Hubp, Jeff
Jampol, Tom Kidd, Chris Martin, Lena Michaels, Ron Perron, Doug
Priestap, Frank Rogala, Rose Rogala, Vince Rogala, Billy Rose, Barry
Squire, Katherine Turman, Jim Washburn
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
