Title
Review for River Wild, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Jon A. Webb
     THE RIVER WILD has Meryl Streep as a rower and former river guide
with a family.  She meets up with trouble on a white water rafting trip
with her family, and deals with it.
     It is clear that Meryl Streep chose this film because of the
opportunity to portray a strong female in a commercial context, and her
acting adds immeasurably to the quality of the product.  Watching her,
I felt I learned something about women generally; I have never felt
this way before. Streep takes this fairly obvious, somewhat creaky
vehicle with echoes of THE INCREDIBLE JOURNEY, DELIVERANCE, etc.  and
turns it into a commentary on the strength of a woman. As my wife said
on leaving the theater: "I feel incredibly empowered--but also totally
inadequate."
     She is supported in this by a fine cast, particularly the big
names--David Strathairn as her relatively weak husband, and Kevin Bacon
as the macho stranger.  Both of them deliver good performances, but
they are out-acted by Streep, as she has consistently out-acted every
leading man in her distinguished career.  Here her strength as an
actress works better than it ever has before, since she now has her
experience to draw on and an appropriately strong character to
portray.
     Here's to Meryl Streep, whose career is finally back on track!
Here's to the director, who was intelligent enough to allow her to
carry the weight of the movie, and to allow the tension and suspense
come from her brilliant style!
     The script is weak--in lesser hands, this would be strictly
made-for-TV fare--and the effects do not work very well; I honestly
never felt that they were that much in danger on the river, despite
numerous scenes that must have been hard to film, showing them
apparently bouncing around in some pretty tough water.
     But this hardly matters in the face of such a richly moving
portrayal. It is almost enough to make one wish that Streep were a man,
so that she would get the recognition she deserves, as the finest
cinematic actor that ever lived, and the corresponding emolument,
rather than merely as the finest actress, and the pay of an upper-end
actress with a young body. But it is better for us, if not for her, as
it is; we will continue to learn from this great woman as she continues
to turn her experience into art.

Author
Jef Poskanzer
     Meryl Streep does a good job with flawed material in this rafting
drama.  She plays an aging former river guide who remembers the glory
days on the river and is dissatisfied with her boring married life in
Boston.  She takes her son on a river trip, and her husband, after
almost wimping out, comes along to try and save the marriage.  But they
run into trouble in the form of a wonderfully creepy Kevin Bacon.  He
hijacks their trip and they end up doing some much wilder whitewater
than they had planned.
     The story was riddled with minor idiocies and amazingly clumsy
dialog.  Too bad, all the problems I remember could easily have been
fixed by a little script doctoring.  Example: the plot requires that a
man on foot in unfamiliar territory with no trails be able to get
downriver faster than the boat.  He does have a map, but in general it
would be impossible.  The exception would be if the river did a big
meander that he could cut across.  And in fact there was a scene of him
way up high looking down on the river.  All it would have taken to fix
this bug is one shot of the map showing the meander, and another shot
from up high looking down from another angle to the other part of the
river.
     Oh, and you can't start a fire with the magnifying glass on a
Swiss Army Knife.  And unless you're Superman you can't dump people out
of a raft by lifting up one end.  Mere mortals have difficulty lifting
an empty, unrigged raft by themselves.  There were a lot more of these
niggling details.
     And check out this dialog.  The husband and wife are smooching,
and the kid starts yelling for them.  Hubby says "I'm going to put him
to bed."  Wife: "And I will bathe."  Huh??  Who talks like that?  Not
anyone I know, and not Meryl's character anywhere else in the movie.
     Now, the whitewater footage in the last third was pretty darn
good.  Oh, some of it was faked a little clumsily, the raft on too-calm
water in the foreground with out-of-scale raging whitewater in the
background and a blurry matte line in between.  But a lot of it was
quite real, and exciting.  Should have had more of that and less
shoot-em-up and McGyverism.
     I saw this at a free sneak preview with a bunch of rafting
buddies.  Their reaction was much the same.  I'm glad, though, that the
movie is getting positive reviews from others who were not driven to
distraction by the above-noted bugs.  If the movie had been a flop,
that would have closed the door on rafting movies for five years.  Now
it looks like they will be a mildly hot topic.  Maybe someone will
actually make a good one.

Author
Eric Mankin
     A gloriously buff Meryl Streep floats--literally--through this
lightweight but workable family-in-peril thriller.  Streep plays Gail,
former white-water river guide turned Boston teacher grown apart from
her distant, workaholic husband (David Strathairn).  The Rocky Mountain
river run designed to Dad back together with Gail and his nine-year old
son coincides with the escape of a group of armed robbers--who hijack
the family, demanding that Gail take them through an impassable series
of cataracts called the Gauntlet.
     It's a smart idea for a movie, credibly giving the physical skills
that are the key to the story to the mother, not the father--and Streep
is convincingly physical, radiating power at the oars of her Zodiac.
Unfortunately, she doesn't get a chance to do much more: director
Curtis Hanson, as he did in his similarly clever but under-achieving
HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE, simplifies everything in the script (Denis
O'Neill's first) just as it starts getting interesting.
     Most of the problems are in the characterization of the crook
leader, Wade (Kevin Bacon), who's initially made both charming and
sexually appealing but turns, much too quickly and much too patly, into
a simple, uncomplicated and uninteresting creep from nowhere.  Streep,
an actress who can do anything, is limited to making her
I'm-going-to-kill-you-face, and trying to keep from being upstaged by
Maggy, the family's loyal golden retriever.
     It's not that Hanson doesn't know how to make things infinitely
more subtle: he did it in a whole series of scripts, including SILENT
PARTNER, NEVER CRY WOLF, and BAD INFLUENCE.  The blandness and lack
of shading seems, instead, calculated:  something nice and simple, not
too spicy, lots of pretty river scenery, to go with the Thanksgiving
turkey.  It's not bad--but the elements were there in all departments
for a much better film.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     THE RIVER WILD is one of the most entertaining and intelligent
thrillers to come along in quite a while, largely due to an absolutely
first-rate cast lead by Meryl Streep.  The wonderful cast and
well-staged action sequences are able to easily overcome a slightly
contrived, occasionally predictable plot.
     Streep stars as a history teacher and mother of two who had worked
as a river guide in her youth.  While taking her young son (Joseph
Mazzello) on a vacation down the river, she makes the mistake of
helping out a stranded boater (Kevin Bacon) who turns out to have a
dangerous secret.  Eventually, Streep is forced to guide Bacon and his
partner (John C. Reilly) down the river along with her son and husband
(David Strathairn).
     Throughout her career, Meryl Streep has proven herself to be an
extraordinarily versatile actor who fits easily into a wide variety of
genres.  It comes as no surprise that she is instantly believable and
seems completely at home in this type of action film.  Streep goes
through a wide range of emotions here, ranging from exhilaration during
the early parts of her journey eventually shifting to immense strength
mixed with occasional moments of fear, anger, and even hatred.  In
numerous scenes, she is able to wordlessly convey a great deal of
emotion through simple facial expressions and body language.  In a
couple scenes, Streep responds to Bacon's actions with wordless stares
that say more than many actors could manage with pages of dialog.
     In the past, Kevin Bacon has usually relied on his boyish charm to
create instantly likable and sympathetic characters.  In this film, he
shows a surprising dark side.  The combination of his usual charm with
occasional shifts to controlled rage create a very effective villain.
John C. Reilly's performance as Bacon's occasionally reluctant partner
is also quite good.  There are several strong scenes where even Reilly
expresses shock at what Bacon is capable of doing.
     David Strathairn continues to be one of the most underappreciated
actors working in film today.  I think the main thing that has kept him
from being better known is that he is so chameleon-like that he can
give two good performances that many people won't even realize are
coming from the same actor.  He is absolutely terrific here in a
somewhat underwritten role that could easily have been a throw-away if
it had been played by a lesser actor.  Instead, Strathairn creates an
interesting character who grows quite a bit during the course of the
film.
     Finally, Joseph Mazzello is sweet and completely believable as the
young son.  Coming after strong performances in JURASSIC PARK and
SHADOWLANDS, this film certainly helps to establish Mazzello as one of
the best child actors currently working.
     While the performances are all outstanding, the story isn't quite
as strong. The biggest problem was the inclusion of a subplot involving
problems in Streep and Strathairn's marriage.  This subplot is
contrived and predictable and tends to occasionally slow the film down,
particularly during the early scenes.  Largely because of this subplot,
the film takes a little long to get the main plot rolling.  Once it
does, though, the subplot is largely dropped and the film moves at a
very quick pace.
     Despite these plot problems, writer Dennis O'Neill and director
Curtis Hanson largely manage to keep things moving and to avoid most of
the common pitfalls of this type of action film.  There aren't any
moments where the characters do anything that seems stupid nor does the
plot ever seem particularly implausible.  It is especially refreshing
to see action heroes who genuinely seem frightened by their situation
and to be aware of the danger.  The acts of heroism seem to be
genuinely done with a great deal of concern and uncertainty.
     Robert Elswit's Panavision photography takes advantage of the
gorgeous landscape to generate some breathtaking shots without ever
allowing the camera to get in the way of the action.  The action
sequences are all very well staged so that it is easy to tell what is
happening.  Jerry Goldsmith was brought in to score the film at the
last minute after Maurice Jarre's score was deemed unsuitable, but the
music is very good and certainly doesn't seem like a rush job. My only
complaint is that we were once again deprived of a Goldsmith suite over
the end credits in order to make room for a pop song.
     Hopefully, THE RIVER WILD will be a big hit for Universal proving
that there is a market for an intelligent action film with a top-notch
cast.  This movie is a lot of fun.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     If there currently is a more talented, more versatile actress than
Meryl Streep, I have no idea who that might be.  Be it SOPHIE'S CHOICE,
DEFENDING YOUR LIFE, FRENCH LIEUTENANT'S WOMAN, KRAMER VS KRAMER,
SILKWOOD, MANHATTAN, or any of her other films, she is magnificent.  It
comes as no surprise then that in this film she is right on the
believability target as the desperate mother and wife who steers a raft
through the white-water rapids to save her family.
     Gail (Streep), her husband, Tom (David Strathairn), and their son,
Roarke (Joseph Mazzelllo), are white-water rafting on their vacation as
David and Gail try to put the lost zest back into their marriage.  Gail
has spent her childhood on the river and knows every inch of it.  She
has even gone over the falls where the three rivers meet in a wicked,
turbulent and very dangerous confluence ... but she was 18 then.  Now,
so many years later, she is called upon to save her family as she and
her son race down the river in a raft with two robbers who are making
an escape with a bagful of money and forcing Gail to get them to the
border.
     Kevin Bacon is properly mean as one of the robbers who befriends
and charms young Roarke but who turns vicious when he kidnaps the
family to aid in his escape.
     The beautiful scenery, the rushing water with its churning waves,
the raft going over several falls, and everyone hanging on for dear
life as Gail maneuvers the raft around waves and boulders makes for an
exceptionally fine thriller while all the time, Jerry Goldsmith's
stirring music pumps up the action, keeping you glued to the edge of
your seat.  This is what action movies are all about.
     Directed by Curtis Hanson who scared you with THE HAND THAT ROCKS
THE CRADLE. The script is by Denis O'Neill.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Meryl Streep, Kevin Bacon, David Strathairn, Joseph
Mazzello, John C. Reilly.
Screenplay:  Denis O'Neil.
Director:  Curtis Hanson.
     Meryl Streep has proved to be an actor impossible to pigeonhole.
Early in her career, she became renowned for her roles in such serious
fare as SOPHIE'S CHOICE and OUT OF AFRICA, but was also stereotyped as
an "accent of the month" technician without an audience-friendly
personality.  Then, with films like POSTCARDS FROM THE EDGE, DEFENDING
YOUR LIFE and DEATH BECOMES HER, she showed a completely new and
extremely appealing gift for comedy.  Now Streep has gotten serious
again, but this time in the context of an action-suspense thriller.
THE RIVER WILD gives Streep the chance to flex new muscles (literally
and artistically), and while she continues to be one of the most
talented actors alive, she is failed here by a script which is
thoroughly by-the-numbers.
     Streep plays Gail, a Boston woman in the midst of marital
difficulties.  When her workaholic husband Tom (David Strathairn) bails
out on a river rafting trip for son Roarke's (Joseph Mazzello)
birthday, Gail, Roarke and the family dog head for the high country
anyway.  Tom surprises her by joining them at the last minute, but
tensions run high.  They run even higher when they happen upon Wade
(Kevin Bacon) and Terry (John C. Reilly), two inexperienced rafters who
have lost their guide.  Gail, a veteran of the river, offers to help
them make it down, but it soon becomes clear that Wade and Terry plan
to go farther than Gail wants to take them, and that she and her family
have no choice but to go along.
     There is something to be said simply for the opportunity to watch
Meryl Streep perform.  At times during THE RIVER WILD, her talent
explodes through the film's surface like one of the Class V rapids Gail
must navigate.  In one phenomenal scene, Gail leans in close to Wade to
explain in a vicious whisper that she simply isn't capable of
navigating "The Gauntlet," a series of rapids which lies ahead.  She
manages to convey not only her anger at Wade for threatening her
family, but a subtle seduction in the attempt to convince him and a
genuine frustration that she isn't good enough to make this journey
even if she wanted to.  It was because of scenes like that that my
attention never completely wandered as long as Streep was on the
screen, and she is almost always on the screen.
     The problem is that most of the elements surrounding her aren't
one-tenth as interesting.  Denis O'Neil's script goes exactly where you
expect it to go exactly when you expect it to go there, a story any
movie of the week could come up with.  A scene between Streep and David
Strathairn in which they discuss their marital problems brought up
elements of Gail's personality which can be found nowhere in the
script, leaving Streep to flesh out this "demanding" streak on her
own.  Strathairn is solid, but has little to do; Kevin Bacon has a lot
to do, and does most of it poorly.  He's too stupid and not crazy
enough when he needs to be most threatening, and there's not all that
much conflict involved when the only thing the villain has over the
protagonists is a gun.  Director Curtis Hanson directs in a workmanlike
manner, trotting out such suspense film standbys as the old "pet leaps
out to the accompaniment of a blast of music" trick.  It frequently
seems as though he sees the family conflict storyline as something in
the way, something to be pushed through to get to the rafting
sequences.
     To be fair, those sequences are exciting.  Cinematographer Robert
Elswit's camera swoops and dives, and there is a genuine sense of
danger.  The location scenery is also magnificent, filmed on rivers in
Oregon and Montana, and helps fill in many of the dead spots.  But THE
RIVER WILD is too often THE RIVER MILD, a mediocre melodrama gifted
with the presence of one great actor.

Author
Eric Grossman
     Actresses always complain that they are not paid as much as their
male counterparts.  Executives and producers explain that the reason
for the disparity is men make action movies that sell big overseas.
Women on the other hand have fewer choice roles and the ones that they
do get tend to be dramas that do not translate well in foreign
markets.  Meryl Streep, probably tired of seeing men who cannot act
their way out of a paper bag earn several times what she does, has
chucked her accents for muscles in the new river-adventure, THE RIVER
WILD.
     This story about a woman who must save her family while on a
white-water rafting trip is trite and pales in the obvious comparison
to DELIVERANCE.  However, Streep is very good in her role as Gail, an
expert river-guide whose marriage to the job-obsessed, wimpy Tom (David
Strathairn) is on the rocks, no pun intended.  Gail thinks the trip
will help bring her family together and boy does it ever.  They meet
some really nasty people that have picked a particularly dangerous
escape route and they mean to take Gail and company along.
     THE RIVER WILD has all the necessary components for a good
action/thriller.  There is the young boy, Roarke (played by JURASSIC
PARK's dinosaur bait, Joseph Mazzello) to make sure there is extra
danger.  Kevin Bacon is the antagonist, Wade, a ruthless thief who is
tough as nails, so tough in fact that he plans his escape down a
roaring river even though he can't swim.  Finally, there is the family
dog, Maggie, who is smarter than all the humans in the film.  All the
ingredients are ready, now we just have to add water, white water to be
exact.
     Unfortunately, something went wrong in the Hollywood blender.
Director Curtis Hanson who made the commercially successful but
mediocre film, "The Hand That Rocks The Cradle," whips up some fancy
aerial shots over the river and some decent action sequences but he
never creates enough credible tension.  Since the screenwriter, Denis
O'Neill, forgot to pack interesting surprises and twists in the script,
it is Hanson's job to find a way to make us think we do not know what
will happen.  Technically everything is perfect, but even Streep's
acting and Jerry Goldsmith's solid score can't sell us the danger.
Like most Hollywood films, we know everything will be fine.  The
difference with this film is that we never doubt that we know this.
     All said and done, the production crew deserves a lot of credit
for even getting the film done.  It was made under tremendous adversity
stemming from the unique problems of shooting a film on the rapids.
There was considerable danger for the actors and as the film shows,
Ms.  Streep did one hell of a job steering those rafts.  The
physicality of her performance and the risks she took allow us to buy
her all the way as the ex-river guide.  Somehow if I was stuck on a
wild river and she was there, I would feel a lot safer.  Will she
become the next action star?  No way.  However, she has proved once
again that there is no role she cannot do.

Author
Rich Kulawiec
     THE RIVER WILD immediately invites comparisons with other films
containing whitewater footage--especially DELIVERANCE.  The parallels
are striking, since in both cases the writers added to the inherent
danger of river-running by creating actively hostile characters intent
on doing harm to Our Heroes.  Speaking of which, the heroes in this
film are Meryl Streep (Gail), David Strathairn (Gail's husband Tom),
Joseph Mazzello (her son Roarke) and Maggie (their golden retriever).
Together, they play a somewhat dysfunctional family torn between Tom's
obsessive work habits and Gail's more relaxed, earthy values.  Roarke
is split between these worlds--while he seems to appreciate the
petroglyphs carved on the canyon walls, he spends a lot of his time
plugged into his portable stereo.
     This story begins as a uneasy river trip; Tom joins Gail and
Roarke at the very last minute, having almost-but-not-quite torn
himself away from his work in Boston.  Gail, a former river guide, is
simultaneously pleased that he's decided to come along and unhappy that
he doesn't seem able to relax and immerse himself in the outdoor
experience.  Neither is prepared for the consequences of their coming
encounter with chillingly charming bad guy Wade (Kevin Bacon) and his
somewhat reluctant cohort (John C. Reilly).  This pair are on the run,
and have decided to make their escape downriver; and while they may not
be smart enough to have thought their plans through, they are smart
enough to coerce Gail to assist them.  Unfortunately for all concerned,
the way downriver includes The Gauntlet, an intimidating and ferocious
rapid which may or may not be runnable....
     Dennis O'Neill's script includes a few cliche moments--the
startled-by-the-benign-character-with-accompanying-musical-punctuation
scene, and the child-too-stupid-to-see-the-obvious-danger scene; but
these are exceptions to what is largely a well-written story which
manages to develop multiple characters in parallel.  The plot flows
much a like a whitewater river: calm and gentle here, unexpectedly
violent there.  The photography is exceptionally good; unlike its
predecessor DELIVERANCE, which was largely filmed from the riverbank,
THE RIVER WILD includes many on-board shots which sweep the movie-goer
right into the huge waves and monstrous holes that make up the larger
rapids.  THE RIVER WILD also differs from DELIVERANCE in its
representation of evil forces; in the present film, the bad guys are
much easier to identify, and the menace much more overt.  The
all-encompassing sense of foreboding that was present on the Chattooga
is replaced here with alternating moments of light and dark.
     Streep's performance?  In brief, Meryl Streep is one of the best
and most versatile actresses working today, and her performance here
shows yet another aspect of her talents.  And while she dwarfs everyone
else on the screen, the supporting roles played by Bacon, Mazzello, and
Maggie (!) should not be lost.
     Incidentally, a word about the "danger" bit: some folks (here and
elsewhere) have commented that the rapids didn't look that tough, and
that perhaps Jerry Goldsmith's musical score combined with Curtis
Hanson's direction had been employed to exaggerate their difficulty.
As an experienced whitewater kayaker and rafter, let me reassure you
that they are every bit as a tough as they look, if not more, and that
a run through "The Gauntlet" (in real life, Kootenai Falls, a class
V-VI drop on the Kootenai in Montana) has every possibility of being
lethal.  Even Blossom Bar on the Rogue (Oregon, class III-IV, used for
a number of scenes in the film) is by no means an easy rapid, and
underequipped, underexperienced paddlers *will* get hurt there.  So if
this movie has fired your sense of adventure, please don't rush out on
rivers you're not prepared for; the last thing the whitewater community
needs is a rash of injuries/deaths such as followed the release of
DELIVERANCE.  Instead, consider a guided trip on a more moderate
stream; the harder rivers will be there when you're ready for them.
     For an excellent account of the production of this film, from the
viewpoint of Arlene Burns (experienced whitewater professional and
stunt double for Streep in some scenes), see the October 1994 issue of
PADDLER magazine--available in outdoor/backpacking shops.
