Title
Review for Last Supper, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Joan Ellis
"The Last Supper" is the perfect title for this sardonic
comedy.  A group of self-satisfied grad students gathers on
Sunday nights to discuss the fine points of issues on which they
all agree.  Since they have yet to engage real life on any level,
they are free to wallow in the untested smugness of their
academic theories.  They are young liberals.
Their habit is to invite an alien thinker to stir the pot at
their Sunday suppers.  When fate deposits a monstrous bigot at
the table, the pot comes to a full boil that ends in murder. 
Faced with an act unimaginable to their humanist sensibilities
just a moment earlier, the students analyze their options much as
they might the pros and cons of going into Bosnia.  
Call the police? Claim self-defense? Bury him in the
backyard?  Quickly, they decide that sacrificing superior
intellect to a jail term for killing an unworthy facist is not an
option.  At this point, the movie takes an abrupt turn into black
humor as the now practiced murderers invite an increasingly
outrageous stream of right-wing zealots to share their table
before dispatching them to the backyard to fertilize their
tomatoes.  
Freed from the suspense of a serious thriller, we ponder the
theoretical questions flying around the screen and laugh
nervously at the comic calm that accompanies the ritual murders. 
We enjoy the choice of murder weapon that establishes collective
guilt, but watching guests and hosts  imprisoned in their own
rectitude is not the fluffy fun of Agatha Christie.  
A reverend intones that "homosexuality is the disease, and
AIDS is the cure."  Another posits that women invite rape,
another that the homeless must "know their place."  The
anti-environmentalist crows, "If the spotted owl's time is up..." 
They smart just a little when a young conservative attacks: 
"It's your generation's morality that has put my generation at
risk."
Oblivious to what they are doing in the name of higher
cause, the graduate students continue to dissect the
hypotheticals that feed their egos: Would you have killed Hitler
before he became Hitler?  At what point is it O.K. to kill
someone who is becoming an evil force on this planet?  Blind to
any idea that is not their own, these budding intellects are
arrogant hypocrits who toast themselves for "making the world a
better place and making a difference...we wouldn't kill anyone
unless we couldn't change their minds."  
Director Stacy Title and his crew have a very good time
using the ugly extremes of conservative zealotry to skewer the
self-righteousness of liberal piety.  Cameron Diaz, Bill Paxton,
Jason Alexander, Mark Harmon, and Annabeth Gish manage to mock
extemism in any form.  
We are reminded that the student who says, "We're liberals;
we do the right thing," usually grows up to be a conservative,
while the student who consistently tries to do the right thing
grows up to be the conscience of democracy.  


Author
James Brundage
What if you could go back in time to Austria, 1909, and eat lunch with an
Austrian art student named Adolf. Do you kill him? Is the death of another
for the greater good worth the act of killing? Therein lies the premise of
the dark dramity/thriller The Last Supper.
Five liberal grad students invite someone over to dinner every Sunday to
talk. About religion; about politics; about sex; about anything and
everything. But when they end up killing (in self defense) one of their
dinner guests -- a psychopath who believes that Hitler was right -- things
change. The liberals decide to stop talking and start taking action: in the
form of a series of murders of hard-line conservatives.
The five get almost addicted to the murders: they form their outlet to
political frustrations in life. They right wrongs, they prevent murders, but
is what they're doing right?
The film is obviously an essay, but is one of the beautiful essays so open
to interoperation that it is nearly impossible to not interpret towards an
outcome you desire. You could say that it is an endorsement, flat-out, of
conservatives: if liberals are killing people, then conservatives should be
the saner group by default. Others could say that the film endorses
liberals. You can believe the ones who died did so for the greater good.
On a raw critical aspect it lacks in performances or skillful direction but
makes up for it in creative genius. I have never seen a film be so political
without saying a definitive word one way or the other. Nor have I seen such
a quirky plot come off as believable. Also, never has a film crossed my eyes
that has been so satiric without screaming its metaphor in your face. It is
a world in which almost nothing is sure. One thing, however, is for sure:
the film has a definitive message, but it is sheltered so in as much
ambiguity as the plot.

Author
Randy Turgeon
Summary 
    Five liberal Iowa Graduate students share a house and carry on a tradition
of a large Sunday dinner. For a year now they have been inviting a guest for
dinner and discussion. On this occasion one of the roommates, Pete (Ron
Eldard),
brings home a stranger who picked him up when his car broke down. The stranger
is Zack (Bill Paxton) who appears like a decent enough good Samaritan. Nothing
could be further from the truth.
    After some dinner conversation it appears that Zack is, among other things,
a racist "You know my Grandfather once said that if he knew you coloreds were
going to be so much trouble we'd have picked the damn cotton ourselves", and an
anti-Semite. An argument escalates at the dinner table and leads to violence.
After Zack assaults Marc (Jonathan Penner) and Pete, Zack is killed.
    The roommates are at odds with what to do. Marc, Pete and Paulie (Annabeth
Gish) immediately wish to call the police. Luke (Courtney B. Vance) and Jude
(Cameron Diaz) suggest something different. After more discussion they agree to
dispose of the body and cover it up. They do not want to be sent to jail for
what they feel was a justifiable homicide. When it is done the roommates
realize
that it was easier than they thought. So easy in fact that they decide that
every Sunday their dinner guest would be someone who opposes of their views. If
they all agree that the guest deserves to die, they will poison them and bury
them in the back yard.
    The back yard fills up rather quickly, its' victims including (among
others)
a right to life extremist, an anti-environmentalist and a homophobe. By the
time
the roommates get to their tenth victim they begin to question their methods.
Are they giving the guests a chance? Are they even giving them good food
anymore?
    This film is what I like to call a "hidden treasure". This film is such a
pleasant surprise. A well written, devilish satire that is funny, sexy and
original. This film should be a hit, but I guess the fact that it apparently
had
no marketing wouldn't give it much of a chance. I had never heard of it until I
saw a copy at my video store.
    Stacy Title does a wonderful job directing. She somehow finds the time to
give all of the characters enough screen time to develop a distinct
personality.
>From the five members of the house to other key characters including Sheriff
Stanley (Nora Dunn), the local law closing in on the truth, and the dream
dinner
guest, Norman Arbuthnot (Ron Perlman), a Rush Limbaugh clone who should be the
roommates easiest kill.
    Perlman gives the films' best performance. He finds the right note as the
right wing big mouth who simultaneously offends and gains followers, and may
just inadvertently talk his way out of death. The other actors are convincing
as
well, as all of the roommates deal with their murderous ways. Some of the
characters appear to be heading down the road towards insanity, while others
grieve their decisions.
    When friends ask me to recommend a movie, this is usually the first one I
think of. I am not saying that this is my favorite movie (although it is in my
top ten), but because the film was such a wonderful surprise, I have a fondness
for it. I also try to recommend films like this: ones that have not been seen
by
many people, but should.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Five liberals invite various right-wing extremists over for Sunday
dinner and death.  That's the premise of this heavy-handed black comedy
from up-and-coming director Stacy Title.  The liberals-- grad student
housemates, of course-- are played by a quintet of appealing young
actors.  Cameron Diaz, Annabeth Gish, Courtney B.  Vance, Jonathan
Penner, and Ron Eldard are an enjoyable ensemble, until their characters
become too smart-alecky for their own good.  The roles of the victims--
one per meal-- are relegated to (mostly) star cameos.  Look for Bill
Paxton as a racist redneck, Charles Durning as a homophobic priest, and
so on.  Paxton, as the first addition to their tomato patch, makes the
strongest impression of the lot.  However, by the time we get to Jason
Alexander's brief appearance as a meat-eating anti-environmentalist, the
joke has become extinct.  THE LAST SUPPER isn't nearly as funny as the
set- up suggests.  The characters all but bludgeon the audience with
their extreme political viewpoints.  Comedy has no room to breathe and,
by the turnabout-is-fair-play end, the heavy-handed narrative makes the
final transition from unbearable to just plain boring.  For this, talk
radio exists.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Cameron Diaz, Courtney B. Vance, Annabeth Gish, Jonathan Penner, 
      Ron Eldard, Nora Dunn, Ron Perlman
Director: Stacy Title
Producers: Matt Cooper and Larry Deinberg
Screenplay: Dan Rosen
Cinematography: Paul Cameron
Music: Mark Mothersbaugh
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Releasing
     Despite receiving a U.S. release on Good Friday, THE LAST SUPPER 
has nothing to do with religion.  Instead, it's a black comedy/satire 
that ruthlessly skewers political extremism by suggesting that the 
farther to the left or right you travel on the political spectrum, the 
closer you move to the same destination.  Call it "circular politics".  
According to Dan Rosen's script, it's possible for the most die-hard 
liberals to be as reactionary as their conservative counterparts.  
     While there's nothing new about this philosophy, THE LAST SUPPER 
approaches it from a fresh, decidedly unconventional perspective.  For 
the first thirty minutes, this picture takes a solid premise and runs 
with it.  Unfortunately, the momentum eventually flags, and THE LAST 
SUPPER meanders through an unnecessarily-protracted middle segment.  
Things don't snap back into focus until the final scenes.
     First time feature director Stacy Title (who helmed the 1993, 
Oscar-nominated short, "Down on the Waterfront") doesn't play favorites 
in the lampooning game -- liberals, conservatives, and moderates all get 
theirs.  THE LAST SUPPER also consciously attacks political correctness 
by depicting the somewhat-absurd lengths to which this predominant 
social philosophy can be taken.  The underlying message is that we 
should be more concerned with people and individual freedoms than with a 
specific ideology.
     THE LAST SUPPER introduces us to five graduate student housemates -
- Jude (Cameron Diaz), Paulie (Annabeth Gish), Luke (Courtney B. Vance), 
Marc (Jonathan Penner), and Pete (Ron Eldard).  Every-so-often, these 
friends invite a guest to dinner for a discussion about life and 
politics.  However, on one rainy evening when their invitee is a 
potentially-violent neo-Nazi named Zack (Bill Paxton), none of them is 
prepared for what transpires.  Zack doesn't appreciate their ideals.  In 
fact, he displays contempt for everything they stand for, and, to prove 
a point about the inherent weakness of liberals, he holds a blade to 
Marc's throat then breaks Pete's arm.  Concerned that they're all going 
to be killed, Marc plunges a nasty-looking knife into Zack's back.  
Suddenly, the five housemates have a corpse on their hands.  They decide 
to bury Zack in the back yard and pretend that the incident never 
happened.
     But that's not the end of it.  They realize that perhaps they have 
done humanity a favor by ridding it of such a misfit.  After debating 
the benefits of killing someone to make the world a better place, they 
formulate a plan to help rid society of certain "undesirable" elements.  
Then, having laced a bottle of wine with arsenic, they invite a 
different conservative type to dinner each day, and, if a guest displays 
views that are deemed too ignorant or hateful, they're offered a drink 
of the toxic liquid.  Racists, homophobes, misogynists, and anti-
abortionists come in through the front door, then end up in the back 
garden. 
     One of the major problems with THE LAST SUPPER is that, following 
an auspicious setup, it stagnates.  After the first few murders, things 
get repetitious, and the script doesn't have anything new to offer until 
the end, when a Rush Limbaugh-like TV personality (Ron Perlman) enters 
the mix.  In the meantime, there's a pointless subplot about a local 
sheriff (Nora Dunn) searching for a missing young girl.  Although this 
eventually dovetails with the main story, the connection is too tenuous 
to be worth all the screen time spent on it.
     Occasionally, THE LAST SUPPER tries to be serious, but drama is by 
far the film's weakest element.  There are also attempt to develop 
character arcs for some of the one-dimensional protagonists, but these 
don't work, either.  Often-bizarre personality changes happen too 
abruptly to be credible.  
     None of the primary actors does an especially good job.  Cameron 
Diaz (the curvaceous beauty from THE MASK), has a few worthwhile scenes, 
as do Annabeth Gish (BEAUTIFUL GIRLS) and Courtney B. Vance (PANTHER).  
Jonathan Penner (DOWN PERISCOPE), on the other hand, gives an amateurish 
performance, and Ron Eldard (TV's ER) frequently blends in with the 
furniture.  The best turn is given by Ron Perlman in limited duty as the 
conservative media-hog.  Bill Paxton, Charles Durning, Mark Harmon, and 
Jason Alexander have cameos.
     Too often in motion pictures, the ideas are much better than the 
execution.  That's the case here.  The concept of a group of liberal 
students eliminating their political opponents by murder ("they're not 
people; they're people who hate") is ripe with promise.  But THE LAST 
SUPPER doesn't push the envelope far enough.  The edge could be better 
honed.  And, in the end, that makes pickings a little slim at this 
particular meal.

Author
Shane Burridge
Drawing-room comedy for the 90s.  A group of postgrad students
(Cameron Diaz, Courney B. Vance, Annabeth Gish, and others) meet every
Sunday for dinner to socialize and discuss politics, art, and
philosophy.  After sharing their table with an unexpected guest they
come to the conclusion that talk is cheap, and that the only way to
make the world the better place they dream of is to set themselves up
as judge, jury, and executioners, and rid it of all the people that
would impede their vision.  From that point on, the dinner parties
become trials.  Film will hold your attention - its characters are
literate and varied enough to encompass a range of opinions - but is
really a one-note symphony.  The first dinner party is essentially a
setup for the last: looking back you'll see there is no need for the
several similar scenes other than to chart the development of the
characters' convictions or doubts.  To give us a sense that the story
is going somewhere, screenwriter Dan Rosen trails a subplot through
the film involving a police officer and a missing girl, but the fact
remains that the two dinner conversations that bookend the film
outweigh the others inbetween.  The first of these, with Bill Paxton,
blends wit and tension effectively enough for us to look forward to a
rematch with the postgrad's nominal nemesis Norman Arbuthnot (Ron
Perlman, who plays his TV broadcaster like Rod Serling in narrator
mode).  Paxton and Perlman are great, and certainly more likely to
remain in your memory than the walk-ons by Charles Durning, Mark
Harmon, and Jason Alexander.
Message of film can be summed up with tried and true 'what goes around
comes around' and when the students start turning into the persecutors
that they hate, the only real surprise is why none of them were ever
bright enough to see it happening (although Diaz is the first to voice
her disapproval).  They're also too caught up in what they're doing to
see that the people they are setting up as targets are becoming
successively less extreme and increasingly marginal as candidates for
their agenda.  It was an interesting choice to make the group's only
black character the most fascistic of the group.  Best moment of film
is also its most subtle, when at the height of their fanaticism the
characters are suddenly reminded of the real, normal world existing
outside their house by something as simple as a hold signal on a
telephone.  Problem: if we are to assume that one of the students is
responsible for the paintings we see in the credits, how does that
explain the last picture?

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Cameron Diaz, Courtney B. Vance, Annabeth Gish, Jonathan Penner,
Ron Eldard, Nora Dunn, Ron Perlman Director: Stacy Title Screenplay: Dan
Rosen
The question posed to the viewer. If able to journey into the past to
kill Adolf Hitler, would you do it?
This group of supposedly intelligent college graduates (see above cast),
with very liberal views would. As a result they have decided to rid the
world of all the would be Adolf Hitlers. Namely people who are harmless,
but politically incorrect in their eyes. Reverends not sympathetic to
the HIV cause; war veteran racists; male chauvinistic pigs; the
illiterate who have no appreciation for "Catcher in the Rye";
anti-abortionists; and a school girl with qualms about sexual education.
This meal is particularly distasteful, as we watch these college
graduates become the person who they hate most - Hitler himself. What
gives them the right to decide who lives and who dies. There is no
victory or satisfaction in watching people murdered at the dining table,
just because they have a different perception to life than what is
considered the norm. Although the grads realise their mistake in the
end, it doesn't make the viewer any happier that they had to kill eleven
people to find this out. Now if they had truly understood the full
meaning of "The Lord's Supper", words like forgiveness, tolerance and
compassion would have been extended to their guests instead of a bottle
of wine laced with arsenic.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE LAST SUPPER is a no holds bared satire and political comedy
about the far left and the far right.  It manages to be both thought
provoking as well being chock full of dark humor.  The premise of the
show, as stated by Luke (Courtney Vance), concerns his theoretical time
machine.  "It's 1909 and you're alone with a young artist named Adolph.
Do you kill him?"  Think seriously about your answer to that question
before reading the rest of the review as it may color how you view the
plausibility of the film's plot.
     As the show starts five graduate students and self-proclaimed
liberals, Jude (Cameron Diaz), Luke, Paulie (Annabeth Gish), Marc
(Jonathan Penner), and Pete (Ron Eldard), who share a house in Iowa,
are watching TV.  They are ridiculing the conservative political
commentator Norman Arbuthnot (Ron Perlman) who is a straight take off
from Rush Limbaugh.  Norman warns his audience that, "A storm is
brewing my friends, and someone must stop it."
     Into their lives comes a redneck ex-Marine named Zack (Bill
Paxton) who drives a pickup and who fought in Desert Storm.  After
befriending Marc by giving him a lift, the group invites Zack to stay
for supper.  He soon starts mouthing one racist cliche after another.
Although the dinner table dialog by writer Dan Rosen, is too outlandish
to be credible, taken as satire, it is great.  After he ridicules
liberals as talking but never taking action, he turns psychotic on them
and threatens them with a knife.  Marc responds by stabbing in the back
and killing him.
     Paulie demands, "We've got to call the police.  They'll
understand."  In a strong and beautifully controlled performance by
Courtney Vance as Luke, he ridicules this idea with, "Sure they would.
Grad student kills war hero with a knife.  You'll probably just get a
ticket."  Luke confidently wants to just bury him since, "People
disappear all of the time."  Jude retorts, "Especially in Iowa.  We
probably saved him from an alien abduction."  The script is full of
this intelligent and biting humor.
     At first some of the group is horrified, but eventually they
decide the world is a better place with Zack dead.  Luke argues
rhetorically, "What if you kill somebody whose death makes the world a
better place?"  Jude says "The conservatives are effective.  They do
things.  All we do is buy animal-friendly mascara."  From this stream
of logic they devise a scheme whereby they have a dinner party once a
week and invite over a conservative.  If they view him as dangerous and
they can not chance his mind by the end of the meal, they will give him
poison wine out of the blue decanter rather than the good wine in the
green.  They all figure this will be a success since as Paulie puts it,
"Look we're liberals.  We do the right thing."  Once this starts, they
find almost everyone suspect and kill them.  When a guy shows up with a
swastika, they announce happy hour and kill him before dinner even
starts.
     Although I am a card carrying conservative, I found the satire
hilarious.  Okay, so I lied, I don't have a card, but I am a dedicated
conservative.  This is the type of movie that people on all ends of the
political spectrum should be able to enjoy, laugh at, and generally
make them think.
     The first in their experiment is a homophobic priest named
Reverend Gerald Hutchen played humbly, but bigotedly by Charles
Durning.  As soon as he asks to say grace, which they ridicule, they
start eyeing the blue bottle.  I soon lost track of everyone they found
objectionable and killed.  These included a male chauvinist, an
anti-ecologist ("I'm not anti-earth; I'm pro-earthling.  Kind of hard
to care about the earth if you don't have a house to live in."), a
librarian who banned "Catcher in the Rye", a militant Right-to-life
activist, a black Muslim, and an anti-homeless guy.  An innocent and
sweet high school senior girl whose only crime was to sue the school
district for distributing condoms does test the groups resolve to fight
for liberal causes with unswerving vigor.
     Nora Dunn plays Sheriff Alice Stanley who gets suspicious of the
goings on at the house.  Finally, the central figure in the show turns
out to be none other than the Rush Limbaugh figure.  The ending of the
film is imaginative as the rest of the script.
     The editing by Luis Colina yields a film that moves quickly but
not so fast it fells like sound bites which would be an easy way to
overedit the film.  The cinematography by Paul Cameron is very
effective in its use of the wide angle lens.  He shoots all of the
liberals at one end of the table with it and then the conservative by
himself at the other end thus creating a perfect us versus them
metaphor.  The dramatic thunderstorms which bracket the shows beginning
and ending are ominous and efficacious.
     Although my favorite is Courtney Vance, all of the acting is
brilliant.  The conservatives with the exception of Bill Paxton and Ron
Perlman have one dimensional parts.  Nevertheless, all of the
conservatives, although most have limited roles, are good too.  I think
most of the credit however should go to the director Stacy Title.  An
exceptional piece of work.
     THE LAST SUPPER runs only 1:34.  It is rated R.  There is some
sex, not overdone violence, pot smoking, a little bad language, but no
nudity.  This show would be fine for any teenager.  With a strong cast,
excellent direction and a funny script that never pulls its punches, I
recommend this show highly and give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
J. Tayloe Emery
this review is also posted at 
http://moviereviews.com/coc-dave-rubitout.html 
Was it just coincidence that  "The Last Supper " was
released Easter Week?  Were they hoping to catch everyone in
that crucifiction spirit? Regardless,  "The Last Supper
" is a film that should have followed its own storyline and
killed itself, as well, before ever making it up on the screen.
Don't be fooled by the big-name cameos; the rushed plotline and
insensitive dialogue drowns this movie within the first ten
minutes.  

A group of Iowa grad students are sharing a house together and
every Sunday they get together and spew their idealized
philosophies.  That is until...he came over.  He
is Bill Paxton, most recent of Apollo 13 but still
affectionately known as "Chett" from  "Wierd Science.  "
 Paxton plays a knife wielding, ex-marine, child molester who of
all things gets invited to dinner after helping one of the
fellas with a flat tire.  Dinner conversation that evening
centers around the problems of the world and Paxton makes no
bones about who he thinks are the culprits...who else?  The
usual stereotypes; Jews; Women; and African-Americans.  Paxton's
views might win over a few in the truckstops across the
heartland, but does not sit well in the presence of the five
liberals who have two women, a jew, and a black in their ranks. 
Next thing you know, fists are raised; knives are drawn; Paxton
gets his.

This starts a long line of invited "guests" who come over for
Sunday dinner and end up in the vegetable garden pushing up
tomato plants.  Ten in all, and everyone of them seemingly worse
than the one before.  The Liberals are out to "put some action
behind our words."  Killing off right wing radicals seems like a
logical way way to do it, but it soon becomes very unbelievable
that no one in the town (save the inquisitive, yet slow, Sheriff
played by Nora Dunn) would catch on.  I mean even right wing
freaks have families and friends...don't they? In the end they
push their luck to far by inviting a Rush Limbaughish character
to dine, and he transcends the whole film.

This movie marks the directorial debut of a talented young lady,
Stacy Title.  An Academy Award Nominee for her short film,
"Down On the Waterfront, " this film may have been a bit
big to swallow for a major production.  My biggest problem is in
the acting; all five actors look as if they lost interest in
portraying real characters.  The stereotypes are so commonly
thrown around in this film that they end up sticking to the
characters, and cheapening their roles.   I hope Stacy's next
film is a strong effort. 

