Title
Review for Shawshank Redemption, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Want to see a near perfect film?  Like to see a movie where the
people in it will undoubtedly get one or two best actor nominations
(and possibly a best director)?  Like slow moving almost dreamy films?
Well, have I got a recommendation for you: see THE SHAWSHANK
REDEMPTION!
     THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is based on a Stephen King book.  Please
do not get turned off.  This is NOT a horror show or even close to it.
It is the story of a strange quiet man (Tim Robbins) and his friend as
well as the story's narrator (Morgan Freeman).  95% of the movie is set
in a prison.  Robbins and Freeman are both lifers.  Everyone in the
prison claims to be innocent with the exception of Freeman and the only
one that appears to actually be innocent is Robbins.  Robbins was a
bank vice president on the outside.  Freeman's specialty in prison is
getting things for other prisoners.   This plot setup happens in the
first few minutes of the movie.  After that it turns into a film about
relationships and a dandy little mystery as well.
     The acting is phenomenal.  I knew Freeman could be this good
(remember him in GLORY?), but I had no idea the depth of Robbins acting
ability (my favorite of his before this was SHORT CUTS).  Numerous
excellent feature parts as well, especially the sinister warden (Bob
Gunton) and the blood-thirsty head guard (Clancy Brown).  Must have
been a dozen other prisoners in memorable acting roles.  Casting was
right on the mark.
     The director (Frank Darabont) really knew how to set the right
pace and keep it.  He made no mistakes in my book.  The well written
script (Frank Darabont and Stephen King) helped immensely as did the
dark and somber cinematography (Roger Deakins).
     You can not say too much about this show without giving key facts
away so I will leave it at recommending you see it on a large screen
with a quiet audience as this is one picture that will absorb you, and
you want no interruptions.  It starts well and ends well, but the 98%
in the middle is the best part.  See it now!
     THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION runs 2:25.  The editing (Richard
Francis-Bruce) was perfect, and I would not have cut out a minute of
it.  It is correctly rated by the MPAA as an R.  It actually has much
less violence and profanity than you would expect in a prison show.  I
would have no problem in letting mature teenagers see it - take 'em
with you, it is a serious show.  I strongly recommend this perfect gem
of a show, and I award it my top rating of ****.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 28, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1994, R, 142 minutes [2 hours, 22 minutes]
[drama]
Starring; Tim Robbins (Andy Dufresne), Morgan Freeman (Red), Bob Gunton
(Warden Norton), William Sadler (Captain Hadley), produced by Niki Marvin,
written and directed by Frank Darabount, based on the novella "Rita Hayworth
And The Shawshank Redemption" by Stephen King.
"The Shawshank Redemption" is unlike anything I've ever seen before. It's
not about a hero trying to overcome a struggle, as the entire film is blatant
in telling us this will never happen. Instead, what makes it great is its
characters and all its many individual events. 
The story revolves around Andy Dufresne (Robbins) and his wrongful sentence
to Shawshank Prison. Of course we meet many other characters and see events
typical of prison films, but this one is scripted, filmed, and acted much
better than any other prison film. Most prison settings depend on violence
and profanity to make for a dark, rough atmosphere, but this film tells a
much grimmer story without using this elements gratuitously.
If prison breeds criminality, than its administrators are no exception.
There is Captain Hadley (Sadler), the stern head guard who takes pleasure in
beating prisoners, and Warden Norton (Gunton) who seems nice on the outside
but turns out to be just as corrupt as the men he incarcerates. 
The prisoners themselves seem to be some of the nicer characters, especially
Red (Freeman) -"the guy who can get stuff." Red is a nice guy, he admits he
was stupid and wrong to have committed his crime, but can never seem to
convince the parole board of this.
Not much happens here in terms of plot, it is mostly just character and
environment study. A subplot begins to form as Andy helps Norton and Hadley
extort and embezzle thousands of dollars. Andy also tries to get the prison
more funding for a library, and an interesting mystery concerning Andy's
chance at freedom crops up, but all of this is just a backdrop for the film's
many philosophies about humanism, freedom, justice, and love.
The evil, oppressive establish in George Orwell's "1984" said "freedom is
slavery" and we see just how true that is through the eyes of these men.
Granted, they would rather not be in prison, but when their friend Brooks is
finally released, he realizes how easy he had it inside. Although they must
work within the prison, all their basic needs are provided. Brooks can't
handle the responsibility and this makes for a powerful theme of prison being
an alternate reality.
Another interesting and thematic philosophy occurs when Andy and Red have a
discussion about hope. Red says hope is the one thing that truly imprisons
him. Once one gives up hope he is free from its grasp. Andy counters by
saying just the opposite - hope is the one thing that will give them a sense
of freedom. The guards can beat them all they want, they can be rejected for
parole, but they can't take away one's sense of hope and dignity.
"The Shawshank Redemption" does have many scenes and events that might be
depressing because of the harshness of reality, but the film has a happy
ending that really makes you think. Andy and Red never give up hope and this
ultimately leads to their freedom. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the great things about movie reviewing is the
diversity of opinion. One man's masterpiece is another man's
junk, both of them are entitled to express their views and
this is how the things are supposed to be. However, the
author of this review, although he tries to live by those
principles, recollects some situations when he was tempted
to sacrifice his personal dissent for the sake of
conformity. One of such situations happened with the film
which is now considered to be one of the greatest films ever
made and which happens to hold top spots in Internet Movie
Database polls for years. Sheer numbers - high marks, plenty
of people giving those high marks and the amount of time
when the film holds the top spot - often give impression of
the overwhelming force that single, dissenting reviewer
shouldn't oppose. Thankfully, when I first encountered THE
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION, 1994 prison drama by Frank Darabont, I
wasn't aware of that. Initial high rating in Internet Movie
Database didn't impress me; I thought that the enthusiasm
for the film is equal to those that elevated titles like THE
ROCK into Top 10 of IMDb and that it would vanish through
time. I was wrong, THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is now one of
the most popular films of the past decade, but that
nevertheless didn't prevent me from keeping maintain my
original appraisal of the film.
Frank Darabon't screenplay for THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is
based on the Stephen King's story RITA HAYWORTH AND THE
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION, Plot begins in 1946 when young
Portland banker Andy Dufresne (played by Tim Robbins) gets
sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of his wife
and her lover. Dufresne maintains his innocence but for the
next few decades he would have to deal with more practical
issues in Shawshank prison, all observed through the eyes of
Ellis Boyd "Red" Redding (played by Morgan Freeman), another
"lifer" who runs prison's black market and who would
gradually become Dufresne's best friend. For the first years
of his imprisonment, quiet ex-banker is ridiculed by general
prison population and often assaulted by the gang of prison
rapists led by Bogs (played by Mark Ralston). His fortune
changes when he offers his accounting services to sadistic
prison guard Captain Byron Handley (played by Clancy Brown).
Soon his boss, Bible- thumping yet utterly corrupt warden
Samuel Norton (played by Bob Gunton) hires Dufresne as his
personal accountant, and in exchange for his help with
embezzlement, kickbacks, tax evasion and other illegal
activities, he gets library job and other privileges. But
Dufresne also uses his new position in order to improve the
prison library and help making life easier for other
prisoners. However, although the life behind bars gets
better through the years, Dufresne doesn't stop dreaming
about freedom.
At first glance, THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION looks like a very
good film and could be hardly associated with first-time
director. The dark, depressive atmosphere of the prison
affects the viewers through the efforts of cinematographer
Roger Deakins, soundtrack composer Thomas Newman and good
use of old, defunct real life prison locations. The acting
is also great. Tim Robbins is good as quiet, enigmatic
character whose agenda remains the mystery until the very
end, while Freeman gives truly superb performance as cynical
prisoner who is going to experience change of heart. Two of
them have great chemistry together, but the supporting cast
is also very good and it ranges from veterans like James
Whitmore in very touching role of an old "institutionalised"
prisoner to Bob Gunton who often played villains, but hardly
so convincingly as in this film. But the best thing about
THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is Darabont's decision to employ
old-fashioned film techniques and not allow time constraints
to stand in the way of the storytelling. His indirect
approach, based on narration and quick flashbacks, works
fine in this film, allowing the audience to envision decades
spent behind bars more easily.
Taking all this into account, the author of this often
wondered whether his disappointment with THE SHAWSHANK
REDEMPTION had something to do with the subject matter and
the prison experience from his own past. However, after a
while, I came to the conclusion that there isn't direct
connection between the two. Fortunately, my time behind bars
was negligibly short compared with the protagonists of this
film and circumstances were completely different. So, the
reasons why I don't share other people's enthusiasm for this
film come from my perception of flaws in the film itself.
First, although the characters in this film are memorable,
they nevertheless belong to prison movie cliches - sadistic
guards, gang rapists, corrupt warden, protagonist's mentor
who "runs" the prison. Cliches later come in some scenes
that are supposed to be "meaningful" (like Dufresne playing
Mozart via loudspeakers) but in the end look trite and
overmanipulative. All that culminates in the last segments
of the film when Darabont tries too hard to wrap things up
with a neat little happy ending, which comes at the expense
of realism and looks too much like a deus ex machina. So,
what was supposed to be gritty but uplifting prison drama
ends like a standard Hollywood fairytale. However, THE
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is terribly overrated, but its pluses
nevertheless outweigh minuses so the potential audience
shouldn't be discouraged from watching it and making their
own mind about its quality.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is one of the most faithful Stephen King
adaptations to date and that's only partial good news for viewers of
this pleasing prison pic.  Taken from the short novel "Rita Hayworth
and the Shawshank Redemption," the film recounts the 20-year friendship
between two "lifers" (Tim Robbins and Morgan Freeman) and how that
relationship changes both each other and the entire prison community.
     True to tradition, every calaboose cliche is present and accounted
for:  the sadistic "screw" (Clancy Brown), the Warden From Hell (Bob
Gunton), and the bad-but-not-too-bad cons (William Sadler and Gil
Bellows, among others).  But don't hold your breath for any action--a
rape is the most jailhouse rock you'll see here.
     Too bad, then, that writer/director Frank Darabont never gets a
firm hold on his hoosegow.  Just as King occasionally overwrites,
Darabont occasionally "overfilms."  Simply, he lets too many scenes run
too long.
     Darabont's eye is fine, though, and the prison--a condemned
facility in Ohio--looks as sharp as any stir seen before.  Strange,
then, that the film never feels as lived-in as it looks.
     One problem is Tim Robbins, too bland for the soft-spoken role of
a banker who was convicted of killing his wife and her lover.  His
character has neither sides nor edge; he's Forrest Gump with a brain.
Mainstream audiences won't mind, though--they'll cry just as much as
they did in that other film.  Sigh.
     Morgan Freeman, on the other hand, excels beyond expectations as
the prison "fixer."  Jeez, when did he get so good?  Too bad the script
shortchanges him by never elaborating enough on his character.
     Other cast members include Clancy Brown (remember HIGHLANDER?),
James Whitmore (last seen going NUTS), and veteran stage actor Bob
Gunton as the religious warden whose first rule is "no blasphemy."
Gunton once played Professor Harold Hill and that's pretty funny until
you recall William Sadler's previous role as Death in BILL AND TED'S
BOGUS JOURNEY.  Excellent.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Tim Robbins, Morgan Freeman, Bob Gunton, William Sadler, 
           Clancy Brown, Gil Bellows 
Director:  Frank Darabont 
Producer:  Niki Marvin 
Screenplay:  Frank Darabont, based on "Rita Hayworth and the 
             Shawshank Redemption" by Stephen King 
Cinematography:  Roger Deakins 
Music:  Thomas Newman 
Released by Columbia Pictures 
     With a legion of titles like PET SEMATARY, FIREWALKER,
SLEEPWALKERS, MAXIMUM OVERDRIVE, and CHILDREN OF THE CORN, it's
reasonable not to expect much from Stephen King-inspired motion
pictures.  Adaptations of the prolific author's work typically vary
from mildly entertaining to virtually unwatchable.  There are a few
notable exceptions, however; two of which (STAND BY ME, MISERY) were
crafted by widely-respected director Rob Reiner.  While THE SHAWSHANK
REDEMPTION is not a Reiner movie per se, it is a production of Castle
Rock Pictures (Reiner's film company), and ranks among the best filmed
versions of any King stories to date.
     Spanning the years from 1947 through 1966, THE SHAWSHANK
REDEMPTION takes the "innocent man in prison" theme and bends it at a
different angle.  Instead of focusing on crusades for freedom, the
movie ventures down the less-traveled road of concentrating on the
personal cost of adapting to prison life and how some convicts, once
they conform, lose the ability to survive beyond the barbed wire and
iron bars.  As one of the characters puts it: "These [prison] walls
are funny.  First you hate them, then you get used to them, then you
start to depend on them."
     Filmed on location in a disused Ohio prison, THE SHAWSHANK
REDEMPTION is set in a place of perpetual dreariness.  What little
color there is, is drab and lifeless (lots of grays and muted greens
and blues), and there are times when the film is a shade away from
black-and-white (give credit to cinematographer Roger Deakins, a
longtime Cohen brothers collaborator).  It's ironic, therefore, that
the central messages are of hope, redemption, and salvation.
     First time feature director Frank Darabont helms a fleet of
impressive performances.  Tim Robbins, as Andrew Dufresne, plays the
wrongly convicted man with quiet dignity.  Andy's ire is internal; he
doesn't rant about his situation or the corruptness of the system that
has imprisoned him.  His unwillingness to surrender hope wins him the
admiration of some and the contempt of others, and allows the audience
to identify with him that much more strongly.
     Ellis Boyd Redding (Morgan Freeman), or "Red" as his friends call
him, is the self-proclaimed "Sears and Roebuck" of the Shawshank Prison
(for a price, he can get just about anything from the outside).  His is
the narrative voice and, for once, the disembodied words aid, rather
than intrude upon, the story.  Serving a life sentence for murder, Red
is a mixture of cynicism and sincerity - a man with a good soul who has
done a vile deed.  His friendship with Andy is one of THE SHAWSHANK
REDEMPTION's highlights.
     William Sadler (as a fellow prisoner), Clancy Brown (as a sadistic
guard), and Bob Gunton (as the corrupt warden) all give fine supporting
performances.  Newcomer Gil Bellows, in a small-but-crucial role (that
was originally intended for Brad Pitt), brings the poise of a veteran
to his portrayal of Tommy Williams, Andy's protege.
     Ultimately, the stand-out actor is the venerable James Whitmore,
doing his finest work in years.  Whitmore's Brooks is a
brilliantly-realized character, and the scenes with him attempting to
cope with life outside of Shawshank represents one of the film's most
moving--and effective--sequences.
     Unfortunately, following a solid two hours of thought-provoking
drama, the movie deflates like a punctured balloon during its overlong
denouement.  The too-predictable final twenty minutes move a little
slowly, and writer/director Darabont exposes a distressing need to wrap
up everything into a tidy little package.
     "Salvation lies within," advises Warden Norton at one point.  It
is the presentation of this theme that makes THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION
unique.  Prison movies often focus on the violence and hopelessness of
a life behind bars.  While this film includes those elements, it makes
them peripheral.  THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is all about hope and,
because of that, watching it is both uplifting and cathartic.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Sridhar Prasad
    All Hollywood films should be this good.  Without a doubt one of the 
most purely entertaining films in recent memory, THE SHAWSHANK 
REDEMPTION, stands out not as a good prison drama, a good drama, a 
well-written film, or anything of that sort.  It's not a distinguishable 
film, and indeed it may not be highly remembered in the annals of 
history, because its accomplishments have been done before.  That, 
however, would be a shame, because THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is one hell 
of a movie, and a fine example of pure Hollywood filmmaking.
The story is relatively simple: Andy Dufresne (Tim Robbins) gets 
convicted for two murders he didn't commit, and ends up in Shawshank 
Prison, where he languishes, having various adventures on the way.  He 
also meets Ellis Boyd "Red" Redding (Morgan Freeman), who helps 
him on the way, and sooner or later, becomes Andy's closest friend.  The 
two share an uncommon bond, and the film gradually explores the 
relationship of these two men.  Dufresne is forced to undergo the 
hardships of prison, but pretty soon overcomes his obstacles, and two 
men bond as Dufresne goes through a series of challenges along the way 
to the eventual ending of the film. 20
The performances of everybody, from Robbins and Freeman to character 
actors such as James Whitmore, are absolutely fantastic. I don't think 
I've ever seen Robbins or Freeman better, and they are certainly the 
highlights.  Whitmore, playing prison librarian Brooks Hatlen, makes a 
triumphant return to the screen in a superb performance that truly is 
etched in the viewer's mind.  Darabont directs with a sure hand, and has 
quite a few memorable moments writted in his screenplay, which is an 
outstanding work.  He lets his actors due their thing, focusing on them 
more than anything else, and lets this plot just develop.  It's a great 
thing to watch this one unfold.  The cinematography and brilliant score 
add to the feel of this film.  Film scores sometimes have the tendency 
to overwhelm the film, but this is a restrained piece of music that 
soars with the viewer's emotion.
You can complain about the "pleasantness" of prison.  You 
can complain about how the prisoners don't age at all during the film.  
You can complain about Darabont's tendency to show the viewers 
everything at all, about how his film may have too much dialogue, how it 
may be too long, or how you've just seen the film before a long time 
ago.  You can even say that it is highly derivative, with good 
performances, but a plot that has been time tested.  Hell, you could 
complain about anything in the world, for that matter.  I frankly don't, 
if you'll pardon the French, give a damn.  For me, and hundreds of other 
devoted fans, THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is one highly entertaining film 
that grabs the viewer, and brings him on a superbly paced journey into 
the land of hope.  The ultimate feel-good movie in a year of feel-good 
movies, and one of the best examples of pure entertainment, THE 
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is gold.  Could it ever happen?  Probably not.  But 
"The Shawshank Redemption" reminds you that film is not meant to 
always be plausible.  Sometimes movies take you to another dimension, 
another world, where everything isn't supposed to make sense, but it 
does.  Sometimes movies are supposed to transport you to a time and 
place so great, you don't want to leave.  This is one of those movies.  
Simply amazing.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is by far one of the very very best, if not THEE
best film of the 1990's. It is one of the most rich examples of cinema of
recent time and truly lets it be known that "movies" can be forms of art in
every sense. This film was the film that was nominated for everything and yet
won nothing, a very sad and undeserved disappointment. It was beat out by
BRAVEHEART for the Best Picture Oscar in 1995, and to be honest, I would hate
to have to decide between the two.
THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is based on a short story by Stephen King, but,
before you jump to any conclusions, it does not involve the occult,
supernatural, or any ghosts, ghouls, and goblins. It is the story of Andy
Dufresne (Tim Robbins best role to date), the successful vice president
banker, is on trial for the murder of his wife and her lover. As we quickly
learn, she was having a steamy affair with some unknown golf pro, and both
were shot to death in bed just minutes after Andy, drunk and carrying a
loaded pistol, waited outside the lover's house. With no other suspects and a
gun that was never found, Andy is sadly sentenced to two life-sentences for
double homicide.
The story is narrated by our other central character of the plot: a black,
slightly older prisoner simply known as "Red" (played magnificently by Morgan
Freeman). Red seems to be the most sympathetic, mature, and sensible prisoner
at Shawshank, the New England prison where we do time along with the inmates.
He is also known for being able to smuggle in anything you need (within
reason that is). He is a self-proclaimed "Sears & Roebuck", and from the
moment Andy arrives, something draws Red to him. Andy seems so peaceful,
humble, and even unaware of his dreary surroundings and his dreary reality.
Even when he is raped and beaten, he manages to go about every day as though
he had no cares in the world.
SHAWSHANK doesn't take long to get you so engrossed in it's characters, that
you find it impossible not to care about them and what they're going to do
next. You feel their pain, you smile with their happiness, and you feel
desperate with their desperation. Such character driven movies are always my
favorite. They're the kind of movies where most of the plot and intrigue is
simply getting to know the characters, making them real and tangible, and as
much a part of your life as they can be. SHAWSHANK succeeds where so many
others don't.
THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is such a beautifully done picture that it makes it
hard to write about. Words like "great", "fantastic", and "wonderful" are so
overused and unjustifying for such a masterpiece. But, for the lack of better
words, the cinematography IS great, the depth of the story IS fantastic, and
the acting, direction, and everything else IS absolutely wonderful. It is a
touching film that could (and should) bring a tear to your eye despite it's
depressing overtones.
To repeat myself, as I can find no other way to praise this film, THE
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is truly a masterpiece and one of the best of the best
movies of the decade. If you miss this one, you ARE missing out on something
spectacular! Morgan Freeman, Tim Robbins, director Frank Darabont, and
cinematographer Roger Deakins all deserve the highest acclaims. This IS an
instant classic!

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A rare one. A grand and wise movie about cosmic patience, hope
found, and hope kept.
The beauty of THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is in the slow and careful way it
works towards its conclusion. Which is, I have to say, a deceptive one: the
movie starts by making you believe it's going to find its subject in one
man, but in reality is about another.
The two men in question are Andy Dufresne (Tim Robbins) and Red (Morgan
Freeman), inmates in Shawshank Prison. Dufresne, as we learn in the opening
credits, has been sentenced to two life sentences for murdering his wife and
her lover. We are shown quite plainly that he didn't do it, but in prison
everyon's innocent: his factual innocence means nothing there.
Dufresne is assaulted brutally over a period of years. The way the movie
deploys this is heartbreaking: this is not one of those cheapjack movies
where the hero sits up all night working to conceal a rock in his fist and
then creams his tormentors with one blow each. He will only be able to
survive by outlasting others, by outthinking them, and by putting himself
out of their reach.
Red is a procurer: for the right price, he can get you anything short of
escape. But in Shawshank, any escape is worth it -- even a poster of Rita
Hayworth -- and so Red is constantly in business. Dufresne and Red slowly
grow to like each other, Red warming to Dufresne's quiet, persistent manner.
Slowly, over the course of time, Dufresne begins to make changes in the way
the prison operates. He has all the time in the world; why not make the most
of it? And while this is happening, another, more subtle series of changes
is taking place inside Red -- one which we see dramatized in each of his
consecutive parole board meetings, ten years or so apart.
The movie is patient. There is no hurried scurrying from one forced plot
point to another, but instead the wonderful feeling of a story developing on
its own, flowing naturally from its material and its characters. And what
characters: as Dufresne, Tim Robbins is almost invisible, but all the better
for it. When he finally smiles and raises his face to the rain near the end
of the movie (in a shot which was better off being kept out of the
trailers), he's earned it. Freeman, as Red, does gradual things with his
role that are worth watching the movie a second time for. Maybe a third,
since he's a lot more important to the significance of the title than we
think at first.
There are some deviations from the original Stephen King novella, and some
people will no doubt find this irksome, although it's probably inevitable.
But they don't damage the movie as a whole -- in fact, it would probably
take nothing short of a missing reel of film to do that.

Author
Eric Mankin
     Well-crafted, well-acted, and utterly bogus, Frank Darabont's
feel-good prison movie represents a creepy height of denial, escapism
and easy sentimentality, dodging every real issue of crime and
punishment with a hopelessly gimmicky, shamelessly manipulative story.
     Read a paper and see how an epidemic of underclass neglect and
crime has produced a boom in prison construction, an army of brown and
black prisoners, and a profusion of elect-me-I'll-lock-em-up crime
bills.  Comes now a movie (adapted from a Stephen King novella) from
another, simpler planet.
     Set between the forties and the sixties, its protagonist is a
banker named Andy Defresne (Tim Robbins), unjustly (he says) accused of
killing his wife and her lover, who befriends the voice-over narrator
Red (Morgan Freeman, doing a Mr. Bojangles turn), one of the two or
three non-white men in a gangless, generic New England joint called
Shawshank.
     Conflict is provided by three tediously one-note heavies whose
parts have been written with magic marker: a brutal stinker of a guard
captain (Clancy Brown) a hypocritical stinker of a warden (Bob Gunton),
and a sexually assaultive stinker of a prisoner.  Our hearts go in the
warmer as we watch the cultured, plucky Defresne win the hearts and
minds of his benighted fellow inmates by improving the library or, in
one sequence broadcasting a Mozart duet on the PA while Freeman's voice
tells us, voice-over, just how moving it is.
     The denouement is a "surprise" that is telegraphed, faxed, mailed,
messengered and smoke-signaled at least an hour in advance; one that is
so thunderingly obvious that even the most guarded reference would give
it away.  The film does have the virtue of putting the wonderful James
Whitmore (playing an old con) back in front of the camera; one of many
excellent performances in the film: that's not enough.

Author
Jeff Pidgeon
     THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is a strong debut for director Frank
Darabont, a screenwriter who sold the script on the provision that he
could direct it.  This isn't a Film For The Ages, but it is involving
and engaging for the majority of its 150-minute running time.  Tim
Robbins and Morgan Freeman are both fine as convicts who meet in
Shawshank Prison in the late 40's and get to know each other as they do
time together.  The suspense mainly revolves around 1) whether Robbins
will continue to survive prison life; and 2) whether he should be there
at all.  The script does a decent job of sustaining these elements and
keeping the viewer in doubt.  On the other hand, there are few moments
in the story that, once they are revealed, are different than you might
expect.  For the most part, the satisfying option is usually chosen,
the one that will make the audience happy.  While this makes for an
enjoyable immediate experience , the side effect is that the lack of
genuine surprise makes it less enduring than you'd like.  On the whole
though, aside from script weaknesses and implausibilities (more than a
couple), the performances are uniformly strong, if a bit
two-dimensional in spots, the period feel of the art direction is
thorough yet understated, Thomas Newman's score nicely supports things
and is emotional without being too overpowering or treacly.  For a
prison drama, the violence isn't played up particlarly, but this ain't
FREE WILLY, either.  For the curious, SHAWSHANK makes for a good
night out, as the saying goes.  If the concept doesn't grab you from
the start, I don't know that it would win you over.  Marginally
Recommended.

Author
Joan Ellis
     If THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION sentences the audience to an
excessively long jail term, the very good news is that the long stay is
rewarded with first rate acting.  Just as you begin to long for a
fast-forward button for this masterful creation of the terrible tedium
of prison life, Director Frank Darabont turns his story into a fine
fairy tale.
     Opening ominously with Andy Dufresne (Tim Robbins) loading a gun
as the Ink Spots croon "If I Didn't Care" on the tape deck in his car,
the movie is driven for its full long length by Tim Robbins' portrait
of a man sentenced for murder to two life terms in Maine's Shawshank
prison.  Robbins' exceptional performance is matched every step of the
way by Morgan Freeman as Red, the prison's procurer of all contraband.
Another lifer, Red has served twenty years with a dignity and humor
that have turned him into Shawshank's elder statesman.  Red and Andy
share a value system that is rooted in restraint.
     It is 1947 and Andy, an eager, bright vice president of a Portland
bank, arrives at Shawshank to spend the rest of his life in a cell.
After enduring the beatings and sexual assaults accorded newcomers, he
settles into the monotony of life without hope.  It is a routine of
brutal explosions alternating with spirit-crushing boredom, and we are
made to feel every second of it.
     The enigmatic face Andy turns to his fellow prisoners gives no
clue to an inner plan.  He gradually uses his banking talents to become
the estate planner for the entire prison staff, including the sadistic
Warden, who is a Bible-quoting, tub-thumping, Christian hypocrite.
Andy quietly becomes indispensable and acquires the essential
ingredient of success: access.  Number 37927 does have a plan after
all.
     Watch for the sublime moment when Andy locks himself in the
communications room and pipes the duet from "The Marriage of Figaro"
into the prison yard.  Mozart stills the place with awe.  With the
exception of Bob Gunton, whose maniacal Warden crosses into caricature,
the cast is uniformly excellent and benefits, as any cast does, from
the presence of Morgan Freeman.  If there is a flaw in his role as
written, it is that his grace and dignity don't prepare us for the
fanciful turn the movie takes toward the end, when it becomes a fairy
tale, whose subtle clues were there all along.
     This welcome flight into the imagination adds lightness to earlier
improbabilities.  Andy and Red had sprung into this world and out of
it, it seems, without family or friends to root for them on the
outside.  And then, there's the matter of Andy's tastes.  How many
young bankers do you know who love opera, chess, the Bible, and
alabaster? These reservations, on reflection, reveal one reviewer who
was late in understanding the feathery notes that lift the movie out of
despair and touch it with hope.


Author
Eric Grossman
     Hope and friendship, that is what lies at the heart of THE
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION, a powerful and moving film based on Stephen
King's novella that stars Tim Robbins and Morgan Freeman.
     In a captivating performance, Robbins portrays Andy Dufresne, a
mild-mannered banker who, despite his ardent pleas, is convicted for
murdering his wife and her lover.  Andy is given two life terms and
sent to Maine's Shawshank Prison, a cold, inhumane place made of steel
and stone.  Morgan Freeman, in another Oscar caliber performance, plays
Red, the twenty-year veteran who can smuggle anything through the
prison walls for money and maybe a few cigarettes.  Red quickly notices
that Andy does not seem to belong at Shawshank, but he likes the young
banker and the two quickly become friends.
     More than prison brutality or prison escapes, both of which are
featured in the film, "Shawshank" is really about the bond that
develops between the inmates.  Andy discovers a group of people who
have buried their hope to maintain their sanity. "Hope is a dangerous
thing," Red explains, but Andy will not give in to Shawshank.  For
years, he writes the Governor twice a week to get funds to expand the
prison library from a tiny, dust-filled room to a place where inmates
can pass their high school equivalency tests.  Andy tries to resurrect
the dreams of those who have, or are becoming, "institutionalized." In
the film, the meaning of the word is intended for those who cannot live
beyond the walls of the prison.  The seventy-five-year-old Librarian,
Brooks (a superb performance by James Whitmore) is so afraid to leave
the prison that he threatens his friend with a knife so that he will
not make parole.  Brooks cannot face the idea of leaving Shawshank, a
place where he is known, respected and has a purpose, for a world that
has long since left him behind.
     While Andy gives hope to the others, he learns from them,
especially Red, to open up emotionally.  Although innocent of pulling
the trigger, Andy feels guilty nonetheless because he pushed away his
wife with his selfishness.  He confesses to Red that had he been more
open, more sharing, she would have neverhad the affair with the
golf pro and hence, would have never been killed Red disagrees, but in
any case, Andy has served his time for his sin.
     While in prison, Andy becomes indispensable to the prison
personnel.  After he saves the brutal Captain Hadley (Clancy Brown)
from paying taxes through the nose, Andy and his friends are given
three beers apiece.  Soon, all the guards are bringing Andy their 1040
forms and to top it all off, the Bible-thumping Warden Norton (Bob
Gunton) has Andy working as his personal accountant.  Red is shocked
when Andy tells him that the seemingly moral warden is as guilty as his
prisoners.  Norton takes money in the form of kick-backs from
contractors competing against his cheap, prison labor.  This adds a
level of irony to the story as the innocent man on the inside becomes a
slave to the criminal who holds the key.
     Writer/director Frank Darabont has made one of the best
adaptations of a Stephen King story to date.  His flowing camera-moves
and sure-handed nurturing of the performances appear to be the work of
a seasoned pro, not someone making his first film.  In addition to the
stars, the cast includes William Sadler, Mark Rolston, and Gil Bellows
as Tommy, the young, naive thief whom Andy takes under his wing.
     Production designer Terence Marsh creates one of the most
important characters in the story, Shawshank prison, and "Barton Fink"
cinematographer, Roger Deakins, gives the film its beautiful but stark
look.  Editor Richard Francis Bruce establishes a steady, deliberate
pace that makes the audience feel the "slow time" of the prison without
boring them.  The authentic costumes are by Elizabeth McBride and
Thomas Newman musical score is a key component to the movie's mood and
emotional impact.
     If it were not for the Academy Awards, we probably would not get
films like this.  Very heavy at times, but overall uplifting,
SHAWSHANK is certain to garner its fair share of Oscar nominations.
The only problem with the film is that with the exception of several
inmates, the Sisters, who like to rape certain inmates, is that it
paints most of the prisoners as decent, likable people.  The audience
is given no sense of their brutality and what they did to be sent to
Shawshank in the first place.  We feel sympathy for these inmates
because of the brutality and emotional starvation they face, but
perhaps we would feel differently if we saw the cold corpse of one of
their victims.
     However, this flaw is not fatal primarily because the film is not
as much about violence and crime as it is about hope and its power to
redeem the human spirit.  Shawshank is a metaphor for our own private
prisons that we trap ourselves in.  Like the prisoners of Shawshank who
have been "institutionalized," we often face the same dilemma of
leaving our private jail cells where at least, we know where we stand.
"Better get busy living, or get busy dying," Red says.  These are words
everyone can learn from, not just criminals.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I never read Stephen King's 1982 novella "Rita Hayworth and the
Shawshank Redemption," part of his collection DIFFERENT SEASONS.  But
it is difficult to believe that THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION could be very
accurate to this non-horror King story.  As much as I like King, it is
difficult to believe he wrote a story as good as this film adaptation.
The theme is the strength of humanity over brutality--much the same
theme as SCHINDLER'S LIST--and Frank Darabont has crafted a film,
writing and directing, that compares favorably with ONE FLEW OVER THE
CUCKOO'S NEST.  There is a lot going on in THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION,
and parts will remind viewers of such diverse films as BILLY BUDD, OF
MICE AND ME, and even DEAD POETS SOCIETY.  The film is another parable,
following on the heels of FORREST GUMP.  But where GUMP was content to
create a period feel and present a message of "Just be simple and let
everything happen to you," SHAWSHANK is a much better piece of
storytelling and has just the opposite message, "Stand up and take
control of your life.  Get busy living or get busy dying."  Forrest
Gump would last about one week in Shawshank Prison.  Andy Dufresne, the
focus of this story, is a survivor.  And he is more.
     As the film opens Andy Dufresne (played by Tim Robbins) is about
to murder his wife and her lover.  On the witness stand he denies that
he ever completed the crime.  But if he didn't, somebody else did, and
all the evidence points to Andy.  The sentence is two consecutive life
terms in Shawshank Penitentiary--not much of a life for a banker.  The
film follows Andy's life in prison.  The first two years are just the
hell that everyone expects prison to be.  Worse.  But a chance comment
by the most brutal of the guards, Captain Hadley (Clancy Brown), gives
Andy an idea of how with one stroke he can get on the good side of
guards and prisoners alike.  And among the prisoners he particularly
want to be friends with Red, the prison scrounge.  Red is useful to
have as a friend, not only because he is a man of character whom the
other prisoners respect, not only because he can get Andy what he needs
to make his life a little easier, but also because he is the story
narrator and it is never a bad idea in a film to be on the good side of
the narrator.  In the book Red was Irish, but here he is played with
tremendous dignity by Morgan Freeman.
     In the years that pass in Shawshank--and they do pass quickly even
if the film has a leisurely pace--Andy finds ways to make himself
indispensable to the sadistic, Bible-thumping Warden Norton (Bob
Gunton) and the guards, always winning more concessions to make life
better for the inmates.  Through Red's and Andy's eyes we see the
ironies of prison life.  But there is much more to the story than that
of a goody-goody in prison, and the plot has interesting complications.
A surprisingly long segment of the film is devoted to one of the minor
prisoners released to the outside world only to find adjustment a
difficult proposition.  But the investment of screen time for this
subplot pays off later in the film.
     This is a film with excellent production values almost without
exception.  Prison movies are an entire genre, I suppose, and in the
hands of a less skilled photographer Shawshank could have come off as
just dismal as any other prison film without any particular visual
interest.  But the director of photography was Roger Deakins whose
films include MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON, HOMICIDE, BARTON FINK, and THE
HUDSUCKER PROXY.  He is a man with a very good eye for the visual in
period pieces and from the first scene of guards on the walls of
Shawshank his photography has excellent composition and detail.
Production design is by Oscar-winner Terence Morgan, who did design for
such diverse films as DR. ZHIVAGO, THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, and CLEAR
AND PRESENT DANGER.  Between the two we see a prison that visually
captures our interest.  This is no small feat for a prison picture.  To
some extent, Shawshank is so well photographed, it gives the film
almost a poetic feel rather than one of realism, but for a longish film
that is the way to go.  The one serious problem visually with the
production is in makeup.  The film covers 19 years from 1947 to 1966
under conditions that should age people quickly.  A little greying in
the hair of the main characters seems the only concession made to the
aging process.  More of the period feel is added by having the film
narrated.  That is more in the style of filmmaking of the 40s and 50s.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Powerful, horrifying, funny and altogether wonderfully uplifting,
the film has "OSCAR" written all over it.  Based on a novella by
Stephen King, with the screenplay written and directed by Frank
Darabont in his first big screen movie, this film about hope and
friendship will grab you where you live.  If you thought King could
only write horror stories, keep in mind that he is the author of Rob
Reiner's STAND BY ME.  And now comes this terrific story.
     Andy Dufresne (Tim Robbins), is a mild-mannered banker, found
guilty of having killed his wife and her lover, and sentenced to two
consecutive life terms in Shawshank maximum security penitentiary in
Maine.  Warden Norton (Bob Gunton) is a Bible-quoting monster, as
mean as they come.  His head guard, Capt. Hadley (Clancy Brown), is a
sadistic brute.  The whole prison is a nightmare with many of the
convicts having lost all sense of decency.
     Into this hell hole comes Andy.  Somehow he survives long enough
to be befriended by Red, (Morgan Freeman), a "lifer" who wheels and
deals in prison.  He can get you anything you want ... for a price:
Red has already been in for 20 years when Andy arrives.
     When Andy makes known to the guards that he knows all about tax
saving, and able to prepare their income tax returns, he is allowed a
few more privileges.  He shows Warden Norton how he can keep the
bribes he receives from contractors, setting up a fake identity so the
warden can deposit the money and it would be untraceable.  When Andy
wants to get books for the library, he is permitted by the warden to
write to various people and agencies.  The warden knows Andy will never
get a response ... but he does.
     While the film is as taut as one can get, little splashes of humor
are dropped in to relieve the tension.  But throughout the film, the
thread of hope is woven; without hope, there is nothing.  We see this
despair in the trustee librarian (James Whitmore in a fine
performance).
     Look for Oscar nominations for Best Screenplay, Best Direction,
Best Acting and Best Supporting Actors; the film has all of that.
Robbins and Freeman are absolutely great!  One perfect movie!
