Title
Review for Client, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE CLIENT is the fourth of John Grisham's five novels.  I read
the first four on vacation in Hawaii last year.  I saw THE FIRM,
awarded it ** 1/2, and gave it a mild thumbs up.  I avoided THE PELICAN
BRIEF because it got such awful reviews.  They have not made movies of
the first or fifth books yet.  I found that liked the movie, THE
CLIENT, for some excellent acting and for the great Grisham plot.
     Repeating his THE FUGITIVE type of role, Tommy Lee Jones plays the
quintessential prosecutor who would do anything to get the bad guys in
jail.  Here Jones plays a U.S.  Attorney who wants his next job to be
that of Governor of Louisiana, hence he wants good press coverage.  A
young boy (Brad Renfro) may have overheard some information that Jones
and the mob both want.  He hires a tough but very inexperienced lawyer
played by Susan Sarandon to defend his rights and to protect him from
both sides.  This is the basic plot set up.  There are a lot of twists
and turns after that - some predictable, some not.
     Almost every word Jones utters is terrific.  The script is good,
but his delivery is what makes it.  I love the way he delivers the
lines: "I want that boy in court, manana! You hear what I'm say'n?"
Almost as good is Sarandon.  She plays a complex character that is both
tough and vulnerable.
Renfro plays the archetypal burnt out teenager.  His performance was
acceptable at best.  I think they should have got a stronger actor or
at least the director, Joel Schumacher, should have given him more
guidance.  Renfro was not convincing enough for me.  Then again, maybe
it was the way Grisham wrote the character that I have problems with.
There were numerous minor characters of merit.  The judge (Ossie Davis)
was the best of the small performances.
     THE CLIENT runs 1:57.  It is correctly rated PG-13 for a little
violence and a modest amount of profanity.  (It would be XXX rated for
smoking.  Almost everyone smoked, and they smoked a lot.  Cigarettes
were even used in evidence.  NONE of the smoking was necessary.) I
think kids over 12 will enjoy the show.  I recommend it and award it
***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Susan Sarandon, Brad Renfro, Tommy Lee Jones, Anthony
LaPaglia, Mary-Louise Parker.
Screenplay:  Akiva Goldsman and Robert Getchell.
Director:  Joel Schumacher.
     The film adaptation of John Grisham's THE CLIENT is in a unique
position.  Commercially, there are probably great expectations; THE
FIRM and THE PELICAN BRIEF combined to gross over $200 million at the
box office last year.  Artistically, on the other hand, the
expectations are probably much lower, again based on the previous
Grisham adaptations.  Grisham on the screen is like Grisham on the
page:  glossy, undemanding, straight-ahead potboilers, perfect for mass
consumption.  But surprisingly, THE CLIENT is slightly more than that.
Even if the whole does not quite equal the sum of its more impressive
parts, THE CLIENT edges out THE FIRM as the best of the three Grisham
films.
     THE CLIENT is the story of eleven-year-old Mark Sway (Brad
Renfro), a poor Tennessee youth who is in the wrong place at the wrong
time one day.  While out in the woods with his younger brother, Mark
stumbles upon a suicidal Mafia lawyer, who spills some dark secrets to
Mark before he kills himself.  The incident leaves the younger brother
traumatized into a catatonic state, and leaves Mark as the only
witness.  This makes him valuable to publicity-hungry New Orleans
district attorney Roy Foltrigg (Tommy Lee Jones), and dangerous to
Barry "The Blade" Moldano (Anthony LaPaglia), who stands to lose the
most from Mark's knowledge.  Convinced he needs help, Mark turns to
Reggie Love (Susan Sarandon), a lawyer looking for a second chance, and
who becomes Mark's only hope.
     THE CLIENT, like THE FIRM, benefits most from a wealth of solid
performances.  Susan Sarandon carries herself with the tension of
someone who knows she has made a lot of mistakes and can't afford to
make any more; Tommy Lee Jones does an oilier take on his Sam Gerard
from THE FUGITIVE, with a dash more Southern bluster.  The scenes in
which Sarandon and Jones tangle are masterful, sparks of raw
intelligence flying between the two gifted performers, making it
regrettable that there aren't more.  Newcomer Brad Renfro actually has
far more screen time than either of his big-name co-stars, and he is
occasionally very good, particularly when showing a bit of an edge.
He's less successful when asked to deliver emotion-filled speeches,
like his description of the custody battle between his parents.  The
best performance, however, might be that of Mary- Louise Parker as
Mark's mother.  In many ways it is a better written part than any of
the three leads, rich and complex, and Parker is wonderful in a
scene-stealing supporting role similar to Holly Hunter and David
Strathairn in THE FIRM.
     There is so much good acting going on in THE CLIENT (aside from
Anthony LaPaglia, whose cartoonish Mafioso does everything but grab his
crotch) that it's easy to overlook what a hum-drum thriller it is.
This isn't true of the first half hour, where director Joel Schumacher
keeps the tension notched up high.  The encounter between Mark and the
babbling attorney, intercut with the reactions of the ever more
frightened brother, is extremely effective, and the low-angle
perspective on Mark's confrontation with an obnoxious police officer
creates a heightened paranoia.  Then, as Grisham plots tend to do, THE
CLIENT's sputters out like a released balloon.  The climactic showdown
is abrupt, silly and very unsatisfying, an appropriate wrap-up to a
sluggish second hour.  It almost seems as though Schumacher realized
that the suspense elements were the least interesting, and did only
what was necessary for resolution.
     In fact, THE CLIENT is much more effective as a character study
than it is as a thriller.  The relationship between Mark and Reggie is
intriguing, as Mark realizes he needs to trust someone and Reggie tries
to exorcise the demons of an alcoholism which drove away her children.
But that relationship is a bit rushed, and while both THE FIRM and THE
PELICAN BRIEF overstayed their welcome, THE CLIENT might have benefited
from an additional ten or fifteen minutes of character development.  It
might have made the maudlin closing scene between Reggie and Mark more
tolerable.  Still, THE CLIENT's first- rate cast carries it through its
many lulls.  Provided you aren't heading to see THE CLIENT expecting a
pulse-pounding thriller, its possible you could be in for a pleasant
surprise.

Author
Eric Mankin
     The third, and by far the most successful translation of a John
Grisham legal suspense novel to film.  A tough little trailer park
pre-teen named Mark Sway (Brad Refro) happens upon the suicide of a
mafia attorney and is almost instantly caught between mob hitmen and a
remorseless federal prosecutor (Tommy Lee Jones).  Mark shrewdly hires
himself a lawyer--and is lucky enough to get Reggie Love (Susan
Sarandon), a woman who has lost so much by surrender that she is now
willing to risk everything to win big.
     The story is at bottom just as hokey and nearly as piously
legalistic as THE FIRM and THE PELICAN BRIEF, but director Joel
Schumacher cannily finds the best in it.  He finesses the violence,
putting all of it off camera, and concentrates instead on character and
relationships, specifically the one between Mark and his damaged but
utterly determined lawyer Reggie--a part that Sarandon seizes with
joyful abandon.
     The film, particularly the first two-thirds, is filled with
wonderful setpieces: the opening confrontation with the fat, suicidal
lawyer (Walter Olkewicz) in his car; Mark's visit to a decrepit roach
motel of an office building, full of shady shysters; almost every scene
with Jones as U.S attorney "Reverend" Roy Foltrigg directing his
supporting crew of worried yes-men; and every confrontation between
Sarandon and Jones. (Jones essentially clones his character from "The
Fugitive"--and is every bit as much fun to watch as he was in that
film.)
     The director and screenwriters (Akiva Goldsman and Robert
Getchell) eventually get into trouble following the novel too
faithfully.  All those threats and atmospherics eventually have to pay
off in some kind of action scenes--and Grisham's books seem to have the
least resourceful assassins in the genre.  The letdown, however, is
almost welcome.  In what must be the most over-pyroed, over-stunted
year in the history of the medium, Schumacher sticks with people
instead of falls and explosions, and makes it work.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by     Joel Schumacher
Written by Akiva Goldsman, Robert Getchell,
        based on the novel by John Grisham
Cast Susan Sarandon, Tommy Lee-Jones, Mary Louise-Parker, Anthony LaPaglia,
     Anthony Edwards, Ossie Davis, Brad Renfro, and J.T. Walsh
MPAA Rating     "PG-13"
Running Time    120 minutes
     THE FIRM was soft, THE PELICAN BRIEF wasn't, and THE CLIENT is a
trial.  Why is John Grisham so hard to make into a movie?  Three, count
'em three different filmmakers have attempted to best the bestselling
author and, with the lastest loss THE CLIENT, three strikes have made
little more than one out.
     The story is straight-forward and easy-to-follow and doesn't have
one scene of anyone going crazy in a copy room.  The plot is about a
eleven-year old Tennessee boy (Renfro) who may be the key to a Memphis
mob murder.  He won't talk to the Feds and barely cooperates with his
lawyer (Sarandon).  That is, until the mob sends some men to "tie up
loose ends." Even though no one actually says that in the movie.
     Brad Renfro and Susan Sarandon are the stars and they have good
chemistry and are more believable than either Tom Cruise or Julia
Roberts.  Renfro, in particular, is politely unpolished and a
refreshing change for smoother child actors.
     With the exception of Ossie Davis--who chairs the film's sole
exciting scene--the rest of the cast is a waste.  Yes, even Tommy Lee
Jones. But they all do drawl within the lines; sometimes even sounding
like bad Elvis impersonators.
     Speaking of which, I counted a total of eight references to The
Big E.  There may be more.  Uuuh-huh.
     THE CLIENT has some good local color and the occasional flash of
humor, but, considering the competition, is hardly deserving of your
summer movie dollars.  There's nothing exciting here.
     Anyone up to again adapt Clive Cussler?  Surely no one remembers
RAISE THE TITANIC....
BOTTOM LINE:  This is the guy who's going to direct BATMAN FOREVER??

Author
Dragan Antulov
Before I saw THE CLIENT I had already been disenchanted by
the books of John Grisham. To be quite frank, I haven't read
them (although they used to be something resembling
bestsellers on the small and bibliophobic market of my
country) but I had opportunity to watch two of the screen
adaptations - Pollack's THE FIRM and Pakula's PELICAN BRIEF
- and that was enough to make me think about Grisham as
nothing more as mediocre author. By that time, I had already
watched enough of Joel Schumacher's films to have opinion
about him as nothing more than mediocre film-maker. Perhaps
that was the reason why this film actually worked - mediocre
script was perfect match for mediocre talent.
The movie, like almost all Grisham's books is set in
American South and features some unusual characters in big,
and, more often than not, legal trouble. This time the
protagonist in question is Mark Sway (played by Brad
Renfro), 11-year old boy from dysfunctional family who had
just witnessed the suicide of a important mob lawyer Romey
Clifford (Walter Olkewicz). Just before killing himself,
Romey told Mark about the body of a murdered senator and
other details that would put away wiseguys like his client
Barry Muldano (Anthony La Paglia) behind the bars. Federal
prosecutors led by politically ambitious Roy Foltrigg (Tommy
Lee Jones) are convinced that the boy knows those details
and they begin harassing him. The boy then hires attorney in
a form of Reggie Love (Susan Sarandon). She, being the
recovered alcoholic, perhaps doesn't look like a much of
help, but she would fight for the rights of his client. In
the meatime, Muldano and his cronies are trying to kill the
boy.
The film has rather weak premise - boy is smart enough to
elude law enforcement and hire attorneys, yet not
intelligent enough to know that the co-operation with the
authorities is the only way for him to stay alive. Perhaps
that works in real world, but in Grisham's works, same as in
the script by Akiva Goldsman, there are some other rules. In
any case, Schumacher directs this forgettable script as real
professional, not allowing us to stop and think of all the
flaws in it. The biggest attraction here is a great acting
talent, most notable in the forms of Susan Sarandon and
Tommy Lee Jones, actors whose talent is very suitable for
fascinating Grisham's characters. Sarandon is very good as
strong professional woman, and Jones is great as scruples
yet charming public official. Actors in minor roles are also
good, like Ossie Davis as sympathetic judge, Will Patton as
menacing yet intelligent policeman and Mary Louise Parker as
boy's desperate mother. On the other hand, Anthony La Paglia
is rather pathetic in thankless role of stupid Mafioso. All
in all, THE CLIENT is still forgettable, but watchable piece
of cinema that gives the phrase "mediocrity" a good name.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Susan Sarandon, Brad Renfro, Tommy Lee Jones, Mary-Louise Parker,
           Anthony LaPaglia, J. T. Walsh, Anthony Edwards, Ossie Davis 
Director:  Joel Schumacher 
Producers:  Arnon Milchan and Steven Reuther 
Screenplay:  Akiva Goldsman and Robert Getchell based on the novel 
          by John Grisham 
Cinematography:  Tony Pierce-Roberts 
Music:  Howard Shore 
Released by Warner Brothers 
     This time around, I thought I'd do things a little differently.
For both THE FIRM and THE PELICAN BRIEF, I made my way through the
written version before approaching the cinematic one.  Neither book
dazzled me, and the impressions given by the movies were less
memorable.  So, for THE CLIENT, I decided to eschew Grisham's novel
altogether and see if, divorced from its source material, Joel
Schumacher's film could provide a couple hours of light entertainment.
Besides, a friend of mine was only able to get through a third of book,
and her opinion of Grisham is certainly higher than mine.
     It's not difficult to understand why THE FIRM, THE PELICAN BRIEF,
and THE CLIENT have all been bestsellers.  They're tightly-written,
don't require a lot of concentration, have very simple storylines, and
can be read in a sitting or two.  In essence, they're what someone I
know calls "good trash."  Grisham is prolific--and now, very wealthy.
     Unfortunately, his writing makes for a perfect Hollywood
screenplay--lots of action and not much originality.  THE CLIENT's
greatest disadvantage is its flat plot, which includes few (if any)
surprises and revolves on a premise that we've seen before--in THE
FIRM and THE PELICAN BRIEF, among others.  Grisham apparently has a
thing about a group of law officers going after some innocent victim of
circumstances.
     THE CLIENT's premise is tenuous in its believability.  The movie
starts out with young Mark Sway (Brad Renfro) out in the woods,
watching a mob lawyer try to kill himself.  In attempting to foil the
suicide, Mark gets caught, and has to listen to a rambling confession
before the lawyer blows his brains out.  After that, hotshot prosecutor
Roy Foltrigg (Tommy Lee Jones) wants Mark on the witness stand,
thinking--correctly--that the boy learned the location of the missing
corpse of a dead senator.  Realizing that he's in over his head, Mark
seeks out an attorney, and finds one in the person of Reggie Love
(Susan Sarandon), who takes his case for a fee of one dollar.  But a
killer (Anthony LaPaglia) who believes Mark knows too much, is after
the boy and anyone to whom he might tell his secret.
     In the beginning, Mark won't reveal anything about his
conversation with the dead mob lawyer.  Why?  Later, after his life has
been threatened, the reason is obvious, but why hide things at the
start?  I guess we're supposed to believe that the kid is scared and
confused, but he does enough clear-headed things to limit the
plausibility of this explanation.
     Despite plot holes and contrivances, THE CLIENT is a well-made
motion picture.  Everything about it (except the screenplay) is
top-notch.  Director Joel Schumacher (whose last film was FALLING DOWN)
has spun a web of intrigue by getting the most out of his cast and
crew.  With expert jobs done by the editor and cinematographer, THE
CLIENT moves while having its share of dark, brooding moments as well
as tautly suspenseful ones.
     The cast is impeccable.  Newcomer Brad Renfro portrays Mark with a
palpable mix of anger and fear.  Susan Sarandon gives her usual solid
performance, and Tommy Lee Jones oozes equal parts charisma and false
charm.  Mary-Louise Parker, one of the better representatives of
today's crop of twentysomething actors, is underused as Mark's mother
Dianne, but she makes the most of every scene she's in.
     THE CLIENT is an example of what happens when a production team
does the best they can possibly do with a routine script.  Schumacher
has succeeded where two other accomplished directors (Sydney Pollack,
who did THE FIRM, and Alan Pakula, of THE PELICAN BRIEF) have failed:
bringing a Grisham novel to the screen in a manner that's more
entertaining than trying.  This isn't a masterpiece of suspense, but it
has its moments and is capable of providing some light summer
entertainment.
     I think from now on, I'll skip reading Grisham's books and wait
for the movies.  If nothing else, it will save me some time.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
