Title
Review for Right Stuff, The (1983)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
People who enjoy science fiction are often faced with
unpleasant surprises due to the improper labelling of
novels, stories, comic books or movies. Often science
fiction aficionados find material, previously labelled as
science fiction, to be pure fantasy or supernatural horror,
or rather simple techno-thriller. In such cases, mistakes
are understandable - genre boundaries are never clearly
marked. But, I believe there are really few cases when a
movie labelled as science fiction actually happens to be
straight historical epic. Such thing occurred in former
Yugoslavia some fifteen years ago, when national
distributors gave such treatment to THE RIGHT STUFF, 1983
film directed by Philip Kaufman.
The mistake of the distributors could be explained with the
fact that the official poster of the film features men in
space suits. But THE RIGHT STUFF film isn't even fiction. It
was based on the non-fiction book by Tom Wolfe, covering the
early years of American space program. The plot of the film
begins in 1947 when few people heard of Edwards Air Force
Base, major test site for experimental planes. The major aim
of test flights is to determine ability of manned aircraft
to reach 1 Mach speed and thus break the sound barrier. Many
pilots tried to achieve that goal and many paid with their
lives for such bravado. But one quiet pilot, Chuck Eager
(played by Sam Shaped) succeeds and thus gives example for
whole new generation of test pilots, determined to enter
history books by breaking new speed records. Ten years
later, Soviets have launched "Sputnik" marking the beginning
of the Space Age. In order to regain national prestige, US
government decides to be the first to send man into space.
Best Air Force, Navy and Marine pilots are recruited into
program, but not Yeager, because he lacks college education
and desired all-American image.
In one of critics' polls THE RIGHT STUFF was named as one
among top 10 films made in 1980s. Such high position could
be explained with the fact that Kaufman's film looks quite
atypical for its time. With more than three hours of length
and epic scope it looked more suitable for 1950s and 1960s -
age when Hollywood used to make films larger than life. But
the real reason lies in the fact that it was made by truly
remarkable and talented filmmaker. Philip Kaufman created
reputation in 1970s by using all the opportunities of that
Golden Age in order to create original, memorable movies.
THE RIGHT STUFF was the last of them, swan song of an era
when producers allowed directors to spend big bucks on
unusual, risk-taking "artsy" projects.
THE RIGHT STUFF is unusual because it lacks many standard
elements of Hollywood film. The plot is almost non-existent
and not very coherent; the story, featuring many interesting
incidents and anecdotes, shifts focus from the old
generation of test pilots, embodied in Yeager, to new
generation of the astronauts. The film also lacks
conventional protagonist - Yeager (who also appears in small
cameo) remains the true hero of the film, but equal time and
exposure is also given to other astronauts and their wives,
making this movie into ensemble piece. That gave opportunity
for Kaufman to use multitude of great acting talents, until
that specialised only for bit or character roles. Sam
Shepard is great as Yeager, war hero whose greatest
achievement - breech of the sound barrier - remained
obscured in history books, probably due to his own modesty.
On the surface, he lacks personality compared with his hyped
and more fortunate astronaut colleagues, but Shepard gives
texture to this character with subtle gestures and phrases.
Shepard's performance is followed with great acting by Ed
Harris as clean-cut Marine (and future politician) John
Glenn. Young Dennis Quaid is more than fine as arrogant
fighter jock Gordo Cooper, and this arrogance is mirrored in
his friend and most tragic figure of Virgil Grissom,
superbly played by Fred Ward. Always reliable character
actor Scott Glenn provides some comic relief as Navy aviator
and (arguably) first American man in space Alan Shepard.
Kaufman left room for female talents to excel too - Barbara
Hershey, Pamela Reed, Veronica Cartwright and Mary Jo
Deschanel are great as pilots' wives. Royal Dano is also
impressive as menacing figure of Preacher, but the most
memorable performances belong to Donald Moffat as
Vice-President Lyndon B. Johnson and Jane Dornacker as Nurse
Murch.
Great acting talent assembled for this film was mirrored
with Kaufman's superb direction. Most notable of all is the
methods Kaufman uses in order to suggest the passage of
time. The beginning of the film shows test pilots living in
the middle of desert, as virtual unknowns, far away from
strict rules and discipline. Everything seems natural
-Yeager can indulge himself in horse riding just few yards
away from the fastest and most precious aircraft in the
world. In that setting, it's quite normal for important
technical problems to be solved with simple chainsaw and for
the test pilots not to report their ribs being broken before
most important flights. But the times are changing; WW2
alliance with USSR is replaced with Cold War, and "natural"
pilots like Yeager must be replaced with more disciplined,
conventional pilots. Their entire lives become focus of
media frenzy, and their job is subjected to strict rules,
meticulous plans and they must fight the bureaucrats,
publicity-seeking politicians and uncaring scientists (like
former Nazi rocket expert Werner von Braun, played by Scott
Beach) only to preserve their most basic human dignity. This
contrast is underlined with the beautifully edited sequence
- while Yeager conducts his final and most spectacular test
flight in absolute obscurity, "Mercury" astronauts receive
fame and fortune, although some of them even before going in
the space.
Those contrasts and similar effects are achieved with
Kaufman's superb use of poetic movie language. Editing is
great, and photography by Caleb Deschanel provides many
memorable scenes like the funeral in the desert or
astronauts in their suits walking in slow motion (the same
image would be copied in many latter films). Although
Kaufman enjoyed support of NASA and American military, which
provided authentic locations and period equipment, he still
had to use special effects in order to simulate space
flights. Those effects are excellent and they can still fool
the audience accustomed to CGI and real footage of Earth
from outer space. Another fine contribution of this film is
"Oscar"-awarded musical score by Bill Conti; I still tremble
from excitement every time I hear it. It is accompanied with
the use of Holst and Debussy. Some of the songs used in the
background also provide authentic atmosphere of the
historical period.
This film is great, and its cult status is well deserved,
but there are some minor flaws. Some of the "Mercury"
astronauts aren't fleshed out enough (although being played
by fine actors, like Lance Henriksen). Film also lacks
proper closure. On the other hand, most logical conclusion
of the film - landing on the Moon - would require this film
to be more than six hours long. Also, some critics were
prone to attack this film as too Amerocentric and hard on
Russians, who were portrayed as evil monsters, just in line
with most virulent Cold War rhetoric of Reagan's America. In
some of contemporary interviews, Kaufman defended that
approach by claiming that he wanted to make film as
authentic as possible, and in order to do that, he portrayed
Russians not as they were in real life, but as they were
perceived by Americans in early 1960s.
Time has passed; now we don't see astronauts as heroes. In
this age of widespread satellite communications and routine
space missions, those men and women in space suits are seen
as mere maintenance workers. Few young boys want to be
astronauts when they grow up. But this film, sentimental
reminder of the times "when future began", perhaps could
encourage at least some of them to follow "Mercury"
astronauts' footsteps seek new frontiers in the sky. And
even if they decide to stay on Earth, they could still
appreciate THE RIGHT STUFF as an extraordinary piece of
cinema.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     While at the wonderful parent-child U. S. Space Camp with my son
this past weekend, they played THE RIGHT STUFF (1983) in our dorm.
[Since so many people have asked, the number for more information on
the camp is 1-800-63SPACE.]
     THE RIGHT STUFF is so long that it took two nights to show it, but
it was well worth it.  We had a group of extremely active and
inquisitive young boys in our dorm with most aged seven or eight, but
when the film started, they found places on the beds and on the floor
and set watching the film in fascination.  Nary a peep was heard during
the entire film and most stayed awake.
     I had seen director Philip Kaufman's THE RIGHT STUFF years ago,
but seeing it after having tried real astronaut training missions and
simulators, it made his story of the United States space program more
vivid than ever.  This is a brilliant picture that works well on more
levels that you can count, but an interest in space is not necessary
for the film's enjoyment.
     The script by the director is based on Thomas Wolfe's tome on the
history of the U. S. program.  Films today are frequently too long
(CASINO and HEAT for example).  They take normal material and try to
make it into an epic by lack of enough editing.  THE RIGHT STUFF is a
true epic and earns the right to come at a little over three hours.
     In a section that most writers would leave out, Kaufman has the
screenplay start with the greatest test pilot of the jet era, Chuck
Yeager (Sam Shepard).  Moreover, this is just not a brief interlude
before the real story begins.  Instead, we see Yeager as the sage who
rejected the space program because it wasn't real flying, but who
watched it from afar throughout all his life.  Shepard, in perhaps the
best performance of his career, plays Yeager as daring and yet humble,
as quiet but assured, and overall he gives one of the most complex and
compelling performances I have seen of a character who is a recluse.
     Playing just the opposite, Ed Harris gives an equally brilliant
performance as the ultra confident and goody two-shoes of the first
group of astronauts, John Glenn.  The other actors playing members of
the Mercury 7 team are Scott Glenn as Alan Shepard, Dennis Quaid as
Gordon Cooper, Fred Ward as Gus Grissom, Scott Paulin as Deke Slayton,
Charles Frank as Scott Carpenter, and Lance Henriksen as Walter
Schirra.  All of them did a fine job, but Glenn, Quaid, and Ward really
stand out.
     The wives had important supporting roles with Barbara Hershey as
Glennis Yeager, Veronica Cartwright as Betty Grissom, Pamela Reed as
Trudy Cooper, Mary Jo Deschanel as Annie Glenn, Susan Kase as Rene
Carpenter, Kathy Baker as Louise Shepard, Mickey Crocker as Marge
Slayton, and Mittie Smith as Jo Shirra.
     It is hard to enumerate all of the reasons the show is such a
great film.  The scale is enormous and the courage is striking.  The
script is laced with tons of natural humor.  The exercises the
astronauts have to go through are both exhausting and sometimes
tedious, and the film transfers these experiences directly to the
audience.
     The historical details you get are so extensive you will feel like
the movie must have lasted ten hours, and yet like a page-turner of a
novel, it is one that you will not want to leave.
     The cinematography by Caleb Deschanel is breathtaking, and the
music by Bill Conti is broad and inspiring.  The technical aspects of
the film feel absolutely accurate.
     Perhaps a few memorable scenes will give a feeling for the
picture.  In the first launch of a man into space, Alan Shepard was
only going to be up for fifteen minutes, and the people on the ground
had no experience in shooting up a man.  Alan had his usual four cups
of coffee before going to work as we all do.  He got into his tiny
office, a space capsule so minuscule they say wore it rather than sat
in it.  He was ready to spend his fifteen minutes before splashdown.
     When delay after delay left him up there for hours, he asked
permission to relieve himself.  The director said no, absolutely not.
If he did, he might cause a short and start a fire.  Finally, after
Gordon Cooper in mission control insisted, they let Shepard urinate.
This caused many alarms to go off as the urine ran through his suit.
Besides the humor of the scene, the look on Shepard's face during all
of it is priceless.  Being an astronaut was not easy in more was that
you can ever imagine.
     The space program also considered using other types of people,
like tight rope walkers, and animals, especially chimps, instead of
test pilots.  This competition made for an interesting subplot.
     In another subplot, we have Vice President Lyndon Johnson (Donald
Moffat) supporting the program so he could make political hay off of
it.  He was incensed when Mrs. Glenn wouldn't let him and all of the
television networks cameras in her house.  Johnson wanted to be shown
on the national news as a space program backer.  Overall, the film
makes him into an opportunist and a buffoon.
     One of my favorite small characters is Royal Dano as the Minister.
He is the grim reaper figure that appears at key moments in the
picture.
     THE RIGHT STUFF runs 3:13.  It is rated PG.  I belief it was rated
before the PG-13 classification started.  Today, I think it would get a
PG-13 rating for its couple of uses of the F word, the nudity of a fan
dance scene, and the semen donation scene among others.  All of this
notwithstanding, I think and I have proof of it, that this film is fine
for kids say six and up.  I did not get a report from the girl's dorm,
but everyone in our boy's dorm, including Jeffrey (age 7), loved it.  I
give it my strongest recommendation and my top rating of ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
