Title
Review for Godson, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Kevin McDonald, Dom DeLuise, Rodney Dangerfield, Joey Buttafuoco,
Keith Coogan,
Lou Ferrigno, Bob Hoge, Dom Irrera, Fabiana Udenio
Written and Directed by: Bob Hoge
Running Time: 100 minutes
Truly awful parody of The Godfather series and other gangster films.
Kevin McDonald (of TV's "The Kids in the Hall" which says to me that
he should know better) stars the youngest son of the Calzone crime
family.  Dom DeLuise (doing the Brando impression he did in Cannonball
Run II and other places too I'm sure) plays the leader of the Calzone
family, named "The Oddfather".  Rodney Dangerfield, who I could swear
had comedic ability at some point in his career, plays a rival to the
Calzone family, named "The Rodfather".  Are you laughing yet?  Neither
was I.
Inept joke after inept joke makes the similarly themed Jane Austin's
Mafia! look like a cinematic masterpiece.  When Joey Buttafuoco gives
the best performance in the film and the only laugh comes when Dom
DeLuise mutters the line "Your mother's ass" then what does that tell
you?  I'd recommend fast forwarding through this garbage if it wasn't
for the presence of gorgeous Fabiana Udenio (Austin
Powers:International Man of Mystery) playing Don Na (get it?  Don Na?
Donna?  It's funny!).  You may still want to hit mute though.
The Godson is available on DVD from Sterling Home Entertainment.  I
can't imagine anyone wanting to own this film on DVD, but I guess it's
still my duty to inform you of the disc's "features".  It contains the
film in standard (pan and scan) format, the film's trailer, and
production notes.  Curiously on the back of the case, certain cast
members are named in the list of special features.  Since when is an
actor who appeared in the film considered to be a special feature
(especially this cast)?  [PG-13]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email:chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1999 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be reprinted
without permission.
