Title
Review for Bicentennial Man (1999)
Number of Reviews
24

Author
Walter Frith
'Bicentennial Man' is a test for ourselves and our attitudes.  It is a test
aimed at our degree of cynicism.  How, in the age of ever increasing
resentment towards many things social, can we ever like a film that reaches
out and asks us to look at the world through the eyes of a machine?  Not to
draw a direct comparison, but 'Bicentennial Man' had that strange flavour a
la 'Forrest Gump' where the world is viewed sometimes in a misunderstood way
by those unfamiliar with its realities.  What 'Bicentennial Man' does is it
takes this premise one step forward and instead of using human eyes, the
eyes and functions of a robot get to see it for two hundred years.  Oh, how
many of us would like to see the world two centuries from now.  A cure for
cancer?  AIDS?  Gasoline in cars?  A cashless society?  People living on
other planets?  Day trips to the moon?  The next two top 100 lists from the
American Film Institute of the greatest films of their given century?
Seriously, 'Bicentennial Man' mixes elements of innocence and technology
nicely to give the film a smooth texture and never tries to answer questions
of society's progress a whole lot but concentrates on how one entity
progresses and watches those around him go from one generation to the next.
Chris Columbus is an interesting director.  If he had been around twenty
five or thirty years ago, I can see him having directed a lot of Disney 'B'
fare.  Perhaps those rascally 'Herbie the Love Bug' films or those cheesy
but entertaining films with a young Kurt Russell.  You know, 'The Strongest
Man in the World', 'The Computer Wore Tennis Shoes', and 'Now You See Him,
Now You Don't' to name a few.  In this generation, Columbus has made the
first two 'Home Alone' movies, a gem of a forgotten movie, 'Only the Lonely'
with the late great John Candy, 'Mrs. Doubtfire' and a real sappy letdown
entitled 'Stepmom' which was a film better suited for the likes of Garry
Marshall.
Beginning in the year 2005, Robin Williams is the voice of a robot named
Andrew brought home to a family by the patriarch whom Andrew refers to as
'Sir' (Sam Neill).  There is the lady of the house (Wendy Crewson) and, of
course, you have to have children in a Chris Columbus movie.  The youngest
daughter, Little Miss (Hallie Kate Eisenberg) is the focus of Andrew's
curiosity as he tries to learn about human behaviour.  One day after a
slight malfunction, Sir takes Andrew to be repaired.  His strange, human
like attributes are explained to the manufacturer (he would love to
manufacture many Andrews like this), but Sir makes Andrew tamper proof and
many years later, Andrew runs into Rupert Burns (Oliver Platt), the
manufacturer's successor, who is also a relative, and slowly, Andrew is
given body parts that make him more and more human.  All the while, Andrew
remains faithful to Little Miss, now a grown woman (Embeth Davidtz).
Williams makes his debut in the movie about forty five minutes into the film
as a human like character and his presence is a welcomed one as he continues
his journey and has many visions of life in the two hundred years that he
lives.
Chris Columbus keeps the film on target and maintains a low key approach to
the material.  It feels like a quiet evening spent at home with family
and/or friends doing something docile like playing cards, reading poetry or
playing a board game.  The film has no loud explosions, foul language, major
bursts of emotion and is good family material most of the time.
The film is based on the short story by Issac Asimov and the novel 'The
Positronic Man' by Issac Asimov and Robert Silverburg with a screenplay
written for the screen by Nicholas Kazan ('Reversal of Fortune').  Kazan
brings up memories of some very familiar films such as 'Forrest Gump', as I
mentioned earlier, Woody Allen's 'Sleeper' and a few other films that you
can see for yourself.  This hurts the film somewhat but the direction it dec
ides to take compensates for this somewhat.
When Robin Williams first landed in movies back in the late seventies and
early eighties, I never thought he would elevate himself to the position he
has today.  An Oscar winning actor with an impressive list of important
social films like 'The Fisher King', 'Dead Poets Society' and 'Good Will
Hunting'.  He makes films for the serious, the not so serious and the
downright whimsical.  Even a guest spot of television's 'Homicide' is
something over looked by a lot of people as the measure of just how good
Robin Williams can be.  With the success of 'Apollo 13', Tom Hanks went on
to involve himself with a study of the space program with the series
entitled 'From the Earth to the Moon'.  I would like to see Robin Williams
dive into something close to his heart.  Perhaps host a documentary of some
of pop culture's greatest comedians or star in a bio pick of a real life
comedian, something that would gain him even more respect than he's already
earned from playing real life characters in films like 'Patch Adams' and
'Awakenings'.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
Stories tend to come in two flavors: either the hero is in some sort of
jeopardy (emotional, mortal, existential, etc) the whole time, or the hero
is on some quest, during which he has to overcome various (life-threatening,
etc) obstacles. Granted, as both of these story-types entail not only
'jeopardy' but the eventual completion of some 'goal,' it's easy to assume
the two flavors are actually one. But they're not: the first situation tends
to result from the hero's meddling--be it purposeful or not--while the
second isn't quite so moral, as the hero has committed no 'crime' for which
all this jeopardy is just dessert. There is still some 'just dessert,'
however; without it, audience expectation would grind down to nothing, and
we'd lose interest. It's just that now that just dessert takes the form of
the hero achieving his goal. Which is to say the hero is deserving, has been
wronged in some way that achieving his quest can right. Of course, then,
too, the more naive and 'wronged' the hero is, the more deserving he is.
It's a sympathy-identification trick, and in Bicentennial Man it works
exactly as it should, to the point where we willfully overlook all the
dramatic problems that arise when compressing a 200 year life span into a
little more than two hours, because all that's important is whether or not
Android Andrew Martin (Robin Williams) will do the Frankenstein-shuffle just
about every mechanical man in cinema tries to pull off at one time or
another: becoming human.
And it's an interesting journey, ('Awakening,' yes) from the
undifferentiated assembly line Bicentennial Man opens with to the uniqueness
Andrew eventually achieves, as technology allows his mechanical self to be
absorbed by his 'human' self: all his robot parts retreat under the skin,
until it's just Robin Williams, albeit a Robin Williams who blinks with the
sound of carriage returns on a typewriter. And the years pass, and the Pepsi
generations slide by, and Andrew's adopted family dies off one by one,
until--like Frankenstein again, or Duncan McCloud (Highlander)--Andrew
becomes lonely. And of course the cure for loneliness is companionship, a
mate. Thing is, though, this future society insists upon classing him with
the household appliances, (per Cherry 2000, etc) nevermind how involved he
is in this all too human condition. He does, after all, still have a
positronic mind, is still hardwired to obey Asimov's Three Laws of Robotics.
Too, he can project movies from the top of his head. Add to this his
immortality and presto, achieving his quest (of being human, where 'human'
is a legal term for the courts to decide) just became that much more
difficult. We've got to have escalation, after all, along with some
insurmountable odds. This is how heroes are made.
It's not the only way they're made, though. There also has to be the unusual
(accidental, in Andrew's case; Short Circuit-type stuff) birth and the
requisite attempts on his life when he's still the equivalent of an infant.
And of course the love interest, (Embeth Davidtz, in two roles across time)
the bungling sidekick, (mad scientist Oliver Platt) and, in Bicentennial Man
at least, the bungling sidekick's bungling sidekick, Galatea, (as in 2.2)
all of whom are instrumental in helping Andrew realize his human potential,
which of course nobody could have injected with as much meaning as Robin
Williams, never afraid to give the old heartstrings a tug. Does society ever
recognize Andrew as human, though? As Bicentennial Man unfolds, it matters
less and less, as the real issue isn't finally in how one's perceived, but
in how one perceives oneself (to use Andrew's androgynous pronoun). Which is
to say that, even though this is supposed to be the flavor of story not
driven by morality, there's still a message in there. And Bicentennial Man
is involving enough that you don't even realize it takes nearly two and half
hours to get that message across. Granted, not much really 'happens' in the
movie, but still, you kind of want it to go on.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Walt Disney Pictures/Columbia Pictures
 Director:  Chris Columbus
 Writer:  Nicholas Kazan, story "The Bicentennial Man' by
Isaac Asimov & Robert Silverberg
 Cast: Robin Williams,  Wendy Crewson, Embeth Davidtz,
Hallie Kate Eisenberg, Lindze Letherman, Sam Neill, Oliver
Platt
   Critics have jumped on director Chris Columbus for turning
out a movie that looks like a Hallmark greeting card, one in
which, they imply, sap oozes slowly and perpetually like
molasses crawling up a tree in January.  If I might demur, I
find that Disney--we're talking Disney don't forget--pushes the
envelope with "Bicentennial Man," just as that studio did in
exposing the tobacco industry with the muckraking and
explosively acted "The Insider."  Disney, known for often
appealing to the most commercial interests, is aiming
"Bicentennial" at the young 'uns in a PG-rated movie--which
contains some frank, discreetly expressed sexual discussion,
a judicious scene of a couple in bed engaged in post-coital
banter, and a nicely clarified exposition of the nature of
robotics suitable for children without talking down to them.  If
you come expecting lots of laughs because Robin Williams is
featured, forget it.  This is not "Moscow on the Hudson" but
rather intends to be a clone not of any other Williams film but
a well-done exploration of another type of cloning.  What's
more, the picture goes beyond the multi-generational
composition of P.T. Anderson's "Magnolia," harking back to
the old-style family epics like George Stevens' 1956 "Giant."  
   The title comes not only from the 200-year longevity of its
title character but from the story's birth as an Isaac Asimov
yarn that came out in 1976 during America's bicentennial
celebration of independence (and also from a novel by
Asimov and Robert Silverberg, "The Positronic Man").  During
the first half, Robin Williams is encased in the 100-degree
heat of a metal suit--leading Variety critic Todd McCarthy to
complain about what he considers a throwaway first half:
"Unfortunately, it takes about an hour for the film to even
suggest that it intends to be about anything other than a
futuristic tin man" while critic Roger Ebert, on the other hand,
reacts, "At the 60-minute mark, I was really enjoying it."  
   During the initial hour, Sir (Sam Neill) takes delivery of a
robot which his family calls Andrew (Robin Williams).  Andrew
does the cleaning and can cook up a splendid chicken.  The
robot is treated with indifference and some fear by Sir's
plastic wife (Wendy Crewson), badly by the envious older
daughter, and with genuine affection by the adorable 7-year-
old Little Miss (Hallie Kate Eisenberg).  When Sir notes that
the robot shows human traits like friendliness and creativity
(though it breaks the favorite toy in Little Miss's glass
menagerie), he acts to have its inners upgraded until, finally,
Andrew receives a central nervous system and all the
equipment he needs to be a real man.  Despite the good
treatment he receives at Sir's home, Andrewy's humanity
compels him to ask for his freedom and his own living
quarters, which he buys with money saved up from working
with Sir.  
   Columbus takes the story ahead a full two centuries from
its opening in the year 2005 until the point that Little Miss's
granddaughter, Portia (Embeth Davidtz) has grown to
adulthood.  As Portia faces life with Andrew, she is plagued
with a conflict. Engaged to another, she ponders giving up
her fiance and taking up with a man-machine who can
implicitly promise her indefatigable love coupled with an
inability to reproduce.  
   This allegedly sappy story could actually be both scary and
thought-provoking for children younger than 10 years of age,
and parents might even be intimidated by its subject matter. 
What does a mother do when her 7-year-old girl asks,
"Mommy, what does Sir mean when he says that men and
women do something as often as they can (at first) because
it feels good?"  Or, Mommy, why does that cute Little MIssy
look so gray and pale and bad and stays in bed at the end of
the picture?"  
   In addition to its provocative dialogue, "Bicentennial Man"
features some cute scenes of the future city as people
transport themselves about the skyscrapers in flying cars and
the Golden Gate bridge is reborn as a double-decker.  The
whole project is an absorbing mixture of sci-fi and fairly deep
(for a kid audience) dialogue about love and death, extending
political correctness to the rights and dignity of a machine.
Rated PG.  Running Time: 133 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Manchester City Centre)
Released in the UK by UIP on January 21, 2000; certificate PG; 132 minutes; 
country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Chris Columbus; produced by Michael Barnathan, Chris Columbus, 
Gail Katz, Lawrence Mark, Neal Miller, Wolfgang Petersen, Mark Radcliffe.
Written by Nicholas Kazan; based on the short story by Isaac Asimov and the 
novel "The Positronic Man" by Isaac Asimov and Robert Silverberg.
Photographed by Phil Meheux; edited by Neal Travis.
"Bicentennial Man" made my thoughts and responses clash -- I knew that its 
plot was stupid, but even as the fact nagged at me, the movie held my 
attention. Its premise is one that has appeared in several movies already, 
and is one that I always react against; but somehow I got enough out of the 
picture to leave with a smile on my face.
Robin Williams stars as Andrew, a big metal robot in the shape of a human 
being. Remember the maid in the TV cartoon show "The Jetsons"? Just like 
that. Andrew is bought by a well-to-do family man (Sam Neill), who notices 
that his new machine is displaying signs of emotion and creativity; it carves 
cute little models for the man's children, for example, and points out which 
one is its favourite.
The businessman is kind-hearted and patient, not to mention open-minded, and 
so decides to treat Andrew as a 'he', not an 'it'. He converses with the 
robot, trying to figure out just how much humanity there is inside its head, 
eventually coming to treat it as one of the family. The man allows Andrew to 
wear clothes, keep the income from the things he builds, and ask questions 
about any topic he feels curious about.
Time moves on, the man and his wife pass away, their children grow up, and so 
on and so forth. Andrew, immortal of course, since he wasn't made in Taiwan, 
stays alive throughout; observing a great deal of humanity, absorbing it, and 
becoming more human. He searches the globe for other robots displaying signs 
of emotional life, and while he doesn't find any, Andrew does run into a 
scientist (Oliver Platt) who agrees to help him become actually physically 
human.
This is a grand journey, that, as the movie's title suggests, takes two 
hundred years to complete. So "Bicentennial Man" has a lot of ground to 
cover, and that leads to one of its stylistic downfalls -- events are skimmed 
over, relationships are suggested rather than portrayed, and the piece is 
tied together with constant soppy music.
With no strong structure to sweep us away, what gets our attention is the 
IDEA of what is happening, and the idea is stupid. Like "D.A.R.Y.L.", 
"Bicentennial Man" doesn't seem to understand that no matter how much its 
characters accept it, and how insistently it forces the notion upon us, the 
concept of a robot developing human features is just not plausible. A 
computer is a device that follows programmed instructions; a living brain is 
an organic member that can grow, learn, and process metaphysical ideas. Of 
all the movies about computers with minds of their own, only "Demon Seed", a 
1977 thriller starring Julie Christie, has made any attempt to remember these 
simple facts.
So what did I get out of "Bicentennial Man"? Well, it features plenty of 
amusing scenes in which Williams uses a robot's cold logic to try to figure 
out the disorganised way humans behave. The joke doesn't wear out its welcome 
because human life has so many different facets, and there's comic potential 
in every one. I also loved the visual style of this movie, which is set 
between the years 2005 and 2205, but doesn't shove overblown space-age 
fantasy designs down our throats. It takes a stunningly sensible approach to 
how the technology and fashions of the next two centuries are likely to 
develop, and the production design never calls attention to itself as 
'futuristic' -- it's present as realistic background. 
While the wretchedness of its premise bothered my in every scene, the 
wonderful look and feel of this picture delighted me just as often. I dreaded 
a mawkish performance from Williams (it has been less than a year since 
"Patch Adams"), but the limitations of his character keep him in check, and 
he serves as a charming lead in this creative and pretty original piece of 
work. The brief, impersonal structure makes the events in "Bicentennial Man" 
seem cold; the aesthetics make them amazing. Funny. Andrew probably 
experiences the world in rather a similar way.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Mac VerStandig
***Moviereviews.org has been asked to start collecting a list of readers 
in the Washington, DC area who would be interested in attending advanced 
promotional screenings of major motion pictures for free. If this 
interests you, please e-mail Moviereviews.org at passes@moviereviews.org 
with your name and zip code (to verify that you are in the Washington, 
DC area). Then check back at Moviereviews.org 
(http://www.moviereviews.org) as often as you like to see what 
screenings you could be eligible to attend!***
---Starting on Christmas Eve you can hear Mac VerStandig's movie reviews 
on the radio in Portland, Maine once a week in addition to reading them 
on Moviereviews.org. Details on time and dial placement still to come. 
Stay tuned!---
*** A copy of this review can be found at 
http://www.moviereviews.org/bicentennial_man.htm ***
Bicentennial Man is an impuissant and confused movie that follows a 
robot through 200 years neglecting to ever develop another character in 
depth or share with the audience that the title-referenced bicentennial 
will mark the end of a journey that seems to be equally as long and 
laborious for the audience. Director Chris Columbus' film centers around 
a not-very-entertaining Robin Williams as Andrew, the aforementioned 
machine, and his trials and tribulations which are as unexplored as the 
West Indies that other guy named Columbus supposedly discovered.
In "the not too distant future" we meet the Martin family and their 
newest household appliance: Andrew. Our protagabot ventures from 
generation to generation of a cliched and overly dull Martin family- 
mostly women. He also comes across a few other humans and robots, but 
none interesting enough to warrant any attention in this review. They 
come and go, Andrew stays, and the movie limps it way through a 
Jetsons-style future setting.
Now banished to a fate worse than ordinary reruns, TV Land, there was a 
delightful 1960's Don Adams show (that Fox unsuccessfully tried to bring 
back a few years ago) called Get Smart. Richard Gautier, a relative 
unknown that never ventured past G. I. Joe fame, played Hymie the Robot. 
Much like Andrew, Hymie was a machine that actively sought life and 
commonly found himself in hilarious situations were his inner-workings 
were experimented with ineptly. Hymie was friendly and romantic, yet 
inevitably robotic. Richard Gautier may not be Robin Williams, but the 
show is just as funny and doesn't cost $7.75 and an otherwise good 
Friday or Saturday night.
The positive end of this almost-dead battery does have some traits of 
which to boast. In a time where they are rare, Bicentennial Man is a 
movie that you needn't be embarrassed to take Grandma and the tots to. 
Robin Williams is very funny and touching with some traditional Disney 
tear-jerking scenes. The explanation offered of sex is edited to a level 
of general appropriateness. But the movie is even confused about its 
family traits as we learn that being human is the ultimate 
accomplishment and you needn't mourn the dead (for all those that pass 
away, only one tear is seen). We are also told that imperfection is the 
key to life and marriage can be taken lightly.   
This film also marks 1999's Christmas time family film that most wants 
to be the next Miracle on 34th Street or It's a Wonderful Life. Last 
year, Chris Columbus entered Stepmom into this notorious yet largely 
unspoken contest, following his slightly more appealing earlier bids 
which include Home Alone and Mrs. Doubtfire. Mr. Capra, rest assured, we 
don't need a robot to locate the West Indies.  

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In the year 2005 a father (Sam Neill) surprises his family with
a new robot (Robin Williams) whom his family dubs Andrew.  But there
is more to Andrew than just Asimov's famous Three Laws of Robotics.
The laws make certain that Andrew is benevolent, but he is
considerably more.  He has a streak of creativity and independent
thinking that supposedly robots do not have.  Rather than being an
appliance, he has the rudiments of actually being human.  The family
has two daughters.  One who is simply called Little Miss (Hallie
Kate Eisenberg as a child and Embeth Davidtz as an adult)
immediately takes to Andrew while older daughter Lloyd immediately
wants to see Andrew discredited and destroyed.  The father comes to
take a fatherly interest in Andrew.  We see Andrew doing some very
human things like showing compassion for a spider and trying to
master the complexities of human humor.
     Racial themes enter the story as a human woman comes to love
Andrew and he loves her in return, but Andrew is only a machine
becoming human.  It is years before a real romantic relationship is
possible between him and a human.  But robots are essentially
immortal and as the title implies, we see Andrew over the course of
two hundred years.  This means even though it is a longer than
average film, 131 minutes, it still covers superficially mostly only
the more important events of Andrew's life.  It seems almost as soon
as you meet characters they are old and dying.
     One thing the film does not handle very well is the view of
society during the passage of so much time.  Change is coming to our
society at an accelerated rate.  One need only look at the rate at
which our own society has changed in the last 40 years.  Forced with
showing the changes in society over 200 years or ignoring them, the
producers have almost entirely had to steer clear.  We see minor and
superficial changes, but not nearly the amount we would expect.  We
are left with an uneasy feeling that society has stagnated, but for
some relatively small advances in the sciences relevant to the
story.
     Even when Isaac Asimov's story "The Bicentennial Man" was first
published, it far from original.  Asimov had been writing for years
about benevolent robots who were misunderstood.  Ray Bradbury wrote
the story "I Sing the Body Electric," produced on TWILIGHT ZONE,
about a family getting a grandmotherly robot and learning to love
her.  Asimov combined this and with some more complex themes for his
novel.  However, the wish to become human and the slow transition to
fulfilling that wish was plundered from the novel and used very
publicly in STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION with the character Data.
The viewer has agonized over Data's attempt to learn to deliver
humor and it seems unfair to make the viewer do it again.  That and
much more of Data's difficult road to becoming human is
recapitulated in this film.  Like STAR TREK, this film never
questions the smug assumption that being human is the highest state
of being.  At its best BICENTENNIAL MAN holds up a mirror to show us
what it means to be human.  But where it rings false the writers
fall back on Andrew being a robot.  That makes its observations
undependable.
     Some of the visuals are very good, but some are surprisingly
flawed.  In particular the futuristic skylines are unconvincing.  If
Andrew behaves too much like Data, he also looks a little too much
like C3PO.  Kudos should, however, go to the design of the robot
makeup and mechanism.  The faces maintain the look of metal and
still are expressive to what is perhaps an unrealistic level.
     Not surprisingly, this is Robin Williams's film.  Somehow his
attempts to be a normal human are touching but never as powerful as
Cliff Robertson is in the comparable film CHARLY.  Sam Neill, after
this film and THE DISH, seems to be vying for the title of the
mellowest actor on the screen.  Embeth Davidtz has a harder role
than Williams.  If Williams does not seem quite right, well, he is a
robot.  Davidtz is quite good as a human, which is harder.  Young
Hallie Kate Eisenberg, known for Pepsi and Independent Film Channel
ads, is her usual sweet self falling a little short of being
cloying.  Oliver Platt is always watchable.  Chris Columbus directed
and previously directed Williams in MRS. DOUBTFIRE.  James Horner's
score is unremarkable.
     While this film does not have all the resonance that a film
aimed at an adult audience should have, it should be good for a
young adult audience.  I give it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Bob Bloom
 Bicentennial Man (1999) 1 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Robin Williams, Sam
Neill, Embeth Davidtz, Oliver Platt and Hallie Kate Eisenberg. Directed by
Chris Columbus.
 It is in the nature of our species to continually try to better ourselves,
to evolve.
 And you can't fault a person for doing what comes naturally.
 So, I really can't be upset with Robin Williams who seems to have turned
his back on comedy to strive to become an Actor.
 After all, we all want to improve, to continually grow ...
Ah, the hell with it. Who am I kidding? Just call me a selfish s.o.b. I
want my old Robin Williams back, the one who kept me laughing for nearly
two hours in concert back in Columbus, Ohio, about 17 years ago, the Robin
Williams from "Good Morning Vietnam" and "Aladdin."
 I want the spontaneous Robin Williams who appears on talk shows or
performs during Comic Relief.
 This new Robin Williams is creepy. Worse, he's kind of dull and boring.
I'm tired of this touchy-feely guy who began emerging in "Good Will
Hunting" and has invaded my multiplex in "Patch Adams," "When Dreams May
Come," "Jakob the Liar" and now "Bicentennial Man."
 He has become the cliche of the comedian wanting to play Hamlet.
 Maybe this is what attracted him to "Bicentennial Man," an artificial
weeper that is overly schmaltzy and ponderous.
 In the movie, based on a short story by science fiction legend Isaac
Asimov, which was later expanded into the novel, "The Positronic Man," by
Robert Silverberg, Williams plays Andrew, a robot who continually strives
for humanity.
How anyone can see this as an improvement is beyond me, but after all, it
is science fiction.
 We first meet Andrew at the home of Sir (Sam Neill), his wife, Ma'am
(Wendy Crewson) and their daughters, Miss (Undze Letherman) and Little Miss
(Pepsi spokeskid Hallie Kate Eisenberg, who already is beginning to wear
out her welcome).
 At first considered merely a "household appliance," Sir sees a creative
spark in Andrew and encourages him to continue his explorations.
 As the decades pass - the movie covers 200 years - Andrew continues to
grow and evolve.
 But then he falls in love with Portia, the great-granddaughter of Sir and
the granddaughter of Little Miss.
 Both Little Miss as an adult (as well as an old woman) and Portia are
played by Embeth Davidtz, best remembered as Ralph Fiennes Jewish maid in
"Schindler's List."
 So, more than halfway through the movie, directed by Chris Columbus, who
has done better work, we are now involved in a robot/girl love story and
all the cliches that entails.
 The real stars of "Bicentennial Man" are the makeup and special effects
people who created Williams' robot look. Unfortunately, later in the movie
he is given a human face that looks like an old, tired Robin Williams.
 People are going to flock to "Bicentennial Man" no matter what I or any
other critic says. It's inoffensive and the kids will like it, though the
younger ones may become restless because of it's nearly
two-hour-and-20-minute running time.
 But it is a rather weak movie, rife in self-important sounding dialogue
and situations that don't ring true.
 I just wish Robin Williams would quit wasting his time and devolve. Who
says moving forward is always progress?
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
The last time director Chris Columbus teamed with Robin
Willliams they came up with Mrs. Doubtfire but, if you're expecting
this to be a slapstick kids' flick, think again. Adapted from a short
story by Isaac Asimov, it chronicles the life of a NDR-114 robot who
begins as a household appliance in 2005, created "to perform menial
tasks: cooking, cleaning, making household repairs, playing with or
supervising children."  Dubbed Andrew by the youngest of the family's
children (deep-dimpled Hallie Kate Eisenberg) who cannot pronounce
"android," he soon begins to show creativity, curiosity, and
compassion, confounding his manufacturer and launching a 200-year
quest to discover his humanity. Nicholas Kazan's thoughtful screenplay
cleverly explores the technology of artificial intelligence as it
integrates with human behavior but, since it follows a family for
several generations with only Andrew as a connective, it involves too
many characters, several with literary-allusion names like Galatea and
Portia.  Plus, there's a constant awareness that underneath the
plastic prosthesis, there's comical Robin Williams, desperately
itching to emerge. Sam Neill scores as Andrew's original owner, as
does Oliver Platt as a bio-tech designer who becomes Andrew's friend.
It's interesting that, just like Woody in Toy Story 2, Andrew makes a
choice between pristine immortality and the inexplicable vagaries of
humanity but, unlike that magical fantasy, children under 10 will
quickly be bored or depressed by the insipid depth of this 2-hour,
13-minute saga. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Bicentennial
Man powers up to a surprisingly serious, existential 7, as a poignant
parable of what it means to be human.

Author
Christopher Null
     Robin Williams wants -- and needs -- nothing more than to have his
own THE TRUMAN SHOW -- a Hail Mary to ward off permanent stereotyping.
Typecast as a goofy loudmouth in throwaway films ranging from MRS.
DOUBTFIRE to FATHER'S DAY to FLUBBER, you have to look back all the way
to THE FISHER KING in 1991 for his last great starring role.
     BICENTENNIAL MAN aims to turn that all around by making Williams
something we can relate to once again.  Ironically, that's not as a
human:  It's as a robot.
     As the robotic Andrew, Williams starts out his life in 2005 San
Francisco as a run-of-the-mill android with an unexplained glitch that
makes him able to experience emotions and gives him creativity.  Andrew
then embarks on a 200-year quest to discover the nature of humanity,
absorbing lessons on art, freedom, love, and ultimately mortality.  (In
other words, the same problems Williams was dealing with in "Mork &
Mindy.")
     It's an ambitious movie and it positively sprawls at close to 2 1/2
hours in length.  Audiences expecting that Robin slapstick are going to
be sorely mistaken.  As a robot, Andrew's only laughs come from his
unintentional mangling of jokes and turns of the phrase like "Swine
Lake."
     No, they're not exactly belly laughs.  And while BICENTENNIAL MAN
is indeed a thoughtful drama with excellent production values, it's
clearly lacking in a number of subtle ways.  Most annoying is the
plastic utopia that the film-world becomes, complete with (of course)
flying cars, metallic skyscrapers, and all-white hospital interiors.
San Francisco, one of the most crowded cities in the country, appears to
be an oasis -- everyone's apartment is enormous -- I wish!  In 2205, I
don't expect the world's foremost concern will be wrestling over the
question, Are robots human?
     But my main criticism of the film is that its protagonist is
obviously *not* a robot but is actually Robin Williams.  Jim Carrey
convinced us that he was Truman Burbank, and he convinced me that he was
Andy Kaufman, too.  Robin Williams does not convince you that he is
anything other than Robin Williams.  It's just a milder version of
himself.  It's DEAD POETS SOCIETY Robin.
     Despite its flaws, BICENTENNIAL MAN is imminently watchable, and on
the whole it's a good time.  Just don't expect a life-altering
experience to be had.  But do expect to see Williams back to his old
song and dance again next year.
Director: Chris Columbus
Producer: Wolfgang Petersen, Gail Katz, Laurence Mark, Neal Miller,
Chris Columbus, Mark Radliffe, Michael Barnathan
Writer: Nicholas Kazan
Starring: Robin Williams, Embeth Davidtz, Sam Neill, Oliver Platt,
Kiersten Warren, Wendy Crewson, Hallie Kate Eisebnerg, Lindze Letherman
http://movies.go.com/bicentennialman/
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
DIRECTED BY:      Chris Columbus
STARRING:         Robin Williams, Embeth Davidtz, Sam Neill, Oliver Platt
WRITTEN BY:       Nicholas Kazan
RATED:            PG for language and some sexual content
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES:       Job 33:4, Genesis 2:7, Acs 17:24-25
A robot/android with a positronic brain who desperately wants to know
what it is to be human?  Didn't we see this done (and done better) on TV's
Star Trek: The Next Generation?
Director Chris Columbus and star Robin Williams, who last teamed up to
bring us MRS. DOUBTFIRE, join forces again for the futuristic
faux-morality tale, BICENTENNIAL MAN.  Based on an Isaac Asimov story, the
film begins in the year 2005 with the delivery of  a household appliance
to the home of Richard Martin (Sam Neill, EVENT HORIZON).  This appliance
is an NDR-114 robot nicknamed Andrew by Little Miss (Hallie Kate
Eisenberg, THE INSIDER), the youngest member of the family. He will spend
the next 200 years in an attempt to be accepted by the world as something
other than a Sharper Image catalogue item.
Encouraged by the family who owns him, Andrew begins to explore various
facets of humanity.  Whenever he finds himself falling short of the human
experience, his standard reaction is to say "That won't do" before going
off to correct the defect.  Over time, he develops and incorporates humor,
taste, facial expressions, a central nervous system, a desire for freedom,
and last but not least... a functioning male anatomical "package".  He
also sees his original family die and "lives" to see the generation after
them die as well.  His next step on the road to humanity is going to have
to be his own mortality.
The 200 years pass quickly in this roughly 2˝ hour long film (That's
about 45 seconds per year) and yet the film itself tends to drag by,
weighed down by its own pomposity.   What begins as a lighthearted family
romp in the comedic style of MRS. DOUBTFIRE rapidly evolves into a
self-important, new-age minded movie equivalent of a warm and fuzzy group
hug where the physical intimacy is forced rather than genuinely
spontaneous.
Mr. Williams has some amusing moments as the titanium plated gentleman's
gentleman.  But unlike Dorothy's Tin Man, Andrew's heart never appears to
be missing.  From the very beginning, he demonstrates a curiosity and
affection for the humans he serves.  Most of the growth or development of
the character is seen in the external improvements rather than in an
internal realization.  Stretched over the length of this movie, the
characterization becomes transparently thin.
Embeth Davidtz (MANSFIELD PARK) in a dual role which has her playing both
Little Miss and her grandchild, Portia, serves as the love interest for
Andrew.  Knowing that she cannot invest her emotions in a machine, she
nonetheless must admit that no human tugs at her heart in quite the same
way.
Oliver Platt (LAKE PLACID) brightens the screen as a kindly robotics
engineer who drolly helps Andrew realize his goal to become accepted as
human.  And Sam Neill as Andrew's first (and last) owner shows a
compassion and endearing affection towards his animatronic property turned
friend.
Chris Columbus tries to look at the age-old question "What is the meaning
of life?" by turning the question on its head and simply asking, "what
defines life?"  Of course, he isn't up to the challenge of answering his
own question which he nimbly sidesteps.  Were the question posed to a
biblically minded person, the answer is readily available:
"The spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty hath
given me life."  Job 33:4 [KJV]
Despite the technological breakthroughs of the modern world, one thing
remains clear.  Regardless of how much man may make something to resemble
a human, the God-given life that is in us cannot be duplicated.
Andrew's quest for humanity is a noble but futile search.  We may someday
reach a point where we can build a machine like an NDR-114 with artificial
intelligence, but to infuse that machine with a soul life is something
that will always remain beyond our purview.  God, after all, is the
Creator of all life.

Author
Scott Renshaw
BICENTENNIAL MAN
(Touchstone/Columbia)
Starring:  Robin Williams, Embeth Davidtz, Sam Neill, Oliver Platt, Hallie
Kate Eisenberg, Kiersten Warren, Wendy Crewson.
Screenplay:  Nicholas Kazan, based on the short story by Isaac Asimov and
the novel _The Positronic Man_ by Isaac Asimov and Robert Silverberg.
Producers:  Wolfgang Petersen, Gail Katz, Neal Miller, Lawrence Mark,
Chris Columbus, Mark Radcliffe and Michael Barnathan.
Director:  Chris Columbus.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  132 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     And so Robin Williams' career has come full circle. Twenty years ago,
his celebrity was insured when he played an innocent to the ways of
humanity, drawing sit-com laughs from his literalist misunderstanding of
idioms and his awkward attempts at humor, before ending the story with a
speech to tell us everything he has learned. In BICENTENNIAL MAN,
Williams plays an innocent to the ways of humanity, drawing sit-com laughs
from his literalist misunderstanding of idioms and ... well, you get the
idea. After two decades of box office success and an Academy Award, it
has come to this: Robin Williams is playing Mork again.
     I'm sure Williams would not see things that way. He would doubtless
inform us that his is a complex and challenging character, a domestic
robot called Andrew serving the Martin family of Northern California. He
would explain that the relationships were rich -- the mentor/student
connection between Andrew and Martin patriarch Richard (Sam Neill); the
gentle affection between Andrew and the Martin's youngest daughter, whom
he calls Little Miss (Hallie Kate Eisenberg); the more profound affection
between Andrew and the grown up Little Miss (Embeth Davidtz). He would
describe a robust character arc, in which Andrew comes to exhibit
creativity and feeling, and begins a life-long quest to become more human.
He might even acknowledge the comic relief value of Oliver Platt as 
eccentric robotics scientist Rupert Burns, and Kiersten Warren as the
perky female robot Galatea.
     All of that might have been true in some incarnation of the story,
based on two short stories by Isaac Asimov, the father of the
robot-in-existential crisis concept. This incarnation, however, is
directed by Chris Columbus, whose contributions to deep-thinking Western
cinema include HOME ALONE, HOME ALONE 2 and NINE MONTHS. He's an
unapologetic crowd-pleaser as a director, but a crowd-pleaser in the most
irritating of ways. His is a style that favors low-brow gags and gee-whiz
pacing, then feigns depth by wrapping things up with sentimental
message-mongering (and, in this particular case, three -- count them,
_three_ -- death bed scenes). BICENTENNIAL MAN doesn't even manage the
gee-whiz pacing; after a moderately promising start, the film drifts into
two hours of Andrew growing ever more pensive about his place in the
world. 
     Such pensiveness is likely meant to allow Robin Williams an uplifting
acting showcase (at least once Andrew sheds his metal casing for Williams'
human face). Williams has seemed inordinately fond of uplifting acting
showcases lately, eschewing straight-ahead comedy for roles like PATCH
ADAMS, WHAT DREAMS MAY COME and JAKOB THE LIAR. Unfortunately, he's not
doing himself any favors in his choices of material, heading for parts
that allow him to do plenty of emoting between gags. There's no gravity to
Williams' performance as Andrew, none of the conflicted pain of a being
coming to terms with its own consciousness and its isolation in the world.
That's because he's being directed by Chris Columbus, for whom gravity is
just the thing that keeps his films from floating away entirely. When
BICENTENNIAL MAN sticks to light comedy, it's not half bad. When it takes
its epic scope too seriously, it's more than half bad.
     BICENTENNIAL MAN does boast solid work from its supporting cast of
Davidtz, Neill and particularly Platt (for my money, now the most reliable
comic actor in film). The technical credits are top-notch, with one wild
scene in which Platt molds artificial flesh into Williams' face. There's
even the chance to consider possible metaphors in Andrew's desire to be
legally recognized as a human to marry the woman he loves (advocacy for
"non-traditional" marriage?). There's also plenty of opportunity to watch
the film grow ponderous in the long stretches between laughs, and to
consider how stale Robin Williams' once-promising career has become. The
man who stepped lightly from broad comedy to DEAD POETS SOCIETY and THE
FISHER KING has spent the last year in reverse. BICENTENNIAL MAN's few
simple pleasures can't make up for its shallow philosophizing -- or the
sense that, for Robin Williams, everything old is nanoo again.

Author
Greg King
BICENTENNIAL MAN (PG).  
(Touchstone/Columbia Tristar)
Director: Chris Columbus
Stars: Robin Williams, Sam Neill, Embeth Davidtz, Wendy Crewson, Oliver 
Platt, Hallie Kate Eisenberg, Bradley Whitford, Lynne Thigpen
Running time: 126 minutes. 
Based on an Isaac Asimov short story, Bicentennial Man is the
story of a robot's 200 year quest to become human.
Robin Williams is perfectly cast as Andrew, a domestic android
programmed to carry out household duties - a sort of futuristic,
robotic Mr Doubtfire, crossed with The Wizard Of Oz's Tin Man.  But
Andrew is unique, and has a wit and creativity and a personality that
surprise and enchant his human family over three generations.  Under
the guidance of his master (Sam Neill), Andrew's abilities are
fostered and developed, and the robot becomes more intrigued by
understanding what it is to become human.
But it is Andrew's feelings for little Miss (played at various
ages by an enchanting Hallie Kate Eisenberg and Embeth Davidtz) and
her grand daughter (Davidtz again) that inspires him to acquire a more
human personality as well.  With the help of a sympathetic scientist
(the ubiquitous Oliver Platt) he gets a make over that eventually
brings him closer and closer to his ultimate dream.
This futuristic comedy basically explores what it is that
essentially makes us human - our feelings and emotions, our mortality,
our flaws and imperfections, and our ability to make mistakes.  Writer
Nicholas Kazan (Reversal Of Fortune, etc) and director Chris Columbus
(Home Alone, etc) gloss over much of Asimov's vision of the future,
and they tone down the darker edge and overtones of prejudice and
intolerance that shaped much of his original tale.  However, there are
some nifty special effects briefly on display here, and the make-up
that ages the actors is also very convincing.  Columbus directs with
his usual slick and light weight style, although there is less
slapstick or physical humour here.  The role of the android with human
feelings is perfect material for Williams, who seems to prefer these
earnest roles of late.  Columbus manages to tease a far more
restrained and understated performance from his star, who is hidden
under some clever hi-tech make-up for much of the duration.  However,
there are several scenes in which one can almost sense Williams' more
manic personality threatening to burst out of his constraints.
Neill brings dignity and class to his role as the droid's
compassionate and understanding master, while Davidtz brings warmth to
her dual role.
The film has a number of touching, heart warming moments, and
Columbus is a rather manipulative director who turns the saccharine
factor up to almost cloying levels at times.  Bicentennial Man is also
somewhat slow paced, especially in the second half, and its overly
generous running time may test the patience and endurance of many.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
There are two sides to Robin Williams.  One is the wacky comedian that
America fell in love with on Mork & Mindy, and the other is an
Oscar-winning actor.  You can tell the two of them apart by Williams'
facial hair  clean-shaven means he's in out-of-control mode (Good
Morning, Vietnam), while a full beard indicates a more serious,
restrained Robin (Good Will Hunting).  But how do you tell which side
you're going to get when his face is obscured by a mask?
Although Williams is beardless under his costume in Bicentennial Man, he
shows the control and self-discipline of his tranquil alter-ego.  I
guess it goes to prove that looks can be deceiving.  But that's not the
only thing surprising about this film.  Disney seems to be selling it as
a holiday film for children, but it's actually a pretty serious drama
(containing a handful of laughs) with a running time of well over two
hours.  And here's another shocker  it's rather good.
Based on a short story of the same name by science-fiction guru Isaac
Asimov (he later fleshed it out into a novel called The Positronic Man
with collaborator Robert Silverberg) and adapted for the screen by
Nicholas Kazan (Fallen), Bicentennial Man is basically a futuristic
version of Pinocchio.  Williams (Jakob the Liar) stars as a robot
servant that dreams of becoming a human being.  As the title implies,
the film takes place over a two-hundred-year period, which means that
Williams' droid watches generations of his human `family' succumb to
death while he never ages.
After showing a nifty robot assembly line during the opening credits,
the film opens `sometime in the future.'  We don't know how far, but we
do see that cars can talk and that sweaters with patches on the elbow
are back in style again (later on, we find out that its 2005, so get
your patches ready).  A well-to-do clockmaker named Martin (Sam Neill,
The Horse Whisperer) has just purchased an NDR-114 robot for his
family.  The machine is supposed to be responsible for housekeeping and
food preparation, but instead shows un-robotic traits like creativity
and a desire to learn.  He is called Andrew and the Martins treat him
like a member of the family, except for making him live in the basement.
Andrew hits it off with the Martins' youngest daughter (Hallie Kate
Eisenberg from the Pepsi commercials), who he calls Little Miss.  Before
you know it, the years have flown by and Little Miss has become Old
Wrinkled Miss (Embeth Davidtz, Mansfield Park).  But prior to kicking
the bucket, Little Miss introduces Andrew to her gaunt granddaughter
Portia (also Davidtz), who is the spitting image of her willowy
grandmother.  Andrew and Portia also have a close relationship, but
she's engaged to marry a guy that looks like Jay Leno's
great-great-great grandson (Jay Johnston, Mr. Show).
Aside from his depressing family life, Andrew runs into a female android
(doesn't the word `android' imply a lack of sexuality?) that works for
an NDR-114 specialist named Rupert Burns (Oliver Platt, Lake Placid).
Andrew expresses his desire to become more human, and he and Burns
create revolutionary technology to begin the transformation.  Burns
starts by slapping some flesh-colored Flubber onto Andrew, and then adds
a central nervous system and so on and so on.  But no matter what type
of upgrades he receives, Andrew is still only recognized as a simple
machine.
One of the greatest features of the film is the realistic aging of its
characters.  The other is the unbelievable fact that Bicentennial Man
received a `PG' rating from the Motion Picture Association of America.
It has a couple of frank discussions about sex, as well as around a
dozen bad words (including, alphabetically, `ass,' `bitch,' two
different versions of `goddamn,' and about a half-dozed occurrences of
`shit').  There's even a scene where Andrew squeezes out a post-coital
fart after his first lay.  This rating seems particularly wrong
following the MPAA's `R' rating for Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo.  They
both had very similar content, but since Deuce's target audience was
drunk, date-raping frat-boys, it was slapped with the `R.'  Bicentennial
Man is being pushed on kids, and ended up with the `PG.'  Go figure.
2:15 - PG for language and some sexual content

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Robin Williams, Sam Neill, Wendy Crewson, Embeth Davidtz, Oliver
Platt, Hallie Kate Eisenberg, Stephen Root, Lynne Thigpen, Bradley
Whitford, Kiersten Warren, John Michael Higgins, George
D. Wallace.
Screenplay by Nicholas Kazan, based on the short story by
Isaac Asimov and the novel "The Positronic Man" by Asimov and Robert
Silverberg.
Directed by Chris Columbus.
131 minutes
Rated PG, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests
to ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com
with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Following the release of "Patch Adams" last December and this month's
"Bicentennial Man," it appears that a new holiday tradition has been
established. Here's how it works. Each Christmas season, Robin
Williams unveils a new mawkish comedy/drama. Then, writers like me
race for our word processors, eager to warn filmgoers that the latest
manipulative drivel from the human Care Bear is just as wretched as
its predecessors. The tradition is completed when audiences ignore
writers like me and flock to their neighborhood theaters, helping the
movie make a gazillion dollars. God help us, everyone.
Last year, the gap between reviewers and the general public was so
wide that several articles appeared with titles like "Patch Adams: The
Critics vs. the Audience." Some argued that reviewers were too cynical
and hard-hearted to appreciate the magic of the film. Others stated
that general audiences were too easily taken in by Hollywood
schlock. My favorite article suggested that the medical comedy/drama
received horrible reviews because critics were secretly teaming with
HMOs to try and destroy personalized health care.
As in "Patch Adams," Robin Williams spends a lot of "Bicentennial Man"
trying to win the hearts of leery, emotionally constricted people. As
in "Patch Adams," death features prominently in the movie (nothing
says Christmas to me like a tender euthanasia scene). The big
difference this time is that the filmmakers' attempts at emotional
manipulation are less offensive.  Where "Patch Adams" used young
chemotherapy patients, a rape victim and others as props for Williams'
shtick, "Bicentennial Man" requires the star to cook up his own
pathos.
That's not a problem for Robin Williams. In a screenplay based on a
couple of Isaac Asimov stories, he plays Andrew, a melancholy robot
longing to become human. Apparently, the folks behind this movie never
saw an episode of "Star Trek: The Next Generation," where Brent Spiner
routinely (and far more credibly) dealt with the same Pinocchio themes
as the android crew member, Data.
Following Andrew's purchase by a wealthy Bay Area family, Williams
spends the first hour of the movie in full robot drag, and the results
are not pretty. To accommodate his middle-age frame, the metallic suit
is awfully thick. While most of the suit is silver, portions are
copper-colored. From a distance, the copper looks like Caucasian
flesh, giving the suit an odd, peek-a-boo appearance. The tacked-on
facial features, particularly the eyebrows, resemble a cross between
Robin Williams and Mr. Potato Head.
Williams' performance during the first half of the film is as
constricted as his outfit. Proper and very deferential ("One wishes
only to serve"), he slowly develops a personality, to the delight of
owner, Sir (Sam Neill, who gives the film's most interesting
performance) and his daughter, Little Miss (Hallie Kate Eisenberg, the
girl who lip-syncs in soft drink commercials). Though other family
members are less entranced, Sir encourages Andrew to further his
personal growth, leading the robot to experiment with humor, which
allows Williams a chance to do some stand-up comedy bits.
The can-I-win-over-the-family first hour is dull and remarkably
inert. Despite periodic shots of futuristic cities and flying cars,
the home segments play merely like a bawdy "Seventh Heaven"
episode. When Andrew finally takes off to explore the world and search
for "others like myself," things only improve slightly. He eventually
meets quirky robotic expert Rupert Burns (Oliver Platt), who helps him
in a series of "upgrades." Once Williams finally looks like himself,
he goes into that sad, twinkly mode that drives writers like me
straight up the wall. Eventually, Andrew returns home to woo Little
Miss' granddaughter, Portia (Embeth Davidtz), leading to a sappy "what
does it mean to be human" final act.
If any of this sounds intriguing, trust me, it isn't. Director Chris
Columbus, the man responsible for "Stepmom," another horribly
manipulative touchy-feely movie, tries to make Andrew's quest seem
profound, but in Columbus' heavy hands, all the fuss and bother
remains maddeningly pedestrian. Rather than epic, the second half of
the film is simply dreary and depressing, with the comic moments
seeming contrived at best.
While not as awful as "Patch Adams," "Bicentennial Man" is a dour,
tepid affair masquerading as an inspirational comedy/drama. Of course,
as long as audiences continue to flock to this kind of pabulum,
Williams will continue to crank it out. Robin Williams is a talented
man in danger of becoming a habitual hack. But you can rescue him from
artistic ruin by refusing to shell out money for films like this. Save
Robin Williams! Together, we can stage a mass intervention and break
this nightmarish holiday tradition! Don't go to "Bicentennial Man!"
Oh, who am I kidding? This dog is going to make a fortune.

Author
James Sanford
     Remember when Robin Williams only wanted to make us laugh? If
you're not already nostalgic for those long-gone days, you will be after
sitting through "Bicentennial Man," Williams' latest foray into
saccharine cinema. Those who weep over phone commercials or get a catch
in the throat just thinking about Valentines Day might not mind slogging
through this epic tale of a robot's quest to become human. Everyone else
will emerge from "Bicentennial" feeling about 200 years older than they
were when they went in.
Thanks to vehicles such as "Toys," "Jack," "Jakob the Liar" and
last Christmas' "Patch Adams," Williams has now officially become the
Emmett Kelly Jr. of 1990s cinema, a clown who won't stop until your
chuckles are tinged with tears. The actor who once did such a fine job
of straddling the worlds of comedy and drama in "Good Morning Vietnam,"
"Dead Poets Society" and "The World According to Garp" has almost
disappeared completely, and in his place is a hollow, perpetually
misty-eyed impostor who's only interested in playing misunderstood
saints victimized and persecuted by the cruel, cruel world. At the rate
he's going, Williams will soon be starring in "The Michael Jackson
Story."
In "Bicentennial," inspired by Isaac Asimov's "The Positronic Man,"
Williams plays Andrew, an unusually sensitive and sentimental android
who starts his life as a servant in the household of Richard Martin (Sam
Neill) and his family and eventually embarks on a journey of
self-discovery that spans from 2005 to 2205. Director Chris Columbus
starts the film off as a corny but watchable sitcom and swings into
"Forrest Gump" territory for the slightly more serious middle stretch.
Andrew's fascination with humanity, his talent for woodworking and
his appreciation of opera mark him as something more than just a
run-of-the-mill robot, but the small-minded folk of the future refuse to
accept him as a real man because of his "positronic brain." Can Andrew
ever transcend his factory origins and become a real live love machine
in time to win the heart of his mortal girlfriend (Embeth Davidtz)?
Since Columbus pulls all the stops out in the last 45 minutes, getting
to the answer requires swallowing more syrup than you'd find in the
best-stocked International House of Pancakes.
"Bicentennial Man" has some sharp special effects, a handful of
imaginative fashions of the future and a handful of genuinely funny
jokes that are vintage Williams. Unfortunately, Columbus and Williams
are so resolutely determined to melt your heart, they finally resort to
using the cinematic equivalent of a flame-thrower. The largely
undramatic story drags on and on to a foregone conclusion, and the
movie's worthwhile moments are quickly forgotten as Williams turns on
the waterworks, Davidtz struggles to look longingly into his oozing eyes
and Celine Dion (sounding more than a little robotic herself) wails
another of her sterile love themes over the closing credits. James
Sanford

Author
Michael Dequina
_Bicentennial_Man_ (PG) *** (out of ****)
The trailer for Chris Columbus' adaptation of Isaac Asimov's short story
and novel _The_Positronic_Man_ makes this Robin Williams vehicle look
like a futuristic sequel to _Patch_Adams_--in short, a ghastly piece of
shameless audience manipulation.  The sentiment is laid on as thick as
molasses as the trailer shows how a robot named Andrew (Williams) is
adopted by a family and proves to be "special"--unlike any other android,
he appears to actually bear the qualities of emotion and creativity.  His
human characteristics eventually feed into a desire to become human, a
dream that gradually comes true over the course of 200 years (hence the
title).  The trailer comes to a climax as Williams, no longer made of
metal and bearing a flesh-and-blood appearance, asks comely co-star
Embeth Davidtz to kiss him.
Watching the film itself, I saw that the trailer was accurate in
conveying one thing: _Bicentennial_Man_ is, without a doubt, a
manipulative picture.  But director Chris Columbus, schmaltzmeister that
he is, makes no bones about it--he wants to move you.  The surprise then
came in how I was touched (though not quite moved) by this gentle,
likable centuries-spanning fable.  While Williams goes through his
earnest warm-fuzzy motions as the lead (the only really distinctive thing
about his work here is how he wears a head-to-toe metal suit for much of
the picture), the standout work--and that which goes a long way for one's
involvement in the picture--belongs to Embeth Davidtz, who has a dual
role as Amanda, a.k.a. "Little Miss," the youngest daughter in the family
that "adopts" Andrew; and Portia, her granddaughter.  When Davidtz is
recycled, so does screenwriter Nicholas Kazan recycle the contrived plot
wrinkle of her character being betrothed to another.  But with a proven
buttons-pusher such as Columbus at the helm, it's easy to forgive
uninspired plot mechanics, for the undeniable emotional pull compensates.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: Chris Columbus  
WRITTEN BY: Nicholas Kazan
CAST: Robin Williams, Sam Neill, Embeth Davidtz, Oliver Platt
MPAA: Rated PG for language and some sexual content.
Runtime: USA:130 
REVIEWED BY: Alex Ioshpe (C) 1999
'Bicentennial Man' is a family film without any external motive with
the exception of providing the minimum dose of entertainment. Chris
Columbus, the director who gave you "Mrs. Doubtfire", plays on
sentimental strings and mushy dialogue to make his point. Based on the
short story by Isaac Asimov, it is supposed to be a science fiction
story about a robot who wants to be human, which as you can imagine is
very difficult. Starting in a not too distant future the film
concentrates on a wealthy family that buys an android to help them
with the house and children. Soon this robot, called Andrew (Robin
Williams) shows abilities that makes his owner Mr.Martin (Sam Neill)
very curious. Andrew is interested in art and music, he "enjoys"
making clocks, which clearly shows that he has genuine emotions. It
shows out that because of a small failure in the "electrical circuits"
and "positronic brain" Andrew has accidentally gained a soul. This
makes him unique and his evil creators worried. Then Mr.Martin decides
to teach Andrew all the things he wasn't programmed to do. Soon Andrew
wants to leave the house in pursuit of freedom, destiny and love.
This film can be described as a Disney version of Blade Runner, a film
that still shines as the biggest gem in the crown of science
fiction. Ever since that film, the subject of humanity still stands as
one big controversy. What makes us human? The thoughts? The emotions?
Is it possible to become human? At what point can we say to a robot
"Now you are one of us"? These are very tough questions that require a
serious and thurral approach. It is obvious that Columbus didn't take
them very seriously. When you think about it, this film is not really
meditating on the question "When is a robot no longer a machine, but a
human being?", but tells a story about racial discrimination and lack
of understanding. Andrew is so complex and emotional from the very
beginning that the audience immediately accepts him as a human being,
and only the society has troubles with it. In other words, it is as
far from reality as from the Academy Awards. Further more, there are
other annoying problems. To this day no serious filmmaker has dared to
speculate about the future in more than 50 years from now. This has
not been done for obvious reasons, because the filmmakers are well
aware of the fact that they lack the knowledge and imagination to
perform such a difficult task. Columbus is the first to have crossed
that line. The result is, as you might imagine, primitive, unrealistic
and incredibly disappointing effort. The world is simply frozen in
time. Neither the society, fashion, culture or values have changed
over 200 years. Mom is still working at the kitchen, doing the
dishes. When you think back to the late 17th century and then compare
it to the world we live in today, you'll see a slightly bigger
difference. I am not saying that everything should change. It is
unlikely that the human rights will change, but it's even more
unlikely that there will not be any progress in science, technology
and fashion. I suppose it's possible to watch this as a some sort of
bizarre fairytale, but it's really hard. Robin Williams is hidden
behind c and speaking in a robotic way. As always he does a decent
job, as does Sam Neill. But it doesn't really matter. It is the
sentimentality and length that turns this picture into a tiresome
experience. Pretty much like last year's "Meet Joe Black", this is a
primitive and unresolved story which is presented with a splendor and
professionalism that it doesn't deserve. Great actors and a talented
crew have worked hard to achieve something that will be instantly
forgotten. When Isaac Asimov wrote this story, the future seemed far
away and magical. Everything seemed possible. Now is the future of
Asimov's time, and we know that it is not as magical and perfect as it
seemed a long time ago. For the same reasons that the young generation
of today can not be amazed by Julius Verne's "20 000 leagues under the
sea", so can't we accept this story as a potential reality. Let us
hope that next year's "A.I." will be more rewarding.

Author
Jamey Hughton
You may assume `Bicentennial Man' is just going to be another
sentimental Robin Williams vehicle dripping with fabricated emotions and
melodrama. You would be mistaken. Although this Williams Christmas
offering has it's share of problems, sentimentality is indeed not one of
the major offenders.
You may also be led to believe that `Bicentennial Man' is for children,
with Williams in permanent shtick-mode playing a goofy futuristic robot
who supplies various punch-lines to please the kiddies. Again, you would
be mistaken. For any youngster expecting a non-stop barrage of slapstick
humor, this film will seem monotonous and dull in it's endless search
for dramatic depth. There is humor (and some of it is genuinely funny),
but `Bicentennial Man' will be best enjoyed by older viewers who are
more familiar with emotional tinkering. This age group may be more
appreciative of the few genuine aspects of the production. Others, I'm
afraid, may be lost in this awkward futuristic stew of special effects
and unrealized drama that `Bicentennial Man' has to offer.
The movie does have a few wonders of it's own. When we are first
introduced to Andrew (Robin Williams), a NDR-114 prototype android
designed as a helpful household appliance, the effect is utterly
charming. Andrew is the new property of Sir (Sam Neill) and Ma'am (Wendy
Crewson), and he takes a liking to their youngest daughter, Little Miss
(adorable Pepsi spokes-girl Hallie Kate Eisenberg). Sir begins to notice
that Andrew is showing a number of human characteristics (*gasp*),
including his ability to grasp the idea of humor and friendship. A
greedy business executive (wonderfully played by Stephen Root) wants to
reprogram Andrew so this `malfunction' can be properly repaired, but Sir
stands up for his desire to become more human, insisting that Andrew is
unique. For these 45 minutes in the Martin household, `Bicentennial Man'
shows enormous potential, with emotions that feel genuine and solid
character development across the board.
But, unfortunately, the film opts for an approach that spans the course
of 200 years into the future. Andrew, with his positronic brain,
survives through several generations while he attempts to `become
human'. The film radiates so much heart in this section that apparently
every other function was abandoned to compensate. It is awkward and
uncomfortable to see certain characters exit at such a rapid pace, for
even if the screen reads 12 Years Later', it has only been 12 minutes
for the audience. The film continues with this pattern until the
possibilities have been virtually exhausted, and director Chris Columbus
elects for a finale that is pleasant but completely under-calculated and
sappy.
Despite my disappointment regarding the film's lost potential, I still
think `Bicentennial Man' is decent family fare. Williams delivers an
appealing performance as the machine who has aspirations of becoming a
man, and then later does - with the help of an out-of-work inventor
named Rupert Graves (Oliver Platt, playing the typical quirky supporting
role we have become accustomed to). In both robotic and human form,
Williams is a charming display of naive splendor, as Andrew learns
everything from the birds and the bees to carving miniature mammals out
of wood. Embeth Davidtz plays a dual role as grown-up Little Miss, and
later her granddaughter Portia, who becomes a romantic interest for
Andrew in human form. Sam Neill is terrific, as usual, playing an
understanding man who first encourages Andrew to find inner freedom. The
performances are all amiable, the James Horner score is lovely, and the
film is swift, honest and funny with a great majority of it's humor.
The production values of `Bicentennial Man' are exceptional, with brief
glimpses of our future society presented with great imagination and
impressive special effects. There is an abundance of frank (but
well-handled) discussions about sex, and some mild coarse language
(Andrew calls a malfunctioning record player a `piece of fecal matter',
and is lectured in the proper method of cursing). And so I offer a
delicate warning: `Bicentennial Man' is not the ideal family movie. A
few aspects are rewarding, but the film, like the title character,
becomes far too mechanical as it goes along.
Cast Your Votes for "1999 FILM AWARDS"
http://apps4.vantagenet.com/zsv/survey.asp?GO=Vote%21&id=9122019309

Author
Ross Anthony
Patiently directed (occasionally too patiently), "Bicentennial Man" is warm
and cuddly, but not the over-the-top kind of comedy or intensity we've come
to expect from Robin Williams. Which probably accounts for at least some of
the negative reaction to it. The schmaltz factor remaining in tact, the tale
becomes kind of an E.T. matures and falls in love story. Not too exciting
for kids, but not bad for we -- more matured types.
Spanning a couple hundred years (hence the title) in a smidgen over two
hours, we follow the "life" of Android "Andrew" from his introduction to the
Martin family in 2005. Andrew shows a propensity towards art and culture
(fixing an old record player and mellowing to Mozart) not common (or
explicable) to Androids of his series. Able to simulate expression with
blinking eyes and raise-able brows, Andrew personifies man's own quest to
understand and better express himself as he seeks humanity.
The film raises interesting questions regarding humankind's ability to
assimilate (on a mass scale) appliances that become too human. But, it's
main point is Andrew's quest and ultimate ability to fall in love.
Outstanding performance by Wendy Crewson as she plays two or three members
of the Martin family over three generations. All others are fine as is the
script and direction, though this gently paced movie drags at a point or
two.
Bicentennial Man. Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG.
Starring Robin Williams, Sam Neill, Wendy Crewson, Embeth Davidtz, Oliver
Platt.
Directed by Chris Columbus.
Screenplay by Nicholas Kazan.
Produced by Columbus, etc. at Columbia Pictures.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Robin Williams, Embeth Davidtz, Sam Neill. Directed by Chris
Columbus. Rated PG.
Chris Columbus is master of melodrama, sire of schmaltz and czar of
cheapness. His films are notorious sentimental hanky-fests. Stepmom, in
particular, comes to mind, but each of his films, from Mrs. Doubtfire
to Home Alone have those infamous moments of ultra-sentimental emotion.
Many have labeled Columbus's movies as cheap and false, and they may be
right, but his new one, Bicentennial Man is different. Somehow, the
emotion in this one is genuine and the movie works: as a tearjerker, as
family entertainment and as a comedy.
Robin Williams, who hasn't done an all-out comedy since the abominable
Flubber and hasn't made a good one since Columbus's Nine Months, stars
here as Andrew, a domestic robot owned by a kindly 2005 family. The
head of the family (Sam Neill), known only as "Sir" since that's what
Andrew calls him, begins to notice something unique about his household
appliance. He takes Andrew to his parent company which wants
to "correct the defect." They go away and Sir takes on Andrew's
education himself, feeling the responsibility to help the robot grow to
bigger and better things.
Andrew himself has grown fond of Sir's youngest daughter, "Little
Miss," who befriends him. Their relationship develops for fifteen years
until Andrew, now officially an enlightened robot (as well as an expert
clock-maker), asks for his freedom. Sir gets PO-ed at Andrew's alleged
ungratefulness and, in essense, kicks him out, with a self-
righteous "You now have your freedom." So Andrew goes off and builds a
house of his own on the oceanside, where Little Miss can come to visit
him as often as she likes.
After Sir's death, Andrew feels something missing from his "life," so
he goes on a twenty year journey to seek out other robots like him.
What he finds is a robot scientist (the dependable Oliver Platt) who
helps him take on human form. But can he actually become a human and
obtain all the privileges that go with it, like the ability to marry a
human?
Bicentennial Man was based on a pair of short stories by renowned sci-
fi writer Isaac Asimov but it was, of course, altered to be more crowd-
pleasing and mainstream. The result is hardly ground-breaking cinema,
but it's watchable, touching, profound and sometimes downright
allegorical. Granted, it occasionally has over-sentimental and cloying
moments Chris Columbus-style, but they feel marginally genuine: things
real people might say or do. I'm still not sold on Columbus's often
condescending style of filmmaking, but at least he's heading in the
right direction.
I liked Robin Williams here too; his purpose, for once, isn't sucking
up to the audience. His performance is quirky, funny and sincere; not
his best, but a lot of fun to watch. I also enjoyed Oliver Platt, whose
hilarious deadpan delivery is impossible to get tired of. This isn't an
actors' movie: the performances are often overshadowed by the flashy,
though not spectacular special effects. The animatronics and CGI used
to create the robot are just as smooth and aesthetically flawless as
the performances. This is, after all, a 100 million dollar movie: the A-
List stars are here, but they are not alone.
There is, of course, a final "inspirational" speech and it's in a
courtroom, of sorts. I dread that family movie staple. But in
Bicentennial Man it is kept concise and to the point -- definitely a
plus. Most importantly, though, the speech doesn't make you cringe. It
actually means something. It's well-written and well-delivered. It
doesn't always follow the formula.
As some critics have pointed out, this plot has been done before, and
sometimes better, on the tv series Star Trek: The Next Generation,
where "Data," an android, was on a constant quest to become as human as
possible. True, there are similarities -- ah hell, it's exactly the
same thing -- but it's unfair to penalize Bicentennial Man for it.
There was more than enough room for two falling meteor flicks (Deep
Impact and Armageddon) as well as two computer-animated movies about
ants (Antz and A Bug's Life) all in the same year, so why cripe about
something that's not nearly as conspicuous?
A couple of final quibbles: I'm now offering a substantial reward for
James Horner's severed head on a stick. The whole movie, I was wishing
he would shut up. The Oscar-winning composer's music here is god-awful,
with "tender" violin compositions playing ceaselessly in the
background, telling us exactly how to feel about the events on screen.
Also, at 2 hours 11 minutes, Bicentennial Man is a little on the long
side, but then again with the streak of 3-hour-plus Oscar contenders
being released in these next few months, I guess I shouldn't complain.
Bicentennial Man is well-worth a look this holiday season, especially
if your other choice is something like Anna and the King which, I hope,
leaves theaters in a hurry. This isn't a perfect movie, but it
entertains and touches the heart, and it's certainly a big step up from
Patch Adams.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
The last time that director Chris Columbus and Robin Williams teamed up for
a movie, the result was 1993's MRS. DOUBTFIRE, a film which domestically
grossed over to $220 Million dollars. This time around, the duo take on a
movie which appears to be a frothy little children's pic from the looks of
its trailer, but actually is a pretty serious film dealing with the various
aspects that make one human.
PLOT:
In the year 2005, a rich family buys a made-for-the-home robot/servant
created to help them around the house. Over the years, the robot and others
notice that he is different from the rest of his peers, this android appears
to have some artistic talents, a personality and emotions. The film covers
200 years in the life of said machine, as he attempts to "evolve" into a
human being, by the way of our world's ever-changing technologies.
CRITIQUE:
This ain't a kids movie, folks! It only took about thirty minutes into this
film for the kids in my theatre to start chattering it up. And that's about
where most of the "real comedy" ends and the existential drama begins. Don't
get me wrong here, the robot doesn't suddenly begin quoting Kierkegaard or
anything, but the movie is essentially an interesting adult film peppered
with a few funny moments, all within a much deeper context of what defines a
"human being", how technology might affect our conditions in the future,
what constitutes "freedom" and how love transcends all. Pretty deep for a
Robin Williams movie, eh? Some of the things I liked about this film
included its span time of 200 years, which I don't remember ever seeing done
in the same way, the concept itself, which dealt with one's identity, the
need for acknowledgment from others, and to a certain extent, racism or
robotism, in this case. I also dug on all the cool little gadgeteries which
became slicker and slicker as the years went by, as well as the consistently
healthy performance from Oliver Platt.
What didn't I like about the movie? Well, this also has to do with the fact
that it spanned 200 years, since I wasn't able to truly identify with any
one human character across the entire film, save for the robot, to whom, I
personally did not invest much emotion. I did however enjoy some of the
human characters in the movie, but as you may have guessed by now, after 200
years, not too many of them were around at the end. And looking back, I
think the film might have benefited more had it stuck to its sci-fi route,
rather than its heavy-handed/humorous presentation here. I for one would
love to see such a film done entirely in serious tone, as opposed to the
generic humor that was tossed into this one every now and again (Maybe if it
starred someone not known to most for comedy?). The film also ran a little
long near the end with what eventually started to feel like a revolving plot
door as the robot just continued to work on his condition year after year
after year. In the end, despite the fact that it was set to touch our human
emotions, I felt little more than the robot did at the beginning of the
film. Interested yet cold and distant. All in all, the film was pretty
engaging to watch all the way through, but seemed to have sacrificed further
scientific depth in return for an unconvincing show of romance and humor. A
nice try, but overall, no dice.
I'd suggest you see it on video just for its original vision.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Robin Williams' middle name is "McLaurim". His first major movie role was
his starring gig as Popeye in 1980's Robert Altman flick POPEYE. When he
auditioned for the role of Mork for TV's "Mork and Mindy" show, Robin met
with producer Gary Marshall who told him to sit down. Robin immediately sat
his head on the chair. Gary Marshall immediately chose him saying that he
was the only alien who auditioned.
Actor Sam Neill's birth-name is Nigel Neill. Sam met his current wife Noriko
Watanabe on the set of 1989's DEAD CALM where she served as a make-up
artist. He was also one of the original candidates for the fourth and fifth
actor to portray James Bond in THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS and GOLDENEYE. Of
course, those parts went to Timothy Dalton and Pierce Brosnan respectively.
Actress Embeth Davidtz birth-name is Gretta Milano. She hails from the state
of New Jersey. Her first big role was in Sam Raimi's 1993 film ARMY OF
DARKNESS.
Director Chris Columbus was first inspired to make movies after seeing THE
GODFATHER at the tender age of 15. After enrolling into the NYU film school,
he sold his first screenplay (never produced) while a sophomore there. Chris
is apparently writing screenplays for two comic-book film adaptations
including DAREDEVIL and THE FANTASTIC FOUR.
Writer Nicolas Kazan is the son of famed director Elia Kazan. His other
writings include FALLEN (7/10), MOBSTERS and REVERSAL OF FORTUNE, amongst
others.
This film was originally titled ANDREW MARTIN, and is based on the story
"Bicentennial Man", by Russian-born author Isaac Asimov.

Author
Sean Eric Fagan
Directed by Chris Columbus.
Cast: Robin Williams, Embeth Davidtz, Sam Neill, Wendy Crewson, Oliver Platt, 
Hallie Kate Eisenberg, Lindz Letherman, Stephen Root, Kiersten Warren, Lynne 
Thigpen, Bradley Whitford, John Michael Higgins, George D. Wallace.
1999 - 131 minutes
Rated PG (for mild profanity and sexual dialogue).
I hadn't intended to post a review of this movie, but after seeing all of the
praise in rec.arts.sf.reviews, I decided I just had to.  Fair warning, though:
this commentary is full of spoilers, and I make no attempt to hide them.
Folks, this was a _bad_ movie.  It failed on every level it tried, with the
possible exception of some eye candy.  Were I still rating movies on the
IMMLSoMFtPF (Infamous Modified Mark Leeper Scale of -5 to +5), I would give
this movie a -2.
The story is allegedly based on Asimov's novella of the same name, as I am
sure everyone knows by now.  However, it's not very much based on it.  It
starts out with some of the same names and characters, but that's about where
it ends.
One of the first divergences is how the family reacts to Andrew.  Not accepted
by half of the family, and treated as a novelty by the father, we aren't given
any reason for anyone other than "Little Miss" to care so much about Andrew.
We also aren't given any reason to feel anything when he asks to buy himself.
One of the early poignant moments in the novella, I have always felt, was when
Andrew attempted to wear clothes -- they did not fit, and yet he wore them
anyway, as he attempted to "be human" we realize later in the story.  Yet this
is not the case in the movie -- he first puts on clothes for a wedding, and
just decides to keep wearing them.  Why?  No reason is ever shown, or implied
by the actions or dialogue of the characters.
Similarly, part of Andrew's greatness in the novella is his artistic bent.
Although the movie starts out along that path, it quickly drops it, and he
becomes a clockmaker.  There is no examination into his woodcarving talent, or
why it moves people so -- in fact, in the movie, Andrew makes clocks because
that is what Sir does.
Similarly, Andrew's attempts to turn himself into a cyborg are treated
differently:  instead of Andrew being the inventor, he is an experimental
subject, maybe an artistic designer, maybe, at most, an assistant, and the
real genius is provided by a human.
And the worst offense, I thought, was the introduction of a romance, between
Sir's great-granddaughter and Andrew.
Now, I have only talked about differences between the novella and the movie;
those, by themselves, would not have caused me to dislike the movie.  No, I
disliked the movie because it _failed_.
As a comedy, most of the humour was simply not funny; in one early scene with
Andrew telling jokes, the laughter of the family seemed very strained; the
audience I was in laughed a bit, but not as much as we should have, given that
this was a Robin Williams movie.
The movie also tried to be a drama, and failed there as well.  A hugely
dramatic point in the story is when Sir dies, and Andrew is there at his side.
Yet by deviating from the novella so much, and not coming up with equivalent
material, we are not shown any real friendship between Sir and Andrew.
_Some_, yes, but not enough to touch the soul as it should have.
Next, of course, is the romance.  Which I truly wish had not been there, but
_still_ could have resulted in a touching story of what it means to be human,
and would have given Andrew a reason to be.  But that would have required more
effort and talent than the writers and directors of this movie were either
willing or able to give.  And instead of a traumatic scene when Andrew is
first denied his humanity (and, again:  _why_ does he want it so much?  By
what right is he able to present his petition to the "World Congress"
directly?), we have a scene filled with some regrets, but not much else.  And
that, of course, means that the scene where he _is_ given his humanity also
fails.
The last aspect of this movie, and its failure, bugs me the most:  as a
speculative fiction story, this movie is simply not all that speculative.
There are robots:  fine.  What is the status of them?  How have they affected
society?  The robots are now allowed to harm a human being, or, through
inaction, allow a human to be harmed -- a robot in a domestic situation is
going to be quite challenged, I should think, and yet they barely touch that.
(A _single_ line, where Andrew says he cannot say who ordered him to jump out
of a window, as it would cause family strife, was all they dared do.)  These,
and others, are themes that Asimov (and others) looked into, and, really, any
movie based on an Asimov robot story should at least _acknowledge_ these
possibilities.
And the end of the movie has two more failures.  First is that Andrew dies
before he hears the proclamation.  While this could have worked, it managed
not to, and is one of the few times in this movie where going with the cliche
would have worked better.  And the last is that a character, who is then
revealed to be a robot, violates one of the three Laws of Robotics -- and no
comment is made on this, I am guessing simply because it was forgotten.
------- End of forwarded message -------

Author
Steve Rhodes
MRS. DOUBTFIRE's director (Chris Columbus) and star (Robin Williams)
team up again in BICENTENNIAL MAN with magical results.  The movie tells
the poignant story of the 200-year-long life and times of a model
NDR-114 robot named Andrew Martin (Williams).  Although frequently quite
funny, the film rarely goes for the cheap laughs.  Most of the
surprisingly serious story focuses on exactly what it means to be human
and on what is important in life.  There are some impressive special
effects, but the picture is more a charming character study than a
futuristic adventure.
If you've seen the trailers, you probably think of the film as slightly
slapstick.  It turns out, however, to be much more substantial and
moving that you would suspect.  The downside to this is that, despite
its mild PG rating, the story isn't for kids who aren't able to handle
the death of loved ones on the screen.  Key characters die naturally and
peacefully of old age, but they do pass away -- a fact upon which the
story dwells.  The result is either meaningfully touching or
depressingly sad.  Adults and teens will mostly be in the former
category, but younger ones may be completely turned off.  As the
10-year-olds with us explained, it's one thing to witness a dinosaur
violently devour people you don't care about, but it's much harder to
watch one treasured character after another perish.
Andrew, who refers to himself with the impersonal "one," lives in the
Martin household headed by Sir (Sam Neill) and Ma'am (Wendy Crewson).
The older daughter is a sassy 10-year-old girl, Miss (Lindze Letherman),
and the younger one is a sweet 7-year-old girl, Little Miss (Hallie Kate
Eisenberg).  Embeth Davidtz (MANSFIELD PARK) plays the grown Little Miss
as well as Little Miss's granddaughter, Portia.  The star of the
production, however, is Nicholas Kazan's script based on an Isaac Asimov
story.  It's a script that plays simultaneously to the head and to the
heart, asking many questions to make the viewers think.
Andrew turns out to be a model NDR-114 like no other.  He has artistic
abilities, able to make intricate carvings and delicate clocks, and he
has "almost" human feelings.  The primary question posed by the story is
under what circumstances could we remove the word "almost" from the
previous sentence.
Sir seizes every opportunity to train Andrew in the ways of humans.  The
results prove quite comical.  Teaching a robot to tell a joke is
especially tricky since he tries to dissect the meanings rather than
enjoying the spirit of the joke.
In one scene we come in at the end of Sir's birds-and-bees talk with
Andrew.  A bewildered Andrew stares at Sir in disbelief.  "People
actually do this, Sir?" he asks.  Once convinced that this is not
another of Sir's jokes, Andrew inquires as to the typical frequency
among married couples.
The story, which is told chronologically, makes several large leaps in
time.  When we meet the first set of grandkids, one of them dumps sand
on Andrew out of pure meanness.  Never at a loss for words, he quips,
"One understands why some animals eat their young."
At one point in the story, Andrew goes off on a long and hard journey in
an attempt to locate other models of his type.  He wants to see if any
of them were blessed with his gifts.  Along the way he comes into
contact with a female robot named Galatea (Kiersten Warren), who appears
to have his intellect.  Alas, she just has her "personality chip"
engaged and has about as many brains as a talking Barbie doll.  Galatea
does provide great fodder for humorous material.  Her master is Rupert
Burns (Oliver Platt), a robot repairman and inventor, who comes to
Andrew's aid.
By the time the 200 years have passed, we have come to realize that the
movie isn't really about a robot, per se.  It is about love and about
the true meaning of life.
BICENTENNIAL MAN runs 2:11.  It is rated PG for language and some sexual
content.  The film would be fine for teenagers.  Whether the movie would
be appropriate for those under 13, depends on the kid's sensitivity to
the issues of dying.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, gave the movie **.  He laughed harder than I've
ever seen him laugh in a movie, but he complained that he found the
deaths "really depressing."  His friend Alan, also 10, gave the picture
** 1/2.  They had similar comments about the movie.  Both were extremely
upset over its sadness, and both thought sections of it were hilarious,
especially those with Galatea in it.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Chris Columbus.
Cast: Robin Williams, Embeth Davidtz, Sam Neill, Wendy Crewson, Oliver Platt, 
Hallie Kate Eisenberg, Lindz Letherman, Stephen Root, Kiersten Warren, Lynne 
Thigpen, Bradley Whitford, John Michael Higgins, George D. Wallace.
1999 - 131 minutes
Rated PG (for mild profanity and sexual dialogue).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, December 20, 1999.
If you saw 1998's "Patch Adams" and heard that Robin Williams' latest attempt 
at an earnest comedy-drama, "Bicentennial Man," is overly schmaltzy, as well, 
there may be cause for hesitation. Williams is a fine actor--he always has 
been--but in recent years, especially since his Academy Award winning turn in 
1997's "Good Will Hunting," he hasn't, to my recollection, made a 
straightforward comedy since. If Williams wants to get a little more serious 
in his film projects, that is exclusively his prerogative, but the problem 
is, he usually seems to try just a little too hard, to the point where his 
dramatic work isn't effective, only melodramatic, corny, and groan-inducing. 
With that being said, "Bicentennial Man," based on the novel, "The Positronic 
Man," by Isaac Asimov and Robert Silverberg, is easily Williams' best film 
(in a starring role) since 1993's "Mrs. Doubtfire," both of which, 
coincidentally, were directed by Chris Columbus (who also made one of my 
personal '80s favorites, "Adventures in Babysitting"). "Bicentennial Man" is 
manipulative in its emotions, to be sure, but it almost always convinces and 
involves the viewer. And, yeah, there was one scene midway through that very 
slightly got my eyes watery (although it may have just been that I was having 
a horrible day to begin with, and the meaning of the scene got under my skin 
a little more deeply because of this).
Opening in San Francisco, circa 2005, and spanning 200 years in total, a 
well-off family has a life-sized robot (Robin Williams, in a metallic-looking 
plastic suit) shipped to their door, programmed to obey all orders and act as 
a sort of housekeeper. With a bit more internal emotions than the average 
robot, he is named Andrew by the youngest daughter, whom he calls Little Miss 
(Hallie Kate Eisenberg), and becomes friends with the parents, Sir (Sam 
Neill) and Ma'am (Wendy Crewson). 
As time passes by and the family gets older, Andrew holds a special place in 
his heart for Little Miss (now played by Embeth Davidtz), and the feeling is 
mutual, but because he is just a robot, they know in their minds nothing 
could possibly come from their relationship. Seeking the help of Rupert Burns 
(Oliver Platt), a scientist who created his robotic model, Andrew, little by 
little, begins his quest to become a human, first acquiring skin, and later a 
central nervous system. By this time, his past family has all passed away, 
leaving him to care deeply for Little Miss' granddaughter, Portia (also 
played by Davidtz). However, because his brain is still mechanical and, thus, 
he remains immortal and considered inhuman, chances of Portia and Andrew 
being able to marry grow more and more slim. Meanwhile, she herself is 
getting older and Andrew realizes she won't be around forever, either.
While not without its intermittent humorous moments, "Bicentennial Man" is, 
no doubt about it, a dramatic motion picture about the passing of time and 
life. Occasionally devastating to watch, as Andrew witnesses everyone he has 
ever loved and cared about die around him, the film does not utterly depress 
and seem as much of a betrayal as the conclusion to the otherwise very good 
"The Green Mile," because this film holds a deeper meaning, and the subject 
of death is more natural to the story. Every once in a while, you can see a 
glimmer of Williams' token maudlin ways beginning to shine through, but it 
almost always disappears quickly, reminiscent in ways of 1998's "Meet Joe 
Black."
Passing through a 200-year time span, the picture appreciatively avoids an 
episodic feel, thanks to the 131-minute running time, which may seem 
excessively long, but really is the appropriate length to tell this story. 
Robin Williams, who breaks outside of his robotic costume by the 75-minute 
mark, is endearing and believable as Andrew, a character always balancing on 
the line between acting like a human, while still acquiring robotic traits. 
Matching him in his charm and likability is the underrated Embeth Davidtz, 
who has two roles (as the adult Little Miss and, later, as Portia), both of 
which capture Andrew's heart. Williams and Davidtz especially work well 
together, as they bring an urgency and spark to their unconventional romantic 
scenes. In notable supporting roles, Sam Neill turns in a quietly touching 
performance as Sir, who sees how quickly his life is passing before his eyes; 
Kiersten Warren, as Galatea, the only other functional robot of Andrew's 
model, has a bright comic sense; and young Hallie Kate Eisenberg (star of the 
popular Pepsi commercials) is cute, but in an unchallenging role.
The only noticeably major flaw with "Bicentennial Man" is related to the 
advertising, not the film itself. Being promoted in its trailers as a zany 
Robin Williams comedy for the whole family, the film is really an 
occasionally dark parable on the process of life, and the fact that almost 
all of the characters die at one point through the story is enough to cause, 
perhaps, a little distress and confusion for younger viewers. "Bicentennial 
Man" is an accessible, yet appropriately serious, film that most audiences 
over a certain age of about 8 or 9 have the capability of appreciating. It's 
just too bad the studio, Buena Vista, has insisted on dishonoring its 
thoughtful themes and messages with a misleading ad campaign. 
