Title
Review for Ayneh (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Marty Mapes
***1/2 (out of 4) A film professor recalled that when he was little,
before he knew how movies worked, he assumed they were acted out live.
When you saw a movie twice, the actors had to do it all over again.
THE MIRROR is a thought-provoking, mindblower of a film that asks its
audience to believe just that.
Iranian director Jafar Panahi tells the story of Mina (Aida
Mohammadkhani), a grade schooler whose mother has not to come pick her
up this afternoon. The telephoto cinematography clutters the screen with
terrifying traffic jams and tangles of human legs, as Mina wanders the
streets of Teheran looking for help. Her teacher is busy talking to
other adults. Nobody answers the phone at her house. She is alone and
scared without anyone to get her home.
Mina gets a ride part-way with her teacher's friend. She gets off his
scooter at a bus stop. She rides a bus to the end of the line, listening
to the older women talk about men. But she is still no nearer to getting
un-lost.
So far, the movie has taken place in real time. That is to say, 45
minutes into the film, 45 minutes of Mina's "life" have passed.
At about the halfway point, Mina is on a bus, staring into the camera. A
voice says "Mina, don't look into the camera." After a tense moment,
Mina breaks down, angry and upset, and says "I don't want to act
anymore."
At this point, the color timing that makes a film look "polished" is
stopped and the film reverts to a more grainy, yellow look. The cameras
keep rolling as a crew member follows Mina off the bus to comfort and
reassure her. Others are sent with different tactics to try to convince
Mina to continue acting, but she refuses. She just wants to go home to
her mother.
The man behind "the camera," which we can now inexplicably see on
screen, realizes that Mina is still wearing her portable microphone. He
orders the crew to keep following her as she tries to get home. The
color timing starts back up and the film resumes, still in real time,
but now APPARENTLY as a documentary. The second half of the film mirrors
the first half. Mina still wants to get home, only this time, she
appears not to be acting for the camera.
Although the film hinges entirely on its gimmick, there is more to it
than JUST the gimmick. In addition to the rare glimpse of Iranian
culture, Panahi includes a cafeteria of food for thought, with each dish
made from the same tantalizing ingredient.
Broadly, the film asks what separates documentary film from fiction
film. But there are also specific puzzles, too. For example, in the
second half, Mina meets a woman from the bus in the first half. The
woman tells her that she was paid next to nothing to be in the movie and
that the lines she spoke were her real life. (But what about THESE
lines?)
Later Mina gets away from the camera truck, even though the microphone
is still working. Now off-camera, she meets the voice of John Wayne (the
man who dubbed the Duke's voice in Iranian movies). He tells Mina he saw
her shooting the opening of the film "two weeks ago," even though the
soccer game introduced at the start of the movie -- Iran vs. South Korea
-- is still being played. Appropriately, we never see "John Wayne's"
face -- he leaves Mina just before the camera finds her again.
If THE MIRROR never used its gimmick, it would still be an engrossing
film for its look at modern Iranian culture -- the segregated buses,
Mina's fearlessness of strangers, the "secret" talk of the women. But
THE MIRROR does crack, and the broken pieces make a unique, puzzling,
picture.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.com
