Title
Review for I'll Do Anything (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Nick Nolte, Whittni Wright, Albert Brooks, 
        Joely Richardson, Julie Kavner, Tracey Ullman
Director:  James L. Brooks
Producers:  James L. Brooks and Polly Platt
Screenplay:  James L. Brooks
Music:  Hans Zimmer
Released by Columbia Pictures
     This certainly isn't the first motion picture to focus on
father/daughter bonding, nor will it be the last.  But I'LL DO ANYTHING
has the distinction of being enjoyable and entertaining, while bringing
a new twist or two to an old subject.  Not everything works out quite
as expected, and that's the biggest element of the movie's charm,
because these days it's usually too easy to predict what's coming
next.
     In 1980, Matt Hobbs (Nick Nolte) was nominated for an Emmy that he
didn't win.  On the night of the awards ceremony, he and longtime
girlfriend Beth (Tracey Ullman) decided to get married.  Seven years
later, around the time that Matt and Beth's marriage was beginning to
fray, their only child Jeannie (Whittni Wright) arrived.  By 1993, the
pair have not only divorced, but are living on opposite coasts.  With
his career in a state of collapse, Matt agrees to become the chauffeur
of powerful movie producer Burke Adler (Albert Brooks), a man with a
heart of stone and a disposition to match.  While performing his new
job, Matt catches the attention of Cathy Breslow (Joely Richardson),
one of Adler's assistants.  Then, just as a little cash starts flowing
in, Matt has to fly out to Georgia to pick up his daughter for a
"visit."  When he gets there, however, he learns that Beth is on her
way to jail, and he's been lumbered with a little girl who he hasn't
seen for two years.
     Kids in movies generally come in one of two categories:
sickeningly cute or terminally annoying.  Young Whittni Wright has a
membership in both clubs.  More importantly, however, she can act,
unlike many of the crop of under-ten performers.  There are a few
scenes where she fails to convince, but far more in which she's
entirely believable.  If Ms. Wright avoids the "Culkin syndrome", she
could have a bright future.
     As always, Nick Nolte is the consummate professional, and his
supporting cast is equally solid.  Especially noteworthy is Albert
Brooks, playing a tough-as-nails, repressed movie producer who has
trouble committing to a relationship.  This isn't a unique role, but
Mr. Brooks acts the part with gusto.
     I'LL DO ANYTHING is blessed with a wonderful screenplay that
shares equal parts drama and comedy.  The emotional texture is
surprisingly firm, especially as it relates to Matt and Jeannie, but
there are plenty of laughs to be had.  Much of the script works because
it rarely strays from the commonplace.  Since the audience can
therefore relate to the characters and their situations, the movie has
an impact.  Those scenes that go over-the-top, such as the incident
with Jeannie running around screaming on an airplane, come across as
silly and unnecessary.
     I'LL DO ANYTHING presents similar themes to those developed in,
among other projects, THE PLAYER, THE BIG PICTURE, and MISTRESS.  The
satire isn't as biting because the overall intention is to create a
human interest story rather than a cynical look at a jaded industry
ripe for parody.
     Movies about parent/child relationships are usually riddled with
formulas.  However, while James Brooks' project occasionally allows a
too-pat resolution to slip by, there are a few minor surprises.  I'LL
DO ANYTHING can justifiably boast a freshness and intelligence too
often absent from motion pictures.  Just take a look at MY FATHER THE
HERO for an example of how a film can take a similar idea and
completely botch it.
     The greatest strength of I'LL DO ANYTHING isn't difficult to
pinpoint--it has immense appeal.  Not only is the movie well-scripted
and competently-acted, but it presents its characters in such a way
that the audience can feel for them without being aware of overt
manipulation.  Mr. Brooks, the director of such films as BROADCAST NEWS
and TERMS OF ENDEARMENT, has delivered a rare jewel in the bleakness of
February's movie wasteland.  I'LL DO ANYTHING may have started out life
as a failed musical, but with judicious edits and re-shoots, it has
become a thoroughly enjoyable dramatic comedy.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Written and directed by James L.  Brooks
Starring Nick Notle, Whittni Wright, Albert Brooks, Julie Kavner,
         Joely Richardson, and Tracey Ullman
     Nick Nolte sings!  At least that was the intention of
writer/director (and producer) James L. Brooks, who originally filmed
I'LL DO ANYTHING as a musical complete with songs written by Prince and
Sinead O'Conner!  But lousy test scores--in addition to audiences that
literally walked out during the songs--prompted Brooks to reshoot and
restructure his film.  The non-musical result is a charming, but
dreadfully slow, romantic comedy.
     The plot revolves around veteran character actor Matt Hobbs
(Nolte).  He's so desperate for work that he's taken a job as chauffeur
to movie producer Burke Adler (Brooks).  Hobbs has been handed his
six-year-old daughter, whom he hasn't seen in two years and now has to
raise on his own.  He's also attracted to one of Adler's staff
members--Cathy (Richardson), a charming development executive with
designs on restarting his career.
     Needless to say, the actor quickly realizes that bachelorhood and
fatherhood don't always go together.
     The story's second tier accompanies Adler.  His relationship with
Nan Mulhanney (Kavner), an audience-tester and dating skeptic, is under
stress because the self-obsessed producer of "Popcorn Pictures" can't
calm down.  He's bugged because his latest actioner is getting lousy
"scores." To add insult to injury, the only time his calls are returned
is at lunch.  When he's not there. (!)
     All this, set against the seemingly exciting and no-longer-musical
world of motion picture and television production!
     Handsomely shot and very well-written, I'LL DO ANYTHING is,
simply, s-l-o-w.  Here and there, a couple scenes move like the better
Brooks comedies BROADCAST NEWS and TERMS OF ENDEARMENT.  But the bulk
of it is a lazy insider-look at movie-making with a sitcom-cute kid
angle.
     Which doesn't work 'cause this kid ain't cute.  In fact, she's
downright obnoxious!  Up until one whopper of a cloying ending,
newcomer Whittni Wright gives a very remarkable performance.  But she
acts just like a six-year-old brat.  And that's *no* fun to watch.
     Dad's quite a draw, though.  Even when sporting a long-haired wig
that makes him look like Ron Perlman's "Beast," Nick Nolte gets off one
of his best (and most subtle) roles in a while.  His chemistry with
Richardson is good, too!
     If Nolte gets the best scenes, Albert Brooks gets all the good
lines.  As the self-absorbed Adler, he even gets a classic monologue in
which he describes a field of "exploding windmills."  Forget those
fictional Joel Silvers; this is a megalomaniac to remember!
     Oddly, both Tracey Ullman and Julie Kavner seem miscast.  Ullman
is barely watchable in her scenes, sporting a Bad Southern Accent as
Notle's jail-bound wife.  Kavner is more watchable, albeit unappealing,
but she doesn't have the fire to match Brooks' raging gloom.  Only
Richardson stands strong on the female front.
     Watch for a few cameos, including Woody Harrelson and Kavner's
"Simpsons" co-star Harry Shearer.
     One question lingers: who is the intended audience?  If mainstream
America didn't want to hear Nick Nolte sing, can they also appreciate
the jokes about "target audiences" and "test scores?"

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I'LL DO ANYTHING is UNIQUE in movie history, but I'll save the
reason for the end of the review.  The story is about a washed up actor
(Nick Nolte) and his daughter, (newcomer Whittni Wright), played as the
classic child from hell type, who turns into a successful child acting
star.  Albert Brooks plays the producer.  Nolte is usually good and he
is here, but nothing special.  In every movie, I have ever seen Albert
Brooks in, especially BROADCAST NEWS, he has been nothing less than
terrific.  In this movie he is okay, but nothing more.  To be honest,
his part was not well written - too timid or something - so I think he
did good as he could.  The best part is the child's.  She is really
cute, and I hope to see her again.
     The worst part was the script by  James L.  Brooks.  It just does
not make you care enough about the characters yet all are potentially
quite interesting.  There were a few good one liners, especially in the
small part of the mom played by Tracy Ullman.  The directing was also
by James L.  Brooks who did BROADCAST NEWS and TERMS OF ENDEARMENT.
Here he is too timid with his cast as if he is afraid to open up and
take a few risks.
     What is unique about this movie?  It was originally a musical but
at the screenings, people hated the songs, but liked the movie.  They
reedited it to take out all of the songs, and released it anyway.  I
did find myself unsuccessfully looking for where the musical numbers
must have been.
     I'LL DO ANYTHING runs too long at 1:56.  With the missing songs
this movie would have gone on forever.  It is rated PG-13, but is
pretty harmless show.  Some movies are great in places and awful in
others.  I'LL DO ANYTHING on the other hand is extremely uniform albeit
highly forgettable.  I rated at a constant ** 1/2 and give it a thumbs
up if you are looking for a pleasant movie that never taxes your brain.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Nick Nolte, Albert Brooks, Whittni Wright, Joely
Richardson, Julie Kavner, Tracey Ullman.
Screenplay/Director:  James L. Brooks.
     I wish I hadn't known so much about I'LL DO ANYTHING.  I wish I
hadn't known that it was written as a musical, and that the songs had
been edited out after disastrous test screenings.  I wish I hadn't
found myself trying to guess where the songs would have gone, or
wondering what might have been different.  Then maybe, just maybe, I
would have enjoyed it even more than I did.  As aware as I was of its
bumps, I was still mostly delighted by I'LL DO ANYTHING, and the reason
why can be summed up in two words:  Whittni Wright.
     I'LL DO ANYTHING stars Nick Nolte as Matt Hobbs, a talented but
struggling actor who never seems to have the "it" anyone is looking
for.  At a particularly down time in his career, he finds himself with
an added responsibility:  his 6-year-old daughter Jeannie (Whittni
Wright), taken away from his ex-wife (Tracey Ullman) when she is sent
to prison.  Juggling Jeannie and his career becomes even trickier when
he begins working for producer Burke Adler (Albert Brooks), and finds
himself pushed for the lead in a remake of "Mr. Deeds Goes to Town" by
a supportive development executive (Joely Richardson).  Meanwhile,
Jeannie is offered a part on a sit-com, and Adler works on a
relationship with a pathologically honest audience researcher (Julie
Kavner).
     The fact is that I'LL DO ANYTHING shouldn't have worked at all.
It's impossible not to play "Spot the Song Setup" (Nolte's number while
he paces his apartment as Jeannie stays with a babysitter for the first
time?  Kavner's watching Brooks schmooze in a posh restaurant?), or to
notice some particularly choppy editing.  The Hollywood satire element
never really hits stride, because it doesn't hit hard enough and
because THE PLAYER already did it better.  Ullman's character sports an
appalling Georgia accent, and the six year time shifts don't allow for
any rhyme or reason to her eventual, rather tenuous emotional state or
why she spoils Jeannie so terribly.  There are plenty of holes in I'LL
DO ANYTHING, and a few more might have spelled disaster.
     Consequently, I consider it fortunate that I fell in love with
Whittni Wright the moment she appeared on screen.  Wright is a
magnificent Jeannie, reducing Matt to a whimper of "I have absolutely
no idea what to do when she throws a spectacular temper tantrum on a
plane.  Unlike so many young performers, she never struck me as overly
precious or self-aware, just winningly adorable.  Stripped of its angle
as a big industry send-up, I'LL DO ANYTHING becomes a story of people
trying to get their priorities straight in a business where every
instinct tells you to sell out those priorities, and Matt's
relationship with Jeannie becomes the focal point of that struggle.  As
many times as "parent learns responsibility" stories have been done, I
was still completely charmed by this one.  Nolte and Wright are great
together, and I found myself smiling almost every minute they were on
screen together.
     As he has done in his previous films, TERMS OF ENDEARMENT and
BROADCAST NEWS, James L. Brooks fills the screen with quirky characters
and clever dialogue.  Joely Richardson is lovely and appealing as
Cathy, the development exec who wants to take a stand but can't quite
work up the nerve, and she uses her splayed-leg sitting position to
give Cathy an aura of perpetual insecurity.  Albert Brooks is good but
underused as the cocky big-budget producer, and Julie Kavner gets off
some of the best lines as the voice of honesty.  It's too bad the
relationships between those characters are generally so sketchy, gutted
of some of their emotion byt the removal of the production numbers.
Still, the one relationship that really mattered worked so well that I
was tremendously forgiving.  I'LL DO ANYTHING may not be the smoothest
of rides, but Nolte and Wright did such a fine job of winning my heart
that I was more than willing to take that ride with them.
