Title
Review for Simoom: A Passion in the Desert (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Fine Line Features/Roland Films
 Director: Lavinia Currier 
 Writer: Lavinia Currier, Martin Edmunds, novella by Balzac
 Cast:Ben Daniels, Michel Piccoli, Paul Meston, Kenneth
Collard, Nadi Odeh
   Honore de Balzac's novella "A Passion in the Desert,"
adapted for the screen by Lavinia Currier, gives new
resonance to the term, "Come on in; the water's fine."  Filmed
in Petra, Jordan and in Moab, Utah to represent the Egyptian
desert, the story takes place in 1798 during Napoleon's
bungled Egyptian campaign and focuses on a French captain
who underwent an adventure with which Maupintour could
never compete. What's more he paid nothing for the
escapade and nothing for clothing, though he did have to put
up with some awfully catty comments about his demeanor.
   The film's themes are as eclectic as its production.
Production-wise, though "Passion in the Desert" hones in on a
batallion of the French legions in Egypt, the men (even Michel
Piccoli) speak English, the French captain is British, and while
the Egyptian desert might have been a fine backdrop, director
Currier threw sand in Mubarek's face by filming in Jordan and
Utah.  Thematically the narrative is in part a philosophic
meditation on the enigmas of nature, with a targeted audience
of both fable-loving children and contemplative adults, in part
a study of reason vs. emotion, and in part a contrast between
European and Near Eastern cultures.  There is little dialogue
and even less plot: this is not a criticism.  Currier exploits the
motion picture genre for what it does best, which is to impart
stark imagery to get its points across.  While some of the
more riveting segments cross the screen, you'll be tempted to
phone the makers of National Geographic films and advise
them to see the picture.  Currier does not rely on
Geographic's pretentious anthropologists and didactic
commentary to command our concentration.  
   Written by Balzac at the beginning of the Nineteenth
Century, "Passion in the Desert" follows a ragtag division of
French forces trudging through the barren Egyptians sands
convinced by their Enlightenment views that they cannot get
lost.  After all, there's the Nile over here and the ocean over
there, or so believes Captain Augustin Robert (Ben Daniels),
who is escorting artist Jean-Michel Venture de Paradis
(Michel Piccoli) through hostile territory.  Venture's
assignment is to sketch what he can of Egypt's art while
Augustin must do what he can to stop the philistine French
soldiers from blowing up aspects of Egyptian culture that they
meet along the route.  When a sudden fight erupts between
fierce Marmaluke warriors and the European intruders,
Augustin and Venture lose each other, and when Venture
shoots himself, Augustin is left alone at the mercy of nature
and a Bedouin fighting force.  
   Near death from thirst and hiding in a cave from a band of
Marmalukes, Augustin encounters a feral leopard who,
fortunately for Augustin, prefers Egyptian food to French.  For
reasons known only to feline psychologists, the big cat takes
a liking to the lost soldier, leads him to water, shares his food
with the young man, and allows itself to be petted.
   "Passion in the Desert" turns around the expected
convention of man subjugating beast as Augustin becomes
part of the leopard's world, even stripping what remains of his
uniform and crawling naked on all fours packed with facial
make-up.  What happens ultimately to this relationship is
almost predictable, the film's conclusion posing a trenchant
inquiry into man's role in nature.  One scene, which could
have some uptight parents wishing they had not taken their
six-year-olds to the movie, displays Augustin erotically
caressing the spotted animal whom he has named Simoon. 
Augustin's is the sort of adventure that most of us will never
have.  We have given up the itinerary of the solitary traveler
who places himself at the forbearance of nature at its most
spartan and spacious in return for the comfort and swaddling
security of the five-star hotel with well-organized, terminally
crowded safaris.  
   Ben Daniels has a commanding presence in letting out the
feline in himself and the three trained cats--who had proved
perilously unpredictable working on the set with Daniels--
move with the grace of undomesticated animals who
perpetually savor the joys of the hunt.  The parable is
professionally lensed by the Russian cinematographer, Alexei
Rodionov with an exotic soundtrack of Arabic music by the
Spanish composer Jose Nieto. PG-13.  Running time: 93
minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) A PASSION IN THE DESERT has good cinematography and an
inventive story. A slowly paced midsection and an off-putting subject matter
keep it from being great (or widely distributed), but for the adventurous
moviegoer, it's worth a look.
Augustin (played very well by Ben Daniels, in a role with little dialogue)
is a soldier in Napoleon's army. Augustin's unit is transporting Venture
(Michel Piccoli), one of Napoleon's artists, to some of the sights in the
Egyptian Desert. After a martial skirmish, Augustin and Venture find
themselves alone and lost in the desert.
Augustin leaves Venture in search of water (both men knowing that he's
leaving Venture to die). Time passes, Augustin walks, and eventually, his
horse dies. He keeps plodding on foot and finally comes to a tent, where he
steals some water. He is chased from the tent and flees into a desert
canyon, where he hides in a cave. As his pursuers approach, he discovers
that he is sharing his cave with a leopard. The cat leaps out of the cave
and kills one of the men, giving Augustin the opportunity to find a new
hiding place.
The surrounding desert condemns Augustin and the leopard to share the same
canyon. The leopard has spared Augustin's life once, but the two still don't
trust each other. They come to terms with each other around the watering
hole, learning to share the water without hostility. Eventually, they learn
to share food, and finally, affection.
Augustin's affection for the leopard takes an unnatural turn after several
nights spent sleeping near each other. A passionate lick is all we see (or
all that transpires, for all we know), but it changes an interesting
hypothetical situation into something more fantastic. It severs some of the
the audience's empathy by being more than most of us would be willing to share.
At this point, it seems that Augustin has given up on being human. After
desperate days wandering through the desert and facing his own death, he
adapts to life with the leopard (whom he names Simoom). He has given up on
finding a way out of the desert and has instead chosen to fulfill his needs
in Simoom's canyon. Being a French soldier has not allowed him to survive;
being this leopard's partner has. When a troop of French soldiers comes
within earshot, he hides himself from them. He truly has shunned humanity.
 Augustin's passion turns into jealousy when a male leopard shows up and
mates with his newfound love. He takes this insult badly. The problem, as he
sees it, is not his unnatural passion and jealousy, but his species. In
another of the film's awkward moments, Augustin strips naked, makes paint
from different-colored rocks, and cakes himself with orange and black mud.
Simoom seems to understand the limits of their relationship much better than
Augustin, and eventually she convinces him to rejoin his own species.
Daniels had a tough job in this role, and he pulled it off very well. The
range required for the part is expansive, and Daniels was convincing at each
level, from competent soldier to near-dead mummy to leopard-man. The
"acting" on the part of Simoom was also incredible (though some credit for
the "performance" should surely go to the director and editor for filling in
the gaps). The leopard had to, and did, communicate distrust, trust, and
affection. 
The cinematography (by Alexei Rodionov) was also very good, although it's
hard to go wrong when you are filming in a desert. The film was shot in
Jordan and in Moab, Utah, both of which seem naturally photogenic. The same
could be said for Daniels' piercing blue eyes and the leopard's sleek form.
Not to detract from Rodionov's accomplishment, but it would have been hard
to shoot this film badly.
With all this going for it, A PASSION IN THE DESERT should be an outstanding
film. But Augustin's unnatural passion keeps us from really empathizing with
him, and thus from getting caught up in the film. His behavior is
explainable, but it is not fathomable. And because this was so integral to
the movie, its length could not have been easily cut. Perhaps the setup
could have been shortened, but then we would not be able to see the change
in the man so drastically. The movie, too long by a couple of minutes, had
nothing left to trim.
Still, the movie is quite original, so if you're feeling daring, go and see it.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        This is a strange one, kids.  Even though independent films
frequently tackle subjects which Hollywood considers taboo or unmarketable,
"Passion in the Desert" raises the bar to new heights.  Interracial love
stories are uncommon enough on the silver screen... but interspecies?
        Such is Lavina Currier's vision.  The tale, adapted from a short
story by Honore' de Balzac, opens in the Egyptian desert circa 1798 A.D.
A small group of soldiers have been assigned to escort Napolean's favorite
artist (played by Michel Piccoli) on a cross-country march as he draws and
paints pictures of the landscape.  The land is staggeringly hostile, and
the group has its hands full coping with the crippling heat, scorpions,
sandstorms, and frequent attacks by rogue nomads.
        During a particularly fierce sandstorm, the artist and a solider
named Augustin Robert (Ben Daniels) get separated from the rest of their
group.  They find themselves lost, hundreds of miles from civilization, with
no supplies to speak of.  They realise the severity of their predicament at
once ("The desert is totally unpredictable, like living in the tempest of a
woman's heart," observes the artist in one of the film's most memorable
lines) and immediately begin the search for the rest of their group.  The
heat claims their horses fairly quickly, and the two men manage to survive
only by drinking the artist's paint.  Even so, the elderly artist is
quickly overcome by the sweltering temperatures, and Augustin (who is the
spitting image of Kenneth Branagh) is forced to leave his friend beneath
a small tree, promising to return with help as soon as he can.
        Little more than a zombie at this point, Augustin chances upon a
nomad camp which appears to be deserted.  In a wonderfully tense scene, he
sneaks inside, searching for food and water.  I won't reveal what he
discovers there (it's one of the film's best scenes), but soon after, our
hero finds himself trapped in a cave with a leopard who won't allow him to
leave.  No matter how he attempts to flee, the leopard always outsmarts him.
Augustin realises that he must earn the creature's respect, and thus begins
a fascinating game of wits.  It's "The English Patient" meets "Dr.
Dolittle."
        Yes, he succeeds, and the two become friends.  It's at this point
that the film switches gears, changing from an exciting drama into something
else completely.  Augustin and the leopard become very close indeed as they
learn to trust and respect each other.  They share food and water.  They
cuddle and play.  They hunt together.  They kiss.  They lick each other's
skin.  God help us, they even slow dance.  In short, they... they... fall
in love, basically.  No, I'm not making this up.  Now it's "Dr. Dolittle"
meets "Lolita."
        From this point on, I had no idea who I was supposed to root for.
Do we hope Augustin makes it back to civilization safely?  That he and the
leopard live happily ever after?  That the SPCA shows up and shoots them
both?  I'm not sure, and that may be the film's biggest flaw: we have no
idea what the ultimate goal of the movie is, nor why Augustin forsakes the
artist after he befriends the leopard.  Surely he could've brought some
water to the old man.  But no... from the moment he enters the nomad camp,
he never seems to think about his companion again.  Why?  I have no idea.
        However, you will not see a single movie this year that's better
photographed than "Passion."  One could literally take a random freeze-
frame from any moment of the film and have a "National Geographic" cover
photo.  From the innovative use of camera angles and shadows, down to the
color of the costumes and the sky itself, this is a movie whose images
have been meticulously planned, down to the smallest detail.  Visually, it
makes "Titanic" look like a home movie (and considering I saw "Titanic" five
times because of its visuals, that should tell you something).  Particularly
impressive is the scene in which we see the leopard for the first time:
darkness.  Then, a pair of glowing green eyes pierce the gloom.  Gradually,
the leopard comes into view... but it looks as though the director is not
so much lighting the set as removing the darkness.  Finally, we get our
first look at the entire creature.  We won't soon forget it.
        The music is also wonderful.  Composed by Jose' Nieto (whose name
I'd never heard before), it features some lovely orchestral work highlighted
by Egyptian instruments.  Best of all, Celine Dion is noticeably absent.
I'll be buying this soundtrack.
        The climax of the film is disturbing, but not unexpected.  Still,
it appears with a suddenness that's a little disorienting.  The movie just
ends, as though the production suddenly realised they didn't have enough
money to buy more film and had to wrap everything up quickly.
        The performance of Ben Daniels in the role of Augustin is admirable.
He conveys all the emotions we'd expect his character to be feeling, and
never seems to be uncomfortable with the material.  We always believe his
sincerity, even as we question his sanity.  (Yes, that's a complement.)
I'd like to see more of his work in the future.
        Truth be told, I found the audience's response just as interesting
as the film itself.  Startled gasps and muffled giggles floated around the
surprisingly crowded theater for much of the screening.  The woman sitting
in front of me stormed out after only an hour and didn't return, but a lady
sitting towards the back wept loudly during the end credits.  And as the
audience filed out, I noticed at least a dozen people wearing expressions
similar to my own-- expressions that said, quite simply, "Did I really see
that?  Is this a joke?"
        This comparison will probably raise a few eyebrows, but "Passion
in the Desert" reminded me of "Dances with Wolves" in many ways.  Both films
are set in the past, and follow the story of a military officer separated
from the rest of his group.  Both characters befriend an animal, are
forever changed by what happens to them, and are reluctant to return to
their former way of life when the time comes.  In all honesty, I think I
liked "Passion" better.
        This film isn't a must-see, but it's not the worst film out there,
either.  The potentially disturbing story is countered by excellent acting,
music, and cinematography.  But be warned: there's quite a lot of violence,
blood, and some full-frontal male nudity.  Leave the kids at home.
This review was written: July 19, 1998
Copyright (c) 1998 by Joe Barlow.  This review may be freely distributed as
long as ABSOLUTELY NO CHANGES are made and this disclaimer remains attached.
It may not be reproduced for profit without the written consent of the
author.  If you have comments or questions, please send them to: jbarlow
at earthling dot net (substituting the appropriate symbols, to discourage
spam).
-----
  "Average Joe" Barlow * MiSTie #73097 * Writer/musician/aspiring filmmaker
       jbarlow@YOURearthling.PANTSnet http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow
              {Remove YOUR PANTS to e-mail me.}        
