Title
Review for Charlie Chan at the Circus (1936)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frankie Paiva
Two or three times a year, all of the good people at AMC decide to dig through
the film's of the 1930s and have a Charlie Chan film festival. On my first
viewing of a Chan film (I believe that there are 38 total) I instantly fell in
love with the interesting characters, fun plotlines, and mysterious mysteries.
For all readers who don't know, Charlie Chan was a Chinese detective who
starred in several extremely popular films from the late 1920s to the mid
1940s. The actor who played him (there were two of them Warner Oland from
Sweden and Sidney Toler from Missouri) was never Chinese. Charlie Chan would
always be involved with, investigate, and solve a murder in just over an hour.
These are exciting films and I hope you enjoy my review of this one.
Charlie Chan (Oland) the famous Chinese detective is at the circus with his
large (16 children to be exact) family. Before the show, they meet the amazing
Tiny (Olive Brasno) and Tim (George Brasno) they are both the littlest people
on earth. During the show, one of the two men they run it is killed in the
wagon that holds most of the production's money. Charlie doesn't want to
investigate at first, but are convinced that they need their help after Tiny
and Tim beg for it. Their first assumption is that they believe it is an
escaped ape, who someone let out of it's cage, but as the pieces come together,
Charlie begins to think that something else actually happened to the man.
The film is classic Chan, it follows all of the main plot points of all the
rest of the Charlie Chan movies. Charlie does however come up with more
interesting similees (Mind like parachute - only function when open) than
usual. I really like Keye Luke as the number one son. Even if he is annoying,
you can't help but liking him as he goes along trying to be just like his
famous father. But this movie doesn't have the same level of charm as some of
the other pictures. I also don't think that the circus was a good place to have
it be set, as nothing really seems to happen that is that much circus related.
It's not as exciting as some of the others films and this film is also very
talky. But no one can refuse a 70 minute movie like this, it's fun and
entertaining, and it gets ** 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: Besides the fact that someone is murdered and that there is a
scary gorilla, there is nothing that would frighten young children in the film.
Good Age 6 & Up

Author
Dennis Schwartz
CHARLIE CHAN AT THE CIRCUS (director: Harry Lachman; screenwriters: Robert
Ellis/Helen Logan; cinematographer: Daniel Clark; editor: Alex Troffey; cast:
Warner Oland (Charlie Chan), Keye Luke (Lee), J. Carrol Naish (Holt), Shia Jung
(Su Toy), Olive Brasno (Tiny), George Brasno (Tim), Maxine Reiner (Marie
Norman), Shirley Deane (Lil Norman), John McGuire (Hal Blake), Francis Ford
(Gaines), Paul Stanton (Joe Kinney), Drue Leyton (Nellie Farrell), Boothe Howard
(Dan Farrell), Wade Boteler (Lieutenant Macy); Runtime: 72; 20th Century Fox;
1936) 
A very entertaining Charlie Chan episode, though the way Charlie gets the killer
seems far-fetched and the killer's reason had to be explained by Charlie because
nothing in the film would indicate his reason. When Charlie shows up with his
family of 14 at the circus, it was a funny sight to take in. He's a guest of the
co-owner of the circus, Joe Kinney (Stanton). Kinney is worried because he's
been receiving threatening letters and wants to ask Charlie about them. They
plan to meet sometime during the show. 
Charlie's 12 kids are awed by the dancing act of Tiny (Olive Brasno) and Tim
(George Brasno), they are the tiniest people in the world (in real-life they are
brother-and-sister 
midget performers). Number one son, Lee (Luke), is romantically inclined to the
show's contortionist, Su Toy (Shia Jung), but she's giving him the runaround. 
When Charlie goes to meet Kinney at his wagon, he finds it locked. The co-owner
Gaines (Ford) can't open the door with his key since it's bolted from the
inside, but when they enter through the vent they find the dead body of the
strangled Kinney. All the evidence points to the dangerous ape, who someone let
out of the cage with a lost key, as being the killer. 
Kinney made many enemies, therefore there are many suspects. Gaines, even though
everyone in the circus likes him, is the prime suspect because he may not be
able to pay the notes he owes Kinney at the end of the season and will therefore
lose the circus he loves. Hal Blake (McGuire), the animal trainer, is a suspect
because he hates Kinney when he sees him whip the ape and doesn't know how to
treat circus people. He wants to quit and asks Louise Norman (Shirley Deane) to
leave the circus with him. Lou's sister Marie Norman (Maxine Reiner), a trapeze
artist, wants to marry Kinney, while Nellie Farrell (Drew Leyton), the circus
dresser, looks to her scam artist brother Dan Farrell (Boothe Howard) for help
about handling her problem with Kinney. She has a marriage certificate saying
she was married to him 5 months ago and will use that to claim a partnership in
the circus. Holt (J. Carrol Naish-portrayed Charlie Chan on a late-1950s TV
series) is the surly snake-tamer, who says someone's trying to pin the blame on
him when a deadly snake is found in Charlie's train compartment. The circus is
on the train to go perform in the next town, as the police are also aboard to
wrap up the case. 
The small-town cop, Lieutenant Macy (Wade Boteler), is handling the case, but
receiving limited help from Lee, who thinks he's a chip off the old block; but,
from Charlie, he's watching a master detective operate. 
Charlie's best quote: "Mind like parachute - only function when open." 
This film had a good circus atmosphere, lots of charm to it, and the suspects
did a good job of looking guilty. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
