Title
Review for Leaving Normal (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard John Rauser
     I'll be honest: a girl friend of mine dragged me to LEAVING NORMAL.
I figured, what the heck, it's half-price Tuesday and there might even
be an interesting scene or two.  But overall, I expected the film to be
a waste of my time.
     LEAVING NORMAL is, to put it simply, a fantastic movie.  The story
concerns an abused, disillusioned housewife who runs away from her
abusive husband and a streetwise cocktail waitress who inherits land up
in Alaska.  The two women cross paths and journey to Alaska together.
     Doesn't sound like much?  A non-violent THELMA AND LOUISE rip-off,
you say?  A sappy film?  Wrong, wrong, wrong.  The movie is brilliant.
The acting is amazing, the story flows so smoothly you'll be literally
carried along, and the characters are so likable you'll be feeling with
them every step of the way.
     I honestly cannot imagine anyone not liking LEAVING NORMAL.  It is
a movie that should be cliched but isn't.  There is female bonding but
it is believable and endearing.  There is the abused-woman-at-every-turn
theme but it works and isn't top-heavy with scores of evil male
characters.  There are good people and bad, likable and unlikable, just
like real life.  LEAVING NORMAL, with the exception of a few scenes that
are intentionally overdone, is a slice of real life.  And what you see
is happy at times, sad at times, tragic at times, and inspiring at
times.  And when it's all said and done, you realize that this trip to
Alaska and everything that happens along the way is really a metaphor
for our daily struggle through this life ... and if there's one thing
that the viewer of LEAVING NORMAL will come away with, it's that life is
not only worth living, it is worth living with enormous dedication and
strength.
     LEAVING NORMAL is nearly perfect.  It is sentimental in the right
places, sad in the right places, funny in the right places, and 
inspiring throughout.
     There is one scene in this movie I disliked, because I felt the
character types that the film was attacking were treated unfairly ...
but this is minor; I hardly noticed it.  Overall LEAVING NORMAL deserves
a 9-1/2 out of 10, which I happily give it.  
     I just wish the so-called "blockbusters" that have been
disappointing me thus far were half as good as this movie.
