Title
Review for Onegin (1999)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
As cold and dull as a Russian winter, Onegin aims to please only the
snootiest of film-lovers.  Set to make its major debut on the Starz
television network (after a pointless one-week, Oscar-qualifying run in
New York and Los Angeles), the film stars Ralph Fiennes (The Avengers)
and is directed by his sister Martha and scored by his brother Magnus.
Magnus…and you though Ralph was a pretentious name.
Based on Alexander Pushkin's lengthy 1823 poem, Onegin takes place in
Russia during the early part of the 1800s.  Fiennes plays the titular
Yevgeny Onegin, a St. Petersburg playboy that inherits the entire estate
of his wealthy uncle.  Onegin appears as bored with his life as I was
watching it.  He has his pick of women and takes pride in showing other
men how easily he can steal their wives and fiancées.  One woman who
pours her heart out to him - Tatyana Larina (Liv Tyler, Plunkett &
Macleane) - is quickly and tactlessly rejected by the smarmy Onegin.
After a victory in a cool pistol duel (which, ironically, is how Pushkin
died in 1837) and a six-year vacation, Onegin returns to St. Petersburg
ready to profess his love to Tatyana.  But, of course, he's too late –
Tatyana has married.  The story may have seemed fresh back in 1823, but
it's a real yawner today.  Onegin was actually filmed twice before, in
1911 as a silent Russian short and in 1959 as a Russian feature, but is
probably best known in this country as a Tchaikovsky overture.
Fiennes is perfectly cast as the frosty Onegin.  He shows as much range
and emotion as Walt Disney, but that's the fault of the role more than
the actor (I think).  An Oscar nominee last year, Remi Adefarasin
provides chilly camera work and has now had the pleasure of working with
four of the Fiennes (sibling Joseph dulled up the joint in Elizabeth).
Poor Remi probably had to be talked down off of the roof after this one,
muttering that `Ralph' is supposed to be pronounced with the `L.'
They say that a decent English translation of Pushkin's poem has never
existed and Onegin does nothing but perpetuate the myth.  Plus, I can't
stop thinking of Robert DeNiro's Rupert Pupkin (from The King of Comedy)
whenever I see that name.  And don't get me started on  the name
Yevgeny, which sounds like `F. Genni.'  Whose Genni?  I don't know, but
`F' him.  It's almost as dumb as `Raif.'
Thankfully, the film is short for a stuffy period piece.  If you take
out the obligatory dancing scenes, you would be left with a half-hour
movie.  And that wouldn't be such a bad thing.  Onegin fails where last
year's family affair This is My Father – with Aidan, Paul and Declan
Quinn contributing to the production – succeeded.  Father was like a
bright, warm ball of ligh,t while Onegin is a bitter, cold shard of ice.
1:46 – R for violence, gore and adult situations

Author
Bill Chambers
ONEGIN ***1/2 (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (bill@filmfreakcentral.net)
starring Ralph Fiennes, Liv Tyler, Toby Stephens, Lena Headey
screenplay by Peter Ettedgui and Michael Ignatieff,
based on the poem "Yevgeny Onegin" by Alexander Pushkin
directed by Martha Fiennes
"When will the devil take me?" he asks rhetorically in lulling voice
over. The spoiled title character of _Onegin_ (pronounced Oh-negg-in) is
waiting on death to relieve him after a lifetime of rapacious behaviour.
Martha Fiennes' debut feature is (quite literally) filmed poetry (it's
based on an epic Russian poem by Alexander Pushkin), a profound study of
regret, of how we confuse shame with guilt.
When we first meet Eugene Onegin (Ralph, acting for his sister; another
brother, Magnus, composed the score), a philandering aristocrat from St.
Petersburg, he has just inherited his uncle's estate. With plans to sell
it, Onegin pays a summer visit to the manor, which is located in an
underpopulated Russian countryside, and not long into the trip he meets
a neighbouring family of blue bloods. Smitten with Olga Larina (Headey),
he befriends Olga's fiancé, Vladimir Lensky (Stephens), while Olga's
sister, Tatyana (Tyler), romanticizing his flippant attitude (he's a
nineteenth bad boy), falls for Onegin.
In one sweaty, inky torrent of passion, Tatyana writes him a love
letter. He is at least intrigued by the note but rejects her affections,
it is implied, because he can. Soon after, tragedy strikes, and Onegin
makes himself scarce. When we catch up with him, six years later, he has
just returned to St. Petersburg, where at a grand ball he discovers that
an old friend (Donovan) has married a more womanly and wordly Tatyana.
This time, Onegin finds her irresistable.
What is most amazing about Ralph Fiennes' performance is his subtle
physical transformation from dashing snob to miserly grouch. Overwhelmed
by a top hat, the Onegin who pines for Tatyana seems smaller in stature
than the one who brushed her off, an Ebeneezer Scrooge trapped in
Christmas past.
The actor has been constricted playing heroes for too long now-there's
room to breathe in a role that's made up of shades of gray like
"Onegin". Petula Clark sang of a universal phenomenon in "Parking Lot":
"You don't know what you've got ‘til it's gone." Onegin's about-face on
Tatyana speaks for those of us (read: most of us) who need confirmation
that someone or something is wanted by others before we want it as well.
What the character feels is not jealousy but remorse, embarrassment,
even, at having let her go. Out of identification we feel empathy for
Onegin, a callous bastard.
Tatyana's emotions echo a thousand ditties, but that makes them no less
vital. She changes, too, from a girl in crush to a woman with divided
loyalties. Tyler acquits herself surprisingly well among her UK
co-stars, filling in sketchy gaps by expressing base sentiments in a
series of wanton stares. They both have faces, Mr. Fiennes and Ms.
Tyler, capable of conveying archetypal Russian misery.
_Onegin_ could have added up to little more than a distinguished episode
of "Masterpiece Theater", even with its current cast of thoroughbreds
intact, were Martha Fiennes not at the helm. An MTV background (she cut
her teeth directing rock videos for XTC and others) has positively
influenced her sense of pace (though, thankfully, not her shot
lengths-no spasmodic cutting here); at just over 100 minutes, _Onegin_
clicks along like a brisk walk through valleys of despair.
The film has an atypical period look, as well. Absent are the sumptuous
tableware and antique furnishings that stand in for plot and character
in those drippy Merchant Ivory productions. The sets are almost
expressionistically bare, echoing the loneliness of the protagonists.
(Cinematographer Remi Adafarasin often allows space to engulf them; I'm
reminded the climax, which unfolds in a sea of white.)
Martha Fiennes has a clear command of cinema, and her spare, often
painfully human visual presentation of "Yevgeny Onegin" is arguably the
most lucid translation of Pushkin's difficult text yet. Ms. Fiennes may
be the most exciting female presence behind a camera since Jane Campion.

Author
Michael Dequina
Only a couple weeks after Neil Jordan's wrenchingly beautiful
_The_End_of_the_Affair_ comes another Ralph Fiennes-starring period
romance adaptation, based on the verse novel by Alexander Pushkin.  In
1820s Russia, the arrogant city-bred sophisticate Evgeny Onegin (Fiennes)
moves to a country estate bequeathed to him by his late uncle.  There, he
becomes the object of admiration for Tatyana (Liv Tyler), sister to the
fiancée (Lena Headey) of his neighbor Vladimir (Toby Stephens).  Onegin
rejects Tatyana, and a tragedy leads him to travel abroad for years; upon
his return, he suddenly feels affection for her, but it may be too late.
Thus the stage is set for grand romantic tragedy, but there's a bigger
difference between _Affair_ and this film than the setting and the
co-star.  Where that film was fiery and passionate, director Martha
Fiennes (yes, Ralph's sister; another Fiennes sibling, Magnus, provided
the score) takes the approach of Onegin--cold and distant.  That
principle is applied to the pacing as well, making the film that much
less involving, even though the two leads--in particular the radiant
Tyler, very at home in period garb--do admirable acting jobs.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Samuel Goldwyn Films
 Director: Martha Fiennes
 Writer: Peter Ettedgui, Michael Ignatieff
 Cast: Ralph Fiennes, Liv Tyler, Toby Stephens, Lena
Headey, Martin Donovan, Alun Armstrong, Harriet Walter,
Irene Worth, Jason Watkins, Francesca Annis
   With "Onegin" we're faced with one of the great paradoxes
of movie-making.  How do you depict the utter boredom that
characters in the story are feeling without making the movie
itself a bore?  This is not easy but for my rubles, Martha
Fiennes, sister of both this film's star, Ralph Fiennes, and the
composer of its musical score, Magnus Fiennes, has
portrayed ennui without boring the audience.  The picture is
slow-moving, Masterpiece-Theatre style, so that the MTV
generation would find it excruciating if any of its
representatives mistakenly wandered into the wrong screen
on the way to "Galaxy Quest."  Those who might appreciate a
solid personal story told with integrity by a director with a
sufficient budget to dazzle us with a few scenes that might
have come out of "Dr. Zhivago" could do worse than take in
"Onegin."
   That's not to say that the film--from the verse poem that
Tchaikovsky made into an opera and into a ballet as well with
a wholly different score--can compare with the pages
generated by Alexander Pushkin. Pushkin's verse novel
written in 1823, actually the first great Russian poem ever, is
difficult enough to translate into English.  All attempts to do
so have failed to convince literate people in the English-
speaking world of the poem's majesty.  The beauty of the film
medium is that the glory of the verse can be approximated if
the director captures the right images for the audience--which
Martha Fiennes succeeds in doing by filming partly on
location in St. Petersburg.
   In this creditable movie version, the title character, whose
role is played by Ralph Fiennes in his signature effete
manner, is a man who has everything.  He has good looks,
charm, money, and property--two homes, in fact, one in St.
Petersburg and a lavish country place that he has just
inherited from his uncle.  He adds up to nothing,
unfortunately, because he is an idler who presumably goes
through women with the same boredom with which he
surveys the snowy Russian landscape.  We see him at first
attending an allegedly sophisticated urban recital in St.
Petersburg, where he and his unproductive acquaintances sit
at tables gossiping about which women can be "had" and
which are not worth the effort.  After taking possession of his
new country home, he meets and befriends his neighbor
Vladimir Lensky (Toby Stephens), is enchanted by Lensky's
fiance Olga Larina (Lena Headey), but is unresponsive to the
attentions of a pretty, intelligent, eligible, and straightforward
young woman, Tatyana (Liv Tyler).  Years later, after a series
of incidents, one ending in tragedy, the romantic
circumstances are ironically reversed as Evgeny Onegin
realizes the terrible mistake he had made in rejecting the
woman who so vulnerably confessed her love.
   Surprisingly enough, Liv Tyler, considered perhaps an all-
American actress appropriately cast in blockbusters like
"Armageddon," profits from her earlier experience in the role
of a teen girl intent on losing her virginity during a trip to Italy
in Bertolucci's "Stealing Beauty."  She easily inhabits the role
of a reticent but up-front Russian blue blood who appears to
care little for the genteel trappings of aristocracy or for the
undemocratic convention of serfdom.  A passionate woman
seemingly fond of romantic novels that she borrows from the
Onegin estate's vast library, she risks her pride by declaring
her love to the handsome ex-urbanite and, having failed to
capture his fancy resigns herself to marriage with a proper
noble for whom she feels little emotional connection.  
   Of the side roles, that of the wonderful veteran of stage
and screen, Irene Worth as Princess Alina evokes the
movie's principal laugh, as she sharply advises Tatyana to
make a politically advisable match and to forget her childish
notions of marrying for love.  "If you insist on your penchant
for love," she responds, "Save it for outside the marriage
bed."  
   One of my favorite spoofs of 19th century Russian novels
is Woody Allen's "Love and Death"--about a devout coward in
the Napoleonic wars, featuring Sergei Prokofiev's music. 
When we hear the term "Russian literature," we all think of
Tolstoy's "War and Peace" and the like--the sort with the
long, epic plots with multitudes of characters we can scarcely
keep track of.  "Onegin," by contrast, is a chamber work,
focusing strongly on two central personalities and the internal
struggles they tussle with to carve out some happiness in
their lives without losing their integrity.  Chamber works are to
big spectacles as string quartets are to rousing symphonies. 
They appeal to a specialized audience, as should this fine
film as it negotiates the art circuit in urban centers and
college communities.
Not Rated.  Running Time: 106 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
