Title
Review for Thief of Bagdad, The (1924)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
TOB is a lengthy, silent movie that moves slowly but is still
very interesting to watch.  The story is a classic of
love not only conquering all, but also changing one's very
nature.
Douglas Fairbanks Sr is the Thief, who is proud of his
ability to take whatever he wants.  He steals a magic rope
that can be used to scale the highest walls.  He raids the
Royal Palace to steal the Princess' jewels, but falls in
love with her from one gaze as she sleeps.
On her birthday, royal custom has it that she must choose
a husband from among suitors, who must be princes.  Four
princes are the candidates.  The first is nondescript, the
second is very fat, the third is evil, the fourth
is our hero, the Thief, who has stolen princely garment
from a slumbering merchant to have dress for the occasion.
He proclaims himself "Prince of the Isles and Seven Seas".
His fraud is discovered, and he is caught, beaten and 
released.  But his efforts has won the love of the Princess.
She does not want to wed any other Prince, so she stalls
by saying she will choose the suitor who in seven moons
brings the rarest treasure.
Our hero must overcome many obstacles to procure his
treasure, a magic box from which any object desired can
be removed.  The other princes each also find rare objects:
a magic crystal that can see the future, a flying carpet,
a magic apple that can restore life to the dead.
The evil prince is the villian in this movie.  He is oriental,
and is always cunning and scheming.  The other orientals in
the film are also this way, actually a weakness of the film.
He poisons the princess so that his apple can cure her.
He stocks the palace with soldiers so that he can conquer
Bagdad.  Our hero the thief must overcome not only his
treachery, but also his army.
The movie has reasonable special effects, although the
monsters would be more scary if they did not simply loom
over Fairbanks until he gets around to slicing them with
his trusty knife.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
David M. Arnold
It's official.  "The Thief of Bagdad" is my favorite silent film, 
edging out "Metropolis".  A lush and visually stunning film, "Thief
of Bagdad" represents the pinnacle of silent Hollywood production
values.  It is "Titanic" of 1924, reportedly the first film ever 
to cost more than $2 million to produce, and it is full of (then) 
state-of-the-art special effects.  "Thief of Bagdad" was recently, 
and deservedly, added to the National Registry of Historic Films.
Black-and-white silent films were more often than not neither 
black-and-white nor silent.  By the '20's, the majority of films 
employed color, primarily through tinting (coloring the film base), 
but also by toning (replacing the black silver oxide with a 
colored material), stenciling and even hand-painting. 
It's hard for me to describe how much of an impact seeing a film 
with authentic tinting and toning makes.  For example, night scenes 
often were photographed in broad daylight with the intent of 
employing a deep blue tint on the final print.  The tinted filmstock 
makes the difference between a night scene looking ridiculous and 
being believable.
In major cities, top theatres employed live orchestras and sound 
effects to accompany films.  Theatres were often equipped with 
theatre pipe organs:  Massive and complex, these organs permitted 
a single organist to be nearly a one-man orchestra.  They featured
many different voices and electrically activated sound effects, 
all summoned up from the keyboard.  By 1924 the silent movie had 
reached its peak of development.  Within 10 years the optical 
soundtrack would be fully developed and very few silent films 
would ever be made again.
Viewing the authoritative print of "Thief of Bagdad" from the 
Killiam Collection on a big screen captures some of the original 
silent film experience.  The Killiam print includes a soundtrack 
of an organ score performed by Lee Erwin, and is reproduced with 
restored tints to deliver that dimension of color the original 
audiences enjoyed.  The Killiam print recently has been released 
on VHS tape by Critic's Choice Video, although the mastering
leaves much to be desired.  However, the same print was used to 
master the much better looking and sounding Republic laserdisc,
which is now out of print but still fairly widely available.
The first title card in "Thief of Bagdad" describes the film as an 
"Arabian Nights Fantasy".  Douglas Fairbanks (Sr) plays the thief 
Ahmed in an ancient Bagdad that is much more fantasy than reality.  
Ahmed is a loveable rogue who lives by one rule:  what he wants 
he takes.  He steals a magic rope that permits him to scale the 
walls in an attempt to burglarize the palace; there, he spots the 
royal princess (Julanne Johnston) and falls in love.
The next day is the princess's birthday, and the day that she is to 
choose her suitor. Ahmed impersonates a prince and joins princes 
from Persia (Mathilde Comont, a woman playing a man's role), from 
India (Noble Johnson), and from Mongolia (So-Jin) as they present 
themselves to the royal family.  Of course the princess chooses 
Ahmed, but a slave girl (Anna May Wong), who is actually a spy in 
the service of the Mongol prince, reveals him to be a common thief. 
Ahmed is scourged and sent into the streets. Rather than choose 
from the other three princes, the princess demands that they spend 
the next seven moons seeking out the rarest treasure, and the prince 
who returns with the greatest and rarest treasure will have her 
as a bride.
Ahmed seeks advice from a Holy Man (Charles Belcher), who teaches 
him that "Happiness must be earned", and that he has it within his 
own power to make himself a prince.  He then tells the reformed 
thief of a hermit in the mountains with knowledge of great treasure.  
But, there is great danger and Ahmed must cross a valley of fire, 
slay a dragon, resist the temptations of sea nymphs, capture a 
flying horse and return to his love before the Mongol prince's 
treachery is complete.
"Thief of Bagdad" treats Islam and the Koran with a charming naivety, 
fondness, and a respectful objectivity that is refreshing in today's 
light of recent events in the Middle East.  But, the portrayal of 
ancient Arabia is most decidedly a fantasy, the setting for a film 
that deliberately makes no attempt at authenticity.
Though the pace of the film is slow and deliberate, and runs for 
nearly 2 1/2 hours, it succeeds in keeping the viewer's attention
for its full span, and the unrushed pace adds to the dreamlike
fantasy of the story.  Unlike "Metropolis", the film is more
or less intact with original title cards, and can be viewed in
the form its creators had intended.
Although directed by Raoul Walsh, there is no question that this is 
Douglas Fairbanks's film:  He was the writer (under pseudonym Elton 
Thomas), producer, and star.  Fairbanks was a fine athlete who 
performed most of his own stunts.  Early on he performs a number 
of clever and humorous stunts as he steals money, jewelry, and food, 
and as he escapes the fakir from whom he has stolen the magic rope.  
Silent film is truly a different art form than modern film.  The 
story must be told entirely visually, and the acting is closer to 
mime than in a sound film.  Douglas Fairbanks performs the role of 
Ahmed with all the subtlety of a baby pig squealing for its dinner; 
other cast memebers deliver more restrained performances.  
"Thief of Bagdad" succeeds because it achieves Film's first and 
foremost requirement:  It is evocative, it transports the viewer to 
another place and time.
I find the enjoyment of "Thief of Bagdad" in the beauty of its 
elaborate Art Deco-meets-Byzantium sets with their soaring spires
and improbable arches, in its special effects (many of which, like 
the magic rope and flying carpet scenes, hold up well even today), 
in its competent exploitation of then-available technology, and 
in the dreamy organ score.  And, in imagining myself seated in an 
opulent, gilded, 1920's movie theatre complete with Wurlitzer pipe 
organ, about to enjoy the biggest blockbuster that had been produced 
to date.
Copyright (C) 1998 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
To reply via EMail, replace "Xexecpc" with "execpc" in the 
above address.
