Title
Review for Soldier's Daughter Never Cries, A (1998)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Walter Frith
'A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries' (1998)
Merchant-Ivory has a long standing tradition of producing some of the
most respected and high quality films dealing with aristocratic
lifestyles.  Films such as 'The Bostonians', 'A Room With a View',
'Howard's End', The Remains of the Day', and 'Jefferson in Paris' have
showcased their talents.  Ismail Merchant is the producer and James
Ivory is the director.  Their latest film is a triumph of family, pride,
cultural comparisons and light drama with an emphasis on telling a
somewhat true story.  Based on the novel by Kaylie Jones, the daughter
of author James Jones, the film is a semi autobiographical account of
life from the middle of the 1960's and into the early 70's.
Bill Willis (Kris Kristofferson) and his wife Marcella (Barbara Hershey)
have a little girl named Channe.  This American family lives in France
and Kristofferson is a successful writer and the family attends parties
and other social events.  They have a French maid to look after their
children as they adopt a little boy named Benoit.
Benoit's mother was 15 years old when she had him and she couldn't
possibly hope to care for the boy and his adoption into the Willis
family (he is later named Bill by his American family) is not an easy
one at first.  The maid and his step sister don't like him and his
somewhat shy personality puts him at odds since he came from a life of
little love and expects nothing special from his new family.  The family
indeed embraces him and later on he and his step sister grow fond of
each other and discover their mutual need and respect for one another.
Their schooling is upper crust.  A full European education in manners,
complete with school uniforms and the strict discipline of the
educators.  Friends are made, identities are established and the kids
eventually grow into their teens and into adulthood (Leelee Sobieski and
Jesse Bradford).  There are romantic relationships for the women.  The
maid has been sexually repressed for most of her life and the daughter
would find her true love back in America.  North Carolina to be exact,
as the head of the household (Kristofferson) decides to move his kin
back there.  At first, the kids have trouble adjusting to the American
way of life.  European born but with American parents is somewhat
confusing to them and they need to adjust promptly.
'A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries' has a natural rhythm to it that
blends in with its benign but effective story telling.  It never takes
itself too seriously but there is an incredible amount of depth in the
character's lives that puts it head and shoulders above most films of
its kind.  The entire cast shines.  When Kris Kristofferson made 'Lone
Star' in 1996, I thought he would receive an Oscar nomination for it. 
His craft makes him a viable force in this film and Hershey, as his
wife, is on target as a strong willed woman who is neither subservient
or intimidated.
The real protagonist of the story is Sobieski.  As the daughter, the
story centres around her.  Her maturity into adulthood is impressively
told through the lens of a very skillfully used camera.  James Ivory
captures every aspect of the family's life perfectly.  There are no
black sheep.  This is usually a pretension reserved for less experienced
film makers.  You want to be a part of this family when it's all said
and done!  The screenplay by Ivory and two time Oscar winner Ruth Prawer
Jhabvala ('A Room With a View' and 'Howard's End') is perfectly churned
out with dialogue that says the right thing at exactly the right time. 
A film that knows the value of the spoken word is usually better than
anything else that tries to imitate it.  This stuff is authentic!
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Luke Buckmaster
A SOLDIER'S DAUGHTER NEVER CRIES
Cast: Kris Kristofferson, Barbara Hershey, Leelee Sobieski, Jesse
Bradford, Anthony Ruth Costanzo, Dominique Blanc, Virginie Ledoyen,
Samuel Gruen, Luisa Conlon
Director: James Ivory
Screenplay: James Ivory, Ruth Prawer Jhabvala based on the novel by
Kaylie Jones
Running time: 124 minutes
Australian theatrical release: January 28, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
2 stars
Coming of age films - or films that develop their characters over
decades of their lives - all face a similar problem.  Obviously, it is
impossible to fit all of life's experiences in the span of two hours, so
the most that a writer can do is carefully choose scenes that examine
their characters best.  The aggravating thing about A Soldier's Daughter
Never Cries is that it presents a trade off that isn't very fair: in
order to watch its characters undergo their life defining experiences,
you also have to sit through the uninteresting and dreary moments which
shape their existence.  No one can accuse director James Ivory of being
unrealistic; instead, we can accuse him of being inefficient.
The film revolves around an American family living in Paris during the
60's and 70's.  Father Bill Willis (Kris Kristofferson) is a successful
writer and a World War II veteran, and Mother Marcella (Barbara Hershey)
is a flamboyant heavy drinker.  They have two children - daughter Channe
(played by Luisa Conlon as a child and Deep Impact's Leelee Sobieski as
a teenager) and adopted son Billy (Samuel Gruen then Jesse Bradford).
The Willis family have a strong love and appreciation for each other;
the two kids especially having an obvious respect for their wise and
gentle father.
Each of the Willis' experience their own set of hardships.  Mum and Dad
worry that Billy will be taken away from them, Channe struggles to be
accepted in her various high schools, and Billy becomes a social
outcast.
The synopsis above does not indicate a one way storyboard, and
rightfully so.  A Soldiers Daughter Never Cries is multi-layered
conventional drama, hiding the fact that it doesn't have much of a plot.
Instead, it is primarily a collection of dramatic scenes that attempt to
illustrate each of the characters' emotional breadth.  Ivory pulls this
off with only reasonable success. Some of the film's best moments are
when Channe becomes best friends with a boy named Francis (Anthony Ruth
Costanzo) who, by textbook definition, will grow up to be gay.  "You're
weird, you act like a girl," she tells him.  Francis retorts by
explaining that he acts like nobody but himself.  But he is only one of
the supporting characters who abruptly disappear from the screen.  Ivory
tries so hard to focus on the Willis family that none of his other
characters have the chance to make a lasting impression.  He succeeds in
giving the film a heart, but in the process forgets to give it a brain.
Leelee Sobieski is able to grasp much of what her role requires.  She
plays Channe with a calm and controlled presence, but gives a gutsy (and
risky) performance. Most of the faults in her portrayal can be narrowed
down to the screenplay, which never accurately represents the hardships
of puberty.  It also never makes that much sense, as I was left
pondering why we witness Channe having her period in class and wearing
her first bra, when the loss of her virginity is only given a mention in
one conversation.  The rest of the cast are uniformly strong (especially
the younger two actors, Luisa Conlon and Samuel Gruen), although each of
their characters lack flair.
For those with patience and do not mind a flat ending, A Soldier's
Daughter Never Cries may provide some pleasant viewing.  Like many
others like it, the film is paced very slowly and its tone and style
remain consistent.  But given his material, James Ivory should have bent
over backwards to ensure that his film was never boring.  He gives A
Soldiers Daughter Never Cries a heart, but not much else.  This is one
trade-off that just doesn't seem fair.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or for any inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Alphalink Movies:
http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by James Ivory.
Cast: Leelee Sobieski, Kris Kristofferson, Barbara Hershey, Jesse 
Bradford, Luisa Conlon, Samuel Gruen, Anthony Roth Costanzo, Dominique 
Blanc, Jane Birkin, Harley Cross, Isaac de Bankole, Virginie Ledoyen.
1998 - 125 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity).
Reviewed December 10, 1998.
"A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries," is the first James Ivory-directed 
film I can recall that is set after the 1930's. Granted, this bit of 
information doesn't really hold very much importance, but I am glad that 
Ivory has made something a little bit away from his norm, and it paid 
off.
The film starts off during the 1960's, where the Willis', an American 
family living in France, adopt Benoit (Samuel Gruen), a young boy whose 
real mother was only fifteen when she gave birth to him. Bill Willis 
(Kris Kristofferson), a writer, and his wife, Marcella (Barbara 
Hershey), are just about the best parents he could hope for. They are 
caring, considerate, and generally good people. Their daughter, Channe 
(Luisa Conlon), is just about Benoit's age, and although she is, at 
first, put off by a new member in the family, she quickly becomes 
attached to her new brother. In these opening sections, not much occurs 
in the way of a clear-cut story, but it is deceptive. By choice, 
Benoit's name is changed to Billy, to sound more American. Channe gets 
into trouble at school when she forges her father's signature. She also 
has a peculiar run-in with a boy around her tender age of eight who 
makes sexual advances towards her. Life goes on.
It is in the last ninety minutes when, "A Soldier's Daughter Never 
Cries," grows the most momentum and becomes especially heartfelt and 
truthful. About seven years pass, leaving Channe and Billy to now be 
young teenagers (now played by Leelee Sobieski and Jesse Bradford). When 
signs that Bill may be forming a heart disease, the family moves back to 
the United States, and as he desperately tries to finish a book he has 
been writing before he dies, Billy grows distant from everyone, and, not 
knowing how to act as a young adult, Channe becomes highly promiscuous 
at school. 
Through everything that occurs during the film, the element that most 
stands out is the warm, unconventional relationship between Channe and 
her father, who does not look down on Channe when he discovers she has 
been having sex, but instead, sympathizes and understands what she is 
going through. In one particularly startling, perfectly realized moment, 
Bill tells Channe and her boyfriend to stay at their house for the 
night. "I'd rather you be under my roof and doing it properly, rather 
than being in the backseat of a car," he says. Bill is the type of 
father who cares so much for his children, that he would risk anything 
for them, and we really get a sense of the love that he feels for 
Channe, and vice versa. In another touching scene, after Channe has gone 
to a party for New Year's Eve, leaving her family at home, she calls her 
father right after it turns midnight to wish him a happy new year, 
knowing that he very well may not be around the following year.
It is in the individual moments and particular performances that make, 
"A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries," a much better film than it might 
have been if, say, a Hollywood studio had made it. The film deals with 
many serious subjects, but never grows heavy-handed, nor predictable, in 
its telling of the story. It is easy to throw in a lot of sappy 
melodrama into a drama, but it is far more effective to stay true to the 
film and always remain realistic, and that it what this picture does. 
The film is broken into three chapters, which is a nice, but 
unnecessary, touch. The first chapter, "Billy," tells of when Channe and 
Billy are young children; the chapter, entitled "Francis," focuses on 
Channe, now a teen, and her strong friendship with Francis (Anthony Roth 
Costanzo), a boy who remains faithful to Channe, even though he knows 
they will never be more than buddies; and the final chapter, called, 
"Daddy," centers on the family after they return to the United States. 
It is the second two chapters that are the most successul, as the 
opening section is more about the set-up of the characters. "Francis," 
is strenthened a great deal by its gentle relationship between Channe 
and Francis, as well as Costanzos memorable and accurate performance. In 
one particular scene that stands out, Channe gets her period while in 
class, and Francis works her through the problem so that she will get 
out of the class without anyone else knowing what has happened.
The performances in the film are all natural and beautiful to watch. I 
cannot recall Kris Kristofferson having such a humanistic role before, 
and he couldn't have been better. Barbara Hershey, at first, seems to be 
playing one-note until the climax, in which we learn much more about 
her, and she is given some well-written scenes with her two children. 
But as good as all of the performances are, it is Leelee Sobieski ("Deep 
Impact") who is a standout. In her portrayal of Channe, Sobieski is so 
honest and unaffected that, for me, it stopped being a performance and 
became a real character, as if she were in a documentary. It is one of 
the most effortless performances I have seen from a youth, and she 
deserves an Oscar nod for her work here.
"A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries," although occasionally uneven, is one 
of the best films I have seen in a while that has to do with family, and 
gets most of the details right. The things that are dealt with, in 
lesser hands, may have turned into a television "Movie of the Week," but 
director James Ivory obviously knew what he was doing when he made this 
film. It is also evident that Ivory felt a deep connection with the 
material, as if it were somewhat autobiographical. The movie rarely 
feels written. Although, perhaps, there could have been more of a 
driving force behind everything that happens throughout, it in no way 
dampered my feelings for the film. "A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries," 
is a powerful film about families, in general, and the many problems 
they face each day.

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: James Ivory
Writers: James Ivory and Ruth Prawer Jhabvala (based on the novel by
Kaylie Jones)
Starring: Kris Kristofferson, Barbara Hershey, Leelee Sobieski, Jesse
Bradford, Anthony Ruth Costanzo, Dominique Blanc, Jane Birkin, Virginie
Ledoyen, Samuel Gruen, Luisa Conlon, Isaach de Bankolé, Nick Nolte
"A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries" is a beautifull shot and beautifully
memorable film, crafted like it was a series of episodes from one life,
divided into three sections of emotional maturity.  It just so happens
that that's exactly what its source is.  Adapted from the
semi-autobiographical novel by Kaylie Jones, daughter of famous American
war scribe, James Jones (author of "Red Badge of Courage" and "The Thin
Red Line"), this film has been meticulously created to be episodic in
structure, and more like distant remembrances than actual emotional
involvement.  And like all films like this, it not only involves in the
story at hand, but it forces us to remember our own pasts, and what has
shaped us to be the person that we are at the moment.
As a skematic for a person's current life, "A Soldier's Daughter Never
Cries" is never fully complete, and there are moments where we don't
understand the lead's motives until the moment she makes her choices.
As a tragedy, which what it would be in the hands of others, it's
unfulfilling, and little subplots (like the daughter's relationship with
her brother) are never totally together.  And there are more than a
couple notable ends left dangling in the wind.  But that's exactly how
it has been designed to be: just the right amount of judgment on
situations with a twist of emotion.  The events of the film are told in
an almost distant tone, but what transpires from them become exactly
like happy/sad memories.  For instance, the story's plot is supposed to
be about a family who has lived most of their life in France coming back
to America, where the teenage children have to assimilate, but it never
feels like that is the actual point of this story.  It feels more like a
woman at an older, more mature age rereading her diary she kept when a
young girl.
The woman, renamed Channe Willis (played at a young age by Luisa
Conlon), is first seen living in Paris with her parents, author Bill
(Kris Kristoferson) and beautiful wife Marcella (Barbara Hershey), when
they adopt a young child named Benoit (played at a young age by Samuel
Gruen), who was the son of a young french woman (Virginie Ledoyen), too
young to keep him.  Benoit happily renames himself after his new father,
and becomes best friends with Channe.  Once grown up to about the age of
14, the two have drifted apart and Channe (now played by Leelee
Sobieski) befriends an affeminate boy named Francis (Anthony Ruth
Costanzo) at her multi-lingual school, and the two become inseperable,
isolating Billy (Jesse Bradford).  Slowly and methodically, Francis gets
on her nerves, though, distancing himself from her until he finally
confesses his undying love for her in an idiosyncratic and touching
scene.
But throughout, despite who is the closest man or boy in her life, her
father always lingers over her.  Though a notorious drunkard and being
totally and hilarious redneck, Kristoferson brilliantly crafts Bill into
the most wonderfully paternal figure of the year.  He's gruff and
intimidating but he's also bizarrely charming and approachable.  When
his health begins to fail a bit, he decides he wants to move back to
America, and his children react differently to the massive change.
Channe becomes promiscuous, and Billy becomes a loafer, watching TV
constantly, a bag of chips never being far away.
As her father's days near an end due to a mortal illness, they become
even closer: she confesses her promiscuous ways to him, and he takes it
matter-of-factly.  When she becomes serious over a boy, and they get to
the point that they want to sleep together, Bill shocks both of them by
suggesting they sleep in her bed, under the same roof - "If they're
gonna do it, they might as well do it right."
This film is chock full of moments like that, the moments that become
memorable not only to the people who live through them, but to those who
observe silently.  And throughout the film, we get the picture that this
family is completely unique, like all families.  They're close yet still
comfortably distant, and all are respective of eachother, even when they
have fits of selfish rage (on New Years Eve, Marcella lays a massive
head trip on her daughter the likes of which I hope I never have to
endure personally).  This is all told in the reserved, matter-of-fact
manner that Merchant Ivory productions have been acclaimed for.  They
tell their plot points flat out, without a whole lot of production, but
then quietly observe the little emotional attachments that come along
with them.  "The Remains of the Day" would be such a boring flick if it
hadn't been for the way they quietly observed the Anthony Hopkins
character, and brought out his inner demons (that's also thanks to
Hopkins, of course).  Well, they work the same way for the characters in
"A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries."  They observe Channe, and all those
around her, especially her father, a man who borders on flawless legend
and down-to-earth flawed human being.
The acting is simplistic and pretty incredible.  Sobieski, totally
annoying in her past films like "Jungle 2 Jungle" and "Deep Impact," is
totally fascinating to watch here (this gives me hopes for her
supporting turn in the upcoming Kubrick film).  Hershey hasn't been this
good in years.  And Kristoferson gives the performance of his life, at
least as to what I've seen of him (which means, I guess, that this is
his best performance, followed by "Big Top Pee Wee").  As notoriously
redneck as he is, he shows that he's a totally lovable actor, and if
there's some special award for "Best Performance by an Actor Who We All
Thought Had Very Little Talent Previously," hands down it'd go to
Kristoferson.  He and the other actors make this all seem real, and
that's the reason this film is so entertaining to watch.  A film like
this reminds us how little plot matters in certain films - it just
matters how much it affects us with the little things, and the memories
it gives us after the film has been long over.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Mark O'Hara
A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries (1998)
A Film Review by Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
The latest collaboration of James Ivory, Ismail Merchant and Ruth Prawer 
Jhabvala is 'A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries.'  Following the life of 
an American girl and her family living in Paris and later on Long 
Island, the film explores many of the sweet and sour moments of growing 
up.  It also convincingly depicts the bonds that glue together these 
lively Americans, though it reaches an ending that is flat and 
under-realized.
Because of his tough-guy reputation, one wouldn't think the American 
novelist James Jones (1921-77) would be a devoted husband and wise 
father.  If the real Jones resembled Bill Willis in Kaylie Jones' novel 
'A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries,' then indeed he was a breaker of 
stereotypes.  Kris Kristofferson, who plays Bill Willis, paints his 
character with gruff but sweet strokes, and what comes across is a 
family man who will go to any lengths to protect his children and ensure 
their happiness.  Most viewers would agree he is a bit too liberal, 
encouraging his daughter and her current beau to sleep together in her 
bedroom, so at least they will not be doing it in cars.  Kristofferson 
hands in one of the strongest acting jobs in the film, with his 
straight-on approach and easy relationships with others in the cast.
And a strong ensemble it is, too.  Willis and his wife Marcella (Barbara 
Hershey) have a daughter Charlotte "Channe" (Luisa Conlon as a child, 
and as a teen, Leelee Sobieski), a child much adored by her French nanny 
Candida (Dominique Blanc).  James Jones saw action in the Pacific 
theater in World War 2, and was part of a second, post-war wave of 
American expatriates living in Paris.  Daughter Kaylie doubtless writes 
about herself in Channe, a girl much loved by her prosperous parents.  
The girl's world is at least mildly upset by the arrival of a boy from 
an orphanage, Benoit (Samuel Gruen and, later, Jesse Bradford).  Benoit 
soon adopts "Billy" after his new American dad, and we see several 
escapades starring Billy and Channe in which they grow close as brother 
and sister.  In one touching scene, young Channe invites Billy to sleep 
with her, as his bed is wet.  Gratefully he gathers his suitcase, which 
he carries everywhere in anticipation of another displacement, and 
follows his strange blond sister.
Once we know the characters and their situation, a three-part 
storytelling structure begins with the name "Billy" across the screen.  
His character is developed well in this segment, partly through his 
relationship with mother Marcella.  Hershey plays a rabidly protective 
mother who throws sand in the face of a teacher who has been confining 
Billy to the coat closet.  She loves Billy unconditionally and tells him 
frequently, most movingly when he expresses a type of survivor's guilt 
after Marcella has a miscarriage.  But the character to whom he relates 
the most is Channe, who seems to be the post to which the other 
characters are tethered.  Relationships in the story appear to go 
against type - there are a lot a group hugs going on - but the lack of 
dysfunction does not draw doubt from the viewer, and this is quite a 
feat of the depiction of sincerity.
'Francis' is the second name heading: Francis Fortesque, he of the 
brilliant ability and eccentric taste.  Think of child confidantes like 
Dill from 'To Kill a Mockingbird', or the little country boy from 'My 
Father's Glory'.  He's a good foil to Channe, drawing some of the 
negative attention away from her and even from Billy, who are having 
tough times adjusting to their new school.  Anthony Roth Costanzo lets 
himself loose as Francis, a boy nurtured by his mother but misunderstood 
by his peers - except the Willises.  Costanzo's performance is the 
centerpiece of the second narrative segment, though it falls off (along 
with the beloved presence of Candida) when the Willis family returns to 
the States.
'Daddy' is the third segment.  Because of a heart condition, Willis 
wants to be under the care of American doctors, and wishes his children 
to know more of their American roots (instead of becoming "Euro-trash 
brats" like many of their friends' children).  The film falls off a bit 
in its magnetic narration, perhaps because the family now lives in rural 
Long Island instead of a diverse European culture-haven.  But Bill 
Willis' relationship with Channe takes center stage, as he gives life 
lessons and directions for handling matters after his heart does him in.
Leelee Sobieski sports an uncanny resemblance to Helen Hunt as a 
teenager, tall and blond and willowy, eyes often partially shut in her 
insouciant manner.  Sobieski does nicely in portraying the conflicts, 
awkwardness and joy of adolescence.
The last minutes of the film stop the gradual momentum of the entire 
story.  I have not read the autobiographical novel, so I don't know 
about its end.  But director James Ivory seems to be missing an action 
to trigger the resonance he is after.
The film did not see wide distribution in the midwestern United States, 
an indicator that it is a "small" film.  Aside from the flatness of its 
conclusion, 'A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries' features a very likable 
and functional family growing together through the 1960s and '70s.  I 
would bring it home on video and enjoy it, although not with the entire 
family, as its language and sexual references label it with a big 'R'.


Author
Susan Granger

Susan Granger's review of "A SOLDIER'S DAUGHTER NEVER CRIES" (October Films)
Kaylie Jones writes about what she knows. In this fictionalized
autobiography, the daughter of James Jones, who wrote "From Here to
Eternity y" and "The Thin Red Line," details what it was like to grow
up bilingual in the late '60s and '70s in Paris, inhabiting two
disparate cultures yet not totally comfortable in either. Her
expatriate parents were obviously conflicted about America and France,
and they passed that ambivalence on to their children. There's the
adolescent girl (Leelee Sobieski), her novelist father (Kris
Kristofferson), free-spirited mother (Barbara Hershey), and adopted
French brother (Jesse Bradford). Plus her best friend (Anthony Roth
Costanzo), an artistic, sensitive soul who sings opera in a lilting
soprano. Then, when her father's heart disease propels a move to Long
Island, there's a whole new set of emotional conflicts as she
comes-of-age in a sexually liberal, unrepressed home. Curiously, it's
the idiosyn= cratic, anecdotal story, adapted by James Ivory and Ruth
Prawer Jhabvala,not the acting performances, that distinguishes this
Merchant-Ivory film. Kaylie Jones's enduring, unbridled homage to the
memory of her father presents him as a tender, doting, understanding
paragon of loving, paternal qualities. James Jones becomes the father
every girl wishes she had. And cinematographer Jean-Marc Fabre
captures this wistful, nostalgic mood on film. The conclusion,
however, is enigmatic and problematic; given her = disturbed brother's
troubled background, it's just not credible that he would not read his
mother's diary which his sister holds for him. Nevertheless, on the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries" is
a subtle, delicately etched, poignant 7, a devoted "Daddy Dearest" for
the art house crowd.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "A SOLDIER'S DAUGHTER NEVER CRIES" (October Films)
Kaylie Jones writes about what she knows. In this fictionalized
autobiography, the daughter of James Jones, who wrote "From Here to
Eternity" and "The Thin Red Line," details what it was like to grow up
bilingual in the late '60s and '70s in Paris, inhabiting two disparate
cultures yet not totally comfortable in either. Her expatriate parents
were obviously conflicted about America and France, and they passed
that ambivalence on to their children. There's the adolescent girl
(Leelee Sobieski), her novelist father (Kris Kristofferson),
free-spirited mother (Barbara Hershey), and adopted French brother
(Jesse Bradford). Plus her best friend (Anthony Roth Costanzo), an
artistic, sensitive soul who sings opera in a lilting soprano. Then,
when her father's heart disease propels a move to Long Island, there's
a whole new set of emotional conflicts as she comes-of-age in a
sexually liberal, unrepressed home. Curiously, it's the idiosyncratic,
anecdotal story, adapted by James Ivory and Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, not
the acting performances, that distinguishes this Merchant-Ivory
film. Kaylie Jones's enduring, unbridled homage to the memory of her
father presents him as a tender, doting, understanding paragon of
loving, paternal qualities. James Jones becomes the father every girl
wishes she had. And cinematographer Jean-Marc Fabre captures this
wistful, nostalgic mood on film. The conclusion, however, is enigmatic
and problematic; given her disturbed brother's troubled background,
it's just not credible that he would not read his mother's diary which
his sister holds for him. Nevertheless, on the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries" is a subtle, delicately
etched, poignant 7, a devoted "Daddy Dearest" for the art house crowd.

Author
Steve Rhodes
The Merchant Ivory film A SOLDIER'S DAUGHTER NEVER CRIES is a richly
textured series of sketches pasted into an inviting, cinematic picture
book.  Based on Kaylie Jones's novel of an expatriate family living in
Paris in the 1960s and 1970s, the story starts slowly as it introduces
its characters, but it eventually weaves a strong spell on the audience.
Kaylie Jones's inspiration for her book was her father, the writer and
WW II veteran James Jones, who wrote "From Here to Eternity" and "The
Thin Red Line", and their family's life abroad.
As the movie opens, we meet Bill Willis, an American writer living in
Paris with his wife, Marcella, and his 6-year-old daughter Channe.
Bill, played by Kris Kristofferson in his first good role since LONE
STAR, is a loving and lovable father, who acts a bit like an old cowboy.
He voices controversial opinions that sometimes make sense and other
times don't.  ("The French don't celebrate Lincoln's Birthday, though
they damn well should," he, quite illogically, tells his daughter, who
has gotten into trouble.  She forged his name on an excuse to get her
out of gym class because of Lincoln's Birthday.  Spelling gym as "jim"
was her downfall.)
Barbara Hershey, without much of a clue as to how to play Bill's wife,
Marcella, makes her into an alcoholic enigma.  Equally underdeveloped is
the orphan boy they adopt.  Called Benoit at first and later renamed to
Billy, he is played by Samuel Gruen as a child and Jesse Bradford as a
teenager.  Except for these relatively weak characters, the movie is
fully fleshed out.
The central character, Channe, is played by Luisa Conlon as a young girl
and Leelee Sobieski, the bride from DEEP IMPACT, as a teenager.  Both
actresses deliver wonderfully complex and winning performances.  The
movie, which possesses little narrative drive, collects together, for
our enjoyment, an array of incidents from her childhood, especially the
relationship with her father and with the various boys in her life.
When Channe is about seven, an older boy of perhaps nine lures her into
his tree house.  In an interesting change of pace on the
let's-play-doctor routine, he tries to get her to take her clothes off
by arguing that she has to be naked to fully appreciate his pet snails
on her skin.  She wises up to his ploy before fully disrobing.
The realistic portrayal of Channe's life and loves has incidents and
characters just quirky enough to mimic real life without being too
outlandish.  The script by James Ivory and Ruth Prawer Jhabvala has the
good sense to avoid the obvious scenes.  When Bill tells one of Channe's
teenage suitors that he doesn't want him to drive too fast, the lad
agrees with big-smiling sincerity.  Most filmmakers would then cut to
the young couple speeding down the highway.  Instead, the script leads
us into a heart-warming Christmas tree trimming scene.
The most original and intriguing character in the movie is the teenage
Channe's best friend, Francis Fortescue.  Francis, played by real-life
operatic singer Anthony Roth Costanzo in his first acting role, isn't
Channe's boyfriend per se, even if he'd like to be.  His passion is
opera, and his high-pitched voice is phenomenal.  Their relationship
together is filled with "sleepovers" but never sex.  His tenderness in
helping Channe through her first period is especially touching.
Teenagers should all have such a wonderful friend as Francis.
With the father's health deteriorating, he moves his family back "home"
to America, where the kids have never lived.  Having made us feel like
part of the family, we become deeply but subtly moved by this last third
of the picture.  The kids, who are ridiculed as "frogs" by their fellow
American students, feel alienated.  Since they are viewed as weird, they
act the part.  Channe experiments with sleeping around, and Billy
withdraws into endless watching of bad television.
The father continues to take controversial positions.  He shocks his
daughter by asking her in front of her boyfriend if they are sleeping
together.  When she says yes, he tells her he doesn't want them doing it
in some car, especially if it is his, so they should have sex in the
family home instead.
"None of us got no guarantee for tomorrow," her dad advises her toward
the end.  The story, which gets to you in ways that are hard to explain,
reminds us of the fragility of life and of the need to take the time to
be with our loved ones, while they're still with us.  And it teaches us
about the need for friendships, both romantic and platonic.
A SOLDIER'S DAUGHTER NEVER CRIES runs 2:04.  The first part of the film
is partially in French with English subtitles.  It is rated R for a
little profanity and for mature situations and would be fine for
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 A SOLDIER'S DAUGHTER NEVER CRIES
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 October Films
 Director: James Ivory
 Writer: James Ivory & Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, novel by Kaylie
Jones
 Cast: Kris Kristofferson, Barbara Hershey, Jesse Bradford,
Leelee Sobiesky, Anthony Roth Costanzo, Virginie Ledoyen
  Maybe Tolstoy was not completely correct when he said that
all happy families are alike.  Take Kaylie Jones's family, for
example.  Ms. Jones, whose novel is adapted for the screen
by the Merchant-Ivory team (co-scripted by Ruth Prawer
Jhabvala), speaks of her childhood in Paris where she
attended French schools, then returned with her family to the
U.S. at the age of fourteen.  When you understand that her
father, James Jones, wrote "From Here to Eternity" and "The
Thin Red Line," you see just how closely she has described
her own experiences in a fictionalized autobiography,
"A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries."
   The movie portrays her as the daughter of an American
expatriate couple with the one misfortune of being
culturally neither here nor there, and yet inhabiting two worlds,
the French and the American.  Who better to bring to life the
strains of class/cultural prejudices than the Merchant-Ivory
team, whose masterpiece, an adaptation of E.M. Forster's
"Howard's End," illustrates the unwillingness of people of
different value systems to connect?
   "A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries" joins this year's parade
of coming-of-age stories ("Slums of Beverly Hills," "Home
Before Dark," "The Butcher"), this one told through the eyes
of Channe Willis.  Channe, played as a 15-year-old by Leelee
Sobieski and as a child by Luisa Conlon), is loved by her dad,
an expatriate writer by the name of Bill Willis (Kris
Kristofferson) and by her energetic and free-spirited mom,
Marcella (Barbara Hershey).  When the family take in a six-
year-old French orphan named Benoit (played as a child by
Samuel Gruen and as a teen by Jesse Bradford), only a
smidgen of sibling rivalry develops until Benoit and Channe
accept and learn to love each other.  They attend a bilingual
school together, where Benoit has a difficult time fitting in
because of a French prejudice against orphans.  When
Channe herself cannot adjust to school, she is befriended by
Francis Forescue (Anthony Roth Costanzo), who has a
wonderful, soprano, operatic voice and is himself ostracized
because of his sensitive, artistic nature.  After the family move
to New York (Bill, who has a congenital heart disease, wants
to be cared for by American physicians), Channe goes
through the usual rites of puberty.  Shut out in an American
high school like her brother--whom her classmates calls a
"Frog"--she throws herself into sexual affairs in an effort to
gain kindness while her depressed brother takes to moping at
home day and night in front of the TV.
   Though the Merchant-Ivory team favor Europe and India as
locales for their films, this is not the first work situated largely
in the U.S.  Having adapted "The Bostonians," and created
the trilogy of stories of lonely New Yorkers in "Roseland," they
are in their elementj. Here they show the U.S. to be neither
the class-tormented setting that defines European cultures nor
the home of unfettered democracy.  Their films are often
berated by American critics for their Masterpiece theater
ambiance (as critic Howard Thomson puts it, "prestigious, well
furnished, accurate, prettily cast and bland, anonymous, and
stealthily interchangeable").  Thomson feels that Ivory "does
not seem to ask large questions about his characters' options
nor is he inclined to employ robust or dangerous American
actors" (he used Paul Newman in the American movie "Mr.
and Mrs. Bridge").  
   The same reproach could be made for "A Soldier's
Daughter Never Cries"--the 61-year-old Kristofferson is sturdy
but hardly burns up the screen while Barbara Hershey does
not come near her exquisite performance in "The Portrait of a
Lady."  Yet the movie succeeds as a heartfelt portrayal of a
daughter's enduring love for her dad against the background
of France and America during the 60's and 70's, a period
dominated by the Vietnam War (which gets scarcely a
mention in the film).  Kristoffersen's Bill Willis is the sort of
father many a kid wishes he had, though some matronly
women might be horrified by the liberal attitude he holds
toward his daughter's sexuality.  It's no wonder that Channe's
latest boyfriend is surprised and delighted when dad asks his
daughter whether they're sleeping together and, when
Channe gives him an honest answer, is told that they might
as well sleep together under his roof rather than the back of a
car.  Bill Willis comes across every so often with strong
opinions such as one he holds against the Church.  When his
housemaid, the Portuguese-born Candida (Dominique Blanc)
refuses to marry Mamadou (Macha Meril) because at the age
of 40 she's "not ready for marriage," Willis chides the priests
for telling "the peasants" that they should wait for pie in the
sky when they die.  Barbara Hershey's Marcella shows her
intrepid side in throwing sand in the face of her young son's
French teacher, who customarily locks Benoit into the closet
for punishment.
   Leelee Sobieski turns in a remarkable performance as the
adolescent Channe, a classic presentation of a daughter's
unbridled affection for her father--as shown most poignantly
by her wish to be with him and not at a major party on New
Year's Eve when she hears that he may die within a year. 
Anthony Roth Costanzo is also noteworthy as a boldly artistic
isolate, that rare teenager who is absolutely gaga over opera
and is predictably shunned by his French contemporaries for
his sensitivity.
   Photographer Jean-Marc Fabre throws in a few sharply
etched scenes of Paris but does best in his filming the beauty
of New York's upscale Long Island communities.  More casual
than "The Bostonians," more restrained than "The Wild Party"
and even more poignant than "Roseland," the trilogy "A
Soldier's Daughter Never Cries" effectively portrays family
members split between two national cultures whose love for
one another transcends both their daily dilemmas and their
ultimate anguish.

Author
Steve Rhodes
The Merchant Ivory film A SOLDIER'S DAUGHTER NEVER CRIES is a richly
textured series of sketches pasted into an inviting, cinematic picture
book.  Based on Kaylie Jones's novel of an expatriate family living in
Paris in the 1960s and 1970s, the story starts slowly as it introduces
its characters, but it eventually weaves a strong spell on the audience.
Kaylie Jones's inspiration for her book was her father, the writer and
WW II veteran James Jones, who wrote "From Here to Eternity" and "The
Thin Red Line", and their family's life abroad.
As the movie opens, we meet Bill Willis, an American writer living in
Paris with his wife, Marcella, and his 6-year-old daughter Channe.
Bill, played by Kris Kristofferson in his first good role since LONE
STAR, is a loving and lovable father, who acts a bit like an old cowboy.
He voices controversial opinions that sometimes make sense and other
times don't.  ("The French don't celebrate Lincoln's Birthday, though
they damn well should," he, quite illogically, tells his daughter, who
has gotten into trouble.  She forged his name on an excuse to get her
out of gym class because of Lincoln's Birthday.  Spelling gym as "jim"
was her downfall.)
Barbara Hershey, without much of a clue as to how to play Bill's wife,
Marcella, makes her into an alcoholic enigma.  Equally underdeveloped is
the orphan boy they adopt.  Called Benoit at first and later renamed to
Billy, he is played by Samuel Gruen as a child and Jesse Bradford as a
teenager.  Except for these relatively weak characters, the movie is
fully fleshed out.
The central character, Channe, is played by Luisa Conlon as a young girl
and Leelee Sobieski, the bride from DEEP IMPACT, as a teenager.  Both
actresses deliver wonderfully complex and winning performances.  The
movie, which possesses little narrative drive, collects together, for
our enjoyment, an array of incidents from her childhood, especially the
relationship with her father and with the various boys in her life.
When Channe is about seven, an older boy of perhaps nine lures her into
his tree house.  In an interesting change of pace on the
let's-play-doctor routine, he tries to get her to take her clothes off
by arguing that she has to be naked to fully appreciate his pet snails
on her skin.  She wises up to his ploy before fully disrobing.
The realistic portrayal of Channe's life and loves has incidents and
characters just quirky enough to mimic real life without being too
outlandish.  The script by James Ivory and Ruth Prawer Jhabvala has the
good sense to avoid the obvious scenes.  When Bill tells one of Channe's
teenage suitors that he doesn't want him to drive too fast, the lad
agrees with big-smiling sincerity.  Most filmmakers would then cut to
the young couple speeding down the highway.  Instead, the script leads
us into a heart-warming Christmas tree trimming scene.
The most original and intriguing character in the movie is the teenage
Channe's best friend, Francis Fortescue.  Francis, played by real-life
operatic singer Anthony Roth Costanzo in his first acting role, isn't
Channe's boyfriend per se, even if he'd like to be.  His passion is
opera, and his high-pitched voice is phenomenal.  Their relationship
together is filled with "sleepovers" but never sex.  His tenderness in
helping Channe through her first period is especially touching.
Teenagers should all have such a wonderful friend as Francis.
With the father's health deteriorating, he moves his family back "home"
to America, where the kids have never lived.  Having made us feel like
part of the family, we become deeply but subtly moved by this last third
of the picture.  The kids, who are ridiculed as "frogs" by their fellow
American students, feel alienated.  Since they are viewed as weird, they
act the part.  Channe experiments with sleeping around, and Billy
withdraws into endless watching of bad television.
The father continues to take controversial positions.  He shocks his
daughter by asking her in front of her boyfriend if they are sleeping
together.  When she says yes, he tells her he doesn't want them doing it
in some car, especially if it is his, so they should have sex in the
family home instead.
"None of us got no guarantee for tomorrow," her dad advises her toward
the end.  The story, which gets to you in ways that are hard to explain,
reminds us of the fragility of life and of the need to take the time to
be with our loved ones, while they're still with us.  And it teaches us
about the need for friendships, both romantic and platonic.
A SOLDIER'S DAUGHTER NEVER CRIES runs 2:04.  The first part of the film
is partially in French with English subtitles.  It is rated R for a
little profanity and for mature situations and would be fine for
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
