Title
Review for Butcher Boy, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Murali Krishnan
The Cuban Missile Crisis is a looming threat, and so is Francie Brady. We
see from the opening scene that Francie has done something bad, and the rest
of the story is told in flashback. Francie's childhood, a mentally unstable
mother and a drunk, often abusive father, is a recipe for disaster and there
is no mystery about how he will turn out. His irrepressible personality is
endearing as a small boy, but becomes menacing as he ages. As a boy, his
wild imagination is normal. What child does not pretend to be a larger than
life comic book hero fighting against the evil forces of a dastardly
villain? Francie's problems begin when the heroes and villains of the
imagination intermingle with the people in his real life, particularly as he
perceives loyalty and betrayal in his friends.
This film has many similarities with the 1995 release "The Young Poisoner's
Handbook" (which was a better film overall). As in that story, this film is
an exploration of the mind of a troubled young person, and the development
of a mentally disturbed criminal. There is no mystery in where Francie will
end up, so the interesting theme of the narrative is how he gets there.
Although the we know the symbolically present Cuban Missile Crisis will be
resolved favorably, we also know that Francie's story has more grim results.
The weakness of the film is the directionlessness in the first half. I
missed large parts of the dialog due to the strong Irish accents (this is
more of a shortcoming of my own rather than the film's) and as result I
could not tell if the parts of the story that I could not follow were my
fault or the film's. The second half of the film is stronger and is more
understandable since it closes the narative and remains focused.
The young newcomer Eamonn Owens has the bulk of the screen time and gives an
outstanding performance as Francie, and is able to give remarkable depth to
the character. Although Francie is often a bit of a bully, he is still a
charming boy with an irrepressible spirit. As time progresses we see fantasy
imaginations of childhood turn into the symptoms of psychosis, perhaps
schizophrenia.
Moderately Recommended. It can be difficult to follow because of the heavy
Irish accents and vernacular, coupled with some of the surreal aspects of
the presentation.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE BUTCHER BOY
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Stephen Rea, Eamonn Owens, Fiona Shaw, Alan Boyle, Aisling
O'Sullivan.
Screenplay:  Neil Jordan and Patrick McCabe, based on the novel by McCabe.
Producers:  Redmond Morris and Stephen Woolley.
Director:  Neil Jordan.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  108 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Everything I needed to know about the themes of THE BUTCHER BOY, it
turns out, I learned from the opening titles sequence.  The film's credits
are superimposed over comic book panels featuring scenes of angry faces
and destruction, the last of which fades into the story of a troubled
Irish teenager named Francie Brady (newcomer Eamonn Owens) circa 1961 -
1962.  It soon becomes clear that Francie is nobody's idea of a perfect
little boy, stealing apples and terrorizing more timid boys as his whim
moves him.  It also becomes clear that he comes from a dysfunctional home,
his emotionally unstable mother (Aisling O'Sullivan) spending almost as
much time in institutions as his drunken father (Stephen Rea) spends in
pubs.
     But it's not just family strife which eventually turns Francie into a
monster.  Every possible external influence sends Francie retreating into
a fantasy world of fear, paranoia and violence, particularly the
pernicious influence of the media.  Radio broadcasts of Cold War rhetoric
from President Kennedy create a general feeling that nuclear war is
imminent; television programs depict The Lone Ranger firing his gun and
The Fugitive seeking the elusive one-armed man; the era's popular mutant
horror movies fill theater screens; and, of course, the comic books
splashed over the opening credits feed boys still more violent images.
Even a priest at a Catholic reform school (Milo O'Shea) is a potential
threat as a fetishist and pedophile.  Is it any wonder Francie comes to
fixate on a single woman (Fiona Shaw) as the cause of all his troubles?
It is an era of scape-goating and fear-mongering, with poor young Francie
simply a product of his environment.
     There is a perverse fascination to watching Francie grow
progressively more demented, but eventually it becomes clear that there's
not much more to THE BUTCHER BOY than that.  It's tough to work up much
sympathy for Francie when he's treated by co-writer and director Neil
Jordan like a lab rat in a grand sociological experiment -- how much hate
and violence can one boy absorb until he snaps?  It can't help that the
lead character is an unstable boy played by an inexperienced young actor.
Though Owens has a few very effective moments, including worrying over the
lost affections of his one and only friend (Alan Boyle), he spends most of
the film mugging, yelling and gesticulating wildly.  For a story on a
serious subject, it's not always easy to take THE BUTCHER BOY seriously.
     Then again, it's pretty clear that Jordan isn't interested in having
us take it seriously.  THE BUTCHER BOY is a truly odd black-humored
concoction which treats Francie's many traumas with more whimsy than
consternation.  Virtually every moment is given a comic spin of some sort:
the simple comment of a townswoman that "it'll be a bitter day for this
town if the world comes to an end;" Frankie's conversations with a
decidedly earthy Virgin Mary (Sinead O'Connor); even electro-shock
treatments in "The Garage" (Francie's term for mental hospital, because
that's where you go when you break down).  Jordan's approach is
consistently surprising, taking even a tired device like omnipresent
voice-over narration (also provided by Rea as the adult Francie) and
turning it into a bizarre duet between past and present.  With Elliot
Goldenthal providing a jaunty underscore to everything from youthful play
to the discovery of a murder scene, THE BUTCHER BOY remains strangely
amusing enough to keep you watching.
     That, unfortunately, is about as far as Jordan goes.  As a comedy,
it's a fairly original collection of sick chuckles.  As a drama, it offers
pat answers and too little insight, putting us through episodic paces
without offering more to learn about its main character than we learned
from the first 90 seconds or so:  keep your boys away from television and
comic books unless you want them going crazy on you.

Author
Frankie Paiva
What happens when you get angry? Many people suppress their anger, and hold 
all of their feelings inside until everything eventually comes bursting out. 
Others let their wrath run wild, not really caring what damage is done as 
long as they feel better. Me, Myself & Irene, starring Jim Carrey, recently 
examined this idea. However, that was a comedy. The Butcher Boy is a drama. 
Little Francie Brady (Eamonn Owens) is an uncontrollable brat. His father 
(Stephen Rea) is a drunk who has a less than friendly relationship with his 
mother (Aisling Oâ^Ŕ^ŮSullivan). The two are always fighting in front of their 
child and the mother tries to hang herself within the first ten minutes of 
the movie. Francieâ^Ŕ^Ůs only friend is Joe (Alan Boyle). Joe treats Francie 
well, and fulfills his needs for companionship. Through a series of events 
(mostly involving another child named Phillip that Francie picks on) Joe 
begins to realize Francie is a rude and cruel person. He tries to distance 
himself from Francie as much as he can, and starts hanging out with Phillip. 
Wanting Joe as his own, Francie seeks revenge. He does horrible things to 
Phillip and his home. In his attempt to win Joeâ^Ŕ^Ůs friendship, Francie will go 
to extreme measures. How extreme he gets may shock you.
The reason this film requires such a long plot summary is because this is a 
very complicated movie. The film looks at anger and how itâ^Ŕ^Ůs handled by 
several people with insight. Ultimately, it reaches the idea that most anger 
stems out of confusion. Confusion plagues Francie Brady. The movie seems like 
it's told in first person, but is really told in third.  Some imaginative 
dream sequences only add to the puzzlement. In one scene, Francie and Joe are 
the last remaining humans after an apocalypse. In a strange attempt to link 
Communism and the events of the Cuban Missile Crisis with confusion, everyone 
in town turns into a pig. The remaining creatures all turn into aliens that 
look like something from an Ed Wood movie. Even stranger is the Virgin Mary. 
She appears to Francie and offers him advice. She also frequently uses the 
f-word. 
Director Neil Jordan did an exhaustive search of the world for someone to 
play Francie, and he found the perfect person. Eamonn Owens is brilliant in 
his first role. He never seems to worry whether youâ^Ŕ^Ůll like his character or 
not, and he meets everything with an extensive set of emotions and often 
understanding. Alan Boyle is good too. They both capture the sense of freedom 
and change many people experience in their youth. Their performances help a 
movie where the adult acting is lackluster.
When Francie commits his disturbing final act, I could feel what was going 
through his mind. The Butcher Boy is a dark drama that brings its viewer 
deeper into childhood insanity than many will ever want to be. 

Author
Ben Hoffman
Born and raised with two strikes against him, Francie Brady (Eamonn
Owens), with a drunk for a father, Benny (Stephen Rea), and a
mother, (Aisling O'Sullivan) slowly going mad because of that and
their abject poverty, the one thing Francie needs but is denied him
is understanding and love. The consequences of being shunned are
horrendous.
 Based on the novel by Patrick McCabe and beautifully directed by Neil
 Jordan whom we all remember from The Crying Game, the film is taut,
 tense with our knowledge that there can be no happy ending for young
 Francie.
 Francie's only friend is Joe (Alan Boyle) who together enjoy a world of
 comic books and imaginative play.   Later, even Joe opts for friends who
 are more stable, leaving Francie further alone and devastated.  One of his
 biggest enemies is the gossip, Mrs.  Nugent (Fiona Shaw) who takes a
 great dislike to Francie, blaming him for all the troubles he experiences.
 When Francie returns from reform school, he finds employment in a
 slaughterhouse, (hence, the film's title) hardly the right place
for a pre-teen, especially one with Francie's problems and
disposition.   Perhaps the last place where he should be working  is
where animals are hacked up and blood is all over the place.
 Both his parents die.  Despite his having had nothing to do with
either, having received nothing from them, he is further alienated.
He latches onto an imaginary Virgin Mary icon (Sinead O'Connor) who
"talks" with him.   However, eventually all of these hardship descend
upon the child and he explodes in a rage of violence.
 Despite the seriousness of the subject, there are, surprisingly,
moments of laughter.  As Shakespeare well knew, you don't  keep
everyone on edge without relieving the tension every now and then.
 I have one caveat: the movie should have subtitles.   I've said it
before of other films made in Great Britain.  In particular, this
film is laid in a small out of the way village and the accents are
rough on the ears.  Despite being able  easily to follow the story
without understanding every spoken word, I felt I was missing
something by not hearing everything uttered.  When are those in
charge going to realize that some English-speaking films do require
subtitles?

Author
Richard Scheib
Ireland/USA. 1997. Director - Neil Jordan, Screenplay - Jordan & Patrick 
McCabe, Based on the Novel by McCabe, Producers - Redmond Morris & 
Stephen Woolley, Photography - Adrian Biddle, Music - Elliot Goldenthal, 
Visual Effects - Peerless Camera Co (Supervisor - Kent Houston), Special 
Effects - Joss Williams, Prosthetics - Animated Extras, Production 
Design - Anthony Pratt. Production Company - Butcher Boy Films/Geffen 
Pictures.
Eamonn Owens (Francie Brady), Alan Boyle (Joe Purcell), Stephen Rea 
(Benny Brady/Adult Francie), Fiona Shaw (Mrs Nugent), Brendan Gleeson 
(Father Bubbles), Milo O'Shea (Father Sullivan), Aisling O'Sullivan 
(Annie Brady), Andrew Fullerton (Philip Nugent), Sinead O'Connor (Our 
Lady)
Plot: Growing up in Ireland in the early 1960s, young Francie Brady 
becomes increasingly troubled and unstable after his mother commits 
suicide and he is left to be raised by his alcoholic father. Thrown into 
a Catholic boarding school, he has visions of the Virgin Mary appearing 
to him. He sees as the focus of his trouble, the self-important town 
socialite Mrs Nugent who lures his best friend Joe away and turns him 
against Francie, the alienation of which causes Francie to erupt into 
violence.
With `The Butcher Boy' Neil Jordan, the highly acclaimed director of the 
likes of `The Crying Game', `Mona Lisa' and `Michael Collins', dives 
into tackling Patrick McCabe's celebrated novel about disturbed youth. 
Jordan and McCabe tackle some difficult themes - the film is a 
unsettling portrait of a child in an abusive home who becomes 
increasingly alienated, socially ostracized and eventually locked in an 
asylum, before the film climaxes in a frightening explosion of violence. 
But despite the gravity of its thematic matter, `The Butcher Boy' rather 
contrarily manages to be a remarkably cheerful film. Jordan directs with 
an enormous degree of vibrance and colour and is abetted to a tremendous 
extent by a wonderfully charismatic and aggressive performance from 
Eamonn Owens in the central role.
Indeed it is possibly the most cheerful film ever made about abusive 
childhoods, alienation, sexual abuse, madness and murder. Just consider 
the point-of-view it holds which is entirely sympathetically balanced 
toward the boy, seeking to explain the mechanisms that make the 
climactic murder a logical act. If this had been a film made in America 
one cannot help but think it would have been entirely balanced toward 
the opposite extreme. The conservative social values the character takes 
issue with would be unquestioningly accepted as a norm and there would 
have been a wholly unsympathetic and condemnatory attitude toward the 
boy's actions. The scene, which is presented here with considerable 
glee, wherein Owens defecates on the carpet of the self-important Mrs 
Nugent would have been painted in disgusted tones of the highest moral 
outrage. And the climactic murder would surely be seen in tones of 
stunned shock, asking how such could possibly happen. Indeed an American 
version would surely have emerged as something akin to `The Good Son' or 
the innately evil child seen at the start of `Halloween'. Instead Jordan 
manages the difficult job of conducting the entire film sympathetically 
- few audiences realize just to what a sociopathic extreme Jordan does 
end up taking them by making them laugh along with and enjoy the film. 
The whole film seems fired up by the sheer perversity of going well 
beyond acceptable social norms. With considerably iconoclastic delight 
Jordan casts singer Sinead O'Connor, notorious for ripping up pictures 
of the Pope on tv, as the Virgin Mary - and predictably O'Connor's 
second appearance as the Virgin is accompanied by the query "So what the 
fuck's going on here ?"
It's not Jordan best film but is an immensely enjoyable one 
nevertheless. And it should be celebrated for the simple fact of being 
about the first film in the new renaissance of Irish cinema over the 
last couple of years to not be centered around sectarian violence.
Reviewed at the 1998 Wellington International Film Festival
Copyright Richard Scheib 1998


Author
Fox Davidson
  Neil Jordan's The Butcher Boy is set in the early 1960s, Ireland.  It tells
the sad tale of a repressed young lad whose childhood was anything but sane. 
The lad is Francie Brady (played excellently by Eamonn Owens), and part of his
sanity that goes down with him throughout the film must be given in large
thanks to his alcoholic father, Da (the always electric, and Jordan regular,
Stephen Rea).
  The movie starts out with Francie narrating the movie.  In the a small town
in western Ireland, all of the world is feeling the affects of nuclear war, the
Cuban missle crisis, and the scary thought that soon all of live will parish. 
But, these things don't stop Francie from becoming what he becomes.  
  His father bashes the television set with his prised trumphet, his mother is
on the verge of suicide, and, eventually ends up in a mental hospital when she
has a "breakdown."  All this is soaked into Francie and he plays them out
double.  No wonder Mrs. Nugent (Fiona Shaw), his archenemy and mother of a
young boy he detests, dislikes the lad so much.  When her two brothers scare
Francie to leave their nephew alone, Francie doesn't take to kind of it and
breaks into the Nugent home and completely fouls it.
  Eventually, Francie is sent to a bording school for boys, where he is
befriended by the Virgin Mary (Sinaed O'Conner).  Is he one of the three
children picked by God as told to him by one of the priests (Milo O'Shea) who
work at the school?  The same priest who enjoys dressing Francie in girl's
clothes and masturbating during his private sessions with the lad.
  Francie is sent home after some time at the school, and gets a job at a
butcher shop, where they slaughter pigs.  Soon, at the climax, when all these
events cluster inside Francie, a hidious murder is commiteed.  
  Butcher Boy is a masterpiece of filmmaking, and Neil Jordan's finest moment. 
I can't think of another movie that was so dark, depressing, sad, yet funny all
at the same time.  Yes, this black comedy is sometimes hilarious.  13-year-old
Owens gives a wonderful performance as Francie, which got him a mention at the
Berlin Film Festival, and, won Jordan a best director Silver Bear award.
  I cared for a lot of the characters in Butcher Boy, even the mean Francie.  I
liked the way Mrs. Nugent refered to him as a pig, and, when Francie comes to
do the evil deed at the end, uses tools involved with pig slaughtering.  And I
liked the dream Francie had about a nuclear bomb destroying his town, with only
him and his best friend, Joe (Alan Boyle ) alive to see the aftermath.
  Butcher Boy has been refered to Stanley Kubrick's nasty A Clockwork Orange, a
film I could never get.  Jordon's film is notheing of the type.  Aside from its
grisliness, it has meaning and depth, and one hell of a cast.

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 25 May 1998 with Lothlorien and Scooter for $8.50 at the Village
East Cinema.
Director Neil Jordan brings us an unrelenting view of a disturbed young
Irish lad. Really, truly unrelenting. Perhaps it's a metaphor. That must
be what it was. Yes. A depressing, long, unrelenting metaphor that made me
very happy to be brought up in a leafy suburb.
Francie Brady is the product of a poor, fractious couple. He's a
wifebeating drunk (Stephen Rea) and she's having a series of nervous
breakdowns (Annie Brady). But they are Da and Ma and Francie loves them;
they are all he's got, really, and he desperately wants a "normal family
life."
Francie lives in his own little world; a chubby lad with ruddy cheeks.
Boisterous with bravado and quivering with fear; he's a little toughie who
just wants to be loved and understood. Eamonn Owens really does a
remarkable job for his first movie. 
But Francie has a long way to go in the being loved and understood
department. He has decided that Mrs. Nugent (Fiona Shaw)--the mother of a
boy he torments--is the root of all his problems, ever since she came back
from England and brought airs with her. 
Francie lives in what must be the world's stupidest town, though. Knowing
his family problems, and knowing he is disturbed and has been to a boys'
reformatory and even the mental hospital (he calls it the garage because
they fix you there), they still let him run around town and he's even
allowed to work in the slaughterhouse! Hello! He's deranged. Give good
old Francie the biggest cleaver you've got! Every adult in this film is
ineffectual--and that's the point, I guess. Still, it's pretty odd.
Along the way, we see Francie chase flies from his poor Old Da's corpse in
the living room, and talk to the Virgin Mary (ironically played by Sinead O'Connor), and almost get buggered but a randy old priest (Milo O'Shea), whom he attacks.  Guess what? It 
gets worse...
The backdrop to this story, set in 1962, is the Cuban missile crisis. Even
in this tiny Irish town, there is a lot of worry of a nuclear winter. 
Personally, I didn't find this device effective. Not like the *Ice Storm*
using the Watergate hearings as a backdrop, for example. Francie's
negligent supervisors are more to blame than the Russians and the
Americans. The device of devout Catholicism contrasted to a complete lack
of adult supervision and a hatred of children ought to have more play than
it did
Also very effective in his child role is Alan Boyle as Francie's best pal
Joe, possibly the only person he hold dear beyond his parents.
Normally, I think I would have liked this movie, but Francie's madness and
the negligence of the adults was just too unrelenting. There are also
moments of joy and humor, which are a bit jarring against the horrors of
his life. Perhaps keeping it completely bleak would have made *The
Butcher Boy* more like *Fresh* or *Los Olvidados*, where loss is complete
and desperate. Bringing magic realism into realism is an unnecessary
addition. 
Still, it's better than *Interview with the Vampire*, which Jordan also
directed. From the novel by Pat McCabe (as Patrick McCabe) and screenplay
by Neil Jordan. Cinematography by Adrian Biddle; costume Design by Sandy
Powell (II).

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   A popular myth about those who kill in the heat of passion
is that they are quiet, friendless people who suddenly
explode, letting out repressions that have built up for years. 
Yet another fiction is that murderers are products of
anonymous, urban environments, misfits who are shunted
about amid the cacophony of voices, eternally lonely in the
bowels of the urban zoo.   In "The Butcher Boy," Neil Jordan,
best known for his direction of "Michael Collins," explodes
these illusions, at least in his treatment of one particularly
young, creatively intelligent, and highly sociable fellow.  With
a marvelous performance by 15-year-old Eamonn Owens in
the role of Francie, a life-of-the-party sort whose overly
cheerful and gregarious nature might make some psychiatrists
wonder what devils are lurking within, "The Butcher Boy"
explores the nature  of the killer instinct in a film co-written by
Patrick McCabe (and based on his novel), one which for quite
a while hardly seems as though it belongs to the genre of
horror.  Jordan mixes the waggery with the macabre so
successfully that the morbid and the whimsical seem to blend
together as a single species, until he takes his audience down
a grisly road with an act of murder that shocks us even as we
can predict its inevitability.
   The story, which appears autobiographical in that director
Jordan came of age during the era of the 1960s in which the
picture takes place, centers on Francie Brady (Eamonn
Owens), who is so outgoing and cheerful that one would not
suspect a malevolent family backdrop.  Situated in the small
Irish town of Cavan, "The Butcher Boy" follows the escapades
of the young man as narrated by Francie several years later,
a series of large and small episodes which are given equal
weight regardless of their dramatic poundage.  Nonjudgmental
to a fault, Jordan details Francie's tragic moments and
chipper experiences as though he wants to keep his audience
off guard and bemused, curious about where he is taking us
and what sort of payoff he has in mind.  The first clue we
have that all is not right under the Owens's roof is Francie's
discovery of a chair which his mother (Aisling O'Sullivan) has
positioned on a table.  His mom, her tears betraying a
profound depression and in the throes of a nervous collapse,,
begs her son not to allow her to die. This attempted suicide
lands her in the hospital.  His da (Stephen Rea) is not there
when Francie needs him most, a sickly man who is on the
sauce and thinks nothing of lashing the boy with his strap
without much provocation and kicking in the glass of a TV set
which is about dysfunctional as he.
   Though Francie's principal solace lies in his adventures with
his best friend Joe (Alan Boyle), his vitality and well-being are
continually undermined by the malicious gossip of the
neighbors, particularly the disapproving observations and
reflections of the snobbish Mrs. Nugent (Fiona Shaw), whose
bookish son is the object of Francie's contempt.  Entirely
committed to defending the honor his family, Francie
collapses emotionally when he is betrayed by his pal Joe,
who turns into an obedient mamma's boy when confronted
with the pressure of disapproving adults.
   The title comes from Francie's occupation as a cleaner in a
slaughterhouse for pigs, the butchery serving as metaphor for
the horrors which Jordan has in store for us as he piled on
the tensions and urgencies of his young protagonist.  
   Using Adrian Biddle's camera to capture both the lush
splendor of the emerald isle and the claustrophobic confines
of the rural village, Jordan makes insistent use of surrealist
imagery to portray the fantasy life to which Francie
increasingly turns.  Shots of the atomic bomb's mushroom
clouds mirror the young man's explosive energies while visits
from the Blessed Virgin (Sinead O'Connor) provide at least
temporary reassurance to his troubled soul.  The Ireland of
the 1960s is not the jolly land of leprechauns and blarney
stones but an island nation filled with pathologies from both
families and institutions.  As Francie begins to lose it, he is
shunted to various establishments, in one case receiving
brutal shock treatments for trashing the home of his worst
enemy, in another suffering the physical abuse of the priest in
charge of a reform school.  
  As a coming-of-age drama, "The Butcher Boy" will inevitably
be compared to classics like "Amarcord" (Fellini's poignant
and funny nostalgic trip to Italy of his youth in the 1930s) and
"The 400 Blows" (Truffaut's captivating study of Parisian youth
who turn to a life of small-time crime in reaction to derelict
parents).  Jordan adds the hypocrisies and fancies of the
people of Ireland to the joyful and trenchant qualities
embraced by the citizens of France and Italy, and in doing so
enriches the cinema's vocabulary with his stellar cast
portraying his country's diverse and all-too-human population.
Not Rated.  Running Time: 106 minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey
Karten

Author
Ben Hoffman
Born and raised with two strikes against him, Francie Brady (Eamonn
Owens), with a drunk for a father, Benny (Stephen Rea), and a
mother, (Aisling O'Sullivan) slowly going mad because of that and
their abject poverty, the one thing Francie needs but is denied him
is understanding and love. The consequences of being shunned are
horrendous.
 Based on the novel by Patrick McCabe and beautifully directed by Neil
 Jordan whom we all remember from The Crying Game, the film is taut,
 tense with our knowledge that there can be no happy ending for young
 Francie.
 Francie's only friend is Joe (Alan Boyle) who together enjoy a world of
 comic books and imaginative play.   Later, even Joe opts for friends who
 are more stable, leaving Francie further alone and devastated.  One of his
 biggest enemies is the gossip, Mrs.  Nugent (Fiona Shaw) who takes a
 great dislike to Francie, blaming him for all the troubles he experiences.
 When Francie returns from reform school, he finds employment in a
 slaughterhouse, (hence, the film's title) hardly the right place
for a pre-teen, especially one with Francie's problems and
disposition.   Perhaps the last place where he should be working  is
where animals are hacked up and blood is all over the place.
 Both his parents die.  Despite his having had nothing to do with
either, having received nothing from them, he is further alienated.
He latches onto an imaginary Virgin Mary icon (Sinead O'Connor) who
"talks" with him.   However, eventually all of these hardship descend
upon the child and he explodes in a rage of violence.
 Despite the seriousness of the subject, there are, surprisingly,
moments of laughter.  As Shakespeare well knew, you don't  keep
everyone on edge without relieving the tension every now and then.
 I have one caveat: the movie should have subtitles.   I've said it
before of other films made in Great Britain.  In particular, this
film is laid in a small out of the way village and the accents are
rough on the ears.  Despite being able  easily to follow the story
without understanding every spoken word, I felt I was missing
something by not hearing everything uttered.  When are those in
charge going to realize that some English-speaking films do require
subtitles?

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Eamonn Owens, Stephen Rea, Fiona Shaw, Alan Boyle, 
      Aisling O'Sullivan, Andrew Fullerton, Sinead O'Connor
Director: Neil Jordan 
Producers: Stephen Woolley, Redmond Morris 
Screenplay: Patrick McCabe and Neil Jordan based on the novel by 
      Patrick McCabe
Cinematography: Adrian Biddle 
Music: Elliot Goldenthal 
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Over the past few weeks, I have heard THE BUTCHER BOY compared to 
everything from A CLOCKWORK ORANGE to THE 400 BLOWS.  And, while I 
suppose there are some superficial similarities, those who are making 
such comparisons appear to be giving far too much credit to this film.  
THE BUTCHER BOY works best as a dark comedy and social satire, and is 
somewhat less successful as a character study of a deeply-troubled young 
boy whose violent impulses are fed by his unstable environment.
     After a pair of big-budget motion pictures (INTERVIEW WITH THE 
VAMPIRE, MICHAEL COLLINS), Irish director Neil Jordan has returned to 
the kind of smaller movies that earned him a reputation (MONA LISA, THE 
CRYING GAME).  And, while THE BUTCHER BOY, an adaptation of Patrick 
McCabe's novel, is far from Jordan's best work, it is a consistently 
engrossing and sporadically comic look at a seemingly-normal boy who 
turns into the biggest nightmare of a small Irish town.
     THE BUTCHER BOY takes place during the early 1960s, when the fear 
of atomic obliteration was on everyone's mind, even the denizens of out-
of-the-way villages like the one pictured here.  12-year old Francie 
Brady (Eamonn Owens) is the local bully.  He and his best friend, Joe 
(Alan Boyle), delight in tormenting other kids, especially the shy 
Philip (Andrew Fullerton), whose mother, Mrs. Nugent (Fiona Shaw), is 
Francie's personal nemesis.  According to him, everything that's bad in 
the world can be traced back to her.  Meanwhile, Francie's home life is 
less-than-ideal.  His mother (Aisling O'Sullivan) is on the verge of a 
breakdown and about to be sent off to "the garage" to be fixed up, and 
his father (Stephen Rea), "the best drinker in the town," is frequently 
drunk and abusive.
     At first, we view Francie as a fairly typical product of a 
dysfunctional home, but it soon becomes apparent that his problems run 
much deeper.  This isn't the story of a prankster who finds redemption 
in a Dickensian fashion -- it's a darker, more ominous tale about a boy 
whose hostile surroundings feed his inner anger and paranoia and turn 
him into an amoral monster.  Most coming-of-age films are about kids 
triumphing by overcoming adversity.  THE BUTCHER BOY shows what happens 
when a child fights back not by bettering himself, but by lashing out at 
others.  
     Jordan presents THE BUTCHER BOY as more of a black comedy than a 
tragedy.  Francie's internal monologues (the film is infected with the 
dreaded voiceover narrative) are sometimes corrosively funny, especially 
his descriptions of certain characters.  He shows contempt for just 
about everyone except his best friend, Joe, and, at times, his mother 
and father.  By playing up the most absurd aspect of almost every 
situation, Jordan manages to find the humor in even the most horrific 
sequences.  In some ways, I was reminded of the recent film INTIMATE 
RELATIONS, which possessed a similar, bizarre tone.
     Without a doubt, Jordan has a good sense of time and place, and 
uses it to the film's advantage.  This is a world where people go about 
their daily work under the constant threat of nuclear annihilation (the 
Cuban missile crisis occurs during the course of the film).  "The 
Fugitive" is on television, although the only one in the town to own a 
working set is Mrs. Nugent.  The accepted treatment for psychiatric 
patients is shock therapy.  And the influence of Catholicism is all-
pervasive.
     Jordan's occasional use of preposterous images and magic realism 
(including Sinead O'Connor as the Virgin Mary, invading space aliens, 
and an exploding A-bomb) are designed to draw us into Francie's world (a 
place that's created as a defense mechanism against the cruelties of 
Francie's environment, and is more than a few steps removed from the 
norm).  In reality, however, they accomplish the opposite by erecting an 
artificial barrier between the audience and the character.  There's no 
debating that Francie is a fascinating individual, or that newcomer 
Eamonn Owens gives an amazing performance, but this boy doesn't burrow 
under our skin in the same way that the two girls from HEAVENLY 
CREATURES (a not entirely dissimilar film) do.  We see Francie's 
explosive rage clinically, from a distance.  We do not experience or 
participate in it, and that keeps THE BUTCHER BOY from being a truly 
memorable motion picture.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Neil Jordan
Writers: Neil Jordan and Patrick McCabe (based on the novel by McCabe)
Starring: Eamonn Owens, Stephen Rea, Fiona Shaw, Alan Boyle, Aisling
O'Sullivan, Andrew Fullerton, Sinéad O'Connor, Patrick McCabe, Ian Hart,
Ardal O'Hanlon, Milo O'Shea
Neil Jordan's "The Butcher Boy" is the tale of a young lad from a small
town in Ireland during the early 60s who has a very traumatic childhood
where every single thing that probably could go wrong goes wrong, and he
begins to take it out on society.  For Jordan, it's a return to some of his
more Irish roots after hitting big with "The Crying Game" and experimenting
with Hollywood with "Interview with the Vampire" and "Michael Collins"; for
us, it means a return or introduction to elements from other films that
have come before and have actually fared better.
First off, "The Butcher Boy" is a very odd, eccentric film, and watching
it, I could see how in about 20 years, this film will have a avid cult
following.  It has a wildness to it that will be appreciated by those who
enjoy surreal and interesting ways in which films are presented, and will
probably even be dubbed "brilliant" by a couple groups.  However, "The
Butcher Boy" is not the amazing film it really sets itself out to be,
probably because it's: a) unoriginal, and b) doesn't really dive into its
topic the way it should.
The film's focus is on childhood and the ways that what we experience when
we are children has a mighty affect on us for the rest of our lives.  The
focus is on Francie Brady (Eamonn Owens, in a stunning debut), who's the
bottom of the lot: he's a bully, he comes from a bad home, and he's just
generally a jerk.  His dad (Stephen Rea, who's been in most of Jordan's
flicks) is "the town's best drinker," and his mom (Aisling O'Sullivan) is
about four flews over the cuckoo's nest.  In fact, one day, Francie comes
home to find her trying to tie a noose and hang herself.
But Francie is able to escape this trauma with his one friend, Joe (Alan
Boyle), who plays games and steals stuff with him.  We see that the only
way he can escape is through this, and also by watching old action shows on
TV like "The Lone Ranger" and reading comic books.  He also picks on a
young peer of his, Philip Nugent (Andrew Fullerton), and steals his comic
books and whatnot because, hey, the boy is a wimp.  I mean, the boy takes
piano lessons, for christ's sake!
It's Philip's mother, referred to as simply "Mrs. Nugent" (Fiona Shaw) who
becomes the object of Francie's hatred.  To him, she's everything that's
wrong with the world: she's a snob, speaks with a delicate British accent,
and seems to delight in torturing him by making him feel bad because of who
he is.  She's the scapegoat for all his problems, and it's only appropriate
because the 60s, as well as the 40s and 50s, were when scapgoating was like
a worldwide fad.
The entire film is told from the perspective of Francie as a middle-aged
man (played by Stephen Rea again, but with some red hair dye so you don't
get confused), who tells it with a nostalgic distancing that allows him to
stay above it, but still get involved with the storyline because he still
understands what he was thinking at the time.  We get the feeling that
though he's still an adult and it's been rougly 30 to 40 years since the
events occurred that he's still the same kind of person, just a little
wiser and with a couple more wrinkles.  But he's still Francie Brady.
Jordan takes these ideas and actually runs with it for awhile, and then
begins to meander around a lot.  Francie's behavior winds him in a juvenile
delinquint home, where he's preyed on by a hilariously perverted pedophile
priest (played by Durand-Durand himself, Milo O'Shea), and then is zipped
around in the storyline before he's brought back for la grande finale,
which brings it right back to its focus.  Episodic storylines work if the
episodes build on one another, but this one actually becomes redundant for
an hour chunk of itself, and then for the last half hour, builds on this.
It would also help if this film was even more original.  The film blatantly
lifts from several films, most notably two great cult favorites: Truffaut's
"The 400 Blows" and Kubrick's "A Clockwork Orange."  From "The 400 Blows,"
it lifts the whole idea of a bully-like boy protagonist, as well as the
somewhat incompetent parents (I'll say).  From "A Clockwork Orange"...well,
the narration which brings the audience in and makes it more of a story
instead of distancing us from it, and, well, the basic premise of getting
back at a society which is pretty inadequate which dealing with criminals
and basically everyone else.  Not only this, but the film uses these like
they were original concepts, trying to be as great as them.  Sorry, Neil:
ain't gonna happen.
But now for some positive remarks: Jordan is very competent in creating the
feel of the 60s in Ireland, and pretty much everywhere else.  We see lots
of talk about nuclear holocaust, and it actually seems like the world could
end any minute.  And he is able to create a very great feeling of being a
kid in this time period, including some really nifty surreal montages using
kid's point of view, and even digging deep into and exposing the way that
kids are taught about violence and hatred through some of the material they
are presented, like comic books.
The film is also interestingly directed by Jordan, who does lots more with
the weird camera movements and whatnot that make this technically great. 
He also gets a lot out of the music by Eliot Goldenthal, who does some cool
work along with placing some interesting tunes on the soundtrack, including
a couple Kurt Weill songs, and even some groovy arrangements of classics
and standards (I loved the modern-day version of Tchaikovsky's "March" from
his Nutcracker Suite).  Even if it's not as great as the films it rips off,
it's gonna be a cult classic nevertheless.
This is where the film works, and since this is what it was aiming for, we
get an understanding that Jordan was not just trying to tell a cool story
so that he can make a cult film, but is able to show that what occurs in
childhood and adolescence really does affect who you are as an adult.  In
some parts of the film, we see Francie talking to a vision of the Madonna
(played by none other than Sinéad O'Connor, avec hair), who comforts him in
some of his more traumatic episodes of his life.  And then when he's older
and out, we see him talking to her again.  There are parts of childhood we
never really get over, and it doesn't matter if we're the town bully or
not; we'll always be the same person.  And by the end we understand not
only this, but why kids often become these so-called "horrible" people.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE CRYING GAME's director, Neil Jordan, is at it again with a movie
called THE BUTCHER BOY that packs some big "surprises."  This time its
twists are gruesome rather than sexual, and the movie itself is a black
comedy instead of a drama.  The body of the film doesn't work - it
isn't funny - and the "surprises" in its conclusion really aren't all
that unpredictable.
     One of the best parts of the movie is the slaphappy jazz rendition
of the pop tunes of the early 60s era in which the story is set.  At
the beginning and the end is a rendition of "Mack the Knife" that is
but one of many hints as to where the story is headed.
     Eamonn Owens gives a strong performance as Francie Brady, a
loud-mouthed kid with a suicidal mother (Aisling O'Sullivan) and a
drunken father (Stephen Rea).  His mother is a "bun lady" who, when she
starts baking, fills every nook and cranny of the house with sweet
buns.  We see (ha ha) a half-eaten one going round and round on the
record being played on the family's turntable.  His father is a trumpet
player who kicks in the television set when it does work right -
another of the story's many unoriginal ideas.
     The movie is a coming-of-age picture with the demented Francie
going from one trouble to another.  He's a bully with a winsome smile
but without limits to his deviant behavior.  Defecating in the living
room of a woman whose house he has just trashed is one of his milder
forms of torment.  Many members of my audience thought his behavior was
a laugh riot, but I never found it funny, only pathetic.
     The comedy tries to be so over-the-top that I swear I could hear a
subliminal laugh track.  The zany music almost demands laugher.
     Using the canonical cliche of that era, THE BUTCHER BOY, based on
Pat McCabe's book, has everyone obsessed that the Communists are going
to drop the atomic bomb on them.  Typical of Jordan's utter lack of
subtlety is that he cuts from a scene of Francie trashing a neighbor's
kitchen to their television set, which shows an atomic bomb exploding.
     When Francie is sent away to a religious school as punishment, he
becomes a local hero by claiming to see and talk with the Virgin Mary,
played in a holy sheen by Sinead O'Connor.  Francie even begins to
believe his own con.
     One good performance does not a movie make.  And a comedy that
isn't funny is an oxymoron.
     THE BUTCHER BOY runs too long at 1:48.  It is rated R for
profanity and graphic violence and would be fine for older teenagers.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Neil Jordan.
Cast: Eomann Owens, Stephen Rea, Fiona Shaw, Alan Boyle, Andrew 
Fullerton, Aisling O'Sullivan, Sinead O'Connor, Ian Hart, Milo O'Shea.
1998 - 111 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, gore, and profanity).
Reviewed November 15, 1998.
I have always been a fan of director Neil Jordan, from his early work, 
such as 1984's "The Company of Wolves," to 1992's "The Crying Game," and 
1994's "Interview With a Vampire." His latest film, "The Butcher Boy," 
is a return to his roots in Ireland, but unfortunately, it is not a 
successful homecoming.
Told through the eyes of a 12-year-old Irish boy, Francis (newcomer 
Eomann Owens), this peculiar film follows him as we learn a little about 
his decidedly unstable life. His father (Stephen Rea) is an indifferent 
alcoholic, his mother (Fiona Shaw) is mentally ill and always in and out 
of hospitals, and Francis himself delights in terrorizing the mother of 
one of his friends after he is forbidden to see him anymore. Francis is 
the type of boy who always has a lot to say, but mostly fluctuates 
between sarcasm and frightening honesty, and it quickly becomes apparent 
that he may very well be a little psychotic, even capable of brutal 
murder.
The premise of, "The Butcher Boy," is one that could have very well been 
turned into a thought-provoking, disturbing motion picture, but somehow 
nothing works. Francis is in almost every scene, but we learn very 
little about him, as if the film was distancing itself away from him 
when, I suspect, we were actually supposed to sympathize with him. This 
is definately not young Owens fault, however, because he gives a 
brilliantly accurate performance, and is able to also seem menacing as 
well. The fact that we don't get close to his character is because of 
the sloppy screenplay.
The supporting characters are no help, though. Rea is wasted, and has 
practically no scenes where he actually talks to his son, or to anyone 
else for that matter. He usually seems to just be sitting watching the 
television throughout. Shaw has a little bit more to work with, since 
she has one touching scene in which she talks to Francis in a time of 
despair, but is out of the picture just as we are beginning to know her. 
And singer Sinead O'Connor appears rather effectively as the Virgin Mary 
who occasionally gives Francis advice. 
The pacing is all off in, "The Butcher Boy." Although the story could 
have been dynamite, it moves at a deadeningly slow rate, and I found my 
mind wandering every once in a while. It is also very episodic, because 
the developments in the story fly by with no satisfying payoffs. At one 
point, Francis is sent away to a juvenile prison, and an odd, possibly 
sexual relationship begins to develop between a priest and himself, but 
nothing comes of it. 
I'd rather think of, "The Butcher Boy," as a brief diversion for 
director Jordan, rather than a total misfire. He has already proven to 
be a strong director, but he lucked out with this latest film. What 
could have been a courageous, unsettling character study of an 
emotionally disturbed young boy, only manages to be an ineffective, 
uninvolivng bore.
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
        Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
David N. Butterworth
Close your eyes for a moment, if you will, and imagine the sound of
Stephen Rea's Gaelic brogue, silky smooth and Irish like a pint of
Guinness.  A lackadaisical, naughty little schoolboy voice that flirts and
gambols.  An acerbic, sing-song metered voice that evokes the startling
imagery and language of Anthony Burgess' "A Clockwork Orange."  A voice
that deliciously conjures scenes both porcine and puerile, like those out
of "Delicatessen," or "The Tin Drum."
Imagine all of that, and you'll get a good sense of what you can
expect from "The Butcher Boy."  Imagine that and more.
Neil Jordan's latest film "stars" Rea in more ways than one.  Rea,
the accomplished Irish actor most notable from his star turn in Jordan's
"The Crying Game," contributes a restrained and managed performance as Da
Brady, a small town drunk in an unnamed Irish community in the 1960s.  But
it's his wall-to-wall narration as the butcher boy of the title, Da Brady's
son, Francis, that makes Rea's "performance" worth watching, worth
listening to.
Playing the young Francie Brady is newcomer Eamonn Owens and he is,
without a doubt, a revelation.  For as much as Rea's voiceover permeates
almost every scene of "The Butcher Boy," Owens commands virtually every
frame.  It's impossible to take your eyes off him.  With his crop of
carrot-colored hair, ruddy complexion, and overall grubby appearance,
Francie Brady is an unlikely hero, refusing to be done in by his alcoholic,
trumpet-playing father, his depressive, suicidal mother, or the
neighboring, bespectacled monster known as Mrs. Nugent (Fiona Shaw).
In fact, everything was OK until "the Nugent" came to town.  Now,
she poses as much a threat to the safety and security of town bully Francie
and his best pal Joe (Alan Boyle) as the looming Commie menace ("The
Butcher Boy" is set at a time when the fear of nuclear obliteration is
first and foremost in the minds of many).
"Pigs!" screams Mrs. Nugent at the Brady menagerie.  "You're all
pigs!"  It's the start of many a related image.
After Ma Brady is shipped off to the "garage" for psychiatric
observation and Da Brady downs one bottle of whiskey too many, Francie
finally loses grip of his fantasy world of cowboys and indians, the Lone
Ranger, and other comicbook characters.  Squealing like a stuck pig,
Francie does "the likes o' that" on the Nugent's living room floor, and is
himself whisked away to a very Catholic remand home for "boney arsed
Bogmen," where his ever fertile imagination--and clever chicanery--runneth
over.
Director Jordan's vivid treatment of Pat McCabe's nightmare novel
produces a sometimes disturbing, dark comedy littered with surreal touches
(such as Sinéad O'Connor playing the Virgin Mary).  It's not as outlandish
as the trailers make out; instead, this remarkable film focuses on the
effects external influences have on the friendship between two boys
(schoolboy chums in real life), allowing us to empathize with their plight
in the presence of extraordinary behavior.
It's bleak and it's black but it's fundamentally very funny.  Rea
talks us through it, beautifully, and Owens drags us though it, admirably,
and, in tandem with Jordan's sure hand, theirs are contributions to make
"The Butcher Boy" a film worth savoring.

Author
James Sanford
        ``The Butcher Boy,'' adapted by director Neil Jordan and
author Patrick McCabe from McCabe's novel of the same name, probes the
mind of young Irishman Francie Brady, a free-spirited kid whose
initially harmless mischief takes on an increasingly violent and
finally murderous bent as his surroundings grow darker and darker.
  Tales of troubled youth are easy to come by these days -
unfortunately this week you need look no further than the front page
of the newspaper - but Jordan doesn't handle this unsettling subject
matter in a traditional, cautionary way.
  Instead, he uses Francie's story as the launching pad for a
sometimes surrealistic portrait of working-class Irish life in the
early 1960s.  ``The Butcher Boy'' is a wildly uneven work, veering
from broad gross-out comedy to subtle observation, but its anchor is
Eamonn Owens' fascinating performance as young Francie. In looking for
his lead actor, Jordan has said he wanted to find a young James
Cagney. His search proved successful.
  As Francie's disillusioned alcoholic father, Stephen Rea (a
staple in most of Jordan's films) is quietly sensational, and so is
Aisling O'Sullivan in her brief appearance as his deeply depressed
wife.
  His Da's deterioration and mother's suicide are two of the
circumstances that put Francie on the road to trouble, but the chief
culprit is the pretentious Mrs. Nugent (Fiona Shaw). She's a
classier-than-thou type whose feud with Francie escalates into
startling physical violence. Jordan and McCabe aren't wholly
sympathetic to either party, but Mrs. Nugent's rampant Anglophilia
causes the Irish-born authors to paint her in a less flattering light
than she may deserve.
  Although it would appear that McCabe had in mind to write a
coming-of-age story, many of Francie's trials play out in an overly
familiar fashion, complete with faithless friends, workhouses not too
far removed from Dickens and priests who prove to be anything but
celibate. The filmmakers chronicle Francie's journey in a stream of
colorful, dreamy visuals, and too often ``Butcher Boy'' engages the
eye rather than the heart.
  Still, Jordan has never made a wholly uninteresting film -
even ``High Spirits,'' his misquided romp with Daryl Hannah
desperately trying to play an Emerald Isle ghost, has a certain
curiosity value - and there's just enough in ``Butcher Boy'' to make
it worthwhile. Besides, any filmmaker daring enough to cast
controversial singer-songwriter Sinead O'Connor as a foul-mouthed
version of the Virgin Mary deserves credit for pure chutzpah.

Author
Michael Dequina
The Butcher Boy (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
No film in recent has left me with such conflicted feelings as Neil
Jordan's harrowing, humorous, horrifying adaptation of Patrick McCabe's
novel about young lad Francie Brady's (Eamonn Owens) descent into madness
in 1960s Ireland.  On one hand, it was difficult for me to become invested
in Francie's story because he is such an unsavory character, unjustifyably
venting his rage at his nosy but otherwise harmless neighbor Mrs. Nugent
(Fiona Shaw).  On another hand, I found it difficult to laugh at some of
Francie's darkly comic shenanigans because he obviously is such a sick,
needy child, having been raised by a drunken father (Stephen Rea) and a
suicidal mother (Aisling O'Sullivan).  On yet another hand, I also found it
difficult to completely sympathize with Francie during his more emotional
scenes because some of his, for lack of a better word, "bad" deeds are so
incredibly shocking in their brutality and the malicious glee in which he
performs them.
However, The Butcher Boy's power is undeniable, and the film as a whole is
unforgettable--perhaps because it is so disturbing.  What makes it so
unsettling is the Francie's overall wink-wink yet matter-of-fact attitude
about everything, expressed in a cheeky voiceover narration delivered by
the adult Francie (Rea again).  Think Heavenly Creatures played largely for
laughs, and you'll sort of understand.  Anchoring the whole film is the
astonishing debut performance of Owens; love Francie or hate him, you
cannot take your eyes off of Owens.  The Butcher Boy truly is a twisted,
unusual film that is bound to make just about anyone uncomfortable.  In the
lobby after the screening, I overheard one man raving about how great yet
disturbing it was; I also heard one particularly offended woman say with
disgust, "That movie was SO UNFUNNY!"
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
I'd like to believe that we all see films that strike us in ways that
we know will not affect every viewer.  I was looking forward to The
Butcher Boy mostly because Neil Jordan is a brilliant artist, and one of
my favorite film makers; he has proved this over and over again, in
films like Mona Lisa and The Crying Game.  But I have a glaring personal
issue with this film --  the main character, Francie Brady, and the
portrayal of him by young Eamonn Owens.  I can say that it's a good
performance, but I'd be misreporting my feelings, because it's also one
of the most intensely annoying performances I've ever had to watch.
But that's not my only problem with The Butcher Boy.  This is supposed
to be a black comedy, but I found absolutely none of it even the
slightest bit amusing, let alone funny.  And it's a crazy picture, full
of misguided energy and expletives, and any kind of meaning that Patrick
McCabe inserted into his novel (on which this film is based) is not at
all clear to me from Jordan's film.  It's ironic, really, the amount of
energy that this film tries to harness, because, for all of the wacky
music and graphic deaths, it left me feeling pretty drab.
The film is about the childhood struggles of Francie Brady, a young
Irish boy who lives with his alcoholic father (Stephen Rae) and suicidal
mother (Aisling O'Sullivan).  He's a loud, obnoxious kid, and seems
fairly unmoved by the unpleasant conditions in which he lives.  His best
friend is Joe (Alan Boyle), and they spend a lot of time in the woods
chasing each other around.  
Francie's nemesis is the evil Mrs. Nugent (Fiona Shaw); he goes to
school with her son, and Francie finds pleasure in torturing the young
boy.  Later, Francie pulls a prank (a vicious prank, I should say) on
Mrs. Nugent, which gets him sent to a boarding school.  Just when
Francie seems to be improving, the head priest at the school turns out
to be a pedophile; Francie, of course, has no idea what this old man's
problem is, but the incident allows Francie to return to his hometown in
Ireland.  
The film doesn't follow strict plotting, nor does it have a truly
cohesive narrative.  I don't mind these elements so much, but in The
Butcher Boy, I was never quite sure what I was supposed to be watching
for.  Clearly the focus is Francie, but both the character and Owens'
portrayal of him are static throughout the picture.  If any child ever
had attention deficit disorder, then Francie is that child, for this is
a boy so out of control, so crazed, so maniacal, that I simply could not
manifest sympathy for him.  I never saw him as anything more than a
sadistic little demon, and this fact simply wrings every bit of comedy
out of the film for me.  
In addition to this, I can't see where Jordan has tweaked the material
to move it over the dubious boundary from serious to funny.  Elliott
Goldenthal's musical score is adequately twisted, but it takes more than
music to make this kind of material funny and engaging.  Jordan has
dabbled in graphic violence in his other films (both The Crying Game and
Mona Lisa have sudden moments of extreme violence), but he never wanted
it to be funny before.  Here, I get the feeling that I'm not supposed to
take it seriously, but there's no incentive to laugh.  So, I took the
movie seriously, and what I got was a rather disengaging biography about
a heinous, unsympathetic child.
The other performances are very good, and probably what I like most
about the film.  Stephen Rae is a terrific actor (and always in Jordan's
films); here, he does a good job of making us care about this man who
has wrecked his son's life through neglect and alcohol abuse.  Fiona
Shaw is an underused and underappreciated actress, and her work here
proves that she needs to make more films; her intense and often
exaggerated performance as Mrs. Nugent is the one element in The Butcher
Boy that I think works with the black comedy-feel that it seems Jordan
was going for.  Unfortunately, she, like the rest of the actors, is
stifled by the handling of the story.
I find great distaste in criticizing Jordan so harshly, since he is
such a fantastic film maker and because I am just a self-proclaimed
critic, but I'm confident knowing that this is the first misstep in his
distinguished career.  As for Eamonn Owens and young Francie Brady, both
are people whom I hope to never meet for as long as I live.
