Title
Review for Mean Streets (1973)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Martin Scorsese
Writers: Martin Scorsese and Mardik Martin
Starring: Harvey Keitel, Robert DeNiro, David Proval, Amy Robinson,
Richard Romanus, Cesare Danova, David Carradine, Robert Carradine,
Martin Scorsese, Catherine Scorsese
In 1973, a year after "The Godfather" made organized crime kind of
glorious, director Martin Scorsese exploded onto the big screen with his
highly ambitious, and incredibly personal "Mean Streets," which
chronicled what seemed to be his early adulthood in Little Italy, a
place where there's organized crime which can look glamorous to anyone
on the cusp of maturity.  To me, this film is about this cusp, and how
life lessons like what happens in this film can help us to grow as
people, and someday mature fully.
"Mean Streets" deals with Charlie (Harvey Keitel), who is supposed to be
the young Scorsese.  He is basically defined as an angel stuck between
heaven and hell.  Highly religious, though easily seduced by crime,
sleazy women, and other assorted things prohibited by catholicism, he is
an immature, though a little more mature than most of his clique.
Charlie is a frequent church-goer, but also resides at his one friend's
(David Proval) bar.  We see him at his most reverent at church, then cut
to him at the bar where he's doing what he always does: hanging around,
drinking, etc.  He seems to be more in his element there, and also seems
more hypnotizing there.  We are lured into his world, and show the same
fascination he does when he gazes up at the topless dancers.
Charlie also has another big weakness: his friendship to the incredibly
immature Johnny Boy (Robert DeNiro).  Johnny owes money to everyone in
the world, it seems, and Charlie acts as his parole officer, checking in
on him, and always making sure he's making money to pay off his debts. 
One of his more outstanding debts belongs to one of Charlie's friends
and associates, Michael (Richard Romanus), who is constantly bugging
Charlie for the money.
He's obsessed with Johnny in more ways than one.  The two share a kind
of homoerotic relationship, at one time crashing in the same bed as
eachother.  Then, in the same shot, we see that it's deeper than that. 
Charlie is kind of dating or pseudo-dating Johnny's cousin, Theresa (Amy
Robinson), who's also on Charlie's case to de-friend Johnny and move
away with her.
With all these tense things going on, as well as his job for one of the
local mafia heads (Cesare Danova), we see Charlie caught in a self-made
cage.  The finale, which is often criticized but brilliant when
understood, brings about the maturity of Charlie, and also the awakening
of a couple other characters.
"Mean Streets" is told in a breezy, epiodic fashion, allowing us to get
to know the characters in a friendly fashion.  Johnny Boy's a seductive
character, being child-like and fancy free and all that good stuff.  He
has no responsibilites, is a good ladies man, and seems to always be in
a state of happiness.  Charlie is more like the majority of us: passive
with a bit of fatherhood over Johnny Boy, who he idolizes in a
non-sexual way (yes, there's homoeroticism between the two, but nothing
serious, although one could say that his relationship with Theresa is a
growth from the one with Johnny).
"Mean Streets," the first big film from Scorsese, is a ferociously
original film.  Its directing style is gritty, often resembling a crude
documentary from the era, only with DeNiro and Keitel as the main
subjects.  Its violence is sudden, often impulsive, catching us off
guard.  One time, a drunken man at the bar (David Carridine, around the
time "Kung Fu" took off) is suddenly shot by an unknown assailant
(Robert Carridine, his cousin, I think).  And there are some great brawl
scene taking place in a local pool hall, ending with some bit of gritty
police corruption.
Scorsese has called this one of his most personal films (I think his
most personal as well as favorite might be "Italianamerica," a short
documentary on his parents), and its bursting with the personal touches
of a man who lived all this.  While it's not up there with my favorites
of Scorsese (i.e. "After Hours" and "Taxi Driver"), it's definitely one
of his best films, and a prime example of how to mould your personal
experiences into a powerful film.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
