Title
Review for Smultronstället (1957)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mattias Thuresson
When I was younger I put my cassette player in front
of the TV and recorded the sounds from Wild Strawberries
to a tape. I used to listen to this tape when I couldn't
sleep. It was much more satisfying than counting sheep.
As a side effect, I learned all the lines from the movie.
I also learned to appreciate it.
This is the Bergman movie that everyone should have
seen. Naturally because it's his best but also because
of Sjöström's performance as the old professor. He
received his doctorate fifty years ago and now he's
going to Lund to become 'doctor jubilaris'.
The professor, Isak Borg, takes the car from Stockholm
to Lund together with his daughter-in-law Marianne. Along
the way, he is confronted with his past. They take a break
at the summer house where he spent the summers of his
childhood. A very good scene is where he steps into
the dining room where his siblings and relatives sit around
the breakfast table just like in the 1890s. Something
similar was used by Woody Allen in Crimes and
Misdemeanors if i remember correctly.
At the summer house, they pick up three hitchhikers. Sara,
Anders and Viktor. Sara looks just like Isak's teenage love
Sara who eventually married his brother Sigfrid instead.
Anders is studying to become a priest, Viktor to become a
physician. This provides Bergman with a symbol for the
distance betwen religion and science. The two boys even
go into the forest to fight about God's existence.
Another important scene is where they stop at a gas station.
The proprietors, Henrik and Eva, tells the professor what a
wonderful provincial doctor he was. 'Maybe I should have stayed',
the professor replies. But the truth about his past becomes
clouded when Henrik answers 'Stayed here? I don't understand
what you mean.' The reasons why he moved out isn't revealed
to the audience.
All the dreams and hallucinations that he has during the
trip make it obvious to the professor what an empty life
he has led. The loveless marriage and the emotional distance
to his only son Evald. "I'm not really sure if I am his son",
Evald tells his wife Marianne. In the end, the professor
and Marianne both tell each other how fond they are of each
other. He also wants to release Evald from his debt but
is interrupted. His proposal to his old housemaid, miss Agda, that they
should stop addressing each other with titles and say
'you' to each other is however rejected by the old woman.
Bergman at his best with a perfect mix of comedy and drama,
funny one-liners and surrealism.
