Title
Review for Pane e tulipani (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Pete Croatto
An unhappy Italian housewife, a lonely waiter, a goofy masseuse, lots of
love, and gorgeous scenery all come together in Bread and Tulips, which
proves charming despite its covering of predictable, well-worn material.
The story concerns the aforementioned housewife, Rosalba Barletta (Licia
Maglietta) who accidentally becomes separated from her immediate family
while on vacation.  Instead of waiting for a ride home, Rosalba opts not
to go home to her Italian town, but to instead hitchhike to Venice. 
Upon arriving, she tells her self-centered husband, Mimmo (an excellent
Antonio Catania) that she'll be home in a few days.
Of course, that doesn't happen, as Rosalba quickly gains a level of
independence that has been unattainable in her past life of scrubbing
floors and buying groceries.  In what seems like days, she moves in with
lonely, suicidal waiter Fernando (Bruno Ganz), gets a job as a florist,
learns the accordion, and befriends her neighbor -- a wacky holistic
masseuse named Grazia (Marina Massironi).  Rosalba, who is first seen
wearing a gaudy stretch pants outfit, starts wearing sexy dresses and
getting closer to Fernando.
I can think of at least five other (American) movies (including Fried
Green Tomatoes and An Unmarried Woman) that are more than similar to
Bread and Tulips.  But Maglietta and Ganz, who act with restraint and
care, help Bread and Tulips from becoming a tired retread.  Ganz plays
the suicidal waiter role with a solemn, sometimes playful dignity that
is a joy to watch, while Maglietta never overreacts to her growing
comfort with the outside world.  Throughout the movie, Maglietta has an
easygoing, confident demeanor, which makes it very easy to root for her
and her growing attraction for Ganz's character. The gorgeous scenery of
moonlit town squares and sparkling rivers provides a perfect love story
backdrop -- you just might want to ask the attractive stranger in the
seat behind you for coffee after the lights come up.
Director and co-writer Silvio Soldini must get credit for sprinkling the
movie with effective goofy humor.  The cheap Mimmo, desperate to find
his wife (after all, he needs his shirts ironed and his mistress won't
do it), hires a job applicant (Giuseppe Battiston) at his bathroom
supply firm to do the job.  The reason?  Mimmo discovers that the
prospective plumber loves detective stories.  The novice detective's
various misfortunes, including him saying goodbye to his weepy mother,
are very funny.
Unfortunately, there are flaws that somewhat spoil Bread and Tulips'
cheery tone.  Rosalba is bothered by several surreal dreams during her
time in Venice, which bring the movie to a halt.  It's like putting a
gunfight in a Nora Ephron movie.  Several details in Fernando's life
also never get proper closure, including his suicidal tendencies.  Early
in the movie, he nearly hangs himself before Rosalba knocks on his
apartment door.  After that, Fernando's step towards death is never made
reference to, probably because Soldini wanted to include a lukewarm,
underdeveloped subplot about Fernando's stormy past.  It seems more like
a desperate attempt to pump up the drama in a plot that doesn't need
any.
But there aren't a lot of overwhelming negatives in Bread and Tulips. 
The movie is fun and romantic, with beautiful scenery and characters
whose lives we'd like to live if we had the nerve... or if our passports
weren't missing. 
Director: Silvio Soldini
Producer: Daniele Maggioni
Writer: Silvio Soldini, Doriana Leondeff
Starring: Licia Maglietta, Bruno Ganz, Antonio Catania, Marina
Massironi, Giuseppe Battiston, Felice Andreasi
http://www.luce.it/film/panneetulipani
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Mimmo Barletta (Antonio Catania) is hopelessly lost.  With his wife off on
something between an indefinite vacation and an ad hoc separation, he doesn't
even have anyone to iron his shirts.  His mistress ridicules his suggestion that
she might do them since that is a wife's responsibilities.
In Silvio Soldini's sometimes cute but excessively long comedy BREAD AND TULIPS
(PANE E TULIPANI), the story starts in an Italian tour bus.  When the bus makes
a rest stop, Mimmo's wife, Rosalba (Licia Maglietta), gets left behind.  Mimmo
and their son don't notice that she is missing.  From there the story briefly
becomes an Italian version of PLANE, TRAINS & AUTOMOBILES as Rosalba tries
without much luck to return home to join up with her family.  
Turning her predicament into an opportunity, Rosalba, a middle-age housewife who
reminds people that she used to work, decides to stay in Venice, a city that she
has never visited but always wanted to.  Carrying no credits cards -- which
seems hard to believe -- and only a modest amount of cash, she is forced to get
a job and to take a room in the small apartment of an Icelandic waiter she
meets.  With remoteness and melancholy, Bruno Ganz plays the waiter, who keeps a
suicide rope in his bedroom.  
Many quirky characters cross Rosalba's new path, but none is more intentionally
humorous than Costantino (Giuseppe Battiston), an out-of-work plumber hired by
her husband to track her down.  This would-be gumshoe, who looks like John Candy
playing Colombo, always wears a rumpled trench coat, a bright, mustard colored
shirt, a frumpy hat and clip-on sunshades.  He sneaks around the Venetian
alleyways like a pudgy Pink Panther.  These visuals of the awkward detective
provide most of the story's limited humor.
The long last act, after Costantino finds his target, quickly runs completely
out of gas, but it goes on and on.  A big hit in its native Italy, BREAD AND
TULIPS generates few laughs on this side of the Atlantic.  I found it rather
comparable to a typical television sitcom, which isn't exactly a glowing
recommendation.
BREAD AND TULIPS runs a long 1:52.  The film is in Italian with English
subtitles.  It is rated PG-13 for "brief language, some sensuality and drug
references" and would be acceptable for kids around 8 and up.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 31, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Laura Clifford
BREAD AND TULIPS (Pane e Tulipani)
----------------------------------
When Rosalba's (Licia Maglietta) husband and children allow their vacation 
tour bus to leave a rest area without her, she furiously decides to hitchhike 
home.  A stopover in Venice introduces her to Icelander Fernando (Bruno Ganz,
"Wings of Desire") and becomes more than a one night stay in "Bread and
Tulips (Pane e Tulipani)".
"Bread and Tulips" is blessed with a charming cast and glowing lead in
Licia Maglietta.  Unfortunately the film's uneven pacing drags it down,
making it a bit of a chore to sit through.
Rosalba finds a desolate pensione on its last night of operation and is
directed to the Marco Polo restaurant.  There she meets downtrodden waiter
Fernando who informs her that they're without a cook before presenting her
with an artfully arranged cold plate.  When Rosalba misses her train home the
next day, she returns to the Marco Polo and asks Fernando where she can find
a very cheap room.  He graciously offers to board her for the evening and
she awakens to find a luxurious breakfast spread left for her.  On a whim,
she takes a job with an anarchist florist, Fermo (Felice Andreasi) and ends
up taking residence down the hall from Fernando.  New age masseuse neighbor
Grazia (Marina Massironi) and Rosalba speculate on Fernando's marital
state when he's seen with a young woman and small boy.
Meanwhile Rosalba's husband Mimmo (Antonio Catania), a bathroom fixture
businessman, has had enough of Rosalba's disappearance when his mistress 
refuses to iron his shirts and sends newly hired plumber Costantino (Giuseppe
Massironi), a pudgy momma's boy who reads detective stories, to find his
wife.  Costantino finds love with Grazia instead.
As amusing as Costantino and his travails are, coscreenwriter (with Doriana
Leondeff)/director Silvio Soldini spends way too much time following the
hapless lug so that we almost forget about Rosalba.  Fernando's 'mystery'
family (his daughter-in-law and grandson) are revealed for what they are
so quickly one wonders why they were ever made mysterious.  Rosalba's 
fantastical dreams, where various characters appear in her bedroom, are too 
random and don't work their way into the film's texture.  Fernando's suicidal 
tendencies are treated as an aside, an important character distinction that 
could be missed by a trip to the concession stand.
Yet there are marvelous touches in Soldini's work, such as Rosalba's 
rediscovery of the accordion, Costantino's lodging in a broken down barge
and Fermo's dictatorial treatment of his customers (which sends many of
them fleeing).  Fernando's archaic way of speaking lends considerable charm
to Ganz' soulful waiter.  The Venice of "Bread and Tulips" is the Venice
known by its residents rather than its tourists.
"Bread and Tulips" is sweet but uneven.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "BREAD AND TULIPS" (First Look Pictures)
    In this delightfully frothy Italian romantic comedy, after
accidentally being left behind by a tour bus while on a family vacation with her
cranky husband and two cynical teenagers, Rosalba (Licia Maglietta), an unhappy
housewife from Pescara, finds herself - and love - in Venice. 
    For the first time in years, Rosalba's on her own when she's
abandoned at a highway rest area. Although her philandering husband (Antonio
Catania), a plumbing-supply dealer, orders her to stay there until she's picked
up, she impulsively accepts a ride to Venice, a bohemian paradise which she's
never visited. Rosalba finds refuge and romance with Fernando (Bruno Ganz), a
gruff Icelandic waiter who offers her a spare room in his modest apartment and
prepares breakfast for her each morning. To support herself, she gets a job
working with a florist (Antonio Catania). 
      Film-maker Silvio Soldini gently explores the blossoming of this
bored, middle-aged, middle-class woman with warmth and affection, savoring
special moments such as when Rosalba starts playing the accordion again and
abandons her maroon stretch pants, silver jacket and orange sneakers for a
simple, new red-and-white dress with platform-soled espadrilles. The superb
actors slip into their roles seamlessly, particularly luminous Licia Maglietta
and low-key Bruno Ganz, along with Marina Massironi as her nosy
massage-therapist neighbor and Giuseppe Massironi as the inept
plumber-turned-private eye who's sent to retrieve her on orders from her frantic
husband - who's discovered that his mistress has no interest in doing his
laundry or cleaning the house. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bread and
Tulips" is a beguiling, escapist 8. As the summer ends, it's a magical getaway
for mature audiences..
