Title
Review for For Hire (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Nusair
My obsession with Joe Mantegna has gotten to the point now where I'll rent
anything that he stars in.  It doesn't have to be a big part either; a
cameo role will do.  Mantegna is, to me, one of the coolest actors out
there, and I try not to miss anything he's in.
Such is the case with "For Hire", a movie I'd never even heard of until I
saw it in the video store.  Joe Mantegna stars as a controversial author
who's being stalked by an edgy source who fears he'll go public, thus
landing the source in a lot of trouble.  Rob Lowe enters the picture as a
friendly, down-on-his-luck cabbie who is on the recieving end of a very
unusual request from Mantegna.  Lowe is offered $50,000 to "take care" of
Mantegna's problem, and since he's just been diagnosed with terminal
prostate cancer, he agrees.
Sound convoluted?  It is.  However, for a while, it's enjoyable enough to
watch.  But after a while, things just start dragging along until the film
eventually reaches it's inevitable, not to mention predictable,
conclusion.  Once "For Hire" reaches a certain point, even the most
idiotic audience member should have no problem guessing what's going to
happen next.  And for a movie of this type, that would definitely be a bad
thing.  Movies like this need to keep the audience guessing throughout,
otherwise what's left?
It is, however, worth watching for Mantegna's performance.  He always
manages to rise above his material, and this is no exception.  It's too
bad, though, that he keeps appearing in these silly made-for-cable movies.
Don't get me wrong; some of them are quite good.  But an actor of this
calibre should really be doing more feature film work.  This is a man who
has worked heavily with esteemed playwright David Mamet, for crying out
loud.  Mantegna would do well to look at the career of William H. Macy,
another Mamet regular.  Macy isn't concerned with being the lead.  Rather,
he's concerned with finding quality roles, and if that role is a small
one, so be it.
"For Hire" is about as predictable as they come.  Joe Mantegna and even
Rob Lowe (sporting a ridiculous bleached-blond George Clooney haircut)
made this worth a look.
