Title
Review for Grumpier Old Men (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Edwin Jahiel
GRUMPIER OLD MEN (1995) ** 1/4  Directed by Howard Deutch. 
Written by Mark Steven Johnson. Photography, Tak Fujimoto. 
Editing, Billy Weber, Seth Flaum, Maryann Brandon. Production 
design, Gary Frutkoff. Music, Alan Silvestri. Cast: Jack 
Lemmon, Walter Matthau, Ann-Margret, Sophia Loren, Kevin 
Pollak, Daryl Hannah, Burgess Meredith, Ann Guilbert, et al.  
A Warners release. 105 min. Rated PG-13 (language)
In the 1993 "Grumpy Old Men,"  John Gustafson (Jack Lemmon ) 
and Max Goldman (Walter Matthau ) were small-town, retired 
Minnesotans -- respectively a  widowed Swede and a divorced 
Jew -- who had been feuding friends and neighbors since 1938. 
The film was an unworthy, dull descendant of "The Odd Couple," 
jerkily built,  minimally salvaged by  traces of comedic 
talent  in the Lemmon-Matthau pair.
I  was not anxious to see the sequel "Grumpier Old Men", but  
I did, partly as a reaction to the flood of three-hour long, 
tush-taxing and grump-making movies.  Surprisingly, it turned 
out to be pretty enjoyable, all the more so since remakes are 
usually much inferior to their originals.  
In "Grumpier," John now happily married to Ariel (Ann-Margret) 
for six months, still lives next door to Max. Max is a lonely, 
ultra-messy bachelor whose companionship consists of three 
television sets that edify him about the world through 
programs like "Geraldo." He still has John's fishing 
companionship. The old antagonism has lessened but still 
smolders -- still quite irrationally. Insults, put-downs, 
deprecation and physical tricks are very much alive. In 
addition to this  Neil Simon-ish rapport, there is a kind of 
Three Stooges behavior. 
There is no third  stooge. On the periphery is the colorless 
affair of Max's son Jacob (Kevin Pollack) who wants to marry 
Max's daughter Melanie (Darryl Hannah), the divorced mother of 
a little girl. Peripheral too, though colorful,  is 95-year 
old Grandpa Gustafson (Burgess Meredith). 
>From Palermo, Sicily, Maria ,the cousin of  a local  nicknamed 
"Spaghetti" Ragetti, moves to   town. In  needless overkill of 
plotting,  she has been unlucky in five marriages. Her old 
mother comes along. Ann Guilbert plays her convincingly as an 
Italian, though her rapid going from ignorance of English to 
relative fluency is too much.
The ladies now own  a former bait shop by the lake, want to 
transform the place into an Italian "ristorante romantico."  
The John-Max odd couple, fearing that this will affect the 
fishing, resort  to childish tricks and pranks to sabotage the 
project.
Max's  initial irritation about Maria telegraphs in large writ 
that it will be transformed into romance and badly-needed 
matrimony. Other complications, including  a break between 
John and Ariel and another between Melanie and Jacob, are also 
signaled from afar as merely passing impediments. 
The film's structure is of episodes tied together by gags, 
jokes and repartees. These are overall better than in "Grumpy 
Old Men." Both movies have the same writer and composer, 
otherwise the crews are different. ( Howard Deutch who has 
been closely associated with John Hughes has also directed  
"Pretty In Pink,"" Some Kind Of Wonderful," "The Great 
Outdoors," "Article 99, ""Getting Even With Dad.") 
Silvestri's music humorously underlines the story with 
familiar renditions of old songs.  "I'll Be Glad When You're 
Dead, You Rascal You" is gratifyingly served in its entirety 
with the opening credits."That's Amore"; "Hit the Road, Jack" 
and others follow. 
Among the funnier highlights, Matthau in love has his truck 
seat "refinished in  authentic imitation leather." (Historical 
Note: The original ads, years ago, said "genuine imitation 
leatherette"). He gets "jewelry" for Loren and in what struck 
me as the movie's funniest bit, explains: "It's a cubic 
zirconium. I got it from the Home Shopping Network." 
A running gag has Matthau videotaping (with unlikely skills) 
neighbor Lemmon posing  nude for sculptress Ann-Margret's 
remake of Rodin's "The Thinker." There is also a good, 
cartoonish dog-chasing-cat , mayhem-producing sequence topped 
by the humans squabbling while now the animals sit together in 
friendship and watch. The tone is kept light except, close to 
the end, for some pathos about Grandpa and some sentimentality 
that you see coming for miles about a legendary fish tracked 
for 20 years and finally caught. 
Most importantly, there is Sophia Loren. She wears her 61 
years with grace and not much disguise. She does her flimsy 
part with wit, warmth and grace.  Her appeal and sexiness go 
beyond the obvious (her bust, her walk). They involve her 
eyes, the way she smiles, reacts and speaks. On the other 
hand, the film  overstresses the ages of  Matthau (75) and 
Lemmon (70), the  close-ups of jowls and watery eyes, the 
shuffling gait.  
Ann-Margret (age 54 in 1995) and the rest of the cast strictly 
provide support, padding or decoration. The movie is slight, 
unambitious and  forgettable, but as short-term or instant 
gratification, it does nicely.  

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jack Lemmon, Walter Matthau, Ann-Margret, Sophia Loren, 
      Kevin Pollak, Daryl Hannah, Burgess Meredith
Director: Howard Deutch
Producers: John Davis and Richard C. Berman
Screenplay: Mark Steven Johnson
Cinematography: Tak Fujimoto
Music: Alan Silvestri
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     As 1993 drew to a close, movie-goers in search of light 
entertainment were treated to the delightful (if formulaic) GRUMPY OLD 
MEN, a reunion of the often-paired odd couple of Jack Lemmon and Walter 
Matthau.  Now, two years later, John Gustafson (Lemmon) and best enemy 
Max Goldman (Matthau) are back at it again.  Only this time, their barbs 
lack the zing of the previous outing.  And that's not all that's missing 
in this ill-advised sequel.  GRUMPIER OLD MEN isn't as fun, spontaneous, 
or amusing as the original.  In short, it's a poor retread that can't be 
redeemed by the pleasure of seeing Lemmon and Matthau together.
     GRUMPIER OLD MEN picks up some six months after the end of the 
first movie.  It's Autumn in Minnesota, and normal fishing has replaced 
the ice variety for John, Max, and John's father (Burgess Meredith).  
John's daughter Melanie (Daryl Hannah) and Max's son Jacob (Kevin 
Pollak) are busy planning their wedding while newlyweds John and Ariel 
(Ann-Margret) are settling down into a comfortable routine.  Meanwhile, 
Max does his best to hide his own loneliness, but his stated preference 
of a TV dinner in front of GERALDO doesn't fool his son, who encourages 
Max to start dating.  As luck would have it, a very eligible Italian 
divorcee (Sophia Loren) moves into town around this time, and her 
eventual pairing with Max seems inevitable.
     Maybe the actors aren't having as much fun this time around, or 
perhaps the jokes are just too flat, but GRUMPIER OLD MEN is uninspired.  
Even Burgess Meredith, who easily stole the first film, isn't as good 
here.  The movie seems like something made exclusively because its 
predecessor was a box-office success.  Whatever magic GRUMPY possessed, 
GRUMPIER lacks.
     As was the case in the 1993 movie, the best part arrives during the 
end credits.  If you bothered to come at all, this series of bloopers 
and outtakes is worth staying for.  Meredith's list of creative double-
entendres is easily GRUMPIER OLD MEN's comic highlight.  Unfortunately, 
the competition for this honor is pretty feeble.  The sequel has only 
about a third as many legitimate laughs as the original.
     While this may not be the final on-screen teaming of "putz" Lemmon 
and "moron" Matthau, hopefully this is the last time we'll see them as 
John and Max.  It's not difficult to recognize that there's still 
chemistry between the actors, but they need a new behind-the-scenes 
creative team.  These particular grumpy old men have had their day.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Tim Voon
Directed by Howard Deutch
Cast Walter Matthau, Jack Lemmon, Ann-Margret, Sophia Loren, Burgess
Meredith, Daryl Hannah, Kevin Pollak.
Written by Mark Steven Johnson
These grumpy old men keep getting older and crankier with fewer excuses
for abusing each other and getting laid.
The personal mini-war between 'Putz' and 'Moron', played respectively by
Lemmon and Mathau is temporarily on hold because their children (Pollak
and Hannah) are getting married. Now that their avenue for playing
childish pranks on each other is closed, they divert their foolery
towards the unsuspecting Maria (Loren), the new gal in town who has
taken over the old bait shop to open a classy Italian restaurant on the
waterfront.
Loren plays the sultry, Italian lass with the same fire and spirit which
made her famous in 'House Boat'. She rubs cold water and ice over her
breasts as she tempts Matthau's character to leave her restaurant alone;
then invites him over for dinner where they discuss the bisexual organs
of the earth worm resulting in the urge to go worm hunting after desert;
she giggles like a school girl as they fumble in the dark before falling
conveniently onto the moist soil where they start --.. well -- you can
only imagine what happens next.
Although this is not the most romantic way to court a woman, it is
certainly one of the more inventive. What can you say when Matthau's
character takes sexual advise from "Geraldo" and buys gifts for his
girlfriend on the home shopping net work.
The kids eventually call the wedding off because of the overwhelming
meddling of their respective father into their private affairs. As a
result second world war erupts between 'Putz' and 'Moron' in Minnesota,
and it requires the death of Grandpa Gustafson (played by the delightful
Burgess Meredith) to bring everyone back to focus on the more important
issues of life.
Yes there are better things to do in life than to banter over the size
of one's manhood, accuse another's sister of having crabs or getting
laid when it is way pass your bed time.
Comment: Diverting entertainment for the elderly with lots of sex
between grandmothers and grandfathers.

Author
Joan Ellis
"Grumpier Old Men" is a an embarrassing effort to extend the
surprising success of the first installment. In a glaring
insensitivity to the ingredients of their own victory, the
producers have dropped the real star of their show:  the frozen
Minnesota winter. The ice and snow that controlled the residents
and propelled the jokes have been replaced by a summer landscape
that turns Minnesota into the most ordinary of suburbs.    
     In a continuing two-man war story, John (Jack Lemmon) and
Max (Walter Matthau) continue to nourish themselves on the
humiliation they inflict on each other. The first movie focused
on John's comic courtship of the merry widow Ariel (Ann-Margret);
the second opens with confirmation that all is well with their
unlikely marriage.  
     While the envious Max videotapes the scene from next door,
the adoring Ariel sculpts her naked husband as "The Thinker." 
Something has to be done about lonely Max. And so, with exactly
the same likelihood of Ann-Margret's moving to Minnesota, Sophia
Loren, as Maria Ragetti, drops into this dysfunctional town to
turn the boys' favorite bait shop into an Italian restaurant.
     A situation as silly as this must either be wrapped in charm
or buoyed by belly laughs. The first movie had a bit of both.
Although the collective talents of this cast could sustain any
major comedy, their combined efforts can't hoist this one beyond
boredom. They are stranded in a bad script.
     Unengaged, we are reduced to examining face-lifts, capped
teeth, and the general well-being of a group of aging stars. On
this level, Sophia Loren is an astonishing sight--still glorious
in every respect, trying with all her intelligence and flair to
lift her leaden lines. 
     In a charmless subplot to the war between friends, the odd
couple's son and daughter (Daryl Hannah and Kevin Pollak) are to
be married. Their gloomy romance, intended as a comic focus,
casts a pall for miles.  
     After some success the first time around with making Burgess
Meredith a dirty old man at 90 something, the producers inundate
him this time with flat jokes about cucumbers, salami, and a one
night stand with Sophia's mother, Francesca (Ann Guilbert.) 
Guilbert lightens things a little with her general nastiness. She
is indeed a grumpy old woman.
     Jack Lemmon can still immobilize us with the sadness in his
eyes; Matthau can still massage a line with his furrowed brow.
But they have been undermined by producers who thought they had
the golden formula and turned lazy in their success. At the very
least, they should have held onto that icebound landscape that
produced so many laughs. 
     Not one of the four principals is dotty enough to be
relegated to the silliness that Hollywood equates with old age.
It's painful to watch all this talent trying so hard to make
something of nothing. For this formula, even when it was fresh,
once was indeed enough.  

