Title
Review for Vénus beauté (institut) (1999)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Venus Beauty Institute is a clumsy and unremarkable French film that's
either a run-of-the-mill chick flick, a caustic look at women's obsession
with beauty, or both.  Its main character is a desperate, middle-aged woman
who loves to strike up conversations with strangers, hoping they'll take her
to bed (or to their car, if there isn't a bed close by).  Maybe I missed the
boat on this one, being a 30-year-old abstinent male loner, so take the
following with a grain of salt.
Angčle (Nathalie Baye, An Affair of Love) works in a Parisian beauty shop,
where she provides facials, manicures and massages to those ravaged by both
age and gravity.  She's twice as old as her co-workers, doesn't wear makeup,
hates love and is terrified of relationships because of something that
happened to her parents when she was a child.  But Angčle still loves sex
and will spread for just about anyone after a couple of drinks.
It comes as no surprise when Angčle, who is used to stalking her own sexual
prey, is turned off when a man approaches her with romantic aspirations of
his own. Antoine (Samuel Le Bihan) is a sculptor who professes his undying
love for Angčle, despite having a fiancée.  Even though he's probably half
her age, Antoine is relentless in his pursuit of Angčle, no matter how
little interest she shows in him.  Because this is a movie, you know his
persistence will eventually pay off (in real life, she'd get a restraining
order and he'd be in jail).
As Angčle's relationship with Antoine plays out, we are also introduced to
her beauty shop co-workers and the wacky customers attendant thereto.
Everyone talks about looking young and beautiful, but they're all just as
emotionally broken as Angčle in one way or another.  The shop sells various
lotions, balms and ointments, and has an irritating door chime that, at
first, made it seem like something magical was about to happen on the screen
(it didn't...and then rings about 75 more times).  The not-so-subtle message
here is that people can shell out hundreds of francs for an expensive salve
to mask their exterior flaws, but it won't do a damn thing to cover up the
fact they're damaged on the inside.
Though Venus' ending is somewhat visually pleasing (sparks fly - literally)
and Baye does a good job playing the unhappy lead desperately clinging to
her youth, the film failed to strike an emotional chord.  It is refreshing
to see a movie that features women (both in front of and behind the camera)
refrains from bashing all men, like pictures of this ilk tend to do.  Baye
is 52 in real life, but can easily pass for Angčle's early 40s.
Venus was written and directed by French actress Tonie Marshall, who crams
the film's beauty shop scenes full of colorful pastels.  She adds some
unique camera angles and there are several interestingly edited segments,
but other than that and Baye's standout performance, there just isn't much
to gush about.  Venus did sweep through the 2000 César Awards (the French
version of the Oscars) like Ted Kennedy through happy hour, winning trophies
for Best Film, Director and Screenplay.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In writer/director Tonie Marshall's VENUS BEAUTY INSTITUTE (VÉNUS BEAUTÉ 
INSTITUT), Angčle, a beautician long-ago scarred by a love affair gone 
bad, is on the prowl for quick sexual flings with strangers.  "Love is 
just another form of slavery," she explains to Antoine (Samuel Le 
Bihan), an old-fashioned kind of guy, who repulses her by pursuing her 
rather than the other way round and who prefers love before sex.
Angčle is played by Nathalie Baye, who appeared recently and quite 
impressively in AN AFFAIR OF LOVE, an infinitely better film with a 
remarkably similar plot.  In VENUS BEAUTY INSTITUTE, a light-weight 
comedy and slice-of-life character study, she gets the only fleshed-out 
character.  The rest of the cast are given parts that are little more 
than caricature.  Most of the movie has her pursuing men who aren't 
particularly interested in her, while avoiding the only one who really 
is.
The Venus Beauty Institute, where Angčle works, has a potpourri of 
clients, but most are elderly women looking for miracle cures to stop 
their skin from aging.  "It takes the skin down memory lane," Madame 
Nadine (Bulle Ogier), the shop's proprietor, lectures Angčle and her 
fellow beauticians about one of the beauty shop's many magical 
concoctions, which range from anti-aging creams to seaweed wraps.
The story is full of whimsical subplots.  One is about a young woman 
with a killer body who always shows up wearing only a trench coat and 
high heels for her tanning session.  She loves to parade around the 
salon strip naked, which attracts the eyes of passersby on the street.  
Another involves a man who comes in to get his wife's skin treated.  
After he was badly burned, his wife gave him the skin off of her buttock 
to be grafted onto his face.  Since she is now deceased, he feels 
obligated to take good care of what little is left of her.
Probably the most interesting part of the movie is it's choice of perky 
colors of pink and powder blue.  This is complemented by the salon's 
relentlessly cheery chimes, which ring whenever a customer enters or 
exits.  Although pleasant enough, the movie, with its most memorable 
parts being its color scheme and sound effects, is not something worth 
recommending.  Nathalie Baye's other recent film, AN AFFAIR OF LOVE, on 
the other hand, is outstanding and definitely worth recommending.
VENUS BEAUTY INSTITUTE runs 1:45.  The film is in French with English 
subtitles.  It is not rated but would be an R for full-frontal nudity, 
sex and language.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Norm Schrager
A movie that centers around the workplace can end up feeling like a
sitcom.  You have a couple of principal characters whose lives are
examined, and a small cast of others that are thrown in to add pizazz to
the storytelling.  This may work in a well-written 22-minute TV show,
but in Venus Beauty Institute it results in a film that eventually loses
its focus, trying to rely on passion that just ain't that passionate.
Pity poor Angčle (Nathalie Baye).  She toils away at the titular French
beauty salon during the day, and looks for quick sexual encounters at
night.  In her 40s, she feels too burned by the loves in her past to get
hurt again, and instead finds her happiness in hunting down men with
whom to have trysts.  Early in the film, she quickly approaches a
stranger in a cafeteria, tactlessly luring him away from dinner so they
can do it in his car.  We get the feeling that she wants more -- a funny
opening sequence where she gets dumped helps -- but she's too headstrong
for that.
Angčle won't commit, and neither does Venus Beauty Institute. 
Writer/director Tonie Marshall has the right idea for two-thirds of the
movie, putting nearly all her efforts to crafting Angčle, diving into
what could be a complex character.  We see her public side at the salon
as well as her private life, and Marshall surrounds her with a circle of
people in both, including an engaged, scruffy-looking guy who falls
instantly in love at the sight of her (what is it with the French and
leading men that look like Gerard Depardieu?!).  We get to see her new
relationship with him as well as her friends, acquaintances, and
customers at the salon.
But once Marshall starts spending more time with others, we lose
interest.  With the time invested in Angčle, we don't really care to see
the supporting characters from the salon outside of that setting.  With
its pink and peach color design in the midst of bustling Paris, the shop
provides a creative contrast to the rest of the movie, and some of the
film's best and quirkiest scenes are right there -- maybe the story
should've never left that set.  But when Marshall decides that we need
to know more about Angčle's buddies, the movie and the salon lose their
flavor.
As Angčle, veteran French actress Baye (The Man Who Loved Women) brings
out as much of this complex character as possible, and was nominated for
France's César Award (the movie won four, including Best French Film). 
Bearing a resemblance to Kathy Baker, she shows a life of weariness and
street smarts on her face, looking like she was once a stunning beauty
who now needs to remind herself of that.  Baye delivers Angčle's
aggressive come-ons and facial mannerisms with a matter-of-fact attitude
that shows off real natural talent.
But as lively as she makes Angčle, Baye can't hold up the finale of the
movie on her own.  The final act makes Venus Beauty Institute too long,
as Marshall stretches the story beyond a comfortable length, and throws
in some stupid, predictable plot points.  Thinking that this would be
great for say, a Sunday afternoon video rental, I was proven wrong by
the movie's finale.  And the final shot, meant to come off as magical
and romantic, is too contrived just like, well, many sitcoms.
Director: Tonie Marshall
Producer: Gilles Sandoz
Writer: Tonie Marshall
Starring:  Nathalie Baye, Bulle Ogier, Samuel Le Bihan, Jacques
Bonnaffé, Mathilde Seigner, Audrey Tatou, Robert Hossein, Edith Scob,
Marie Rivičre, Hélčne Filličres
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Laura Clifford
Angele (Nathalie Baye, "An Affair of Love") works at the Venus Beauty
salon with her much younger colleagues Marie (Audrey Tautou) and 
Samantha (Mathilde Seigner, "Dry Cleaning").  Marie is a naive young girl 
being courted by an elderly widowed client (Robert Hossein, "Rififi").
Rebellious Samantha has too many boyfriends.  Angele, emotionally
hurt by a love affair which left her lover (Jacques Bonnaffe, "Lucie
Aubrac") literally scarred, promiscuously seeks one night stands. 
Then the young and handsome Antoine (Samuel Le Bihan, "Red") insists he
is in love with her and begins to follow her in writer/director
Tonie Marshall's 1999 Cesar Best Film winner, "Venus Beauty Institute."
Venus Beauty is a pink and blue microcosm of female society where males 
hover at the periphery of its harp chiming glass door.  Its chic owner
Madame Nadine (Bulle Ogier, "The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie")
advises Angele that she should own her own salon as she 'won't be one
of the girls forever,' yet Angele persists in her depressing, emotionally
angry lifestyle.
Ironically, for a woman who apparently seeks no relationship ties, Antoine
first falls for Angele when he observes her being dumped at a train station
by a weekend lover she clearly wishes to see again.  Angele treats the
impassioned young man horribly, getting drunk on their first 'date.'
Antoine rejects her sexual advances because of her agressive, unaffectionate
manner.  It's not until Angele sees Antoine speaking with Samantha in
the salon that she realizes she may reciprocate his feelings.  There's
another hitch, though - Antoine has a 20 year old fiance (Helene Fillieres)
who begins to shadow him just as he shadowed Angele.
Meanwhile, life in the salon goes on with customers such as Madame Buisse
(Claire Nebout), an exhibitionist who struts her buff stuff in the reception
area much to Madame Nadine's dismay and passersby's delight.  Director
Claire Denis is also on hand as an asthmatic massage client.  Samatha fights 
with Nadine and becomes suicidal.  Angele dissaproves of Marie's flirtation 
with Monsieur Lacheney until her and Antoine's spying upon the consummation of
that relationship fires their own spark.
Marshall's Cesar-winning script perfectly captures the life of the salon 
business and spins an intriguing subplot with Marie's April/December romance.
However it's main character Angele is a frustrating one - you want to reach
into the screen and shake her.  Her relationship with former lover Jacques
is perplexing.   Does she love him?  Did he dump her?  What keeps them from
entirely breaking their bond?  The ending of the film, which can be taken
at face value or seen as a fantasy, is not only downright weird but
terrifically unsatisfying as it makes you dislike the very conclusion you've 
been hoping for.
Technically, the film is terrific featuring strong art direction for the
shop (Michel Vandestien, "Nobody Loves Me") and fluid camera by Gerard de
Battista ("French Twist").
Acting is strong all around.  Samuel Le Bihan is a shaggily appealing
obsessive.  Newcomer Audrey Tautou is one to watch and plays beautifully
opposite veteran actor Robert Hossein, who never comes across as a dirty 
old man, but a courtly suitor.  Veteran actress Bulle Ogier shows just the
right amount of businesslike tartness peeking from behind her outward style 
and charm.  Baye makes us feel Angele's troubled emotional state by the 
strain we can see around her eyes.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 VENUS BEAUTY INSTITUTE (Vénus beauté (institut)) (director/writer:
 Tonie Marshall; screenwriters: Mario Vernoux/Jacques Audiard;
 cinematographers: Gérard De Battista/Eric Brun/Stéphane Degnieau;
 editors: Jean- Jacques Ferran and Eric Thomas; cast: Nathalie Baye
 (Angčle), Bulle Ogier (Nadine), Samuel Le Bihan (Antoine), Jacques
 Bonnaffé (Jacques), Mathilde Seigner (Samantha), Claire Nebout (Madame
 Buisse), Robert Hossein (Aviator, Mr. Lachenay), Audrey Tautou
 (Marie); Runtime: 105; Lot 47 Films; 1999-France)
A bittersweet romantic comedy, French style. The one thing this film has
going for it, is Nathalie Baye in the starring role. She's been around
as a star ever since her 1973 role in Truffaut's "Day for Night" and Bob
Swaim's well-received "La Balance" (1982); Godard's 1979 Every Man for
Himself made her an international star. But, she has hardly had American
recognition because most of her over 50-films were not released in the
States. Here she stars as Angčle, an attractive forty-year-old
beautician working in the titled Parisian salon. She has a life history
of one-night stands because she's afraid of looking for love and getting
dumped on, as she once was when she was more trustful of men. This
became a very popular French film winning France's César awards for best
picture, best director, best young actress and best screenplay.
The film opens with Angčle, at a train station café, talking about
future plans with her much younger lover, who seems disinterested. When
she finishes, he insultingly tells her their affair is over because she
has a skinny ass. She's so hurt by this that she makes a public scene,
shouting curses at him and threatening to stalk him. Watching this take
place is a young bearded sculptor, Antoine (Le Bihan), who becomes
fascinated with her and stalks her.
In this romantic comedy, the two destined lovers must overcome all the
emotional barriers that separate them before their romance could be
fully tested. As is the custom in a French film of this kind, love is
the most important thing in the world. The film keys in on the working
class girl, who is concerned about aging and being alone. She has to put
aside her personal troubles and sell beauty to the varied women and few
men clients who open the salon door with the harp sounding chimes and
are inundated by the blue and pink surroundings, and all sorts of beauty
products and services for facials, massages, tanning (a Madame Buisse
(Claire Nebout) comes in without anything on under her trench coat - and
walks around nude before entering the tanning booth), or the various
other cosmetic services offered as 'feel good' treatments. The salon is
used as a metaphor for how women are deceived into thinking they can
change their surface appearances and find happiness through something as
superficial as cosmetics. It's also their one place of relaxing and
living with the lies they tell themselves, as they use this place as a
retreat from their real life problems.
Angčle is a good listener and offers friendly advice to her pampered
clients. She is trusted by the elegant business-oriented salon owner,
Nadine (Ogier), and is even encouraged by her to open up her own salon,
and she forms a workplace friendship with her two other  much younger
workers. The sexually active Samantha (Seigner) is ready to pack it in
and become a nurse, as she keeps falling in and out of love and is not
happy where she's at. While the very young and naive Marie (Tautou-Cesar
winner), is content in her job. She is gently wooed by a lonely, rich
widowed pilot (Hossein). He had a crippling accident which caused him to
have his wife's thigh skin grafted onto him and that is the reason he
comes into the salon daily so as to preserve the skin. He gives her
jewelry gifts and demands nothing in return, but Marie doesn't mind
pleasing him. Angčle is just a little puzzled why he didn't choose her.
At first, we don't know what to make of Antoine, whether he's a psycho
or just a drifter, as his straggly appearance is not appealing to
Angčle. When he catches up with her in a coffee shop after stalking her
at her salon, he comes on so strong that it's either a bit frightening
or weirdly comical. He tells her: "I can't stop thinking of you -- I
love you so much."
His plea for affection is so strong: that he shaves off his beard to
look more presentable for her, treats her to a delicious restaurant meal
and refuses a blow job because she's drunk. He tells her the truth about
breaking up with his beautiful young fiancee, and turns out to be an
intelligent and sensitive person; this makes Angčle rethink her attitude
about avoiding a true love affair.
In her confused state she still clings to her former boyfriend, whom she
doesn't love but  she still needs around to console her, the facially
scarred, so-called loser, Jacques (Bonnaffé). She also shows how she can
waltz into a restaurant alone and pick out the most attractive man,
albeit a married one, sit down with him, talk nonsense and go for a
quick bang shortly afterwards.
The beauty in this film is in the way Baye interprets her character's
many moods and of how she lives with the mental pain that she suffers
from, but still is a lively person who is capable of finding what joy
there is in her life while also maintaining a friendly, non-competitive
relationship with her clients and fellow workers.
It's a sexy French romp into familiar territory, with characters who
don't tell us much about what's inside them. But, "Venus..." is able to
remain pleasantly atmospheric until the nonsensical melodramatic climax,
when its charmed life runs out of charm.
There's nothing new uncovered about relationships here, in fact the main
relationship is more absurd than real. But Nathalie Baye is able to
carry off this fantasy romance story further than it deserved to go, and
for that alone it's worth a look.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
