Title
Review for Substance of Fire, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
(Reviewer's Note)
     I saw THE SUBSTANCE OF FIRE at the press screening.  It opens
nationwide on December 6.  Locally in the San Jose area, I am not sure
of where it will be opening, but my guess is that it will be either the
AMC or the UA theater chain.
     THE SUBSTANCE OF FIRE is a movie that tries hard to be unlikable
and succeeds.  The script by Jon Robin Baitz, based on his play, is
populated with unlovable characters who hate each other.  Besides being
about as much fun to watch as witnessing your neighbor's squabbles, the
movie is on the low end of the believability scale.
     The film starts extremely well, and since this was an early
screening, there were no press kits available and I had no idea what to
expect.  In the poignant opening scene a young boy views a group of
Nazis burning books.  This is the best and only completely satisfying
part of the show, but it lasts a mere two minutes before the picture
switches to the present.
     In the lavishly appointed Manhattan offices of a book publisher,
the people are arguing over what books to publish and how expensive to
make the elaborate bindings.  This is a family firm controlled by
father Issac Geldheart (Ron Rifkin).
     Issac's son Aaron (Tony Goldwyn) wants to publish the obvious to
be best seller of his lover Val.  With a death wish for his family's
fortune, Issac rejects the novel with the put-down, "You think I'm
going to publish some trashy novel by some slicko hipster?" Instead
Issac wants to do yet another expensive book about the Holocaust.
Their last Holocaust treatise sold just 17 of the 500 printed copies.
     The father plans on publishing a four volume set by his friend
Louie (Ronny Graham) that chronicles the medical experiments of the
Nazis.  He intends to have all of the books hand bound and to use
extremely expensive paper even if it bankrupts the company.  Since the
company is currently broke, spending money you don't have will
certainly force it into receivership.
     The rest of the family consists a daughter Sarah (Sarah Jessica
Parker) and a son Martin (Timothy Hutton).  The mother died a year and
a half ago, and Issac tells his children how awful she was.  The whole
family is dysfunctional in various ways, and poor Martin is dying of a
long term illness.
     In an example of the trite and pompous sentiments typical of the
script, landscape architect Martin asks his students about a field of
grass, "What is the one thing that landscape architecture requires?"
One of his pupils replies, "A social motif."  He proudly tells her she
is "right" and that what is missing in this meadow is a social motif.
     Although daughter Sarah has grown up in a publishing family, she
has no love for books and remarks to her brother Aaron, "Tell me the
truth.  Does anybody actually finish a book once they have formed an
opinion of it?"  Sarah makes her living acting in a cliched kid's TV
show.  She spends her off hours having an affair with the married
producer of the show.
     There is one classic Dilbert style line in the film.  When a
Social Services person comes by to examine Issac's competency, she
explains that there is no individual responsibility in evaluating his
case.  "It's a process.  No one person can come to a conclusion."  It's
not me, I'm just part of this bureaucracy.  Kafka would have liked the
scene.
     The show is devoid of any characters you care about.  Director
Daniel Sullivan has his actors thumb their noses at the audience.  If
the script were more insightful, perhaps its cadence would be
tolerable, but as written, it is merely banal and implausible.  There
is no way this family would have ever been capable of amassing a
fortune much less keeping it for more than a month.
     Much of the show is pure hokum.  When the script is not insulting,
it attempts overwrought sentimentality.  The director does not deliver
a single subtle moment.  The music and the cinematography are sincere
and somber, quite fitting for a much stronger film than this piece of
nonsense.
     THE SUBSTANCE OF FIRE runs 1:47.  It is rated R for some uses of
the F word.  The show is a mild R and would be fine for any teenager
and probably for those a bit younger.  There is no reason to see this
meaningless show so I do not recommend it.  It gets a single * in my
book.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 3/14/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:37
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Ron Rifkin, Tony Goldwyn, Timothy Hutton, Sarah Jessica Parker, 
      Ronny Graham, Elizabeth Franz, Gil Bellows, Eric Bogosian
Director: Daniel G. Sullivan
Producers: Jon Robin Baitz, Randy Finch, Ron Kastner
Screenplay: Jon Robin Baitz based on his play
Cinematography: Robert D. Yeoman
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     Spending 100 minutes with the Geldharts seems a little too much 
like a penance for past misdeeds.  THE SUBSTANCE OF FIRE, adapted by Jon 
Robin Baitz from his 1989 play, is an unfortunate motion picture filled 
with poorly-developed characters and half-realized, cliche-riddled plot 
elements.  Aside from a powerful performance by Ron Rifkin (reprising 
his stage role) and a few quietly effective scenes, there's not much 
reason to subject yourself to a film this off-putting.
     One of the most evident flaws in THE SUBSTANCE OF FIRE is that it 
doesn't put much effort into developing its characters.  Each is 
introduced with an anecdote (one is teaching, another is on television, 
a third is having a meeting with Japanese bankers), and that's supposed 
to be sufficient to establish who they are.  It's not, and, as a result, 
we have to work hard to generate any emotional response to them as the 
movie progresses.  Too often, it seems like we're watching the 
inventions of a writer rather than unique individuals.
     Rifkin plays Isaac Geldhart, the sole survivor of a family that was 
wiped out in the Holocaust.  Isaac carries around a huge burden of 
guilt, and, as a form of atonement, he has devoted the bulk of his adult 
life to publishing volumes about the Holocaust and its aftermath.  
Geldhart/Kreeger Books has become "the single most important publisher 
of serious literature", but the imprint's specialization has led to 
financial ruin.  It has been six years since Geldhart/Kreeger has had a 
bestseller and the firm is "hemorrhaging money".  Without some sort of 
change, it will go under, but Isaac is unwilling to compromise. 
     So Isaac's children get involved to keep the company afloat.  Each 
represents a different, easily-identifiable stereotype.  There's Aaron 
(Tony Goldwyn), the gay child who never got out from under his father's 
thumb.  He manages Geldhart/Kreeger's finances but has been given no 
creative control.  Martin (Timothy Hutton) suffers from cancer, but it's 
in remission.  He tries to avoid his family as often as he can, since 
the stress of interacting with them could cause his symptoms to re-
emerge.  Finally, there's Sarah (Sarah Jessica Parker), who hosts a 
children's television show while engaging in a dalliance with a married 
man (Roger Rees).  Like Martin, she prefers not to get involved in the 
firm, but changes her mind when Aaron makes it clear that, if things 
continue as they're going, there won't be a business at all.
     THE SUBSTANCE OF FIRE doesn't offer much to chew on.  The story 
isn't especially engrossing and neither Baitz nor director Daniel G. 
Sullivan (who directed the stage play) bring anything new or vital to 
its telling.  For the most part, we're watching characters go through 
the motions.  It's dull, pedantic, and pointless, and the final coup de 
grace, which is supposed to bring a sense of closure to the situation, 
feels contrived and out-of-place.  It's an ending that makes the whole 
movie seem like a cheat.
     The weightiest and most potentially interesting aspect of THE 
SUBSTANCE OF FIRE centers around Isaac's guilt and how it has shaped his 
life.  As a child, he was hidden from the Nazis, but he had to watch as 
his parents and siblings were taken away to their deaths.  Had the 
script chosen to explore Isaac's tortured psyche more deeply, this could 
have been a compelling issue.  Instead, however, we are presented with a 
frustratingly shallow surface view that depicts Isaac as an ogre who's 
more interested in controlling his children than loving them.  Rifkin's 
top-notch performance gives Isaac a forceful personality, but not a 
particularly deep or sympathetic one. It's easier to dislike Isaac than 
to understand him.  And, rather than dealing with the generational 
conflict in a forthright manner, Baitz's script is compelled to 
introduce yet another standby plot device -- inflict Isaac with creeping 
senility.
     Aside from Rifkin, the acting of the leads is uniformly bland.  
Neither Timothy Hutton, Tony Goldwyn, nor Sarah Jessica Parker seem 
comfortable in their roles.  In Parker's case, this is surprising, since 
she played Sarah on stage.  Two of the supporting cast members -- Ronny 
Graham as the author of a history of Nazi medical experiments and 
Elizabeth Franz as Isaac's devoted secretary -- steal scenes, although 
not enough to prevent THE SUBSTANCE OF FIRE from inducing boredom.
     For a film like this to work, the characters have to seem real, the 
situations have to be interesting, and the approach needs to be fresh.  
Baitz and Sullivan are 0-for-3.  Tired dysfunctional family cliches 
utilizing stock characters rarely translate into effective drama. What 
little impact this film attains can be attributed directly to Rifkin's 
work.  Without him, this would have been a sorry project.  Ultimately, 
THE SUBSTANCE OF FIRE is pretty insubstantial.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
