Title
Review for Chasing the Deer (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jim Jackson
Scotland 1994 
Rated:  PG (Parental Guidance)
Starring: Brian Blessed, Ian Cuthbertson, Carolyn Konrad, Jake D'Arcy,
          Jacqueline Pirie, Fish, Matthew Zajac, Jock Ferguson,
          Dominique Carrara, 
Director: Graham Holloway
Producer: Bob Carruthers
Screenplay: Jerome Vincent, Bob Carruthers, Steve Gillham
Photography:  Alan M Trow
Music: John Wetton, Bob Marlett, Bob Mitchell
       Runrig, Fish
Released by Cromwell Productions
     The film is set in Scotland in the aftermath of the Jacobite
rebellions in the the early 18th Century.  Across the highlands rumours
abound of the return of Prince Charlie, son of the exiled Jacobite
King.
     Young Euan (Lewis Rae) is learning to shoot deer under the
guidance of his father Alistair (Matthew Zajac).  A Jacobite party
appears in the village intent on pressing men into the service of King
James, they are led by Cameron (played by Fish) who bears a bitter
grudge against the innkeeper Tam (Jake D'Arcy).  Tam's killing is
witnessed by Euan who manages to shoot one of the Jacobites before
being taken prisoner himself.
     Alistair hearing that his son is now with the Jacobites joins up
himself as Cameron insists that is the only way that he can be sure
that no harm will come to Euan.  However Euan's party is ambushed by
Hanoverian troops and he becomes a drummer in the government ranks.
While his father fights with the Jacobite army during their advance to
Edinburgh and on into England, Euan's commander Major Elliot (Brian
Blessed) takes a shine to him as his own dead son would have been of
similar age.
     The climax of the film is the battle of Culloden where father and
son fight unknowingly on opposing sides. At the height of the battle
Euan is killed.  Seeing his son, Alistair runs to his aid. A shocked
Major Elliot notices the Jacobite soldier leaning over the body of his
favourite and in a rage strikes him down.
     The film's message is clearly anti-war, it does not glamorise the
Jacobite rebellion of 1745 instead it shows, with historical accuracy,
what the events of 1745-46 meant for a highland family.
     CHASING THE DEER was almost entirely funded by public subscription
and the small budget has inevitably meant that there has had to be
compromise.  For example, the film does not move smoothly from one
scene to the next.  However, the quality and accuracy of the costumes
and scenery belies this low budget production.
     There are good performances notably from Fish (former singer with
Marillion) and Jock Ferguson who plays Lord Murray.
     For anyone with an interest in Scottish history and what the 1745
meant for ordinary Scots, this film is essential viewing.
