Title
Review for Atlantic City (1980)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Atlantic City" is a character study that falls
short of expectations.  While the characters are
interesting, their actions are not always credible.
The film's message is unclear as well.
Sally (Susan Sarandon) is training to become a casino
dealer, and dreams of escaping her dreary routine
to live a cultured life, perhaps in Paris.
Lou (Burt Lancaster) is an aging small-time hood,
financially dependent upon a miserly and abusive
(by choice) elderly woman (Kate Reid).  Unknown to Sarandon,
Lancaster is in love with her.
Lancaster still has ambitions of becoming a big-shot.
He stumbles upon a financial windfall (a large
amount of cocaine, and a customer who badly wants it).
He promptly changes his lifestyle, living for the
moment and playing sugar daddy to Sarandon.  Sarandon gladly
goes along for the ride, using Lancaster for all he can
give her.
"Atlantic City" has some problems with the actions
of the main characters.  We are to believe that
Sarandon poses topless at length in front of an
unshuttered window every night, and that Lancaster
is able to peep at her unseen, every night.
Sarandan's husband Dave (Robert Joy) is the lowest form of
street-life vermin.  Why would she have married
him?  Her stated reason is to escape Saskatchewan,
but there are better ways of doing that.
Why would she let him move in with her again?
Joy cannot sell his stolen cocaine, because he looks
like the weasel he is.  But he could find another
customer, or clean up his act, rather than putting
complete trust in stranger Lancaster, who could steal the
cocaine or the money, or report him to police.
Joy is brutally murdered by hoods.  I don't have
problems with the murder, but the hoods make no
effort to get Joy to reveal where the cocaine and/or
money is, a subject that they would soon be fixated
with.
Lancaster tells the hoods that he has the cocaine and
money, ostensibly to protect Sarandon and promote
himself as a big-shot, but he has to have known the
negative consequences of this action.  He is also
fond of telling everyone that he has just killed
two gangsters, which does not seem credible even
given his need for recognition.
After Lancaster shoots one of the hoods, the other
hood just stands there, waiting to be shot as well.
Reid is apparently bedridden throughout the film,
but is up and walking without problems in the final
scene.
"Atlantic City" was shot on location in New Jersey and
has a largely American cast, but is a Canadian production.
The consensus on "Atlantic City" is that it is an
outstanding character study.  Since my opinion is
definitely in the minority, there is a good chance
that I have not interpreted the film correctly.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Walter Frith
Some actors find success in their careers sooner rather than later and vice
versa but in the case of Burt Lancaster it was pretty much a smooth ride all
the way.  Lancaster died in 1994 his career began in 1946 with a picture
entitled 'The Killing' and his career really took off in the 1950's with 'Jim
Thorpe: All American' (1951), 'Come Back Little Sheba' (1952) and the movie
that would bring him his first Oscar nomination, 'From Here to Eternity'
(1953).  'From Here to Eternity' would win eight Oscars and really launch
Lancaster's career and he would win the Best Actor Oscar in 1960 for 'Elmer
Gantry'.  In that film he played a second rate preacher whose moral
followings were called into question.  Lancaster's career cooled off somewhat
in the late 1960's and for most of the 70's but he would make a comeback with
one on his finest performances in 'Atlantic City U.S.A.' (1980).  This
Canadian and French production first released abroad with the above mentioned
title would come to the U.S. in 1981 with the title 'Atlantic City' and play
across the country including a run in a Los Angeles theatre to qualify it for
Oscar consideration which it got being nominated for five Oscars: Best
Picture, Actor (Lancaster), Actress (Susan Sarandon), Director (Louis Malle)
and Original Screenplay (John Guare).  It would not win any of them.
Lancaster plays Lou, a man who brags about a flamboyant and high profile
career in crime but in reality is a small time loser with dreams that never
succeeded into making him anything more than a two bit hood.  He and Sarandon
live in the same apartment building and he watches her constantly through his
window and secretly falls in love.  Director Louis Malle brilliantly directed
this film with a distinctly European flavour and managed to tell a story
without pretention and one full of strong characters.  Sarandon plays a
casino employee training to become a hot shot card dealer and that isn't the
only deal that goes down.  Her sister and lover come to visit and the lover
(Canadian actor Robert Joy) becomes involved in a drug deal which embroils
Sarandon and Lancaster heavily in the plot.
Lancaster's character would prove to have some noble qualities as he tries to
protect Sarandon's honor and life from the scum of society.  His romantic
consumation of their relationship is based purely on lust while Sarandon uses
him in a somewhat justifiable manner out of a sense of survival and need.
 It's one of the most unusual love stories you will ever see.  'Atlantic
City' manages to convince its audience that while it stands up as a
respectable character study, it's also a story of human nature at its most
immoral and has the stamina to invoke itself as a classic motion picture
without popularity but takes its place as a buried treasure.  
Other members of the cast are largely made up of talented actors and notable
personalities such as English born but Canadian raised Kate Reid and
Canadians Hollis McLaren, Harvey Atkin and Al Waxman.
Comments on this review may also be sent to wfrith@icom.ca
Visit Mr. Frith's 'Movie Reviews' section of 'The Review' at
http://www.arrowweb.com/review 
