Title
Review for Ngo hai sui (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
E.J. Winner
The gradual introduction and growing popularity of Jackie Chan in America has 
from the beginning been fraught with odd twists and turns.  "Rumble in the 
Bronx" at last popularized Chan for American audiences, but Chan cultists 
tend to hold this to be a disappointingly trivial film.  These cultists 
generally came to Chan via  "Drunken Master" some years before the release of 
"Rumble", and still hold that film in high esteem - even though it is 
actually inferior to a number of later Chan films, including the 1994 sequel 
"Drunken Master II".
The release of "Rumble" was followed-up theatrically with the release of 
"Operation Condor"; the problem with this is that "Condor" is actually the 
sequel to "Armour of God", a more interesting and more problematic film, 
which was released in America only on video.
Chan solidified his "Rumble" reputation with the extraordinarily 
energetic "Supercop", which also introduced Michelle Yeoh to American 
audiences two years before her appearance in the James Bond film "Tomorrow 
Never Dies".  "Supercop", by the way, is also a sequel to a previous film, 
"Police Story", which only appeared in the US on video.
Chan then embarked on 3 film ventures almost guaranteed to subvert his 
reputation: the James Bond imitation "First Strike";  the low-key, difficult 
to follow "Mr. Nice Guy", and the disastrous "Rush Hour", which apparently 
succeeded at the box-office, much to my disappointment.
This year, the continuing saga of Chan's appearance of America continued 
on its twisted way.  A film made around 1985 was re-dubbed and released 
theatrically: "Twin Dragons".  The odd thing about this is that "Twin 
Dragons" has been available in America on vuideotape for at least ten years!  
Meanwhile, almost simultaneously, Chan's most recent Asian release, 
1998's "Who am I?" was also released in America - but only on video! 
The odd thing about this simultaneous release is that Who am I is 
decidedly the better of the two films. So before remarking on "Who am I?", a 
brief note on "Twin Dragons":  This film, co-directed by Tsui Hark and Ringo 
Lam (although Lam claims he only acted as second-unit pick-up director), is 
loosely based on a Claude Van Damme film, "Double Impact" and was made (very 
quickly) as a benefit for the Hong Kong Director's Guild. It is enjoyable, 
and has one or two remarkable stunts, but on the whole is a bit of fluff, 
even by the standard of "pure entertainment.
On the other hand, "Who am I?" - co-directed by Chan and Benny Chan (no 
relation) - is a well mounted stunt-and-fight-filled maze of plot and theme, 
as Chan stars as a commando with amnesia in a struggle with a corrupt CIA 
agent over a recently discovered explosive element derived from a meteorite; 
the film moves from South Africa to the Netherlands, and involves 
considerable double plays and double-guessing on the part of Chan's character 
as he struggles to reclaim his memory while also stopping the corrupt CIA 
agent from successfully selling the new element to the highest bidder.  The 
message of the film is very positive, and the action is lively; the editing 
and camera-work are worthy of commendation.
There are some draw-backs to the film: Relationships between Chan's 
character and, first, a tribe of South Africans, and then later two women 
helping him, are never fully developed; thus Chan's character, rich in 
potential, is never developed fully, since this would require greater 
interaction with others. 
For Chan fans the film is also disappointing in a number of subtle ways: 
the stunt work here tends to belie Chan's claim that he works "without a 
net"; i.e., without safety-supports.  The slide down the skyscraper. for 
instance, is too obvioulsy along a guide wire.
Secondly, the climatic final kung-fu battle between Chan and two 
kick-boxing thugs, while well done and exciting in itself, is clealry derived 
from the climatic finale of the much better "Drunken Master II." 
Both these problems raise an important issue which has been buzzing 
around Chan Fans for a couple years now - namely, is the master running out 
of steam? Is he perhaps growing too old for the kind of acrobatics his stunts 
and fights require?
Well, stay tuned for the next episode of the saga...

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
Jackie Chan may not make the best films, but there's no question that he makes
some of the most entertaining and audience-friendly ones.  "It's not Bach," a
friend once said, "but it is at least Offenbach."
"Who Am I?", a Hong Kong production which was released direct-to-video
through Columbia TriStar, is very much in the same vein as "Rumble in the
Bronx".  Its plot is mostly a clothesline on which Jackie hangs as many
stunts, visual gags, bits of derring-do, slapstick, and everything else that
isn't hammered down.
And what of the plot, you ask?  Jackie plays a member of a secret military
platoon who're deployed to get their hands on a meteorite fragment that can be
used as an energy source.  The platoon is betrayed from within, and Jackie
takes a chuteless nosedive from his helicopter.  He wakes up, sans memory, in
the care of a jungle tribe.  "Who am I?" he cries out, and the running
(Homeric?) gag of the movie is that Whoami becomes his name.  (The tribe, BTW,
is depicted with a surprising amount of sensitivity and intelligence given the
movie's pedigree.  They've got T-shirts and binoculars, and understand that
Jackie fell out of a crashed copter, not some Great Metal Sky-Bird.)
The movie actually gets a lot less mileage out of Jackie's memory loss as a
plot device, but it gets a lot of mileage regardless.  Jackie saves a
motorcross driver from snakebite (driving the ATV over the finish line
himself); gets mixed up with a journalist who wants to write about his story;
wrecks a Mitsubishi sports car; winds up in the Netherlands, throwing wooden
shoes at the bad guys; and gets into a rooftop fight with two astonishingly
brutal savate' fighters.  The usual stuff, but it's served up with a good
sense of fun and a fast-moving camera.
And of course, we get to see Jackie's end-of-movie outtakes.  It wouldn't be a
Jackie Chan film without at least one shot of him on the stretcher -- although
this time around, we get to *hear* outtakes as well, from the studio sessions
where Jackie sang the title tune.  And as a singer, Jackie's mostly a pretty
good stuntman.  Like the man says: not Bach, I guess, but certainly Offenbach.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
R. L. Strong

TriStar Pictures presents a Golden Harvest / Leonard K. C. Ho Production
Jackie Chan  WHO AM I?  Michelle Ferre    Mira Yamamoto   Ron Smerczak
Ed Nelson   Tom Pompert   Yannick Mbali   Washington Xisolo
Music by Nathan Wang    Cinematography by  Hang-Sang Poon
Edited by  Peter Cheung & Yau Chi Wai   Executive Producer: Leonard Ho
Produced by Barbie Tung   Screenplay by  Jackie Chan  Susan Chan  Lee Reynolds
Directed by  Benny Chan &  Jackie Chan
Since Jackie Chan broke onto the U.S. film scene with 1996's "Rumble
in the Bronx", we've been subjected to a rather mixed bag of films
starring the famed go for broke action star. The main problem with the
majority of Jackie's films is that (as many other critics have noted),
his films don't have a very strong plot line. But first and foremost,
Jackie has always been the reason to see these films. With the
upcoming release of "Who Am I?", we are witness to a vital change in
Jackie's screen trade. This time we have a plot.
The plot of the film starts off with the discovery of a strange isotope
from a meteorite found in a deep cave in some un-named location. The
isotope is checked and discovered to have unlimited energy potential.
As the isotope is being transported through South Africa, the scientist
are ambushed by an elite team of commandos (one of which is Jackie).
Stealing the computer information which could lead to harnessing this
energy, the commandoes  helicopter crashing into the brush.
Jackie awakens slowly over an undisclosed period of time. He has been
nursed back to health by an African tribe. As Jackie regains full
consciousness, he is asked by the tribesman who he is and where he
comes from. Jackie, suffering from amnesia, cannot remember his name
or how he came to be in the village. He asks the Village Chief
(Washington Xisolo), who am I? Misunderstanding him, the Chief believes
Jackie's name to be "Whoami", and this is what they call him.
Jackie is adopted by the tribe. He learns their language and their
culture, becoming a part of their society. During this time, Whoami
(Jackie Chan) regains bits and pieces of him memory. Realizing that
he most go back to civilization to discover his past, Jackie leaves
the tribe and goes off in search of himself.
This is the initial setup for the film, and I found this to be so
enjoyably quirky and different that I found myself wanting more.
Jackie's performance in the film is as good as anything he's ever
done. But those scenes in the African village are truly unique in
that we (U.S. movie-goers) finally get to see that Jackie is much
more than a high kicking stunt man. He IS an actor. The other
performances in the film are a hit and miss affair, but there is
nothing here that is as embarrassing as any of the gangsters in
"MR. NICE GUY" (1998). In fact on of the surprises of the film is
the return of Ed Nelson ("Attack of the Crab Monsters" )to the
screen as the corrupt General Sherman. Mr. Nelson is obviously
enjoying his role in this film and tries his best to give a
Cormanesque performance. The two female leads Mira Yamamoto as
race driver Yuki and Michelle Ferre as undercover CIA operative,
Christine are both working on screen for the first time and are
not called upon to do anything very strenuous, but they are
appealing and easy on the eyes.  The remainder of the cast are up
to the task, with Ron Smerczak doing a fine job as the evil arms
broker, Morgan.
Now of course everyone knows that Jackie does all of his own stunts,
and this film is no different. That "Oh My God" quality is still there
in abundance. Jackie is still the hardest working star on screen
today. We've heard other actors claim to do their own stunts, but no
one has that "go for it" attitude that Jackie has. Some critics have
called Jackie a Human yo-yo, and in one absolutely amazing stunt,
literally proves it. Trust me! Your mouth will remain open in
amazement for the next five minutes. There are fight scenes here that
are just unbelievably complex and inventively funny. A classic example
is a fight in the streets of Rotterdam with a set of Wooden Shoes.
The script by Jackie, Susan Chan and Lee Reynolds is remarkably
tight. Once the power of the isotope is explained, it becomes less of
an issue. The driving issue is tied to Jackie's attempts to rediscover
his own identity and the growing conflict he is having his past and
adoptive personality. As the film progresses, flashbacks are used to
fill in the blanks in the plot, creating a sense of urgency that is
very enjoyable. The direction by Benny Chan is reminiscent of some of
the more extreme work of Sammo Hung Kam-po. There is as much camera
movement as in any John Carpenter film, and it's use is marvelously
inventive. Co-Directed by Jackie himself (obviously handling the
action scenes) the film is a solid whole. In the past, Jackie has had
many disagreements with his directors, but here it seems that a mutual
cooperation is at work for the film holds together much better that
any of Jackie previous films since "Drunken Master 2".
The Cinematography by Hang-Sang Poon is beautiful. Africa has not
looked this majestic since "The Naked Prey" or "Born Free". Scenes of
the tribesmen shot from on high are sumptuous in their presentation,
giving these native people and their land a regal quality that is awe
inspiring.
One of the most appealing aspects of the film are the scenes with the
African villagers. In the past, it could be said that Jackie (and most
Hong Kong filmmakers) were a bit insensitive to other customs and
cultures. Here, there is nothing but honor and respect. This un-named
African tribe is presented with honor for both their customs and
individuals. The scenes of ritual dance are wonderful to watch. These
scene make you want so much more.
"Who Am I?" is a grand return from Jackie, a few mis-steps. A film
that honors Jackie's past achievements and points to a very promising
future.
Nothing in this article may be reprinted or copied without the expressed written permission of the author.
Article ) 1998 R.L. Strong
