Title
Review for Enigma (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
    CAPSULE: Dark and complex espionage thriller based on the 
    Robert Harris novel.  March 1943 the British lose their 
    former ability to decode German messages to their submarine 
    fleet.  They must either get it back or lose an important 
    shipping convoy.  An intelligent thriller perhaps a little 
    too reserved to be thrilling.  Rating: 7 (0 to 10), low +2 
    (-4 to +4)
For thirty years after the end of the World War II Britain's most 
secret weapon remained secret.  Like the US had done with the 
Manhattan Project, Britain had put many of their best minds onto 
their own scientific wartime project.  What they found could well 
have saved the war for Britain.  At minimum it shortened the war 
by at least two years by negating the Germans' most effective 
weapon, the U-boat.  The Germans communicated with their men in 
the field (or in this case the sea) with an incredibly complex 
code called Enigma.  The code was encrypted and decrypted with a 
device of mechanical and electronic components that created an 
unimaginably large number of possibilities that has to be 
considered in decoding the message.
The mathematics necessary for decoding Enigma was considered to be 
orders of magnitude beyond what any country could accomplish, even 
if the closely guarded Enigma boxes fell into the hands of the 
enemy.  What the Germans did not know was that an Enigma box had 
fallen into allied hands and teams of puzzle solvers and 
mathematicians were recruited for the purpose cracking the code.
The team was installed at Bletchley Park under the direction of 
Alan Turing.  For the first time rudimentary electronic computers 
were used to search for and test solutions.  By July of 1941 the 
work had already borne fruit and supply convoys from America were 
saved from submarine wolf packs.  It typically took two days to 
decode a message, but for many of the messages that was short 
enough time.
Then in February 1942 the code changed.  It was still Enigma, but 
a new order of complexity had been added.  The code could not be 
solved.  At the same time the strategy of the submarine packs 
changed.  The Germans could not know how great a setback it was.  
By December the Allied shipping losses had quadrupled.  It took 
ten months to recover the old capabilities and the Battle of the 
Atlantic again turned in favor of the Allies.  And so it remained.
All this is history.  It is history filmmakers have not made much 
usage of, though code breaking was an important part of World War 
II.  The film U-571 told the fictional story of Americans 
capturing an Enigma box and set it much later than the British 
actually did.  The film MIDWAY tells a little about the Americans 
efforts at code breaking.  Robert Harris wrote the novel ENIGMA, a 
mystery story set in and around the Bletchley Park project.  Tom 
Stoppard has adapted the novel into a screenplay and Michael Apted 
directs.
The premise is that in March 1943, the Germans changed the code 
again.  The British have just four days to break the modified code 
before an important convoy from New York will be entering waters 
that may have German U-boats.  Without knowledge of where the U-
boats are there is no way to avoid these waters.  With nary a 
mention of Alan Turing in the screenplay, sullen mathematician Tom 
Jericho (played by Dougray Scott) who had left the Bletchley Park 
project has been brought back onto the project.  He had been 
instrumental in breaking the code the last time, but had since 
suffered a nervous breakdown.  That breakdown was brought on by 
being rejected by lovely co-worker Claire (Saffron Burrows).  She 
was a fellow project member with whom Tom had fallen in love.  Now 
there is evidence that Claire intentionally broke project security 
and perhaps was spying for the Germans.  Tom has a double problem 
of resolving the new German code and looking for the now missing 
Claire.  Helping him is Claire's swatty and bookish housemate 
Hester Wallace (Kate Winslett).  Making life even more difficult 
is sinister and polished intelligence operator Wigram (played 
nicely by Jeremy Northam).
Tom Stoppard's adaptation is better than one might have expected 
retaining some reasonable explanation of the history and the 
mathematical issues involved without obvious expository lumps, 
though by the end of the film some technical problems are going by 
too fast to comprehend.  Perhaps in deference to Apted the script 
has some feminist touches that I do not remember from the book.  
It also has one gratuitous car chase.  John Barry has provided a 
score that is by turns lush and ominous.
An interesting chapter in history could have made for a better 
thriller, but as it stands it is reasonably exciting if reserved.  
I rate it a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low +2 on the -4 to +4 
scale.
People interested in the efforts to break the Enigma can find a 
lot of intriguing material at 
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/decoding/.  This is information to 
accompany the excellent episode of Nova "Decoding Nazi Secrets."  
Included is a transcript of that broadcast.
