Title
Review for Gone Fishin' (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Joe Pesci, Danny Glover, Rosanna Arquette, Nick Brimble, Lynn
Whitfield.
Screenplay:  Jill Mazursky Cody and Jeffrey Abrams.
Producer:  Roger Birnbaum and Julie Bergman Sender
Director:  Christopher Cain.
MPAA Rating:  PG (mild profanity, violent situations)
Running Time:  92 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I was sitting next to a Laugher as I watched GONE FISHIN'.  When I
say "Laugher," I don't just mean someone who laughs loudly, or someone who
laughs frequently.  I mean someone who laughs loudly _and_ frequently.
The most innocuous line of dialogue was greeted with a hearty chuckle,
while a full-fledged sight gag inspired the kind of explosive bellow which
I was certain would cause a loss of bladder control.  If Disney had
test-screened GONE FISHIN' for an audience comprised entirely of clones of
this fellow, the champagne corks would have been popping like bubble wrap
in the hands of a 10-year-old.
     Under most circumstances, the Laugher would have annoyed me to
distraction.  In the case of GONE FISHIN', the distraction was welcome.
The film's breathtaking awfulness forced my mind to wander in sheer
self-defense, leading me to spend a lot of time thinking about what a
splendid time the Laugher was having.  As a critic, it is sometimes useful
for me to confront how uniquely personal the movie-going experience can
be, particularly when it comes to comedy.  In my world, GONE FISHIN' was a
complete catastrophe.  In the Laugher's world, it was an unqualified
delight.
     There's certainly nothing inherently clever about the premise.  Joe
Pesci and Danny Glover play a couple of life-long pals named Joe Waters
and Gus Green, who share a love of fishing and a talent for leaving
heaping piles of rubble in their wake.  And that, ultimately, is what GONE
FISHIN' is about.  Forget the contest which sends Joe and Gus to the
Florida Everglades from their New Jersey home, forget the run-ins with a
creepy con artist (Nick Brimble) and the search for his hidden loot,
forget the cameos by Louise Fletcher and Willie Nelson (they'll certainly 
hope you do).  GONE FISHIN' is about boats crashing through plate glass
windows, exploding gas stations, exploding hotel rooms, and wild rides on
runaway vehicles of every possible kind.  In other words, it's in the
tradition of the slapstick-y live-action comedies Disney made when Dean
Jones and Kurt Russell were foiling the nefarious schemes of Joe Flynn and
Cesar Romero in various permutations.
     At least those concoctions were fast-paced and enthusiastically
silly.  For every two minutes of action in GONE FISHIN' there are at least
twenty minutes of inane chatter between Pesci and Glover.  The two are
supposed to be lovable, incurably optimistic simpletons, but someone
forgot to spend any script time on the "lovable" part.  Joe and Gus are
dull, immature and, worst of all, they simply refuse to shut up.  They're
like two long-lost Howard brothers, a pair of Stooges whose suburban
upbringing bred most of the malice out of them and left them garrulous,
well-intentioned accidental anarchists.
     Thoughts of the Three Stooges led me back to the Laugher, and his
enjoyment suddenly made a lot more sense.  He was laughing at Joe and Gus
because they were losers who managed to take con men and slick-talking
salesmen down along with them.  They were Everymen looking for a break,
but they were also trouble-makers.  The were rebels without a clue, making
an id-level connection the way the Stooges have made id-level connections
for sixty years.  It's actually a bit of an insult to the Stooges to
compare them to the ponderous shenanigans of Joe and Gus, except to note
that the audience may find the mayhem similarly appealing.  For the
Laugher, Joe and Gus's adventures were a riotous 10+.  The less
Stooge-inclined may consider them nothing but a pair of foreheads waiting
for a swinging two-by-four.  Now _that_ would be comedy.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Reteamed for the first time since the LETHAL WEAPON sequels, Joe
Pesci and Danny Glover play a pair of New Jersey numbnuts, headed to the
Everglades for their annual pre-Thanksgiving fishing trip.  There, they
promptly lose their car, then their boat, then another boat, etc. etc.
A pair of unfunny opening gags is an early indicator that director
Christopher Cain (THE AMAZING PANDA ADVENTURE, THE NEXT KARATE KID)
can't set up slapstick to save his life.  Pesci and Glover, however,
have an innocent charm that endures when the physical comedy doesn't.
(Much in the same way that Mira Sorvino and Lisa Kudrow anchored the
otherwise awful ROMY AND MICHELLE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION.)  Ok ok ok ok,
you won't split your sides, but you may enjoy the less-frantic moments.
Like when the two stooges are set upon by a smooth-talking salesman at a
boat yard.  Or when they're giving babes the "killer look." With
appearances by Carol Kane (as Pesci's wife!), Louise Fletcher, Rosanna
Arquette, and, in one of the year's most curious cameos, Willie Nelson
as an avenging angel fishing instructor.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     First, the good news.  The two leads of GONE FISHIN', Joe Pesci
and Danny Glover, mumble so many of their lines that a large portion of
the film is incomprehensible.  But the audience can hear the rest of
the movie.  That's bad news.
     Although I usually save the last paragraph of my reviews of kids'
movies for the thoughts of my 8-year-old, his summary is too precious
to hold back.  Jeffrey said, "the show was funny, but not enough to
make me laugh."  He decided the jokes were aimed at the adults and that
was why he did not get them.  Well, speaking as adult, I laughed about
as often as Jeffrey, which was just about never.
     Both Pesci and Glover have tremendous talent, but they both share
a propensity for signing up to do hopelessly bad comedies.  The script
by Jill Mazursky and Jeffrey Abrams for GONE FISHIN' alternated between
recycled humor, heavy on sight gags (long demolition derbies being
particularly popular), and frequent dead time where laughs were not
even attempted.
     That this DOA flick was not screened to the critics comes as no
surprise.  Director Christopher Cain's last theatrical release was THE
AMAZING PANDA ADVENTURE, which wasn't.  The critics were not
appreciative of his talents then, and I suspect GONE FISHIN' will be
even less well received.
     As the film opens, Joe and Gus, played later by Pesci and Glover,
are two young kids fishing.  Joe is smoking a cigar which he tosses
behind him setting off a big fire that ends up shorting out the
electricity for an entire city.  This setting buildings on fire is a
nasty habit that they will keep all of their lives.
     The film quickly switches to grown Joe, wearing a "Fish Newark and
Die" T-shirt, and Gus heading south to the Florida Everglades for a big
fishing trip.  The trouble starts when Dekker Massey (Nick Brimble), a
con man so notorious that he has swindled 43 women and killed the last
one, steals their '68 Barracuda with their old fishing boat in tow.
     After the boat breaks off and crashes through a restaurant window,
our heroes start pushing the boat on the trailer down the highway.
Nothing will stop them.  Actually, the two stars give the impression of
two idiots playing two idiots.  Only because I've seen their better
pictures do I know otherwise.  An any rate, nothing of their characters
here merit seeing.
     Rita (Rosanna Arquette) and Angie (Lynn Whitfield) give Joe and
Gus a lift.  The women are looking for Dekker too and want to try to
pick the men's brains to find out what they know.  Now, there is a
hopeless job.
     Along the way, we suffer through one inanity after another.  For
example, we learn that Gus is such a solid sleepwalker after eating red
meat that he will dry his hair with an electric hair dryer, turn on the
gas on the fireplace, set his pillow on fire with a lighter, make a
phone call, and then walk quite a distance.  Glover's wooden
performance makes this long sleepwalking scene extremely tedious.
     Towards the end of the picture, their fishing idol, Billy "Catch"
Pooler (Willie Nelson), comes in almost as an apparition to rescue
them.  Catch fills them with inspiring quotations.  ("Don't forget.
The canary sings, but the eagle flies."  And that most instructive of
all, "Be the one you want to catch.")
     Dekker delivers the most accurate line in the movie.  "You
insignificant little man," Dekker barks at Joe after hearing enough of
his drivel.  "You've got a big mouth.  Now, shut it!"  I couldn't have
said it better myself.
     GONE FISHIN' runs 1:33.  It is rated PG for threatened violence.
The film would be acceptable for just about any age, but not worth
seeing by any.  Although my son claims he actually liked it, he laughed
very little.  Then again, he likes just about everything he sees.  I
was bored silly by the film so I do not recommend it.  A generous one
star from me.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Danny Glover, Joe Pesci, Rosanna Arquette, Lynn Whitfield, 
      Nick Brimble, Willie Nelson, Carol Kane 
Director: Christopher Cain 
Producers: Roger Birnbaum, Julie Bergman Sender 
Screenplay: Jill Mazursky Cody & Jeffrey Abrams 
Cinematography: Dean Samler 
Music: Randy Edelman 
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures 
     It's DUMB AND DUMBER meets LETHAL WEAPON sans Mel Gibson.  Can any 
premise be more doomed from the start?  Actually, the saddest thing 
about this unfunny, misguided motion picture is watching two performers 
I admire -- Joe Pesci and Danny Glover -- stumble their way through such 
obviously inferior material.  I suppose it's worth remembering that 
Glover and Pesci meshed well in two LETHAL WEAPON movies, albeit 
primarily because the characters were cleverly written.  Here, although 
the two actors display a certain "buddy" chemistry, that's a fragile 
thing to build a movie on.   
     As the title implies, GONE FISHIN' is about two men who go fishing.  
They're Gus (Glover) and Joe (Pesci), a couple of North Jersey guys who 
win a contest to spend a November week angling in the Florida 
Everglades.  So, hitching their rowboat to the back of Joe's '68 
Plymouth Barracuda, they head south.  Things start to go awry somewhere 
in the Carolinas when a slick con man, Dekker Massey (Nick Brimble), 
makes off with Joe's car, leaving the two men stranded.  Fortunately, 
they get a lift from Rita and Angie (Rosanna Arquette and Lynn 
Whitfield), a couple of women who are passing through on their way to 
Florida.  It turns out that Rita's mother was one of Dekker's many 
victims, and the daughter is out to recover the money he stole.  Poor 
Gus and Joe become embroiled in a situation involving guns, stolen 
jewels, and a treasure map when all they really want to do is find a 
secluded spot and cast their lines. 
     I can't help thinking that if this movie had allowed us to spend 
ninety minutes with Gus and Joe sitting in a rowboat, catching fish, and 
talking, it would have been infinitely better than what's on screen.  
Even Pesci, a decent comic actor, can't cull humor from mirthless 
material.  For the most part, GONE FISHIN' seems uncertain how to get 
laughs.  Its PG rating robs it of the opportunity to use the kind of 
flatulence jokes that turned DUMB AND DUMBER into a hit, so it settles 
for making Gus and Joe act like little kids.  That approach is a 
failure, but no one, not director Christopher Cain nor screenwriters 
Jill Mazursky Cody and Jeffrey Abrams, seems to recognize this.   
     With so few comic bits that actually succeed, GONE FISHIN' quickly 
turns into a dull and meandering affair, drifting from one cliche to the 
next.  All of the expected staples are present:  runaway boats, high-
speed chases, predictable one-liners, and a bunch of equally trite 
contrivances.  All the while, we're looking for a single bright spot -- 
one solitary thing to make us chuckle so that the $4.50 matinee price 
doesn't seem like a complete waste of money. 
     If you look hard enough, you'll find it.  One sequence with a 
sleazy boat salesman is well-written, nicely acted, and ably directed.  
It's funny, and, surprisingly enough, reasonably smart.  It also only 
lasts about three minutes, and, after that, GONE FISHIN' plunges back 
into the murky depths from which it briefly emerged.  By the time we get 
to the animatronic alligators, it's all-too-easy to forget that this 
movie contained a worthwhile moment or two.  When it comes to GONE 
FISHIN', it's best to stay home. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
