Title
Review for In the Company of Men (1997)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Alex Fung
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
With these three words, director/screenwriter Neil LaBute has crafted
an audacious opus of ruthlessness and manipulation unlikely to be
surpassed this year in its raw, savage brutality.  Certain to litter
year-end Top 10 lists across the board, IN THE COMPANY OF MEN cuts
straight to the core in its powerful depiction of misanthropy bred by
tumultuous anxiety associated with the modern cutthroat corporate
workplace -- it's a remarkably auspicious first feature for Mr.
LaBute.
Chad (Aaron Eckhart) and Howard (Matt Malloy) are diametric opposites
who make for unlikely friends: while Chad is tall, handsome,
assertive, superficially charismatic, and confidently authoritative,
Howard is short, bookish, insecure, awkward, and rather hapless.
However, it is Howard who wields the power in their professional
lives; he holds the title of project manager and Chad is his
subordinate when the two meet up at the film's outset in an airport
courtesy lounge; they've been assigned for six weeks to a Midwestern
office of their company.  Howard's authority, though, is in title
only: it's Chad who is the true leader, and when he proposes a little
sport -- to soothe their bruised male egos and as a bit of vindictive
payback to the female gender, he suggests that they find some
vulnerable and susceptible wallflower that they would both romance,
raising her spirits to dizzying heights ... and them dashing them,
and her, to pieces by unceremoniously dumping her -- Howard is unable
to resist.  They find their perfect mark in Christine (Stacy
Edwards), a young temp working at the Midwestern branch as a typist
who happens to be deaf, and unleash their malevolent plot.
In any list of Top 5 helpful tips to follow at a modern workplace,
"Watch your back" would occupy at least three of the entries, and IN
THE COMPANY OF MEN shows how the immersion of oneself into an
environment of ruthless ambition coupled with a paranoid cutthroat
mentality grooms bitterness, spitefulness, and anger.  Chad is
spawned from this system: he, as they say, knows how to play the game
-- on the surface, he's handsome, supremely self-assured, and
smoothly knows how to handle every situation -- how to charmingly say
exactly what people want to hear, or how put a convincing spin on
everything which leaves him in the best light (this naturally
requires casting everyone else in the worst light).  Chad's a mover,
a shaker, a man on the rise -- in terms of corporate America, he's a
winner.  But behind every handshake and pleasantry exchanged over
donuts and coffee before project meetings, one can almost sense the
palpable rage and malice emanating from Chad -- bitterness at being
passed over for promotion, for getting the dead-end assignments, for
failing to receive the recognition he feels is deserved; anger at
those who would dare pass him in the race up the corporate ladder,
who steal his deserved acclaim, who pose a threat for his
advancement.  "I hate that prick," Chad says of a co-worker
(actually, of many co-workers), and it's not uttered in jest or in a
light-hearted vein; he truly, completely means it.  To Chad, every
co-worker is potential competition for the pay increase or the cushy
new promotion, and is consequently an enemy -- one to be greeted
warmly, lulled into a false sense of security, and humiliatingly
betrayed.  It's Darwin's Law to the fullest extent -- survival of
the fittest -- and not only is Chad determined to be the one still
standing at the end, he's more than happy to be the one to slay off
his competitors and gloat as they squirm on their deathbeds.  "How
does it feel?"
If the competitiveness of the modern workplace creates hate-filled
monstrosities like Chad out of the strong-willed, among the weak the
pressure-cooker molds men like Howard, whose inherent insecurities,
fears, and frustrations are magnified into self-loathing.  Howard is
not an assertive man, and he clearly hates his impotency in his
professional (under his wing, his project is floundering) and
personal life (the film opens finding him tending to a bruised ear --
a parting gift from his new ex-girlfriend) -- it's obvious that
Howard admires and seeks to emulate Chad's confidence, slickness and
suavity; constantly seeking Chad's approval, it's easy to
occasionally forget that Howard is the project manager and the one
actually in the position of authority.  Howard, in short, does not
know how to play the game, which is akin to being a bloody slab of
meat in a shark-infested pool.
While IN THE COMPANY OF MEN is thunderously powerful and at times the
film's unflinching depiction of turpitude borders upon revolting, it
yet remains riveting and compulsively watchable, even wickedly funny
on many an occasion.  Mr. LaBute's incisive and daring screenplay,
filled with snappy dialogue, is wonderfully realised by an
accomplished trio of performances by the lead actors, and his use of
blaring percussive riffs as segueways between the seven separate
sections in the highly-structured film, as in Todd Solondz's WELCOME
TO THE DOLLHOUSE, jolts us and violently propels us forward.  Mr.
Eckhart's screen debut is nothing short of astonishing -- he's
deliciously villainous, an unrestrained embodiment of bile and venom
who is incomparably malicious.  It's a virtuoso performance which is
always utterly convincing, and heralds Mr. Eckhart as a bright new
talent. (Either that, or he's *really* like that -- a frightening
thought, but in either case Mr. LaBute deserves credit for his
casting.)  Ms. Edwards is superb as Christine, who proves to be more
resilient than anyone could have expected, although her depiction of
her character's deafness isn't quite credible and is consequently
mildly distracting.  Mr. Malloy is also good as Howard, perhaps the
most complex character in the film and certainly the one called upon
for the greatest emotional range, although he is overshadowed by his
castmates.
Many have pegged IN THE COMPANY OF MEN as a film about misogynism,
but this isn't a very accurate assessment.  While Chad and Howard's
game involves crushing the spirits of a vulnerable young woman, Chad
doesn't particularly hate women -- no moreso than his hatred of
everyone else, at least -- and Howard hates himself far, far more
than anyone with XX chromosomes.  What Chad understands at the outset
to their cruel sport, and what Howard fails to comprehend, is that
theirs is an environment where it's kill or be killed.  Their
malicious sport is an extension of this philosophy, and a means to an
end.  And as for sweet, innocent Christine, caught in the crossfire?
To Chad, she'll merely be a victimized bystander, a casualty of war.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Let's hurt somebody." - Aaron Eckhart, IN THE COMPANY OF MEN

Author
Ben Hoffman
It was difficult for me to picture the motives of the two
yuppie junior executives Chad (Aaron Eckhart) and Howard (Matt
Malloy).    They are unhappy with their jobs because they seem
always to be passed over when promotions are made . . . and they
are angry at the world.  So far, that is understandable.  What is
not so readily understood is the absolute meanness, perversity in
the suggestion by Chad that he and his friend find a woman who
needs love and friendship, overwhelm, her with kindness . . . and
then drop her like a bomb from on high.
True, they both have lately been having girl trouble but their
prime anger seems to be with their employment . . . and it a far
cry from that to the obscene undertaking they engage in with a
pretty woman, Christine (Stacy Edwards), a secretary.  What kind
of misogynist bastards are they?   How are we supposed to
understand, to relate to these two brutes?   What possesses someone
to think up such a vile trick and what allows another to go along
with it?
Christine is dated by both men.  While she falls madly in love
with Chad, she has strong feelings for Howard as well.  Why not?
They treat her as if she were the most desirable woman on Earth.
With her disability of being mute, able only to speak in a strange
voice, this very pretty woman is vulnerable to anyone who will
shower her with attention.
At some point, she is told by Chad that he will no longer see her.
No reason.  Just a metaphoric slam in the face.   When Howard
later confesses to her that he, too, is in on it, that it is only
a gag, I wanted to throw things at the screen.   A controversial
film?  You bet it is.
Fine acting, good dialogue, keep the film alive and worth seeing
. . . but be prepared to hate a couple of rats.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        As moviegoers, we've become accustomed to certain rules -- 
bad behavior is punished, the good guy gets the girl in the end and 
everyone is happy. Very few movies dare break the formula and fewer 
still flip the bird to everything we'd expect in a movie. IN THE 
COMPANY OF MEN does, presenting a protagonist who announces 
his evil plan toward the beginning of the film, carries it out over the 
next hour or so and then gets away with it in the end. It is not a 
feel-good movie.
        The protagonist, Chad (Aaron Eckhart), is a corporate 
employee sent to another city for six weeks on a project. During a 
night of drinking, he convinces his associate and friend Howard 
(Matt Malloy) to play a game with him. It will grant them both the 
satisfaction of getting back at the opposite sex for all the cruel 
breakups, indecipherable behavior and never picking up a check. 
What they will do is romance the same woman for six weeks, bombard 
her with attention and affection, then pull the rug out from under her 
and retreat to their hometown, confidence fully regained.
        The plan reeks of pure, heartless evil, which Chad 
personifies. His social exchanges are all governed by a falsity and 
ass-kissing most people can't seem to see through, including Howard, 
when he agrees to the plan. Chad picks a shy office assistant named 
Christine (Stacy Edwards) because she's deaf and desperate; we can 
sense this woman's insecurity right off, in the self-conscious way she 
wears headphones to disguise her hearing. She needs a good man, but 
falls hard for the wrong one.
        Howard, meanwhile, begins his part of the game and takes 
her out a few times. It's clear before too long that he's taken the 
predictable romantic comedy road -- intending to scam her but falling 
in love for real. A studio movie would have had Howard punch out 
Chad, to cheers from the audience, and embrace Christine as some 
upbeat pop song played over the end credits. IN THE COMPANY OF 
MEN is no studio movie, and develops very differently. The Hollywood 
ending would have been more enjoyable, but false, and for once the 
filmmakers' refusal to compromise has brought us a far more 
fascinating film.
        This is definitely a high-quality, well-thought-out film, 
but that's what keeps me from loving it. It's too depressing; there's 
absolutely no satisfaction to be had here. What we do get is 
characterization that rings painfully true to life -- we all know people 
like Chad who play everyone for their own cruel purposes. Consider, 
for example, what he makes his intern do. And we all know gullible 
people like Howard, who obviously doesn't want to participate in the 
scheme until he is talked into it by his "friend," and Christine, who 
becomes a victim because someone else has been hurt in the past. 
As written and directed by Neil LaBute, IN THE COMPANY OF MEN 
is the ultimate anti-date movie.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Almost 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
for more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film"
His philosophy. "Never lose control - - that is the total key to the 
universe". His outlook on women. "I don't trust anything that bleeds for 
a week and doesn't die". His idea. "Let's hurt somebody". 
Meet Chad, an attractive, glib young man who manipulates others with 
surgical efficiency. His name couldn't be more appropriate, conjuring up 
images of All-American good looks and slick superficiality. A wolf in 
preppie's clothing, Chad has charisma and knows exactly how to best 
utilize it to further his ruthless agenda. And if he destroys some people 
along the way, well...good!
"In The Company Of Men", the debut feature by Fort Wayne writer-director 
Neil LaBute, is a stark, nasty little tale of competition, power and 
cruelty. Corporate climbers Chad and Howard are sent to a small 
Midwestern town for a six-week assignment. Both men are filled with anger,
at their company for farming them out and promoting younger men ahead of 
them, and at women, for dumping them. Smiling at his toady colleague, 
Chad lays out a plan to ease their pain. During the six-week stay, the 
men will find a suitable victim, carefully build dual romantic 
relationships with her, then break her heart just before skipping town. 
"Trust me", Chad purrs, "she'll be reaching for the sleeping pills within 
a week, and we will laugh about this until we are very old men". 
Initially startled by the coldness of the plan, Howard agrees to 
participate. The men select a deaf receptionist as their prey, and the 
game is afoot.
LaBute's ultra low-budget feature, filmed for less than $25,000, created 
a sensation across the country. Despite winning an award at the Sundance 
Festival, it was one of the last films to find a distributor, thanks to 
executives skittish over the staggering misogyny of the lead characters. 
Sony Pictures Classic finally picked up the film, which has garnered some 
of the best reviews of the year.
"In The Company Of Men" is shocking, but the central conceit is nothing 
new. During the 60's, many of the frothy Rock Hudson/Doris Day comedies 
were built around the idea of men deceiving women to meet their own ends. 
One of the subplots of last years "Everybody Says I Love You" focused on 
Woody Allen building a romance with Julia Roberts based totally on deceit.
 What makes "In The Company Of Men" different isn't the premise. It's not 
even the brazenness of the plan. "In The Company Of Men" shocks because 
of the sustained cruelty of Chad and his utter lack of remorse. As Chad, 
29 year-old Aaron Eckhart is mesmerizing, a reptile with a broad smile 
and GQ good looks. He is one of the best villains in recent memory, the 
epitome of the corporate world's dark underbelly. He amuses his cohorts 
by thumbing through a company magazine and pronouncing his hatred for the 
various executives therein. He casually humiliates a young intern, 
bullying the man into pulling down his pants ("You got the balls for this?
Well, show me those clankers") then smirking and sending him off to 
fetch some coffee. But he reserves his worst for Christine, the deaf 
receptionist, wooing her with new-age sensitive-guy shtick, while mocking 
her disabilities behind her back.
While Chad is the bold Nazi, Howard functions as the "good German 
soldier", cooperating with the plan even as he develops real affection 
for Christine. As the mealy-mouthed Howard, Matt Malloy paints a 
disturbing portrait of what a person can turn into when he lacks focus 
and courage of heart. Howard appears a bit sympathetic initially, but 
ultimately his uncertain stumbling approach does as much damage as Chad. 
Stacy Edwards is exceptional as Christine, investing the character with 
enough strength to keep her from appearing to be a mere victim, and 
enough nuance to keep her from looking like a saint. Edwards, who is not-
deaf, manages to capture the unique vocal inflection of a deaf person 
without overdoing it.
Neil LaBute is a playwright and "In The Company Of Men" is very a stagy 
piece of work. LaBute uses the camera in a static fashion that invites 
the audience to examine the characters as if they were animals in a zoo. 
The result is effective, though one questions whether it was deliberate 
or simply the mark of a first-time director.
While "In The Company Of Men" deals with misogyny, the real focus of the 
film is the competition between Chad and Howard for power, personal and 
corporate. The story is extreme, but the message is clear. If never 
losing control becomes your mantra, the only thing you'll end up in touch 
with is your own inner Chad.
Rating: Four stars.

Author
Christopher Null
     Yikes!  Turning the tables on political correctness, affirmative action,
and especially, the feminist movement, never seemed so fun on film!  IN THE
COMPANY OF MEN teaches you that everything you know is wrong and slaps you in
the face for enjoying it.  This phenomenal gem is, on the surface, a simple
tale about two jilted male co-workers, who, on a six-week long business trip,
decide to take revenge on all the females of the species by jointly finding a
"corn-fed" wallflower, making feel like she's a beauty queen, then dumping her
like a sack of bricks.  Hard.  Chad (Aaron Eckhart) is the smooth one.  Howard
(Matt Malloy) is a lovable Winnie the Pooh type.  Together, they're
devastating... until "the game" ends up having unpredictable effects on the
both of them, as well as Christine (Stacy Edwards), their deaf victim. 
Unpredictable and wholly unique, IN THE COMPANY OF MEN is a powerful
moviegoing experience.  Take my advice, and watch it with someone you love.
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Rick Ferguson
Starring Aaron Eckhart, Stacy Edwards and Matt Malloy
IN THE COMPANY OF MEN made a splash at the Sundance Film Festival because,
in a year plagued by BROTHERS McMULLEN-style, earnestly shallow Gen-X angst
pictures, it seemed to be actually ABOUT something.  It angered people,
started arguments outside the theater, riled things up.  It ignited a spark
of excitement in what otherwise has been a disappointing year for
independent film.  Having endured my share of the hype, I waited calmly for
MEN to reach the hinterlands wherein I reside, and then checked in to see
what all the fuss was about.  Does MEN live up to its press?  Well, yes it
does.  And it may make you think twice before you consider dating anyone
your office.
For the uninitiated, newcomers Aaron Eckhart and Matt Malloy play Chad and
Howard, two corporate drones who are dispatched by their nameless company
to a remote branch office for a six week assignment.  Chad and Howard are
archetypes, examples of which you can no doubt find in your own place of
business.  Chad is the blond golden boy, genetically engineered for
success, the natural charmer who seems to glide effortlessly up the
corporate ladder.  Howard is Chad's boss, but he is weaker of will, the
clumsy practitioner of office politics who has achieved his position
through dogged persistence rather than raw talent.  We first meet them
awaiting their flight in a drab airport lounge.  There Chad suggests a
scheme worthy of a Shakespearean villain: he and Howard will find a
vulnerable single woman at the branch office, woo her simultaneously, win
her love, and then dump her.  The reason?  Both men have recently been
dumped themselves, and Chad sees an easy route to revenge against the
fairer sex.  "It'll restore a little dignity to our lives," he says.
Howard, helpless against the force of Chad's will, agrees to the plan. 
They quickly spot their prey in the form of Christine (Stacy Edwards), a
fragile deaf woman working as a temp.  Chad moves in for the kill, flashing
his golden boy smile, plying Christine with lunch, then flowers, then
dinner.  Howard follows suit, though his efforts are in contrast ham-handed
and desperate.  Flattered to have the attention of two eligible men,
Christine dates them both.  You can guess which one she falls for.  Soon a
tragic lovers' triangle develops: Christine loves Chad, Chad loves himself,
and Howard loves Christine on the grounds that, since she's handicapped and
shy, she just might be wretched and lonely enough to settle for him.  Adult
social interaction never really progresses beyond the level of junior high,
does it?
In Chad, writer/director LaBute and actor Eckhart have created one of the
most chilling monsters ever committed to film-Hannibal Lector may eat human
flesh, but Chad is an eater of souls.  His evil is as subtle as a viper's,
and as easy as his smile.  We watch in stunned disbelief as he back-stabs
coworkers, humiliates his subordinates, and works his deadly venom into
Christine's heart.  His character would be a joke if he wasn't so
chillingly real- all of us have worked with a Chad, and some of us may be
him.  He's the guy who takes your job and then laughs at you for your
weakness.  If one of his co-workers should happen to go postal and walk
into the office with a bag full of handguns, he had best have his escape
route clearly in mind.  Politics is his game, and the modern cubicle-filled
office is his playground.
MEN wears the guise of a black comedy, but it functions best as allegory. 
The most controversial moment in the film happens when Chad humiliates a
black temp by asking him how badly he wants to succeed in the company, then
forces him to prove it in a manner I won't describe.  The scene is charged
with racism and fraught with peril.  Could it happen in the real world? 
Probably not.  Taken as allegory, however, it is representative of the
treatment of the meek by the powerful in all facets of society.   Maybe
it's just the English major in me, but Chad, in his motiveless cruelty
towards Christine and his careful manipulation of Howard, can be seen as a
symbol of unbridled capitalism, of greed without conscience.  The entire
film is a metaphor for social Darwinism- only the strong will survive.  
The marvel of LaBute's multi-layered script is that it can disturb each
member of its audience in an entirely different way.  But does the film
work as entertainment?  Its darned funny in spots, particularly in the
men's room scenes, which demonstrate the lengths to which guys will go to
hold a conversation while engaged in the most basic of bodily functions. 
It works less well as drama, since by necessity the characters in an
allegory tend to be flat ciphers.  Stacy Edwards gives a measured dignity
to Christine, and succeeds in making us care for her, but by the end of the
film we still know nothing about her.  Likewise, Chad and Howard are simply
the sum of their actions.  By the end of the film you'll feel as if you've
met a genuine monster in Chad; perhaps we can also classify MEN as a horror
film.  Certainly those expecting a conventional Hollywood resolution to the
story will walk away disappointed.  But the picture is often mesmerizing,
and the script is a work of fine craftsmanship, which makes it well worth
your time.  Like all good films, it offers a myriad of parallels to the
outside world.  While watching Chad in his moment of triumph, I couldn't
help but think that Bill Gates must have felt the same sort of cold,
merciless satisfaction when he finally stuck it to Steve Jobs. There may be
a little bit of Chad in all of us, but some of us have taken Chad-ness to
the level of art.
Please visit the Film Geek web site at:
"Reviews for the discriminating movie fanatic"

Author
Duncan Stevens
They could have subtitled this one "As Nasty As They Wanna Be," this is a
film about evil, unrepentant and unchecked. Director Neil Labute's first
feature, shot for less than $50,000, effectively depicts misogyny and
cruelty without making the characters seem overdrawn-no small feat in an
era where Hollywood villains tend to be vaguely absurd caricature. But the
result, while effective, is far from pleasant to watch; the ending is as
troubling as that of any movie in recent memory.
The plot is simple enough, and Labute's minimalist style keeps the
proceedings mercifully free from distracting subplots. Chad and Howard
(Aaron Eckhart and Matt Malloy) have been assigned to a Midwestern branch
of their company for six weeks, and Chad, establishing that each has
lately been dumped by a girlfriend, proposes the following on the flight
there: that the two romance the same woman during their stay and then
abruptly dump her at the end of the six weeks. Why? "To restore some
dignity to our race." Because, as Chad envisions it, "she'll be reaching
for the sleeping pills within a week, and we'll laugh about this until we
are very old men." In short for the thrill of it. ("Let's hurt somebody.")
Moreover, Chad stipulates that it should be a lonely woman, "maybe
disfigured," the better to prey on her insecurities and make her fall all
the harder. Howard goes along, and Chad chooses a deaf typist named
Christine (Stacy Edwards) as the victim.
The three central characters are well realized. Eckhart's Chad combines
rage at the world for a variety of imagined slights with an oily
charm-which works so well because it doesn't seem oily. Myself, I
pigeonholed Chad as a fratboy gone bad, devoid of respect for anyone or
anything; never does the character convey that he particularly cares about
being liked, but the force of his self-assurance silences any potential
criticism. Howard is as weak as Chad is strong-whether cowed by his mother
over the phone or bullied by Chad (and the force of conformity that Chad
seems to represent) into his plans, Howard's capacity to stand up for
anything is minimal, and Malloy's stammer and nervous body language paint
the picture well. And though Christine has little to do besides be a
victim, Edwards gives her dignity; her insecurities, and increased
confidence over the course of film, come alive despite the limited part.
LaBute's style is best described as restrained: in many scenes, the camera
simply stays where it is and lets the dialogue run, all in one shot. There
are a few odd camera angles and sudden closeups, but the unremarkability
of most of the camerawork keeps the director out of the way-and, perhaps
more importantly, lends a documentary-style feel to the story, making the
events that much more real. Adding to that is the frigid cinematography:
the backdrops are airport lounges, executive conference rooms, hotel
rooms, places so familiar that no one could consider them distinctive or
foreign. The milieu feels depersonalized; the blank walls and bland
surroundings draw attention to the coldness of the main characters'
scheming.
Labute has called his film a "cinematic inkblot test," and it succeeds in
that respect on several levels: the viewer is forced to ponder to what
degree he or she shares traits with the two predators, or recognizes
friends and associates in them. More than that, though, Labute strives to
give the proceedings a comic element, and viewers who laugh may wonder
afterwards how they could have found humor in such a grim tale. (I
certainly heard plenty of laughter in the theater, much of it at moments
that made me cringe more than anything else--and I refuse to believe that
I was in a theater of sociopaths.) As in any good Rorschach test, the
viewer is left unsure at the end about what went on-how close to real life
do the interactions here come? Was Howard as guilty as Chad, or merely too
weak to resist?
It could be argued that "Men" is really about the corporate lifestyle and
the people it produces, and there is certainly that element. Chad uses his
power to humiliate a black office worker; one discussion of Chad's various
dislikes in the company instantly turns on the one who leaves the room ("I
hate that prick"); the antagonism among the main characters springs in
part from Howard's position of power in the firm. But the attitudes at
issue are hardly specific to the corporate scene; they are common about
all sorts, and the competitve sphere of the workplace brings them out
especially vividly. And Chad, for all his charm, is not truly the type to
climb the corporate ladder; such an ascent requires more fundamental
people skills than superficial bonhomie, and no one who spends time around
Chad could trust him or think his good will genuine. At bottom, the office
environment in "Men" is relevant because it creates a situation where
personalities clash, where different types are thrown together-and the
story tracks what happens when a strong persaonality takes hold of a weak
one. And it doesm't feel accurate to say that the men here are evil
incarnate, far from real life; the intent, I think, is more to show what
people are capacble of if suitably manipulated, and what locker-room
misogyny could become if allowed free rein.
There is much to appreciate about "Men": the dialogue is fresh and snappy,
and Chad's lines have enough bite to show that his is a character to be
feared as well as despised. His humor, in particular, leads me to suspect
that LaBute has been hanging around locker rooms taking notes-and the way
he pressures a reluctant Howard into going through with the plan is
classic high school bully. There are moments when the director appears to
be deliberately savaging Hollywood conventions, particularly those
involving romance, for instance when Chad goes saccharine: "I want our
relationship to blossom." Likewise, the sheer force of the ending catches
the viewer off guard-and makes the final few shots very nearly
stomach-turning. If there is such a thing as a horror film without
violence, this is it.
"Men," in sum, holds the grim fascination of a car accident: we know the
sight will be unpleasant, but we look anyway. Though far from enjoyable,
LaBute's first film is immensely thought-provoking. 
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Aaron Eckhart, Matt Malloy, Stacy Edwards
Director: Neil LaBute
Producers: Mark Archer, Neil LaBute, Stephen Pevner 
Screenplay: Neil LaBute
Cinematography: Tony Hettinger
Music: Karel Roessingh, Ken Williams
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     IN THE COMPANY OF MEN is one of those rarest of rare breeds -- a 
movie that doesn't just ignore Hollywood conventions, but openly flouts 
them.  The film, which premiered to great critical acclaim at 1997's 
Sundance Film Festival, initially had trouble obtaining a U.S. 
distributor (for the record, Sony picked it up).  The reason is simple:  
because of its brutally-direct depiction of certain aspects of the 
current North American social climate, IN THE COMPANY OF MEN is anything 
but entertaining.  It's virtually impossible to sit through this film 
without suffering bouts of intense discomfort, and therein lies its 
power.
     The picture begins as something much different than what it 
concludes as, and the metamorphosis occurs so gradually that it only 
becomes apparent in retrospect.  Shortly after IN THE COMPANY OF MEN 
opens, the intent appears to be to center on the conflict between the 
sexes.  Ultimately, however, this only a small piece of the much larger 
pie into which Neil LaBute's directorial debut slices.  IN THE COMPANY 
OF MEN widens its focus to encompass the falseness and gamesmanship that 
underlies many aspects of everyday human interaction.  It's a cynical 
perspective that's all the more disturbing because it's grounded so 
deeply in reality.  The characters here aren't cardboard cut-out 
stereotypes -- they're the kind of people you can find anywhere inside 
or outside of the workplace.
     Chad (Aaron Eckhart) and Howard (Matt Malloy) are two very 
different guys with a great deal in common.  They attended the same 
college, work for the same corporation, and have a history of bad 
relationships with women.  Their combined romantic record reads like a 
litany of injustices perpetrated on them by females.  They have been 
duped, rejected, neglected, and intentionally misunderstood.  Chad, 
ready to go to war against the entire gender to "restore a little 
dignity", has a simple, vicious suggestion for revenge.  They will find 
a woman who has trouble getting dates, both take her out, then, after 
duping her into falling in love with one or both of them, they'll dump 
her at the same time.  Howard is initially reluctant, but Chad talks him 
into it before locating the perfect target:  an attractive-but-deaf 
typist named Christine (Stacy Edwards), whose disability has caused her 
self-esteem to erode.
     Have you ever seen anyone leap from the top of a skyscraper?  Or 
perhaps watched as two cars collide head-on?  The revulsion and horror 
are indescribable, but the compulsion to look is too great to ignore.  
No matter how deeply the experience tears at the soul, we can not avert 
our eyes.  It's a base reaction, but that's human nature.  Sitting 
through IN THE COMPANY OF MEN is a cleaner, more guilt-free experience, 
but it's not entirely dissimilar -- much as we dread viewing what must 
happen, we cannot tear ourselves away.  As painful as this film can be, 
it is never less than engrossing.
     The film doesn't follow a linear path; it evolves continually, 
which is untrue of many lesser motion pictures.  At the beginning, 
everything seems deceptively simple, but there are layers of complexity 
underlying each move.  As the story unfolds, it becomes difficult to 
discern a genuine action from a duplicitous one, and once-clear motives 
grow murky.  Slowly, however, the truth begins to assert itself, and, 
for those who really understand what drives these characters, the ending 
will be inevitable, not surprising.
     Much of LaBute's script is about manipulation and deceit, but he's 
smart enough to show the characters manipulating each other without 
turning that manipulation on the audience.  Nevertheless, because we 
become so involved in the interaction between these people, it's 
impossible for us not to be enflamed by what's transpiring, or to hope 
that justice comes from heaven in the form of a lightning bolt.  Part of 
us wants a deus ex machina resolution; however, LaBute's solution is 
more true, albeit less cathartic.  And, considering the overall impact 
of IN THE COMPANY OF MEN, it's hardly worth mentioning the 
writer/director's few rookie mistakes (static camera placement, 
occasionally stilted word choice).
     The lead actors, none of whom are well-known, give impressive 
performances.  Aaron Eckhart, who has slightly more camera time than his 
fellows, brings a surprising depth of humanity to the charming-but-
vengeful mastermind of the plan.  As Howard, Matt Malloy does a good job 
emphasizing his character's internal conflict.  The best member of the 
trio, however, is Stacy Edwards, who brings fire, passion, and fragility 
to Christine, and wins our hearts in the process.
     If you want every movie that you see to be SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE, 
avoid IN THE COMPANY OF MEN.  This movie doesn't take prisoners, and 
"feel good" is a term no one will ever use to describe it.  But IN THE 
COMPANY OF MEN deserves high praise because what it does, it does 
extraordinarily well.  Finally, here's a film with the guts to tell this 
kind of the story without turning it into a fairy tale.  It's rare for 
any motion picture to generate such a profound sense of disquiet, but 
the path traversed by LaBute's characters is so bold that it's 
impossible not to be affected.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
IN THE COMPANY OF MEN *** 1//3.  Written & directed by Neil LaBute.
Photography, Tony Hettinger. Editing, Joel Ploch. Music, Ken Williams,
Karel Roessing. Cast: Aaron Eckhart (Chad), Stacy Edwards (Christine), Matt
Malloy (Howard), Jason Dixie (intern) et al. A Sony Classics release. 93
min. Rated R (language,sexual aspects)
You don't need special effects or the supernatural to make a horror movie.
"In the Company of Men" is perhaps he most horrifying film of the year, yet
it's all done with naturalism, minimalism and three main characters in
"real" though anonymous sets.
The plot is diabolically simple. Ten years out of college, two old
classmates work for an unspecified firm's headquarters in an unspecified
city as junior or middle executives. We meet them in an airport lounge, one
of those bland, anonymouss, faceless spaces where business people can be
found. The anonymity applies throughout to buildings, offices, cubicles,
restaurants, etc., not to mention dark suits and white shirts. One of the
men is Chad, who looks like one of those cookie-cutter ex-Joe College
"boys" that some people go for --but then some people also go for Joe
Camel. The other is Howard, shorter, vaguely nerdy-ish, wearing glasses. He
outranks Chad in the firm.
They are waiting for the plane to take them for a six-week stay at a branch
of their outfit, in a non-specified city. (F.y.i. the end credits thank
Fort Wayne, Indiana). Howard is nursing an ear bitten, it  would seem, by
his now alienated fiancee (or perhaps wife). The movie does have the nasty
habit of trying to be so coyly generic, in the special sense of "this can
apply to anyone, anywhere," that it  can get counterproductive. It
distracts the viewer by holding back bits that, if given,  would not have
tainted the "purity" of the script.
Chad is a misanthrope, a hater of everything he can name, from the
machinations of the world of business to his stab-you-in-the back
colleagues to ...you name it. He is also someone who seems to think of
himself as a Don Juan, and is a misogynist seducer. (That's no
contradiction by many interpretations of Don Juan). Right now, he is
seething because it would appear (note how prudently I phrase this) that
his current girl friend has jilted him.
At the airport and on the plane, working himself up to a sickly level of
fury, he hatches a plan and enlists the less polemical Howard's
collaboration. To take their revenge on women, they should cast around for
a good subject during their six-week tour of duty, both of them seduce her,
then discard her. "She'll be reaching for the sleeping pills within a week
and you and me, we'll laugh about this until we're very old men." This is
like extermination camp talk by the SS.
 Howard, albeit less sanguine, goes along. At the new work-place, their
victim is spotted: Christine, a pretty temp typist who has been deaf since
age eight but can speak haltingly, slowly, with those special intonations
of deaf persons.
The men go to work on her, dating her without letting her know that they
are colleagues. Chad turns on the charm, or what passes for charm, while
ridiculing the woman's speech to his buddy. Awkward Howard is more polite
about her yet at first shows subtle lechery. After he has complimented
Christine on her looks, heating her say she has a sister, he knee-jerkily
pops the question: "You have any pictures?"
Back at the office, it's all friendly talk with miscellaneous colleagues
and badmouthing the same as soon as they're out of the room. Politics
reign. Hypocrisy and insecurity reach Mach 3. Sexist jokes abound. Cruelty
to man and women is the order of the day (and the week, and the years). To
put it simply, the two men are crude,callous louts. Could many other men be
far behind?
The movie is the first film effort by Neil LaBut, a known playwright. In an
interview he has made some statements that prove to me how differently
creators and critics can interpret things. "The film has a lot of laughs."
I didn't see any, riveted as I was by the nastiness on the screen. "Then
the situation turns vicious. I love the idea of pulling people in and
turning on them. For instance, seducing them into thinking that Chad is
amusing and even charming, only to leave them shocked when they discover
later just how much of a viper he really is." I can't see this. Chad is a
sickening fellow from the start. You don't have to wait for him to
humiliate a black trainee, or to cheat in business matters on his pal
Howard to realize this.
The film's structure calls for seven divisions, from Week One through Week
Six, plus A Few Weeks Later. Each section fades to black and the next one
is announced by aggressive, ominous, indeed scary drum beats. The camera
remains mostly static, with shots that often distance us from the subjects.
This may be partly the result of a tiny budget of $25,000, if you believe
the information, which one should generally not do with low-cost
independent productions, since the smaller the sum announced the more
admiration is engendered. But there is also a stage strategy, Brechtian
perhaps, to keep the villains at arm's length.
As the seductions or tentative relationships proceed, there is much
ambiguity about who may be sincere or not, and there develops definitely an
unforeseen situation which leads the men to lie to each other.
More, I will not reveal, but take my word for it, it is very well handled
and, as the trend goes of late, without real closure. It was a hit at the
last Sundance Festival, even as many hated its characters, although the
news of "very controversial" seem like hype for the more logical "very
discussed."
The casting and acting by the lead thespians, not big names but
experienced, is superior. Stacy Edwards, who is not deaf, gives a terrific,
tour-de-force performance, quiet and entirely convincing
I am a bit confused by the penultimate sequence, when the now demoted
(courtesy of his buddy) Howard visits Chad in his new apartment and where
something to do with decamped girl friend Suzanne comes up. But setting
aside iffy spots, the movie is a powerful indictment of certain men and
above all of the mentality that our cutthroat world generates within a
corporate society (note the word "company" in the title) where the goal,
from Academe to Politics to Zoos, is "get there, keep  the job and climb
the ladder, no matter how." That's the sad story, not of Chad and Howard,
but more generally of Calvin Coolidge's dictum " The business of America is
business."

Author
Luke Buckmaster
If there were ever such a thing as the opposite of a chick flick, In the
Company of Men would be it.  Working with a mere budget of US $25,000 yet
achieving the filmmakers trophy from the 1997 Sundance Film Festival, this is
truly an independent and very daring drama fueled by the desire to showcase
exactly how destructive people can be.
Chad (Aaron Eckhart) and Howard (Matt Malloy) are two corporate businessmen who
have been mucked around with by women a few too many times.  One night in a bar
room they decide that in order to reek revenge on women in general, they will
target a vulnerable lady, take advantage of her and break her heart.  Shell be
reaching for the sleeping pills within a week, Chad says to Howard, And you
and me will laugh about this until were very old men.
Soon after their arrival in an unnamed town, where they spend 6 weeks working
out business affairs, Chad meets a charming and beautiful deaf woman named
Suzanne (Stacey Edwards).  He immediately picks her out as a perfect target, and
both guys overwhelm the young lady by dating her and giving much needed
attention.  Suzanne begins to fall for Chad, and feel sorry for Howard.
What becomes of this platter of charm, emotional power and verbal violence is
really quite extraordinary.  In the Company of Men shows more than anything else
that the power and dexterity of the spoken word is back, and is very much alive
in independent films.  As Aaron Eckhart said during an interview last year: It
s not that Hollywood cant do it, I just dont think they can trust it.
Newcomer director Neil LaBute has shown astonishing skill in creating what
should be known as the best film to slip past the realms of mainstream cinema
since last years Sling Blade.  Its dangerously powerful, impeccably acted,
sharply written and so corporately controversial that it may be simply too
overwhelming for some audiences.
The integrity, and the skill, that is so shrewdly evident all throughout means
that it will not be quickly forgottenand I know it will lurk in the dark alleys
of my mind whenever I see a couple together on the silver screen again.
Enjoy it on its entertaining merits  there are plenty of them - but beware: its
riveting, disturbing stuff.  And its utterly brilliant.


Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Neil Labute's writing and directing debut delves deep into the sickest
and most inhumane part of men's psychology, and comes out with an
independent look at the twisted head games that some degrading people
could play, and the real emotional consequences that are regurgitated
upon all involved.
PLOT:
Two third-tier businessmen with a history of negative experiences with
women, decide to turn their 6-week stay at an out-of-town corporate
setting, into an opportunity to play an emotional head game with an
unsuspecting woman employee. They both agree to wine her, dine her and
romanticize her for the period of their stay, up until the day on which
they have to leave, at which time they will both unceremoniously dump
her, and laugh about it for years to come.  
CRITIQUE:
Interesting, original premise starts off with a slow burn, but
eventually challenges you into watching the screen without a cringe, as
the actors work their thespian chops, and the script gets more
involving as it moves along. I did however find the cinematic style of
this film to be quite distracting, as a lot of shots were taken from
long-view, and felt too symbolic and impractical. I found myself
waiting for the camera to zoom in on the characters, rather than
attempting to listen in closer to their far-away conversations. That
aside, the three main characters had strong showings, with the
character of Chad, as played by Aaron Eckhart, rating the highest as
the bastard with the heart of ice. Eckhart looks like he chewed into
this part like a rabid dog on a bloody bone. 
This movie does not have any other side-stories to offer the viewer,
and doesn't even recognize any real secondary characters either. The
film is based solely on these three characters and the dysfunctional
dynamic of their respective relationships. And despite my patience
being tested during the film's initial slow build-up, I did find myself
engrossed enough by the end of the film, to warrant a thumbs up in
regards to character development. Having said that, I did find some of
LaBute's writings manipulative and exaggerated just for the effect on
its audience, but mostly interesting to watch. The conclusion left me
satisfied to a point, but did not wholly resolve all of my
reservations. It also felt a bit set up, and unbelievable in respect to
Chad's destiny. All in all, the acting and the dialogue were good, the
pace very slow, and the premise very original and brave to tackle.
Watch it with your buddies or your loved one, and try to figure out if
you know anyone as disgusting as Chad in your life. If you do...you're
in trouble!!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
In the press kit for this film, director LaBute described the movie
thus, "It's a simple story: boys meet girl, boys crush girl, boys
giggle." He apparently filmed the picture for a little under US$25,000.
Despite playing a deaf woman in this film, actress Stacy Edwards is not
deaf in real life. She was born in Glasgow, Montana, the daughter of an
Air Force officer, and grew up all over the world, from Guam to
Alabama. At 18, she received a scholarship to the Lou Conte Dance
Studio in Chicago and began her performance career as a dancer and
actress. She is married to actor Eddie Bowz, and currently stars as Dr.
Lisa Caterra on TV's "Chicago Hope". 
Originally from Northern California, Aaron Eckhart was a college friend
of director Neil LaBute's at Brigham Young University where he appeared
in several of LaBute's plays.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
IN THE COMPANY OF MEN (director: Neil LaBute; cast: Aaron Eckhart, Matt
Malloy, Stacy Edwards, 1997)
This powerhouse of a film is geared to get under your skin and is not,
as most Hollywood films are, made to amuse you and cater to your idea of
what a romantic film is supposed to be. LaBute's debut film is hard to
describe, though the plot is simple enough, but this is not a film that
depends on plot for it to be understood.
LaBute looks at men through the eyes of successful thirty-ish corporate
types and penetrates their real feelings about women, themselves, and
their relationships. He gets us to listen in on what they are trying to
communicate to each other. This is accomplished in the sterile, power
driven workplace of high tech, where the men who work there make their
own rules about what works and roam the sleek corridors of their modern
glass offices and hold manly conversations in the immaculately clean
bathrooms they feel very comfortable in (a substitute for the proverbial
locker room). That what comes out of these conversations, to say the
least, is disdainful, but that is not the point LaBute is trying to
make, nor does he use these talks solely for shock value. What is taking
place is more real than that, and much more frightening. We are made
witness to what it takes to be in their company, and we want to puke. We
want to say these are freaks or they are not the people we come into
daily contact with, or that this is exaggerated, but what is true in a
certain sense, is that these are the regular guys we ordinarily come
into contact with; the guys cranking out this booming economy, buying
condos, living luxuriously lifestyles, not worried about the world's
problems and the unfortunate; they are the smart movers and shakers of
the business world, the ones who are country's future and present
leaders.
Playwright LaBute uses words that are meant to be spiteful and piercing
to one's fragile ego. The tough business guys understand this, and can
talk the talk, and fight for their place on the corporate ladder with
seemingly effortless grace, as they constantly watch their backs.
The scene with the black intern is bound to rub people the wrong way, as
it takes us into the strident relationships these business warriors
have, and adds the racial issue as another dimension to its political
incorrectness stance. The black intern learns how it is to feel that he
is not being humiliated when he is being humiliated by his boss, Aaron;
and, at the end of the lecture he receives, he is reduced to a flunky,
getting coffee for the boss, that is after he is told to take down his
pants so that Aaron can see if he has balls, as supposedly, a secret
deal is struck between him and Aaron that will benefit both. We can now
be reassured that "the old boy" network will be passed on, even between
the races, as the intern is initiated into the business world community.
Aaron, along with his college friend, Matt, who is chosen to be the
temporary supervisor of the project they are assigned to by their
company, are on a six-week business assignment to this city that LaBute
chooses not to name.
We are struck by the different personalities of the two- -  Matt is
insecure and geeky. Aaron is handsome and bold. But what they have in
common, is what at first seems most important to them: they have struck
out and have been rejected by women, and feel a bitterness to them.
Aaron is very vocal about this, and suggests to Matt that they do
something about this that might appear strange to him at first, but when
he thinks about it, he will realize that it will give him a way to
restore some of  his self-esteem by getting even with all females (this
is, of course, absurd. But the point of the story is, that their life is
absurd, so why not get what you want, no matter what you have to do to
get it). At least, we have the feeling that Aaron understands this.
Aaron suggests they meet a woman who is a loser and they both date her
without her knowing that they are doing this, and they will treat her as
nicely as they can, and before they go back to their regular workplace,
they will both dump her. Matt is at first put off by this, but soon
agrees when Aaron comes up with the victim, a deaf typist (Stacy), who
is not bad looking but because of her disability which causes her to
talk in garbled tones, has lost her sense of self-esteem. She is the
perfect victim for their villany.
The movie is not driven by plot, so what unfolds is somewhat
unconventional for movie lore (though not for the world of plays, from
where the director draws his strength (ala Mamet), which has a much
richer history of  misogynistic characters being the ones you love to
hate). What is here unpleasant and shameful and immoral, is played out
to the hilt with all the traumas one could expect. I must respectfully
say, this film has balls. No matter how politically incorrect and
unbelievable the story might be, it still attracts our attention and
makes us react to it on a visceral level. I think that is because we
have all questioned our relationships at one time or another and felt a
certain vulnerability, and wonder about how that other person now feels,
the one who did harm to us, how is he or she getting on. This film does
that to us; it provokes us to look at things that are unpleasant in our
lives.
We realize that Aaron wins because he is a charmer, but those not taken
in by sharing his deceits would not be taken in by his charm. He is
ruthless, because he understands the nature of the business he is in and
is willing to do what it takes to succeed. But we are not really
comfortable with Aaron's aggressiveness, and out first reaction, is to
recoil from him in horror when seeing him so depicted on screen. But I
wonder how many Aaron-types we have met in real-life and didn't recoil
from. As for Matt, he is only too humanly frail, and his insecurities
become in many ways too easy for us to identify with for us to care
about him. At first, we might tend to be feeling a bit sorry for Matt,
but since his weakness' do not prevent him from being sneakily cruel to
others, we soon realize that he might even be worst than Aaron who, at
least, is following his natural instincts. And his lies, are the kind
that those without a true sense of themselves tell; while, the Matts' of
this world are the humorless types you might have had a morning coffee
with and felt you were with someone you didn't quite like but didn't
know why, as they seemed nice enough in the office ambiance, but you
know instinctively that you can't trust them, that they will harm you if
they can, that they just can't help being the worms they are.
Stacy is the only one in the film that we are supposed to feel for. She
is the passive female who is capable of giving us her blind love. She is
the trophy many an aggressive businessman has won for himself, that is,
if they can somehow cover up her handicap (I see "her" as a symbol for
the dumb blond type the boss marries or has an affair with, except in
this case she is the deaf nice/smart girl).
The three stars are all excellent in convincing us of who they are in
the film. Stacy's role might seem to be the most difficult one to pull
off, because of her portrayal of deafness and vulnerability, and being
"the female" in the film. She becomes a representative for all women.
But she is resilient, and we are left with the impression that in the
long run of things she will come through this embarrassing episode in
her life better than the two men; she is the only one that is capable of
knowing what love is, and that is, because she is the only one who could
get a glimmer of what the truth is even after being deceived. One can
surmise that Aaron is heading down a long road of  manipulations and
false senses of security, and that Matt is falling apart because he
can't make up his mind about who he is or what he wants to be, and what
he has to do to find himself.
This is not a flawless picture, but it is one that penetrates the
masculine soul of the competitive capitalistic system that feeds on
aggressiveness and getting results at the cost of coming to grips with
one's more tender feminine side. It is able to captivate us, because its
words have power.
 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jerry Saravia
Men and women are likely (and understandably) to be disturbed by the acidly
amusing and intoxicating "In the Company of Men,"  a new film about how
pernicious and hateful men are towards women, and men. The film is a devilish
surprise: a morbidly comical and terrifyingly real expose on what happens
between men and women in today's society.
 Newcomer Aaron Eckhart (resembling a young Harrison Ford) stars as Chad, a
malignant office worker who continually shares his hateful views on other
workers and women to his bumbling colleague, Howard (Matt Malloy). Chad hates
everyone, hates his job and especially hates women. One night at a restaurant,
Chad proposes an idea to Howard: they will find an insecure, sweet woman whom
they will woo and then dump with a major thud. The idea is that they must be
complicit in their wounding an innocent woman, which leaves Howard unsure
whether to proceed with such a plan. Chad finds the right victim - a fragile,
deaf secretary named Christine (Stacy Edwards). Chad's only objective in this
game is to inflict emotional injury by only pretending to love Christine.
Howard, however, really starts to develop feelings for her, and feels that this
game is immoral. 
There are many ways in which "In the Company of Men" makes us see how complex
this triad is. Chad is eminently lethal and hateful whereas Howard is more
caring and has some shred of humanity. The film doesn't make Christine a
complete saint, though, considering she dates both men simultaneously until
Chad tells her he really loves her. Essentially, Christine dumps Howard for
Chad. Then Howard becomes envious and feels he has to do something to prevent
this false union. But does Howard suddenly care because she's deaf, or because
he loves her? And is Chad really doing more damage to Howard than to Christine?
"In the Company of Men" is both darkly comic and scathingly serious in its
treatment of a curious subject - it is written by first-time writer-director
Neil LaBute, and at times, you won't know whether to laugh or cringe. A major
reason for this imbalance is the depiction of its characters who are acutely
performed by all three leads: Eckhart is brilliantly effective as the insulting
and obnoxious Chad; Matt Malloy makes Howard as pathetic and cumbersome as you
can imagine; and Stacy Edwards is a revelation as the flattered Christine
unaware of her doomed relationship with Chad; she projects sympathy and
heedfulness.
 "In the Company of Men" is a film you're not likely to forget and shouldn't -
it is profound, shrewdly written and masterfully directed. LaBute composes this
world in bland, colorless ways such as the anonymous offices; the employees
dressed in white shirts; the dreary cafes, restaurants and rental cars; and
roofs that seem to offer no discernible view. What will stay with you, though,
is Chad's malice thereby evoking the most uncommon and complex behavioral
portrait of the year. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with comments, suggestions or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     The two main characters in Neil LaBute's IN THE COMPANY OF MEN -- the
best American film to appear this year, and the best film _likely_ to
appear -- do some of the most vicious things screen characters have ever
done without weapons.  Chad (Aaron Eckhart) and Howard (Matt Malloy), a
pair of mid-level corporate drones on a six-week project assingment in
their company's Midwestern branch office, decide to find a vulnerable
woman they can mutually seduce and abandon as their revenge against all
women.  Howard berates deaf secretary Christine (Stacy Edwards) for having
the audacity to be selective about her romantic partners; Chad forces a
male office intern to drop his pants and prove that he has the gonads for
the business world, physically as well as metaphorically.  You may walk
into IN THE COMPANY OF MEN expecting it to be about the cruelty of men
towards women.  You'll walk out realizing it is about cruelty in every
possible permutation.
     It is a testimony to LaBute's talent as a storyteller that he allows
us to see the damaged humanity beneath the despicable things his
characters do.  Matt Malloy's Howard, who seems to be the kinder of the
two, simply has a more benign pathology.  A desperately insecure man
recently dumped by his fiancee, Howard longs for the ability to exert
power over others yet has no idea how to use it.  Though he has no desire
to hurt Christine, his interest in her is purely selfish.  He merely wants
someone so pathetic and so low-status that she would never leave him.
     Then there is Chad, a startling creation rendered with creepy
nonchalance and savage humor by Aaron Eckhart.  It would be easy to read
Chad as a simple sociopath; it would also be the least interesting
reading.  Bubbling beneath his brutality is a profound fear and paranoia,
making Chad so convinced that everyone is ready to screw him over that it
only makes sense for him to screw everyone else over first.  His every
action is a pre-emptive first strike of rage -- at women, at his
co-workers, at the world -- designed to keep everyone off-balance through
the bald-faced exertion of power.
     LaBute employs notably static composition throughout IN THE COMPANY
OF MEN, the kind which might be written off as the work of a rookie
film-maker who hasn't discovered his visual style.  I can't imagine a more
fitting style for this story.  For all their barely-diluted bile, Chad and
Howard are essentially creations of their world, a corporate culture of
claustrophobic cubicles, water cooler back-stabbing and mundane line-ups
at the copy machine.  LaBute's shots cage his performers, observing their
panicked movements from a distance as though they were zoo animals.  There
is no room for morality IN THE COMPANY OF MEN; the concept is a luxury for
those who still feel human.
     IN THE COMPANY OF MEN is caustic enough that it's not always a
pleasant experience, but it's hardly like taking medicine, either.
LaBute's brilliant script and Eckhart's star-making performance as Chad
create some of the year's most hilarious moments, even if the laughter is
born of disbelief as frequently as delight.  In fact, Chad is so charming
that there is bound to be consternation over his portrayal, concern that
he could be viewed as a cutthroat role model.  How sad if there were even
a glimmer of truth to such perceptions.  Neil LaBute has unveiled the
horror of an environment of gross selfishness turned toxic -- it's
Objectivism rendered as psychosis.  Watching IN THE COMPANY OF MEN is like
watching a car wreck between ethics and primal urges, one from which it's
almost impossible to look away.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Chad and Howard are a couple of suits from the head office of some
nameless corporation.  They've been sent on a six-week business trip to
a branch office so, as guys will, ever cocky Chad proposes a game to
pass the time.  Afterall, "Life is for the taking, is it not?" reasons
Chad.  Although somewhat reluctant, Howard welcomes the idea of some
excitement so he agrees to go along.
     As the harmless looking trailers for IN THE COMPANY OF MEN argue,
this film has no sex, no special effects, and no monsters, only
conversation -- so how scary can that be?  In the press kit, first-time
writer and director Neil LaBute describes the movie thus, "It's a
simple story: boys meet girl, boys crush girl, boys giggle."
     Like its female counterpart, THE LAST SEDUCTION, the strength of
IN THE COMPANY OF MEN is that it never pulls its punches.  Movie goers
used to Hollywood endings, where bad guys eventually get their due, may
find IN THE COMPANY OF MEN disquieting, but there will be few
complaints about the quality of the presentation.  The acting is
superlative, and the imaginative script has minimalist cadence a la
David Mamet.  The result is at once devastating and compelling.
     Bitter white collar workers, Chad and Howard, are indignant about
being passed over for promotions and paranoid about the future.  Their
anger extends to the women in their lives, both of the men having
recently been jilted.  Chad proposes a scheme whereby they will find an
especially vulnerable woman and both of them will romance her.  The
coup de grace?  "One day out goes the rug with us pulling it hard, and
Jill comes tumbling after."  They will string her along for the full
six weeks before administering the final blow.
     Aaron Eckhart plays Chad with macho evil and is one of the best
screen villains in a long time.  His hearty laughter and charming smile
glosses over a malevolent nature always lying just below the surface.
"Never lose control, that's the key," he advises Howard.  And Chad is
someone who follows his own advice.
     Howard, as the pseudo-innocent who always bows to peer pressure,
is played by Matt Malloy.  Whereas Eckhart gives his character an
alluring likeableness, Malloy makes his such a wimp that his is the
easier of the two to despise.  Chad masks his devilish behavior with a
beguiling nature, but Howard has no such mask.  The audience, although
not the female victim, can always see through the more transparent
Howard.  When presented with "the game," Howard goes along even though
he admits, "it's way out there."  Howard is as unsure as Chad is
super-confident, but Howard is quite willing to hurt others to go along
with his buddy.
     The object of their cruelty is a sweet, deaf woman named
Christine, who is a lightning-fast typist and temporary clerical worker
in the branch office.  Beautiful and svelte Stacy Edwards plays
Christine as a big hearted, but shy and unsure woman.  Christine has
not dated in quite a while and worries that men no longer find her
attractive or interesting.  While smooth talking her, Chad ridicules
her behind her back.  He says her voice sounds like Flipper and claims,
incorrectly, that she slobbers when she tries to talk.
     To press the point that Chad's maliciousness extends to more than
women, LaBute includes scenes of Chad disparaging his male coworkers as
well.  In language most foul, he goes through a picture book of the
company's employees telling a room full of men what he thinks of some
of them not present.  In private he humiliates a black intern so
completely that you are sure than the scene will cut before he strips
the intern of his self-respect, but as in the rest of the story, Chad
never pulls back.
     The director has the good sense not to make all of the classic
mistakes of most first-timers.  He does not try to pack the film with
all of his ideas.  And thankfully, he avoids shaky handheld cameras and
cute angles.  Filmed by first-time cinematographer Tony Hettinger
almost totally in the office with the actors' faces lit by the glow of
desk lamps, the audience's attention is riveted to the screen without
needless distractions.  Editor Joel Plotch follows the director's
minimalist style so that the focus stays on the characters and their
conversations.
     Chad's depravity knows no bounds, but as the weeks pass, the
scheme must unravel.  The question is how.  Suffice it to say that the
intelligent dialog and engrossing story continue to the very last
minute.
     Studies of evil are by very their nature controversial, but this
is a film that demands to be seen.  And with three such wonderful
performances, it is a film well worth going out of your way to find.
     IN THE COMPANY OF MEN runs a fast 1:33.  It is rated R for mature
themes and some profanity.  The show would be acceptable for teenagers
if they are mature.  For adults, I strongly recommend the picture and
give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
