Title
Review for Alive (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Brundage
Starring Ethan Hawke, Vincent Spano, Josh Hamilton, John Hayes Newton, Sam
Behrens, and Illeana Douglas
As reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 Ah, the splendid sight of a good movie after a string of bad ones.
Understand me, I have seen about five bad movies in a row, and, when I
watched Alive, I broke my streak.  Perhaps then it is fitting that I should
write my review of Alive last (the last of a marathon writing stretch of
seven reviews), that is should be my final respite after such a long series
of typing.
 Alive is the true story of a plane crash that occurred in 1972 in the
Andes.  Come on, you know what I'm talking about, the one where the
survivors had to resort to cannibalism?  Yeah, I saw that episode of
"Seinfeld" too.  The movie has been parodied way too much for something of
its caliber.
 It starts out with a steely narration by John Malkovich, who tells of his
finding God in the Andes, and then quickly goes into a terrific sequence
involving the plane crash.
 From there on in, most of the rest of the movie occurs at the front half of
the plane, where 27 survivors begin their fight to live.  A few people are
completely broken by the experience and die.   A few people do will go to
any lengths to survive.
 The particular lengths they will go to include cannibalism.  They do not
kill and eat, but instead eat the people who have already died.  Nando
(Ethan Hawke) and Antonio (Vincent Spano) have such strong survival
instincts that they are willing to climb the Andes to save themselves and
their friends.
 Unfortunately, I saw Alive last, after all of the wave of survival films
that it spawned.  Because all of these were Alive rips, Alive now appears to
be contrived and cliched.  But it is not.
 Alive is a movie able to touch your heart (and your stomach) as it grimly
displays the miraculous true story of survival in the Andes.  Using relative
unknowns at the time, Alive was able to manipulate the audiences into
believing that the circumstances were actually happening.
 As normal, however, I have my complaints of Alive.  For one, although the
performances are great, the dialogue is incredibly bad.  True story or no, I
have trouble believing that anyone would say half the lines in this movie.
Also, the movie tries to be funny.  Although many people who go through
trauma develop a dark sense of humor, it doesn't ever seem realistic... and
seeming realistic is what dramas are about.
 Ethan Hawke and Vincent Spano do their finest studio roles (Gattaca as an
exception for Ethan Hawke) as they take on fairly simple characters and take
them to new heights.  Illeana Douglas manages to hold her own as practically
the only female member of the cast, a woman desiring to go home to her
family.  Most impressive, however, is John Haymes Newton, who plays the team
captain, Antonio Vizintin.
 Antonio is a control-freak who is forced, by the mountains, to realize that
there are things that he cannot control.  As the mountain gets harsher on
them, and as hope dies, Antonio dies along with it.  Nando and Antonio
Balbi, however, will not allow their hope to die.
 Alive is a good drama, uplifting, hopeful, and intelligent.  It is not the
greatest movie ever made, nor is it especially worth spending three bucks to
rent. If it's on the television, however, go ahead.

Author
James Berardinelli
Running Length:  2:06
Rated:  R (Language, disturbing images, cannibalism)
Starring:  Ethan Hawke, Vincent Spano, Josh Hamilton
Director:  Frank Marshall
Producers:  Robert Watts and Kathleen Kennedy
Screenplay:  John Patrick Shanley
Music:  James Newton Howard
Released by Touchstone Pictures and Paramount Pictures
     In 1972, a chartered plane carrying 37 people--friends, family,
and members of a Uruguayan rugby team--crash-landed in the Andes en 
route to Chile.  For 72 days, the survivors struggled to prolong their 
existence, resorting to cannibalism to stay alive.  ALIVE, based on
Piers Paul Read's bestseller, is their story.  
     The film begins and ends with a close-up of an uncredited John 
Malkovich, who, playing one of the survivors, reflects back on the
ordeal and how it has affected his life since then.  Malkovich,
although only on-screen briefly, effectively sets the stage for what is
to come.
     ALIVE will not be shown on any airplanes.  The plane crash
sequence, perfectly led up to and executed, is hair-raising, perhaps
the most terrifying crash ever shown in a movie (including those in the
AIRPLANE films and DIE HARD 2).  The tension of the moment is
heightened, rather than diminished, by the knowledge of what is to
come.  As the plane begins to rise and drop through air pockets, we're
put on the edge of our seats, dreading the inevitable.  ILM,
responsible for making the crash real, has created a memorable
spectacle.  The sight of seats, with people still in them, tumbling
through a gaping hole in the back of the cabin is unforgettable.  
     The unpleasant subject of cannibalism is dealt with in ALIVE.
Because it was such an important factor to the survival of the sixteen,
it could not be glossed over.  The film confronts the issue head-on,
but deals with it sensitively rather than sensationalistically.  There
are no gruesome close-ups of half-eaten bodies.  The characters react
with genuine horror at what they have to do.  The most graphic scene
occurs past the mid-point of the film, in a wide shot of the crash/camp
site, where several stripped skeletons can be seen half-covered by
snow.
     ALIVE is an adventure story that grapples with themes more profound
than most movies of the genre.  The moral implications of eating the
body of a dead friend or relative are not overlooked, nor is the
spiritual cost of such a decision.  The will to live demands
sacrifices, none of which come cheaply.  Religion and the existence of
God are themes that Alive constantly returns to.
     One of the disadvantages of having so many characters is that few
of them attain independence from the mass as far as the audience is 
concerned.  As a result, most of the deaths are meaningless.  There are
only three characters who have enough screen time, dialogue, and
interaction to achieve depth:  Nando Parrado (Ethan Hawke),  Antonio
Balbi (Vincent Spano), and Roberto Cannessa (Josh Hamilton).  It is
primarily around these three that the story centers.
     The cinematography by Peter James is impressive, effectively
capturing the awe-inspiring feel of the Andes--vastness, majesty, and
danger.  The camerawork that sets up the plane crash at the beginning
is of equal importance in detailing an avalanche and showing the
difficulty of a long trek across the snow-covered, precipitous slopes.
A less inspired effort would have resulted in a film with reduced
impact.
     ALIVE is far different from any recent motion picture.  It is an
adventure tale with depth and breadth that would put many dramas to
shame.  Well-produced, acted, and scripted, this is a film that has to
be seen to be experienced, even by those who know the entire story.  
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Brian Koller
"Alive" is one of the best disaster films ever made.  This may
be because it is based on a true story,  thus avoiding the
usual disaster formula of presenting us with dubious (but
demographically diverse) characters and unrealistic heroes.
Another difference from the typical disaster movie is that
there are no real villians in "Alive".  The character that comes
closest is the plane's mechanic, whose greatest crime is stealing
an injured girl's coat.
The story is very compelling, and the subtitle "Miracle of
the Andes" is well deserved.  (Although "Horror of the Andes" may
be even more appropriate.)  It is a miracle that anyone returned
from those mountains alive.
"Alive" begins with a chartered plane full of Uruguayan soccer
players, en route to Chile.  There is a storm, and their plane
crashes into the desolate Andes mountains.  The plane crash is
stunning.  I doubt that Hollywood has ever done another better.
About half the passengers, mostly young male soccer players,
survive the crash.  They nurse the wounded, obtain shelter from
the cold, obtain water, ration food, and wait for a rescue that
doesn't arrive.  Needed leadership is initially provided by
angst-ridden team captain Antonio (Vincent Spano) and medical
student Roberto (Josh Hamilton), but later surprisingly arises
from Nando (Ethan Hawke).  Antonio's despair, Roberto's
pettiness, and Nando's vision all come across with credibility.
The nature of the story provides dramatic tension, and the
setting (the Andes mountains) provides superb cinematography.
"Alive" will always be infamous in film circles because of its
subject matter: the survivors were forced to cannibalize the
dead, since there was no other source of food.  It is unfairly
cynical to judge the film by this, but undoubtedly that has
kept the film from receiving its due merits or box office
success.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
