Title
Review for China Moon (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
David Wong Shee
     CHINA MOON is an important recent production in the tradition
known as film noir--the cinematic manifestation of the Marlowe style
detective novel.  CHINA MOON reanimates the set piece stereotypes of
the detective story, rendering the classical motifs of the genre
flawlessly: a woman in distress who may or may not be a femme fatale;
the hard bitten homicide detective; bar room conversations rich in
seduction, mystery and promise; and the nesting of conspiracies within
conspiracies, of games within games like that metaphorical set of
Russian Dolls.  These conspiracies are notably as much those of chance,
accident and misfortune as they are of conspiracies of human design and
intention.
     The most striking thing about this movie was the
uncharacteristically touching portrayal of the relationship which
develops between detective Kyle Bodine (Ed Harris) and the beleaguered
Rachael Monro (Madeleine Stowe).  This greatly sharpens the tragic
elements of the story through to the final climactic scene which
unfolds in a style not unlike the closing scene of Hamlet.  Similarly,
in a Shakespearean mode, Rachael exhibited several qualities
reminiscent of Lady Macbeth.
     In general CHINA MOON achieves a accuracy of detail in the
emotional landscape that was well above your average melodrama.  In
particular, the state of mind that might lead a battered woman in an
abusive relationship to seek retribution instead of simple escape the
situation were for me convincingly illustrated.
     The element of film noir not strongly represented in CHINA MOON is
that of a burnt out cynicism toward life and love.  This is in spite of
it's pain staking depiction of the destruction of a "good man" through
the influence of perverse motives such as greed, envy and revenge
operating in those closest to him.
   I will leave the finding of fault in this film to others.  My view is 
that this is a MUST SEE for devotees of film noir.
Directed by John Bailey.
Starring: Charles Dance as Rupert Monro; Benicio Del Toro as Lamar Dickey;
          Ed Harris as Kyle Bodine; Madeleine Stowe as Rachael Monro.
Cinematography by Willy Kurant.
Music by George Fenton.
Written by Roy Carlson.
     Which is worse do you think, taking the movies too seriously, or
taking life too seriously?  What do people think the popularity of film
noir says about the way late Twentieth Century people see themselves
and their destiny?

Author
James Berardinelli
     As the financially-troubled Orion Pictures digs through their
vaults looking for shelved films to release, they come upon dud after
dud.  In the past two years, they have unearthed (among others) SHADOWS
AND FOG, MARRIED TO IT, and ROBOCOP 3, none of which was really worth a
trip to the local multiplex.  Their latest offering is something called
CHINA MOON, a film noir featuring the unlikely pairing of Ed Harris
with Madeleine Stowe.  This movie, which bears a 1991 date, is not like
a fine wine--age has not improved it (in fact, in the three-plus years
since it was filmed, Ms. Stowe has gone to some lengths to distance
herself from the production).
     Detective Kyle Bodine (Ed Harris) is one of the brightest and most
observant men on the force.  He can walk into a crime scene and
determine whodunnit before the body is even cold.  His partner, Lamar
Dicky (Benicio Del Toro), shares none of those qualities and, in Kyle's
words, is "an average cop".  One night at a bar, Kyle meets the
mysterious Rachel Munro (Madeleine Stowe), the abused wife of bank
tycoon Rupert Munro (Charles Dance).  After exchanging a few bad lines
of dialogue, Rachael and Kyle recognize the attraction, although they
don't act on it--at least not immediately.  Inevitably, however, the
pair become lovers and, just as inevitably, the conversation turns to
how to get Madeleine out of her unhappy marriage--with a divorce or a
bullet.
     As far as thrillers go, this one starts off dead in the water.
The first forty minutes are not only dull, but dull in a manner that
calls attention to the bad dialogue and obvious plot points.  There are
instances when the relevance of some little detail is called attention
to by everything except a big neon sign saying: "Look!  This will be
important later!"
     The second half of CHINA MOON almost redeems the first.  Despite
numerous coincidences designed to stretch one's suspension of disbelief
to the breaking point, and several truly dumb plot contrivances, it's
actually fun to follow all the twists and turns--even if too many of
them are predictable.  The ending, which displays a willingness to try
something a little different, is another source of potential
forgiveness.
     Then there are the actors.  If you don't listen to 75% of the
dialogue (which sounds like it was written by a seventh-grader hooked
on dime-store potboilers), the two leads give enjoyable performances.
Ed Harris is generally convincing, as is Madeleine Stowe, although it
should be pointed out that neither role demands a great deal of range.
These are pretty much single-dimension performances:  the strong,
silent detective and the scared, abused wife.
     On the other hand, the supporting cast doesn't have a clue.
Charles Dance gets into his role as the detestable husband, never once
eliciting a glimmer of sympathy from the audience, but his performance
seems almost clinical--a sort of act-by-numbers job with a very, very
bad Southern accent.  Benicio Del Toro is absolutely dreadful, and
almost every scene that he's in turns into an endurance contest for
those watching.
     Basically, for anyone who just wants to see a truly convoluted
thriller without considering the logic or intelligence of the
serpentine track of the story, CHINA MOON isn't a terrible choice.  The
film is good only by B-movie standards, and as such it offers something
in the way of lowbrow entertainment.  Enjoyability depends largely on
how deeply the viewer can immerse him- or herself in the movie's murky
waters--something that's an iffy prospect with the combination of
Mr. Del Toro's acting and screenwriter Roy Carlson's often-inane script.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CHINA MOON is a poor mystery but a good mood piece by director
John Bailey.  It reminds you of a sultry melodrama from the 50s, but
rather than being a caricature, it is a fresh portrait.  It is easy to
go with the flow of this picture and really enjoy it.  It never taxes
your brain, but it does put you in the mood of the story.
     The real reason to see CHINA MOON, however, has nothing to do with
this "mood thing".  Go see it if you like movies with two very sensuous
leads a la BODY HEAT but better.  Madeleine Stowe and Ed Harris light
up the screen.  The romance is better than the last show (BLINK) that
Stowe was in although I must admit BLINK was better overall because its
mystery worked.
     Just watching Stowe before she speaks is a joy.  Reminds me of
Shakespeare's "She speaks, yet she says nothing; what of that?".  When
she delivers her words, her intonation of each seems to roll off her
tongue.  An excellent actress I hope to see in many more roles.  Ed
Harris, whom I do not remember seeing in a romantic part before, is her
equal.  He is living proof that life does not end in your 20s or 30s.
     The script by Roy Carlson will present a problem for many viewers.
It is easy to listen to the dialog and think this is pretentious and
kind of ridiculous.  Alternatively, you can view it as, well, poetic.
I am in the latter category.  The nighttime cinematography (Willy
Kurant) is impressive.  Made me want to wait for dark and for a lake to
see if it was really that lovely and dreamy.
     The studio has had this movie on the shelf for a while.  The
copyright was 1991.  I read that only after BLINK did so well, did they
dust it off.
     CHINA MOON runs an easy 1:33.  It is rated R, but I think it is
fine for teenagers.  I recommend this to you and award it ***.  If you
have a romantic or a poetic side, I especially recommend it to you.
