Title
Review for Anniversary, The (1968)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Even if you're not a Bette Davis fan you'll find her impossible to 
resist in this nasty, often hilarious comedy by director Roy Ward Baker.  
Davis is the matriarch of a family business who treats her three 
children more like board members than sons.  The boys (two of them with 
female partners) gather at the family home for their mother's ruby 
wedding anniversary (their father has since passed on, and Davis wears a 
bright red dress for the occasion).  They pledge that this year will be 
different.  Fat chance.
Film version of Bill MacIlwraith's play looks pretty much how it would 
in a theater - there are only two outdoor scenes and neither of them are 
essential.  Also, Baker elects not to use a background score.  Quite 
rightly, the rhythm comes from the sharp, snappy dialogue.  And Davis 
snaps with the best of them.  She gives a delicious performance as 'Mum'  
(almost every line she delivers is a put-down) and succeeds in making us 
admire a character who by rights we should view as monstrous.  What 
helps us from being put off the Davis character altogether is that we're 
not sure who to root for otherwise.  We want her sons (and their 
partners) to break free of their mother's control, but none of them seem 
deserving of our support.  They're either wishy-washy or petulant.  It's 
noteworthy that the only one we come to admire (Sheila Hancock) is just 
as sharp-tongued and strong-willed as Davis - her worthy foil.  As the 
film goes on, fiancee Elaine Taylor is ready to follow her example.  You 
have to question Davis' real opinions of her children: does she even 
love them at all?  I think it's more a case of maternal instinct in 
overdrive.  Consider, for example, if Davis had three daughters instead 
of sons.  I don't believe she'd be as possessive if she was in the 
position of welcoming another gender (sons-in-law) to the family home.  
As it is, the men in this film are tokens to be claimed and fought for - 
the only one exempt from this treatment is the most soft-spoken of the 
trio, who has a fetish that is decidedly effeminate.  In the end, it 
doesn't even concern us what real opinion Davis has of any of the others 
at her party - she so enjoys her Machiavellian power plays that it's 
easy enough for us to believe that she's simply acting that way for the 
sheer hell of it.  

