Title
Review for Fille seule, La (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Virginie Ledoyen, Benoit Magimel, Dominique Valadie, Vera Briole 
Director: Benoit Jacquot 
Producers: Philippe Carcassonne, Brigitte Faure 
Screenplay: Benoit Jacquot, Jerome Beaujour 
Cinematography: Caroline Champetier 
U.S. Distributor: Strand Releasing 
In French with subtitles 
     Rarely has any film so accurately and effectively captured the 
essence of a human being -- the look, the feel, the mannerisms, the 
vocal inflections.  Benoit Jacquot's A SINGLE GIRL isn't a typical 
motion picture in any sense.  Narrative is curtailed in favor of pure 
character development, and the result is akin to suspending your own 
life for ninety minutes and spending that time living in someone else's 
skin.  It's extremely unusual for a director, actress, and writer to 
bring an audience into such a close rapport with a character. 
     A SINGLE GIRL shows us seventy-five ordinary minutes in the life of 
Valerie (Virginie Ledoyen), a young woman who's beginning a new job as a 
room service waitress at a Paris hotel.  She's four weeks pregnant, and 
has just informed her boyfriend, Remi (Benoit Magimel).  Her life is at 
a watershed:  does she continue in a strained relationship with him that 
may lead to discord and abandonment, or does she make a clean break now 
and attempt to raise the baby on her own?  This is the question that 
preys upon her mind as she gets to know her co-workers and experiences 
the ups and downs of the morning room service rush. 
     Not once in seventy-five minutes does Jacquot's film transition 
away from Valerie or jump forward in time.  It is strictly 
chronological, presenting a minute in real time as a minute in screen 
action.  The camera follows Valerie's every move, no matter how mundane.  
She's shown walking down streets and through the halls of the hotel, 
riding elevators, and stealing a moment for a quick smoke.  She's not 
just in every scene, she's in practically every frame. 
     Yet, even though the voyeuristic perspective of the camera allows 
us intimate access to Valerie's thoughts and actions, it is not 
invasive, nor is it interested in exploitation.  For example, during a 
scene when she changes her clothes in a locker room, the camera cuts to 
her face, passing up the opportunity to peer at her topless body.  This 
scene clearly indicates what the director's motives are (and aren't) in 
telling this particular story in this manner. 
     The quiet, intense realism of Virginie Ledoyen's (the daughter in 
LA CEREMONIE) performance is one of the paramount reasons for A SINGLE 
GIRL's unqualified success.  Not only does Ledoyen have a pleasant 
countenance for the camera to dote upon longingly, but she's a shrewd 
actress who understands the importance of details in making the 
character real.  There are numerous occasions when we understand 
Valerie's mindset and intentions as a result of some subtle action:  a 
gesture, an expression, or a mannerism.  Yes, Ledoyen is beautiful, but 
it's her aptitude, not her comeliness, that draws us in. 
     A SINGLE GIRL concludes with a fifteen minute epilogue that takes 
place some three years after the bulk of the film.  It's a nice addition 
that offers a sense of closure to the story and answers many of the 
questions that couldn't have been resolved had Jacquot decided to 
restrict the entire movie to one time-frame.  The Valerie we meet in 
this future segment is a more mature, secure woman, but much of the same 
tempestuousness and obstinacy are still evident.  It's a credit to 
everyone involved that the growth and change of several years can be 
conveyed in such a relatively short sequence. 
     When a character study fails, it is, more often than not, because 
the audience never really connects with the film's protagonist.  This is 
a flaw that never plagues A SINGLE GIRL, because Jacquot bends all of 
his film making talents to forging a deep link.  As a result, even 
though nothing much happens during the course of the movie (Valerie 
spends over half the running time wandering around the inside of a 
hotel), this is a thoroughly engrossing motion picture.  This is one 
single girl I wouldn't mind spending more time with. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
David Nusair
"A Single Girl" is filmed in real-time, which means that every minute of
the first hour and 15 minutes of this movie is accounted for.  I
ordinarily like real-time movies.  "Nick of Time", the vastly underrated
Johnny Depp thriller, was exciting and fun.  "A Single Girl", however, is
boring and uninteresting.
Ledoyen stars as a woman who has just found out she's pregnant, and is
starting work at a hotel that same day.  We see her with her boyfriend at
a cafe, and at the hotel.  Those are the only two locations seen during
much of the movie.  
The problem I had with it being filmed in real-time is that Ledoyen is the
focus of the movie.  This means we are treated to many shots of her
walking.  Walking down a corridor in the hotel.  Walking to and from the
cafe.  Walking while she smokes.  I would guess that if you were to
fast-forward all the scenes where there is no talking, just walking, you'd
be left with a very short movie.
Ledoyen, though, gives a great performance.  As with most foreign movies I
watch, I didn't know or recognize any of the stars in it.  Since the
entire movie rests on the shoulders of Ledoyen, the quality of her
performance had better be good.  And it is.  She's very charismatic and
yet also aloof at the same time.  I liked her as a character, I just wish
she had been in a better movie.
I've read a few other reviews comparing "A Single Girl" to some of the
French New Wave films of the early 60's.  I suppose I can see that, but "A
Single Girl" doesn't have the energy found in many of those films.  It
mostly just trods along, aimlessly wandering to its final destination,
which isn't even that interesting.  
Skip "A Single Girl" and rent "Breathless" instead.

Author
Ben Hoffman
The movies have always had pretty faces.  Not a year passes but that
some new and beautiful woman enchants the audience with her presence.
This year, the one who bowled me over is 19-years-old Virginie
Ledoyen.  Although she has been in French films for some 6 years, this
was the first time I had seen her.  In 1995 she appeared in this
current film (just being released in the U.S. now), in La Ceremonie and
in Mahjong, a film by Taiwanese director Edward Yang.
Virginie is not of the Hollywood mold.  In what may be described as
wholesome, intelligent, a delight to behold, Virginie (who in this film
is Valerie) has a unique kind of beauty.  Her eyes have depth; you can
see the wheels turning inside her head; happy and giggling, sad and
sizing up a situation,  Every emotion comes through that lovely
face.  Little wonder that she is in every scene in A SINGLE GIRL.
Little wonder that the director has the photographer, (Caroline
Champetier), slavishly follow her every move, whether sitting at a
table in a cafe, strolling briskly through the French city, bringing
Room Service meals to the hotel's customers where she works.  And
almost always, a look of independence on her face.  A pretty good
trick when you are only nineteen.  .  . and pregnant.
Valerie is in a cafe talking over a cup of coffee to her unemployed
boyfriend, Remi (Benoit Magimel).  She is waiting for the right
moment to tell him she is one month pregnant and does he have any
thoughts about the new situation.  He really does not; he is surprised,
of course, but speaks in generalities.
Employed as a waitress who serves the Four Star hotel's guests when
they ring for room service, she encounters some odd ones; those who
offer to pay for her sexual services, those who are freaky in other
respects.  There is also the hotel's manager who would like to get at
her (as he doing with another employee). Valerie wards them all off,
accepting her situation with stoic equanimity.  In short, she is a
person of exceptional character.  Her experiences enable her to
determine what she will do about the baby she is bearing.  Looking at
that face, you know that whatever decision she makes, it will be the
right one.

Author
Bryant Frazer
The shot I remember best from A Single Girl is of Virginie
Ledoyen's face in profile, nearly filling the screen as she
changes her clothes. The camera watches from across the room
as Ledoyen pulls off her shirt, but then cuts respectfully to
the close shot, granting her modesty but never looking away.
The movie has a confidence in this lovely face, a conviction
that sometimes, it's enough for us to simply *watch.*
It's true -- Ledoyen's face is something to see, and her
nearly prim, perfectly composed presence helps move the film.
Equally propulsive is the tension generated as director
Benoit Jacquot steadicams his way into elevators, down
hallways, and through the portals of guest rooms at a Paris
hotel. The brilliance of A Single Girl is its elevation of
daily routine and its careful exploitation of voyeurism. When
the movie really works, we're following Ledoyen around in
real time, as she learns her trade as a room service worker.
When it doesn't work, it's because the film is busily
justifying its own existence, as in a framing device
involving two conversations between Valerie and her
boyfriend.
Those conversations are key to the film, because they set up
the conflict inside Valerie's head as she goes through the
motions of her first day on the job. On her way to work, she
tells her boyfriend that she's pregnant. She has to leave
right away, but promises that she'll find a way to come back
in an hour, if he'll wait. Naturally, he does, and what she
tells him then is sort of a foregone conclusion -- but she's
plenty introspective as she walks the halls, crossing into
the private lives of hotel guests and assessing the politics
of the workplace.
A young Russian director once became famous for what's known
as "the Kuleshov effect." As part of a series of
investigations into the nature of film editing, Lev Kuleshov
took raw footage of actor Ivan Mozhukhin's face and intercut
it with unrelated images -- a bowl of soup, a child in a
coffin, and a child playing with toys. Shown the footage with
no introduction, audiences praised the actor's sensitive
portrayals of hunger, grief, and joy. The joke, of course,
was on them, since no such "portrayal" ever existed on screen
or even in the actor's mind -- the emotion was created by the
audience (and herein may lie the key to many a great
performance).
I'm not suggesting that A Single Girl plays similar editing
tricks. As a matter of fact, the edits are painstakingly
naturalistic, necessarily preserving the "real time"
progression of the filmed events. But the whole film may be a
sort of a trick. Given the information that Valerie is
pregnant, we viewers can then project our own imagined
doubts, anxieties, and frustrations onto Ledoyen's largely
emotionless face. Perhaps this is a partial explanation of
the nearly universal raves Ledoyen has been receiving for
this role -- truly, what we "see" up on screen is essentially
a projection of ourselves, the ways that we might experience
a similar life crisis, onto a comfortably beautiful human
specimen.
This is not to diminish anyone's estimation of her talent,
since it's hard to overestimate the value of comfortable
beauty in the cinema -- pundits are claiming that this film's
audiences are witness to the rise of one of the next great
stars of French cinema, and I have no reason to doubt those
assertions. Any young actor should be so lucky as to get this
kind of role. Ledoyen seemed similarly aloof in Oliver
Assayas' excellent Cold Water (which never received a U.S.
release), but in that film she was a world-ravaged enigma,
nearly untouchable. Here, we're encouraged to get up close.
What's really terrific about A Single Girl is its simplicity.
Except for a lengthy, misguided coda, this is compelling in
the best way -- it's nearly guerilla filmmaking. When the
camera follows Ledoyen as she charges down Paris sidewalks,
bystanders get out of her way, gaping quizzically at the
camera -- Jacquot and company didn't even have the luxury of
roping off the streets before shooting their exteriors.
Seat-of-your-pants filmmaking is almost by definition a labor
of love, and such is the crazy energy of the bond between
filmmaker and performer that everyone else in the wide world
just bounces off of Ledoyen as she gets from point A to point
B. It is indeed a pleasure just to watch.
