Title
Review for Salň o le 120 giornate di Sodoma (1975)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jet Wimp
     As you all know, I have solicited best film lists from the
readership of rec.arts.movies.  What has surprised me is that so far
there has been so little overlap in the many lists sent to me.  The
lists have revealed very eclectic tastes, and have been generally
unresponsive to what are often called "The Great Films."  CITIZEN KANE
has appeared on only one list, for example.  I was intrigued by the
fact that the only film common to several lists was the infamous SALO
of the Italian director Pier Paolo Pasolini.  I had not seen this film,
but after an e-mail exchange with one of the readers whose list
contained it, I decided to view it.  Since I have read the book on
which the film is based, THE 120 DAYS OF SODOM, by the Marquis de
Sade (1740-1814) and many have not, I thought my observations on the
film would be of interest to the Net readership.
     SALO is not for everyone.  It's depiction of sexual torture and
murder as well as other perversions is convincing and very graphic.
Full nudity of both sexes abounds.  In the films of established,
"respected" directors, SALO has no antecedents.  A measure of
Pasolini's facility with morally extreme thematic material is the fact
that many consider his THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (1964) to
be the finest film setting of the life of Christ.  SALO (1975) is the
moral obverse of the earlier film.
     De Sade, from whom the word "sadism" derives, wrote THE 120 DAYS
OF SODOM while imprisoned for sexual crimes.  Though the book is
considered his most important work, it was not published in his
lifetime.
     De Sade professed a philosophy of Rousseauian individualism,
carried to psychopathic excess.  Men have the right to do whatever they
want to do.  (It is not clear whether he would grant women the same
authority, although many of the women in his writings have a startling
degree of self-actualization.)  Pity and compassion are lies,
promulgated by the weak to procure the leniency of the strong.  De Sade
would revile the ideas of humanism as self-deception and folly.
Humankind is divided into two classes, the oppressors and the
oppressed. You must choose to be either one or the other.  While you
may cringe at making such a choice, you cannot change the facts: that's
the way things are, and the history of our species proves it.
     De Sade claimed that his philosophy brought him happiness:  "On
the basis of my errors, I have established principles;  since that
time, I have known felicity."  His writings, as I point out later,
reveal otherwise.  De Sade placed himself in a prison grimmer than the
physical prison he inhabited, a prison of the soul.
     Some may question why we should tolerate de Sade's writings.
Simone de Beauvoir has written a very perceptive defense of de Sade,
and her essay is contained as a preface to the Grove Press edition of
THE 120 DAYS, under the title, "Must we burn de Sade?"  However, rather
than get into a swivet of self-debate about whether such material
should be permitted in even a free society,  I suggest that, if the
first paragraph or so of my description indicates the film would not be
congenial to your tastes, you avoid it.
     What follows is a TOTAL SPOILER!  Also, I warn that my description
of the film and book may offend some.
     For a number of years I have tried to analyze the reasons for the
exceptional texture of Pier Paolo Pasolini's films.  His films seem to
possess a strange kind of stasis, consisting of a series of brief,
isolated set-pieces, not narrative but rather visual in character,
somewhat like snapshots, mathematical lemmas, or pronouncements from a
catechism.  It is interesting that TEOREMA, one of his most striking
films, takes its title from the Italian word for a medieval
theological treatise.
     The methods that Pasolini uses to achieve this effect, as I see
it, are three: i) the frequent use of long shots, often with either
no action or some non-committal action, like walking; ii) almost no
camera movement; iii) the use of untrained actors.  No one has used
untrained actors more effectively than Pasolini.  Directors working
with trained actors rely on the reaction shot to establish film
continuity.  The more skilled the actors, the more emotional momentum
the film has.  When Pasolini's camera captures the face of a young
peasant, the effect is one of disjunction:  the film, in a sense, comes
to a halt.  The face is affectless, bland, passive--not even baffled
or uncomprehending.  There is no bad acting, there is simply no acting
at all.  Such devices allow Pasolini to produce an almost mechanical
passivity, an implicit fatalism.
     "This is the way things are," the films seem to be saying.
"There's nothing that can be done about it."
     Whether you like Pasolini's films will depend to a large extent
not so much on the subject matter but whether you accept his film
language.  Some people can't.  Several years ago I attended a revival
of TEOREMA at the Theater of the Living Arts, in Philadelphia.  There
were titters and even guffaws from the audience during the film.  In
the face of what cannot be understood, Pasolini seems to be saying,
passivity is inevitable.  Audience laughter is a way of resisting this
invitation to victimhood.  On the other hand, Pasolini's films enjoy
a rare timelessness because his style often lifts the material above
social conventions.
     Such a film vocabulary is, I believe, perfect for translating de
Sade's dark vision.  It is safe to say that no other director could
have dealt with THE 120 DAYS OF SODOM, certainly the most appalling
book ever written.  Whether you think that Pasolini himself deals with
it successfully is, I suppose, a matter of personal taste.
     The Duc de Blangis, with a entourage of depraved nobles and
prelates, a rogue Archbishop, servants, armed guards, and congeries of
male and female youths kidnapped for the occasion, retire to an
immense castle in the countryside.  There, over a period of 120 days,
they execute a series of activities designed to explore the extremes of
sexual perversion, generally to the detriment of the kidnapped youths,
including torture and murder.
     The Duc begins the festivities by reading to the soldiers and the
terrified youths certain rules: 1)  the mention of God, or the
undertaking of any religious observance, including prayer, is
punishable by immediate death; 2) any private sexual act is punishable
by immediate death.  All sexual activity must be prescribed by the Duc
and witnessed by him.
     Each morning begins with a dissolute middle-aged courtesan named
Duclos relating one of her past sexual escapades to the assembled
nobles, youths, and soldiers--de Sade's version of matins.  The
assembled leaders impatiently prod Duclos for more details.  These
scenes follow the book closely.  The furious probing for ever more
lurid details suggests that de Sade during these episodes was the prey
of his own fantasies, that he was indulging them as gingerly and
fearfully as one might hand-feed a starving tiger.
     Later in the day, sexual activities, orchestrated by the Duc, take
place.  The activities of the first several days are rather
conventional, but because of the Duc's boredom and impatience, they
soon begin to assume a cruel and bizarre aspect: frequent homosexual
and heterosexual rape, coprophagia, uropinia, morophilia  (I'm having
to reach for my Greek dictionary now), miscegenation, elaborate
tortures.  There is a remarkable banquet with only one entree.  A young
soldier and a maid are found in bed together and are summarily
executed.
     The cynosure of the book is the Duc.  In the Duc de Blangis, de
Sade created an unforgettable character: implacable, fathomlessly
evil, a moral black hole.  He is the most intimidating figure in
literature.  "He may be regarded as the depository of every vice and
crime," de Sade stipulates.  "He has killed his mother, his sister, and
three of his wives."  One has to look to the Jacobean stage to find any
close contenders in villainy.  Even the Duc's lust, fueled by a sort of
ethereal rage ("Today would go badly for them.  The Duc was in a black
mood...") seems theoretical, divorced from human concerns.  For those
of us worried about the redemption of our species, he presents a
terrifying construct.
     SALO is truly shocking.  However, it is neither exploitative nor
sensationalistic.  Exploitation and sensationalism are film devices
adopted for a particular occasion with the response of a particular
audience in mind.  Pasolini's adaptation of de Sade's long (500 pp.)
book is measured, literal, almost reverent.   He selects, but he alters
little.  He places the film in northern Italy during the Second World
War--the leaders, in black business suits,  are higher-ups in the
Gestapo, the guards are SS men.  We hear throughout the film the low
distant rumble of war, as though some gigantic inscrutable machine were
at work, a very effective device.  The suggestion is that the only
difference between war and systematic torture is the ingredient of
specific human intent.  The film attains some resonance because of the
setting, which invites us to reflect on the nature of fascism.  However
the Duc is not a fascist.  Fascism involves values, perverted,
perhaps, but values nevertheless.  The Duc has no values.  The
contemporary setting is useful only to explain the origins of the Duc's
power.
     Toward the end, de Sade's writing becomes frantic.  Sentences
tumble out.  Tortures are more grotesque and abbreviated.  The excised
nerves of a maid servant are wound on red-hot spools of iron.  "In
order to combine incest, adultery, sodomy and sacrilege," we are
informed, "he embuggers his married daughter with a Host."  Like a
racing driver trapped under the carriage of his runaway machine, de
Sade has become the ejecta of his own fixations.
     At this point Pasolini distances himself from de Sade's hysteria
and shapes the material to his own ends, revealing a formidable
artistry.  The Duc and the Archbishop are seated in elegant drag,
almost as though they were holding court.  With binoculars, they watch
through the castle windows the silent, prolonged torture of young males
in the courtyard below: disembowlings, blindings, branding, the
excisions of tongues, scalping.  Beyond the small window panes partly
obscured with dirt we can observe the silent, sprightly glee, the awful
grin,  of the torturer who presides over the mayhem.  Pasolini's use of
this distancing device is a stroke of genius.  The effect it produces
is unearthly.
     The seated Duc peers through the eyepiece of his binoculars, then
the lens piece, then again through the eyepiece, so the action is
enlarged, diminished, and enlarged again.  In just this way, Pasolini
is saying, tyrants can always orchestrate their own reactions to the
cruelty they inspire.
     Then the film ends with an unexpected scene, typical of Pasolini's
lavish use of irony. In an upstairs bedroom two handsome young armed
guards in street clothes are listening to the radio.  One tunes it from
the ominous cadences of "Carmina Burana," which has been playing during
the torture sequence, to a light-hearted '40's dance tune.
     They rise, put down their guns, clasps hands and waists, and
proceed to move in a clumsy, yet stately, dance.
     "What's your girlfriend's name?" one asks.
     "Margarita," the other replies, with a soft, embarrassed grin.
     My feeling is that SALO is a unique phenomenon in the history of
film.  It cannot be dismissed nor ignored, and those who view it must
be willing to live with its images.  It forces us to think in new ways
about the nature of power and victimhood.  Time and again it stresses
that victimhood--far from eliciting pity in an oppressor--is the
posture that is most likely to goad him to increased cruelty.  In its
ability to make such extreme material real, SALO is a testament to the
franchise of film in today's aesthetic world, as unassailable and
nonnegotiable as the hegemony of the Duc himself.
     The Italian government pressed obscenity charges against SALO
which delayed its release for many months.  The film was finally
released in 1975, the year of Pasolini's own death by homicide.  A
17-year-old street tough, towards whom Pasolini had made sexual
advances, bludgeoned him to death, than ran over him repeatedly with
the director's Alfa Romeo.

Author
Shane Burridge
Salo, or The 120 Days of Sodom (1975) 115m.
I've yet to read more than two pages of the infamous Marquis de Sade volume 
on which this film was based, but that's still enough to establish the 
cataloguing of carnality and scatology that appears to be the books raison 
d'etre.  After working his way ever more deeply into controversial subject 
matter such as sex, religion, and politics, director Pier Paolo Pasolini 
finally decided to go the whole hog and make a film from a text which 
single-handedly defined the term 'unfilmable'.  He would be bludgeoned to 
death near a soccer field shortly after filming was completed, making this 
his final opus - but after SALO he would have been hard pressed to come up 
with material for an encore.
SALO starts with gorgeous, summery photography of rural Italy but quickly 
moves indoors and stays there for the duration of the story.  This is Italy 
under fascism in the 1940s, and the mansion that is the central set of the 
film plays host to a number of appalling aberrations beneath its sunny 
skies.  In Pasolini's restructuring of the original text, a group of 
wealthy, corrupt fascists have rounded up young Italians and imprisoned them 
within a large country estate in order to play out the De Sade book as if it 
were a type of instruction manual (Pasolini actually kept his cast inside 
the mansion for nearly two months of shooting).  Whether or not they hope to 
learn something more about their own baser nature isn't even a subject for 
consideration as they humiliate and torture their hapless prisoners 
relentlessly.  SALO is, by its subject, a confrontational film, and was 
banned outright in different countries.  I think the charges brought against 
it are less a result of what is shown on screen than the sense that it 
appears so studiously committed to its own moral vacuum.  You'll see more 
graphic sex and violence in other films but these are usually punctuations 
within a wider context - in SALO these elements are present constantly.  Not 
for one moment are we offered any relief from the emotional and 
psychological torment being inflicted upon the fascist's victims, and just 
when we think the film is all bark and no bite, it offers a final scene that 
is horrific not only for what it portrays but because it can be the only 
logical conclusion.
I believe that SALO is not as controversial for its content as it is for the 
conditions it imposes upon the viewer from the outset: that there is no 
hope, that there will be no rescue, that these young people will suffer and 
that we will be witness to every moment of it.  Because we accept these 
conditions and view on regardless we get the feeling that we are conspiring 
with an agenda of the film-maker's.  Is it a film that exists more in the 
reaction to its content than the content itself?  Is the event of the film 
emulating the anarchic argument behind De Sade's own scandalous writings?  
What's problematic with SALO is that by means of blasphemy, cruelty or 
depravity it positions itself as a dialogue with which the audience cannot 
help but engage, overwhelming conventional attitudes of storyline or 
character.  I also can't help feeling that Pasolini's decision to update the 
text to a wartime setting is pure strategy on his part, as if allegory 
conveniently excuses his indulgence.  It's not a film that should be banned 
(there were lines around the block when I went to see it), or that people 
should be discouraged from seeing, or that most people should be encouraged 
to see, for that matter.  Ultimately, despite its controversy, I'm left with 
a muddled reaction to SALO.  It's certainly disturbing, but probably for the 
wrong reasons.  Just as De Sade's book tells you more about the man who 
wrote it than the work itself, so too do I think less of SALO as a film than 
the end-product of the man who made it.
