Title
Review for Flubber (1997)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robin Williams, Marcia Gay Harden, Christopher McDonald, 
      Raymond Barry, Clancy Brown, Ted Levine, Wil Wheaton, 
      Edie McClurg, voice of Jodi Benson
Director: Les Mayfield
Producers: John Hughes and Ricardo Mestres
Screenplay: John Hughes and Bill Walsh 
Cinematography: Dean Cundey
Music: Danny Elfman
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     With FLUBBER, Disney is again guilty of self-cannibalization.  This 
film, a remake of THE ABSENT-MINDED PROFESSOR, is the production 
company's third recent re-working of one of their older films.  And, 
like both ONE-HUNDRED AND ONE DALMATIANS and THAT DARN CAT, FLUBBER was 
developed with the lone goal of being successful at the box office.  One 
wonders if there's anyone at Disney capable of an original thought.  
After all, their biggest hit of the year, GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE, was a 
live-action version of an old TV cartoon.
     I find it amusing to note that, in the press notes for this film, 
Disney has referred to THE ABSENT-MINDED PROFESSOR as a "classic."  If 
this is an accurate description, then the word has undergone a radical 
devaluation.  The 1961 movie was, at best, a mildly-amusing diversion.  
Granted, it probably wasn't any worse than most of Disney's other live-
action offerings, but that hardly qualifies it as a "classic."  Of 
course, Disney has taken to using that term for just about everything 
they produce, deserving or not.
     I'm not going to spend much time comparing the original THE ABSENT-
MINDED PROFESSOR with director Les Mayfield's updated version.  Both are 
equally dopey, but, in large part because of the inclusion of Robin 
Williams (taking on the Fred McMurray part), FLUBBER has its share of 
genuinely funny moments, whereas the best THE ABSENT-MINDED PROFESSOR 
could manage was an occasional chuckle or two.  The special effects are 
obviously greatly improved, and the script has made allowances for the 
36-year time shift.  Watching the 1961 movie now is a good reminder of 
how much society has changed.  The involvement of John Hughes as co-
producer and co-writer guarantees a heavy portion of cartoon-like, 
physical comedy.  In fact, there are times when this movie feels like 
the latest installment in the over-milked HOME ALONE saga.
     Phillip Brainard (Robin Williams) is a science professor at the 
financially strapped Medfield College.  Although obviously a brilliant 
scientist, Phillip has a little personality defect:  he's forgetful.  
Actually, that's understating the situation -- he's not just 
absentminded, he's a senile fruitcake.  He has already forgotten to show 
up for his wedding twice, and, when he misses it for a third time, his 
girlfriend, Sara (Marcia Gay Harden), gives up on him.  It doesn't 
matter that Phillip has what he believes to be a valid excuse; she's not 
interested in hearing any more lame explanations.  
     The reason Phillip missed the wedding is because he made the 
scientific discovery of a lifetime -- something he calls "Flubber."  A 
jello-like green goo, Flubber has the ability to energize anything it 
comes into contact with.  Put some of the glop on a golf ball and it 
will bounce higher than the tree-tops.  People with Flubber-coated 
sneakers can jump so high that they're almost flying.  And a Flubber-
powered car can soar above the clouds.  Phillip sees his discovery as a 
means of saving the college and re-uniting him with Sara, who has begun 
dating the unscrupulous Wilson Croft (Christopher McDonald).  But, when 
a wealthy businessman (Raymond Barry) learns of Flubber, he becomes 
determined to possess it, even if that means getting his two idiot 
henchmen (Ted Levine and Clancy Brown) to break into the professor's 
home and steal it.  
     Most of the humor in FLUBBER is sophomoric, but that doesn't mean 
it isn't funny.  The film has its share of laugh-aloud scenes, many of 
which are fueled by Robin Williams' antics.  There's also a moment of 
explosive flatulence that had almost everyone in the audience in 
stitches.  On the other hand, the physical abuse suffered by the bad 
guys as they break into the professor's house isn't amusing.  This is 
standard John Hughes stuff, and he has used it too many times.  It 
worked in HOME ALONE, but has become progressively more tiresome since 
then.  What's so funny about a guy being repeatedly whacked on the head 
with a bowling ball?  
     One of the more innovative aspects of the film is a romantic 
subplot involving the professor's levitating robot 
assistant/companion/friend, Weebo (voiced by THE LITTLE MERMAID, Jodi 
Benson), who is infatuated with Phillip.  She dreams of taking a human 
form and actively works to sabotage his relationship with Sara.  In 
fact, there's more chemistry between Williams and this floating computer 
than there is between him and his female co-star, Marcia Gay Harden.  
Personally, I was rooting for Phillip to get together with Weebo in the 
end.
     Aside from the jokes that work and a typically high-energy 
performance by Robin Williams, FLUBBER doesn't have much to recommend 
it.  The creature, a special effects masterpiece, is cute to look at, 
but doesn't have much of a personality.  The bad guys are typically 
uninteresting, and the Phillip/Sara romance is trite.  The worst thing 
about the movie, however, is the low intelligence level of the script.  
The best family films have something for members of all different age 
groups; FLUBBER is aimed exclusively at the under-10 crowd.  If that 
describes your mental or physical age, you'll probably be hugely 
entertained.  More discriminating viewers may get a few laughs out of 
the film, but little else.  In plundering its own history, Disney has 
come up with yet another exercise in mediocrity.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Les Mayfield
Writers: John Hughes and Bill Walsh (based on the 1961 film "The Absent
Minded Professor" by Bill Walsh)
Starring: Robin Williams, Marcia Gay Harden, Christopher McDonald, Raymond
J. Barry, Clancy Brown, Ted Levine, Will Wheaton, Edie McClurg, Jodi Benson
"Flubber" is the second best example of how to take all the life out of a
film remake an adaptation, and hysterically enough both were distributed by
Disney.  It's the kind of film that may be slightly entertaining to tiny
kids, but anyone else will feel left out as it's boring, slow, and
incredibly lifeless.  What could be a film with cinematic magic is instead
dead in the water, and it's a shame because it could have been a great
film.  Hypothetically, I mean.
"Flubber," as you probably know, is a remake of the Disney Classic I never
saw, "The Absent Minded Professor," where a, well, absent minded professor
played by Fred McMurray created an erratic substance known as "Flubber,"
you know, flying rubber?  The new one keeps the basic plot, but appears to
have added a lot else, like more absent-mindedness on the part of the
proffessor, some more villains, and several "show-stopping" moments, like a
big rumba with the flubber, and some more elaborate setups, none which
really make it any better, but instead make it worse.
The basic plot revolves around a college professor, Philip Brainerd (Robin
Williams), who creates lots and lots of inventions, but is sadly absent
minded.  In fact, he's forgotten his wedding to the college's president,
Sara Jean Reynolds (indie actress Marcia Gay Harden), two times before he
forgets it again at the beginning.  Doesn't this warrant some kind of
mental treatment?
Anyway, on his wedding day (the third one), he invents the Flubber, which
not only bounces off of everything like a super ball on speed, but can also
change shape like the aliens in water form in "The Abyss."  Philip believes
that this invention, once fully realized, will save his college, which is
in threat of being shut down by a millionaire tycoon/villain, Chester
Hoenicker (Raymond J. Barry), which is ironically enough the same college
his brat son (Will Wheaton - thought he was dead) goes to.
Through a plot twist, Hoenicker's goons, named Smith and Wesson (ha ha -
what a great sense of humor this film has) who are played by Clancy Brown
and Ted Levine (both who needed the pay check), discover it the hard way,
and try to steal for Hoenicker, who wants it just 'cause he's evil enough.
A sub-plot involves Philip's attempts to win back Sara, who's angry at him
(and with good reason), but who is being seduced by who is basically
Philip's Belloq, Wilson Croft (Christopher McDonald, playing the
hysterically suave-yet-unsuave asswhole once again).  And in another
subplot, Philip's day-timer robot, Weebo (voiced by the one-and-only Jodi
Benson), falls in love with him.  Yuckity-yuck.
What's most pathetic about this film is how dull it is.  You don't need to
be a cynical college student to be able to see right through this film,
which is another in a long line of cheap attempts at making a quick buck by
Disney, who have essentially become the Puff Daddy of the film industry,
half-assedly re-mixing classics (or non-classics) for distribution to the
general public, who sadly eats it all up.  Earlier in '97, they released
"Jungle 2 Jungle," an adaptation of a really awful French film, "Un Indien
Dans la Ville," which, yeah, improved over the original, but not by much. 
Disney's in about as bad shape as Warner Brothers right now, only
creatively.
In the rush to ship out a film for distribution, Disney has forgotten to
give this film a little thing called "magic."  Such scenes as dancing
flubber, a flying car, a basketball team that pretty much sucks flying all
around thanks to some carefully placed flubber, and an elaborate ending all
fail to amaze, delight, or even cause people to laugh.  I sat there the
entire film stone faced, chuckling perhaps twice, and shaking my head at
all the bad jokes.  Who could really laugh at a scene where Philip enters
the wrong classroom and starts teaching chemistry?  Didn't think so.
It doesn't help that our protagonist is essentially unfunny or even really
respectable.  Philip is not a lovable absent minded professory, just a
really dumb man being played by Robin Williams.  Williams is a brilliant
comic actor...okay, a brilliant actor in general, but here he's given very
little to do but occasionally get hyper over something, and other times act
sad.  Those times, he's not bad.  But what are we supposed to think of a
man who's forgotten his wedding thrice?  Maybe it was funny and/or
respectable in the 60s...
I like Disney, and I usually enjoy their films, not only animated but live
action, and their recent films (save for "Hercules," which was good, but
not great) have been worse than lackluster, they've been pathetic.  "Jungle
2 Jungle" is probably the worst film I saw last year.  "Flubber"'s probably
second.  What do they need to do?  Perhaps create something new.  Get
writers who can write something that's universally entertaining.  Films
like "The Parent Trap" and "Mary Poppins" are films that are live action
(or in the latter case a mix of both), but even I can still watch them
because they're not only written to be magical to children, but to be fun
to adults.  What's more torturous that taking a child to a film that
insults you and annoys you at every turn?
And my god, couldn't they have done something else with Edie McClurg?
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
redman@bvoice.com
Robin Williams is a comedic genus. That is, he is one when he's in a film that
allows him space to move. "Flubber" straps him in a straitjacket, covers him
with duct tape, stuffs him in a coat closet and piles furniture against the
door to make sure that he doesn't get out.
In a re-make of its own 1961 "Absent Minded Professor", Disney offers us proof
that more is definitely less. Recycling old films ("That Darned Cat", "101
Dalmatians") dressed up as new is the newest money machine from the home of
the mouse that roared.
Professor Phillip Brainard (Williams) is a terminally forgetful scientist
teaching at a small college. His fiancee, Sara Jean Reynolds (Marcia Gay
Harden), president of the college is none too happy with him because he's left
her waiting at the altar due to his lack of short-term -- and long-term --
memory. She's giving him one more chance.
He blows that chance when he invents "flubber" (FLying rUBBER) and is so
excited by his discovery that Sara Jean is once again awaiting him in her
white dress. His tardiness is helped along by his jealous flying robotic
assistant who wants him all to herself.
It's not all bad news. Flubber is a green jello that can magnify and reflect
energy that is applied to it. Brainard realizes the commercial potential
within the goo can save the school from bankruptcy and being taken over by the
town's evil industrialist Charles Hoenicker (Raymond Barry).
While he's busy with his new breakthrough, the slighted sweetheart is being
wooed by his sleazy rival Wilson Croft (Christopher McDonald). There's a
flying car, flubber-enhanced basketball game and an assortment of broken lab
equipment: none of which are the least bit interesting or funny. At one point,
my son looked around the audience and asked "Why are these people laughing?"
Although Williams turns in one of his least inspired roles, he is easily the
most lively of the actors. Everyone else comes across as half-asleep. The
re-make is successful in that respect. It feels like a bad Disney movie from
the sixties. I remember the original as being charming, but my guess is that
the memory from almost four decades ago has been artificially enhanced by the years.
There have been some updates. Fred MacMurray's flying Model T has been
replaced by a T-Bird. His faithful dog Charlie is now "Weebo", the hovering
robot. The biggest change is that, with sophisticated computer animation, we
now can have films show off special effects without being at all entertaining.
Flubber is anthropomorphized into a being supposedly with personality. The
gloop has little arms and legs and splits into tiny little gloopettes for a
big dance number. This has nothing to do with the story. The only possible
reason is to create merchandising opportunities so that kids can badger their
parents into taking them to McDonalds for the toys.
Not that contributing little to the plot is a big problem. There are very few
aspects of the film that move the story and those that do don't make sense.
The discovery of flubber is going to save the college because Brainard can
sell his flying car to Ford. Anyone with half a brain would be able to see
that his intelligent flying automaton is worth billions.
It's unbelievable that his lover (well, probably not a lover -- after all this
is Disney) starts dating Croft after the aborted wedding. There's not one
appealing component of this man.
After the professor discovers that smearing a golf ball with the gunk causes
it to bounce uncontrollably around his lab wreaking havoc, I cringed as he
picked up a bowling ball. This guy is beyond forgetful, venturing into the certifiable.
Co-writer John Hughes used to direct light-weight but thoughtful teen films.
The care behind "Pretty In Pink" and "The Breakfast Club" all went out the
window after his "Home Alone" franchise heated up the box offices. Looking
much like "Home Alone 3 1/2", "Flubber" even features a couple of vapid goons
who get banged around and a cute little boy who screams a lot.
In some ways, it's difficult to judge this film. I have a suspicion that I'm
not it's target audience. After all, I measure my age in two digits.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 22 years and can't believe
that there are only some unspecific number of shopping days before all those
holidays that fall on December 25. Email gift ideas to redman@bvoice.com)
[This appeared in the 12/10/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at redman@bvoice.com ]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Jamie Peck
Walt Disney / 1:32 / 1997 / PG (mild innuendo, slapstick violence)
Cast: Robin Williams; Marcia Gay Harden; Christopher McDonald; Jodie 
Benson (voice); Raymond J. Barry; Clancy Brown; Ted Levine; Wil 
Wheaton; Edie McClurg 
Director: Les Mayfield 
Screenplay: John Hughes; Bill Walsh 
"Flubber" is the latest in a recent scattershot trend of Disney 
self-remakes, but despite Robin Williams in the lead role and all the 
gooey special effects money can buy, it's something a flub itself. 
Pretty much any family-oriented holiday release starring Williams is 
guaranteed to have lengthy staying power (think "Jumanji" and "Mrs. 
Doubtfire"), but this surprisingly low-energy update of Fred 
MacMurray's 1961 "The Absent-Minded Professor" never realizes its 
gooey potential. Flubber lacks the deliciously campy energy that Glenn 
Close brought last year's "101 Dalmatians," but perhaps we can all 
give thanks it's not as dreadful as spring's "That Darn Cat." 
Williams plays college professor Phillip Brainard, a foggy-minded 
genius who has twice forgotten wedding dates with his sweetheart Sara 
Jean (Marcia Gay Harden) because of his preoccupation with a possible 
scientific breakthrough. Another nuptial ceremony is going down the 
toilet as the movie opens, a disaster aided this time by Brainard's 
flying, talking, enamored laptop WEEBO. Reminiscent of those mini-UFOs 
from Steven Spielberg's "* batteries not included," WEEBO would like 
Phillip all to herself and resorts to devious trickery to keep his 
relationship with Sara Jean on the edge of disaster -- kind of a kinky 
love triangle. 
Phillip's eventual invention of flying rubber is immediately dubbed 
Flubber, a lime Jell-O ball of goo with a mind of its own and a 
penchant for all sorts of bouncy mischief -- mischief that gets it 
noticed by the hired thugs (Ted Levine and Clancy Brown) of the 
college's scheming bankroller Chester Hoenicker (Raymond J. Barry, 
doing his best Christopher Walken impersonation). Hoenicker is already 
after Phillip for flunking his son, and by stealing Flubber he can 
even capitalize off of his revenge. But Flubber isn't the most 
agreeable substance, as he will soon find out. 
A lot of "Flubber"'s troubles can be attributed to too little manic 
humor and too much physical shtick. Perhaps co-screenwriter/producer 
John Hughes deserves a large part of the finger-shaking, because 
"Flubber" contains large doses of the same lame conked-on-the-noggin 
slapstick that wasn't all that funny in "Home Alone," let alone its 
employment in most of his films since. Kids will be delighted by all 
of the comedic bodily harm to be sure, but they may roll their eyes 
when Phillip hops in his Flubber-powered '63 Thunderbird and soars 
serenely through the skies. It might have been charming in "The 
Absent-Minded Professor," but now it's rather dull seeing as how cars 
fly in every third Hollywood flick. 
Williams can be an effective semi-straight man when he's given someone 
to bounce jokes off him (see his turn as Nathan Lane's subdued better 
half in "The Birdcage"), but here he has nobody. It's rare that he's 
allowed to cut loose; funny scenes like a Flubber test session on a 
basketball court demonstrate how little life there is in the rest of 
the film. Harden is extremely pleasant, but the snoozy Sara Jean is no 
match for WEEBO; Christopher McDonald, as a potential beau for her, is 
reduced to shooting the green stuff out of his rear in a bout of 
freaky Flubber flatulence. It is nice, however, to see co-stars Edie 
McClurg and Wil Wheaton acting again after their expired stints on 
"The Hogan Family" and "Star Trek: The Next Generation," respectively. 
"Flubber" has its moments, but they are few and far between. With both 
Williams' antics and the number of magical moments severely lacking, 
the relatively brief running time of 92 minutes creaks by fairly slow. 
But at least the movie has an interesting, uh, character in WEEBO (the 
professor's sidekick was a dog in the original). Brought to life by 
the sweet voice of "The Little Mermaid"'s Jodie Benson, this robotic 
personal assistant acts effectively as both a day planner and a secret 
admirer, and is given a lot more personality than any of the human 
cast. I want a WEEBO of my own for Christmas. As far as everything 
else is concerned, somebody hand me the Goo-Be-Gone. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Matt Petras
Rating *1/2 out of ****
Length: 93 min (1:33 hours)
Director: Les Mayfield                  
Producer(s): John Hughes, Michael Polaire
Cast: Robin Williams, Marcia Gay Harden, Christopher McDonald, Raymond
J. Barry, Clancy Brown, Ted Levine, Wil Wheaton, Jodi Benson (voice)
        As forgetful as some people may be it is doubtful that anyone
could forget their wedding, especially three times. But, alas
professor Brainard somehow manages to accomplish this feat twice
before the momentous night that he actually creates Flubber. It's
amazing that he is able to remember any of the processes he uses to
make anything. The whole point here is how could a man be so blatantly
forgetful. This is not absent minded this is almost mindless and he is
a professor. Well, this is the case for about the first half of the
movie then things begin to settle into what might truly be considered
absent minded. 
        Along the way to becoming absent minded from absent of mind
the professor stumbles onto Flubber. Thankfully or there would be no
movie or any amusement for the audience. The Flubber is supposed to be
flying rubber, but it seems to have a life of its own. This is there
strictly for the kids. The properties of the Flubber provide some
antics for the audience when Flubber coated golfballs and bowling
balls assail two would be thugs. Although amusing this is not original
what so ever and brings back haunting memories of Home Alone. 
        The poor professor has to save the university where he teaches
at, get his fiancee back, finally stop the plotting of an evil
millionaire, and do all this in the funniest way possible. Admittedly
there are funny moments but the movie is rather shallow and does not
compare very well to the original(The Absent Minded Professor). The
whole scene with the basketball game was just atrocious and totally
unbelievable. The basketball players, stereotypically unqualified for
the sport, somehow manage to bounce, fly and dribble their way back to
being close to winning? This just sounds too bad to be true, the least
that could have been done was keep semi close to the original movie to
give this film a chance. 
        As for innovations and new ideas there is but two good ones in
this movie. Giving life to the Flubber, which is so poorly executed
that it's best forgotten, and Prof. Brainard's flying robot Weebo.
Giving life to the Flubber would have worked beautifully if it wasn't
for scenes of the sort where you have the Flubber dancing around on
tables and books for no real reason other than to put in a bit of
music and extend the length of the movie. The life of the Flubber had
brief and rather whimsical moments where it might have been used well,
but it wasn't and in the end might have done the movie more harm than
good. Now, Weebo is a totally different story. It's a robot that Prof.
Brainard created but forgot how and gave something of a life too. This
is a really original idea, well maybe not, but it is an idea that is
well executed and in the end makes the poor robot the most developed
and real character in the movie. Yes folks the little yellow robot has
more emotion and character than the characters. 
        The film lacks the emotional punch to pull the audience in at
all. The acting by Robin Williams(Prof. Brainard) seems to be half
hearted for most of the movie and in many cases quite forced. Most of
the acting in the movie was so convincing as to fool only the part of
the audience that had not quite yet reached the age to 12. People when
stood up at the altar, don't usually give third chances. Or for that
matter talk to the fiancee afterwards, but what can be expected this
is a children's movie. 
        Flubber, as a movie does little original and is nothing
special in any respect. With the best character in the movie being
something of a prop I doubt that many people will find it all that
great. It does have its amusing moments and it is a good story in the
end, but it does not wash up to the original. Kids should find this
movie amusing and fun and they'll probably enjoy the whole movie. As a
movie it's just a kids movie and not the best of ones at that. 


Author
Michael Redman
Robin Williams is a comedic genus. That is, he is one when he's in a film that
allows him space to move. "Flubber" straps him in a straitjacket, covers him
with duct tape, stuffs him in a coat closet and piles furniture against the
door to make sure that he doesn't get out.
In a re-make of its own 1961 "Absent Minded Professor", Disney offers us proof
that more is definitely less. Recycling old films ("That Darned Cat", "101
Dalmatians") dressed up as new is the newest money machine from the home of
the mouse that roared.
Professor Phillip Brainard (Williams) is a terminally forgetful scientist
teaching at a small college. His fiancee, Sara Jean Reynolds (Marcia Gay
Harden), president of the college is none too happy with him because he's left
her waiting at the altar due to his lack of short-term -- and long-term --
memory. She's giving him one more chance.
He blows that chance when he invents "flubber" (FLying rUBBER) and is so
excited by his discovery that Sara Jean is once again awaiting him in her
white dress. His tardiness is helped along by his jealous flying robotic
assistant who wants him all to herself.
It's not all bad news. Flubber is a green jello that can magnify and reflect
energy that is applied to it. Brainard realizes the commercial potential
within the goo can save the school from bankruptcy and being taken over by the
town's evil industrialist Charles Hoenicker (Raymond Barry).
While he's busy with his new breakthrough, the slighted sweetheart is being
wooed by his sleazy rival Wilson Croft (Christopher McDonald). There's a
flying car, flubber-enhanced basketball game and an assortment of broken lab
equipment: none of which are the least bit interesting or funny. At one point,
my son looked around the audience and asked "Why are these people laughing?"
Although Williams turns in one of his least inspired roles, he is easily the
most lively of the actors. Everyone else comes across as half-asleep. The
re-make is successful in that respect. It feels like a bad Disney movie from
the sixties. I remember the original as being charming, but my guess is that
the memory from almost four decades ago has been artificially enhanced by the years.
There have been some updates. Fred MacMurray's flying Model T has been
replaced by a T-Bird. His faithful dog Charlie is now "Weebo", the hovering
robot. The biggest change is that, with sophisticated computer animation, we
now can have films show off special effects without being at all entertaining.
Flubber is anthropomorphized into a being supposedly with personality. The
gloop has little arms and legs and splits into tiny little gloopettes for a
big dance number. This has nothing to do with the story. The only possible
reason is to create merchandising opportunities so that kids can badger their
parents into taking them to McDonalds for the toys.
Not that contributing little to the plot is a big problem. There are very few
aspects of the film that move the story and those that do don't make sense.
The discovery of flubber is going to save the college because Brainard can
sell his flying car to Ford. Anyone with half a brain would be able to see
that his intelligent flying automaton is worth billions.
It's unbelievable that his lover (well, probably not a lover -- after all this
is Disney) starts dating Croft after the aborted wedding. There's not one
appealing component of this man.
After the professor discovers that smearing a golf ball with the gunk causes
it to bounce uncontrollably around his lab wreaking havoc, I cringed as he
picked up a bowling ball. This guy is beyond forgetful, venturing into the certifiable.
Co-writer John Hughes used to direct light-weight but thoughtful teen films.
The care behind "Pretty In Pink" and "The Breakfast Club" all went out the
window after his "Home Alone" franchise heated up the box offices. Looking
much like "Home Alone 3 1/2", "Flubber" even features a couple of vapid goons
who get banged around and a cute little boy who screams a lot.
In some ways, it's difficult to judge this film. I have a suspicion that I'm
not it's target audience. After all, I measure my age in two digits.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 22 years and can't believe
that there are only some unspecific number of shopping days before all those
holidays that fall on December 25. Email gift ideas to redman@bvoice.com)
[This appeared in the 12/10/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at redman@bvoice.com ]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Andy Wright
Directed by Les Mayfield (Miracle on 34th street)
Written by John Hughes
Starring: Robin Williams, Marcia Gay Harden (Miller's Crossing), Ted 
Levine (The Silence of the Lambs), Clancy Brown (Blue Steel)
Year of Release: 1997
Rating: PG
Deserves Recognition for: Making this relatively youthful critic feel 
extremely old and crotchety20
Capsule Review:
    This is what feel-good family entertainment has morphed into in the 
90's: An hour-and-a-half commercial, disguised as an unnecessary 
remake, in which the defining image is that of a grown man launching a 
volume of green protoplasmic goo out of his ass. (Between this, 
Rocketman, and George of the Jungle, Disney has recently eclipsed 
longtime champion Troma as the studio most likely to include a fart joke 
in a film.) As the absent-minded professor who invents the titular 
computer-generated goop, a listless Robin Williams manages the difficult 
task of making original lead Fred MacMurray seem sprightly.
    The only thing that made this film borderline tolerable for me is my 
newly-founded but firm belief that writer/producer John Hughes is going 
to spend his eternal afterlife being conked in the noggin by all of the 
different blunt instruments he's used for comedic effect in films like 
this and the odious Home Alone series. Take your kids to see Boogie 
Nights instead.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Author
Michael Dare
You can stop trying to figure out the worst film of the year right
now. This is one of the most embarassing pieces of crap ever to emerge
from the tired brain of John Hughes. It is simply the laziest script
ever written, full of things that make absolutely no sense, refusing
to even adhere to it's own sense of idiotic logic. It's the story of a
professor who is trying to invent an anti-gravity polymer. He's so
absent minded that he has missed his own wedding three times. His best
pal is a little floating mechanical device with a video screen that
flies around the house helping him out and giving him advice. Did you
hear that? He has ALREADY INVENTED a device that can fly around of
it's own accord, yet we're supposed to go EUREKA when he gets his car
to fly. Are you insulted yet? Can you believe we're supposed to get
involved with a man who is desperately trying to create something he
has already created? John Hughes thinks we're idiots. 
Once flubber is invented, the film continues to violate every single
rule of decent screenwriting. The flubber does all kinds of crazy
things that have absolutlely nothing to do with the plot of the film.
At one point, when no one is looking, the flubber breaks itself into
hundreds of pieces and does an enormous Carmen Miranda musical number.
How does a piece of FLying rUBBER know how to do this? WHY would a
piece of FLying rUBBER do this? Who cares? The scene is there because
it is there. Cut it out and the film doesn't change at all. Cut out
just about every single scene where the flubber does something
supposedly funny and it doesn't effect the plot at all. 
The first thing that the professor does with the flubber is put it on
a golf ball. It bounces around his laboratory destroying everything in
its path. What's the next thing the professor does? He puts the
flubber on a bowling ball. We laugh in anticipation of the havoc it
will wreak. We also learn that the professor isn't just absent minded,
he's a moron. Who gives a damn what happens to this idiot?
Later, his little floating mechanical pal gets smashed. What does he
do? He cries. This is the single most embarrassing moment of Robin
Williams carreer. He doesn't cry when his bride abandons him. He cries
when his little toy breaks. A toy he built. A toy he can easily
rebuild. 
I could go on and on but I won't. The film doesn't deserve analysis.
It deserves immolation.

Author
Martijn van Turnhout
Robin Williams is echt zo'n acteur die elke rol aankan. Hij is o.a. DJ
geweest in "Good Morning Vietnam", leraar in "Dead Poets Society,
genie in "The World According To Garp", homo in "The Birdcage" en
later in het jaar is hij te zien als therapeut in "Good Will Hunting",
waar hij een Golden Globe-nominatie voor kreeg.
Altijd hyperactief en nooit verlegen voor andere stemmetjes, dat zijn
de kenmerken van Williams. Geen wonder dus dat hij zich in z'n laatste
film, "Flubber", helemaal kan uitleven, want in deze Disney-productie
speelt hij een verstrooide professor, compleet met een bril en een
mooi strikje. Clichי dus. Net als de rest van de film.
Het gaat niet goed met professor Brainard (Robin Williams). Al voor de
derde keer is hij z'n huwelijk met Sara Jean (Marcia Gay Harden)
vergeten. De afgelopen dagen is Brainard namelijk druk bezig geweest
met het ontwikkelen van een nieuwe stof.  Eindelijk, na eindeloos
proberen, krijgt hij het voor elkaar. Er onstaat een stof, wat uiterst
rekbaar, sterk en stuiterend is. Brainard doopt deze stof om tot
'flubber', vergelijkbaar met vliegend rubber.
Professor Brainard is erg enthousiast over deze stof en wilt het al
meteen gebruiken voor het basketbalteam van zijn school. Dit
basketbalteam, bestaande uit doorsnee nerds, wint door het 'flubber'
voor de eerste keer een wedstrijd. Dat valt natuurlijk iedereen
op. Ook een miljonair die de wedstrijd bijwoont heeft in de gaten dat
er iets niet klopt, dus stuurt hij een paar handlangers op pad om
erachter te komen wat het geheim van het winnende basketbalteam is. Ze
belanden bij Brainard en ontdekken het 'flubber'. Foute boel dus.
Het grootste minpunt van "Flubber" is dat het zo voorspelbaar
is. Binnen een kwartier had ik al in de gaten wie de slechterik was en
daarna duurde het niet zo lang voordat ik wist hoe de rest van de film
zou lopen. Alles wat je in "Flubber" ziet, heb je al in honderden
andere films gezien.
Het is duidelijk dat John Hughes, maker van de "Home Alone"-serie, een
vinger in de pap had. De capriolen van de twee handlangers van de
slechterik hangen je al snel de keel uit, mede doordat ze gewoon
rechtstreeks overgenomen zijn van "Home Alone". Met het verschil dat
"Home Alone" veel grappiger is.
"Flubber" is de eerste comedy waarbij ik niet ייn keer gelachen
heb, het is zelfs voor een Disney-film te flauw voor woorden. Het
enige wat de film te bieden heeft, zijn mooie special effects. Maar of
die je bioscoopkaartje waard zijn...
E-mail us at: mailto:janvanturnhout@pi.net
'Filmpje!' is located at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/
where you can also subscribe to my mailing-list!

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Robin Williams, Marcia Gay Harden, Christopher McDonald, Raymond
Barry, Clancy Brown, Ted Levine, Wil Wheaton, Edie McClurg, voice of
Jodi Benson Director: Les Mayfield Screenplay: John Hughes and Bill
Walsh
In this Disney offering for Christmas, our children are presented with
the latest in technological goo  FLUBBER i.e. flying rubber. Like most
John Hughes movies he is out to entertain the juvenile masses with his
usual slapstick style of mayhem-come-hurt-em comicness. How many laughs
can be generated from flying bowling balls repeatedly rebounding off
somebody's head? Lot's - that's if you're underage for both TITANIC and
TOMMOROW NEVER DIES. The standard of comedy reaches the profound heights
of FLUBBER shooting through the digestive system of an individual,
before exploding out the poop shoot in a spectacular display of
fireworks. It's the kind of grade six humour where farts, burps and
bodily sounds sends kids into a state of uproar; and perhaps the sought
of humour which should be left in the privacy of a classroom.
Sadly, our children are taught nothing from this movie. They are
undeniably entertained but no lesson is learnt. Where are those
wonderful holiday children's movies like BABE, MATILDA, A LITTLE
PRINCESS where entertainment and learning are rolled into one. Instead
our children are introduced to abstract adult themes like Cybersex. I
found the topic particularly fascinating, having a particularly close
relationship with my own computer, but this is not your everyday topic
for show and tell.
In this movie two females, a college professor (Sara Jane Reynolds) and
a flying robot Weebo, vie for the love of an absent-minded scientist
(Robin Williams). The robot in question projects an image of a woman in
a nightie before entering the bedroom of her master to plant a kiss on
his lips. When the robot in question awaits death, she tells the
scientist of her secret love for him and also about the love child
carrying a bit of both of them inside it. When it comes to sex, children
always want to know how and why. So how does a parent explain to a young
child that computers and humans can't copulate? Just when you thought
you hit home run with your lessons on the birds and the bees, here comes
a puzzling scenario of a computer with claims to immaculate conception.
How to tie it in with the Christmas Story?
FLUBBER isn't a poorly made children's movie by any means, it's just not
a very good one. Robin Williams plays second fiddle to the flying
elastic compound and sadly loses every scene to the special effects
department. The super goo that has a life force of its own and makes
possible the impossible, is also every bit the fluffy material daydreams
are made off. It comes as a big let down when you finally wake up to
reality and realise that the chemistry experiment has just blown up in
your face - very disappointing overall.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     It's pop quiz time.  Who stars in FLUBBER, Disney's remake of its
1961 film THE ABSENT MINDED PROFESSOR?  Well, if you answered Robin
Williams, you only get partial credit.
     Although your answer may be technically correct, there is a small
lovable, flying female robot named WEEBO, voiced by Jodi Benson from
THE LITTLE MERMAID, who steals most of the scenes.  That is, except for
those with Flubber in them.  Flubber, a cross between the Pillsbury
Doughboy and a lump of green Jell-O, manages to steal the scenes from
both of them with his antics.  One minute he is shooting bowling balls
into the sky, and the next he splits into a hundred pieces and starts
doing a Copacabana-style synchronized dance routine.  With the special
visual effects by Douglas Smith, the Academy Award winner from
INDEPENDENCE DAY, one could argue that Smith deserves equal billing
with Williams.
     The main storyline has our hero, a very absent minded but
brilliant professor named Phillip Brainard (Williams), trying to cook
up some magic substance in order to save his almost insolvent college.
His home looks like inventor Wayne Szalinski's from HONEY I SHRUNK THE
KIDS but with gadgets that work.  Phillip is so forgetful that he
forgets his wedding with Sara Jean Reynolds, played Marcia Gay Harden
from THE SPITFIRE GRILL, for the third time.  This provides an
opportunity for a rival professor, Wilson Croft (Christopher McDonald),
from another school to try to sweep her off her feet.
     At this point our show has gone nowhere.  But with the arrival of
Phillip's invention of flying rubber, hence "Flubber," the movie takes
off right along with the bouncing substance.
     The script by John Hughes, who has done a host of good comedies
with the best being FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF, is loosely based on Bill
Walsh's original script.  With a young audience in mind, the humor
places heavy reliance on physical comedy -- flying bowling balls and
golf balls, for example, to knock out the goons.  The way they use the
Flubber substance is quite imaginative.  They spray in on their bodies
to create bouncing surfaces, put it on shoes to create super basketball
jumpers and wipe it on their hands to create mile-a-minute dribblers.
The substance should come with a warning label: Do not use internally.
Wilson does so with disastrous results.
     The spoken dialog is fairly lame.  "I love you with every cell,
with every atom," Phillip says about Sara in one of show's few mildly
funny lines.  "I love you on a subatomic level."  Most of the show
sticks, correctly, to the action for his laughs, and director Les
Mayfield keeps a high energy level to the proceedings without going
overboard.
     One subplot deals with WEEBO's crush on Phillip.  In addition to
talking, she has a video screen that pops up so that she can show brief
clips of old movies to illustrate her feelings.  When WEEBO is angry,
for example, she brings up a clip of Shirley Temple pouting with her
hands on her hips.  And when WEEBO comes to the rescue, she plays a
Western with the cavalry arriving and bugles blaring.  Rather than
tiring of this gimmick, it actually grows on you as does WEEBO's
adorable personality.
     The bad guys are purely cartoonish, the type that get knocked down
and then knocked down again.  Their putative purpose is to attempt to
steal the Flubber, but they are really there to be human punching bags.
     In a minor but recurring subplot, a little boy keeps getting
frightened of staying in his room at night.  After his Dad assures him
that his window is locked, all manner of mayhem breaks out on the other
side of his window.  Robin Williams, flying his Flubber-powered 1963
red Thunderbird convertible, even runs into the tree outside the kid's
bedroom.
     Evaluated as adult level humor, FLUBBER would have trouble
measuring up.  But as a kid's show, it delivers the goods with some
riotously funny sequences.  Finally, consider this modern miracle.
FLUBBER is an outlandish kid's comedy without almost no bathroom humor.
They don't make many movies like that anymore.
     FLUBBER runs a quick 1:32.  It is rated PG for cartoon mayhem and
would be fine for all ages.  My son Jeffrey and his friend Kerry, both
8, thought the show was "very funny."  Kerry commented on how much she
laughed, and Jeffrey talked about his favorite characters, WEEBO,
Flubber, and the little kid.  Jeffrey said he thought it was one of the
best movies of the year.

Author
Chad Polenz
1997, PG, 93 minutes [1 hour, 33 minutes]
starring: Robin Williams (Phillip Brainard), Marcia Gay Harden (Sara Jean
Reynolds), Jodi Benson (voice of Weebo), Christopher McDonald (Wilson Croft);
written by John Hughes, Bill Walsh; produced by John Hughes; directed by Les
Mayfield; based on the screenplay "The Absent Minded Professor" by Bill
Walsh.
Seen December 2, 1997 at 6:50 p.m. at The Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas (Oneida,
NY), theater #3, by myself for free (free pass). [Theater rating: ***: good
seats, sound, and picture]
There are many philosophies as to why we are so fascinated with cartoons.
They provide a method of total escapism in which anything will work within
their context, from the outrageous slapstick of Looney Tunes to the intensity
of Japanimation. Watching "Flubber" really clinched this idea for me, because
it's just a live action cartoon that presents itself as a regular comedy. It
proves how painfully unfunny all those gags and slapstick would be in
reality, and how important it is to actually have a story.
The film wastes no time in establishing its lighthearted, cartoony
atmosphere. We meet Medfield College chemistry professor Phillip Brainard
(Williams), the typical, supposedly likable mad scientist. Within the first
10 minutes we get at least a half dozen jokes about how forgetful he is.
Phillip's memory loss seems less like a cartoony gag and more like a real
case of Alzhiemer's Disease - isn't this rather lowbrow comedy? He starts
teaching chemistry after walking in on a nude figure drawing class (an
inappropriate joke for a kids' movie if I ever saw one). We learn he has
stood his up fiancee, Sara (Harden), twice at the altar simply because he's
forgotten. Sara claims to love him, but says if he forgets the wedding again
she'll stop loving him (a sign of childish attitude the film denies it has). 
But even cartoons must have conflicts to resolve, and it's no surprise the
major conflicts here are related. Christopher McDonald does and even worse
version of his usual villain shtick as Wilson Croft, a scientist who not only
wants to steal Phillip's ideas, but his woman too. What's worse is that Sara
actually seems interested in him! Wilson works for a rival college that wants
to buy out Medfield, which is going broke, unless Phillip can invent
something to save the day.
One of the first rules of filmmaking is to make sure the title has something
to do with the film. The flubber is played for gags after it is introduced,
but is all but forgotten about thereafter. It's obvious Phillip is going to
accidentally invent flubber, a flying rubber compound that yields tremendous
energy, and the promotions make the flubber look realistic and funny.
Unfortunately, the flubber, like all the special effects in this film, looks
very fake and unconvincing.  Flubber also seems to have intelligence and a
personality, and by the time it performs a song and dance routine, you give
up wondering how life could spontaneously come to an inanimate object.
Most of the film wanders aimlessly as it relies on the flubber to make for
the comedy (since Phillip's absent-mindedness is forgotten about) and somehow
push the story along. But it's clear how weak this premise is from the get-go
and the film just gets worse. All the jokes involve people getting hit by
fast-moving, flubber-powered objects including: bowling balls; flying cars
that don't fly well; and a basketball team capable of jumping 100 feet into
the air. It's all presented with complete logic, and no one believes flubber
exists even when they see it with their own eyes. During the basketball
scene, the coach for the rival team actually says, "I think they might be
cheating," to which the referee replies, "There's no rules about jumping too
high."
"Predictable" doesn't begin to describe the motions the film goes through,
especially after the halfway point. And it's not how terribly contrived the
plot is, it's the way it's broken down scene-by-scene, with absolutely no
transition. Not only that, but all the actors here, especially Williams, seem
bored to tears. I'd say 80 percent of all the scenes were shot with a
bluescreen, so it's almost forgivable when you realize they're talking to
nothing and interacting with nothing.
It's safe to say everything that could be bad about "Flubber" is. The only
original element the film has is the world's first romance between a machine
and a human. But this aspect is quite twisted if you think about it, and,
like the rest of the film, you won't.

Author
James Sanford
FLUBBER (Disney)
Directed by Les Mayfield
 In "The Time Machine," the passive, docile Eloi were lured to their deathes
at the paws of the man-eating Morlocks by huge sirens that emerged from the
Morlocks' underground lair. Similarly, families are summoned into movie
theatres at least twice a year by the almost irresistible call of the Disney
marketing machine: How can anyone with children be expected to withstand the
non-stop barrage of ads, tie-ins and merchandising that accompanies every
major Disney production?
 To make matters worse, Disney has lately taken to remaking well-remembered
titles of the past, such as "101 Dalmatians" and "That Darn Cat," which
throws baby-boomer nostalgia into the equation and makes the sales pitch
even tougher to resist for the over-30 demographic. "Flubber," for instance,
is an update of "The Absent-Minded Professor," the 1961 Fred McMurray comedy
about an awkward scientist who discovers a kind of "flying rubber" that
allows objects, cars and basketball players to rise to new heights. Changing
the title to focus on the substance instead of the man who discovers it is a
indicator not only of how "Flubber" differs from its source, but also of
what sets these newly minted Disneys apart from the movies that inspired
them. "Flubber" features some inspired visual effects and state-of-the-art
computer animation, but it's a singularly joyless experience to sit through,
as technology once again trumps any kind of human interest.
 Actually, after "Hook" and "Jumanji," Robin Williams ought to know better
than to attach himself to family entertainment, but perhaps after the
disaster of "Father's Day" earlier this year, he figured "Flubber" might
restore a bit of his luster. Sadly not. Director Les Mayfield has no idea
what to do with Williams, aside from reining him in, always the worst way to
handle such a volatile talent. Not that Mayfield gets decent performances
out of such reputable actors as Marcia Gay Harden or Christopher McDonald
either: Almost everyone in the cast seems to realize they're here purely to
kill time between special-effects sequences and the tiresome slapsticky
antics served up by screenwriter John Hughes.
 Ever since his grand-slam with the original "Home Alone," Hughes has given
up on writing about human beings and concentrated solely on rehashing his
biggest hit. "Flubber" is no exception to the rule, as Hughes works in a
pair of moronic henchmen (Clancy Brown, Ted Levine) who must endure multiple
unfunny pratfalls while trying to steal Flubber. For no reason other than to
offer one more reminder of "Home," the bad guys are often observed by a
little boy who's a rather obvious clone of Macaulay Culkin, and does a lot
of screaming to prove it.
 Hughes' teen romances of ten years ago ("Pretty in Pink," "Some Kind of
Wonderful," etc.) had more depth than his playing out of the love triangle
between Williams, Harden and McDonald; to make matters worse, there's also a
chatty flying computer on the sidelines who keeps trying to distract
Williams from matters of the heart. At one point this horny little love
machine conjures up a holographic vixen to seduce the professor, a rather
kinky departure for Disney fare, and --needless to say-- an undeveloped
idea.
 Of course, it's doubtful that "Flubber"'s low quality will have much of an
effect on its box-office performance: "Jumanji" was every bit as
unimaginative and mean-spirited, and it still grossed over $100 million.
It's hard not to feel sorry, though, for the too-trusting Moms and Dads
who'll round up their broods and trudge to the multiplex to see this piece
of product masquerading as a movie. Chances are they'll have a better time
looking for a parking space or waiting in line at the concession stand than
they will watching "Flubber."
James Sanford

Author
Homer Yen
Bowling balls bounce high into the air and out of sight.  Basketball
players make incredible slam dunks by leaping from mid-court.   Golf
balls ricochet off walls like a pinball.   All this thanks to a
mysterious rubber polymer called Flubber.  It's unique characteristic
is that when you apply a little amount of energy, it gives off an
exponential amount in return.  This breakthrough was discovered by
Professor Philip Brainard (Robin Williams), a genius when it comes to
science but a forgetful dolt when it comes to daily routines.  He goes
to the wrong class to teach, he easily forgets names, and worst of
all, he has already twice missed his wedding ceremony.   "One more
chance," says finacee Sara Jean Reynolds (Marcia Gay Harden), who is
also President of Medfield College where they both work.  But Sara
Jean has more than an absent-minded professor to worry about.
Medfield is also bankrupt, and a greedy creditor is about to
foreclose.
Brainard knows that Flubber holds the answer to his woes.  As an
alternative energy source (he modifies his old car so that it can
fly), companies would pay millions.  He could save the college and
salvage his relationship all at once.  However, people soon learn
about his discovery and want to steal it including the creditor and a
rival scientist.
This is a  pleasant film, but it's appeal is geared towards a younger
audience.  Robin Williams gives a charismatically manic performance as
the memory-challenged professor.  He is likable, but his fellow
performers seem kind of silly.  The comedy is purely slapstick, and
thus begins to curiously look like one of those Home Alone movies.
People get hit by flying objects, they slip and fall, and everyone
generally winds up with a head full of lumps.  If there is any proof
that the comedy is pure silliness, all you have to know is that two of
the hired goons are named Smith and Wesson.  But this is also a Disney
production, and Disney's brand of wonderful magic is present
throughout the film.  Flubber takes on a cute, life-like quality (it
whimpers and whines); there is a terrific sequence that involves a
basketball game pitting jocks versus 'flubberized' nerds; and there is
an incredible dancing sequence which I can only describe as the
Flubber Mambo.  The professor is also aided by a cute, self-aware,
floating, mechanical assistant named Weebo.  She flashes images on her
miniature television screen from various shows to convey her feelings.
Why didn't the professor just create more of these?  They'd sell like
hotcakes!  He probably forgot.
While flubber may ultimately save Medfield college, it isn't enough to
make this movie anything truly special.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Robin Williams' eccentric excuse to bounce around the silver screen side to 
side with a comical green bloc is a remake of the 1960's hit The Absent Minded 
Professor (starring Jerry Lewis).  It was great then, and it's great now.
Phillip Brainard (Williams) can be described perfectly using the title of the 
1960's film - yes, a very absent-minded professor.  Though he is unmistakably 
brilliant in his own demented way, Phillip has invented many remarkable and 
ground breaking gadgets in the name of science.  The only fault in his 
phenomenal mind is that the science of daily life eludes him.
So after forgetting to attend his own wedding on two separate occasions, 
finance Sara Jean Reynolds (Marcia Gay Harden) has chosen to forget about her 
first two attempts at marriage and gives Harry a third-time-or-nothing deal, 
vowing that she will not marry him unless he attends the wedding at 6:30 in the 
evening.  But that night Phillip, accompanied with flying robot invention 
"Weebo", stumbles across the most amazing of his discoveries yet.  In the form 
of a gooey green substance, the flying rubber (hence, Flubber) which he has 
created almost seems to have a personality and life of its own.
As Phillip's watch alarm rings, he breaths a sigh of relief - its only 6:30the 
next morning.
>From then on Phillip and Flubber are on their own and get tangled up in many 
comical adventures including applying energy to the local basketball team, 
taking care of a couple of dim witted goons and giving the car and air born up 
date.  Whilst this is taking place, Phillip fights to win his woman back and 
save where he teaches from being shut down.
Flubber is great fun.  Robin Williams' physical maneuvers are alone worth 
seeing; and the collection of scenes which make up this radical experience are 
high quality entertainment.  The kids will have a wonderful time jumping, 
shouting and pointing at Flubber's amusing antidotes whilst adults will have no 
problem in twisting their faces into a cheerful smile and appreciate the more 
subtle jokes.
Flubber has got to be one of the most enjoyable films I've seen this year.  
Easy going, stress free and awesome fun for young and old.

