Title
Review for Cemetery Club, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Ellen Burstyn, Danny Aiello, Olympia Dukakis, Diane Ladd
Director:  Bill Duke
Producers:  David Brown, Bonnie Palef, and Sophie Hurst
Screenplay:  Ivan Menchell
Music Direction:  Elmer Bernstein
Released by Touchstone Pictures
     Esther Moskowitz (Ellen Burstyn), Doris Silverman (Olympia
Dukakis), and Lucille Rubin (Diane Ladd) are three aging Jewish best
friends.  When we meet them in a short prologue, they are all married.
Four years later, they're widows.  Most recently bereaved, and taking
her husband's death the hardest, is Esther.  Then, one day at the
cemetery, she meets Ben Katz (Danny Aiello) by the graveside of his late
wife.  Together, after an uncertain period of getting to know one
another, they begin exploring what love can be like the second time
around.
     Like USED PEOPLE, THE CEMETERY CLUB tries to present a romantic
comedy centered around the over-fifty crowd.  Also like USED PEOPLE, THE
CEMETERY CLUB is not wholly successful.  Both movies suffer from the
same problems: an over-reliance on formulas and a plot that meanders.
     The recipe-style storytelling of THE CEMETERY CLUB identifies it as
a product of one of the Disney subsidiaries (Touchstone), companies
which survive by churning out marginally-watchable films that recycle
worn-out ideas.  In this case, the only thing new is the age of the main
characters.  Everything else in this film has been overdone before.
Perhaps the most disappointing thing about THE CEMETERY CLUB is that
there are no surprises from start to finish.  Everything is completely
predictable.  At least most of the humor, some of which seems
out-of-place, is amusing.
     There are a few moments which are supposed to be poignant.  One,
where Esther talks about coming home after her husband's death to find
his toothbrush still damp, works.  The others, however, are marginally
successful at best, including the "big" one near the end.  With the
exception of Esther and Ben, we don't know enough about these characters
to really care what happens to them.
     THE CEMETERY CLUB runs out of energy about a half-hour before the
final credits roll.  Around the time that the plot goes on full
automatic, I lost interest.  When a film should be building toward
something, THE CEMETERY CLUB loses momentum.  Pacing is part of the
problem, but there's enough blame to go around for the director, writer,
and producers.
     Don't blame the actors for the movie's shortcomings, however.
Ellen Burstyn, taking on her first major film role in a while, does an
excellent job fleshing out Esther, and almost manages to singlehandedly
pull the movie through its murkiest moments.  Diane Ladd and Olympia
Dukakis, in what amount to supporting roles, have a good sense of their
characters - better, I think, than the audience is ever given an
opportunity to see.  Danny Aiello does as much as he can with a banal,
stereotyped persona.
     This movie should have been better.  The romance between Esther and
Ben doesn't have to follow typical Hollywood form, but instead of
crafting something special, the producers opted for the easy way out.
Also, the relationship between the three women is bland and incompletely
developed.  Films like ENCHANTED APRIL illustrate the kind of dynamics
that could have been present in THE CEMETERY CLUB.  While not a total
waste, this picture is a definite disappointment.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
