Title
Review for Search and Destroy (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Andrew Hicks
        A bizarre play becomes a bizarre movie. SEARCH AND 
DESTROY is about a no-talent guy who wants to turn a bad book 
into a low-budget movie -- so it's at least partially autobiographical. 
But it's never more than partially watchable and partially 
interesting. Griffin Dunne plays the no-talent guy, a second-billed 
Rosanna Arquette his bitchy wife in the first five minutes of the 
movie. After that, Christopher Walken enters the picture as a 
businessman / drug dealer who also loves the book Dunne wants 
to make into a movie and promises to back him if he runs a few 
deals for him.
        The author of the book is strange Dr. Dennis Hopper, who 
does those inspirational late-night informercials. After Hopper and 
his assistant (Ethan Hawke) kick Dunne out of his offices, Hopper's 
assistant (Illeana Dougas, the hockey-skating sister from TO DIE 
FOR) ends up falling in love with Dunne and slips him a backstage 
pass to see Hopper, after which he gets kicked out again. Dunne's 
only hope (not for his career; he doesn't have any hope left there) 
is to get $500,000 for the movie rights from Walken and his crazed 
dealer friend John Tuturro, who looks exactly like Kenny G here.
        It may sound interesting to you -- it did to me, that's why 
I rented it -- but SEARCH AND DESTROY never rises above the 
level of mediocre and spends most of its running time far beneath 
that level. The big draw is the cast, but Arquette, Hawke and 
Turturro all have five minutes screen time or less, despite being 
billed above the title. Walken and Hopper in a movie doesn't 
guarantee quality (think of NICK OF TIME and WATERWORLD) 
and Douglas, who actually gives a best performance of the movie, 
isn't mentioned anywhere on the video box. The movie never 
delivers on its promise to be a scathing satire of Hollywood (a la 
THE PLAYER), but instead gains irony by illustrating just how 
substandard many current-release movies are.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release beginning 4/95 
Running Length: 1:33 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity) 
Starring: Griffin Dunne, Illeana Douglas, Christopher Walken, 
          Dennis Hopper, John Turturro, Ethan Hawke, Rosanna Arquette 
Director: David Salle 
Producers: Ruth Chamy, Dan Lupovitz, and Elie Cohn 
Screenplay: Michael Almereyda based on the play by Howard Korder  
Cinematography: Bobby Bukowski 
Music: Elmer Bernstein 
Released by October Films 
     There are essentially two ways to do a satire:  go for all-out 
zaniness with an overload of one-liners and sight gags (a la AIRPLANE), 
or try for something more subtle.  This second tactic, if used 
correctly, is almost always more scathing.  Robert Altman employed it 
for THE PLAYER, which is pretty much regarded as the ultimate skewering 
of Hollywood.  With SEARCH AND DESTROY, director David Salle tries 
unsuccessfully for something similar.  Even at its most effective, this 
film comes across as a pale imitation of far better pictures. 
     SEARCH AND DESTROY opens by introducing us to Martin Mirkheim 
(Griffin Dunne), a slimy "entrepreneur" who finds himself $147,956 in 
debt to the IRS (exclusive of interest and penalties).  To solve his 
financial woes, he decides to make a movie based on a book called DANIEL 
STRONG:  AN ADVENTURE STORY, written by one of Martin's heroes, cable 
access pop psychologist Dr. Luthor Waxling (Dennis Hopper).  However, to 
get the rights to the book, Martin must first come up with several 
hundred thousand dollars in cash.  So, with his assistant Marie (played 
with wide-eyed vivacity by Illeana Douglas) in tow, Martin heads for New 
York City.  Once there, he goes to the offices of a supposed drug dealer 
named Kim (Christopher Walken), in hopes of raising the necessary money.  
Much to Martin's surprise, disappointment, and embarrassment, Kim turns 
out to be a legitimate businessman, but that doesn't mean he might not 
be willing to arrange a little drug deal--just to help out a friend.   
     Parts of this film seem a little too reminiscent of THE BIG PICTURE 
and NAKED IN NEW YORK, movies which, like this one, deal with the 
sacrifices and tribulations of getting a motion picture made.  The 
difference here is that, unlike the protagonists of PICTURE and NAKED, 
Martin isn't concerned about protecting the integrity of his script.  
Actually, he could care less about the integrity of anything, as long as 
he gets the money. 
     Some of the core ideas in SEARCH AND DESTROY have potential.  Take, 
for example, the premise of approaching a supposed gangster who's not a 
gangster but who's willing to try being one.  The film has fun with 
this, at least to start with, chiefly because of wonderful performances 
by Christopher Walken (as Kim, a man determined to "do it with passion") 
and John Turturro (as a profanity-spewing small-time hood with terrible 
taste in wigs and clothes).  Eventually, however, this element of the 
plot descends into a series of tedious episodes punctuated by moments of 
extreme violence.  This is an example of how something that starts out 
fresh can end up boring and derivative. 
     There are a number of enjoyable, sometimes hilarious moments in 
SEARCH AND DESTROY, but the framework joining them doesn't work 
particularly well.  This is a case when the whole is vastly inferior to 
its parts.  The focus is too diffuse, attempting to satirize everything 
from '80s greed and motivational TV programs to motion picture making.  
SEARCH AND DESTROY is very much hit-and-miss, and might have been less 
grating had it done more of the former and less of the latter. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     When you read the title SEARCH AND DESTROY, you immediately
thought it was another vehicle for either Jean Claude Van Damme or
Charles Bronson to show off their ability to slaughter hordes of bad
guys.  Right?  Wrong.  This is a musical starring Christopher Walken as
a song and dance man.
     Okay, so I lied, but only partially.  This movie does feature a
song and dance routine by Christopher Walken, and although it is a
black comedy with a plot, the plot's meaning is so obscure that
characterizing the show as a musical for its single musical number, is
as good a characterization as any.
     In the movie, Martin Mirkhein (Griffin Dunne) is a small time
operator and loser married to Lauren Mirkhein (Rosanna Arquette).  He
listens to the motivational pitches made on late night cable TV by Dr.
Waxling (Dennis Hopper) and loves Dr. Waxling's adventure novel
featuring a character called Martin Strong who reveals the four inner
secrets of life.  His secrets include don't apologize since what
apologize for is what you really want.  Another is that just because
you do something that doesn't mean it's interesting.  Dr. Waxling's
speaking into the camera is such a parody that it is clearly the best
part of the movie.  Too bad the scene only lasts a minute or two.
     Martin Mirkhein decides that the way to make some serious money
and to get his $100,000+ overdue Florida taxes paid right away as
advised by his accountant (Martin Scorsese - also the executive
producer) is to make a movie of Dr. Waxling's book.  Roger (Ethan
Hawke), Dr. Waxling's bodyguard, will not let Mirkhein see Dr. Waxling
so Mirkhein makes a play for Marie Davenport (Illeana Douglas) the
doctor's assistant in order to get to see the doctor.  This is not easy
since Mirkhein, like Martin Strong, practices sexual abstinence to show
his strength of character.  Later Mirkhein seeks the aid of some shady
characters called Kim Ulander (Christopher Walken) and Ron (John
Turturro) to make money to impress the doctor.
     First time director David Salle seems to think he is going to be
the next Fellini.  Salle populates his movie with tons of quirky
characters like Fellini.  Salle's, however, are about as believable and
interesting as cardboard figures.  The audience in the art house I went
to set through the entire movie in stunned silence.  Nobody moved.  We
all stared at the screen in amazement.  What was this all about we
seemed to all be thinking.  When the credits started, everyone, except
me, quickly stood up and left immediately (and without saying a word).
     The script by Michael Almereyda, based on a play by Howard Korder,
has the sole virtue of being extremely bizarre.  The writing and the
directing had all of the actors acting like free agents from different
movies who all happened to be captured by the camera together.  There
was no chemistry or believability among them.  I must admit, on the
other hand, I never considered leaving early.  I developed sort of a
morbid fascination of where the show was going and how it would end.
By the way, it goes nowhere and the ending is the worst part -
gratuitous violence.
     I am a fan of every one of the actors mentioned above.  I even
like Dunne and Arquette who have been in one bad movie after another.
I felt sad seeing all the actors in this show.  I kept thinking of all
of the times I had enjoyed their work.  I absolutely loved Ethan Hawke,
for example, in the recent BEFORE SUNRISE - which is a show you must
see if you have not done so already, but here he was given a worthless
part with pathetic dialog.  What a waste!
     SEARCH AND DESTROY runs 1:30 which was mercifully short.  It is
correctly rated R for profanity, unnecessary violence, nudity, and
cocaine use.  This is an adult show.  For a couple of a scenes that
worked, for risk taking, for ambitious albeit failed directing, and for
a certain strange compelling fascination, I generously award it *.  I
do not recommend you spend your hard earned money on it.  I should say
that it is so outlandish some people will undoubtedly be charmed by and
fall in love with this show.  They can have it.  I want none of it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
