Title
Review for Hamlet (1996)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
antpage@aol.com (Antpage)
Direction............................Kenneth Branagh
Writing..............................William Shakespeare 
Adapted for Screen by................Kenneth Branagh
Kenneth Branagh......................Hamlet
Derek Jacobi.........................Claudius
Julie Christie.......................Gertrude
Kate Winslet.........................Ophelia
Brian Blessed........................Ghost/Old Hamlet
Richard Briers.......................Polonius
Michael Maloney......................Laertes
Cinematography.......................Alex Thomson
Music................................Patrick Doyle
Film Editing.........................Neil Farrell
Costume Design.......................Alexandra Byrne
Production Design....................Tim Harvey (I)
Nicholas Farrell.....................Horatio
Timothy Spall........................Rosencrantz
Reece Dinsdale.......................Guildenstern
Charlton Heston......................Player King
Billy Crystal........................First Gravedigger
Robin Williams.......................Osric
Rufus Sewell.........................Fortinbras
Produced by..........................David Barron
     After seeing the 4 hour version of Hamlet, I feel I ve seen something
special. Kenneth Branagh shines when doing Shakespeare ( a shine that s
not so bright for his other films ) and this film is certainly an
accomplishment. To do a Shakespeare play is not something to take lightly.
A Shakespeare film can be either very inspiring or very painful. But
Kenneth Branagh does it well and with understanding, aiding in
understanding, inspiration and humor. 
     Kenneth has put to film the other Shakespeare plays Henry V and Much
Ado About Nothing, the later being my favorite except maybe till now. Many
things make this film special, the rich sets, the costumes, the
interracial superb actors, the humor ( of which there is a lot of in
Shakespeare plays including the tragedies ), but most of all the full text
version of Hamlet. It s great to see Fortinbras, and hear Hamlet realize
how insignificant his worries are when these other horrors exist ( this
was an impressive and fantastic way to start the intermission ). To see
what happened after Hamlet died. To see Fortinbras place himself on the
throne, signifying that the tragedy did not end here but extended out to
the whole kingdom. To hear the confirmation from Horatio and Fortinbras
that his story would be told and heard by all including those in power,
England included. ( did these people exist? Was this play based on
history? Was all the text used? It seems to me that some of the text is
missing. antpage@aol.com )
     Although it s almost the longest movie in history ( Cleopatra still
holds that title ) I feel the time passed by quickly ( I heard people say
this in the theater too ), as a matter of fact, I felt it needed to be
longer. Because through out the film it seems that everyone is running
through the text, some of it expressed well, some not. That s why I feel
this play is best suited for video or mini-series, to give enough time to
express the play the way it deserves. Clearly this was another time, maybe
people loved to hear the words, had longer attention spans. I like to
imagine how they might have done it back in those days, gracefully
expressing their emotion, story, poetry and musings on life, taking there
time unworried about the length. I don t think they had there noses in the
air with too much nobility and flair and strong voices going through an
emotionless play, Branagh included the scene were Hamlet instructs them in
how to give the play, an intriguing and fascinating look into Shakespeare
s mind on how he might have done it back then.  But I thought it was
innovative the way Branagh would show them going through the first part of
the text in one scene and then fade out to another and finish the text
suggesting time had passed between ( the scene with Laertes and Ophelia
before he leaves ). Also the rich location were they shot the film was an
aid, if it got to be to much your eye would dwell on the rich
surroundings, the beautiful furnishings, which would bring you back to the
story. Also the movement of the camera. 
     But I feel that Branagh may have catered to much to the general
public, and may not have given the play full justice by running through
the text and not fully expressing all the words and emotions involved in
the text. A good example of someone who took their time was Franco
Zeffirelli, his Hamlet released in 1990. Although he had to cut out quite
a lot of it. If you like Branagh s I highly recommend you see this one
too, available for rent.
     All in all this is a fantastic film. I was surprised Branagh could
play Hamlet with such humor. The location and costumes were an excellent
idea for the play. The acting top notch. The music beautiful, in synch
with the film and unobtrusive. Billy Crystal s scene was one of the most
hilarious scene s in the film. Many scene s brought tears to your eyes if
not streaming down your checks ( like the scene with Hamlet describing his
father to his mother ). A wonderful film I hope it does well. In a rating
of 1 to 5 stars ( 1 being avoid it, 4 being excellent and 5 being all time
classic ) I give this 4 stars.
--
 E-mail: antpage@aol.com
 Web Page at: http://members.aol.com/antpage
 Hamlet Review: http://members.aol.com/antpage/antswebpg/brhamlet

Author
Ivana Redwine
Kenneth Branagh, Derek Jacobi, Julie Christie, Richard Briers, Nicholas
Farrell, Michael Maloney, Brian Blessed, Rufus Sewell, Billy Crystal,
Jack Lemmon, Charlton Heston, Gerard Depardieu, Rosemary Harris,
Timothy Spall, Reece Dinsdale, Robin Williams. Directed by Kenneth
Branagh. Screenplay Kenneth Branagh, based on William Shakespeare's
play. MPAA Rating: PG-13 (violence, sexual situations). Running Time:
238 Minutes.
WARNING: This review contains spoilers.
Until I saw Kenneth Branagh's 238-minute, full-text version of HAMLET, 
I thought nothing could rival Laurence Olivier's classic 1948 film 
version. I've always loved Olivier's subtle, sensitive, and poetic 
performance as Hamlet, in addition to the way that his film wrapped 
everything in a moody black and white chiaroscuro. But Branagh has 
created a powerful masterpiece that is psychologically complex and 
lushly cinematic. Never have all the nuances of Shakespeare's story 
been more vibrantly examined on screen. I predict that Branagh's 
HAMLET will eventually become the definitive film version of 
Shakespeare's play; yet, I make this prediction with some degree of 
sadness because Olivier's version has always been one of my favorite 
movies.
Of course, Branagh had advantages that Olivier could only dream of in 
1948, including a studio willing to finance and release a version that 
is nearly four hours long. With an hour and 20 minutes less to tell 
the story, Olivier's version is less dramatically coherent and omits 
some rather important minor characters, notably Rosencrantz and 
Guildenstern. Also, Branagh had at his disposal the magician's bag of 
technical tricks available to today's filmmaker, including digital 
special effects. I only hope that people who are excited by Branagh's 
HAMLET might be inspired to take a look at Olivier's film in order to 
compare different takes on Shakespeare's classic story.
Both Olivier and Branagh have managed to breathe the kind of life into 
the title role that makes for a classic film. Branagh's interpretation 
of Hamlet differs greatly from Olivier's, but then there is no correct 
way to play the role. Olivier's Hamlet is focused on the character's 
melancholia and indecisiveness, while Branagh encompasses a greater 
emotional range, running through a spectrum from an almost serene 
state of intellectual contemplation to an intense anger that 
threatens to tear his sanity apart. Thus, there are more nuances in 
Branagh's portrayal than in Olivier's.
Branagh's film is a veritable feast for the eyes with dazzling 
cinematography that is all the more vivid because of the crystalline 
clarity and trompe l'oeil depth of the 70 mm format. And Branagh makes 
excellent use of color in his film, made credible in part by changing 
the setting of the story to the latter half of the nineteenth century. 
This change also justifies impressive location shooting at Blenheim 
Palace, which plays the role of Shakespeare's Elsinore Castle. 
However, as richly visual as this film is, its dynamic visual aspects 
never detract from the substance of the story or the beauty of 
Shakespeare's words.
At the core of the artistry in Branagh's movie is that all the 
elements of film making come together in a seamlessly integrated work. 
Where Branagh's film outshines Olivier's is in its intricacy and in 
its ability to bring image, word, performance, and music into a 
gestalt of pure genius. 
The story of HAMLET has to be one of the most famous in the English 
language, but I'll refresh your memory with a broad synopsis. The 
film's focal character is the Danish prince Hamlet, who is deeply 
disturbed over his mother Gertrude's (Julie Christie) quick marriage  
to Claudius (Derek Jacobi), the brother of Hamlet's dead father. Soon, 
Hamlet has an encounter with what appears to be his father's ghost, 
who informs him that Claudius murdered him and that it is now Hamlet's 
duty to take revenge for this murder by killing Claudius. The tragedy 
then grows out of Hamlet's delay in carrying out this revenge.
Branagh's film illuminates an often overlooked aspect of the story, 
namely that it is not merely a personal tragedy for Hamlet, but it is 
also a tragedy for Denmark and its people. Because of Hamlet's 
indecisiveness, the Danes must endure the consequences of a political 
power vacuum and corrupt leadership. Then, near the film's end, there 
are scenes of Hamlet fighting a duel in Elsinore Castle interspersed 
with scenes of Fortinbras, Prince of Norway, and his army closing in 
on the Castle. At the end of the duel, the Danish Prince, King, and 
Queen all lie dead and the fate of Denmark and its people has fallen 
into the hands of Fortinbras.
Branagh's HAMLET makes good use of the classic Shakespearean motif of 
illusion and reality. In a scene that filled me with terror, Hamlet 
meets the ghost of his father (played menacingly by Brian Blessed). 
Special effects along with excellent acting and direction make the 
ambiguity between specter and hallucination come alive on the screen. 
There is a supernaturally sharp focus to this scene, and Blessed's 
eyes are a deathly shade of blue and strangely distorted. At times 
his face and eyes fill the screen. The ghost's highly processed voice 
(it reminded me at times of Darth Vader's voice in STAR WARS) rumbles 
across the surrounding area, cracking open the ground under Hamlet's 
feet. When the ghost instructs Hamlet to "Remember me!", there is 
little doubt that Hamlet could ever forget.
The difficulty in distinguishing between illusion and reality is 
clearly a factor in Hamlet's delay in killing the King. Before 
carrying out this act of revenge, Hamlet must determine the veracity 
of what he believes he saw and heard. Was it a hallucination, an 
apparition, or even the devil in disguise? Or was it the actual ghost 
of his father's spirit? Dramatic tension is maintained throughout the 
film; and until the dueling scene near the movie's end, it is neither 
clear nor simple when or whether Hamlet should take action on the 
ghost's mandated revenge. 
Another strong scene that also echoes the motif of appearance and 
reality is when Hamlet "tests the conscience of the king" by altering 
a play put on by a traveling group of players to mirror the ghost's 
description of the murder. Hamlet hopes that Claudius's reaction will 
determine if the ghost was telling the truth. Hamlet feigns an "antic 
disposition" to camouflage his actions and protect himself from 
Claudius, who poses a real threat to him if he knows that Hamlet 
suspects him of regicide. Branagh's performance is what makes this 
scene so dynamic. While waiting to see how Claudius reacts to the 
play, Hamlet struggles within himself trying to contain an anger that 
is tearing his sanity apart. As the scene progresses, it is not 
entirely clear whether the madness he is putting on is an act anymore.
Every aspect of Branagh's production, even set design, enhances 
meaning and emotional impact. The main gallery of Elsinore Castle 
contains a hall of mirrors that cast a dizzying myriad of reflections 
and conceal doors leading to secret rooms--a breathtaking visual 
metaphor that again echoes the motif of illusion and reality. It is to 
one of these mirrors that Branagh delivers the famous "To be, or not 
to be" soliloquy. As the soliloquy progresses, the camera comes in 
tighter and tighter on the reflection until it appears to be Hamlet 
himself who is speaking and not his reflected image.
Another strength of this film is how it uses visually stunning images  
to intensify dramatic impact. For example, in one scene Hamlet slowly 
inserts a blade aimed at the head of Claudius who is alone at prayer. 
On the surface, it appears to be the perfect time to act out the 
revenge. As Hamlet debates the merits of killing the repentant 
Claudius, the blade inches closer to the head of Claudius who is 
oblivious to the threat that is just a hair's-breadth away. Hamlet 
decides that killing Claudius would be an unsatisfactory form of 
revenge since Claudius's soul would go to heaven since he is at 
prayer, and the blade is then slowly withdrawn. The knife being 
inserted through the screen adds power and dramatic tension, making 
an already thrilling scene burn white-hot with emotion.
Branagh's performance is magnetic; his performance acts as a center of 
gravity. Yet, the other performances are strong enough not to be 
overwhelmed. Branagh assembled an international cast of the highest 
caliber, and most of the performances are exemplary. I'll comment on a 
few that impressed me most. Derek Jacobi's Claudius has a regal and 
controlled surface demeanor that occasionally cracks to reveal the 
dangerous monster lurking just underneath his public facade. Claudius 
here is a cold-blooded, pragmatic man, and Jacobi makes him as 
bone-chilling as the snow-covered landscape just outside the castle 
walls. The character of Gertrude has so often been portrayed as 
weak-willed and passive, but Julie Christie plays this role with a 
hedonistic charisma that speaks to Claudius's motivation--as evil as 
his actions are, they are not beyond the pale of credibility given the 
attractiveness of Christie's Gertrude. Kate Winslet is well cast as 
Ophelia, bringing an air of vulnerability to the role, which, when 
combined with  flashbacks showing a sexual relationship between Hamlet 
and Ophelia, makes the character's eventual emotional breakdown more 
believable to contemporary audiences.
Added to the mix of Shakespearian actors, there are quite a few 
recognizable faces from Hollywood--Charlton Heston, Billy Crystal, 
Robin Williams, Jack Lemmon. With the exception of Jack Lemmon, who is 
badly miscast as Marcellus, their performances hold up well against 
the competition. Heston is a wonderful choice for the role of the 
Player King; his rich voice and clear delivery are perfect for 
Shakespeare. And Crystal's considerable comedic gifts make the 
conversation between the two grave diggers sparkle with wit and humor. 
The four-hour version of HAMLET was released on Christmas Day in New 
York, Toronto, and Los Angeles, in the 70 mm format, and a shorter, 35 
mm version will also be released nationwide at the end of January, 
1997. Given the positive response to the longer version, I hope that 
it will also remain in release, at least in larger cities and 
university towns. With its visual vividness, emotional depth, and 
complexity, the longer version is the one I recommend. Don't let the 
length scare you; the longer version is a highly entertaining film. 
Plus, a film like this produces an event atmosphere where you can 
catch a theater-like spark of excitement in the air during 
intermission. For Shakespeare lovers this is a dream come true; if 
you are not a Shakespeare lover, this might just turn you into one. 
Don't miss one of the film experiences of a lifetime--HAMLET has 
never before been realized with such power, passion, and pathos.   

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Sometimes you are fortunate to see something so special and
unusual that you have trouble writing about it.  Kenneth Branagh's new
HAMLET affected me that way.  Every time I picked up my notes to finish
writing about it, I would switch to some other review instead.  (During
the Christmas season, there are so many films opening that I stay
behind.  Sometimes I even have three press screenings at once.  You can
see why the New York Times needs three film critics to cover all the
movies.)
     So why is there all this buzz about yet another adaptation of
William Shakespeare's "Hamlet"?  Afterall, there have been twenty-eight
HAMLET movies already.  Surely there is no longer anything new to say.
     In two words, the answer is: four hours.  Four hours plus a twenty
minute intermission to be precise.  Granted, that for those who hate
Shakespeare, the idea of sticking around this long will sound like
masochism.  Yet, even people not enamored with the Bard may be as blown
away by this film as was I.
     Let me explain.  Branagh chose the film's length for two reasons.
First, he wanted to break with tradition and do a full text version of
the play.  This means that viewers would get to enjoy the many minor
scenes that directors eliminate because of time considerations.
     Second, he wanted to allow enough time for the play to breathe.
This is the groundbreaking idea that makes the play so uniquely
accessible.  Hamlet has more lines worth pondering than ten other
plays, but usually the listener can not pause to reflect on them
because the actors are flying through their lines so they can get the
movie completed within a traditional length.  Never I have I understood
or appreciated HAMLET so completely, and I predict that others
fortunate enough to see the movie in its full four hour length will
feel the same way.
     There is much history behind the running time.  Let me summarize
what I heard about it.  Branagh wanted a four hour version, but the
distributors and the theater owners thought it would be a financial
disaster for them.  Normally they could fill the theater twice during
that period.  Branagh was forced to create both a two and a four hour
version with the latter to be shown briefly in three cities in the
world.  After a hue and cry, especially on the Internet, the strategy
was changed to releasing both versions widely.  Moreover, the shorter
version will be a 35mm print, whereas the longer will be the original
70mm.  Plans, of course, could still change before the nationwide
release next year.
     I was privileged to see one of the selected members of the Bay
Area press that Castle Rock invited to a special screening in San
Francisco.  We were supposed to see the 70mm four hour version, but the
print was "stuck in London," so we saw a 35mm print of the four hour
version instead.  Like Sergio Leone's ONCE UPON A TIME IN AMERICA
(1984), which has both a truncated and a full length version, the
longer one is the one is see.  I would drive hours to see the four hour
version of Hamlet.  Given there was a massive storm the day I saw it,
that is exactly what I did and was it ever worth it.
     The sets by Tim Harvey for Hamlet are stunning.  This adaptation
of the play is set in the nineteenth century.  The interior scenes in
Elsinore Castle have a long mirror lined gallery.  They combined
adjoining sound stages at Shepperton to create the largest single set
ever constructed in the United Kingdom.  The exterior scenes were shot
at Blenheim Palace where they used more artificial snow than any movie
in history.  Yes, even more than DOCTOR ZHIVAGO.  (The press kit
assures us that it is "environmentally friendly" fake snow so you
needn't be troubled by that while watching the picture.)
     The music by Patrick Doyle (SENSE AND SENSIBILITY and HENRY V) has
a haunting and lovely theme as well as dramatic parts full of kettle
drums, horns, and wailing choirs.  Beautifully sad and majestic music
so memorable that you may want to buy the CD,
     The costumes by Alexandra Byrne (PERSUASION) are fashioned using a
lush color palette of royal reds and golds set off against dramatic
whites and blacks.  The cinematography by Alex Thomson makes you feel
the warmth of the interior and the cold of the exterior.  Branagh said
he did not want "gloomy castles and dour costumes," and his crew
delivered.  The sets are as inviting as the text is compelling.
     Branagh is my favorite Shakespearean actor and director.  Anyone
doubting his abilities should see his brilliant HENRY V, which remains
his best acting ever.  (As a director, HENRY V is not his best film;
HAMLET is.)  Branagh brings an intensity and a focused approach that
illuminates every word he speaks.  Early on, Hamlet tells his mother,
Queen Gertrude (Julie Christie), "Seems, madam! nay it is; I know not
'seems.'" His thin lips quiver as he delivers the lines, and he appears
as if he may explode at any moment.
     Every actor puts his stamp on Shakespeare's most famous lines, "To
be, or not to be."  Branagh decides to downplay them somewhat in favor
of other lines.  He delivers the speech in a mirror with the camera
focused on the mirrored imaged rather than directly on him.
     As is appropriate, Branagh is the star about which the other
performers revolve.  Appropriate both because of his position in the
play and because of his talent.  Nevertheless, the other luminaries in
this star studded sky are worth mention and perhaps some Oscar
consideration.
     Branagh says he purposely cast the film with a host of big names
to ensure the audience can "look and see and hear with greater clarity"
even the minor roles.  I want to get the one exception to this rule out
of the way quickly since it is my only criticism of the film.  Jack
Lemmon, as Marcellus, is a disaster and appears totally lost on how to
approach the role.  Luckily, Lemmon has only a few minutes of screen
time.  The rest of the actors range from quite good to exceptional.
     Besides those already mentioned, Derek Jacobi gives a controlled
and effective reading of the malevolent Claudius.  Interesting choice
since Jacobi's signature role was as Emperor Claudius in "I, Claudius."
Branagh said he first saw "Hamlet" at age fifteen with Jacobi in the
lead.  That performance left an indelible mark on his memory of how the
play was so "exciting, sexy, dangerous, and violent."
     Kate Winslet (HEAVENLY CREATURES, SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, and JUDE)
delivers the best performance of her short but talented career as the
fragile and vulnerable Ophelia.  When Ophelia goes mad, you believe it.
     Nicholas Farrell (Antonio in TWELFTH NIGHT) plays Horatio with
much passion.  Charlton Heston and Rosemary Harris are perfectly cast
as the Player King and Queen.  Timothy Spall (SECRETS AND LIES) is
Rosencrantz, and Reece Dinsdale is Guildenstern.  Robin Williams is
quite funny in the small part of Osric, but Billy Crystal underplays
the comic role of the First Gravedigger.  Michael Maloney (Dauphin in
HENRY V) as Laertes is explosively powerful.
     An incredible motion picture experience.  Movies this good remind
us of the power of the medium.  See the four hour version.  Accept no
substitutes.  And try to see the 70mm version that I missed.  70mm
gives images a three dimensional realism that the smaller 35mm format
can never bring out.  I have trouble imagining a more striking visual
that the 35mm print I saw.  You could see something even better.
     HAMLET runs 3:58 plus an intermission.  It is rated PG-13.  There
is brief sex, some nudity, and violence.  The film would fine for kids
say nine or ten and up.  I recommend this film to you in the strongest
terms whether you like Shakespeare or hate him, and I give it my top
rating of ****.  Do NOT miss this film.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Vincent Merlaud
Hamlet (USA, 1996, 237min59s), based on William Shakespeare's play,
adapted for the screen and directed by Kenneth Branagh, filmed in 65mm on
location at Blenheim Castle and at Shepperton Studios
with Kenneth Branagh, Julie Christie, Derek Jacobi, Richard Briers,
Michael Maloney, Nicholas Farrell, Kate Winslet, Charlton Heston, Billy
Crystal, Gerard Depardieu, Robin Williams, Jack Lemmon, John Mills and
John Gielgud.
A long time ago, in another movie era, Laurence Olivier directed his
version of the Bard's turn-of-the-seventeenth-century play, and the
critics then blamed him for being too old for the part and, most of all,
for restructuring (a polite word for "butchering") the play. What Branagh
presents in 1996 is -- for the first time ever -- the play uncut, albeit
transposed into Denmark's nineteenth century.
These four hours with Denmark's Royals are completely worthwhile. For the
third time this year, adapting a 400 year-old play has led to fascinating
results: Al Pacino's Looking For Richard was personnal and brilliant, and
Baz Luhrman's Romeo And Juliet colorful and deeply energetic. Respecting
the author (John Gielgud is part of the cast), Branagh gives this time a
more epic grandeur to the play (he even hired Charlton Heston!).
This is probably the most famous story in the English language, I'm sure
everyone has heard of it. It focuses on the young prince of Denmark, who,
mourning the death of his father, encounters his ghost, who informs him he
was poisoned by his brother Claudius, who's just married the widow Gertrude.
The film is technically breathtaking: Alex Thompson's cinematography
masterfully exploits the depth of the 65mm format, and the production
design is one of the most beautiful in years. Yet the strength of
Branagh's cinema resides in its actors: filming in long unbroken takes, he
gives them the opportunity to deliver great performances.
Lucky boy! Who could possibly dream of a more suitable cast? Mixing old
Shakespearian pros with relative newcomers and Hollywood stars provides a
terrific result. I was particularly impressed by Julie Christie (a natural
born actress) and Derek Jacobi (who directed a younger Branagh as Hamlet
on the stage). Her Gertrude rejects her premature remarriage, and his
Claudius is not the villain into which other adaptations turned him -- we
feel he might do as well as King as his predecessor. Branagh's performance
as Hamlet is very good, though monotonous. The long-awaited "To be or not
to be" monologue being filmed in a mirror, the character hesitating to
act: that's an easy trick to show the duality of the man!
This is however little, when compared with other manifestations of
Branagh's ego. In Much Ado About Nothing, he showed himself walking on
water; in the current film, the end has him being carried away after the
duel with his arms outstretched in a not oversubtle allusion to Jesus
being taken from the cross. I can think of only one person whose ego is
possibly as big as his: the other half of Britain's most celebrated
ex--movie-couple, Ms. Emma Thompson herself...(see Sense And Sensibility)

Author
John Bauer
After many years of watching movies I should have seen quite a few
adaptations of Shakespeare by this time, but the fact of the matter is that
those few I have seen (e.g., Zeffirelli's THE TAMING OF THE SHREW, Olivier's
HENRY V) irritate as much as they impress.  It's true that Shakespeare's work
is something I more often admire than enjoy.  Who is not awed by the
incredible beauty and poetry of his language?  Yet the stories themselves can
seem long-winded and overly complex.
Which is not to say that no play of Will's can succeed today.  I have been
fortunate to have seen several stunning theatrical productions of Shakespeare
that have managed to breathe incredible life into English literature's most
sacred texts.  I have even witnessed such success onscreen in Kenneth
Branagh's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.  But if all of the components are not
perfectly in tune, I fear I find the Bard tedious.
Branagh is making something of a career out of filming Shakespeare, this
HAMLET being his third attempt.  He is to be admired not only for trying to
bring such classics to modern audiences, but also for not pandering to same
in the process.  This is not WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S ROMEO + JULIET, complete
with MTV enhancements of sound and vision.  Rather, in a rare show of faith
in the material, we are presented with Shakespeare's original text, complete
and unabridged.
While the effort may be noble, however, the result is somewhat less so.  As
in MUCH ADO, the cast is a mix of British and American actors.  In fact,
HAMLET's large ensemble is packed with recognizable faces, so much so that it
reminded me a bit of old-fashioned Hollywood epics.  Even Charlton Heston, an
icon of those epics, makes an appearance -- and a damn good one it is, though
not all the familiars fare so well.
But the most profound fault in this version of HAMLET lies not in the use of
stars, but in Branagh himself.  Far from striking me as troubled, indecisive,
or bordering on madness, Branagh's Prince seems more like a highly composed
actor displaying his range.  His dashing blond coif and smashing black attire
only emphasize the point.  That he is also a highly talented actor is not in
doubt; some of his scenes are quite moving, including the famous soliloquy.
 But without a Hamlet who can give some cohesion to the sprawling story, the
tale loses its meaning.
It does not help that for all the preserved dialogue, much of it is spoken to
an annoying and inappropriate underscore.  I'd prefer to let the words speak
for themselves.  Likewise the camera and editing are rather hyperactive,
particularly in the first half -- seemingly a desperate concession that a
four-hour movie may not hold our interest after all.  (Although the idea of
showing an edited version for Peoria strikes me as ludicrous, I am now
curious as to how it turned out.)  And though the indoor scenes in the
central court are reasonably well lit, much of the outdoor cinematography is
washed out and lacking in mystery.  At one point, the appearance of the Ghost
almost recalls the tacky artistry of ED WOOD(!).
I wish I could say better of this film.  I *want* to like Shakespeare.  And I
want Branagh to keep trying to show me why Will is so great.  Alas, this
HAMLET has not made me all that eager to see more.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Kenneth Branagh has now directed his third Shakespeare film.  His
HENRY V surprised all by being a vivid and powerful adaptation that
transcended the frequent language barrier that some feel seeing
Shakespeare's plays.  Branagh managed this by putting more modern
intonation into the words and by just plain good acting.  His MUCH ADO
ABOUT NOTHING proved to be a joyful romp that was even more
approachable than HENRY V.  It demonstrated that Shakespeare comedies
could really be made as enjoyable and even as funny as most modern
comedies being produced.  For his third Shakespeare adaptation Branagh
decided to make his most ambitious film to date, an unabridged HAMLET.
Until now his Shakespeare films have been abridged to fit the standard
screentime of two hours or less.  And while HENRY V had the exciting
Battle of Agincourt and MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING was a light and frothy
comedy, HAMLET is much more weighty and cerebral.  The producers asked
would audiences accept sitting through a four-hour film adaptation of a
tragedy?  Well, they would not have to.  Two versions would be
released: a limited full-length version for the few who would be
willing sit through the whole thing and a faster-moving version edited
down to two and a half hours.  What happened must have startled the
film distributors and undermined the old truism that nobody every went
broke underestimating the intelligence of the public.  What was
discovered was there was almost no market for the peppier abridged
version.  Had the shorter version been the only film made the public
would likely have flocked to it, but just about anybody erudite enough
to want to see the short version actually preferred to see the full
play performed.  After nearly a century of cutting down Shakespeare
plays to make versions the public would want to see--Shakespeare films
go back as least as far as the 1899 KING JOHN--it turned out that the
public really did not want their Shakespeare cut down for them.  This
discovery may affect many Shakespeare film productions to come.  So
even before its release HAMLET had broken new ground.
     Unfortunately, that new ground is among the precious little
innovation this new version of HAMLET gives us.  Not that it is not an
estimable film, but unfortunately it is not so much ingenious as just
highly competent.  Branagh has assembled a terrific cast, particularly
considering the cameo roles, and created a lavish and beautiful
production that is at the same time just a bit dull and safe.  This is
a surprisingly unsurprising adaptation particularly since it is coming
from the innovative Kenneth Branagh.  The only major creative touch--
beyond telling the whole story--is to move the setting to the late 19th
Century.  A year earlier when Ian McKellan moved RICHARD III to Britain
in the 1930s, he chose a time which many of us could actually picture
and for which we had rich associations.  He chose a time when similar
events could have almost taken place in Britain and were actually
taking place in Germany.  But Branagh's change of setting is
comparatively pointless.  The public has few associations with his
chosen setting beyond perhaps the plays of Strindberg and Ibsen in
other parts of Scandinavia.  Branagh's recreation of this time and
place is a time impressive and perhaps a bit exaggerated and overdone.
A major setting is a huge mirrored palace ballroom equipped to drop a
blizzard of white confetti to celebrate the first, rather prosaic,
pronouncements of the new king.  This may be spectacle, but it is
unnecessary and overdone.  The film, set in the harsh Danish winter, is
being distributed at the height of a particularly harsh American winter
when the viewer may well ask himself, "Isn't there enough ice and cold
in the world without having to pay to see it on the screen?"  For
visual effect Branagh has moved the story to the Danish winter in spite
of the play having Ophelia find fresh flowers and unfrozen water late
in the story.  Also the setting calls for an unstrung Ophelia to be
committed to an oppressive asylum, but without comment from any of the
characters she seems to be able to escape it not unlike DRACULA's
Renfield.  Is this what Shakespeare intended?  But then, frequently the
visuals contradict the play.  A character who supposedly has found "a
muddy death" is found floating in clear water.  A scene in which the
ghost is said to turn in a start shows no such action from the ghost.
     Branagh's great talent for use of modern inflection to make
Shakespeare understandable is somehow missing here from his
performance.  This is never more clear than in an exchange with that
great Shakespearean, Billy Crystal, playing the gravedigger.  It is
surprising how much easier it is to follow Crystal's end of the
conversation.  Crystal seems a little out place, but less so than
Michael Keaton was in MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, and his diction is
plainer and easier to understand than Branagh's by far.  At times
Branagh races through his speeches as if his goal is to get to the
other side.  While we are on the subject of famous comedians in smaller
roles, Robin Williams who discusses Shakespearean acting in DEAD POETS
SOCIETY gets a chance to do some as Osiric.  For once he is reasonably
restrained and while his fans may be disappointed he really should not
be the focus in his scenes and he shows commendable control.  Derek
Jacobi plays the new king with quiet dignity and few strong emotions
though why the queen should prefer him to his brother Old Hamlet (Brian
Blessed) is never convincingly clarified.  Julie Christie begins with
the same quiet dignity, but of course her role improves as the story
progresses and as an actress she takes full advantage.  Other small
roles go to the likes of Charleton Heston, Jack Lemmon, and Gerard
Depardieu to no strong effect.
     Branagh has a taste for the visually over-dramatic particularly on
scenes that feature him.  He holds the intermission until the end of
Act 4, Scene 4, very late in the play, so that he can bring the break
with what comes the closest to the usually-vacillating Hamlet giving
something approaching a stirring speech.  Trying to recapture some of
the fire of Henry V doing the St. Crispin's Day speech, he has Hamlet
giving the soliloquy on a field of ice and stone to a camera tracking
back and back from him.  Hot dang, that's dramatic!  Later he self-
indulgently has himself carried from the floor of the palace in a
Christ-like pose.  Once again Patrick Doyle provides the music, though
rarely with the effect of the pre-intermission sequence.  His music is
used to a much lesser degree than in MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, perhaps
because of the more thoughtful nature of the themes.  Sadly the score
is not particularly original or exciting and like Branagh his newer
efforts are strongly reminiscent of his earlier work.
     By its very completeness, Kenneth Branagh's HAMLET will probably
be the definitive version for our generation and beyond.  It stands
head and shoulders above the 1990 Franco Zefferelli version that
starred Mel Gibson.  It probably even outshines the Laurence Olivier
version.  But this was Branagh's opportunity to make what is probably
the most celebrated play of the most celebrated playwright.  As such it
is something of a disappointment and is certainly the least artful and
most overdone of the three Branagh- directed Shakespeare films.  It is
a flawed adaptation, but still probably the best cinematic theatrical
release of Shakespeare's HAMLET.  I rate it a low +2  on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom/United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 12/25/96 (NY, LA, Toronto), 1/24/97 (limited)
Running Length: 4:02 (plus intermission, which occurs at 2:40)
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Mature themes, brief nudity, sex, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Kenneth Branagh, Derek Jacobi, Julie Christie, Richard Briers, 
      Nicholas Farrell, Kate Winslet, Michael Maloney, Brian Blessed, 
      Rufus Sewell, Billy Crystal, Jack Lemmon, Charlton Heston, 
      Gerard Depardieu, Rosemary Harris, Timothy Spall, Reece Dinsdale, 
      Robin Williams
Director: Kenneth Branagh
Producer: David Barron
Screenplay: Kenneth Branagh based on the play by William Shakespeare
Cinematography: Alex Thomson
Music: Patrick Doyle
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
"Presenting the play uncut has allowed the characters to reveal even 
more, and we discover extra details about them which are usually lost on 
stage.  The political situation becomes clearer, and Hamlet is revealed 
as a knowledgeable man of the theater in his discussion of the boy 
actors.  We can convey a stronger sense of Denmark as a country ill at 
ease with itself, where there is indeed something rotten and disjointed.  
The restored lines are not mere padding, but reinforce the idea that the 
play is about a national as well as domestic tragedy."
          -- Kenneth Branagh
     The play, "Hamlet", by William Shakespeare, was first performed 
around 1600.  Since then, it has proven to be one of the English 
language's most enduring stories, and there has never been a decade that 
hasn't seen dozens of new productions.  "Hamlet" has come to the screen 
numerous times, in incarnations varying from early, silent versions to 
grand, color epics.  Legendary actors John Gielgud, Richard Burton, and 
Laurence Olivier have taken the lead role.  Now, as the curtain falls on 
the 1996 movie season, another HAMLET has opened.  And, in a statement 
that I do not make lightly, this latest version is not only the best 
filmed adaptation of "Hamlet" I have ever seen, but the best cinematic 
expression that I have come across of any of Shakespeare's plays.
     "Hamlet" has been something of a private obsession for Kenneth 
Branagh since, at the age of eleven, he first saw it on British TV.  
Even when HENRY V was an international sensation, he was adamant that 
his true dream was to bring an unabridged version of "Hamlet" to the 
screen.  Now, half a decade later, after directing HENRY V and MUCH ADO 
ABOUT NOTHING and co-starring in OTHELLO, that vision has been realized.  
Branagh's HAMLET, filmed in 70 mm, has arrived in all its glory, and, 
with every line from the original play intact, it takes approximately 
four hours to run.  It is a well-spent four hours.
     Part of the enduring appeal of "Hamlet" lies in its complex 
characterization and twisty, tragic plot.  "Hamlet" deals with, among 
other things, madness and revenge, sex and love, politics and treachery, 
and ghosts, both real and figurative.  Yet, despite the depth and weight 
of the issues it essays, there is still a great deal of humor and good, 
old-fashioned adventure.  "Hamlet" can quite literally make you laugh 
and cry, hiss and cheer.  It also contains a slew of famous lines, 
including, but not limited to the likes of "Frailty, thy name is 
woman!", "To thine own self be true", "Something is rotten in the state 
of Denmark", "Brevity is the soul of wit", "The play's the thing", "The 
lady doeth protest too much", and, of course, "To be, or not to be, that 
is the question."
     The story centers on Hamlet (Branagh), a thirty-year old Prince of 
Denmark during the twelfth century, who is mourning the death of his 
beloved father (Brian Blessed) and the untimely (and, according to 
custom, unseemly) wedding of his mother, Gertrude (Julie Christie), to 
his uncle, Claudius (Derek Jacobi).  Hamlet sees his mother's sudden re-
marriage as a betrayal of her union with his father, but worse news is 
yet to come.  An apparition, appearing in the shape of Hamlet's father, 
haunts Elsinore Castle, and when Hamlet confronts the ghost, it claims 
to be the true spirit of the late king, doomed to walk the Earth for a 
set time.  It also states that, by using a fast-acting, deadly poison, 
Claudius committed murder to claim both queen and crown for himself.  
Hamlet vows revenge, and thus begins either his slow spiral into madness 
or his carefully orchestrated act to appear insane.  
     The peripheral issues of "Hamlet" are no less interesting.  
Fortinbras (Rufus Sewell), the nephew of the King of Norway, is massing 
armies to attack Denmark.  Ophelia (Kate Winslet), Hamlet's lover, has 
been forbidden to have any further contact with the prince.  A group of 
traveling actors has come to Elsinore.  And two old school mates of 
Hamlet's have been employed by Claudius to betray their old friend.  
     One of the things that Branagh brings to his adaptation of the play 
is an amazing visual sense.  From start to finish, this is a stunningly 
beautiful film, filled with vibrant colors, startling camera angles, and 
costumes and production values that are among the best of the year.  
Even if the story was weak (which it isn't), HAMLET would be worth 
seeing for its pure visual splendor.  And, although the dress and 
settings are those of late-eighteenth century England, no part of the 
film seems anachronistic.  Cinematically time-shifting Shakespeare's 
plays has become popular of late (see Ian McKellan's RICHARD III or the 
recent ROMEO AND JULIET), but Branagh has surpassed everyone.  With an 
unflagging attention to detail, HAMLET demands to be noticed.
     Yet, even amidst the spectacle of the visual elements, the 
narrative is not upstaged.  A key to great cinema is to use time and 
place to augment the story, and that's what Branagh accomplishes here.  
We are not so enraptured by the stunning appearance of Elsinore's 
terraced throne room that we lose sight of Hamlet's pain, Gertrude's 
uncertainty, Polonius' foolishness, or Claudius' guilt.  From the wintry 
snowscapes surrounding the castle to the desolation of a graveyard, the 
settings emphasize, but never overwhelm, the action.
     For his version of HAMLET, Branagh has assembled a top-notch 
international cast.   Well-known actors like Charlton Heston (as the 
Player King), John Gielgud (Priam), Judi Dench (Hecuba), Billy Crystal 
(First Gravedigger), Gerard Depardieu (Reynaldo), Jack Lemmon 
(Marcellus), and Robin Williams (Osric) fill small roles.  Most are 
adequate, and a few (Heston and Crystal in particular) are excellent.  
Only Robin Williams, affecting a silly accent and even sillier 
mannerisms, stands out as an obvious concession to commercial pressure.  
Williams is out-of-place, but his presence is only the smallest of 
blemishes on a wonderful production.
     The leads are all in peak form.  Michael Maloney (Laertes) and 
Nicholas Farrell (Horatio), both of whom appeared in Branagh's A 
MIDWINTER'S TALE, give strong performances.  Richard Briers, another 
long-time collaborator of Branagh's, adds layers of guile and 
intelligence to his interpretation of the fatuous Polonius.  Brian 
Blessed makes us feel the power and malevolence of the ghost.  Julie 
Christie's wonderful Gertrude allows us to understand why Claudius would 
resort to murder to win her.  And Derek Jacobi's cultured, politically 
savvy, yet privately tortured Claudius is richly portrayed and worthy of 
Oscar recognition.  
     Then there's Kenneth Branagh, the film's undisputed star.  The 
actor's emoting, which has been a problem in less-theatrical productions 
such as MARY SHELLEY'S FRANKENSTEIN (in which he was hopelessly over-
the-top), works to perfection here.  For Hamlet's calmer, quieter scenes 
(such as the soliloquies), Branagh brings a contemplative and 
introspective quality to his performance.  But, for the emotionally-
rousing sequences, his interpretation is brash and forceful, drawing us 
into the pure drama of the situation and raising the hairs on our necks.  
It's a marvelous portrayal that compliments those of the many other cast 
members.
     By using some creative license, usually in the form of flashback 
visuals without dialogue, Branagh adds more dimension to several of the 
characters.  He shows scenes of domestic tranquillity in Elsinore years 
ago, with Gertrude, Old Hamlet, and the young prince playing games and 
laughing at the jests of Yorick, while Claudius lingers ominously in the 
background.  In a moment that elucidates the true nature of their 
relationship, we're shown Hamlet and Ophelia in bed.  And, with the 
ghost's words serving as a voiceover narrative, we see Claudius murder 
his brother and predecessor.
     Briefly, I want to mention a few of the many scenes that arrested 
my attention.  The first, which may be the most majestic moment in the 
entire film (and which is used for the theatrical poster), occurs during 
the departure of Gertrude and Claudius from Elsinore's audience chamber 
under a hail of flower petals while Hamlet, dressed in black, watches 
bleakly from behind them.  Then there's the sequence where Hamlet 
encounters his father's ghost.  The earth splits open, fire belches 
forth, mists coalesce, and the forest reverberates with the unearthly 
voice.  Hamlet's "Get thee to a nunnery" confrontation with Ophelia is 
tense and emotionally wrenching.  The graveyard scene, which opens the 
final act, is perfectly realized, especially as Hamlet recognizes the 
body in the coffin.  Finally, the climax is handled with the right mix 
of drama and adventure, and includes a nice nod to Errol Flynn.
     From the moment it was first announced that Branagh would attempt 
an unabridged "Hamlet", I never for a moment doubted that it would be a 
worthy effort.  After all, his previous forays into Shakespeare have 
been excellent.  Nothing, however, prepared me for the power and impact 
of this motion picture. Hyperbole comes easily when describing this 
HAMLET, decidedly the most impressive motion picture of 1996.  Nothing 
else this year has engaged my intellect, senses, and emotions in quite 
the same way.  I have seen dozens of versions of this play (either on 
screen or on stage), and none has ever held me in such a grip of awe.  
This may be Branagh's dream, but it is our pleasure.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Kenneth Branagh, Derek Jacobi, Nicholas Farrell, Kate Winslett, Charleton 
Heston, Billy Crystal, Jack Lemmon, Robin Williams
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
The Uber Hamlet has hit the big screen. Kenneth Branagh's four hour 
production of Shakespeare's classic, the first full-text version ever 
filmed, is the King Kong of tragedies. As a play, Hamlet deals with 
everything: murder, passion, politics, betrayal, madness, love, death, 
and the very meaning of existence. Branagh tackles it all with a 
vengeance; he's not only going to illuminate every facet of Shakespeare's 
epic, he's going to do it in such a vigorous, grand fashion that 
contemporary audiences will embrace the often difficult work. His vision 
and chutzpah is boundless and the film virtually bursts with energy. 
There are many magnificent moments in Hamlet, and quite a few painful 
ones.
Filmed in wide screen 70mm, the movie was made on massive sets in London. 
For the exterior shots the handsome Blenheim Palace in Oxfordshire stands 
in for Elsinore. Visually, the interior scenes are a feast, brimming with 
rich details and spacious beauty. The outdoor scenes are a mixed bag. 
Some shots, particularly those of advancing troops, have a real sense of 
grandeur. Unfortunately, many scenes are undermined by surprisingly bad 
set dressings (check out the tons of fake snow) and chintzy special 
effects. A nighttime shot early in the film attempts to capture an 
ominous, spooky feel, but the overuse of dry ice, coupled with very 
cheesy shots of the earth cracking open, make the whole scene look more 
like an amateur haunted house.
But enough about the dressings, let's look at the performances. Branagh 
states "This production is cast color-blind, nationality-blind, accent-
blind. I wanted to work with people I had admired for a number of years 
and who I thought would be very good for the parts." Some of his choices 
are inspired. Despite a spiky blond hairdo and look reminiscent of the 
royalty in David Lynch's "Dune," Derek Jacobi is magnificent as Claudius, 
Hamlet's murderous uncle. Jacobi's performance captures the treachery of 
the man, but also his fear, guilt and remorse. Without minimizing the 
evil of Claudius' deeds, Jacobi makes him much more of a human being. 
Nicholas Farrell gives a hearty, utterly credible performance as Horatio, 
and Kate Winslet's turn as Ophelia is both lovely and heartbreaking. 
Charlton Heston is a commanding presence as the Player King, a part often 
minimized in other productions of the play, and Billy Crystal does a 
surprisingly good job as a wry gravedigger. 
Alas, some of the other actors don't fare as well. Julie Christie, as 
Queen Gertrude, is passive, displaying little of the character's depth. 
As the devoted Marcellus, Jack Lemmon delivers his lines in a shaky, 
tentative fashion. He's hard to watch. And Robin Williams, playing the 
boorish Osric, seems cartoonish and wildly out of step.
As Hamlet, Branagh's performance is all over the place. In some scenes, 
notably the "To be or not to be" soliloquy, he is sublime, adding new 
layers to Shakespeare's extraordinary dialogue. But all too often, in his 
zeal to portray Hamlet as a vital, robust man, he leaps about exsessively,
 shouting his lines at breakneck speed in bombastic fashion. In most 
versions of the play, one of the enduring mysteries is whether Hamlet 
simply feigns madness or actually crosses the line into insanity. Not so 
here  Branagh does everything but wink at the audience, leaving little 
doubt about the mentality beneath the Dane's behavior.
During the intermission, which divides the film's 158 minute first 
portion from the 84 minute conclusion, I confessed to my companions that 
much of the archaic dialogue, delivered at lightning fast speed, was 
flying way over my head. My friends laughed and said they both feared 
they were the only people in the theater that felt that way. Despite 
Branagh's noble intentions, the rushed, often hard to understand dialogue 
makes it clear why the play is usually cut. 
The second portion of Hamlet, structurally shaky even in the short form, 
is particularly confusing and inconsistent here, though it does wraps up 
with a spectacular, if stagy, sword fight. Despite its problems, 
Branagh's Hamlet is well worth your time. His reach extends his grasp and 
the film stumbles along the way, but Branagh's audacious vision, coupled 
with Shakespeare's dazzling prose, delivers many substantial rewards. 

Author
Walter Frith
Kenneth Branagh's 'Hamlet' is perhaps the most ambitious working of the
Shakespeare tragedy ever brought to the big screen.  Intelligent, literate,
exquisite and breathtaking are other adjectives that come to mind when
describing this film.  The Prince of Denmark and Shakespeare's nobel
protagonist is played by Branagh himself.  In comparison to Olivier and
Gibson's portrayal of this character, I was impressed by the way Branagh was
able to add a dimension of subtext in order to make it a four hour and two
minute journey well worth the time.  The story of Hamlet as almost everyone
knows is his determination to avenge his father's death at the hands of his
uncle.  But the story of this character is much more than that.  It's about
searching for what being human is all about and how life's complexities and
frailties can drive men insane.  Hamlet's uncle Claudius portrayed by Derek
Jacobi is a sharp and well meaning portrait of evil which Jacobi executes
with acute brilliance and his character is just as compelling as any in the
film.  Jacobi has played Hamlet many times in his career and relates to the
story very well in this film playing an opposite character.  Lord Laurence
Olivier who died in 1989 is perhaps the most famous Hamlet as his 1948 film
production won Oscars for best picture and for Olivier himself in the best
actor category.  Mel Gibson's Hamlet from 1990 was an interesting journey for
the superstar who proved there's more to film than 'Lethal Weapon' and 'Mad
Max.'  Other members of Branagh's production include Julie Christie, Kate
Winslet, Jack Lemmon, Charlton Heston, Billy Crystal and Robin Williams.  It
was photographed in 70 mm and looks spectacular on a movie screen displaying
that format which I was fortunate enough to see.  Certainly not original but
definitely ambitious and alternative, Kenneth Branagh's 'Hamlet' is one you
soon will not forget.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Leaving aside Orson Welles, nobody else has tackled Shakespeare in all its
guts and glory, and in the beauty of the language. Kenneth Branagh's
full-throttled, four-hour version of Hamlet is the exception, and a model for
others to follow. Too often "Hamlet's" text is truncated, eschewing some of the
relationships and complex themes for simple emotions. Mel Gibson looks like a
wimp in the 1990 film version by Franco Zeffirelli; this new "Hamlet" will
leave you cheering and weeping with delight at Kenneth Branagh's bravura
performance. 
Branagh ("Henry V") stars as the virile Prince Hamlet who is torn by the
unexpectedly quick marriage of his mother, Gertrude (Julie Christie), to the
callous, manipulative Claudius (a scene-stealing Derek Jacobi), who is stealing
the throne of Denmark. What gets Hamlet to the boiling point of madness and
despair is that he is told by his associates that Claudius murdered Hamlet's
father - this is told in an eerie sequence by the ghost of Hamlet's father
(Bard veteran Brian Blessed). When Hamlet becomes aware of this, he becomes
anxious, jealous, manipulative, depressed, vengeful, and...yes, murderous. He
also has a lost love whom he pines for, Ophelia (Kate Winslet), but he can
never bring himself to admit his love to her, or do anything about his father's
death - he's a coward in denial. His cowardice becomes more evident when he's
continually walking through his palace becoming overbearing and obviously
theatrical - this Hamlet thinks nothing of insulting everyone, including
staging a play for Claudius where a prince's father is killed alarmingly the
same way as Claudius had killed Hamlet's father! Hamlet gradually becomes more
overbearing, and even cheerful, devilish. It is no wonder that Ophelia is
understandably confused by Hamlet's behavior, she becomes crazy herself. 
Kenneth Branagh is the perfect actor to play the bleached blonde, virile Hamlet
- he successfully brings all the character's emotions to life in a performance
I will never forget. It is outstanding how he makes us, the audience, unable to
keep up with his fast-talking rhythms and plans, but it is clear that his
madness and arrogance is leading to a path of doom - his lack of restraint
within himself is his own undoing. Derek Jacobi is simply marvelous as the
scheming Claudius - at times, he seems more dashing and in control than Hamlet,
yet it is noteworthy how Jacobi manages to mask Claudius's villainy and bring a
sense of sympathy. A round of applause must go to the return of Julie Christie
to the big screen - her Gertrude is the maternal, emotional force who tries to
heal Hamlet (I might add that Christie is at the appropriate age to play
Gertrude when comparing to the youthful Glenn Close in the Zeffirelli version).
Major pluses also go to Jack Lemmon as the doleful Marcellus, and the haunting
expressiveness of Rufus Selwell as Prince Fortrinbas who eventually brings the
throne to its knees. Kate Winslet ("Sense and Sensibility") is the ideal
Ophelia; beautiful, sad, sexy, and madly insane.
Despite the great performances, there are some that are superfluous at best. I
would have preferred other actors playing the First Gravedigger (Billy Crystal)
and Osric (Robin Williams) - they distract us from the genuine power of the
play and makes us feel as if we entered a Saturday Night Live special. Gerard
Depardieu's walk-on bit as Reynaldo also feels unnecessary. 
These are minor complaints for what is a superbly crafted work of art by
Branagh. Serving as director as well, he makes the play into a visionary
landscape of both the internal and external workings of Hamlet's mind. The
vastness of the palace; the nocturnal bluish moors; the wintry scenery; the
dazzling sword duels; Rufus's army marching symmetrically into the palace; and
the moment when Hamlet tells his famous "To be or not to be" speech - these
scenes, and many more, are beautifully realized by Branagh and cinematographer
Alex Thomson.         Branagh's first film was Shakespeare's "Henry V," a powerful,
stirring film that made me want to join Henry in his battles. Since then,
Branagh has fashioned a wonderful body of work ("Dead Again," "Peter's
Friends," "Much Ado About Nothing"), and he continues to amaze. This vivid,
breathtaking "Hamlet" finally gives Shakespeare and Branagh the respect they
both deserve.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns, or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Jun Yan
I think just about everyone knows what the story is, so I won't bother to
reiterate it. Here is only my comments on Kenneth Branagh's production. 
I saw it in 70mm version. It didn't struck me as particularly large, but
the color and the texture of the picture is incredibly beautiful, with
equally stunning art design, costume and sound effect. The castle was most
magnificent both exterior and interior. I cannot give higher praise to the
richness of the color.  
Comparing to the famous version of Lawrence Olivier, this Hamlet is
brighter, bolder, and more contemporary, and of course, more violent. I
have mixed feelings about including all the sometimes unimportant details
of the play into the film, characters who show up for 5 minutes and never
seen again, and casting familiar movie stars (mostly American) in minor
roles.  All the important roles are performed, with good to great effect,
by British actors, which makes it serious enough, but the cameos give me a
feeling of watching a parody -- not that I dislike it. I think enough
people have pointed out the flatness of Jack Lemmon as Marcellus, but
Robin Williams gave me the most distraction. He's the material of a lead
actor, and his mere presence can make American audience chuckle. He looks
very self-conscious at the moment meant to be tragic (when we know that
Hamlet doesn't know that he's about to be killed by a poisoned sword). And
when he was stabbed to death, it has a rather strange effect. I would
rather see this role played by a nameless actor.  Other American actors
are fairly good in their 10-min to half-hour play. Billy Crystal gave the
appropriate touch to the gravedigger, but again I felt like watching a
parody of Hamlet. When Billy pullled out a whole row of sculls and bones,
I told me friend next to me: "This is not the royal clown's grave, it's
John Wayne Gacy's backyard!"  Then we both missed the famous speech by
Hamlet holding the scull. I mean one scull is enough! 
The whole film struck me as very uneven and kind of strange as to what KB
had been doing. Most parts are made excellently and acted beautifully. KB
himself is adequate as the prince. Kate Winslet, IMHO, is better than any
other Ophelia I've seen and has a slight edge over other actors in the
whole movie. Claudius and Gertude are played well. All the major
supporting actors are better than average and are given sufficient time on
the screen so that we get to know not only the big players. I especially
like the sympathy and explanation given to Ophelia's brother. 
But there are always sloppy details that bother me. The most laughable is
the ghost of old Hamlet. I can't believe how cheesy the special effects
are when the ground shakes and steam comes out and thunders roar. We
laughed so hard at this point that we missed another speech about how
great the old king was and how much he misses him. :) Now I see why
Frankenstein was such a flop. KB's special effects  are almost as good as
Ed Wood's! And the flashback of the fat little boy with a horrible wig as
young Hamlet. There are waaaaayyyy too many flashbacks made in a waaaayyy
too simplistic fashion as if their sole purpose is to spoonfeed the stupid
audience with pictures accompanying the difficult Shakespearian language.
I felt a little insulted. The nude scenes of Ophelia and Hamlet having sex
have offended many experts, but I thought it was credible in this
particular time period in this film.  Yet when Gertude describes Ophelia's
death, I sat and waited for them to show the touching image of O's
drowning and was disappointed with only one shot.  I do NOT understand
what was going on. It's such an unbalanced production that greatness and
silliness co-exist.  Did KB hire some really really incompetent filmmaker
or was he having short attention span? 
This Hamlet looks, IMHO, more ruthless and cynical. The film looks quite
violent and bloody. My fragile friend had to cover her eye when the camera
repeatedly goes back to the pool of blood in the Queen's bedroom. The
ending was very bloody too. When the sword flies and nails Claudius, I had
a strange feeling that KB would be interested in making something like
"Reservoir Dogs." But I liked that scene very much. The death scene of
Hamlet was OK, but it does not surpass Mel Gibson's death scene. 
This film is, as I said, a very unbalanced production. Because of
Winslet's great performance (which has not been adequately recognized :P),
I give it an A-. 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    So, you have to see this one in Chapel Hill, at the Carolina, and
they're conveniently charging $7.50 for all shows.  Price gouging is
what it's called and, if you arrive early, you'll have time to (a.) get
incensed and (b.) deliver a monologue about it in the lobby.  I just
took my seat, as I was already spent from having an aside on Franklin
Street, after a traffic ticket informed me that the Elvismobile was
parked approximately one inch into a towing zone.  Sigh.  I can report
that $32.50 buys a lot of movie.  Four hours worth, actually, with the
complete text, a zany international cast, Elsinore imagined as a bright
and sunny palace, and Kenneth Branagh, Mr. Shakespeare himself, spitting
spittle as the peroxide-blonde brooder.  (His Hamlet is quite the
shouter.) The twenty-minute intermission is helpful, though, by the end,
I wanted even more movie.  I wanted more action, more sprawl, and more
visual space, especially in the flashbacks and exterior scenes.  I
wanted to witness Ophelia's final fate, for example, and see more of the
Norwegians, who storm the castle at the end of the story.  Mr. B.  has
made a big play at a big play, but, you know, it still doesn't feel like
a big-enough movie.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Kenneth Branagh, Derek Jacobi, Julie Christie, Richard Briers,
Nicholas Farrell, Kate Winslet, Michael Maloney, Brian Blessed, Rufus
Sewell, Billy Crystal, Jack Lemmon, Charlton Heston, Gerard Depardieu,
Rosemary Harris, Timothy Spall,  Reece Dinsdale, Robin Williams
Director: Kenneth Branagh
This version of HAMLET, will undoubtedly be remembered as the prettiest
version of the Shakespearean classic. Kenneth Branagh has filled this
production with more mirrors than at Tiffany's, and more rose petals
than at a garden show. If you can't change the words, at least you can
change the look. Not that this is bad, because dcor is important in a
Shakespearean play. After all, the poetry of timeless verse, needs a
garden in which to sow it's timeless seed. It would take an absolute
moron who can't recite lines, to destroy the language of Shakespeare,
but one has to compliment Branagh and Hollywood ensemble, for delivering
HAMLET with great flourish and relish.
I stood in front of the video shelf, undecided as to whether to borrow
the 2 hour or 4 hour version of the feature film. Time set it's limits
on my agenda and 2 got the better of 4. As I sat down, half-heartedly to
watch the great play, not in the mood for Shakespeare after a weary day.
Slowly, I was entranced by the lyrical spell of the dead poet. His words
seemed vibrant and alive, as if calling from the grave. Hours seemed
like minutes, and I began to wish I had borrowed the
four-hour-for-two-days version of the play. My heart longed to hear more
musings from the great courts of the Danes, where disloyal brothers
murder kinsmen, to claim a crown and bed a wife, only to drive the young
prince Hamlet into royal rage. For no matter how often this story is
told, the cat's will mew and the dog's will have their day.'
The cast includes Kenneth Branagh as an intense Hamlet, Kate Winslet as
the forlorn Ophelia, Julie Christie as the unfaithful Queen Mother,
Gertrude and Derek Jacobi as the murderous uncle, Claudius. With notable
performances from Billy Crystal as The Gravedigger, Jack Lemmon as
Marcellus, Robin Williams as Osric and many others. This is probably the
most faithful version of the classic tale, and should be appreciated by
all followers of the master writer.
                              Timothy Voon
                     e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
         Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
                  Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
         http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Brian Takeshita
Shakespeare.  You hardly understood it in high school.  Why would you want
more of it now that your English grade doesn't count on it?  If this is your
attitude, then I'll say right off the bat that Kenneth Branagh's HAMLET is
probably not for you, and you might as well stop reading right now.  If,
however, you are a lover of The Bard, or at the very least are open-minded
about a challenging script, read on, for there is something rotten in the
state of Denmark.
Namely, the king has died, and his widow the queen has wed the king's
brother, Claudius, but prince Hamlet suspects foul play.  His suspicions are
confirmed when the ghost of his father appears and relates the story of his
murder at his own brother's hands.  Hamlet, enlisting the help of his friend
Horatio, conspires to capture the conscience of the new king to expose his
treachery....and the game is afoot....
The first things you notice about this production are the sets and costumes.
With external scenes filmed at Blemheim Palace in England (also the one of
the sites for the recent THE AVENGERS), the grandiose quality of the setting
is immediately established.  Interior scenes are similarly graced with
intricate and flamboyant rooms and chambers.  The Hamlet Castle's grand
throne room is an impressive piece of work incorporating high ceilings,
mirror-panel doors, and bridges which connect opposite sides of a
second-story loft.  Costuming is equally grand, drawing upon both history
and imagination..  Not quite the Denmark of the 1600's, the characters'
attire is something of a cross between that era and turn of the century
Russia, very effectively giving the film more of a timeless feel.  It is not
surprising that Tim Harvey and Alexandra Byrne were nominated for Best Art
Direction and Best Costume Design Oscars, respectively.
In addition to directing, Kenneth Branagh also plays the title character.
As the revenge-driven royal heir, Branagh provides a riveting performance of
emotional highs and lows.  From the anticipation of seeing his father's
ghost, to the melancholy of finding the burial site of his childhood jester,
to his eventual wrath, Branagh delivers in spades.  Every scene truly
revolves around Hamlet, as much a tribute to Branagh's acting and directing
as to Shakespeare's manuscript.
HAMLET seems to be a who's who of Shakespearean-trained actors, so watching
them perform the craft for which they have much love is a delight in itself.
Julie Christie, as Hamlet's mother Gertrude, and Derek Jacobi as his
murderous uncle Claudius both fill the classic roles superbly, as do many of
the supporting players.  Kate Winslet as Hamlet's lover Ophelia, does an
outstanding job demonstrating the character's plummet to the depths of
dispair and madness.  Richard Briers as Ophelia's father, Polonius, and
Michael Moloney as her brother, Laertes, are equally convincing.  Nicholas
Farrell as Hamlet's trusted friend Horatio, and Timothy Spall and Reece
Dinsdale as the two-timing Rosencrantz and Guildenstern round out the
excellent core cast.
HAMLET also seems to be a film in which someone tried to stuff as many well
known actors as possible.  In some cases, this made for interesting scenes.
Billy Crystal is surprisingly good as the gravedigger who unearths the skull
of Yorick, whom Hamlet knew quite well.  Crystal proves himself able to
deliver the lines with both the timing of a classic actor and the verbal
countenance of a comedian, and the result is a very funny scene.  However,
Charleton Heston, whom many might think would butcher Shakespeare, is the
biggest surprise of all.  As the Player King, the leader of a troupe of
traveling actors, he is absolutely breathtaking when narrating the story of
Priam and Hecuba.  Part of his monologue is overlaid with a visual enactment
of the story (with Sir John Gielgud and Judi Dench), but this is most
unfortunate, for it robs Heston of some of the attention which he deserves
at this time.  His off-camera speaking, while gripping, sort of downplays
the scene to a narration done by any other well-voiced actor.  I wish
Branagh had chosen to allow us to envision in our own minds the scene which
Heston lays out, and let the venerable actor have the attention.
Unfortunately, there were some casting choices which led to poor
distractions.  Jack Lemmon, an excellent actor, just can't do Shakespeare.
As Marcellus, the guard who sees the elder Hamlet's ghost, Lemmon sadly
underperforms and is shown up left and right by those around him.  Gerard
Depardieu, another talented actor, is wasted when given little more than the
utterances of "yes, my lord" and "no, my lord" in the role of Reynaldo.
Richard Attenborough has a (literally) walk-on role, showing up at the
eleventh hour as the English Ambassador.  I think he had two lines.  Then
there is Rufus Sewell as Fortinbras of Norway.  When I went to see DANGEROUS
BEAUTY earlier this year, two ladies behind me kept commenting about how
handsome he was.  If bulging eyes are your idea of handsome, well I guess
comic actor Marty Feldman was some kind of sex symbol to you.
HAMLET is a complicated tale of treachery and revenge in which triumph and
defeat become one.  Branagh attempts to help us out with some of the
intricacies by visually representing some of the more elusive stretches of
dialogue by presenting them as flashback-type images.  This only works about
half the time, and I wonder if it would have been just as well to do without
them.  You don't have to be some kind of genius to appreciate Shakespeare,
but it is quite difficult to understand unless you have the time to read or
hear it carefully and repeatedly.  The alternate method of comprehension is
that with which most of us are familiar, the high school English course.  In
it, you are hopefully fortunate enough to have an educator willing to help
you with the plot points and nuances essential to understanding a play
written in the rigmarole known as the King's English.  Or I suppose you
could just read the Cliff Notes.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Columbia/Castle Rock)
Starring:  Kenneth Branagh, Derek Jacobi, Kate Winslet, Julie Christie,
Richard Briers, Nicholas Farrell, Michael Maloney.
Screenplay:  Kenneth Branagh, based on the play by William Shakespeare.
Producer:  David Barron.
Director:  Kenneth Branagh.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, sexual situations)
Running Time:  238 minutes, with a 20 minute intermission after 158
minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Kenneth Branagh's HAMLET is the first film version of Shakespeare's
revered tragedy to use the full, uncut text, and you know what that means:
before you settle into your theater seat, smoke 'em if you got 'em, be
sure to use the restroom, and bring extra quarters for parking.  This
HAMLET is 238 minutes long -- 258 including the intermission -- making it
one of the longest films ever produced for theatrical distribution.  It is
a terribly risky undertaking, but Branagh has proven once again that the
Bard is safe in his hands.  His HAMLET does a remarkable job of
demonstrating exactly how much is lost in edited versions of the play,
re-vitalizing characterizations and offering a visual spectacle.  It is a
worthy challenger to Laurence Olivier's 1948 HAMLET as the definitive film
interpretation of the text.
     The story's titular character is the son (Branagh) of the King of
Denmark, but Hamlet was also the name of the recently deceased King
himself.  Young Hamlet is troubled by the marriage of his mother Gertrude
(Julie Christie) to his uncle Claudius (Derek Jacobi), who has assumed the
Danish throne, but he is even more troubled when he is visited by the
ghost of his father (Brian Blessed).  The ghost informs Hamlet that
Claudius murdered the King, and sets him to the task of avenging the foul
deed.  Hamlet, however, is unsure how to proceed, and his frustration
spills over onto everyone around him, including his beloved Ophelia (Kate
Winslet).  Meanwhile, Fortinbras of Norway (Rufus Sewell) begins a
military campaign which may include a threat to Denmark.
     That bare bones synopsis cannot even begin to do justice to the
complexity of HAMLET, of course, but neither do many abbreviated film and
stage versions.  Branagh's use of the entire text proves to be far more
than a purist conceit, as he reveals additional layers of meaning.
Fortinbras' actions to answer the dishonor of his father, forced to
surrender lands to the elder Hamlet, becomes a counterpoint to the young
Hamlet's inability to answer a more grave dishonor; Ophelia's descent into
madness is given a wrenching power as she dissolves in front of her
already grief-stricken brother Laertes (Michael Maloney).  There is also
surprising humor, particularly in the banter of the two gravediggers
(Simon Russell Beale and Billy Crystal), which leavens the melancholy in
the story of the melancholy Dane.  This HAMLET is richer than any other
you might have known because every piece of sub-text remains in the text.
     It is also a version which uses the unique opportunities of cinema
better than any other.  Branagh has an instinct for excess in his film
direction, but his dedication to Shakespeare has anchored his adaptations
of HENRY V and MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING where MARY SHELLEY'S FRANKENSTEIN
and DEAD AGAIN occasionally got away from him.  In HAMLET, Branagh employs
flashback cutaways to show a sexual relationship between Hamlet and
Ophelia which makes her subsequent reactions more understandable; resonant
sound turns the ghost's apparition into a terrifying ordeal for Hamlet;
snowy landscapes give Elsinore (Oxfordshire's Blenheim Palace) a chilly
desolation.  Combining creative interpretive choices for the characters
(Polonius [Richard Briers] becomes more malevolent and hypocritical as he
is shown with a prostitute before sending someone to check up on Laertes
in France) with superb technical credits (Tim Harvey's dazzling production
design and Alex Byrne's elegant, evocative 19th century costumes), Branagh
adds another thoroughly cinematic Shakespeare to his resume.
     His direction may be nearly unimpeachable, but there are other areas
where Branagh's "more is more" philosophy are a hindrance.  The casting of
several familiar faces in minor roles feels more like a stunt than an
artistic choice, and while Crystal and Charlton Heston (as the player
king) in particular are surprisingly effective in their roles, the effect
is more often to turn HAMLET into a Hollywood sight-seeing tour:  "Look,
there's Gerard Depardieu!  Look, there's Robin Williams!"  Branagh's lead
performance is also distracting, and not because he makes poor character
choices (unless his bleached-blond hair counts); the problem is that he is
playing to the balcony even though he is on a movie screen.  There may be
one too many scenes in which spittle flies from the thin lips of his
impassioned Hamlet, and while Branagh has a firm grasp of the Dane's
lighter side, his emoting is often forced.  Still, it is hard to come down
too hard on a man who not only committed himself to the most challenging
role in the history of theater, but directed an epic period production of
the most challenging play in the history of theater.  Branagh took an
exceptional gamble, and it paid off in an exceptional film.  Take a chance
on spending 238 minutes to stretch your understanding of this remarkable
play; you can always stretch your legs during the intermission.
