Title
Review for Tuesdays with Morrie (1999) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pete Croatto
I didn't read Mitch Albom's book, Tuesdays With Morrie, which spent
about two jillion years on the bestseller lists.  But based on the
movie, I can see why so many people bought the book and why it's ripe
for criticism.
As Brandeis University professor Morrie Schwartz's body deteriorated
from Lou Gehrig's Disease, former student Albom decided to record the
man's thoughts on an array of topics.  If the movie is anything like the
book, then Morrie sounds like the world's foremost pop psychologist.
And that's part of the problem I had watching the adaptation.  Albom
claims that Morrie was "a force" in the classroom, but he gets stuck
saying things like "once you learn how to die, you learn how to live." 
Albom is certainly a happier person for having talked to his teacher,
but I get the feeling he could have rented Old Yeller or watched a few
self-help infomercials and came out OK.
Sarcastic comments aside, I can't fault a made-for-TV movie that has
sturdy, sensitive performances and good intentions.  If I can be taught
about the values of life and not want to smack any of the characters
upside the head, then the movie can't be all that bad.
Hank Azaria (The Birdcage) plays Albom, a work-obsessed Detroit
sportswriter who is constantly on the go.  His world stops when he sees
a news special profiling Morrie's condition.  Some 15 years after
promising to keep in touch and not doing so, Albom decides to visit his
professor.  Pretty soon, they regularly meet on Tuesdays--Morrie's old
office hours.
Jack Lemmon plays Morrie, a man whose indomitable spirit is still whole
regardless of the medical obstacles he faces.  It's a role that could
have been played like a geriatric Patch Adams, but Lemmon (one of the
best actors of his generation) handles the role with grace.
Azaria, always an undervalued actor, does a good job and even sounds a
bit like Albom, a regular on ESPN.  Azaria has always had a slightly
cynical streak to him that makes him more human.  That trait serves him
especially well in this occasionally sudsy, but overall entertaining
fare.
Director: Mick Jackson
Producers: Kate Forte, Susan Heyer, Jennifer Ogden, Oprah Winfrey
Writer: Tom Rickman
Starring: Jack Lemmon, Hank Azaria, Wendy Moniz, Caroline Aaron
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
