Title
Review for Straight Story, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Jerry Saravia
After the decadent mania of "Lost Highway," one of my favorite films of the
1990's, I never expected director David Lynch to make a peaceful, simplistic
film thriving on simple pleasures. Sure enough, Lynch always manages to
surprise audiences, and "The Straight Story" is no exception - a wonderful film
that is as illuminating and introspective as Laura Palmer's descent into hell
or the duality of human nature in "Lost Highway." 
Based on a true story, Richard Farnsworth plays Alvin Straight, a stubborn old
man living with his slow, loving daughter, Rose (the amazing Sissy Spacek) in a
small town in Iowa. One day, he learns of that his brother is sick, and decides
to travel on a 1966 John Deere lawnmower from Iowa to Wisconsin to see his
brother. You see, Alvin does not have a driver's license and has no one to
drive him there, so, yes, a lawnmower might do the trick.
Alvin himself is not in perfect health - he has to walk with two canes and has
bad eyes. But the stubborn, eccentric soul must travel against all odds on that
damn lawnmower with an oversized trailer (chock full of Indian coffee beans and
American wieners) and get to his destination. He must overcome speedy monstrous
trucks, a paranoid deer lady, a runaway pregnant teenager, burning houses,
dozens of bicyclists, and so much more. Alvin will be kind to strangers, but
insists on sleeping outside or in his trailer, never in anyone's house. 
And that is it. No time warps, no truly outrageous characters or elephant men,
and no Agent Cooper or mystery men. David Lynch plays it straight, as it were,
never opting for stereotypes or condescencion - this Midwestern world is
presented simply and without artifice. That in itself captures something which
Lynch has only briefly pinpointed in the past - a heartland of emotions and
embraceable humanity. The reason may be that the screenplay is written by Mary
Sweeney, Lynch's long-time skillful editor, who once read an article about
Straight's long journey in Time magazine, and ever since wanted to make a film
about it. Smart move 
"Straight Story's" humanity comes from the strength and vigor of Richard
Farnsworth, a veteran stuntman who has also given fine performances in "Comes a
Horseman" and "The Grey Fox," and here gives a performance of rare dignity. He
is essentially a face wrinkled with memories of times past, as when he recounts
the horrors of World War II as a sniper, or when he relays the importance of
family as a bundle of twigs. Moments like this are priceless, especially for
Farnsworth, and he embodies the film with quiet grace and panache. The Academy
Awards should recognize this man, as did the Cannes Film Festival with a
standing ovation.
David Lynch also gives the film the needed pace and style to match a simple
slice of Americana. There are numerous high-angle shots of the farm fields, and
the grain elevators working its way through them. These shots are repeated by
Lynch to emphasize that life in these parts moves slowly because that is the
way of life - there is no need to hurry. In a scene of extraordinary calmness
and solitude, Lynch shows Alvin on his lawnmower traveling at 5 miles per hour,
and then he pans to the sky followed by a mini dissolve as he pans down and
shows that the vehicle has only moved a few feet ahead. This journey may take a
while, but Lynch understands that these people can appreciate a good sunset and
the aesthetic beauty of the farmlands, or to have a campfire without rushing
through deadlines or last-minute events. 
Is "Straight Story" such a departure for Lynch overall? Well, a G rating and
the fact that it is a Disney picture may put off those accustomed to mutant
babies and car accident victims. Don't fret over the choice of material because
Lynch certainly has an affinity for these people in the Midwest - the opening
scenes unravel much in the way as they did in the famous opening moments of
"Blue Velvet." The buildings, the hardware stores, the empty streets, and the
woman lying on her lawn chair next to Alvin's house - all beautifully framed
and composed by cinematographer Freddie Francis. The lingering shots of Alvin's
lawnmower against a desolate landscape will resonate long after the film is
over.
1999 has produced more end-of-the-world, milennium thrillers than one cares to
count. It is suitably ironic that the Master of Weirdness produced one of the
gentlest, most humane films of the 1990's, and Farnsworth's performance
beautifully manifests in this world of Midwestern calmness and sincerity. "The
Straight Story" is a haunting, touching, poetic film - unforgettable in its
sincere attitudes towards the simple aspects of life.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Nick Lyons
  David Lynches latest flick, is similar to Elephant Man emotional wise, but
not as touching. Although Richard Farnsworth was superb as Alvin Straight, the
film depends too much on sentimental moments, rather than paying attention to
the dull script.
  In "The Straight Story," Richard Fransworth is Alvin Straight, a stubborn old
man, with bad knees and vision. When he is told that his brother is in critical
condition, he wants dearly to visit him. The only problem is he can't drive,
nor can anyone drive him. The alternative? A John Deere lawnmower. Alvin
immediately ventures 300 miles  on a rugged road trip down to his brother's
home.
  The film basically plays like Easy Rider on sleeping pills. In both films,
they venture out to see the world, and meet exciting new people. Sure Alvin
meets some friendly people, but they don't keep your interest like Jack
Nicholson did with Easy Rider. Another problem is that Richard Fransworth is
the only real value of the film. Story has it's moments, but Farnsworth is
always there to lift our spirits, with his funny lines and charming stubborn
self. Ever since Anne Of Green Gables, I knew he was going to strike it big in
Hollywood . Unfortunately, he's not in Green Gables anymore. Instead, he's
stuck on a mower with a repetitive script.
  The film itself struggles immensely. If it weren't for Farnsworth, and I can
see no other actor to do the job, this film would make a nice nap. Seriously
folks, it tried too hard to be sentimental, and that's a shame, because I've
seen that kind of film hundreds of times. Also the film dragged on slower than
a John Deere lawnmower. The constant pauses, and uninteresting dialogue just
couldn't keep the audiences attention. This film is not for the
squeamish.
I'm quite surprised that Lynch would take on a project so ordinary. If you've
seen his past pictures (Lost Highway, Eraserhead , etc.), you wouldn't even
know it was him. Usually Lynch makes your head spin with dazzling images and
bizarre scripts, that's why it's hard for me to believe he could do such a
film.
  Going back to Fransworth, I think he can pull off an Oscar nomination. I
think if any actor can carry the film by himself, he without a doubt deserves
recognition, and boy does Richard get that. Sissy Spacek was another annoying
element of the film. Although she had a speech impendement, (which was not the
reason I disliked her) she still managed to get under my skin. She always plays
the most boring character possible, with the exception of
Carrie, but I still dislike her acting.
  Straight Story is a simple film, with a simple story, and a great actor. It's
worth seeing the film for Richard Farnsworth, but I'd wait for video, unless
you want to see a typical feel good film.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 This delicately wrought, true story of Alvin Straight, a man
on a mission, is a marked departure for film-maker David Lynch ("Blue
Velvet," "The Elephant Man"), and charismatic Richard Farnsworth's
poignant performance has definite Oscar potential. The story revolves
around a stubborn 73 year-old - that's Farnsworth - who travels 260
miles from Laurens, Iowa, to Mt. Zion, Wisconsin, to visit his ailing
brother and patch up a quarrel. What makes his odyssey unique is his
mode of transport: a '66 John Deere lawnmower. With his own health
failing, Alvin can't see well enough to drive and refuses to let
anyone take him, even though he must hobble with two canes. So,
despite the protests of his speech-impaired daughter (Sissy Spacek)
and his cronies who consider him crazy, Alvin rigs up a small trailer
behind his lawnmower, packs up his gear, and putts along the highway
at 5 m.p.h. for six weeks. En route, he encounters some kindly folk
and spreads his simple brand of homespun wisdom. He counsels a
pregnant teenage runaway about the strength of family ties, recalls to
yuppie bikers how "the worst part of being old is remembering when you
were young," negotiates engine repairs with quirky twin mechanics, and
commiserates with a fellow veteran about his guilt of being a sniper
during World War II.  Screenwriters John Roach & Mary Sweeney and
director David Lynch show taste, discipline, and restraint in this
heartwarming, if slow-paced, geriatric "road picture," while
cinematographer Freddie Francis hauntingly captures the dramatic
skies-and-plains vistas of America's autumnal heartland.  On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Straight Story" is an
unforgettable 9. A delight from start to bittersweet fade-out, this
subdued, lyrical, mature film is a treasure.

Author
David Dalgleish
Starring Richard Farnsworth, Sissy Spacek, James Cada, Harry Dean Stanton;
Directed by David Lynch;
Written by John Roach and Mary Sweeney;
Cinematography by Freddie Francis
        THE STRAIGHT STORY is a breath of fresh air.  It winds its way
through the American Midwest, the nation's heartland, wide-eyed and
open-hearted, steeped in admiration for both the landscape and its people.
The admiration is not rooted in misplaced nostalgia or uncritical
patriotism, but in simple affection for the kindness and decency of
uncomplicated people who uphold values which seem almost archaic in a world
of increasing moral relativism.
        The relaxed narrative follows the journey of Alvin Straight, a
73-year-old man who learns that his estranged brother, Lyle, has suffered a
stroke and decides to visit him.  Lyle lives hundreds of miles away, and
neither Alvin nor his daughter can drive a car, so he decides to travel by
tractor.  He purchases a John Deere and hits the open road ... very slowly.
Near the beginning of his journey, he meets a pregnant woman, and toward
the end he chats with a priest in a graveyard, and in some sense his trip
is a voyage from life to death: it encompasses his existence and all he has
learned.
        The movie wisely does not force the "journey of life" metaphor, but
focuses instead on the particulars of each incident.   There are no
antagonists; there is little inner conflict.  The people Alvin meets are,
every last one of them, decent, trusting, and considerate.  The quirkiest
thing about THE STRAIGHT STORY, indeed, is the niceness of its characters,
who are lacking in evil or malice.  It is strange to think that this should
seem so odd, but it does.  The movie does not insist on their goodness.
The people come across as eccentrics, not saints; as individuals, not
paragons.  And their actions are reasonable enough: why on earth would you
not want to help an old man on a tractor, on his way to meet his estranged
brother?
        Alvin meets many people.  The pregnant woman and the priest, a
middle-aged couple, twin mechanics,  and more.  To some he imparts wisdom;
from others he gains insight.  The most affecting scene, perhaps, is a
conversation in a bar with another older man, who like Alvin is a veteran
of World War II.  Their conversation becomes, in effect, a mutual
confession, as they unburden memories of the war which perhaps could not be
shared with others, because the others were not there, and would not
understand.  The exchange is intensely moving, and is but one of many
moments in THE STRAIGHT STORY which illuminate the essence of the
characters' frailties and virtues, depicting them with compassion, and
without censure or unearned sentiment.
        The camera hovers lovingly over familiar American icons--an Ace
Hardware store, Alvin's John Deere tractor, combine harvesters tilling
amber waves of grain, wood-panelled saloons with neon beer logos and sports
memorabilia on the walls--but it is the people who are the heart of the
movie, and none more so than Alvin.  He is portrayed with gravitas and
dignity by Richard Farnsworth, whose unaffected performance deserves all
the praise it has received.  Alvin is plainspoken, kindly, and
self-effacing, but it is evident that he has experienced much hardship.  We
learn some of it, including traumatic experiences in the army, difficulties
experienced by his daughter, alcohol-fuelled fights with his brother--but
he has survived it, and in surviving, found strength.
        Drawing on this strength, he undertakes his journey with
determination, patience, and gruff good humour.  Everyone he meets stops
and listens and learns from him.  It is easy to see why.  He has a quality
which commands respect: a look in his eyes, a set to his grizzled chin,
which suggests that he has seen much in his time and that he should not be
trifled with.  He has earned people's attention.  If we met him, we would
pay attention too.
        The movie is by David Lynch, and has been called a radical
departure from his earlier work.  It does indeed provide a much-needed
change of pace after his past few films, which are for the most part
inferior reworkings of the obsessions he elaborated with such unsettling
genius in BLUE VELVET and "Twin Peaks."  Even so, the hushed humanism of
THE STRAIGHT STORY is not entirely new.  There is a childishness apparent
in much of Lynch's work: the perspective is often that of a male
adolescent, with a naďve appreciation of the beauty of the everyday, a
muddled and terrified sense of sin and evil, and an irreconcilable
confusion about the sexual nature of women.  This sense of adolescent
simplicity is often interpreted as ironic, but I think it is meant to be
taken at face value.  The arrival of the robins at the end of BLUE VELVET
and Agent Cooper's unwavering devotion to the ideals of law and justice,
for example, are not meant to invite our cynicism: rather, we are asked us
to set aside our skepticism and embrace their pureness.
        If such heartfelt goodness is difficult to accept as unironic, it
may be because the nightmare desires which underpin Lynch's vision of
reality overwhelm the uncomplicated sense of innocence which his work at
times strives to retrieve from a fallen world.  THE STRAIGHT STORY,
however, bestows upon us that sense of innocence in its fullness.   Unlike
Lynch's other works, the film does not address sexual desire, which in
Lynch's world is the source of all anguish.  The perspective is, if
anything, that of a child rather than an adolescent--hence the 'G'
rating--but an ancient child, both innocent and knowing.
        The mature perspective of THE STRAIGHT STORY finally humbles most
other movies, including many of Lynch's own, which, for all their
brilliance, can be rather juvenile in some respects.   The film is long and
slow, but never unfocused.  It is as efficient as a parable, and as
revealing.  It tells its lessons in a thoughtful, unhurried manner, and it
does not raise its voice.  It expects us to pause and reflect.  It assumes
that insight comes not from needless speech, but from quiet contemplation,
from taking the time to look at things without superficial distraction, and
the assumption is borne out for the duration of the film.  Simple in its
telling, complex in its wisdom, it is an American classic, and it
reconfirms David Lynch's status as one of the great American directors.
        Review by David Dalgleish (subjective.freeservers.com) -- January
8th, 2000

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by David Lynch. Screenplay by John Roach and Mary Sweeney.
Starring Richard Farnsworth, Sissy Spacek, James Cada. Running time: 106 
minutes. Rated PG (MFCB). Reviewed on April 24th, 2000.
"The Straight Story" tells a tale that would seem too far-fetched to be 
believed -- if it hadn't actually happened. Based on true events from the 
summer of 1994, director David Lynch's newest film is an unusual choice of 
project for the man behind sometimes baffling fare like "Twin Peaks" and 
"Lost Highway". But "The Straight Story" is pleasant and engrossing, and 
is also a rare motion picture that dares not only to feature a largely 
elderly cast, but also to treat them with considerable respect.
Alvin Straight (Richard Farnsworth) is 73 years old, a World War II 
veteran who has seen better days. His hips are giving out on him and his 
emphysema is getting worse. He lives with his daughter Rose (Sissy 
Spacek), who is mildly retarded but bright enough in her own way. One 
stormy night, Alvin learns from a relative that his brother Lyle has 
suffered a stroke. Alvin and Lyle were once as close as brothers could 
be, but they had a falling out ten years earlier and haven't spoken 
since. Desperately aware of both Lyle's mortality and his own, Alvin 
decides he has to make the journey from his home in Laurens, Iowa to 
Lyle's place in Mount Zion, Wisconsin.
Neither Alvin nor Rose have a driver's license, and Alvin is too proud to 
ask anyone else for help. So Alvin decides to hitch a trailer up to his 
battered old riding lawnmower and set out for Wisconsin, travelling no 
more than five or ten miles a day. His lawnmower soon breaks down, but 
Alvin is not swayed: he trades it in and uses the last of his money to 
buy a 1966 John Deere mower, then starts the journey all over again.
Alvin's slow voyage from Iowa to Wisconsin provides the framework around 
which the bulk of the movie is built. As is often the case in these sorts 
of films, the destination here is not nearly as important as what happens 
en route. (Indeed, the ending of "The Straight Story" is a beautifully 
underplayed scene, a real lesson in minimality that demonstrates Lynch's 
trust in his audience.) "The Straight Story" is "The Odyssey" writ small, 
with Alvin trundling from episode to episode like a wrinkly old Odysseus. 
None of these little stories are particularly fascinating, but put together 
they form a touching mosaic. It is through these chance encounters that 
Alvin's character is most fully illuminated and, moreover, that we are 
afforded a glimpse of the effect his passage has on others.
Some of these meetings are funny. Alvin witnesses a collision between a  
car and a deer, and learns that the driver (Barbara E Robertson) has 
killed more than a dozen of the creatures along that stretch of highway in 
the past six weeks. The problem is that she has to drive that route, 
back and forth every day, to get to work. Beyond quitting her job or  
moving, she simply has no other choice. "And I love deer!" she wails.
Other meetings are more serious. Alvin is nearly killed when he loses his 
brakes going down a steep hill. Shaken up and out of money until his 
next welfare cheque comes in, he is taken in by Danny and Darla Riordan 
(James Cada and Sally Wingert). The Riordans' friend Verlyn Heller (Wiley 
Harker) is a WWII veteran like Alvin, and one day at the local tavern 
the two share stories of the horrors of war. This is a beautifully acted 
sequence and again, Lynch shows faith in his viewers by leaving it 
static and quiet so that the audience can conjure in their own minds the 
scenes that Alvin and Verlyn relate.
As Alvin, Farnsworth does a very good job in an Academy Award-nominated 
performance. He gives the character considerable depth; his delivery in 
sequences like the aforementioned tavern scene are tinged with a lifetime 
of emotions. The only real drawback to the role -- and the same could be 
said of "The Straight Story" as a whole -- is that Alvin comes across 
as just a little too sweet, too coy. Although the very fact that he chose 
to endure the six-week journey is indicative of Alvin's character, I 
found it difficult to believe that he could really be so cherubic (and 
indeed, reports suggest that the real Alvin Straight, who died in 1996, was 
not quite as lovable as the movie implies). I don't think viewer sympathy 
would have been lost by giving Alvin a bit more of an edge, and I think 
it would have made him generally better-rounded.
None of the other actors have substantial screen time, but there is not a 
poor performance in the entire movie. Lynch is successful in coaxing just 
the right note out of all his cast, be it dramatic or comedic.
Like Stanley Kubrick in "2001: A Space Odyssey", Lynch successfully  
conveys the lethargic pace of Alvin's trip. There are long periods 
consisting of nothing but shots of Iowa farmland, for instance, and more 
than once the camera pans up from Alvin to the blue summer sky in a 
traditional passage-of-time shot, only to pan down again to show him just 
a few yards further along. This may induce boredom in some viewers, but 
for the most part I felt Lynch handled such scenes judiciously. They go 
on long enough to achieve their intended effect, but not so long that I 
began glancing at my wristwatch. The fact that these sequences are 
accompanied by gorgeous fiddle music composed by Lynch's frequent 
collaborator Angelo Badalamenti doesn't hurt, either.
Quiet, unassuming, gentle, endearing, "The Straight Story" is a delightful 
film. Here is a testimony not just to the principle that truth is 
stranger than fiction, and not just to one man's character and 
determination, but also to the innumerable little stories that are out 
there, just down the road, waiting to be discovered.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/TheStraightStory.html
--
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|  shannon@morgan.ucs.mun.ca |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Richard Farnsworth, Sissy Spacek. Rated G.
Sometimes I think Hollywood no longer knows how to make real movies.
Not everything has to be slam-bang and in-your-face. How quickly we
forget that eloquence and quiet tenacity can be far more satisfying
than disturbing images and big time special effects. As great as
American Beauty was, I'm not sure I would want to live on a steady diet
of pessimism and angst. As transporting an experience as The Matrix
was, there's only so much room in my brain for mind-blowing kung fu.
What I want -- and what I haven't seen much of lately -- is a film that
is beautiful, good-natured, powerful in its own quiet way without
getting in my face with its morals.
David Lynch's The Straight Story is just such a movie. In the best
Lynch tradition, it's an eccentric but approachable true story about
growing older and shooting for the stars. Corny stuff? You betcha. But
only the best stalks are used.
79 year-old Richard Farnsworth plays 73 year-old Alvin Straight, a
crippled old man living in Iowa with his slightly "slow" daughter Rose
(Sissy Spacek). One day Alvin gets word that his brother Lyle, whom he
has not talked to for decades has just had a stroke. Alvin makes up his
mind to go see Lyle, who lives in the neighboring state of Wisconsin,
300 miles away. Trouble is, Alvin does not have a driver's license
because of his poor vision, and his daughter can't drive. But Alvin
isn't ready to give up so easily. He takes his 1964 John Deere tractor
lawn mower and sets of on a pilgrimage at 5 miles an hour.
Along the way, Alvin meets Midwestern eccentrics. Some are in awe at
his mode of transportation, some are impressed at the distance he has
covered, many think he is just plain crazy. When his mower breaks down,
a benevolent couple offers to drive him the rest of the way to his
brother's house. But he refuses. He wanted to finish this trip himself,
his own way, to round out his life with an achievement which would give
him a sense of self-satisfaction, a feeling that he has done something
truly valuable, something he will be remembered for long after he
passes away.
The Straight Story claims to be based on real events. It shouldn't
have. Such a claim, in retrospect, cheapens this magical movie,
detracting from the sense of wonder that it inspires in us. It's better
to think of this as a glorious fantasy. But either way it's a great
film. The epitome of pleasantness, it will be a hit with those
audiences wise enough to seek it out. But aside from being a crowd-
pleaser, it's also a profound, touching drama.
With his sad eyes and intelligent face, Richard Farnsworth can be
credited with bringing pathos to the screenplay. Sissy Spacek, probably
best known still for her role in Carrie, is just as good; her role is
poignant and, speech impediment and all, she plays it for devastating
effect.
But the film's brilliance doesn't really lie in the performances,
excellent as they may be. You've heard critics call other movies "The
antidote to summer blockbusters," I'm sure. Nonsense. All nonsense. If
you see this movie, you will agree. If this isn't the antidote to
Hollywood blockbusters, such a thing does not exist. By its very
nature, it's anti-Hollywood. Its pace, its atmosphere, its plot all
bear no resemblance to anything I have seen come out of Hollywood
previously. It's a surprise to me that Walt Disney, the distributor,
agreed to even touch this film. It never had a chance of making any
real money. That doesn't make it any less extraordinary or refreshing.
Often the best films are acknowledged as definite future box-office
flops as early as pre-production.
Technically, this is as adept a film as I've seen this year, with a
gorgeous score, deft camerawork and beautiful cinematography. David
Lynch manages to make the sight of cornfields and a guy riding a lawn
mower genuinely breathtaking. The soothing soundtrack, composed by
Angelo Badalamenti (who also scored Arlington Road, another of my
favorites this year), adds to the gloriously docile atmosphere; the
same theme repeats over and over, becoming more hypnotic each time
around. By the end of The Straight Story I was not only involved in the
characters, I was also mesmerized by the film itself.
Above all, this is a family movie, one to take your kids to and then
talk about with them afterwards. Don't expect excitement, action or big
laughs. It's not that kind of movie. Instead, expect wholesome
entertainment for all ages, a heartwarming, touching story about aging
and following your heart. This is truly an antidote to the Hollywood
blockbuster.

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
Looking for an action movie with lots of special effects?  Then don't look 
at "The Straight Story."  But if you're after a well-acted character study, 
a masterful collection of frame tales,  this small film will leave you well 
pleased.
Richard Farnsworth plays Alvin Straight, a character based on the real man 
who drove his lawn tractor across Iowa and into Wisconsin in order to see 
his sick brother.  As always, Farnsworth exhibits a gentle, patient style of 
acting.  If you saw "The Natural," you may remember him as the assistant 
coach with the white mustache, who ate spaghetti with Robert Redford, 
treating him like a friend when no one else did.  Here Farnsworth shows 
quiet dignity when friends discover him on the floor of his kitchen, unable 
to get to his feet.  It turns out that Alvin has bad hips, and his daughter 
Rose (Sissy Spacek) is very worried about him.  When he discovers that his 
estranged brother Lyle has had a stroke, Alvin stubbornly makes his 
decision.  Bad hips, bad eyes, no driver's license, stiff-necked 
independence:  not many options.  No one seems to have faith in Alvin's mode 
of transportation, an ancient lawnmower tugging a makeshift plywood-covered 
trailer.  In fact, Alvin does not even reach the next town, fulfilling the 
pessimism of one of the nosey curmudgeons down at the hardware store.  But a 
friend sells him a more reliable - though still thirty year-old - John 
Deere, and he's able to resume his slow but sure journey.
What begins with a simple premise offers consummate opportunities.  This is 
a finely wrought road movie, with all kinds of stories-within-stories 
waiting to be told.  There's a pregnant runaway who receives a wiener and 
life-saving advice around Alvin's campfire.  There's a woman whose car hits 
a deer just yards in front of Alvin's motley rig - the thirteenth deer in 
seven weeks.  There are several other sidetracking tales told and heard 
along his route - one particularly wrenching one narrated by Alvin himself.  
It's the storytelling motif that makes this film hang together, with the 
implication of just how important stories are to our very lives, to our ways 
of understanding the world.
Along with the quiet ways of the wizened character actor Farnsworth, there's 
also a quietness about the movie's tone.  A few scenes we view from several 
yards away, the speakers too far to hear distinctly, and so we must rely on 
our understanding of plot, a bit of inflection thrown in.  Director David 
Lynch further uses shots that linger longer than they would in another 
filmmaker's movie.  The cuts don't come as quickly, and therefore we get a 
sense of prolonged realism, a technique that makes for solid character 
study.  Modern attention spans would not be pleased by several of these 
moments.
In a just world without politics, Richard Farnsworth would receive large 
awards for his work in "The Straight Story" - and not because it's sometimes 
deemed fashionable to send a trophy the way of a senior citizen.  In nearly 
every shot the actor acquits himself with remarkable reserve, depicting the 
determination it must take to drive across states at a speed of four miles 
an hour.  We hear stories that tell us Alvin is the father of 14 children, 
seven of whom survived childhood.  He saw combat in the Second World War.  
And now he has decided to see the brother to whom he was so close in youth.  
Each time Alvin tells his story to a curious listener along the way, we 
understand he is also preparing himself for the actual visit to Lyle, a 
piece of his life lost through anger and alcohol.  Once again, Farnsworth 
knows how to mimic the most subtle emotions, plainly plodding toward Alvin's 
crazy goal.
Sissy Spacek delivers an astounding portrayal of a mentally challenged woman 
- Rose, Alvin's daughter.  The most striking aspect of her performance is 
perhaps her awkward, halting pattern of speech, a hard-starting stutter that 
puts us in mind of a sensitive and troubled soul.  She is now her father's 
faithful housekeeper, though further into the film we discover the 
unpleasant events that shook Rose's life.  Though we see the father-daughter 
relationship only in the first third of the film, its strength sends a 
powerful message about family.
The supporting cast does a nice, natural job, interacting well with Alvin, 
in many cases showing him good deeds that he usually tries to refuse.  Jane 
Heinz is Dorothy, Alvin and Rose's neighbor; Everitt McGill is Tom the John 
Deere dealer; and many other actors play the average people occupying the 
towns through which Alvin drives.  Although his appearance is short, Harry 
Dean Stanton is perfectly cast as Lyle Straight, a man who lives in a 
ramshackle cabin in the Wisconsin country, every bit as stubborn as his 
older brother.  Stanton is one of the few actors whose craggy face matches 
Farnsworth's own.
The nature of the film calls for outdoor scenes, and clearly part of Lynch's 
agenda is to show beautiful expanses of the American Midwest.  Much of the 
landscape awes us not only with its beauty but with its size, Alvin crawling 
along a road that stretches endlessly before him.  We do get a few too many 
aerial shots of wind-blown corn fields, at times a harvester going full 
blast in the October sun.  Repetitive violin and guitar music frequently 
accompanies these scenic establishing shots.
Part of this G-rated film's attention has come from its director's 
reputation for making off-beat, often graphically violent films.  Yes, "The 
Straight Story" is a different path for David Lynch, but it shows strong 
intuition and storytelling sense.  And it's certainly a pleasure to be able 
to take every member of the family:  though you may not find this film in 
every multiplex, it is worth searching out.  You'll leave the theater with 
an encouraging vision of the real America, held together by a creaky but 
still strong backbone.


Author
David N. Butterworth
        In "The Straight Story," 73-year-old Alvin Straight learns that his
brother Lyle, with whom he hasn't exchanged a civil word in almost ten
years, has had a stroke.  Determined to pay his estranged brother a visit,
Alvin drives across Iowa and into Wisconsin on a John Deere riding mower.
        That unusual set-up makes for a very interesting road movie as the
ailing Alvin (OscarŽ probable Robert Farnsworth) heads out across America's
heartland against the better judgment of his grown daughter Rose (Sissy
Spacek).
        For much of the film we're treated to colorful vistas of cornfields
stretching far and wide towards the great Mississippi, their symmetric
lines fazed occasionally by a lone combine kicking up dust.  And Alvin,
unfazed by everything around him, dogged and determined like a mangy old
cur worrying a bone.
        It would be nice if this amiable, heartfelt little film could be
remembered for its simple and straightforward storyline and the power of
its performances.  After all, if you're going to be watching a
septuagenarian trekking cross-country on a lawnmower, engaging those he
meets along the way in candid conversation, then whose better company to
share than Farnsworth's?  Unfortunately, "The Straight Story" is more
likely to be talked about as "that G-rated picture David Lynch made for
Disney" rather than for the notable contributions of Farnsworth and Spacek,
who's longtime husband Jack Fisk is responsible for the distinctive
production design.
        Scary storms, road-kill, teenage pregnancy, moving violations, a
semi-naked man with liver spots who, later, downs a beer--ask yourself how
this movie got a G-rating when all those other, harmless, inoffensive
G-rated films were slapped with a "PG."  It would seem that the promoting
of this film has once again revealed the inconsistency--and the
hypocrisy--of the MPAA.
        Calculated marketing ploys aside, "The Straight Story" is a
worthwhile investment of your time, although--action fans take note--about
as slow moving as Alvin's curious mode of transportation.  The lone
traveler seems genuinely surprised when a fleet of cyclists pass him by.
"What's the worst thing about getting old?" one of them asks him at camp
later that evening.  "Remembering what it was like to be young."
        The film is filled with these kinds of observations; none of them
particularly awe-inspiring but all of them genuine and from the heart.
Like the time Alvin tells a hitchhiker who's running away from home that a
warm bed and a roof over one's head sound a lot better than sharing a
wiener on a stick with an old geyser who's traveling by lawnmower.
        In that vein, "The Straight Story" concerns itself first and
foremost with the strength of family: unlike a single twig, a cluster of
sticks cannot be easily broken.  It's a simple yet effective metaphor that
mirrors the simplicity and effectiveness of the entire film.  And we can
thank the Motion Picture Association of America for allowing General
Audiences to see it.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Marty Mapes
***1/2 (out of 4) David Lynch revealed his view of America on TWIN
PEAKS. He continues his offbeat portrait with the true story of Alvin
Straight.
Alvin Straight (Richard Farnsworth) is an old Iowan with hip,
circulation, and lung problems (to name a few). He lives with his
Daughter Rose (Sissy Spacek) who has a strange, Lynchian speech
impediment. They get a call from Wisconsin, where Alvin's brother has
just had a stroke. Alvin moons and pines for a few days -- he's not
really fit for travel-- but ultimately decides to go visit. With all his
health problems, the only vehicle he can legally operate is a riding
mower, so he hooks his old Red's to a trailer and heads north across
Iowa.
At first his journey is merely functional: the destination is the goal.
But over time it becomes Alvin's last great quest, the thing that will
give meaning to his last years of life. Offers for help are politely
answered with "I wanna finish this one my own way." It becomes a ritual
for him, a way to put all his affairs right before he goes.
Along the way Alvin meets a handful of characters. I was going to say
"colorful" characters, but on reflection, they all seemed pretty
ordinary. What makes them seem quirky is that they are presented in a
David Lynch film.
Lynch has a unique talent for making the ordinary seem strange. He does
this by focusing attention on details that most directors would gloss
over. Alvin meets a woman who has hit a deer with her car every day this
week. It's not implausible, but when that's all we know about a person,
they might seem, well, "colorful."
Lynch does likewise with props and scenes. A shot of a sprinkler stays
on screen long enough to give it some significance. It has nothing to do
with the plot, but Lynch lingers, obsessed with this detail. In another
scene, Alvin buys a grabber tool from the local Ace hardware store. The
scene might have been shortened or cut altogether by another filmmaker,
but Lynch shows the whole 2-minute transaction between Alvin and the
clerk. Why? Only Lynch knows.
Other trademarks of Lynch's are beautifully photographed settings and
appropriately evocative music. Twin Peaks was set in the foggy northwest
scored by a sad, simple electric bass. This time the cinematographer is
Freddie Francis, who shot CAPE FEAR and Lynch's DUNE. He captures all
the lush beauty of the Midwest. Rows of corn, rolling hills, vast
expanses of fields and roads all fill his wide screen. The music (by
Angelo Badalamenti, who also scored TWIN PEAKS) has a calm, folksy feel
that matches the cinematography perfectly.
The worst thing about THE STRAIGHT STORY is that it is slow. The pace of
the movie matches Alvin's own pace, which is ambling, at best. Combine
this with Lynch's lingering details, and to the casual viewer or the
average 8-year old, THE STRAIGHT STORY could be downright boring.
But this movie isn't about action or events. It's about characters,
reflection, and old age. Taken on its own terms, THE STRAIGHT STORY is
an excellent, thoughtful piece of filmmaking.  

Author
Walter Frith
The man who has brought audiences his very unique directing style with such
daring and bizzaro films as 'Eraserhead' (1977), 'The Elephant Man' (not so
bizzaro) (1980), 'Blue Velvet' (1986), 'Wild at Heart' (1990), 'Twin Peaks:
Fire Walk With Me (1992)', and 'Lost Highway' (1997) has now decided to
embark on a real life subject with docile characters, no insanity contained
in his subject matter, and a dose of what it feels like to take your grand
parents to the movies in this day and age.  A real comfort with safe, tame
and extremely likable aspects.
Director David Lynch is getting almost no recognition (and that's a shame)
for 'The Straight Story', a wonderful and low key film that is the most
fondly remembered of its kind since 1983's 'Tender Mercies' which wasn't so
much a motion picture as it was a series of still photographs brought to
life through the miracle of characterization.  That's what 'The Straight
Story' looks and feels like.  And it shrinks the marvel of the big screen
motion picture into a compact memory of finely wrought images and the story
of a simple man who really did exist.
Based on a true story, in 1994, a 73 year old man named Alvin Straight (who
died in 1996), drove his lawn mower some 300+ miles from Iowa to Wisconsin
to see his brother who has suffered from a stroke and Alvin wants to make
peace with him since the two men last spoke because there has been some bad
blood between the two of them.
The film begins in Alvin's home town in Iowa.  Alvin is poverty stricken.
He lives in a small run down shack with his simple minded daughter Rose
(Sissy Spacek).  One day he falls in the kitchen of his home and needs to
see the doctor.  Alvin suffers a series of physical ailments.  He has bad
vision.  His hips are shot etc., etc.  He can't afford treatment and tells
the doctor that.  Alvin then needs to walk with two canes instead of the
doctor recommended walker (he can't afford that either).  Upon receiving the
news that this brother has had a stroke, Alvin under takes a project that no
one (not even the audience) knows about until it completed.  He fixes up his
John Deere lawn mower and welds a trailer like contraption to the rear that
will carry his supplies and provide his shelter, including a place to sleep.
His first trek is unsuccessful.  He gets a few miles from town but then has
to come back.  He buys a better lawn mower and then takes off for a bumpy
but successful go of it.
Alvin has many encounters on his trip.  One night after parking for the day
and relaxing, Alvin meets a young female runaway and invites her to spend
some time with him by his camp fire.  He is roasting wieners on a stick and
offers the lady one.  She asks him if he's afraid to be an old man at night
by the wayside with no one around.  Alvin tells her that as a war veteran,
if he could survive the trenches, he can't be afraid of anything.  They
strike up a conversation where Alvin does most of the talking and he tells
of how his daughter Rose had a tragedy in her life that saw the removal of
her children from her home because authorities thought she was a danger to
them because of her Forrest Gump/Rain Man personality and acts of the mind.
Alvin meets college kids and a group of ordinary, middle aged folks.  He is
almost killed when he loses control of his lawn mower while rolling down a
steep hill.  The town's folks find out about his trek to see his sibling and
they help Alvin fix his lawn mower, give him lodging and even offer to drive
him the rest of the way.  Alvin accepts their help except for the part about
being driven to his destination.  He wants to do that himself.
The film has little or no music score.  It looks extremely easy to make but
that's the deception.  This is an extremely difficult film to pull off
because the subject matter is so ordinary that unless it is told in a simple
fashion it will look like more than it really is.  There are no fancy camera
tricks, no sharp, quick witted editing flashes, and virtually no technical
marvels at all.  Richard Farnsworth's Oscar worthy performance is the best
thing the film has to offer.  While Alvin is something of an enigma to
behold, Farnsworth portrays him as a wise, level headed man who never gets
angry and while the performance is one track for the most part, it's done
with the quality of making those who see the film, want to adopt Alvin as a
foster grand parent because he hasn't let life get him down.
'The Straight Story' is just the kind of slapping down many of us need in
our homogenized, digitized and computerized worlds of high technology with
cell phones, DVD players, fax, e-mails and other gadgets that make society
seem artificial as we forget where are roots are.  Alvin never lets us
forget who we really should be at certain moments in our lives.
Extraordinary!
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Michael Redman
Lynch's lawnmower leisurely triumphant
At times we feel an overwhelming drive to put our lives in order. The
compulsion might follow a traumatic incident or it might be a change in
the seasons that triggers the need. Whatever the catalyst, we attempt to
right previous wrongs and clean our psychic house.
Many people delay until later -- sometimes much later. Often so
much later that we never get around to it. How many people lie on their
death beds with thoughts of "I should have..."?
Alvin Straight (Richard Farnsworth) is a lucky man. He's made it to 73
and still has an opportunity to make his pilgrimage. Based on a true
story, "The Straight Story" is touching and to the point.
Alvin's journey of spiritual reconciliation takes an unusual form. He
drives a John Deere lawn mower 350 miles across Iowa to his own personal
Mecca of Mt. Zion, Wisconsin. Alvin needs to visit his estranged ailing
brother to set things right and he can't put it off much longer. He has
to do it on his own, even without a driver's license, so he resorts to
the bizarre form of transportation.
The six-week trip through the Iowan cornfields and small towns in the
autumn is presented at a leisurely pace, well suited to the speed of the
mower towing a trailer three times its size. The camera pans slowly from
Alvin, across the fields, up into the sky and then back to the road
where he has progressed 20 feet. The luscious cinematography perfectly
illustrates the slowness of the trip.
As you might expect, Alvin encounters an assortment of characters during
his trek. A pregnant teenage hitchhiker, a Catholic priest, volunteer
firefighters: they all take to him like they would a long-lost
grandfather. And with good reason. Farnsworth is the guy everyone dreams
about having as an older relative. Homespun and stubborn, he has a
lifetime of experience in the real world.
A few scenes are real tearjerkers. Hanging out in a bar with a fellow WW
II vet, they exchange war horror stories. On a very personal level, they
reveal how combat changed them forever.
Asked the worst part of being old, Alvin replies "Remembering when you
were young." You know he means it and it captures an aspect of elderly
melancholy, but as he reminds his daughter, "I'm not dead yet."
We have come to expect the occasional effective feel-good down-home film
from Disney Studios. This is exactly one of those. Alvin is an old guy,
but he's full of life. Facing a struggle, he attacks it with the courage
of the young. The awe and wonderment of a child are still alive within him.
Here's the shocker: it's directed by David Lynch. Yes, David Lynch of
"Blue Velvet" and "Twin Peaks" fame. David Lynch who has delighted in
showing us the perverted underbelly of America now celebrates an
ordinary man. He does it to perfection.
There are a few Lynchian scenes that could have come from his previous
films. A woman hits a deer on the highway and rants about how she loves
deer but this is the 13th one within the past few weeks. Twin lawnmower
repair brothers work on Alvin's vehicle. One of them has a piece of
metal embedded in his cheek and no explaination is offered. Some of the
characters are just a nudge out of kilter.
Somehow they all fit. There are indeed odd people out in the cornfields,
but that doesn't make them any less real. They are more human because of
their weird touches, not less.
Although Farnsworth owns the lion's share of the screen in his best role
since "The Grey Fox", the supporting cast is equally impressive. Sissy
Spacek as his possibly-mentally challenged daughter is totally
believable in her understated role. Harry Dean Stanton as Alvin's
brother Lyle is as convincing as could be. Other bit parts are played by
actors that Lynch could have found out in those Great Plains.
Alvin was lucky. He put off getting right with himself until he was 73.
Some of us might not have so long.
(Michael Redman has been writing this column for nearly two and a half
decades. He plans on being a crotchety old man, but maybe not in the
next couple of weeks. Email tales of cornfields to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 11/11/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at mailto:redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
This week's Y2K article: http://www.indepen.com/
Y2K archives: http://www.indepen.com/y2k.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz

STRAIGHT STORY, THE (director: David Lynch; screenwriters: John
Roach/Mary Sweeney; cinematographer: Freddie Francis; cast: Sissy Spacek
(Rose), Richard Farnsworth (Alvin), Harry Dean Stanton (Lyle), John
Farley (Thorvald), James Cada (Danny Riordan), Jane Heitz (Dorothy),
Everett McGill (Tom the John Deere Dealer), Jennifer Edwards (Brenda),
Barbara E. Robertson (Deer Woman), John Lordan (Priest), Donald Wieggert
(Sig), 1999)
David Lynch (Eraserhead/Lost Highway/Blue Velvet/Wild at Heart/Twin
Peaks) switches filmmaking gears and goes from his hipster style of
making weirdo films to making a simple heart-rendering story of a
73-year-old from Laurens, Iowa, Alvin Straight (Farnsworth-he's actually
79), who rides his ancient Rehds lawnmower with a trailer hitched to it
until that breaks down and he has to splurge for $250 and get a 1966
John Deere to take him the 300 miles he needs to go- which takes a
little over five weeks- to see his brother Lyle (Stanton) in Mount Zion,
Wisconsin.
The film is most like a timeless spiritual quest, something Alvin feels
he has to do in order to make peace with himself and with his brother.
This is after a bitter argument, which kept him from not seeing or
hearing from him for the last 10 years, but now he learns that his
brother has just suffered a stroke.
Alvin's mentally impaired daughter, Rose (Sissy), lives with him after
the state took away her four kids due to a fire in the house, even
though it was not her fault, as Alvin adds, she got a raw deal from the
state, though there seems to be no bitterness in his tone.
Alvin's eyesight is so poor, that he doesn't have a driver's license, he
walks with a cane, has a bad hip, has emphysema, and is as stubborn as a
mule; therefore, even though, it doesn't make too much sense to travel
the way he does, no one can talk him out of it. He will not have his
daughter drive him or take a bus or let a stranger he meets on the road
take him there; he feels that this is something he just has to do by
himself.
The film reeks of Midwestern wholesomeness, folksiness, and homespun
philosophies. That it works so well, is a testament to Richard
Farnsworth's compelling characterization and the flavor the film
captures of the genuine straight people playing straight man to Alvin
Straight on the two-lane highway he takes across the Mississippi River
to Wisconsin. It features a road show of ordinary folks, consisting of
those who can be kind to a stranger who is doing something he probably
ought not be doing. Their ordinary lives are put under the microscope in
a slow-moving tale that is not in a hurry to get to the end of its
journey, as the strangers talk to each other, seriously listen to each
other, and we as an audience get to know all of them reasonably well. As
a change of pace, American viewers might welcome a pause from all the
action films and whacky stories they are inundated with, and take a
reality check to see if they are interested in seeing a film that most
of them could have been in.
This is a fictionalized version of a true story that took place in
September/October of 1994 and was discovered by the screenwriters from
an article in the "N.Y. Times."
The film plays as if it was a foreign film, since it is rare for an
American film to be so self-conscious of itself, so interested in just
looking at the open blue sky, the blowing wheatfields, the bare streets
of a sleepy town, and having its star find peace with himself without
any reason or big event in the film. It is also a film that knows how to
keep proper time with its slow-moving story and the slow-moving
transport of its hero. By doing this, it suggests that his life can be
carefully digested without everything being brought to a conclusion
before it needs to be.
Some of the vignettes worked better than others, but what was always
convincing was how the unsophisticated but straight-forward manner of
Farnsworth, came across in such an appealing way, a way many Americans
would like to think of themselves as actually being.
His encounter with a runaway young pregnant hitchhiker, whom he advises
to go back home, seemed too pat for it to be a moving experience, as
true as her sad story might be and as good as his advise to her was.
Yet, Lynch handled it correctly by just indicating by her changing
facial expressions that something was clicking inside her and that she
was becoming less confused about what to do, and by having her
symbolically show that she understood what Alvin told her to do. His
encounter with an hysterical lady who keeps hitting deer with her car on
her way to work, also seemed too overblown a situation to even comment
on his failure to ease her anguish. Fortunately, nothing much is made of
this event, except Alvin has the common sense to have some deer meat for
his nightly camp fire. But when Alvin's tractor belt breaks going down a
steep hill and he is shaken, he is befriended by Danny Riordan (Cada), a
retired John Deere employee, who was at the time watching a practice
fire exercise in this sleepy town. He looks upon Alvin as the national
treasure he is, taking Alvin back to his yard to camp out while he gets
the town's mechanics, bickering twins, to repair the tractor, as Alvin
has a go at getting the brothers to relate to each other in a more
amiable manner.
The film moves into territory where people of good nature really
communicate with each other and offer whatever support they can to each
other, and it is the right support because they have tapped into the
source that gives them such character, which is what the kindly
relationship that developed between Danny and Alvin offered. Alvin also
meets, an old-timer he instantly relates to, and since this is an
odyssey where one of its primary purposes is of reliving the past, and
Alvin throughout the journey is bringing up tidbits about his life, what
comes up now is the dark secret from his days fighting in WW11,
something he couldn't tell anyone, it is when he was a sniper and had
the misfortune of unknowingly killing someone on his side; and, who
better to tell this too than this WW11 veteran with such a kindly face,
who quietly understood everything Alvin was saying, knowing full-well
how farm boys came back from the war with images of the horrors they had
been through and couldn't face themselves anymore and took to drinking.
Alvin has already faced his drinking problem, and now that he has
confessed to what has been eating away at him all these years, he seems
to be ready to fulfill his life by just seeing his brother again and
making peace with him.
He will encounter a priest when he camps out on one of the oldest
cemeteries in Wisconsin, and they will have a friendly discussion about
religion, indicating that there's not much difference between Alvin's
Baptist faith and the priest's Catholicism. His last meaningful
encounter, before he ends up on the porch of his brother's shack and is
looking up at the night sky, is with an old-time bartender, who serves
him a Miller light and gracefully talks the friendly chatter barkeeps
throughout the country are known for.
This film was just right for what it wanted to do; it felt good seeing
Alvin's journey find closure. The sentimentality of the film was kept to
the minimum and Lynch did not try to make this small story grander than
what it was, and that's a good thing, because the smallness of the story
is what made this film seem so elegant and it is also what made it seem
epic.
But, in a film that goes only surface deep in uncovering the mythos
about small-town America and its elderly, it becomes unfortunate that
the filmmaker couldn't delve deeper and get more out of the story, as it
seems as if this is a story waiting to be pried open even wider by
someone who is not stuck on what seems to be the obvious but wants to
make some waves with the politics of such small-town conservatism and
question why the towns look so dry and shrivelled-up, the people seem so
unintellectual, and the places visited so dull, notwithstanding, how
kindly its citizens can act in an emergency. After initially being very
pleased with the film, I got to wondering what I learned about Alvin
Straight that I didn't know when the film began; and, though I thought
that Alvin's reflections about his life were genuine, I still didn't
really know what he is all about by the film's end, even if I now knew
his darkest secret, and that is what troubles me most about this film.
There is something about his life that makes me think of Alvin as not
only a likable character, which is what I found him to be, but someone
who is so set-in-his-ways that he cannot evolve further, and he is
someone who is so accepting of the "American Way of Life," that it seems
a shame that he can't find anything to say that questions the America
and its institutions he was prepared to give his life for during WW11.
Lynch seems to have created a character that buys into all the
old-traditional values America supposedly cherishes but without
reexamining them, such as family values, religious institutions, and the
military. He would be someone who would make a good poster boy for the
religious right. There seems to be no rebel in Alvin, as Lynch seems to
accept his status quo without any hesitation.
Alvin, for all his appeal, just seems to be another blind follower of
the so-called American value system. It was difficult for me to see
Lynch's motivations for making this simple story without offering any
ruffles in the feathers of the American eagle. Though, he certainly has
a right to see things the way he does; it, nevertheless, is
disconcerting to see a film that is so accepting of the institutional
American values without even questioning them.
If this film was meant as a religious quest, then it failed in that
venture, especially when compared to the lives of other religious
figures' autobiographies who had to fight the conformity of society and
their own inner being until they were able through their journey to
raise their consciousness. But if this is just a mild tale about an
old-timer, doing something a little ornery, then it works and is
pleasant to look at, just like it is pleasant to have a conversation on
Main Street with some real people. It makes you feel good, but is that
challenging enough?
I still don't know what Lynch's motivation is for making this Walt
Disney family value production film, except it seems to be an ode to
traditional values, which seems odd coming from him, especially since he
is known, rightly or wrongly, for making films that are supposed to be
on-the-cutting-edge. There was nothing daring about this film, as its
appeal is mostly through the magnificent performance of Richard
Farnsworth, who is a movic relic, chiseled in dignity with his
weather-beaten face and his geezer-like sensibilities shining through.
He is someone beyond acting criticism, and whatever failings or
misplaced points there are to his story, the film is still a relatively
interesting work, retaining something about the American mythos that is
worth investigating further; this is a film that is well-crafted and
well-worth seeing, and this is so because Lynch knows how to film a
story in a thoroughly professional manner. As for Lynch personally, I
don't have the foggiest idea what his real beliefs are or what his
changing career moves might mean, but as far as this film goes, he seems
to be very accepting of the status quo.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
An older man once told me that once you get old, time seems to go by
much faster. You wouldn't think it from watching Richard
Farnsworth's character in `The Straight Story', but in one of
the film's smaller scenes, I realized something. His character,
Alvin Straight, has been driving on a lawnmower at a painfully slow
pace over about 500 miles. He asks a man for the date, and he realizes
it's been five weeks since he began his journey. That
inconsequential scene proves that life can move at a slow pace while
time speeds ahead. Sad, isn't it?
Sad is one way to describe this new film from David Lynch; odd is
another.  Compared to the films Lynch has done, there is little which
could seem odd. Except for a G-rated Walt Disney Picture,
perhaps. Like David Mamet did with `The Winslow Boy', Lynch (who
made `Blue Velvet', `The Elephant Man' and `Twin
Peaks') has ditched his unusual, edgy style for something more
refined but no less compelling.
But in `The Straight Story', Lynch takes a backseat to 79 year
old actor Richard Farnsworth.  Farnsworth, who has appeared in films
like `Misery' and `The Grey Fox', takes control of the
film in a subtle way that only the most gifted and experienced actors
can perfect. He has already garnered quite a bit of Oscar buzz.
Alvin Straight is in his seventies, and he yearns to be young
again. He lives in Laurens, Iowa with his stuttering daughter, Rose
(Sissy Spacek), and isn't in such great shape. The World War II vet
ignores health advice from his doctor, and has a diet composed
entirely of red meat.
One day, he learns that Lyle (Harry Dean Stanton), his estranged
brother, has just suffered a stroke.  He realizes that neither of them
have much time to live, and that they mst reconcile before they pass
on. He announces that he will be going to visit Lyle in
Wisconsin. Sounds reasonable enough...except for the fact that he has
decided to travel the 500 miles on his lawnmower.
Much to the delight of onlookers, Alvin begins his trek and meets a
handful of quirky characters along the way (among them; a lady who has
killed 15 deer on one highway).  Despite the G rating, `The
Straight Story' is a Lynch movie at every turn. The irony is,
depsite the quirkiness of these Lynchian characters, this film does
more justice to small town folk than any film this year.
`The Straight Story' is about a man who knows his time is almost
up, and about his final journey of freedom. `The worst part about
being old,' he says, `is thinking back to when you're
young.' Alvin Straight is trying to purify his soul.
While the film is pleasant and compelling enough, it's glacial pace
is often annoying. Some conversations seem to last a lifetime, and the
thin premise isn't enough to fill a 2 hour picture.  However, there
are some great shots of America's heartland, and it's a nice
slice of life that's suitable for the whole family. Kids may be
able to sit through it, but `The Straight Story' is adult in its
themes.
This isn't one of David Lynch's better films, but it has its own
simple pleasures. Personally, I'm not a fan of edgy directors
making G rated films, no matter what kind of violence is occuring in
today's society. If this is the way Lynch wants to make films,
that's fine, but I don't want filmmakers to feel pressured by
the ratings board to make films family-friendly. I'm such a fan of
Lynch's old stuff that I don't fell compelled to call `The
Straight Story' a refreshing change, but it is an intriguing piece
of work.
Richard Farnsworth is `The Straight Story', and deserves
recognition for his three dimensional work on Alvin
Straight. Farnsworth presents a character who sits back and chooses to
watch everything from freighters to bicycles speed by him. But he
doesn't care. Life moves slow, but time goes fast.


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Walt Disney Pictures
 Director: David Lynch
 Writer:   David Lynch, John Roach, Mary Sweeney
 Cast: Richard Farnsworth, Sissy Spacek, Jane Heitz, Everett
McGill, Jennifer Edwards, Barbara E. Robertson, John Farley,
John Lordan, Harry Dean Stanton
   The first lesson you learn in literature class is that every
story must have conflict: Man against man, man against his
fellow man, man against nature.  "The Straight Story"
challenges this assumption, unless you want to discuss a
new type of friction in literature, man against lawnmower. 
There isn't a single rotten apple in this 111- minute drama,
and aside from a brief if heavy downpour, nature is not the
enemy.  The principal character, Alvin Straight (Richard
Farnsworth), does not even have a confrontation with himself. 
He is determined to visit his ailing brother and at no point
expresses a single doubt about the journey he is to
undertake.  
   There are, however, a couple of unorthodox departures
aside from this paucity of strife.  One is that the majority of
people in the tale are old--over 70, or presumed to be.  The
other is that the director and co-scripter of this sweet, linear,
and orderly narrative is David Lynch, the very person who
confounded the moviegoing public two years ago with "Lost
Highway"--a story so bizarre it made "Twin Peaks" look like a
walk in the woods, and whose audacious "Blue Velvet" back
in '86 penetrated the surface of a picture-postcard town in a
more cryptic way than Sam Mendes had in mind when he
dissected suburbia with this year's "American Beauty."  Why
would a master of the surreal and the bizarre veer off into
what's just about the straightest story of the year--a G-rated
movie targeted to adults?  Never mind what Lynch might tell
the interviewers: I'd speculate that someone made a wager
that he couldn't turn out a normal, everyday piece--just as the
great contemporary composer Sergei Profkoviev was once
challenged to devise a major piece of music in the 18th
Century style (and succeeded with his "Classical Symphony").
Other than that, I'd say that since Lynch is also a serious
photographer, he may have wanted to conceive a pictorial
essay on the real America.  His camerawork (especially the
long shots) on the seemingly infinite corn fields of Iowa look
like the backdrop to Kate Smith's singing "God Bless
America."
   The picture belongs to the charismatic Richard Farnsworth,
who at the age of 79 plays a 73-year-old who is made up to
look like 83.  As Alvin Straight, Farnsworth performs in the
role of a widower whose wife had produced 14 kids (7 of
whom survived) and who now lives with his speech-impaired
daughter, Rose (Sissy Spacek), whose defect makes some
people believe that she is retarded.  When the codger hears
that his estranged brother Lyle (Harry Dean Stanton) has had
a serious stroke, he is determined to visit the ailing fellow, but
lacking money and a driver's license, and determined not to
hand over his sovereignty to a bus driver, he sets out by
lawnmower from his run-down abode in Laurens, Iowa for the
Wisconsin border town where his brother lives in a shanty.  A
lawnmower?  Yep.  The 1966 John Deere turns out to be a
conversation piece on the road just like Charlie, John
Steinbeck's dog, who accompanied that author on a trip in
search of America.
   We expect the septuagenarian combat veteran of World
War 2 to dispense words of wisdom to those he meets: to the
pregnant runaway teen with whom he shares his hot dogs; to
the young people vigorous pedaling their racing bikes across
the empty highway; to the old fella tending bar near the
Mississippi River border between Iowa and Wisconsin. 
Instead, we hear only platitudes: how old age hasn't a single
redeeming feature, how it's tough to be on the outs with your
brother, how fighting in a major war and accidentally killing
one of your own can lead to a drinking problem.
  If advice is not the movie's strong point, then the picture of
rural, MidWest America as an unspoiled land of selfless
people surely is.  A guy who needs two canes to walk and
whose only transportation is a 33-year-old lawnmower is
going to depend on the kindness of strangers.  Not a single
person laughs at him or makes fun of the eccentric guy and
his unusual wheels.  When his machinery gives out on him
just as his own body is losing its elasticity, the folks invite him
into their homes and even fix up his vehicle at a cut rate. 
The bartender who gives Alvin his first beer in years, the
lawnmower repair twins who give him a nice discount, even
the pregnant teen who'd expect to want little to do with the
older generation--all have good hearts, are great listeners,
and seem fascinated by Alvin despite the meagerness of his
actual words.  What's bewitches them all is obviously his
determination to do things his way, the lack of a single
misgiving in his craggy expressive face or deliberate speech.
   Since the film is too slow-paced to interest the little ones
and since adults might be turned off by the G rating, you'd
not expect a huge audience for this Disney relaxer.  There
are some quiet gems to be found, and perhaps the movie will
restore your faith in humanity and make you somewhat
ashamed to live in a large, impersonal city.  As for me, I'll
take the softness of "Blue Velvet" over the tranquil landscape
depicted herein, the large edge of "The Elephant Man" over
the vastness of the American countryside, and the abstract
enigmas of "Lost Highway" over the rudimentary concrete of
the Iowa roads.

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Straight Story (1999) 4 stars out of 4. Starring William Farnsworth,
Sissy Spacek, Everett McGill and Harry Dean Stanton. Directed by David
Lynch.
 The simplicity and sincerity of "The Straight Story" will put a
stranglehold on your soul.
 It's a movie that celebrates determination, love and life. It is one of
those events that will cradle you in its warmth and caress you with its
generosity of spirit.
 "The Straight Story" is a feature that overwhelms you with its lack of
pretense. It's unassuming art like a Grandma Moses painting or a Norman
Rockwell drawing.
 And it's protagonist, Alvin Straight, is a man who could have stepped out
of one of those Rockwell works.
 As portrayed by Richard Farnsworth, Straight is as leathery as an old
saddle and as intransigent as Mount Rushmore. His character befits his
name. He is a frank, honest man, quiet-spoken with an economy of words. He
says little, but speaks volumes.
 "The Straight Story," which is based on a true incident, follows Alvin as
the 73-year-old decides to travel from his home in Laurens, Iowa, to Mount
Zion, Wis., to visit his estranged brother, Lyle, who has been felled by a
stroke.
 Alvin and Lyle had a falling out about 10 years earlier and Alvin feels he
must make things right.
 However, Alvin is not in the best of health himself. He walks with the
support of two canes and can't see well enough to drive.
 So Alvin, fueled only by his determination, sets out on his 1966 John
Deere riding lawnmower to cover the approximate 350 miles to Lyle's.
 Alvin refuses help from those around him, including his beloved daughter,
Rose (Sissy Spacek). This is a trip he feels he must make on his own terms.
It is a kind of penance, he believes.
 Along the way, Alvin meets various people, among them a runaway, pregnant
teen-ager whom he teaches the value of family, and a good Samaritan former
John Deere dealer who helps him out when his mower runs into problems.
 "The Straight Story" is directed by David Lynch, the man who has given us
such dark and perverse movies as "Eraserhead," "The Elephant Man," "Blue
Velvet" and "Lost Highway."
 It turns out Lynch is as talented at showing the heart of the heartland as
he is the dark underbelly of society.
 And "The Straight Story" is a movie with heart, lots of it. Alvin is a
good man as are the people he knows and the people he meets along his
journey. This is a movie that leisurely celebrates family in the
all-encompassing sense of the word.
 Lynch has us ambling along with Alvin as he travels at 5 mph on the
highway berm drinking in the beauty of the land and the stars. This is a
reflective movie and Lynch offers us plenty of time to think about the ties
that bind people.
 In one of the film's loveliest sequences, Alvin offers a meal and shelter
to a runaway girl. He doesn't pry into her life. He simply tells her a
story. When his children were young, he says, he would have them pick up a
stick and break it. Then he would take a bundle of sticks and tie them
together and tell his children to try to break the bundle.
 They couldn't, of course. And that, Alvin explains, is family.
 The next morning the girl is gone, a bundle of sticks lying near the
campfire embers.
 Another powerful sequence features Alvin and another World War II veteran
sitting in a bar swapping their war memories. Their shared pain can be seen
in their eyes. It's here that Alvin explains that the war led him to drink,
which he admits caused much pain for his family.
 But he has quit drinking and put that part of his life behind him. Now he
only wants to make amends.
 Farnsworth, a former stuntman, best known for his roles in such films as
"Comes a Horseman" (for which he received a supporting actor Oscar
nomination), "The Natural" and "The Grey Fox," gives a magnificent
performance. It is so warm, so tender - so human - that if does not walk
off with the best actor Oscar at the next ceremony, the movie industry
should toss the entire proceedings into the trash heap.
 This is a once-in-a-lifetime role, one which Farnsworth was born to play.
Whether dealing with a distraught woman who - because she has to travel the
same road every day to get to work - has hit and killed 14 deer in seven
weeks (a typical Lynchian touch), or sweetly explaining to the bickering
twin mechanics who repair his riding mower the special bond of brotherhood,
Farnsworth carries himself with a craggy dignity.
 Ably supporting Farnsworth are Spacek as his loving daughter, Everett
McGill as the John Deere dealer who gets him the wheels to make his
journey, and Harry Dean Stanton as Lyle.
 When the brothers finally meet, no words are necessary. Alvin and Lyle
merely need to look at each other. Their expressions convey all that needs
to be said.
 "The Straight Story" is one of the best movies of the year, and Lynch's
finest achievement. Academy Award recognition should go to the movie,
Lynch, Farnsworth, the cinematography of the legendary Freddie Francis and
the screenplay by John Roach and Mary Sweeney.
 "The Straight Story" is that rarity, a "G"-rated movie that is a true
family experience. In this instance, the "G" stands for more than "general
audiences;" it connotes gem, great and genuine. "The Straight Story" is a
film that will make you stand up and cheer.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
Ross Anthony
Alvin Straight is seventy-three. He has bad eyes and hips. The state won't
issue him a driver's license, he refuses a walker opting for two canes and
he's too stubborn to have anyone drive him. Yet, his brother has had a
stroke in Wisconsin and he's bound and determined to get there.
"Alvin you're not thinking of riding this lawnmower to Wisconsin, are you?"
the mower salesman asks. Later Alvin puts it this way, "You're a kind man,
talking to a stubborn man."
This Straight story is also a slow one. The roaring pace (that's loving
sarcasm) of America's rural states, namely Iowa, add a carefully harvested
flavor to this simple robust tale. For example, a scene in which Alvin
purchases a "grabber" from a local hardware store takes a full two minutes
to blossom. It just goes to show you what patience and a good sense of humor
can yield.
The Straight Story. Š 1999. Rated G.
Starring Richard Farnsworth and Sissy Spacek.
Directed by David Lynch.
Written by John Roach and Mary Sweeney.
Produced by Mary Sweeney and Neal Edelstein at Picture Factory.
Distruibuted by Buena Vista/Disney.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Ordinarily, I wouldn't give a second thought to the dunderheads that
think the world will end with the onset of the new millennium.  But who
was counting on two G-rated films being among the best of this year's
releases?  Scarier yet is the fact that both films were directed by two
of the last people you would ordinarily associate with a G-rated film -
David Mamet (The Winslow Boy) and here, David Lynch's The Straight
Story.  Mamet's forte seems to be cramming as many expletives into a
film as humanly possible, while Lynch's films are a mélange of adult
language, kinky sex, gratuitous violence and deranged characters.  The
Straight Story is a different story altogether.
Story begins with several shots of a small Midwestern town - houses,
people, businesses, landscapes.  Since Lynch is involved in the project,
I held my breath waiting for the camera to pan down and reveal a
detached body part laying in a field (a la Blue Velvet).  But it doesn't
happen.  The film's protagonist is 73-year-old Alvin Straight (Richard
Farnsworth), a kindly old codger with bad hips, diabetes and emphysema. 
Despite his declining physical health, Straight refuses his doctor's
advice, rebuffing the need for surgery, tests, x-rays and the use of a
walker.  Straight is a widower and lives with his slow-witted daughter
Rose (Sissy Spacek, Blast From the Past).
When he gets news that his estranged brother Lyle has suffered a stroke,
Straight decides at once that he needs to visit his sibling in
Wisconsin.  With no car, a mentally challenged daughter, failing
eyesight and the inability to walk more than a few steps at a time,
Straight begins the trip from Laurens, Iowa to Wisconsin the only way he
can - on his riding lawnmower.  The trip takes many weeks and Straight
encounters the typical road-movie hazards along the way, including
breakdowns, hitchhikers, inclement weather and traffic accidents.  As he
chomps on cold hot dogs, he slowly waves to slack-jawed onlookers that
don't seem sure whether to laugh, salute or wave back.
Probably best known for his Oscar-nominated performance in the Alan J.
Pakula western Comes a Horseman, Farnsworth gives one of the year's best
and most heartfelt performances, and is destined for year-end
recognition.  His Straight is reminiscent of Peter Fonda's
Oscar-nominated turn in Ulee's Gold, with both mature characters going
to any length to preserve their family in films that take their time to
unravel.  Spacek is memorable as the birdhouse-building Rose and could
also garner accolades if Disney gives the film a big marketing push. 
But Story could be overshadowed by the Mouse House's unusual number of
Oscar-contenders this year, including The Sixth Sense and The Insider. 
Each is capable of receiving multiple nods.
Lynch's (Lost Highway) direction has never been better than it is here,
reminding viewers how much can be said with long shots, a good score and
minimal dialogue.  He more than effectively portrays the severity of
Straight's physical condition, as well as just how slowly his lawnmower
travels down the long, country roads.  And speaking of the score, it's
amazing.  Longtime Lynch collaborator Angelo Badalamenti crafts one
beautiful melody after another, using more guitars in Story that we're
used to hearing from the composer.  The film is wisely set in the fall,
so viewers will be treated to lush, colorful scenery that seems to burst
off of the screen.  Another old-timer, 82-year-old cinematographer
Freddie Francis (an Oscar winner for Glory) provides the beautiful
visuals.  Remarkably, the film is based on a true story and is adapted
by debut screenwriters John Roach and Mary Sweeney, the latter also
serving as the film's editor.

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE STRAIGHT STORY
(Disney)
Starring:  Richard Farnsworth, Sissy Spacek, Everett McGill, John Farley,
Jennifer Edwards-Hughes, Harry Dean Stanton.
Screenplay:  John Roach and Mary Sweeney.
Producers:  Mary Sweeney and Neil Edelstein.
Director:  David Lynch.
MPAA Rating:  G (mild profanity)
Running Time:  111 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In most exceptional films, there is a moment early on when you can
just tell you're tapped into something special. That moment in THE
STRAIGHT STORY comes as Alvin Straight (Richard Farnsworth), a 73-year-old
widower with failing eyesight and failing hips, begins the true-story trek
at the center of the film. Having recently learned that his estranged
brother Lyle has had a stroke, Alvin decides it's time to make amends. He
sets out from his home in Laurens, Iowa to Lyle's home in Mt. Zion,
Wisconsin on the only transportation at his disposal: a riding lawnmower.
As Alvin hits the two-lane highway, director David Lynch slowly pans up
from Alvin to the cloud-filled sky above the Iowa fields. He holds that
shot for what seems like a full minute, then slowly pans back down...  
where we see Alvin's puttering rig about 100 yards from where we last saw
it.
     I think that shot might have been one of the best of the year even if
its only purpose had been as a shaggy dog joke. But it's more than that;
it's a remarkably efficient tone-setter. Instantly, you know this is going
to be a rather unique travelogue. You can begin to appreciate the truly
inspired combination of Freddie Francis's cinematography and Angelo
Badalamenti's fiddle-and-guitar road music that makes THE STRAIGHT STORY
so evocative in its heartland sincerity. And you understand that slow,
methodical persistence is central to this story's success -- not just in
Alvin's journey, but in Lynch's willingness to ask his audience for some
patience as the film unfolds.
     If you're busy rubbing your eyes incredulously, wondering if we could
possibly be talking about the same David Lynch who made "Twin Peaks," BLUE
VELVET and LOST HIGHWAY, let me assure you that we are. We're also talking
about the same David Lynch who made THE ELEPHANT MAN, another fact-based
story overflowing with compassion and humanity. There may be something
about working from real life that keeps Lynch anchored, and it's a style
that suits him well. As provocative as his more surreal films have been,
they can make it difficult to appreciate what a talented director he is
between the cringes and the head-scratching. In THE STRAIGHT STORY, he is
more in command of his simple visual storytelling than he has ever been,
which is not necessarily saying that THE STRAIGHT STORY is his best film.
It's simply obvious, with none of the grotesquerie characteristic of other
Lynch films, that he knows exactly what works for any given story.
     He also knows that THE STRAIGHT STORY is more than a bunch of pretty
pictures of the American midwest. Richard Farnsworth's performance is so
low-key and naturalistic that it may not seem there's a lot going on, but
Alvin Straight is a superbly crafted character. Senior citizens rarely get
the kind of showcase THE STRAIGHT STORY provides, and Farnsworth does
beautiful things with Alvin. It's always clear that he's a stubborn man,
but it becomes clear that he's also a man trying to make the wisdom of his
years mean something. His journey to reconcile with Lyle becomes a chance
to show he's learned what matters, and that difficult moments in life can
be overcome by one selfless act. If you're unmoved by Lyle's (Harry Dean
Stanton) silent realization of what Alvin has done for him, then movies
may hold no power to move you.
     It's true that Alvin's homespun homilies -- to a teenage runaway he 
encounters; to young cyclists; to the feuding twins who fix his lawnmower
-- do drag THE STRAIGHT STORY down a bit. Farnsworth does a fine job of
pulling all possible sanctimony out of those scenes, but the film is still
stronger when it's quiet and observant, soaring on the skills of Francis
and Badalamenti. There's also a sly sense of humor to THE STRAIGHT STORY,
including Lynch's ability to poke fun at himself. In a very early scene,
he trains his camera on a front yard, where a heavy-set woman lies tanning
herself. It's exactly the kind of scene where Lynch might have dipped into
the creatures beneath the green lawn, or found some other bit of suburban
horror. In THE STRIAGHT STORY, he just tells a straight story, finding
poetry in the simple reliability of a lawnmower's slow, steady journey.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Walt Disney presents a G-rated movie by David Lynch.
Yes, that David Lynch.  The one that did BLUE VELVET, TWIN PEAKS and
LOST HIGHWAY and about the last director you'd expect to hook up with
Disney to do a live-action, G-rated film based on a true story.  What's
next?  Brian De Palma with a sequel to BAMBI?
Every week, it seems, brings another absolutely trivial coming-of-age
movie featuring a bunch of crude, oversexed teens.  In stark contrast,
THE STRAIGHT STORY is a closing-of-age story filled with a generous
spirit and wonderfully sympathetic characters.  It never toys with your
emotions or insults your intelligence.
At the heart of the story, Richard Farnsworth (THE GREY FOX) gives an
Oscar worthy performance as 73-year-old Alvin Straight, a man on a
mission.  Alvin, who looks a decade older than his age, is in rapidly
failing health.  His doctor says he has emphysema and must give up
smoking -- fat chance.  Only with the help of his two canes is he able
to hobble around.
All of the above notwithstanding, when he hears that his estranged
brother has had a stroke, Alvin sets off to see him, no matter how
difficult the trip is certain to be.  Farnsworth with his intense eyes
and the small curls of his lips displays Alvin's resoluteness and his
suppressed pain.  Every furrow of his brow contains some hidden thought
and long repressed regret.  In a highly nuanced performance, Farnsworth
with tiny gestures reveals much but suggests more.
Sissy Spacek, in a small but important role, plays his grown daughter,
Rose.  Everyone says Rose, who has an unusual speech impediment, is
slow, something that Alvin doesn't buy.  Both Alvin and Rose have known
tragedies that have scarred them, but each has managed to cope.  They
live together in a small house in a typical, little Midwestern town.
She tries to restrain him and remind him of his fragility, but he will
have none of it.  "Rose, Darling, I'm not dead yet," he informs her with
a father's sternness.
Without a driver's license (his bad eyes preclude him from obtaining
one), Alvin sets off on a journey on the only vehicle available to him
-- a small riding lawnmower, three decades old.  Traveling a few miles
per hour, he makes his life's last odyssey, going 350 miles from Iowa to
Wisconsin.  Taking six weeks, his journey becomes a personal crusade
that taps every bit of his resilience.   Frequently looking just two
beats away from a heart attack, he presses on.  A proudly stubborn and
resourceful man, Alvin will let nothing come in the way of his goal.
The movie's delights are in the rich vignettes about the people Alvin
encounters.  A road picture of a very different type than you normally
see, it is that rare movie which you can describe as slow and mean it
sincerely as a compliment.  From the pregnant teenage runaway to the
World War II veteran, the people Alvin meets are beneficiaries of his
small doses of solace and wisdom.
Alvin teaches you to take life one step at a time and relish every
moment.  From small pleasures like the starry sky to more dramatic ones
like watching a lightning storm, he still approaches his surroundings
with the awe of a young lad.
"What's the worst part of being old," one of the young strangers Alvin
meets inquires of him.  "The worst part of being old is remembering when
you were young," Alvin replies with sad, longing eyes.
Some of the people he meets wonder if he isn't scared of camping out in
the middle of nowhere at night, what with all of the weird people about
today.  "I fought in the trenches of World War II," he points out.  "Why
should I be afraid of an Iowa cornfield?"
Lynch, eschewing the many opportunities to turn the story maudlin,
builds a mesmerizing picture that warms your heart without ever
attempting to manipulate it.  The touching story brings you close to a
true individual and reminds you of what our elders are capable.  By the
end, you feel like you've taken an almost spiritual journey with Alvin
and have gotten to witness some superlative acting in the process.
THE STRAIGHT STORY runs 1:41.  It is rated G, and, although it would be
fine for all ages, younger kids will probably find the pacing too slow
to keep their interest.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
