Title
Review for Extreme Measures (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Ben Hoffman
This thriller is about the medical profession and, in
particular, the harm that could be done if a top doctor allows himself
to think that he has the answer that other doctors do not have.  This
allows him to experiment his theories on people who have not given him
permission . . . and if they die, they die, while he keeps on with
his experiments.
Dr. Guy Luthan (Hugh Grant) works in the emergency trauma
section of a hospital.  It is a madhouse in the sense that patients
are brought in from accidents, gun shots, etc. and Luthan has to make
instant decisions.  It's like a war zone.  Whom do you try to save?
If someone is obviously going to die why waste precious time on him
when you could be trying to save someone who appears may still be
savable?
What happens when a patient who is wearing one of those
hospital ID wristbands dies but no one can identify the hospital.  In
addition, his symptoms before he dies are very odd.  While everyone is
running around madly in the trauma ward, only Dr Luthan notices the
band and wonders what hospital had issued it.  This turns into a
mystery thriller as he attempts to track down the hospital and learn
why the man died.  Dr. Luthan feels there is something very fishy
going on and indeed there is.
What makes the film even more exciting is that it involves one
of the country's most famous doctors, Dr. Lawrence Myrick (Gene
Hackman).
Dr. Luthan's nurse is Jodie Trammel (Sarah Jessica Parker)
who works with him in the trauma ward.

Author
Alex Fung
(Columbia-Castle Rock - 1996)
Starring Hugh Grant, Gene Hackman, Sarah Jessica Parker, David Morse,
   Paul Guilfoyle, Debra Monk, Bill Nunn
Screenplay by Tony Gilroy, based on the novel by Michael Palmer
Produced by Elizabeth Hurley
Directed by Michael Apted
Running time: 110 minutes
The medical thriller genre has been fairly dormant in recent years,
but Michael Apted's new film, EXTREME MEASURES, is a solid entry to
the genre, and looks to have strong commercial potential.  Making a
halfhearted attempt to touch on moral issues, the film is by and
large a thriller, and as such, a fairly good one.
Hotshot ER doctor Guy Luthan (played by Hugh Grant) is going places.
The British doctor, working in New York under a work permit, is the
star of Gramercy Hospital, and hobnobs with prestigous and brilliant
doctors like the presidentially-acclaimed Dr. Lawrence Myrick (played
by Gene Hackman).  When a homeless man is brought into Luthan's ER,
suffering from a multitude of convulsions, he is baffled by the
patient's spontaneously changing conditions.  Before dying, the
homeless man gasps off a few revelatory sentences to Luthan.
While everyone else writes off the incident as a mildly unusual
incident from a drugged-out homeless man (or not even that - "This
is New York!" points out one character), Luthan is unconvinced, and
begins to probe.  Finding resistance from senior staff, he becomes
intrigued and pushes deeper and deeper, even as obstacles and roadblocks
are thrown up in front of him.  Subtle and not-so-subtle threats
are issued at Luthan.
It doesn't take a neurosurgeon to see where this is going.  Tony
Gilroy's screenplay adaptation (he last adapted DOLORES CLAIBORNE)
isn't filled with innovative new concepts or clever banter, but it
is well-paced and, despite the familiarity of the basic plot,
engaging.  One knows where EXTREME MEASURES is headed, but it doesn't
really detract from the film.
The reason why is mostly the work of Hugh Grant in the leading role.
Getting his first chance to show off his dramatic chops since his
North American breakthrough in 1994 (supporting performance in SENSE
AND SENSIBILITY notwithstanding), Grant is wholly convincing and
credible as the young doctor whose life is torn apart around him.
While some of the action scenes surrounding Grant may be difficult
to swallow, his portrayal of the sharp and surehanded ER doctor are
on the nose.  Gene Hackman, despite his billing before the film's
title, plays a supporting role (or even a glorified cameo), and Sarah
Jessica Parker's character is really more of a plot device, so the
weight of EXTREME MEASURES has to be carried by Grant, who proves
to be up to the task.
In addition to its thriller elements, the film also attempts to deal
with moral issues - namely, the cost (and price) one is willing to
pay for medical treatment.  Foreshadowed earlier in EXTREME MEASURES
when Luthan is blasted by his supervisor for approving expensive lab
tests on a patient with no medical insurance, this theme ends up
casting a long shadow over the final third of the film.
Still, EXTREME MEASURES is not a wrenching drama, but a conventional
thriller, with the requisite gunfire and chase sequences and mano-a-mano
fisticuffs.  Director Michael Apted's last foray into this genre was
the little-seen BLINK (1993), and he proficiently handles this film,
always keeping things moving and keeping the audience involved.  With
his solid direction and Grant's fine performance, Castle Rock may
have another hit on their hands.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Hugh Grant, Gene Hackman, Sarah Jessica Parker, David Morse, Bill
Nunn, Debra Monk, Paul Guilfoyle Director: Michael Apted Screenplay:
Tony Gilroy based on the novel by by Michael Palmer
As a member of the medical profession, I encourage the practice of organ
donation for the furtherance of research and medical science. So if
you'll kindly fill out this form. It merely states that members of my
trade can use your heart, kidneys and liver for transplantation. I
promise that the rest of the body will not go to waste, and will make
great viewing in an anatomy dissection lab. Imagine the heartfelt
appreciation of the first year medical students as they poke and prod
your insides and out, with fingers and scalpels not sparing any orifice.
I remember the "Oooohs" and "Aaaahs" having gone through the ritual
myself. If there is any pathology of note like a brain tumour,
perforated viscus or ambiguous genitalia, don't fret, we always pickle
and pot the most interesting specimens for display in our splendid
anatomy museum. Did I also mention that we want your body only after you
are dead, and not before.
When a prominent doctor becomes a renegade, we have the antiphony of
fears that Jekyll brings out in Hyde. Don't fear the doctor that wants
to kill a million people with a lethal viral genocidic bomb, fear the
one who wants your spine column so he can grow some pretty neural twine.
It seems that the overly clever doctor, is usually the one who ends up
preoccupied with himself and his work.
Dr. Lawrence Myric (Gene Hackman), a brilliant neurologist, has decided
to break his Hippocratic oath by kidnapping homeless men, and using them
as guinea pigs in his otherwise admirable feat of growing neural tissue.
This would be an outstanding achievement, no less deserving of a noble
prize, if the lame can once again walk, and the blind see. However, his
questionable method of research cannot be overlooked simply because he
carries good intentions. Hackman carries the natural elements of being
repugnant, which makes him ideal as the immoral doctor who sacrifices
his principles in place of his work. Dr Guy Luthan (Hugh Grant), seems a
bit too dithery and indecisive to make a good casualty officer; but once
out of the emergency seems more at ease with himself, despite being
shot, framed and beaten for uncovering the body stealing conspiracy.
Sarah Jessica Parker has a small but key role to play in the movie, and
is otherwise rarely seen.
So I did enjoy this psychological, medical thriller because it sparked
some professional interest within. The story isn't as tight or
suffocating as "Coma", but carries enough edge to keep you suspicious of
your local emergency department and doctor. When bodies start going
missing, think experimentation on a scale of extreme measures.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In Manhattan's gray dawn, two naked men burst out of a steel door.
Stumbling and falling all over themselves, they somehow manage to
escape the unknown horror hidden in the skyscraper above them.  Thus
starts Michael Apted's EXTREME MEASURES in a beginning evocative of
TWELVE MONKEYS.
     Always imaginative director Apted has given us a wide varied of
wonderful films.  His documentary series 21UP, 28UP, and 35UP are among
my all time favorite films and a must see for any cinema buff.  He
makes unusual films like NELL and true stories like GORILLAS IN THE
MIST and COAL MINER'S DAUGHTER.  As he showed in GORKY PARK and does
again here in EXTREME MEASURES, he is also a master at the thriller
genre.
     Thrillers have good guys and bad.  As Hitchcock taught us, the
best thrillers focus on the innocent man in the center.  They make sure
that the danger he faces is terrifying and just out of his control.
Finally, through shear perseverance he somehow manages to thwart the
villain.  Here, Apted knows these inner truths as the master craftsman
Hitchcock has laid them down.
     One of these naked men from the skyscraper shows up in the
emergency room run by Dr. Guy Luthan (Hugh Grant).  The patient's heart
and all of his bodily functions race wildly and then calm like passing
through the eye of a hurricane.  As Dr. Luthan later puts it, "The guy
had a total medical meltdown."  After a few cycles of this, the patient
dies.  This scene happens early in the show and serves not only to set
up the plot, but also to get the audience's adrenaline pumping wildly
in sync with the dying man.  Apted's craftsmanship shines.
     We switch to the home of Dr. Lawrence Myrick (Gene Hackman) who is
celebrating receiving the prestigious Wainwright award for neurological
medicine.  His daughter reads him a congratulatory telegram from the
White House.
     Back at the morgue, they seemed to have misplaced the body.  A
mysterious coroner shrugs and tells Dr.  Luthan, "Your hospital's been
known to lose persons both living and dead."  Confused at what is going
on and what, if any role, the coroner has in it, Dr. Luthan tells him,
"You're quite a creepy person."
     Grant gives a sympathetic and convincing performance as the
everyday doctor who gets sucked into the vortex of some gruesome terror
and has no idea what is going.  When he tries to figure it out, all of
the important files are missing.  Soon his life will take a dramatic
turn for the worse and then go totally down the drain.  The story is
about him solving the mystery and proving what he has found to the
police.  It is created in such a way that the audience is in total
empathy with the lead character.  He has a periodic sidekick, a nurse
named Jodie Trammel (Sarah Jessica Parker), who is sometimes there for
him.
     Equally well cast is Hackman as a benevolent Nazi concentration
camp style doctor who proclaims that, "we can change medicine forever."
Like Amon Goeth (Ralph Fiennes) in SCHINDLER'S LIST, Dr. Myrick gives
the appearance of being a sweet and compassionate person, but
underneath lurks the evil.  The script by Tony Gilroy (based on the
novel by Michael Palmer) minimize Hackman's screen time so that the
attention is kept on Dr. Luthan's troubles.
     I can't tell you any more of the show other than to say that every
time you think you have it all figured out, you haven't.  Although the
medical conspiracy and most of the rest of the show is made believable,
there is a homeless syndicate that isn't.  Finally, there is an
unnecessary and confusing epilogue.  Why it is there, I have no idea
other than perhaps it is a failed attempt to address some criticisms
made during the test screenings.
     EXTREME MEASURES runs 1:58.  It is rated R for violence, emergency
room gore, some bad language, and brief nudity.  There is no sex.
Teenagers will probably like the show, but it would be inappropriate
for younger kids.  I recommend the picture to you and give it ***.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 30, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Chris Webb
        Hugh Grant (Dr. Guy Luthan), Gene Hackman (Dr. Lawrence Myrick)
        Sarah Jessica Parker (Jodie Trammel).  Directed by Michael Apted
        "I took the liberty of ordering you some baklava," says a shaky Hugh 
Grant to Sarah Jessica Parker as they meet in a diner.  If that isn't bad 
enough, Grant will go on to say baklava one more time in that *scene*.  I 
can imagine that Grant would be pleased to know that his affinity for all 
things Greek is encompassed in this movie, since Extreme Measures is what 
the Greeks created best: a tragedy.
        With the A-list leading men trioed with Parker, the 
movie seems to get off on a respectable footing.  However, as Grant does 
his bumbling Brit, the movie trips over itself.  In an inner-city 
emergency room, Grant's British accent and calm demeanor don't lend any 
credibility to what we see on screen.  Still, its probably the 
writing more than his acting, as Grant yells at convulsing 
semi-conscious patients to calm down.  
        Suddenly, one unfortunate night, homeless men wander into 
the ER, naked and sick.  They convulse, vomit, and bleed, with no medical 
explanation, and suddenly stabilize, but ultimately die.  Who could be 
behind such diabolical deeds?  Movies new bad cronie, Gene Hackman, of 
course.  Hackman is working on flushing his career down the toilet, since 
he seemingly has picked his latest roles with a dart board. You see, Hackman 
is a rogue doctor who uses the homeless to do vertibrae transplants in order
to allow those who have been paralyzed to regain use of their bodies.  
        With such high aspirations, we might see a debate between human 
experimentation and be given compelling arguments for both.  However, 
Michael Apted (documentarian for the 7-14-21-28-35-Up series and 
director of Nell) treads into thriller territory.  This movie is not a 
bit scary, its a joke.   
        Now, what has happened to Hackman's career?  He was sympathetic 
and tormented in The Conversation and Mississippi Burning, and has fallen 
into the world of evil with Crimson Tide (great performance), The Chamber 
(tired performance), Absolute Power (lifeless performance), and now 
this.  He needs to read the scripts before choosing parts.  Nonetheless, 
he adds some credibility to this faltering picture.  But, he's becoming 
boring and repetetive with his holier-than-thou bad guys.
        Parker is the real doozy in this film.  Her career started 
brightly as Annie, and since then she has gone on to other roles such as 
Matthew Broderick's wife.  Yes, folks, she's terrible.  Is it her or her 
lines?  In Extreme Measures its tough to see.  She plays a 
two-dimensional supporting part with her two-dimensional acting, and 
sometimes it feels like we're transported into the black hole of the 
fourth dimension.  She's on a personal crusade in Hackman's underground 
hosptial.  She wants the experimentation on humans to maybe save her 
brother, who was paralyzed in an accident.  Let's add to the sympathy: 
she was driving the car.  Let's wander into afterschool special land: She 
was drunk.  You see, kids, there's a message in this film being spelled 
out for you.  She almost kills Grant by letting him into the hands of 
Hackman, and then comes to his aid.  For Grant it would have been
be a mercy killing.  In fact, someone should have pulled the plug on this film.
        This movie is so bad, so contrived, that it was fun to make jokes 
while watching.  However, if you want to rent a good film, bypass 
this.  Don't believe the hype on the case, you will be disappointed.  
Extreme Measures took the liberty of placing itself right on 
our platters, and we're left there to stare, wondering what exactly it is.

Author
Michael Redman
Hugh Grant desperately wants the movie-going audience to think his first
name is "Cary". First we get the stumbling romantic-comedy leading man
from his past several films. Now we have the Hitchcockian thriller
detective. And he's really not too bad at either of them.
It's unfortunate that the rest of the film doesn't keep pace.
Grant is Guy Luthan, a surgeon in a busy New York hospital on the career
fast track. Everything is going along fine until an emergency room
patient with out of control symptoms and an undiagnosable disease dies.
His curiosity aroused, Luthan attempts to follow up, but finds records
lost, a mystery hospital ID bracelet and a vanished body. Something's
rotten in the state of medical care.
As he delves further into the mystery, Luthan's life is destroyed. The
cops plant drugs in his apartment and he is jailed. He loses his
prestigious position and his friends turn against him. Then it gets even
worse.
The question at the root of the film=92s moral dilemma is given away in
the previews: "If you could cure cancer by killing one person, wouldn't
you have to do it?" It turns out that Dr. Lawrence Myrick (Gene Hackman)
is conducting research on humans in order to further medical research. =
He's not killing just one person and he's not curing cancer, but you=92re=
supposed to consider the ethical costs of medical research. There's not
really much to ponder in this situaation. Despite Hackman's impassioned
speech, he's one of the bad guys.
The movie meanders around, never settling on one direction. For a while
it's a medical mystery, a thriller, a psychological horror film, and
even drifts off into almost a fantasy movie as Luthan is lead to an
underground civilization of "moles". While there are effective episodes
of each genre (the beginning scenes of two naked men clothed only in
strips of plastic running through the streets of New York are
particularly horrific), the different sections don=92t hold together.
Hackman's appearances are brief and not up to his usual skills. Sarah
Jessica Parker, in a stretch from her usual babe role, is cast against
type as Luthan=92s only friend. A courageous decision on her part, it is
not one that works. The rest of the characters are only here to further
the story, not to be people.
This first offering from Grant and girlfriend Elizabeth Hurley's
production company leaves a lot to be desired, but perhaps it serves its
function. When compared to such mediocre filmmaking around him, Grant
looks all the better.
[This review appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
10/10/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Christopher Null
     It's an old question of what's right and what's wrong:  if you
could cure a disease by killing one person, would you do it?  That's
basically the premise which starts up EXTREME MEASURES, an ultra-creepy
little medical thriller by prolific filmmaker Michael Apted.
     If you can deal with the notion of Hugh Grant as a doctor, you've
probably suspended disbelief enough to buy the whole production.  Dr.
Guy Luthan (Grant) finds a mystery patient in his trauma room at
Gramercy Hospital.  When the patient dies from a bizarre collection of
symptoms, no one seems to care except for the dashing British doc.
     Guy's investigation leads him into a conspiratorial cover-up in the
hospital system, an underground dwelling of human moles, and a cryptic
research lab where groundbreaking medicine is practiced -- on human
subjects.  What's more is that the head of the research lab is none
other than Dr. Lawrence Myrick (Gene Hackman), one of the country's most
respected physicians.
     Blending the right amount of "medical" with just enough "thriller,"
EXTREME MEASURES succeeds in giving the audience the willies from its
opening scenes.  Danny Elfman's creepiest score to date does a lot to
help out, too, and Hackman is always good at getting you squirming in
your seat.  Lots of blood, surgical scars, and seizures are even more
effective, giving cause to wonder, where was David Lynch when this movie
was being made?
     Performances are fair to good, with the exception of supporting
player Sarah Jessica Parker, who really isn't at home playing an
unglamorous nurse.  The 2-hour film moves along quite well, too, never
getting too caught up in boring exposition while keeping the viewer
informed with just enough backstory.  On the other hand, there's not a
whole lot of "thrill" to the picture, just background discomfort that's
scarier than any horror flick.
     Overall an above average movie, but EXTREME MEASURES gets bonus
points for exposing the harsh truth about physicians and confirming my
worst fears:  they really are all evil.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Whenever I hear an actor talk about needing to "stretch," I generally
feel the need to stretch my legs very far in the opposite direction.  I do
not mean to suggest that actors are not artists who seek out new
challenges.  It is simply that those who usually make the biggest noise
about moving beyond one type of role in which they have been successful
are also those who have lingered in that one role for a very good reason.
Hugh Grant had become so familiar as a stammering, self-effacing light
comedian that one would be forgiven for suspecting that was all he had in
him.  As evidence to the contrary, witness EXTREME MEASURES, a solid
Hollywood thriller in which Grant takes to the role of suspense hero like
a producer to a sequel.
     Grant plays Dr. Guy Luthan, an emergency room surgeon in a New York
public hospital who has grown accustomed to the chaos and life-or-death
judgments which come with the job.  He thinks he has seen everything,
until a homeless man is brought in one night experiencing unexplainable
symptoms.  The man's sudden death piques Guy's curiosity, but when he
begins looking for autopsy records, he finds that the body has
disappeared; further, the man's records seem to have been purged from the
hospital's computer files.  Guy smells a conspiracy, but before he can
investigate further he is framed for drug possession and fired from his
job.  His life in a shambles, Guy does the only thing he can do:  throw
all his energy into finding out who is behind the frame-up, and how it is
connected to the research of Dr. Lawrence Myrick (Gene Hackman).
     As a rule, the Hollywood suspense thrillers of recent years have been
a rather sorry lot, and I believe that one of the reasons has been that
constant attempts to shock are being substituted for the creation of
mounting tension.  Director Michael Apted has made some of the more
intriguing character-based suspense yarns of recent years (THUNDERHEART,
BLINK), and EXTREME MEASURES has a way of getting under your skin.  It is
an exceptionally well-paced film, with Guy's dilemma growing
incrementally; its effect is based on watching Guy get deeper and deeper
in trouble, rather than watching him hurtle from one life-threatening
confrontation to the next.  There is also at least one completely
unexpected turn which seems to put Guy in an impossible situation, and a
fight in an elevator which might truly bring you to the edge of your seat. 
     Anchoring it all is Hugh Grant, who appears determined to go all the
way in becoming "the next Cary Grant" by playing a Hitchcockian man who
knew too much.  Grant is exceptionally convincing as an ER surgeon,
approaching every crisis with a matter-of-fact professionalism and
confidence.  It is tempting to play such characters as arrogant, and in
the case of EXTREME MEASURES it would be even more tempting so that the
story could be based around a lesson about playing God.  But Guy is simply
a scientist whose basic curiosity gets him into a completely unexpected
mess, and there is such a consistency to Grant's performance that his
comic and dramatic moments merge seamlessly.  It is an eye-opening piece
of acting, and all the more challenging because Grant has to carry nearly
every scene.
     If there is one major frustration in EXTREME MEASURES, it is that
Apted and screenwriter Tony Gilroy don't handle the conspiracy at its
center very well.  It is obvious what is going on far too early,
particularly if you have seen any of the trailers which essentially give
everything away.  That detracts from the process of discovery, and might
make you impatient as you simply wait for Guy to figure out what you have
known for over an hour.  The conclusion tries to shove far too much into
far too little time -- a physical showdown; the outlining of a moral
dilemma; the attempt to flesh out Hackman's role, which is really a
glorified cameo -- resulting in a thriller which sags exactly when it
should be peaking.  It is fortunate that the preceding ninety minutes is
so energetic and involving.  It is even more fortunate that Hugh Grant is
so well-suited to his role, and that it proves not to be such a stretch to
think of him in a lab coat rather than just a morning coat.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Hugh Grant, Gene Hackman, Sarah Jessica Parker, David Morse, 
      Bill Nunn, Debra Monk, Paul Guilfoyle
Director: Michael Apted
Producer: Elizabeth Hurley
Screenplay: Tony Gilroy based on the novel by Michael Palmer
Cinematography: John Bailey
Music: Danny Elfman
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     Gramercy Hospital's emergency room is a picture of overcrowded 
chaos.  Only one operating room is available, and Dr. Guy Luthan (Hugh 
Grant) has to make a decision:  operate immediately on an injured cop 
whose vital signs are stable or on the drugged-out junkie who shot him, 
whose condition is worse.  Luthan elects the former, and, while both 
patients survive, he's never wholly satisfied with his choice, as he 
later confides to Jodie (Sarah Jessica Parker), a sympathetic ER nurse.
     It's moral questions like these that lift EXTREME MEASURES above 
the level of a routine, paranoia-driven thriller like THE NET.  True, 
when you get right down to it, this movie is about a guy trying 
simultaneously to survive, clear his name, and bring the bad guys down, 
but there are more shades of gray here than in most modern-day 
Hitchcockian efforts.  EXTREME MEASURES never portrays guilt as clear-
cut, and its easy to see how, by telling the same story with a script 
slanted towards another character's perspective, the roles of 
protagonist and antagonist could be reversed.
     In the film MALICE, Alec Baldwin's character gave a delicious 
speech about the so-called "God complex" that affects some doctors.  "I 
am God!" he declared, indicating that he had the power of life and death 
over his patients.  EXTREME MEASURES is also about a doctor who crosses 
the line, although, unlike in MALICE, his goal isn't a big financial 
windfall.  In EXTREME MEASURES, Dr. Lawrence Myrick (Gene Hackman) is a 
world renowned neurosurgeon who believes he has discovered the means to 
heal severed spines and allow paralyzed people to walk again.  
Frustrated by the laws that constrain medical experimentation, he sets 
up an underground complex and begins to kidnap homeless people from 
hospital ERs to involuntarily assist him.  His goal is to be known as 
the man who enabled the lame to walk -- a very godlike ambition.
     Luthan becomes involved when lab tests on one of his dead patients 
reveal some very strange things.  Stonewalled by his bosses, who tell 
him to forget it or risk his promising career, he begins his own 
investigation.  Soon, pressure is being brought to bear on him, and he 
discovers the price of ignoring others' warnings.  Now, desperate to 
clear himself of a crime he didn't commit, he ends up wandering through 
New York City sewers and subway tunnels, dodging bullets and searching 
for the mysterious place where Myrick conducts his experiments.
     The question that Luthan eventually has to confront is whether the 
ends do indeed justify the means.  There's no court scene here, but, in 
an extended, well-played confrontation between the two leads, the 
morality of the entire medical profession (not to mention the validity 
of the Hippocratic Oath) is put on trial.  The resolution is perhaps not 
as powerful or satisfying as we might hope, but it's not a cop-out, 
either.
     Considering its overall format, EXTREME MEASURES employs the 
familiar rhythms that have fueled dozens of Hitchcock-inspired thrillers 
(including THE FUGITIVE).  The hero is on the run, being hunted by 
pursuers with uncertain motives.  Computer files are deleted.  Friends 
become suspicious and unhelpful.  Evidence is planted.  There's at least 
one betrayal.  Director Michael Apted, perhaps best known for his 7-UP 
documentaries, has fashioned a well-paced features, keeping the tension 
level high even during routine action sequences (of which there are 
perhaps a few too many).  He has a keen sense of atmosphere, and the 
underground sequences are especially creepy and claustrophobic.  In 
fact, EXTREME MEASURES is a surprisingly dark film.  Even the humor is 
of the gallows variety.
     So how does Hugh Grant, the "aw shucks" poster boy of feel-good 
movies, fare in a role that is significantly different from anything he 
has recently attempted?  For the most part, he's solid.  Not great, but 
effective in getting us to forget temporarily about his appearances in 
FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL and NINE MONTHS.  We come to identify with 
Luthan, which is really all that's necessary for EXTREME MEASURES to 
succeed.
     Gene Hackman is, as always, excellent, and it's in large part due 
to his performance that the film's central moral dilemma has teeth.  
Sarah Jessica Parker, another actor better known for playing light, 
undemanding characters, is fine in a supporting role.  David Morse (THE 
CROSSING GUARD) and Bill Nunn (THE LAST SEDUCTION) play guys with guns 
but no personalities (attempts to give them "character-building" scenes 
fail).
     EXTREME MEASURES isn't going to be described as the "slam bang 
thrill ride" of the Autumn, or any other such nonsense.  The film's 
inherent tension comes not from the shootouts and chases, but from its 
core ethical questions -- questions that ultimately have to be 
addressed, not only in movies, but in real life.  "If you could cure 
cancer by killing one person, wouldn't you have to do it?"  Obviously, 
there's no easy answer, and, whether you agree or disagree with the 
position taken by EXTREME MEASURES, at least the film frames its 
response in an entertaining, and occasionally thought-provoking, 
package.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
