Title
Review for Flim-Flam Man, The (1967)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"The Flim Flam Man" is a reasonably good comedy, with
many good scenes, but ultimately loses credibility
as a drama.  George C. Scott gives an effective performance,
and the script gives him several good lines.
"The Flim Flam Man" stars Scott as an aging con man.
He recruits young Michael Sarrazin, also wanted by
the law, as a shill.  The pair commit various amusing
cons, and soon the local sheriff (Harry Morgan) is after
them.  Meanwhile, Sarrazin gets a love interest in
Sue Lyon (you may recognize her from "Lolita").
The film's humor comes from the marks, typically greedy,
foolish yokels.  The dumbest of them all is Slim Pickens,
who gives a great cameo performance.  There is also a
wild car chase that wrecks a beautiful sports car.
The drama works less well.  It is impossible to see why
Lyon would fall in love with Sarrazin, who stole and
wrecked her car.  It is even more silly that Sarrazin
would want to turn himself in, having just committed
a slew of serious felonies, and then commit more to
get Scott out of jail.  The stereotype of rural Southerners,
especially Sheriffs and moonshiners, as dumb and
easily-manipulated yokels wears thin after a while
as well.  Sarrazin also becomes an expert con artist
the same day that he meets Scott.
Trivia: Scott was much younger than his character, and
had to wear much makeup to look older.  "The Flim Flam
Man" was Sarrazin's first theatrical film.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Shane Burridge
Lighthearted film by Irvin Kershner should appeal to all ages. 
Traveling con man Mordecai Jones is tossed off a train passing through
North Carolina and is befriended by a young army deserter.  The older,
experienced Jones gets his newly-appointed partner to shill for him
while dodging the local county sheriff and several less-than-satisfied
`customers'.  George C. Scott puts a bit of W. C. Fields in his
portrayal of Jones, while Michael Sarrazin (his film debut) is
relegated to the role of sidekick (Kershner jokingly tilts the camera
during the scene where Jones introduces himself, just so we know he's
crooked).  Characters come across as being stock rather than
believable.  Pretty Sue Lyon, in one of only a handful of starring
roles she featured in after LOLITA, doesn't have a lot to do opposite
Sarrazin - sparks don't exactly fly between the two.  More interesting
could have been the relationship between Scott's Jones and Harry
Morgan's Sheriff Slade (it certainly would have been more fun) but
this isn't developed either.
Film still manages to be entertaining.  There are various chases and
escapes on trains, trucks, cars, and a paddleboat.  In keeping with
their shifty con tricks, the characters keep on the move.  It's also
fun watching them exploiting the greed of others, and seeing each step
of their tricks slide into place.  The scams themselves, however,
aren't that elaborate - they follow a similar formula throughout, 
involving either sleight of hand or misplaced trust.  You'll find trickier, more
absorbing ploys in THE STING and HOUSE OF GAMES.  But what the
characters of those two films lack is the philosophy Jones uses to
justify his self-professed trade.  He's not obsessed with getting rich
(he's still hopping freights), and sees himself performing a public
service: his victims will become better people after seeing the
consequences of their avarice, and those who are truly honest will not
yield to temptation in the first place.  Invariably, all his hustles
involve the desire of other people to make money.  It's Sarrazin who
pulls the film's final scam, though unfortunately it doesn't amount to
much more than a bluff.  But the whole movie is so easygoing that it's
unfair to nitpick.  Also featuring:  Jack Albertson, Slim Pickens,
Alice Ghostley.  Jerry Goldsmith wrote the music.  For history buffs: 
The alias that Jones uses in one instance - Titus Oates - refers to a 
17th century 'con man' who duped the English into believing there was 
a plot to assassinate their reigning monarch.  
