Title
Review for Az én XX. századom (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
There aren't many films made today that have a sense of wonder, of, what is
all this about anyway?, and that keep you wondering what is all this leading
to.
 My Twentieth Century is one of those films.  The best way I can explain it,
is that it reminds me ( A LOT, too ) of Luis Bunuel's style of  film making,
which was surrealistic, and bounced from the person's mind to
external action without any reason, or idea, but all based on the whimsical
nature of the character, or characters, involved.  Or the director's of
course.
 The only real theme, this enchanting and very curious film appears  to
have, is a small subplot, related to Thomas Edison, who is trying, nervously
and once again, to prove to people that his telegraph is not a joke, and
neither is it a ghost, or trickery, which, is very likely to have happened
to him, by people who feared modern discoveries, or the unknown.  This film
plods along, never explaining anything, although it does have a story of
sorts.  There is a birth of two girls, twins, Lili and Dora, and they grow
up to be separated after they were orphaned, and one has become a spinster
and high class prostitute, while the other is a revolutionary ideologist.
And a man, whose talents lie in writing, or studying the psychological
behavior of people, through his observation of animals, happens to have had
an affair with one of them.  Along the way, he accidentally bumps into the
other sister, whom he thinks is the original, and gets even with her by
taking her to bed ( he was robbed before ), ...  but in the end there is a
sequence full of mirrors, where he gets a look at the two girls, while a
voice talks, the seer of his thoughts, perhaps, or is it an alien form which
has talked from the start, and plays with the stars, animals, the girls,
and him.
 And the film, shot in black & white, has an aura of wonder, like the films
around the turn of the century did, which makes it really nice.  The  film
floats, easily along, while you wonder what is happening.  Amidst all
the visual scenes and events, you end up thinking things like this: 1. If
this were a film around the beginning of the 20th century, then you would
think you were seeing something which was alien. 2. The 20th century was the
time when psychology took hold. ( A sociology professor delivers a lecture
to women on sexuality and psychology of. ) 3. Do we like seeing 'floating'
fantasies, instead of politics, or serious and meaningful faire .?  One of
the sisters almost drops a bomb on a political  figure, but she freezes at
the last moment and keeps running off with the  bomb in her hand.  The fuse
ends.  The bomb never explodes. 4. And finally, if we are going to see
something, give them something which  they can never explain.  Which was the
main theme which led Salvador Dali, Luis Bunuel and Andre Bretton to create
the surrealistic movement of art, starting with a manifesto, and a film,
which had sequences which may or may not have matched to anything.  It
defied convention, and your ability to decipher any meaningful
understanding, except that it lived, on its own.
 The fun part of seeing this film is that you can not tell if it is being
funny, weird, off the wall, or just plain serious.  And it carries you all
the way to the end, because it never goes back to explain anything, although
it repeats three visual sequences that have each person 'listening' to the
stars talk to them, much like people may have thought the telegraph would
have done.  In fact, this is the only real link it has, the only  thread
which makes any sense, and it also is the catchy theme, which makes  this
work, although it is a bit odd.  We would have to be transplanted to that
time to 'feel' what the wonder was all about.
 Nice film. A bit too artsy for those that like entertainment and a good
escape or romance.  This film is for the free thinkers of the world, and the
real appreciators of the fine dialect of film, ... by a Hungarian artist
with a surreal boot on his hand.
