Title
Review for This Is My Father (1998/I)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THIS IS MY FATHER" (Sony Pictures Classics)
This Irish romantic drama is a uniquely personal collaboration
between first-time writer-director Paul Quinn and his brothers Aidan
Quinn ("Michael Collins," "Practical Magic") and Declan Quinn
(cinematographer on "Leaving Las Vegas," "One True Thing"). It's the
bittersweet story of a Chicago schoolteacher (James Caan) who travels
to Ireland to discover his roots and learns the sad, true "Romeo and
Juliet"-type tale of his mother and the father he never met. The
screenplay stemmed from a story the Quinns' Irish-born mother used to
tell about ill-fated lovers in her village. The couple's secret is
something the tight-lipped locals still refuse to discuss - 50 years
later. Told in flashback, Aidan Quinn plays Kieran, a shy tenant
farmer, who meets Fiona (Moya Farrelly), a lovely, free-spirited 17
year-old, and they fall in love. But her alcoholic mother, who owns
the farm on which Kieran works, disapproves because he's poor and a
bastard child.  Eventually, the community, mobilized by a tyrannical
priest (Stephen Rea), manages to separate them. The acting is
admirable with a stalwart supporting cast that includes John Cusack,
Colm Meaney, Brendan Gleeson, and Donal Donnelly.  The weakness of the
film is the contrived structure. Paul Quinn's tragic story-line is so
full of hackneyed interruptions that it loses its power - which is too
bad since the poetic imagery evokes a society smothering under the
weight of doomy superstition and inevitable tradition. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "This is My Father" is a gentle, moving 6. And
the family collaboration will continue as the Quinn brothers'
Ireland-based sister Marian is developing a script about four Dublin
girls.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   With the rise of ethnic cheerleading over the past decade or so, it
has become fashionable to know "who you are," whether that means
finding out more about your racial, religious, ethnic or national
group or, in the case of people who are adopted to find out the
identities of their real parents.  Somehow, the theory goes, you
cannot be a complete person if you are not centered in all of these
ways: you will be plagued throughout your life, rudderless and adrift,
unless you can settle up on your singularity.  I don't buy this, but I
don't bury my head in the sand.  This is the current reality and is
probably the basis for Paul Quinn's intriguing film, "This is My
Father."  The picture moves forward at a snail's pace, perhaps because
plot takes a distant second to character, though despite its lingering
pace, the film never becomes truly languid.  Featuring some major
stars and introducing a fetching new personality, Moya Farrelly, "This
is My Father" tells the story of a man who is a burnt-out high-school
teacher, not married, who seems to spend considerable time with his
sister, his nephew, and his stroke- ridden mother in a Chicago suburb.
Paul Quinn, its writer and director, takes us from a present-day
American scene to the Emerald Isle as Kieran Johnson (James Caan),
having accidentally discovered a sixty-year-old letter written by a
father he never knew to his mother, suddenly determines to go to his
ancestral home in Ireland to find out more about his heritage.
   What Kieran finds when travels to his dad's old home village with
his rebellious, adolescent nephew Jack (Jacob Tierney), is more than
he bargained for.  A village being a village, Kieran has little
trouble finding an elderly woman in the bed-and-breakfast place he
settles into, Mrs. Kearney (Moira Deady), who knows all about Kieran's
dad.  As young Jack forms a friendship with two local girls his own
age, a rapport which will revitalize his own life, Kieran listens over
several days to Mrs. Kearney's tale while Seamus (Colm Meaney), the
owner of the B&B and Mrs. Kearney's son, collects a storyteller's fee
of twenty Irish pounds.
   Director Quinn takes us back to the late thirties, a time that
Mrs. Kearney believes was better because then you rarely heard about
murders.  But in describing the characters of the town, people who
were anything but the almost unanimously cordial folks in Kirk Jones's
picture "Waking Ned Devine," we wonder whether the village Ireland of
1939 could be described as a pleasant place to take root.  Its
characters include a frustrated Widow Flynn (Gina Moxley); a happy-go-
lucky girl liberated in a traditional society, Fiona (Moya Farrelly);
an ornery malcontent, Mrs. Madigan (Sheila Flitton) who is to put a
curse on Widow Flynn; and an assortment of people who are terrorized
by the hellfire sermons of the two priests, Father Mooney (Eamonn
Morrisey) and Father Quinn (Stephen Rea).  While the town has at least
two fine folks who take in a poor orphan lad and put him to work on
their farm, the hamlet houses anything but those dear hearts and
gentle people often portrayed by the drawings of Norman Rockwell.  The
core of the story is the relationship of Kieran O'Day (Aidan Quinn),
who is Kieran Johnson's long lost father, and the former's underage
girl friend, Fiona Flynn (Moya Farrelly).  Because Kieran is a poor
orphan many years older than Fiona and from a different social class,
their relationship does not enjoy the town's or the Church's
approbation.  Much of the humor of the story lies in writer-director
Quinn's obligatory ribbing of the Catholic Church, with the
unforgiving Fathers Mooney and Quinn who rail against "fornication"
and warn sinners of the eternal fires that await them.
   "This is My Father" carries some of the baggage usually conveyed in
stories of rural Ireland.  By way of comparison, Jim Kelley, the
good-news lottery official of Kirk Jones' "Waking Ned Devine" could be
compared with the brash American pilot-photographer, Eddie Sharp (John
Cusack), who transports his vivacious personality to Fiona and Kieran,
while the grouchy and vindictive Widow Flynn and Mrs.  Madigan could
be equated with that movie's spoilsport, Lizzy Quinn.  The town
doctor, John Maney (Donal Donnelly) is motivated by other than money
when making housecalls on Widow Flynn, and the town's brawling lads
have similar lust on their minds when they cut in on Kieran's
dance-hall date, Fiona.
   "This is My Father" interweaves a comic light spirit with
melancholy and ultimate tragedy so seamlessly that we scarcely are
aware of when one genre ends and the other takes root.  We leave the
two-hour sketch with a better understanding of why so many people left
their home countries (in this case rural Ireland) for American
shores--to escape religious harassment, clannish envy, and a feudal-
style backwardness.  This is a small, gentle movie with sincere,
heartfelt acting that will reinforce the stereotypical belief that the
Irish are the world's eminent storytellers.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: An American schoolteacher (James Caan) travels to Ireland
to trace a father he never knew.  In uncovering the story he finds the
story of a good simple man and a tragic story of lovers kept apart by
prejudice and intolerance.  Aiden Quinn stars, his brother Paul
directs, and brother Declan photographs.  Rating: 7 (0 to 10), low +2
(-4 to +4)
   - Production of the Quinn Brothers based on the story of their own
     father.
   - Mournful score by Donal Lunny.
   - Kieran Johnson (James Caan) is an unpopular English teacher voted
     among the most boring by his class.  His life at home is equally
     bad with a rebellious son and a bed-ridden mother.  He decides to
     take time to go to Ireland and find out about his father Kieron
     O'Day (Aidan Quinn).  The story he is told puts his own life and
     his problems into perspective.
   - Kieron O'Day is a simple farmer with a hard life.  He romances
     Johnson's mother, played at this age by Moya Farrelly.  This
     arouses the ire of both the local priest (Stephen Rea) and of the
     mother of the woman he loves.
   - Priest is an intolerant man who curses O'Day from the pulpit,
     delivers fire and brimstone sermons, and chases a man from the
     confessional yelling after him "Get out and don't come back to the
     church until you stop doing that."
   - One happy night when out with is love on a beach,  Airplane lands
     with Life Magazine photographer (John Cusack) wanting to rest the
     night and looking for someone to play American football.
   - Nice representation of Irish village life.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THIS IS MY FATHER(US/Ireland) **1/4   Written & directed by Paul 
Quinn. Photography, Declan Quinn. Editing, Glen Berman. Production 
design, Frank Conway. Music, Donal Lunny. Cast: James Caan (Kieran 
Johnson), Aidan Quinn, (Kieran O'Day), Moya Farrelly (Fiona Flynn), 
Colm Meany (Seamus Kearney), Moira Deady (Seamus's mother), Gina 
Moxley (Fiona's mother), Stephen Rea (Father Mooney), John Cusack 
(the flying reporter), Brendan Gleeson (Officer Jim), et al. A Sony 
Classics release. 120 min. R (for a li'l bit of sex)
A family picture, though not in the usual sense, since it is about 
the darker side of families. It is the fruit of three cooperating 
brothers from Chicago: first-time writer-director Paul; actor Aidan ; 
cinematographer Declan. They were also the executive co-producers. 
And if you look at the credits with a lynx-eye you may note that 
their sister Marian has a tiny role. No sibling rivalry here.
I read that Paul "briefly attended the University of  Illinois , 
where he studied film and writing," but soon quit to travel around 
Europe. He lived in Ireland for six months. Back in Chicago, he 
formed (with Jeremy Piven and John Cusack) a theater company.
Declan went to Chicago's Columbia College, lived and worked for years 
in Ireland. Returning to the USA he photographed several films: the 
much neglected The Ballad of Little Jo, Leaving Las Vegas, Kama 
Sutra, Louis Malle's last movie, Vanya on 42nd Street, and others.
This Is My Father is a curious mix of professional production, a 
heartfelt subject with good intentions, gauche development and 
continuity, and rather muddled relationships. It does have a cast of 
performers who are on my list of very good as well as most likable 
thespians.
James Caan, whose career has been sadly spotty since about the 1980s, 
opens the movie as Kieran Johnson --a present-day high school History 
teacher in Aurora, Illinois-- in a classroom  sequence which is 
economical and right on target. He is a disabused professional among 
too many who-gives-a-damn students whose future, he tells them 
without mincing words, is unpromising.
His home life is not uplifting either.  His very old, widowed mother, 
Fiona, is totally incapacitated by a stroke. Living with them is 
Betty, his divorced sister Betty, and her  rebellious teenage boy 
Jack who's been expelled from school. Kieran himself, the stepson of 
Fiona's late husband, was told that his birth father was a French 
sailor.
The discovery of a fading photo of Fiona and a stranger, whose 
love-message as well as a book of poems were signed "Kieran," incite 
the schoolteacher to find out about his origins.  Since it is 
summer-vacation time, he takes off for Ireland, with his nephew Jack.
The search leads to a small Irish village. Kieran learns nothing from 
the close-mouthed locals.  But then, at their bed-and-breakfast, run 
by Seamus and his aged mother (tinkers who have settled down), the 
old lady, first by having her "palm crossed with gold," then gratis, 
tells the Irish-American the story of star-crossed lovers Fiona and 
farmer  Kieran O'Day (Aidan Quinn).
That sad, beautiful tale takes place in 1939. Fiona is 17, lovely, 
independent, spirited. Kieran is several years older. The girl has 
been sent home by the nuns of her school. Home means  Mother, whom 
all call "the widow Flynn" and who is the richest person in the 
village, owns it sole automobile, has a terrible character, is 
authoritarian, and a lush to boot.
Kieran lives with, and works for his foster parents ,tenant farmers 
for the widow. His lowly origins make him what we'd called today 
"disrespected" by the narrow-minded majority of villagers.
The Fiona-Kieran relationship is revealed to us and to the Chicago 
Kieran in successive episodes, with the time frames alternating 
between 1939 and the present. I will not reveal the plot's evolution 
here. No doubt it holds one's attention. Yet that attention is 
needlessly distracted by the film's structure, certain details and 
the lack of others, so that the story proper becomes slow.
For one thing, relationships can be muddled. Certain characters' 
nature or backgrounds (e.g. the widow Flynn's) have to be inferred. 
What makes her so nasty? There are gratuitous sections or portrayals. 
There's an unexplained store-keeper who covets the widow. Landlord 
Colm Meany starts out with small but  unmistakable gay mannerisms, 
but soon these get dropped.  In a silly episode, Yank photo-reporter 
John Cusack who's just learned how to fly, drops in out of the sky, 
close to the couple that's stranded at , the beach by a malfunction 
of the widow's car. A hyperkinetic fellow, the journalist  wants to 
play American football right away, and does.  He also fixes the car. 
Later he and his tiny plane are gone. If this was meant to be 
semi-comic relief, or to underline American vigor, or else a kind of 
childishness, it was a misguided, jarring interlude.
The village priest, a major figure, is played by Stephen Rae as 
meddling, autocratic, fanatically prejudiced, fire and 
brimstone-preaching, and clearly lecherous. Is this going to extremes 
necessary? The same question applies to the presence of young Jack 
who is quite nice and makes friends with two giggly schoolgirls. But 
the  youth scenes, though pleasant are extraneous to the plot.
Harder to swallow --and found in many a movie--is unfounded 
omniscience. The old woman who relates the past (1939)  knows too 
many details and specifics which she could not possibly have 
witnessed. She's like the eye of God --which counters the good 
photography that has nary a close-up (at most medium close-ups) and 
uses medium and long shots which cleverly distance us.
All the performers are fine, in spite of the sketchiness of most 
roles. Good as well as strong is the depiction of the village as a 
suffocating place. As someone says "in small villages a small 
difference makes a big suspicion."
There have been thousands of Irish or Irish-American roles in cinema. 
There have been   quite a few Irish-themed movies, whether made in 
Hollywood, the U.K., and now in Ireland too. But how many of them do 
American audiences know or remember?
Several of those films were political dramas, such as the grim 
classics The Informer (1935) and Odd Man Out (1947). Most of the 
modern ones deal with Northern Ireland: Cal (84), Hidden Agenda (90), 
In the Name of the Father (93). There have been socially conscious 
items, some sad, others upbeat, others mixed: Ryan's Daughter (70), 
The Field (90),  The Commitments (91), The Playboys (92) (with Aidan 
Quinn), Raining Stones (93), The General (98, starring Brendan 
Gleeson as the real-life gangster) ). There have been few outright 
romances, like Circle of Friends (95); or  comedies, like the warm, 
realistically colorful The Snapper (93, starring Colm Meany); and 
probably just one major poetic legend, The Secret of  Roan Inish 
(95). Yet the one title that would be most familiar to most viewers 
would be John Ford's picturesque The Quiet Man (52, starring John 
Wayne).
This is My Father joins the group of grim Irish-centered movies, and, 
whatever its weaknesses, deserves praise for its honest 
,non-commercial avoidance of picturesque or cliched or true or false 
Irishisms. It may not be a film after the Irish Travel Bureau's 
heart, but then this is its principal orginality.
The Irish Republic and Ulster cannot compete with the multitude of 
genre movies, such as Westerns, yet the  overwhelming majority of the 
above titles are gems.  In any case, comparisons would be pointless. 
It's like the elephant mocking the mouse "Look at the size of me, and 
look at the size of you.""Yeah" retorts the mouse "...but I've been 
sick!"
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Steve Rhodes
The Quinn brothers' THIS IS MY FATHER is such an obvious labor of love
that it is a shame that it doesn't have more depth.  Primarily set in a
1939 Ireland that seems a half-century earlier still, the film waxes
nostalgic for a time that probably never was except in books and motion
pictures.
Starring Aidan Quinn as Kieran O'Dea, written with studied simplicity
and directed with slow deliberateness by brother Paul and filmed in warm
tones by brother Declan, the movie lists all three as executive
producers.  As a one-hour episode on television's Masterpiece Theater,
the story's limitations would not have been so obvious.  But at a full
two hours, the thinnest of the plot and the reliance on stereotypes can
get a bit tiresome.  All of this notwithstanding, the cast's heartfelt
performances raise the picture above the hackneyed storyline.
The story opens in the present in Illinois.  An unhappy high school
teacher, Kieran Johnson (James Caan), is being ridiculed by his class.
He puts his class in its place by dryly rattling off what he claims will
be the most important message they will hear.  He reads a set of
statistics for lower middle-class youth like themselves.  He says that
only 2 of them will be financially stable; most of the rest will spend
their lives flipping burgers and sweeping floors.  And 4 of them will go
to prison, one of them for the rest of his life.  Afterwards, he looks
more depressed than his students.
While visiting his mother, who has had a stroke and can no longer speak,
he comes across a picture of her from her youth in Ireland.  With her in
the picture is a man who he assumes may be the father he never met.  He
decides to go to Ireland to find the truth about the picture and see if
he can locate his father.
Once he arrives in Ireland, he meets a fortune-telling gypsy who knew
his mother and tells the story of his mother and father and of the old
curse on his family.
Most of the rest of the story is spent in flashback in 1939 when Kieran
Johnson was conceived by his father, Kieran O'Dea (Aidan Quinn), and his
mother, Fiona Flynn (Moya Farrelly).  He's in his early twenties
probably, but she's only 17.
Flynn is a spunky lass with a bewitching smile who charms the pants off
of O'Dea.  A simple farm worker, he's referred to as a "poorhouse
bastard," since the tenant farmers who work the Flynn lands got O'Dea
from an orphanage to be their live-in laborer.
The movie is full of incidents and plot contrivances that make little
sense.  The worst of these is John Cusack's cameo as Life magazine
photographer Eddie Sharp.  As Flynn and O'Dea walk along a remote beach,
Sharp lands the plane that he is piloting.  Sharp explains that he has a
desperate need to pass around a football in order to relax.  After he
takes the obligatory photo to tie the past with the present, he's gone
again.
In another such disingenuous moment, Stephen Rea shows up as a
fire-and-brimstone priest who, in the confines of the confessional,
demands to hear all of the lurid details of O'Dea's sexual sins.  Not
content to learn of what O'Dea did, the priest, wanting more
titillation, insists on knowing everything the sinner would like to do
as well.
Our full audience had one woman who laughed regularly and another who
snored loudly, while the rest sat there in almost total silence.
Slightly humorous and a little poignant, this small movie tells a simple
story without many flourishes.  Still, the grace and earnestness of the
performances give the relentlessly corny film a soul that makes it more
than the sum of its cliched characters.
THIS IS MY FATHER runs 2:00.  It is rated R for a little profanity and a
brief sex scene and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     THIS IS MY FATHER is a family affair, and not just because its
subject matter involves family ties.  The writer/director is Paul Quinn,
brother of star Aidan Quinn, both of whom are also brothers to
cinematographer Declan Quinn, with all three acting as executive
producers.  It must have seemed a warm and wonderful thing for the
brothers Quinn to collaborate on a tale of their homeland, a paean to the
importance of finding one's roots combined with the rich atmosphere of
1930s Ireland.  So warm and wonderful was the experience, evidently, that
no one bothered to pay much attention to telling an interesting, coherent
story.  
     THIS IS MY FATHER is a sprawling mess of a film that tries to tell
several stories, each one more irritating than the last.  The narrative
opens in the present day, where Chicago high school teacher Kieran Johnson
(James Caan) is experiencing some sort of existential crisis.  When he
finds a photo and note from a man named Kieran among his invalid mother's
possessions, he connects that malaise to never knowing his father.  With
his vaguely sullen nephew Jack (Jacob Tierney) in tow, Kieran travels to
his mother's Irish hometown, where an elderly resident (Moira Deady) spins
him a tale circa 1939.  In that tale, Kieran's mother Fiona Flynn (Moya
Farrelly) is a high-spirited 17-year-old who catches the eye of shy farmer
Kieran O'Day (Aidan Quinn).  The pairing causes trouble in the town, of
course, as religion and family objections come between Fiona and Kieran
the elder.
     The trouble begins in THIS IS MY FATHER with a present-day prologue
that does a miserable job of setting up the premise.  In fact, the entire
framing story feels like little more than a series of ridiculous
contrivances.  Caan's monotonously shellshocked performance offers little
indication as to what his problem is, how long it's been going on, or how
it's connected to his equally shellshocked sister and ill mother.  The
addition of fatherless young Jack to the travelling party seems intended
to provide a contemporary parallel as his own youthful romance blossoms.
Unfortunately, that romance is so ridiculously apocryphal that it's not
clear until the last ten minutes which of two girls is supposed to be his
own lovely lass.  Every moment set in the present is a wearying bore,
leading this viewer to a stone-faced demand that the flashback sequences
better be worth it.
     They're not.  They're an improvement, to be certain, but there's so
much extraneous business going on that the central romance gets lost.
Strewn throughout the tale are a couple of curses, the omnipresent
institutional frown of the Catholic Church (including a nicely creepy
role for Stephen Rea as a fire-and-brimstone priest), a bit of class
warfare, and a cameo appearance by John Cusack as an American photographer
who lands his plane to play American football with Kieran and Fiona on a
beach, take the picture which will end up in Kieran the younger's hands,
and go away.  The romance itself ultimately makes no sense from Fiona's
side, with nary an attempt to explain why the spunky girl would be charmed
by the socially inept Kieran.  Aidan Quinn fares better as a man-child
unsure how to handle a romantic relationship, but the story places too
much tragic weight on his shoulders.  THIS IS MY FATHER wanders all over
the Emerald Isle in search of a compelling theme or relationship, and
never finds one.
     I suppose the Quinns may have been pointing out the generational
consequences of fatherlessness through Kieran O'Day (orphaned), Fiona
(child of a widow), Kieran Johnson and Jack (both with absentee fathers).
They may have been most interested in re-creating the sights and sounds of
1939 Ireland.  They may have wanted to make their own TITANIC-lite
romantic weeper, complete with Celtic music.  The problem is that you
really can't tell what they wanted to do with any degree of certainty.
THIS IS MY FATHER never pulls its two storylines together in any
believable way, nor manages to make either one gripping on its own terms.
The filming may have served as a pleasant, roots-exploring Quinn family
vacation, but we the viewers are left with the tedium of watching their
home movies.
