Title
Review for Death Becomes Her (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Frank Maloney
     DEATH BECOMES HER is a movie directed by Robert Zemeckis, from a
script by Martin Donovan and David Koepp.  It stars Meryl Streep, Goldie
Hawn, Bruce Willis, and Isabella Rosellini.  Rated PG-13 for violence
and nudity.
     DEATH BECOMES HER is an occult black comedy, neither qualifier
being an easy one to bring off successfully.  LOVE AT FIRST BITE and
YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN did this neatly, but a hundred other efforts have
failed to find that perfect mixture of camp, horror, and conscientious
scenery-chewing.  DEATH almost succeeds in its aspirations, never quite
going over the top, but it works as entertainment; it is bold,
inventive, chance-taking, and a lot of fun.
     Of course, no small amount of the fun arises from the amazing,
seamless special effects.  This is Hollywood's most expensive film in
this genre and the money was well spent.  The folks at Lucasfilms'
Industrial Light and Magic Company employed a rich vocabulary of
computer-generated, live-action effects of the sort we would normally
expect to be possible only in animated cartoons.
     Robert Zemeckis (WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT, ROMANCING THE STONE)
found the right cartoon visual style and comedy tone to highlight both
his f/x and his stars, and to carry us over the rough spots in the
script by Martin Donovan and David Koepp.  The script is the weakest
element of the movie; it has an important satiric point to make about
aging in a society that prizes youth and is rapidly aging itself.
Unfortunately, the script never finds a way to give this point the
necessary power and force.  The set up is a long time developing and
exposes some holes in the plot.  Some of the scenes are strictly of the
slow-boat-to-China variety, some are open to charges of prejudice
against women, against the overweight, and so forth.  All of which
distracts from the point of the film: the price to be paid for immortal
youth.
     The cast, like the special effects and the direction, help
overcome, or at least obscure, the script problems.  Meryl Streep is
nothing short of brilliant as the aging, frightened star, the insecure
grande dame.  The first time we see her is in the funniest parody of the
Broadway musical since Robert Preston gasped and panted his way in drag
through the finale of VICTOR/VICTORIA, and possibly since the
"Springtime for Hitler" sequence in THE PRODUCERS.  She trots out a rich
store of expressions, gestures, and slapstick schtick.  In our
household, her line "*Now* a warning!" has become a by-word, a running
joke, but we still can't do it as well as La Streep.  Goldie Hawn
handles her triple-part effectively.  But it is Bruce Willis who is the
greatest surprise and therefore the greatest pleasure, in its way; he is
the broken wimp caught between two self-obsessed, manipulating viragos;
he is our, the audience's, spokesman and as such becomes the moral
center and the hero, the point of light in the blackness.
     I found DEATH BECOMES HER an pleasant way to spend a couple of
hours and can recommend it to you for its virtues.  For its failings, I
recommend you pay matinee prices.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Death Becomes Her (1992) * out of ***** - C:Goldie Hawn, Bruce Willis,
Meryl Streep, Isabella Rossellini, Jonathan Silverman, Sydney Pollack.
What the hell? The same creative team which brought us the Back To The
Future trilogy and Forrest Gump must have really been bored one day and
half-assedly thought of the idea for this garbage. After the idea was
pitched to the studio, a conversation like this must have taken place:
"Hey guys! The studio gave us the $50 million budget we asked for!"
"A script? Screw the script! Let's call the special effects team! Think of
what we can get for $50 million!"
"What about the public? I think the people like a little script with their
special effects."
"Screw the public! We've got $50 million! Don't let morals cloud your mind,
we're filmmakers!"
And thus was born Death Becomes Her, the most pathetic special effects
comedy since Howard The Duck. There's not even an attempt at comedy in this
film except for one scene involving Sydney Pollack who plays a doctor. The
effects and the direction are excellent but are by no means enough to make a
movie interesting for an hour and a half. A total waste of talent.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
2fatguys@tdis.icpsr.umich.edu (Too Fat Guys)
Roger:  Say Roger, isn't Meryl Streep a Serious Actor?
Roger:  I was wondering, why does she keep squandering her talent on
        these pitiful comedies?
Roger:  She tried it once and she liked it?

Author
Eric Walker
     I remember reading a short story about the Fountain of Youth back
in high school; the story's title was something like "The Strange
Experiment Of Professor Heidigger."  It was the story of a group of old
men (and one woman) who had wasted their lives in frivolous pursuits,
and they come to the Professor seeking a second chance.  He gives them
the Fountain of Youth, and they become young and beautiful once again--
but have they learned their lesson?  Heck, no; within a few minutes
they're at each other's throats, engaging in the petty squabbles amd
making the same mistakes they made the first time around.
     This is the moral of DEATH BECOMES HER, a supernatural black
comedy from today's number-one slapstick Hollywood director, Robert
Zemeckis.  It doesn't matter how old or how beautiful you are--it's
what you are on the inside that counts.  We've heard this message
before, of course.  Supposedly, it's taught to us from day one, though
in truth the idea of "beauty" is forced upon us by our very society,
which believes that in order to be beautiful you have to be young and
thin.  Grow old and fat, and forget it--you're history.
     The movie revolves around Meryl Streep, playing the character of
Madeleine Ashton.  She's an aging stage star, but she refuses to admit
it: she is absolutely, completely obsessed with being young and
beautiful.  She applies enough makeup to herself to keep the whole
cosmetics industry rolling in dough; she makes weekly trips to her
plastic surgeon; and she still sees young men in order to promote the
illusion that she's still young and beautiful.  Of course, all of her
efforts to stop aging are futile.
     Goldie Hawn, meanwhile, is Helen Sharp, who has an obsession of her
own.  All her life, Madeleine Ashton has been stealing her boyfriends
from her, and the last straw happens in 1978, when Maddy seduces and
marries Ernest Menville, her fiance (played by Bruce Willis).  This last
one leaves Helen's life in shambles, to the point where she will do
anything for revenge.
     Cut to 1992.  Madeleine is growing old fast, and Ernest is reduced
to a drunken mortician who interns Hollywood corpses.  Maddy's life is
at a dead end--until she attends a party thrown by Helen, and sees that
her rival has mysteriously remained young and beautiful.  She has her
revenge, it seems--and Maddy is willing to sell her soul to be young
again.
     Here's where DEATH BECOMES HER takes off.  Maddy meets an
incarnation of the Devil himself, played with relish (and without much
to wear) by Isabella Rossellini.  She gives Maddy a potion that will let
her live forever--*if* she takes good care of her body.
     And so the stage is set.  The two ladies begin fighting again like
two cats on a fence, with poor Ernest caught in the middle.  I don't
want to spoil the comic moments (of which there are many), so let it
suffice to say that this battle royale is a special effects
extravaganza, where some scenes will make your eyes gape and you'll
wonder "How'd he *do* that?"
     Robert Zemeckis truly has a gift for comedy.  Of the movies he's
directed so far, his masterpiece was 1988's WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT."
It's easy to see why: Zemeckis has the heart of a cartoon director.  He
can do slapstick in the style of the great comedians of old (and in the
style of the Warner Bros. cartoons, too), and his sight gags and visual
comedy style is superb.  The special effects and the slapstick are where
the laughs come from in DEATH BECOMES HER: this is a live-action
cartoon.
     And here lies the movie's greatest fault: like a cartoon, there's
nothing underneath the gags and the laughs.  There's nothing *wrong*
with the story, and the plot holds together quite well.  Meryl Streep's
performance is great, as she threatens to go over the top into comic
farce but in fact remains firmly in control; Goldie Hawn easily holds
her own and balances the movie nicely.  Bruce Willis' role is good, if
unexceptional.  But the lessons and the "theme" of the movie (vanity
will be your undoing) are laid out in the first five minutes of the
film, and after that you can effectively shut off your brain and just
laugh at the sight gags.  This is a very funny movie--it's just not very
"deep."
     DEATH BECOMES HER is good summer fare--despite its morbid subject,
it's actually a very light-hearted comedy.  It's better than most of the
other big-budget movies to come out in 1992; there are no real flaws to
spoil the audience's entertainment.  Go see it; you'll get lots of
laughs.
     Just don't bother *thinking* about the movie afterwards.
