Title
Review for Immortal Beloved (1994)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Eric Grossman
     January may be the wet season for weather but it is the dry season
when it comes to movies.  Having fired the last of their big guns for
Oscar contention and still completing their new blockbusters for spring
and summer, January typically consists of movie dregs.  Fortunately,
there are leftover goodies from December.  Such is the case with
IMMORTAL BELOVED, an engaging new film about the life and loves of
Ludwig Van Beethoven.
     The movie begins just after Beethoven's death.  His trusted
friend, Anton Schindler (Jeroen Krabbe), discovers a cryptic letter
from the late composer stating that  all of his possessions and money
are to be left to his "Immortal Beloved."  Since the letter does not
state specifically who the beneficiary is, Schindler sets out to find
Beethoven's mystery woman.   In the course of his search, he discovers
several  of Beethoven's love interests and as they talk, the film fades
into flashbacks where Gary Oldman plays the famous figure at various
stages of his life.
     Part love story, part mystery, writer/director Bernard Rose
provides a great deal of atmosphere and passion in this movie.  Using
powerful visuals and highly effective sound design, Rose takes us into
the mind of Beethoven.  We hear what he cannot and see what the music
creates in his mind.  There is one shot in particular that I think
everyone who sees this film will remember.  During the Ninth Symphony,
we see a boy running through the forest until he reaches a lake and
lies down.  When the music climaxes, we pull away from the boy until he
is lost in an oblivion of stars.  The image fits so well with the music
that if there was a best shot award for last year, this one would be
the winner.
     Beethoven was a great composer, but as a human being, he gives Ty
Cobb a run for his money.  After his brother died of consumption,
Beethoven stole away his nephew from the widow.  He had a terrible
temper and was self-centered, although much of this can attributed to
the frustration of losing his hearing, a sense so important to him that
its loss was enough to push him over the edge.  Oldman plays the man
without judgment and we are left with the right balance of fascination
and disgust for his character.  His performance is one of controlled
ferocity, with rising fits of love and anger that captivate but never
fall into the realm of over-acting.
     A strong supporting cast includes Isabella Rossellini as the
beautiful, Hungarian Countess, Anna Marie Erdody, a woman who was in
love with the man as much as his music.  Valeria Golino plays Julia
Guicciardi, a former Countess who is the opposite of Anna Marie.  Julia
is completely enthralled with Beethoven's music, so much so that she
overlooks his faults.  Jeroen Krabbe does a fine job in his role as
Schindler, the character who leads the audience on their journey
through the film.   Other cast members include Johanna Ter Steege and
Marco Hofschneider as Carl, Beethoven's nephew.
     Shot in Prague which doubles for Vienna, the film is filled with
stunning locations.  Cinematographer Peter Suschitzky deserves extra
recognition for the outstanding lighting and shot design.  Film editor
Dan Rae finds the right pace and effectively weaves the images to Nigel
Holland's sound design.  Jiri Hlupy's production design and Maurizio
Millenotti's costumes are of the highest order.  Of course, the real
star of the film is the music, all taken from Beethoven's compositions
by music director Sir George Solti of the London Symphony Orchestra.
     Now in wide release, IMMORTAL BELOVED is the answer to the
January movie blues.  Bernard Rose has combined great filmmaking with
great music to create a film that both educates and entertains.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Gary Oldman, Jeroen Krabbe, Johanna Ter Steege, 
          Isabella Rossellini, Valeria Golino, Marco Hofschneider 
Director: Bernard Rose 
Producer: Bruce Davey 
Screenplay: Bernard Rose 
Cinematography: Peter Suschitzky 
Music: Ludwig van Beethoven 
Released by Columbia Pictures 
     Those who prefer more than a token of historical fact in their
biopics may be less-than-enamoured with IMMORTAL BELOVED, an erratic
look at the life of Ludwig van Beethoven (played by Gary Oldman).
Writer-director Bernard Rose is obviously more concerned with telling
his version of the tale than in remaining anchored in reality.
Nevertheless, as the old saying goes, "Don't let the facts stand in the
way of a good story."
     The question is: Is IMMORTAL BELOVED solid drama?  Ignoring a
silly and melodramatic conclusion, the probable answer is "yes." While
never approaching the power of AMADEUS, IMMORTAL BELOVED isn't a bad
portrait of a temperamental genius and the three women who are the most
likely candidates to be his secret, lost love ("I can only live
completely with you or not at all..." Beethoven wrote).
     The title refers to the addressee of a letter unearthed when the
composer died in 1827.  No one then, or now, knows who the "Immortal
Beloved" is, but Bernard Rose decided it might be fun to take a guess
or two.  To that end, he has framed his film as a detective story with
Beethoven confidante Anton Schindler (played by Jeroen Krabbe) trekking
across Europe searching for clues.  Along the way, he meets three
women--Johanna Reiss (Johanna Ter Steege), Anna Marie Erdody (Isabella
Rossellini), and Giulietta Guicciardi (Valeria Golino)--all of whom
loved Ludwig, and one of whom is almost certainly the "Immortal
Beloved." Most of the movie takes place in flashbacks--and flashbacks
within flashbacks--as parcels of Beethoven's life are unwrapped for the
cameras.
     The movie is least satisfactory in the investigative sequences,
combining a rather lackluster performance by Krabbe with an implausible
scenario.  On the other hand, perhaps it's the absence of Gary Oldman's
flamboyant Beethoven that makes these sections of IMMORTAL BELOVED so
flat.  Often, especially when the story slows, it's the lead actor's
performance that keeps this film from devolving into a turgid mess.
     Aside from Oldman, the other really impressive element of IMMORTAL
BELOVED is, as might be expected, the soundtrack.  Taking the
composer's best-known pieces and stringing them together makes for a
heady experience, especially when director Rose marries the music with
sufficiently impressive visual images (the use of the Ninth Symphony's
"Ode to Joy" is a memorable moment of cinematic poetry).
     Ultimately, however, the film's biggest failing is its
characterization of Beethoven.  Not only is he shown to be a selfish,
crabby, arrogant womanizer (which is probably accurate), but we're
rarely given more than a surface look into his personality.  Because
we're forced to watch him from an emotional distance, it's difficult to
generate much sympathy.  By extension, the identity of Beethoven's
"Immortal Beloved" is less a great mystery than a minor curiosity.
     There are times when the script is unworthy of the subject matter,
and occasions when Oldman's co-stars (especially Marco Hofschneider,
who plays Beethoven's nephew Karl) seem ill-suited to their roles.
Nevertheless, negatives aside, the plot holds the viewer's interest,
even if it doesn't touch the heart.  IMMORTAL BELOVED is the sort of
flawed movie that still has enough assets to allow it to be enjoyed.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinelli@delpi.com) 

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This is being billed as "The untold love story of Ludwig Van
Beethoven."  What we are not being told is that the story is pure
fabrication, written and directed by Bernard Rose.
     Over the years I've seen a number of films about the life of
probably the greatest composer of all time, from Abel Gance's (1937)
(the same Gance who did the memorable NAPOLEON) to the 1985 BETHOVEN'S
NEPHEW but never has anyone taken the liberty, the licence to invent a
biography such as IMMORTAL BELOVED.
     No place does it say it is a documentary but to throw in
unsubstantiated nonsense as part of a biography is shameful.  No one
knows to whom Beethoven dedicated several of his pieces but director-
writer Rose let his imagination soar so that Beethoven's nephew (his
brother's son) turns out to be Ludwig's son.  Hah!  That's a new one on
me.
     That is not my only complaint.  There is lots of great music and
with Sony Digital Sound it is great.  But no one seemed to relate the
visual portion of the film to the music being played.  When Ludwig, who
had dedicated his third symphony (Eroica) to Napoleon and then
eradicated the honor when he discovered Napoleon was just another
military dictator on a land grab, the music playing in the background
is the 5th Symphony, not the 3rd, or my ears have also gone deaf.
     When the wonderful 9th is soaring, some of the visuals show kids
punching at each other on a dark street.  Was that Rose's
interpretation of Heine's lyrics?
     I cannot believe any of the above and will force myself to see it
again.  But the inane story and the poor choice of the visuals
accompanying the music are simply awful.  Maybe when I've had time to
see it again I'l review it to be sure everything I've written above is
true.
     Gary Oldman is subdued as Ludwig.  Others in the cast include
Jeroen Krabbe who tries to find out to whom Beethoven left a dedication
"To My Immortal Beloved"; also Isabella Rosselini, Johanna Ter Steege
and Velerina Golino.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     IMMORTAL BELOVED is the reputedly true story of Ludwig van
Beethoven.   The degree to which they stretched the truth for dramatic
purposes, I have no idea since I know only of Beethoven 's music and
little of his life other than he was deaf at the end.  For some reason,
the script's plausibility never bothered me, and I took the movie
totally on face value.
     IMMORTAL BELOVED is told as a mystery, but actually the mystery is
more of a ruse to be able to tell the story of Beethoven's life in a
fresh way.  The mystery is that when he died he left all of his estate
to "his immortal beloved", but no one knew who that was.  His secretary
(Jeroen Krabbe) decides to dedicate his life to finding out who she
was.  The movie then tells Beethoven's life in flashback from his
severe beatings as a child to his death after composing his ninth
symphony.
     We find many amazing things about his life.  He was the Mick
Jagger of his time!  His music turned his female fans (Isabella
Rosselini, Johanna Ter Steege, Valeria Golino, and others) into
ecstasy, and he had many lovers, groupies if you will.  He was
considered something of a villain by their fathers.
     Moreover, Beethoven (Gary Oldman) we find was a crude, mean,
vicious, angry, and extremely obnoxious person.  The movie seems to say
that although he is terrible to everyone around him, this is because he
was a victim of child abuse and deafness.  There are periodic
statements that he is a good person inside and that people are just not
able to see that part of him.  Perhaps.
     I am not a big fan of Gary Oldman.  I found his SID AND NANCY
repulsive in the extreme.  He has done some acting I like, but his
specialty is playing despicable characters (he was Lee Harvey Oswald in
JFK).  The minor character parts of the movie played by Steege and
Golino I found I enjoyed the most.
     Now, unless you are an historian, comes the only real reason to
see movie--the music.  The show opens with a piano sonata and ends
with an amazing set of images while playing the Ode to Joy part of
Beethoven's last symphony.  What do you think of when you hear his
choral symphony?  I sure never thought of what they did, yet it worked
wonderfully well.  The music is all directed by Sir.  Georg Solti and
is beautiful.
     I have to mention the art decoration as another outstanding part.
You are transported to 18th century Vienna, and it feels so real you
think you are in a time machine.  Actually, the credits show it was
filmed in Prague, but hey, save a few bucks wherever you can I suppose.
     What is wrong with the show?  The script is pretty outlandish and
tries to cover way too much material.  The editing is too choppy.
Finally, I just did not buy Oldman as Beethoven.  I thought he was
miscast and he certainly overacted.
     It does seem like producers feel they can only make movies about
composers if they show them as bizarre and quirky individuals.  I think
back to the only movie about by far and away my favorite composer -
Gustav Mahler.  It was called simply MAHLER.  It was directed by Ken
Russell, and he has Mahler hallucinating about death and Nazis and has
him seeing his wife dancing on his grave in jackboots to the tune of
one of Mahler's greatest symphonies.  Sure.
     The movie runs too long at 2:03, but if they felt that they had to
cover as much ground as they attempted, then it should have been a 3 or
4 hour movie.  The movie is correctly rated R for the beating of one
small child and the death of another, for rape, murder, blood, and a
little nudity.  [Actually, the show featured some very effective
kissing.]  I think older teenagers could see it though since it does
present the items above in a non-exploitive fashion.  If you are a
lover of classical music, then you will probably enjoy yourself as I
did; otherwise, I would say skip it.  I give it a very mild thumbs up
overall, and I award it **.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: January 26, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Ludwig van Beethoven (1770-1827) is one of the greatest
composers who ever lived, and his work is able to inspire
people centuries after his death. At two fine examples of
this could be found in the world of cinema - A CLOCKWORK
ORANGE and DIE HARD are impossible to imagine without
Beethoven's music. The private life of the great composer
was perhaps less impressive than his work, but Beethoven's
biography was interesting enough to become subject of many
films. The latest of those films is IMMORTAL BELOVED, 1994
biopic written and directed by British filmmaker Bernard
Rose.
The film begins with Beethoven (played by Gary Oldman) dying
in 1827. His young secretary and friend Anton Schindler
(played by Jeroen Krabbe) digs through his papers and finds
the will in which he leaves everything to the mysterious
woman refered only as "Immortal Beloved". Schindler is
determined to establish the identity of said woman so he
starts travelling all across Europe in search of people who
might be the key to this mystery. Among them are Beethoven's
past lovers -Giulietta Guicciardi (played by Valeria Golino)
and Anna Marie Erdody (played by Isabella Rossellini) - and
through their stories Schindler starts to make a picture of
a great artist, haunted by childhood traumas, deafness and
long-time feuds with his own family, including sister-in-law
Johanna Reiss (played by Johanna ter Steege) with whom
Beethoven fought for the custody of her young son Karl
(played by Marco Hofschneider).
Rose decided to depict Beethoven's life using the story
device similar to Welles' CITIZEN KANE - present the
character through bits and pieces of other peoples' memory.
Unfortunately, the jigsaw puzzle was simply not worthy of
the effort - according to Rose, the most important thing
about great composer's life was not his music but his love
life. Because of that, IMMORTAL BELOVED looks less an
ambitious biopic and more like a cheap melodrama. To make
things even worse, Rose took too many liberties not only
with Beethoven's life, but also with the broader historical
events, including Beethoven's infatuation with Napoleon and
French invasion of Austria - the events that were as
thraumatic to 19th Century Viennese as WTC bombing was to
early 21st Century New Yorkers. Because of that, the ending
is completely non-cathartic and the whole story is rather
unengaging. What saves this film from complete failure are
two things. One is the scene that tries to show where and
how Beethoven found inspiration for his 9th Symphony. The
other is excellent performance by Gary Oldman, who again
utilises his raw energy to play a madman, although this time
madness manifests itself in art rather than homicidal acts.
Unfortunately, Oldman's performance is not matched by his
colleagues, and he can't save IMMORTAL BELOVED from ending
like a big disappointment.
Review written on September 18th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Gary Oldman, Jeroen Krabbe, Isabella Rossellini,
           Johanna Ter Steege, Valeria Golino.
Screenplay/Director:  Bernard Rose.
     Every time a film based on actual events or including real
historical figures appears, it seems that there are scholars stepping
over each other to decry its lack of faithfulness to historical fact.
Whether it's Shoeless Joe Jackson batting right handed in FIELD OF
DREAMS, or the condensed time line in the recent QUIZ SHOW, or any of a
hundred other possible examples, there seems to be a widespread refusal
to allow film dramas to be exactly that:  dramatizations of real
events, no more documentary than the re-creations on "America's Most
Wanted."  IMMORTAL BELOVED is based on a footnote in the life of Ludwig
von Beethoven, which will doubtless inspire Beethoven biographers to
inveigh against its questionable scholarship.  As a moviegoer, my only
question is, "Does it succeed as drama?"  The answer for IMMORTAL
BELOVED is that while it is sometimes quite enjoyable, it is better
experienced than analyzed.
     IMMORTAL BELOVED opens in 1827, shortly after the death of
Beethoven (Gary Oldman).  In the course of tying up Beethoven's
affairs, his personal secretary Anton Schindler (Jeroen Krabbe)
discovers a final will leaving Beethoven's entire estate to a woman
identified in a letter only as "my immortal beloved."  Schindler sets
out to discover the identity of the woman among the composer's many
lovers, including Countess Giulietta Guicciardi (Valeria Golino) and
Countess Anna Maria Erdody (Isabella Rossellini).  Through their
recollections, Beethoven's life and abrasive personality emerge in
flashback, including his struggle to hide his deafness from the world
and his bitter battle with his sister-in-law Johanna (Johanna Ter
Steege) for the custody of his nephew.
     Perhaps the best, if most precious, way to describe IMMORTAL
BELOVED is as LUDWIG VON-ADEUS.  Writer/director Rose has mounted a
sumptuous production, gloriously scored with the subject's compositions
and intended to bring some humanity to a figure most often seen as a
wildly coiffed bust on a marble pedestal.  And he manages to deliver
some marvelous sequences:  the sea of mourners greeting Beethoven's
casket; his deafness revealed to an audience as he attempts to conduct
an orchestra; the beautifully staged premiere of the 9th Symphony, as
the "Ode to Joy" accompanies flashbacks to Beethoven's difficult
childhood.  Rose manages to wed sound to image in that manner that is
uniquely cinematic, evocative without ever lapsing into
pretentiousness.
     As successful as IMMORTAL BELOVED is as a sensory experience, it
is not nearly as successful at establishing character.  For better or
worse, AMADEUS managed to make Mozart a character we could relate to;
IMMORTAL BELOVED does not quite manage that feat with Beethoven.  He is
always somewhat remote, even as we witness his struggle with disability
and his volatile interpersonal relationships.  Gary Oldman returns to
earth from his whacked-out recent performances, and is quite good as
the angry and isolated composer.  But the fragmented nature of the
narrative allows us only unsatisfying glimpses of the man Beethoven
might have been, and even Rose's tendency to film Oldman in medium and
long shots contributes to this distancing effect.
     Rose's choice of the "immortal beloved" letter might have seemed
perfect as a jumping off point for examining Beethoven as a character,
but too often it just doesn't work.  Part of the reason behind
Schindler's near-obsessive pursuit of the identify of the woman in the
letter is that he is fascinated by the object of such passion in this
often hateful man, but Rose lets both us and Schindler down by leaving
key relationships under-developed, particularly the relationship
between Beethoven and the woman Rose selects as the real "immortal
beloved."  When the film stops dead for Schindler to talk to one woman
or another about Beethoven, we expect some insight, and there just
isn't all that much.
     Though I have focused on many of IMMORTAL BELOVED's failings, I
should make it clear that on the whole, I enjoyed it, particularly in
the moment I was watching it.  Music coordinator Georg Solti fills the
theater with grand music, and those scenes which simply feature music
accompanying Rose's images are quite powerful.  But afterwards, I
realized what that made IMMORTAL BELOVED: a somewhat ineffectual plot
connecting some exceedingly well-made music videos.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Well, to start with, there probably were three major amors in
Beethoven's life.  And one really was Giulietta Guicciardi; so far the
filmmakers got that one right.  The other two women were Giulietta's
cousin Josephine von Brunsvik, to whom he proposed, and Therese
Malfatti, the daughter of one of Beethoven's doctors.  The film did
show Josephine as a minor diversion and ignored Malfatti altogether.
This is a rough biography of Ludwig Van Beethoven that takes some
liberties to add some suspense.
     There genuinely is a historical mystery, of course.  After
Beethoven's death three letters were found addressed to someone he
called "Immortal Beloved."  It is possible they were just a writing
exercise, though the fact they range from poetic prose to complaints
about his health and his discomfort makes that unlikely.  If they were
to a real person, nobody ever found out to whom the letters were
addressed.  The film suggests that Beethoven (here played by Gary
Oldman), kept this love a secret, then illogically left a bequest to
his "Immortal Beloved" without ever naming the intended recipient.
Anton Schindler, a friend (played by Jeroen Krabbe) sets out, to solve
the mystery. (The real Anton Schindler apparently was a junior
acquaintance of the composer.  Beethoven was born in 1770 and Schindler
was the author of BIOGRAPHIE VON LUDWIG VAN BEETHOVEN--English title:
BEETHOVEN AS I KNEW HIM--in 1860, some thirty-three years after
Beethoven died.  But Schindler might well have looked for the
mysterious love, so to set up this mystery/biography is really not too
much of a conceit.  Though it is a bit absurd to assume that the
composer would on one hand be so secretive about this love and on the
other hand virtually to force this investigation by leaving her his
fortune.  And, of course, as with AMADEUS, any conclusions the film
draws are purely speculation and should be considered as such.
     The film opens with Oldman living up to his name and near death.
(He looked much the same early in BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA, but there he
was near death just on the other side.)  Schindler finds the will and
sets out with a list of leads to try to discover who this Immortal
Beloved is.  The structure is like that of CITIZEN KANE and as with
CITIZEN KANE the story of the life is revealed as a mosaic of
flashbacks and here even flashbacks-within-flashbacks, mostly covering
the period from the onset of his deafness to his death.  First
Schindler visits the now-aging Countess Giulietta Guicciardi (Valeria
Golino), whom Beethoven forcefully makes his pupil.  She falls in love
with him and wants to marry him, but she and her father discover a
secret about Beethoven that he cannot bear them to know.  The trail
then leads to Anna Marie Erdody (Isabella Rossellini), a Hungarian
noble who continues the story, and so forth.  Much of the film
concentrates on either on his women, his deafness, or his cruel battle
for custody and control of his nephew.
     Gary Oldman is one of the best and most versatile actors in film
today.  He gives us a very watchable impression of a great genius in
constant struggle with himself and with his own personal demons.
Krabbe's role is less demanding, calling for him to be little more than
a good listener in period clothing.  Galino and Rossellini are winning
but are upstaged by the intensity of Oldman's performance.  In fact the
only other strong performance is by Johanna Ter Steege as the sister-
in-law who fights Beethoven for custody of her own son.  Direction is
by Bernard Rose, director of the off-beat fantasy PAPERHOUSE and of the
horror film CANDYMAN.
     "It is the power of music to carry one into the mental state of
the composer," according to Beethoven.  And Rose seemingly uses this as
the inspiration to score the film with whatever music Beethoven is
composing at each point in time.  Whether he was entirely accurate is
unclear, but he does seem to  proceed though the symphonies in
chronological order.  This means, of course, that the filmmakers get a
glorious, evocative orchestral score simply by making selections.  And
certainly one cannot deny the power of scenes like Napoleon's shelling
Vienna to the strains of the first movement of the Fifth Symphony in
pure digital sound.
     The fragmentation of the narration, using the patchwork narrative
form, and bogging down of the story into a custody battle tend to rob
IMMORTAL BELOVED of some of its power, but the music on a really good
sound system and the crafty proposed solution to the central mystery
make this one of the better musical biographies.  Rating high +1 on the
-4 to +4 scale.

Author
Pedro Sena
Few people liked this film, either for the music or for the story. How dare
a film maker make a genius look like such an idiot, and not act like the
great composer and bad person that he can be/was.
Like AMADEUS, and many of the other films that have been done about any
composer in the past, there are a few literary licenses in this story, but,
there is very little else that is implausible or not well done.  while
scholars may disagree as to Anton Schindler's
whereabouts and doings, the film decides that a nice little story, however
far fetched is may be, is better than two over weight professors discussing
the merits of the thirteenth bar in the Adagio of the Third Symphony.  And
like AMADEUS, we see the story in retrospect, through the story telling of
his own son.  And he is the real story.
Beethoven left his estate to the mother of his son, but he had a hard time
admitting, and let anyone else know that it was his own brother's wife, with
whom he had an affair prior to her leaving for his brother.  He never
recovered from that, specially when they knew the child was his.
And much of the music seems to be designed around the life story of the
growing of this child.  In the meantime, Anton is searching for Beethoven's
Immortal Beloved, the woman he wrote some poetry and much music about.  And
some of his paramours, and various patrons of the arts, do not really know
who she is.  All they know is that he always leaves for her, whoever she is.
If anything, Bernard Rose's story gives us a nice ending, to the story that
has gone unforgiving and forgotten for so very long.  What triggered this
man to write so much, and so well, given his terrible condition and curse of
deafness in the field of
listening.
Gary Oldman is excellent as Beethoven, as are all the women in the film.
And the music is beautifully directed around the events, or otherwise. It
comes in and goes out quietly, and teaches Hollywood one thing it can not
do.  Choreograph real soundtracks with meaningful stories.   We know that
these two go together, and it is many people's opinions as to how they
should.  The invisible part is how it all got written behind all the anger.
Hollywood only uses fill-ins.  It hasn't had a real composer since Bernard
Herrman, whose music could be considered better than any movie ever made.
The same is the case here.
The music isn't worshipped. It is just played and mixed and matched to the
various people. And the result is excellent.  Even if the story may not be
true.  Who cares.  It still is a very good film with excellent acting and
costumes.

Author
Lewis Butler
     The movie IMMORTAL BELOVED makes several fatal errors, chief of
which is playing fast and loose with historical accuracy.  How fast and
loose?  About the only things they got right were that Beethoven wrote
the 9th Symphony and that he died.
     It is frustrating to watch this movie if you know anything at all
about Beethoven, and the more you know, the worse it gets.
     Firstly, Beethoven was *not* a ladies man, in fact he was rather
unlucky with women in general, and was often rejected by them.  Because
of this, he tended to form attachments to women who were unreachable
(already married).  In short, he was not Amadeus Mozart, as the first
half of this film would paint him.  He has been linked romantically to
a few women, among them Guilietta Guiucciardi and Teresa von
Brunswick.  No one has ever seriously suggested a romantic link between
Beethoven and the person the movie portrays as the "Immortal Beloved."
As a matter of fact, a man named Maynard Soloman has effectively ended
the debate with his research linking Beethoven and the wife of a good
friend, Antonie Brentano.
     Secondly, Beethoven was quite old when he lost his hearing, in his
late 40's, and it wasn't until 1814, I believe, that he stopped
playing.  The implications in the movie are that Beethoven had stopped
performing by the time he wrote the Eroica (Symphony #3).  He did
remark on his hearing loss in the "Heiligenstadt Testament" written in
1802.  By 1818 Beethoven was unable to hear people in normal
conversation.
     Thirdly, Beethoven's deafness was in no way a secret.  He was
examined by many medical professionals of the day, and he used an
earhorn.
     Fourthly, although it is true that Ludwig and his nephew Karl had
a rather stormy relationship, it is not true in the way it was
depicted in the film.  Yes, Karl did attempt suicide, but he did not
leave his uncle until he had finished helping with the metronome
markings for the Ninth Symphony, and when he left it was with his
uncle's permission (albeit reluctant) to join the army.
     In short, the makers of this film wanted to recapture the essence
of AMADEUS, and in doing so they abandoned the truth.  Beethoven died
in 1827, and he was well-know, popular, and acknowledged as a great
artist.  There are over 100 "Conversation Books" surviving to the
present day, and thousands of pages of musical notes.  In short,
Beethoven's life is not a mystery, we know as much about him as about
Thomas Jefferson or Benjamin Franklin.
     Even with all the historical inaccuracies discarded, the movie
still fails.  Though the performances are good (especially Isabella
Rossellini) the movie fails to to capture the viewers interest.  I
found myself closing my eyes at times and just listening to the music,
knowing there was nothing interesting to see on the screen.  The basic
plot is not only laughable, but predictable.  That is, we know the
woman in black never saw the letter.)  And on top of that, the movie
switches time frames in a helter-skelter manner that leaves the viewer
struggling to reorient.  In short, a poorly scripted and edited
movie.
     In spite of all its flaws, there is some nice art direction and
cinematography work, and the music is wonderfully performed by the
London Symphony Orchestra.
