Title
Review for Voyages (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Julia Levin
Emmanuel Finkiel, the director of Voyages, was once an assistant
director to the late, great Krzystof Kieslowski.  Perhaps from
Kieslowski the French filmmaker learned to portray daily life with such
quiet intensity and deep profoundness.  Voyages reminds us that life is
an ongoing memory, a way of coping with the present by looking into the
past.
The film is composed of three separate stories about people searching
for their relatives, all of whom have had lives forever changed by the
horrors of the World War II.  The first story begins with a group of
French Holocaust survivors who make a pilgrimage to Auschwitz.  On the
way, they stop at an old Jewish cemetery, passing by monuments to the
victims of the Warsaw Ghetto in Poland.  Before reaching the site of the
Jewish death camp, the bus in which they travel breaks down.  In
distress, they argue and reminisce about their past; when they interact,
the lost world of Eastern European Jewry echoes in their intonations,
gestures, and language.
We witness the emotional quandary of one of the passengers, Rivka, but
just when the story picks up the speed, it flows into another one:  A
widow living in Paris receives a phone call from a man in Lithuania who
claims to be her father.  She agrees to meet him, and the painful
exploration of the past begins again.  Is this man, whom she assumed had
died in a concentration camp fifty years ago, really her father?  She
questions him, but the memories they share have been obscured by time
and distance.
In the third and most enigmatic episode an old, Russian émigré, Vera,
travels to Tel-Aviv looking for her distant relative.  To her dismay,
nobody in Israel speaks Yiddish and her cousin's memory is faulty.  (It
reportedly took Finkiel three years to find actress Esther Gorintin to
play Vera, a woman whose round face and beady eyes exude tireless
dignity and determination.)  By a sheer accident Vera, meets Rivka on a
Tel Aviv bus, whereupon the film reveals its delicate psychological
premise.
Unlike many other films that deal with the Holocaust, Voyages is a film
of incredible emotional subtlety.  While it may only be appreciated by a
patient and careful viewer, the film's pace is slow; its elaborate, long
takes thicken the weight of the past.  Set in a contemporary world, the
film lays out the heartbreak of the post-war generation with tenderness
and compassion -- and shows how that tragic legacy separates it from the
rest of the world.
Director: Emmanuel Finkiel
Producer: Yael Fogiel, Laetitia Gonzales
Writer: Emmanuel Finkiel
Starring: Shulamit Adar, Liliane Rovére, Esther Gorintin, Natan Cogan,
Moscu Alcalay, Vladimir Friedman, Maurice Chevit
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
