Title
Review for Queens Logic (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Wayne Citrin
     The summary I posted above, "DINER goes to Queens," is not
necessarily dismissive.  DINER was a great film, and we need more films
like DINER.  I used to call these films "coming-of-age films," thinking
of such examples as AMERICAN GRAFFITI, but as I wrote this review, it
occurred to me that most of the most interesting examples of this genre
involve post-adolescents, although the central event is one that finally
forces the group to grow up.  These films involve a group of long-time
friends who are either reunited, or one of them, who has been away for a
long time, finally returns.  The cause for their reunion is usually an
event like a wedding or a funeral, although it may sometimes simply be a
regular reunion.  The films are usually comedies.  Some of the best
films in this genre, in my opinion, are the aforementioned DINER, THE
RETURN OF THE SECAUCUS SEVEN, THE BIG CHILL, FIVE CORNERS, and THE
WANDERERS (the only example in the group that is about adolescents).
The worst film in this genre that I can think of is ST. ELMO'S FIRE.
QUEENS LOGIC falls somewhere in the middle, although on the
better-than-average side.
     The plot is easily summarized.  One of the gang is about to get
married.  They all hang out together and are joined by one friend who
returns from California for the wedding.  They hang out, talk about
life, get drunk.  Each has a problem.  Al's wife has just walked out on
him.  Ray, the one about to get married, is getting cold feet.  Denny
was never the success in Hollywood that he claims to be.  Vince is
looking for love (or maybe just a good lay, it's not clear which).
Elliot is a homosexual, which (according to Hollywood rules) is supposed
to make him unhappy.  Everything comes to a head at the big bachelor's
party, which is more like a regular great party than a traditional
bachelor's party.
     Let's talk about what's wrong with the movie first.  Most of the
characters are simply labels.  Ray is an Artist.  Denny is a California
Musician.  Vince is a Lover.  Elliot is a Tormented Homosexual.  A
little more depth in the characterizations would have been appreciated.
     Also, the women's roles are generally peripheral.  In a film where
relations with women are central (Al's wife, Ray's wedding), the women
are good, long-suffering, and eventually forgiving.  Jamie Lee Curtis
shows up in a cameo that's somewhat inexplicable.
     The screenplay could have been a little more carefully written.
There are two incidents involving a gun near the end of the film that
are almost replays of each other.  The first one worked, the second
could have been taken out.  Also, some of the set-piece speeches just
don't work.
     The film trades on a Queens mystique.  But the problem is, there is
no Queens mystique.  It's just a place, and not a very interesting one,
either.  (At least not in the white working-class ethnic areas they
concentrate on; there are some very interesting ethnic neighborhoods in
Queens.)  I have some limited experience in this:  I was born in
Flushing, spent a year in Forest Hills, and my mother's family comes
from Queens.  It's just not such an interesting place.
     So, what's good about the film?  The main thing that's good about
it is Joe Mantegna as Al.  His performance holds the film together, just
as Al holds the group of friends together.  This is the first thing I've
ever seen Mantegna do that I've really liked.  (The other things I've
seen him in were HOUSE OF GAMES, THINGS CHANGE, and THE GODFATHER PART
III.)  John Malkovich is good as Elliot, but he's been good in
everything I've seen him in.  Tom Waits has an excellent small part as a
wonderfully strange shady character named Monty.
     The best thing about the movie is the friendship between the
characters.  It's believable that these guys have been together for a
long time, and that the genuinely like each other.  Since the friendship
is what's on screen most of the time, the film worked for me.

Author
Ann Hodgins
     It has been compared to DINER and THE BIG CHILL, and there is some
truth in that claim.  Like DINER, it is about boys becoming men, but in
QUEEN'S LOGIC the women and less oppressed, stronger and more supportive
of each other.  Like THE BIG CHILL, it is about a get-together --
occasioned by a wedding in this case, not a funeral - that decisively
changes the lives of the participants.  But QUEENS LOGIC is funkier
than BC and concerns itself with a different class and type of people.
     I appreciated QUEENS LOGIC more than either of the other two
movies.   I enjoyed the performances more and somehow warmed to the
characters more.  I particularly delighted in Tom Waits as a gorgeously
dressed, switchblade-wielding aesthete, and John Malkovich as a gay man
who never met another gay man he could like.
     Most of all I enjoyed the party scenes in QUEENS LOGIC.  Earlier
in the movie, a character announces enigmatically: "An event is about
to take place that may or may not result in a wedding."  During the
party, this prophesy is strangely and wonderfully fulfilled.
     I found the plot of QUEENS LOGIC unpredictable and the characters
original.  I enjoyed it and I recommend it to people who like movies
about people and their relationships.
