Title
Review for All Over Me (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: beginning 5/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:30
MPAA Classification: R (Sex, drugs, violence, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
     Welcome to Hell's Kitchen:  a part of New York City that's not on 
many visitors' tour maps.  Hell's Kitchen the quintessential inner city:  
no one has any money, crime is rampant, and everyone dreams of getting 
out.  It makes a great backdrop for a motion picture, provided that you 
want your story to be set against a world of poverty, violence, and drug 
abuse.  Since that's precisely what first-time film makers Alex and 
Sylvia Sichel were after, Hell's Kitchen is the perfect setting for 
their debut, ALL OVER ME.
     When we're growing up, all of us (boys as well as girls) have a 
best friend.  It's how we survive adolescence -- having someone to talk 
to, share experiences with, and traverse the mysterious road to 
adulthood alongside.  Many of these friendships don't survive, because, 
as we begin to unearth our identity and come to terms with who we really 
are, we often find ourselves growing apart from those with whom we were 
once inseparable.  This issue is at the heart of ALL OVER ME, a coming-
of-age story that explores what one girl gains and loses as she fights 
to unlock the mystery of her true self.
     At the center of ALL OVER ME is Claude (Alison Folland), a slightly 
overweight, somewhat insecure fifteen year old whose whole life revolves 
around her best friend, Ellen (Tara Subkoff).  But, even as Claude is 
beginning to recognize that her feelings for Ellen may run deeper than 
friendship, Ellen becomes involved with a local drug dealer/bad boy, 
Mark (Cole Hauser), and, suddenly, Claude's importance in Ellen's life 
plummets.  To fill the void, Claude begins exploring new relationships -
- a casual acquaintanceship with Luke (Pat Briggs), a gay musician who 
moves in downstairs, and a tentative friendship with a lesbian guitar 
player (Leisha Hailey).  Through it all, Claude realizes that what she 
wants more than anything is to recapture her closeness with Ellen, but a 
series of events in Hell's Kitchen may make that goal impossible to 
achieve.
     Part of the reason ALL OVER ME possesses such a stark sense of 
realism is because of the keenly-observed, unaffected performances of 
the lead actors.  Alison Folland, who attracted attention for her role 
as a troubled teen in TO DIE FOR, is exceptionally strong, realizing all 
of the angst and conflict churning within Claude.  As Ellen, Tara 
Subkoff has a less demanding part, but is no less effective in it.  
Ellen isn't as fully developed as her best friend, but Subkoff is called 
upon to present a character trapped in a cycle of drug and alcohol 
abuse.  The supporting cast includes Cole Hauser as the irredeemably 
nasty Mark, veteran actress Ann Dowd as Claude's mother, singer Leisha 
Hailey (of the group The Murmurs) as Claude's would-be lesbian 
girlfriend, and Psychotica band member Pat Briggs as the sensitive Luke.
     The setting and music of ALL OVER ME play an important part in 
developing the story.  These elements don't just function as background, 
but are integral to Claude's life choices.  As uncertain as she is about 
her sexual identity, there is one thing she's sure of -- that she loves 
playing the guitar.  Her dream has been to start a band with Ellen, but, 
when that is no longer possible, she is forced to consider the 
likelihood that their futures will diverge and that their irreplaceable 
friendship will become a memory.
     ALL OVER ME falls loosely into the same genre as last year's GIRLS 
TOWN -- entirely-believable stories of the troubles faced by girls 
growing up in a '90s inner city environment.  Contrast that with 
Hollywood's approach to the same subject matter, as demonstrated in 
unconvincingly melodramatic productions like last year's FOXFIRE.  The 
strength of this movie is that, with all the truth inherent in the 
story, it could easily be depicting the life of someone we might pass on 
the street.  And that makes it very easy to care about Claude, Ellen, 
and what happens to them during a few short summer weeks in Hell's 
Kitchen.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Heather Picker
     Directed by Alex Sichel. Written by Sylvia Sichel. Starring Alison Folland
and Tara Subkoff, with Cole Hauser and Wilson Cruz. 1997, 95 min., Rated R.
     The teen coming-of-age film came to popularity in the 1950s and over the
years has gone through many changes. From the angst-filled rebellion melodramas
of the 50s to the beach fluff of the early 60s, wistful looks back at the brink
of adulthood in the 70s, and John Hughes in the 80s...Along come the 90s,
somewhat hard to define. Raging hormones, insecurity, and the internal conflict
between wanting to be independent but also fearing adulthood can be seen more
on television, which has become a wasteland for teen-oriented programming, than
in the movies that the same actors and actresses from the over-hyped television
shows are starring in. Where is a viewer looking for an intelligent look at
normal teens supposed to turn? "All Over Me," the feature film debut of the
writing and directing Sichel sisters duo, is high on the list of alternatives.
      Claude (Alison Folland) and Ellen (Tara Subkoff) are inseparable. They
spend almost every waking hour together at the Hell's Kitchen apartment Claude
lives in with her mom. Their bond is closer than close, it is the type of
intense friendship that has a way of alienating others around them, and to an
extent, alienates themselves. Claude loves Ellen on more levels than just
friendship, and Ellen seems to reciprocate these feelings but can't deal with
them and instead turns to a homophobic, drug-pushing boyfriend, Mark (Cole
Hauser, "Higher Learning") and begins a downward spiral into drug addiction.
     As she begins to fully realize and accept her sexuality, Claude becomes
friends with Luke (Pat Briggs of the alternative rock band Psychotica), her
neighbor, and Jesse, who works with her at a pizza place (Wilson Cruz, playing
a role similar to his character on the late TV show "My So-Called Life"). Both
of them are gay, and her frustration over the Ellen situation is both eased and
complicated when she meets Lucy (Leisha Hailey of The Murmurs, who contribute a
song to the soundtrack), who performs in a rock band, which has long been a
dream of Claude's, one that she used to half-heartedly pursue with Ellen.
Claude and Lucy begin a stop and go relationship that nicely progresses as
Claude grapples with Ellen drifting out of the picture.
     As the fates of these two high school students with the expanding rift
between them become clearer, so does the depth of the performances. Folland
("To Die For") brings all of the elements of Claude, curiosity, fear,
awkwardness, uncertainty, beautifully to the screen.  Though portraits of teen
druggie characters usually lose credibility due to over-exaggerated acting,
Subkoff is rather subdued at times, and never overdoes it. The supporting cast,
including Hauser, Cruz, musicians Briggs and Hailey, and Ann Dowd as Claude'
mom, Anne, are all good. Alex Sichel directs, based on one of the few recent
scripts to treat various teenage topics honestly, written by her sister,
Sylvia. "All Over Me" has a terrific soundtrack featuring music from Ani
DiFranco, the Geraldine Fibbers, and Sleater-Kinney, among others.  Useless
trivia: One of the producers, Dolly Hall, has produced several films including
"High Art" (1998) and "The Incredibly True Adventures of Two Girls in Love"
(1995).  Noteworthy cinematography by Joe DeSalvo.
        
Š Heather Picker 1999
http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com
