Title
Review for Aparajito (1956)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
India, 1956
U.S. Re-Release Date: widely variable, limited distribution
Running Length: 1:50
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.33:1
Cast: Karuna Bannerjee, Kanu Bannerjee, Pinaki Sengupta, Smaran Ghosal
Director: Satyajit Ray
Producer: Satyajit Ray
Screenplay: Satyajit Ray, based on the novel APARAJITA by 
      Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay
Cinematography: Subrata Mitra
Music: Ravi Shankar
U.S. Distributor: Merchant-Ivory/Sony Pictures Classics
In Bengali with subtitles
     APARAJITO, the middle installment of legendary Indian film maker 
Satyajit Ray's APU TRILOGY, follows his 1955 debut, PATHER PANCHALI, and 
precedes 1959's THE WORLD OF APU.  Although PATHER PANCHALI is a study 
of near-perfect cinematic style and exquisite emotional insight, 
APARAJITO lifts Ray's talents to new levels.  The word "masterpiece" is 
certainly overused, but this is one instance when it is deserved.
     When APARAJITO opens in 1920, Apu (Pinaki Sengupta) and his 
parents, Harihar (Kanu Bannerjee) and Sarbojaya (Karuna Bannerjee), are 
living in the city of Banaras, where they moved following the events of 
PATHER PANCHALI.  In Banaras, along the banks of the holy Ganges River, 
Harihar, a Brahmin priest, recites Hindu scriptures to earn a living, 
while Sarbojaya attends to their home.  Apu, like any typical child, 
spends his time running off to play with his friends.  In the early 
sequences of APARAJITO, Ray paints a memorable picture of the city and 
its culture -- Banaras is a place where the ordinary and the majestic 
blend seamlessly together.  Shots of the sacred steps and the men 
immersing themselves in the river are among the movie's most lasting 
images.
     Tragedy strikes when Harihar falls ill, then dies.  Suddenly, Apu 
and Sarbojaya are left alone, without means of support.  After working 
as a cook for a wealthy man in Banaras, Sarbojaya and Apu move to the 
Bengali village of Mansapata to live with her uncle.  There, Apu begins 
attending school, and quickly becomes a top student.  After several 
years, Apu (now played by Smaran Ghosal) is offered the opportunity to 
continue his education in Calcutta, but he is concerned that his mother 
will forbid his leaving home.
     APARAJITO was filmed forty years ago, half way around the world, 
yet the themes and emotions embedded in the narrative are strikingly 
relevant to modern Western society (thus explaining why it is called a 
"timeless classic").  While watching this film, who doesn't nod 
knowingly when Sarbojaya carefully packs Apu's suitcase before his trip, 
adding a jar of home made butter and pleading with him to write soon?  
And how familiar is it when mother and son meet after a long separation, 
and her first comment is that he has grown taller and doesn't appear to 
be eating well?  One aspect of Ray's mastery is that, even though he 
creates unique worlds for his stories, the films' basic, universal 
truths allow them to speak directly to the hearts of each viewer.
     The overriding theme of APARAJITO is that nothing is static -- life 
is about change and discovery.  In PATHER PANCHALI, the characters and 
settings are much the same throughout.  Here, supporting characters and 
locations are in a continual state of flux.  The only constant is 
Sarbojaya; even Apu undergoes a visible metamorphosis as the younger 
actor gives way to the older one.  
     It is an undeniable fact of life that children grow up and move 
away.  And, though their motives in turning their back on their homes 
are not necessarily unkind, their actions may appear selfish.  Such is 
the case in APARAJITO.  As Apu leaves for Calcutta, he is excited about 
the future, and barely gives a thought to the mother he leaves behind.  
For her part, she puts on a brave face for his sake, but, the moment his 
back is turned, the mask crumbles, revealing her fear and loneliness.  
With her husband dead and her son gone, Sarbojaya has nothing left to 
live for.  Especially during the film's closing half-hour, her scenes 
are poignantly realized.  The emotional conflict between her despondence 
and Apu's exhilaration creates a powerful dichotomy that is only bridged 
in APARAJITO's closing moments.  I can't say enough about the strength 
of Karuna Bannerjee's performance, not only in the concluding act, but 
throughout both of Ray's first two movies.
     APARAJITO is an amazing motion picture.  Its rich, poetic 
composition is perfectly wed to the sublime emotional resonance of the 
narrative.  For those who have seen PATHER PANCHALI, APARAJITO provides 
a nearly-flawless continuation of the journey begun there.  Yet, for 
those who missed Ray's earlier effort, this film loses none of its 
impact.  On its own or as part of the APU TRILOGY, APARAJITO should not 
be missed.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Murali Krishnan
[3.5/4.0]  (dialog in Bengali, English subtitles)
This film, with the English title "The Unvanquished", is the second
installment of Satyajit Ray's "Apu Trilogy".
Although it is can be coherent story when viewed by itself, it
definitely builds upon the context provided in "Pather Panchali".
That narrative concluded with the Roy family leaving the ancestral
village to seek a better existence in Benares, the holy city on the
Ganga (Ganges). This film picks up at that point, and we see that
the Roys' fortunes have improved. Although they live in a shared
house, Hari's (Kanu Bannerjee) regular work as a priest brings in a
steady income and Apu (Pinaki Sengupta as the child, Smaran Ghosal
as the adolescent) has made new friends and he is thriving. Sarbojaya
(Karuna Bannerjee) still worries, but they have found the stability
she had been seeking. However, this all changes when Hari dies of a
sudden illness. With the death of her daughter (which occurred in
the previous film) and her husband, Sarbojaya now only has Apu. She
decides to move them to the countryside, and there Apu is able to
learn priestly duties from his grand-uncle. However, Apu aspires to
go to school, and with determination and their meager savings, he is
able to attend. At school he becomes an outstanding student, and
earns the opportunity for further studies in Calcutta on scholarship.
Going away to school has opened a new world for Apu, but it has also
separated him from Sarbojaya.
Once again, Satyajit Ray has sculpted a masterpiece. It continues the
saga of the trilogy, but it also explores somewhat different themes.
 "Pather Panchali" dealt with the road of life, this film focuses more
narrowly on the dynamics of an individual relationship, namely that of
Sarbojaya and Apu. As a result, the pace of this film is more crisp,
with limited use of interspersed cinematic flourishes which would slow
the narrative. The issues of commitment and dependence are explored.
Sarbojaya displays the strength of her spirit by not being broken from
the hardships that have befallen her. The soberness of the story is
tempered with small nuggets of simple humor. As in the previous film,
this film is backed with the delightful and appropriate music of Ravi
Shankar.
The acting performances are outstanding, although few characters are
given exposure besides Sarbojaya and Apu. Kanu Bannerjee is again
exceptional, as she handles the character's evolution into a world-
weary but resolved and loving mother. Smaran Ghosal does a fantastic
job as the adolescent Apu. The character is naive, and often self-
absorbed, from simple childish immaturity. Although he does not intend
to be uncaring, his determination blinds him to the requirements of
responsibility. This is a multifaceted character and Ghosal is able to
combine all the parts into a credible whole.
As Apu discovers a passion for learning, he immerses himself in that
world, which unwittingly separates him from his mother. Apu proudly
recounts what he has learned to Sarbojaya, and she shows her happiness
in seeing her son doing well as something he loves, a success which
eluded his father. However, in these scenes, like Apu describing the
positions of the sun, earth and moon to Sarbojaya, it is obvious that
this is a foreign world to her. Eventually, his passion takes him to
another city, and essentially away from Sarbojaya. It is wrenching to
see the conflicts involved with Apu's decision to study away in
Calcutta. Apu's intoxication with knowledge is so endearing and his
drive to succeed is so overriding that it is wholely understandable
that he does not see how his departure would affect his mother.
Sarbojaya's desire for Apu to stay with her is also understandable
because she desperately wants to keep her last remaining treasure with
her, not because she wants to restrict Apu in any way. She shows her
tremendous strength of character by not being possessive of Apu.
Eventually fate unrolls the results of the decisions the individuals
make.
Highly recommended. Ray has crafted another masterpiece which captures
the drama of the human condition in a simple story. The story is
engaging and moving. It can be watched on its own, but for full
appreciation, it should be viewed after "Pather Panchali."
--== Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/ ==--
---Share what you know. Learn what you don't.---
