Title
Review for Startup.com (2001)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
It may not rank with Alexander Graham Bell's idea of long distance voice 
communication, but the team at govWorks.com does have a vision.  They 
want citizens to be able to order fishing licenses at 3:15 A.M., attend 
town meetings in their underwear and pay parking tickets on-line.
STARTUP.COM, the engrossing and enlightening documentary about govWorks 
by Chris Hegedus and Jehane Noujaim, argues convincingly, if only by 
implication, that for the company's founders, Tom Herman and Kaleil 
Isaza Tuzman, it isn't about creating "insanely great" products, as 
Steve Jobs would say, but about making insanely large amounts of money.  
About the only song in the film is "Money (That's All I Want)," which 
just about sums up the approach of these two hard-working entrepreneurs.  
Tom, the technical lead, and Kaleil, the CEO, have been best buddies 
since high school.  Like brothers, they talk to the company's employees 
and to each other about their mutual "love."  Although this isn't a 
fictional story, the decline of their mutual affection takes on 
Shakespearean proportions when their dot-com begins a rapid descent into 
a dot-bomb.  Although they each have their own families and loved ones, 
which we see in glimpses, their bond is just like a marriage.  When Tom 
starts talking about how he has always viewed himself as being a co-CEO, 
you can hear the offstage corporate divorce lawyers sharpening their 
pencils.
We follow the company by tagging along with Tom, Kaleil or both, as they 
go from nothing to $50 million in VC funding in a few months and as 
their staff bloats up past 300.  There probably are worker bees toiling 
away in the background who passionately believe in their product, but 
what we see are a couple of 28-year-old guys who dream of getting rich.  
Kaleil, who hobnobs on TV with everyone from President Clinton on down, 
seems on a trajectory to billionaire status.  A comment from one 
employee, who believes himself destined to be a mere multi-millionaire, 
hints of possible resentment over the size of Kaleil's options package.
But before Kaleil and Tom become as rich as Croesus, there are a few 
problems to be dealt with.  The Web site that they assume will make them 
all wealthy isn't a focus of the movie or the management until the end.  
"The VCs are not in this for charity," Kaleil warns over his cell phone.  
When they should be ramping up slowly and paying attention to their 
product and their business plan, Kaleil and Tom are out hustling money.  
At one point, Kaleil tries to work in some time to get more involved 
with the product he is pedaling, but he and Tom can't figure out when 
that would be.  Both of them are likable guys who you want to win but 
who seem headed for disaster.  
On April 14, 2000, the anniversary of the day that the Titanic struck 
the infamous iceberg, the NASDAQ crashes dramatically.  A savvy Kaleil 
immediately sees the writing on the wall.  Just like the movie TITANIC, 
STARTUP.COM is fascinating even if we feel certain that the company will 
sink in the end.  Whatever you do, don't leave before the ending credits 
which tells you the status of the company, what happened to Kaleil and 
Tom's friendship and what they're doing now.  Expect to see these guys 
on the business talk shows again.  Maybe soon.  Who knows, as they say, 
"what goes down must come up."
STARTUP.COM runs 1:43.  It is rated R for brief language and would be 
acceptable for any kid old enough to be interested in the subject.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Robin Clifford
Only two or three years ago, a few smart guys with a little bit of capital 
could parlay an idea into a multimillion-dollar Internet business and have 
their fortunes made. Docu filmmakers Chris Hegedus and Jehane Noujaim 
rolled their camera at the birth of just such a company and planned to 
follow the meteoric rise of its founders, until the bottom fell out of the 
market in 2000, in "Startup.com." 
In 1998, four young entrepreneurs - Kaleil Isaza Tuzman, Thomas Herman, 
Chieh Cheung and George Fatheree - founded PublicDataSystems, Inc., a firm 
whose goal was to build a government Internet portal that would ease the 
public's pain in dealing with the bureaucracy we have all come to know and 
loath. Longtime documentary filmmaker Hegedus and newcomer Noujaim followed 
their group of web entrepreneurs from the very beginning, at the first 
discussion of the idea of their business to hiring the first folks into the 
company to their almost arrival at the top. The plan was to show the rags 
to riches success of their govWorks.com website and the making of 
20-something multimillionaires. 
But, in true documentary style, things do not go off as planned and a 
variety of circumstances happen that signal the end of the ambitious plans 
for the company. Venture capital dollars are a fickle thing and can dry up 
without a moment's notice. The company offices are broken into and valuable 
documents, outlining business and strategies, are stolen. The volatile 
personalities and differing viewpoints of the founders creates conflict and 
threatens the future of the govWorks.com. Then, in 2000, the bottom fell 
out of the Internet marketplace. The rags-to-riches tale becomes the rise 
and fall of an American dream. 
"Startup.com" is a sometimes-interesting document that suffers from a major 
problem - none of the individuals being followed are likable and, with 
their arrogance, bickering and techno-automaton behavior, create no empathy 
from the viewer. The makers do a decent job of capturing all aspects of the 
making of a startup company but they, unfortunately for the viewer, picked 
the wrong subjects. There is an attempt to introduce humanity into the mix 
by showing Thomas taking care of his young daughter and Kaleil having 
girlfriend troubles, but these are mere distractions and only serve to make 
an overly long film even longer. Perhaps some judicious editing would help, 
but the subjects, themselves, are the real problem. 
"Startup.com" documents the rise and fall of four guys' dreams, but, in the 
end, I don't care, and that's not good for a documentary movie. I give it a 
C. 
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com 

Author
Laura Clifford
Just after Jehane Noujaim quit her MTV job to take up filmmaking, her roommate
Kaleil Tuzman left a job with Goldman Sachs to team up with friends in founding
a dot.com.  Documentarian Chris Hegedus ("The War Room") met Jehane while 
looking for a project on the Internet and the two teamed up to co-direct the
rise of govWorks.com from ground zero.  They didn't get what they had expected,
but they did capture drama aplenty in "Startup.com."
As much the story of the rise and fall of a dot.com as of the unravelling of
a lifelong friendship, "Startup.com" focusses on govWorks cofounders Kaleil
Tuzman and Tom Herman.  Friends since childhood, Kaleil is the darkly exotic,
charismatic money man who convinced multiple venture capitalists to invest
millions of dollars in govWorks.com while Tom is the all American kid who
stayed in the background guiding development.  Kaleil's ruthless, workaholic
drive contrasts so sharply with Tom's laid back, trusting nature we know
we're in for major conflicts.  The cracks begin to show early on, when Tom's
enthusiasm for the technology during an investment meeting causes Kaleil
to accuse him of being unfocussed.  On the flip side, Tom makes design
decisions without waiting for Kaleil to return from one of his countless
business trips.
The film is frequently, often unintentionally, funny.  Reporting from an
early meeting in the Silicon Valley, Kaleil sputters on about how their
proposal was criticized for being presented in hardcopy rather than
computerized presentation, for their lack of IT experience, lack of startup
experience and for being 2-3 years behind the curve.  'He just doesn't get
it!' Kaleil remarks on the obviously prescient investor.  Later on, when
their company's grown to over 50 employees, they're all trooped
out to Tom's parents' Camp Interloken retreat for a mandatory morale
weekend.  Tom hikes them into the woods where he tells them he likes to
meditate - the wind whistling through the pine needles is particularly
inspirational he tells the awe-struck group as the video camera records
utter silence.  Occasionally, we're treated to Kaleil's girlfriend Dorita
complaining about his refusal to understand that just one phone call from
him can 'keep her going' for up to three weeks (another relationship hitting 
the skids).
Kaleil 'I refuse, reFUSE, REFUSE to lose!' Tuzman's chutzpah knows no bounds,
as he invites competitors to visit their office (Atlanta's ezgov.com eventually
beats them at their own game) or slips President Clinton his business card
right in front of CNN's cameras.  On the eve of their launch, though,
govWorks' search engine is declared a dud and the company never regains its
footing.  Tom gets philosophical and is sacked by Kaleil, who can't believe
Tom no longer trusts him when Tom begins to protect his own self interests.
"Startup.com" is conventionally filmed on video by a filmmaking team with
exceptional access to their subjects.  While they've captured the story of a
generation who surfed the Internet wave with dreams of untold wealth, when
their own subject was one of the ones who wiped out, Jehane and Hegedus
seem to reel with them.  The documentary has a long and dramatic build,
marking time with the build up in govWork's employee base, yet suddenly,
it all drops off.  Tom's ejection is given weight, but the gradual
disintegration of govWorks is not.  The abrupt feel of the film's wrapup
is also a casuality of the filmmakers' decision to concentrate on Kaleil and
Tom without so much as naming almost any other employee.
Still, "Startup.com" packs more drama than most fictional films currently in
release and documents a distinctive moment in America's business landscape.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
