Title
Review for You Can Count on Me (2000)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Robin Clifford
Sammy and Terry Prescott (Laura Linney and Mark Ruffalo) were orphaned as
kids when their mother and father were killed in a car accident. Since
then, the siblings have drifted apart. Sammy put down roots in the small,
upstate New York town of Scottsville with her young son Rudy (Rory Culkin).
Terry is a troubled wanderer who ekes out an existence and not much more.
When he abruptly leaves his pregnant girlfriend, he heads for Scottsville
and his sister to borrow some money. Terry's arrival disrupts Sammy's
quiet, stable life in tyro director Kenneth Lonergan's "You Can Count On
Me."
Terry's unexpected arrival in Scottsville coincides with Sammy getting a
new boss at the bank where she works. Brian Everett (Matthew Broderick) is
a martinet, of sorts, whose first actions are to restrict the colors his
employees use on their computer screens and put a halt to Sammy's work day
excursions to pick up Rudy at school and ferry him to his sitter's home.
Sammy protests Brian's decision to no avail. "You'll have to make other
arrangements," he says, or else. With no other option, the distraught
mother calls upon Terry to fill in for her with the daily pickup.
The temporary solution to the problem goes bad from the start when Terry
forgets to pick up Rudy at school one time and takes him to a bar to play
pool another. When Sammy finds out about the pool game from the town
sheriff and confronts Terry with the fact, he immediately blames innocent
Rudy for tattling on him. The relationship between Sammy and Terry begins
to change from that of sister and brother to one of scolding mother and
petulant, troublesome son. Terry and Rudy draw closer together, too, at
this time. As expected, by the end of the movie, everyone loves everyone
and a hopeful finale ensues.
While the brother/sister conflict boils, Sammy and Brian get into an
adversarial battle between the boss man's penchant for bureaucratic BS and
Sammy's desire to have the workplace be happy and cooperative. The fight
soon changes as Sammy and Brian get to know and like each other. His
unhappy marriage and her uncommitted situation drive the pair into each
other's arms and a romance begins. Of course, a boss/worker relationship is
destined to disaster and this one is no exception.
"You Can Count On Me" is straightforward story-telling about what happens
to a brother and sister as they grow older and apart. Laura Linney has not
had the opportunity to get the lead for a movie, until now, and holds up
her end of the bargain pretty well. Mark Ruffalo is OK as the brooding,
selfish, nomadic Terry and shows the most personal change by the film's
end. Unfortunately, Linney and Ruffalo look as much like siblings as Gore
and Bush look like brothers. This is a notable distraction. Matthew
Broderick is fine as the anal retentive bureaucratic boss. Rory Culkin is
nondescript as Sammy's little boy.
Kenneth Lonergan makes a sound debut effort, showing an ability to tell a
story while getting convincing performances out of the principle cast, if
not so the supporting players.
Tech credits, like the directing and writing, get the job done, though
nothing about the film knocks my socks off.
Hollywood doesn't usually make films about brothers and sisters and I can
understand why. Who would want to watch a story about me bickering with my
sister? I wouldn't.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 YOU CAN COUNT ON ME (director/writer: Kenneth Lonergan;
 cinematographer: Stephen Kazmierski; editor: Anne McCabe; cast: Laura
 Linney (Sammy Prescott), Mark Ruffalo (Terry Prescott), Matthew
 Broderick (Brian), Jon Tenney (Bob), Rory Culkin (Rudy), J. Smith-
 Cameron (Mabel), Josh Lucas (Rudy Sr.), Gaby Hoffmann (Sheila), Adam
 LeFevre (Sheriff Darryl), Kenneth Lonergan (Priest); Runtime: 111;
 Paramount Classics/A Shooting Gallery release; 2000)
An impactful and meaningful personal human interest drama about the
anxious relationship between two adult siblings who will always remain
close despite their differences because of their tragic upbringing that
made them cling to each other for comfort, when as youngsters their
parents died in a car accident. This film offers a literate script and
is sensitively directed, it's a brilliant debut as a director for
playwright Kenneth Lonergan (co-scripted "Analyze This!"). Besides
writing the screenplay and directing it, he also has a minor part in the
film as a religious counselor. It is so well-conceived a work that it
never feels stagy, as many other films of this type tend to be. The film
was a co-winner of this year's Sundance grand jury prize and recipient
of the Waldo Salt Screenwriting Award.
Laura Linney gives a smashing performance as a single mother of an eight
year old, whose conservative lifestyle in the fictional small upstate
New York town of Scottsville becomes challenged when her younger brother
visits after being away for a few years. He is a drifter who pictures
himself as an outsider, who is happiest when he's on the move to far off
places like Alaska. He is played with deep feelings by Mark Ruffalo.
The film opens with Terry (Ruffalo) leaving his impregnated and suicidal
girlfriend Sheila in Worcester, Mass., unable to tell her convincingly
that he loves her, as he heads by bus to see his sister Sammy (Linney),
hoping that he can borrow money from her to help him straighten out the
situation with Sheila and while here reestablish some lost links with
his concerned sister.
The siblings meet in a restaurant, with Sammy worried that she has
recently lost contact with her brother, while he feels out of place and
very edgy to be back in his hometown, a place he finds narrow and dull.
He can't stop fidgeting and acting nervous, dressed in a torn T-shirt
while she's more formally dressed, wearing an outfit she would normally
wear when working at the local bank where she's a loan officer. The
siblings have different personalities and have gone down different
roads, and even though there is a strong bond between them, what this
restaurant meeting highlights is how different they also are, as this
scene brilliantly sets the tense tone for the remainder of the film.
Sammy accepts the limitations of her provincial life, trying to raise
her child the right way, but is instead smothering the sheltered child.
She attends church services regularly, as she seeks out her priest for
daily guidance and wants to believe wholeheartedly in the Catholic
dogma. Sammy refuses to talk to her son about his father or how she was
wild as a youth and one of her mistakes was in marrying the wrong guy,
which resulted in a bitter divorce and her son Rudy (Rory Culkin) never
knowing his redneck father or how rotten a person he really is, as he
instead imagines his missing father in a more glorious light. She also
has an unsatisfying relationship with her on-again, off-again boyfriend
Bob (Jon Tenney), a real nice guy but who doesn't turn her on, and she
is a very sexually turned on woman.
Living a life that is opposite to his sister's, Terry believes what the
church has to offer is a fairy tale. He is someone who can't take
responsibility for having a family of his own or to find direction in
his life, and often gets in trouble because he makes bad decisions,
which results in frequent fights, one of those barroom brawls resulted
in a three month jail sentence in Florida, which is why he lost contact
with his sister, not wanting her to worry that he was in jail.
The sheer beauty in the film is in the natural bonding that develops
between the curiously bright but lonely Rudy and the irresponsible
Terry. An intimacy develops between them that benefits both in their
need to grow up. Their unsettling yet intimate friendship grows from
conversations that seem so natural and from the child needing a
different perspective to chew on besides having only his mother's. The
bad decisions Terry makes are not selfish ones, but are the one's he
makes because he means well but doesn't always know how to do the right
thing. For example, he sneaks Rudy into the local bar to play pool
without his mother knowing about it and gets him to lie to her about
where he was. Terry will, also, on a whim, take Rudy to the nearby town
of Auburn to meet his real father (Josh Lucas), who is living with
another woman. As Rudy Sr. refuses to admit that Rudy is his son, his
anger grows against Terry for bringing him around and the two get into a
brawl, which results in Terry's arrest.
Sammy's life grows confusing as an adulterous relationship develops with
a new bank manager, Brian (Broderick), whose unfriendly wife is
pregnant. He's a twit that no one in the bank likes, as he tries to
enforce in a stiffly polite way petty and meaningless rules. Somehow
Sammy has a penchant for being vulnerable for the wrong type of man, and
mistakes her pity for romance.
Sammy and Rudy touch something about themselves in Terry's short
summertime visit, something they wouldn't have touched that was so real
without Terry being there as a catalyst for change. What the three of
them are all looking for, is something real to believe in. This subtle
drama is satisfying in almost every respect, but mainly as a realistic
presentation of working-class characters who are struggling with the
mundane problems of everyday existence. Their small problems are seen by
them as being gigantic, and their way of resolving them are different
for each. Sammy wants the church to tell her authoritatively what is
right or wrong instead of giving her their feel-good evasive answers,
afraid that in her wildest feelings she can be tempted to secretly smoke
grass or cigarettes, or to have an illicit affair. Her wild nature
leaves her feeling guilty and unsure of what to believe in, as she is
looking for someone to love but can't find anyone in her limited
environment, as she acts outwardly conservative in the hope that she can
be perceived as a good mother to Rudy. While Terry wants answers to come
to him which relate to his particular situation, as he's trying to get
in touch with how he really feels inside himself. In the meantime, Rudy
awakens from his sheltered childhood as he sees for the first time how
the real world can be both a cruel and loving place. He will be through
looking for his real father as a role model, whom he now realizes is not
as he imagined he would be and that he will have to find something else
that is real to believe in or someone else to look up to.
This is a superbly acted and subtle work, whose only flaws are in the
unbelievable romance between boss and worker and the artificial
lovemaking depicted between Sammy and her townie boyfriend, both of
which had no ring of truth to it. But, otherwise, this is one of the
best films of 2000, and indie type of art film with an intensity and a
strong sense of realistic dramatics that brings out the complex
emotional problems of the main characters.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, screensavers, trailers & more, visit http://www.joblo.com/
A touching character drama about a brother and sister questioning the ways
of their life and spirituality from the guy who wrote ANALYZE THIS and ROCKY
AND BULLWINKLE? Yup, believe it! This film tied for the Grand Jury Prize at
this year's Sundance Film Festival with another fall release entitled
GIRLFIGHT, and features a breakout performance from actor Mark Ruffalo.
Remember the name. Of course, you already know the name of the executive
producer on this project...one Martin Scorsese.
PLOT:
A carefree brother comes back home to visit his morally upright single mom
sister and decides to stay awhile. Their day-to-day goings-on is what fills
our time together with brother essentially trying to "find himself" while
making friends with her young son, and sister trying to figure out which
fella she'd rather keep dating while simultaneously not losing her job at
the bank. Slowly but surely, their respective traits begin to rub off on one
another.
CRITIQUE:
A small movie set in a small town delivers various big elements including
top-notch performances from its two leads, extremely effective character
development all around and a poignant message dipped with the importance of
love, family, relationships and spirituality. This is obviously not a
typical Hollywood picture and surely not for everyone, but definitely one to
see for anyone who appreciates superior character studies, feels confused,
overwhelmed or bored about their own life, and is curious about the familial
foundation which supports this entire movie. This isn't a very upbeat film.
It does contain a handful of lighter moments, but is basically a movie that
feels sort of somber all the way through but doesn't ever really get boring.
The force of the writing is the main reason for that, with the superior
performances set forth by all, straddling in as a close second. Major kudos
go out to Mark Ruffalo, who completely inhabits his role as the loose
younger brother with the knack for getting into trouble, as well as Laura
Linney, playing the full role of mother, sister, lover and employee to a
tee. The excellent rapport between the two leads also makes you glad to be
spending some time with them.
The film also offers a solid outing for Rory Culkin in a pivotal role of the
son in the movie, and Matthew Broderick delivering yet another small but
effective performance on his end (dude, it's time to put films like GODZILLA
and INSPECTOR GADGET behind you once and for all!). The film isn't really
about anything in particular, plot-wise that is. It moves from moment to
moment, sort of like a "week in the life of" you or me. But the crux of the
story is really simmering under the covers, the relationship between brother
and sister, an emotional attachment that isn't really discussed much in film
nowadays. The two kids grow up as orphans and maintain different standards
of living, one very opposite from the other. The truth is that neither one
of them really knows exactly what they're doing (perhaps because of the lack
of parental guidance), but the love between them is never in doubt. This is
one of those smaller pictures that I really love balancing off against those
big, loud, smack-down Hollywood flicks. It's insightful, it's emotional and
it actually means something! Okay, so I might not be selling this film as
best as I could, but all I know is that it touched me with its solid
performances, great insight and universal message. One to see.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Writer/director Ken Lonergan also plays a small part in this movie. He is
the priest. He is primarily known as a playwright but has written several
screenplays including a co-writing stint on ANALYZE THIS and a full-blown
screenwriting credit on ROCKY & BULLWINKLE. His wife, J. Smith-Cameron is
also in this picture. She plays Mabel.
Actress Laura Linney is probably best remembered for playing Jim Carrey's
wife in THE TRUMAN SHOW. Clint Eastwood picked her for the part of Kate
Whitney in his movie ABSOLUTE POWER after seeing her performance in PRIMAL
FEAR.
Long-time Martin Scorsese producer and ex-wife, Barbara DeFina, is one of
the producers on this project. Martin Scorsese is also one of its executive
producers.
This is 11-year old Rory Culkin's second movie. He played the "young Richie"
his brother Macauley Culkin's RICHIE RICH movie. He also has another acting
brother named Kieran.

Author
Susan Granger
 If you enjoy literate, intimate dramas, rich in texture, this
is the film for you. In a small, rural town in upstate New York, a
petulant, irritable but good-hearted stoner/drifter (Mark Ruffalo) comes
home to borrow money from his church-going sister (Laura Linney), a
single mother with an eight year-old son (Rory Culkin).  Their parents
were killed in a car crash when she was a teenager, so she virtually
raised her younger brother. Writer Kenneth Lonergan ("Analyze This,"
"Rocky & Bullwinkle"), making his directorial debut, is less concerned
with plot than with his theme of trust and his complex characters,
particularly their dialogue. Their words are an awkward condensation
of how they feel and what they think they should feel, what they should
say. That's what subtext is all about. And Lonergan's meticulous care
includes the supporting roles: Jon Tenney as the sister's occasional
beau and Matthew Broderick as her bullying new boss at the bank, an
uptight, married man with whom she has a disastrous affair. You can
spot the perceptive Lonergan himself as the laid-back pastor who asks,
"Do you feel your life is important?" Eventually, of course, both
siblings must re-evaluate their lives and their relationships. Mark
Ruffalo and Laura Linney deliver subtle, terrific performances, as do
the rest of the cast except, perhaps, Matthew Broderick who resorts to
rigidity. Using Loretta Lynn's "The Other Woman," amidst Lesley Barber's
classical music, is a delicious touch. My only quibble is that, visually,
it's slow-moving, resembling a play that was filmed. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "You Can Count on Me" is a multi-layered,
melancholy 9,  both challenging and intriguing for mature moviegoers.

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Kenneth Lonergan, from his screenplay. Starring Laura Linney,
Mark Ruffalo, Matthew Broderick. Running time: 100 minutes. Rated AA for
coarse language by the MFCB. Reviewed on March 28th, 2001.
Let's be honest: movies don't often deal with reality. Filmmakers tend to 
prefer high drama, incredulous farce, or invented fantasy, and while 
these genres can be effective and entertaining, their connection to our
daily lives is often tenuous. In cinema, there's usually a beginning, a 
middle and an end, all punctuated by moments of great suspense and 
emotion. In real life, the highs aren't so high nor the lows so low, and 
there's nothing but middle.
"You Can Count On Me" is a film which is as close an approximation of 
reality -- real reality, not movie reality -- as I've seen. The story it 
tells is one which began before the theatre curtains went up, and which 
continues on past the credits. Those looking for a plot in which 
everything is ultimately wrapped up in a neat, tidy package will probably 
be somewhat disappointed; the movie has an ending, but it is not the 
ending. On the other hand, audiences desiring a genuine portrayal of real
people with real problems should be very satisfied indeed.
Sammy Prescott (Laura Linney) is a loan officer in the small town of 
Scottsville, trying to raise young son Rudy (Rory Culkin) all by herself. 
Her parents died in a car accident when she was young, and this left her 
and her brother Terry to raise each other. Sammy had her wild phase but 
survived it. Terry, on the other hand, is a drifter who checks in with his 
sister only every few months and seems to be going nowhere in life.
One day, Terry (Mark Ruffalo) returns to Scottsville. He only plans to 
stay long enough to borrow money from Sammy, but ends up sticking around a
while longer. Terry begins bonding with Rudy, who has never had a father 
figure -- he takes him to a bar to play pool, and lets him help out with 
the plumbing. This meets with the disapproval of Sammy, however, who is 
concerned that Terry -- never having properly grown up himself -- is a 
poor role model for her son. At the same time, straight-laced Sammy is 
experiencing turmoil of her own: not only is she involved in a 
dispassionate relationship with her on-again, off-again boyfriend Bob (Jon 
Tenney), but she starts an affair with her nerdy new (married) boss Brian 
(Matthew Broderick).
"You Can Count On Me" is written and directed by Kenneth Lonergan, a 
filmmaker who clearly understands people. Beyond an opening flashback to 
the accident which claimed the lives of the elder Prescotts, cinematic 
artifice is all but absent from the movie. This is a simple story told in 
a simple style, which is nonetheless absolutely perfect. Lonergan's 
approach is to be direct and sincere, neither too harsh nor too tender, 
thereby lending his situations and the characters a stronger sense of 
realism. Nothing happens simply for dramatic purposes, and even the 
picture's warm humour arises naturally from the goings-on, as opposed to
being artificially grafted onto the proceedings.
But this technique cannot be successful unless we believe in, and are 
engaged by, the main characters. Let's be honest again: more often than 
not, everyday life just isn't that interesting -- there's a reason why 
most movies don't follow this realistic approach. In the end, then, "You 
Can Count On Me" is an actors' movie. Without performances which are 
believable but still captivating, "You Can Count On Me" would be no more 
interesting than this morning's office gossip.
How fortunate we are, then, that Lonergan has assembled such a splendid 
cast. It is Linney who has received the most accolades, and for good 
reason -- quite frankly, it is Linney and not Julia Roberts who deserved 
the Academy Award. Sammy is a strikingly multifaceted character. On the 
one hand, she is a doting and responsible parent, straightlaced and
dependable. On the other hand, she's emotionally confused, and in the 
space of the film's running time we see her involved in no less than two 
ill-advised and potentially disastrous romantic liaisons. Linney 
demonstrates tremendous range, but does so without losing sight of the 
character she's playing. Too often, actors translate their roles into just 
a handful of convenient default demeanours. Linney approaches Sammy as 
though she is a real person, complete with a dizzying array of emotions 
and responses; as a result, Sammy becomes real.
No less impressive is Ruffalo. Screw-ups and black sheep are a staple of 
the family drama, but Ruffalo ensures that Terry does not fall so easily 
into these categories. Terry is a man who makes mistakes. Sometimes he 
learns from them and sometimes he doesn't. Sometimes he makes up for them 
and sometimes he doesn't. One thing he isn't is a man who behaves 
according to type. The complexity of the character is particularly 
evident in his interaction with Rudy: Terry is neither a godsend for the 
child nor a devil on his shoulder. Their relationship follows not a 
straight line but instead experiences any number of twists and turns, and 
is all the more satisfying because of it. 
Also fine is Broderick as the nebbish Brian, a man who is never entirely 
loathsome (or else Sammy's affair with him would be tough to swallow), but 
who always finds a way to rub the audience wrong. And Culkin shows that, 
like older brother Kieran, he is capable of genuine acting and not just 
mawking for the camera. Rudy is not preternaturally intelligent nor laden 
with problems nor unbearably cute; he's just a regular kid unique in ways 
all his own, and there aren't enough of those in the movies.
By the end of the picture, both Terry and Sammy have changed. And while 
the implication is certainly that they have both benefitted from the 
sometimes tortuous renewal of their family bond, I liked the fact that 
Lonergan doesn't overemphasise this development. Both siblings still have 
lives that are full of questions and problems, and futures with plenty of 
uncertainties. Just like you, me, and everybody else.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/YouCanCountOnMe.html

Author
Jon Popick
You would expect a film written and directed by the guy that co-wrote
Analyze This to be a hoot.  Or at least be somewhat comedic in nature.
But Ken Lonergan's directorial debut is a tender drama about the
relationship between a nomadic brother and his unadventurous sister in
upstate New York.  Save the heavy-handed music and the embarrassing
two-hanky ending, You Can Count On Me is one heck of a great film.
Laura Linney (The Truman Show) plays Sammy Prescott, a single mother and
the lending officer at a small bank in Scottsville, New York.  She's
more than a little overprotective of her eight-year-old son Rudy (Rory
Culkinyes, those Culkins), leaving her job each afternoon to transport
her child from the school bus to his babysitter.  The absences from work
don't play well with Sammy's unpleasant new bank manager, Matthew
Broderick (Inspector Gadget).  She's also got a great boyfriend (Jon
Tenney from television's Get Real) that seems ready to commit to a
long-term relationship.
Sammy has a younger brother named Terry (Mark Ruffalo, Ride With the
Devil), who, apparently, has spent his entire adult life as a drifter.
He always makes sure to send his worried sister letter from each stop he
makes (she excitedly reads them and carefully files them away in a
drawer).  Terry's latest correspondence announces he's coming home to
Scottsville for a visit, causing the overjoyed Sammy to nearly spin out
of control with happiness.
But when Terry arrives at Sammy's house, old sibling rivalries are
reheated.  Sammy can't understand Terry's lack of desire for stability
in his life, and he thinks she's too uptight, rigid and set in a life
full of routine.  As much as they don't get along, the two share an
incredible bond  the result of losing both parents in a car crash while
they were both small children.
After a few days in Scottsville, Terry develops a close bond with Rudy,
who has been pining away for a father figure for years.  In the
meantime, Sammy's life begins to become unhinged, dumping her boyfriend
to have a tawdry affair with her married manager (how many more films do
we have to see Broderick having sleazy affairs in seedy hotel rooms, a
la Election?) to Loretta Lynn's `The Other Woman.'  Count is one of
those films where the two main characters slowly begin to take on each
others traits.  Kind of like Simpatico, but nowhere near as awful.
The chemistry between Linney and Ruffalo is amazing.  In fact, it's
almost too good.  I was half expecting a storyline involving incest to
pop up toward the end of the film (independent cinema has taught me to
expect the unexpected).  Lonergan script is fantastic, and his direction
may be even better.  He elects to leave out scenes that you would
typically find pivotal in other films.  In particular, Lonergan doesn't
show the young Sammy and Terry being told of their parents demise.
There is also a great scene where Terry takes Rudy to a pool hall to
make some money off the local yokels, and Lonergan points his camera on
the uncle and nephew for a long shot while their competitor runs the
table.
Executive produced by Martin Scorsese, Count made me wish I had an older
sister.  And I'd have to strongly recommend a film that made me feel
that way.
1:49 - R for adult language, some drug use and sexual content

Author
Laura Clifford
Single, small town mom Sammy Prescott (Laura Linney, "The Truman Show") is
delighted to receive a letter from her younger brother Terry (Mark Ruffalo,
"Committed"), who's returning for a visit after some long term, aimless
travelling.  Tempers immediately flare, however, when Sammy learns Terry's
girlfriend is pregnant and he needs money.  The complex relationship of
these orphanned siblings is explored in writer/director Ken Lonergan's
Sundance Grand Jury and Waldo Salt screenwriting awards winner, "You Can
Count on Me."
Writer/director Ken Lonergan establishes his screenwriting abilities while 
making a tentative directorial debut with "You Can Count on Me."  While his 
fine cast keep the audience involved in their unique yet recognizable 
situtations, Lonergan's film is visually flat.
Sammy has clearly assumed the mother role in her relationship
with Terry, who acts the needy and irresponsible child.  (Her own child, 
Rudy (Rory Culkin), is overprotected.)  Sammy's in a jam at her job as
Scottsville's bank loan officer.  Her new ramrod straight boss Brian
(Matthew Broderick) demands that she discontinue her practice of taking
fifteen minutes of her lunch hour in midafternoon to pick up Rudy from school.
Terry steps in and begins to fill a big need, providing the male interaction
and law loosening Rudy's been craving.  In fact, Terry empowers Sammy to
begin to act irresponsibly as she slips into an affair with her married
boss while turning down her long-standing boyfriend Bob's (Jon Tenney)
proposal of marriage.
The cast is terrific and true.  Linney and Ruffalo, who bear no physical
resemblance whatsover, are emotionally on target as soulfully close siblings
who judge each other harshly.  Matthew Broderick takes his "Election" cheating
spouse and adds endearingly geeky quirks to hilarious and frustrating effect
(he's so uptight he bans employees from setting their computer monitors
background colors).  Jon Tenney plays the small town honest guy with a 
maturity issue recognizably while Rory Culkin acquits himself well.  Lonergan
gives himself a cameo as the local priest whom Sammy calls upon to 'help'
Terry.
Lonergan's writing here is far superior to his more commercial work in
"Analyze This," only ringing false in one scene where Sammy gives Terry
an uncharacteristic public scolding in a local restaurant.  His portrait of
a small, upstate New York town, where trailer dwellers mix with owners of 
sprawling colonial homesteads at the local pool hall is beautifully 
rendered, almost seeming frozen in time.  Unfortunately, the camera
(cinematography by Stephen Kazmierski, "The Myth of Fingerprints") is too
static, giving all interior scenes the feel of actors in a square frame.
"You Can Count on Me" is a small, regional feeling film which offers us several
rich character studies.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
So how many really good movies can you name about brother-sister 
relationships?  And what if you limit your list to only those about 
adult siblings?  Don't be surprised if your list is empty, or at least 
close to it.  In the future, any such list will have to start with YOU 
CAN COUNT ON ME, the winner for Best Picture and Best Screenplay at this 
year's Sundance Film Festival.  Written and directed by Ken Lonergan 
(the writer of last year's hit comedy ANALYZE THIS), YOU CAN COUNT ON ME 
is a rich and witty drama whose centerpiece is a sibling relationship.
Laura Linney (Truman's wife in THE TRUMAN SHOW) stars as the sister, 
Sammy.  Sammy tries to be a level-headed mother to her 8-year-old, Rudy 
(Rory Culkin).  Her ex is a permanently AWOL father to Rudy, who has 
never seen Rudy Senior.  Her brother, Terry (Mark Ruffalo), has come for 
a visit.  In a poignant restaurant scene, she shows that she is there 
for him, but he is there for money.  It momentarily breaks her heart.
But this isn't one of those dysfunctional families movies, even if their 
relationship does have its difficult moments.  This is a story of love, 
not hate.  The chemistry between them and between Terry and Rudy is 
remarkable and genuine.
Sammy has had a modestly successful life, but Terry is a screw-up, 
although he claims, as if he doesn't believe it, that "I'm not the kind 
of guy that everyone says I am."   They grew up in the small backwoods 
town of Scottsville, where everyone knows everyone else.  It is a "dull, 
narrow town, full of dull, narrow people," Terry tells Rudy in a long 
put-down of Scottsville.  "What are you talking about," Rudy asks him 
with soulful, confused eyes.  "I have no idea," Terry confesses in a bit 
of self-reflection.
Their parents died in a car accident when Sammy and Terry were young.  
In a brief prologue, we witness the accident almost matter-of-factly.  
The beauty of the delicate script is the way tragedy is consistently 
downplayed and that key incidents are merely sketched out.  The writer 
allows us to use our imagination to fill in the details.  And the 
direction is done with great subtly and finesse so that there isn't an 
overacted or schmaltzy moment in the production.  The result is a 
picture so authentic that it has the audience hitting the ground 
running.  Only a few minutes into it, and we feel like we've known and 
cared about these people all of our lives.
Sammy laments, "I wish Mom was here," when talking to her brother about 
how to handle a troublesome issue.  Anyone whose mother has died 
certainly thinks this and often.  Linney delivers this line with 
heart-felt but restrained emotions, making it feel as genuine as if she 
were talking about her own dead mother.
Another part of the plot concerns Brian (Matthew Broderick, ELECTION), 
Sammy's new manager at the bank.  His is an anal-retentive type, who 
admits that "I like paperwork."  He wants daily time cards and a 
conservative color palette for the bank's PC displays.  Brian and Sammy 
are a combustible mix, but rather than getting fired, as it looks like 
she is destined to be, Sammy ends up sharing fireworks in bed with her 
boss instead.  This affair shocks and delights her at the same time.  In 
Linney's best bit of acting, she lets out a small series of nervous, 
joyful laughs in the car as she sits there by herself after their first 
fling.  (The writer gives us a few glimpses into what may or may not be 
Brian's unhappy married life with his pregnant wife.)
Besides writing and directing, Lonergan also plays the part of Sammy's 
laid back priest, the funniest character in the movie.  She wants him to 
tell her that she will burn in the flames of eternal damnation for her 
sins, but he has a more flexible moral code, which allows for continual 
redemption.
Linney, with some of the spunk that Holly Hunter demonstrated in 
BROADCAST NEWS, delivers a delicately nuanced and wonderfully appealing 
performance that deserves to be remembered at Oscar time.  But you want 
to see this movie now and not wait until the nominations come out to 
remind you of the great movies that you missed.
YOU CAN COUNT ON ME runs 1:49.  It is rated R for language, some drug 
use and a scene of sexuality and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Bob Bloom

 You Can Count on Me (2000) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Laura Linney,
Mark Ruffalo, Rory Culkin, Matthew Broderick and Jon Tenney. Written and
directed by Ken Lonergan. Rated R.
 Absolutes, it seems, only exist in the movies ó and thatís because
audiences require a closure of some sort.
 That is what makes You Can Count on Me so unusual. It is a movie that
deals with life issues and in a manner that mirrors reality ó sloppy,
flawed and inconclusive.
 Sammy (Laura Linney) has been on her own since her parents were killed
in a traffic accident.
 As the film opens, Sammy is the lending officer at a small-town bank
branch. She is a single mom with an 8-year-old son, Rudy (Rory Culkin).
 Her younger brother, Terry (Mark Ruffalo), is a drifter and a screw-up.
In need of money, he abandons his girlfriend and drops in on his big
sister.
 And the family dynamics begin. Sammy mothers Terry, brow beating him
for not keeping in touch. He finally admits that he served a few months
in a Florida jail because of his involvement in a barroom fight.
 Sammy, meanwhile, has a lot on her plate. She is dating Bob (Jon
Tenney) whom she may ó or may not ó love, and she is coping with a fussy
new bank manager, Brian (Matthew Broderick), who at their first meeting,
refuses to allow her to leave ó as is her custom ó from 3:15 to 3:30 so
she can pick up her son at the bus stop and drop him off at the baby
sitter.
 Terry, meanwhile, decides to extend his visit after he discovers his
girlfriend tried to commit suicide. Terry takes this opportunity to get
closer to his nephew.
 Written and directed by Ken Lonergan, You Can Count on Me rivets your
attention not only because of the top-rate performances by all involved
ó especially Linney and Ruffalo ó but because we each can recognize some
of ourselves in the interaction between the two: The long-held
resentments, the fear of disapproval the self-doubts about a course of
action.
 On a whim, it seems, Sammy begins an affair with the married Brian.
Linney superbly displays Sammy's mixed emotions as she goes through a
grab-bag of feelings ó from exhilaration to guilt ó after one tryst with
her boss.
 Ruffaloís Terry is really a good-hearted soul who just cannot do the
right thing. He means no harm. Rather, he's merely a bit naive and even
a bit idealistic.
 When Rudy asks Terry about his father, the latter ó without consulting
Sammy ó drives Rudy to the trailer where his father lives. There, the
boy is rejected and denied, an action that so infuriates Terry that he
gets into another fight and again winds up in trouble ó not only with
the law ó but with Sammy.
 Ruffalo plays Terry as a wounded animal, but one that has been mentally
abused. It is a performance that garners sympathy and ultimately
respect.
 Broderick is clever in his supporting role as the anal boss who cannot
understand why people continually question his authority or his
decisions. Broderick, a childhood friend of Lonerganís, takes what could
have been a one-dimensional  buffoon and transforms him into a comical
individual whom you can laugh at and recognize from your own workplace.
 You Can Count on Me ends as it begins, with life going on and nothing
really getting resolved. Terry leaves to see how his former girlfriend
in faring, while Sammy merely drives back to the bank for another day of
work.
 Even this description is inadequate to explain the emotional resonance
that rings through You Can Count on Me. Itís a movie that doesn't tackle
any big issues or even make any profound statements. It is merely a look
at some regular people making the best of their situations from day to
day.
 And, just like us, for them some days are better than others. And if
you want a better day, I strongly recommend you take the time to see You
Can Count on Me.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Other reviews by Bloom can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http:.//www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Norm Schrager
You Can Count on Me is a film that, in true Sundance form, mixes the
familiar with the unexpected.  The Best Dramatic Film winner from this
year's festival has some actors we've seen before (including Matthew
Broderick) and some traditional storylines (single Mom's troubles, loner
returns to hometown), but first-time writer-director Ken Lonergan adds
just enough unpredictable dialogue and creativity to make this movie the
real deal.
The single Mom is Sammy (Laura Linney), an organized bank loan officer
living in her small-town childhood home.  The loner is her scraggly
brother Terry (Mark Ruffalo), a troubled wanderer coming back to ask
Sammy for cash.  And while this seems pretty basic from the outset,
Lonergan has some smart ideas up his sleeve.
Most notable is the way he uses the character Rudy, Sammy's 8-year old
son, a kid utilized by Lonergan as well as any writer has ever used a
child, avoiding action that seems cutesy or contrived.  Sammy would love
for Terry to be a strong male influence on Rudy while he's visiting, but
she isn't sure she trusts him.
Rudy (played by 11-year old Rory Culkin -- yes, another Culkin),
connects with Terry but is smart enough to know that his uncle's not the
brightest guy in the world.  Their dialogue is the highlight of the
movie; there hasn't been such straight talk between two guys in a film
in a long time.  In essence, Lonergan has written Rudy as a young boy
that has enough understanding to take people as they are.
Alas, Sammy should be so smart.  She tries to anchor Terry, give him
home, give him purpose -- but maybe she needs all of the above as well. 
The director never misses the opportunity to show the dichotomy and the
irony between the two siblings, but thankfully doesn't beat us over the
head with it.
Lonergan, who previously wrote The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle,
has put together a killer cast to take advantage of his fine script. 
Linney (The Truman Show) gets a once-in-a-career chance to shine, giving
Sammy the delicate balance between saint and whore.  Ruffalo and young
Culkin are just great -- both are as meaningful and natural as it gets
-- and the aforementioned Broderick admirably takes a lesser role as
Sammy's new boss, a man who's got troubles of his own.
You Can Count On Me is directed and edited with a refreshing efficiency,
with Lonergan preferring to simply move along to the next scene if you
already know how this one will end.  We don't need to see two people
stare at each other, start making out, and then jump into bed.  Lonergan
gives us the stare, and then cuts to the bed after the sex is over.  It
provides a nice dose of surprise and complexity throughout the movie.
The movie's dramatic flavor is occasionally peppered with some quality
laughs, in a healthy combination that also keeps the film moving, which
is good.  But in the most unorthodox move of all, You Can Count On Me
really doesn't have any dramatic climax, no grand moment of epiphany. 
It's just an intelligent look into a connected set of lives, in which a
neatly-tied ending isn't as important as the details that make up each
day.
Director: Ken Lonergan
Producers: Barbara De Fina, John N. Hart, Larry Meistrich, Jeffrey Sharp
Writer: Ken Lonergan
Starring:  Laura Linney, Mark Ruffalo, Rory Culkin, Matthew Broderick,
Jon Tenney, J. Smith-Cameron, Ken Lonergan
http://www.youcancountonmemovie.com/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
