Title
Review for Conceiving Ada (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CONCEIVING ADA (director/writer: Lynn Hershman Leeson; screenwriter:
Eileen Jones, their conception of Ada's life based on the book "Ada, the
Enchantress of Numbers, a Selection From the Letters of Lord Byron's
Daughter and Her Description of the First Computer," by Betty A. Toole;
cinematographers: Hiro Narita/Bill Zarchy (virtual sets); cast: Tilda
Swinton (Ada Byron King), Timothy Leary (Sims), Karen Black (Lady
Byron/Mother Coer), Francesca Faridany (Emmy Coer), J.D. Wolfe
(Nicholas), John O'Keefe (Charles Babbage), John Perry Barlow (John
Crosse), Ellen Sebastian (Emmy's doctor), 1997)
Lynn Hershman Leeson is the director/writer of an intriguing
cyber-fantasy film. In 1980 the U.S. Department of Defense named the Ada
programming language in honor of Lord Byron and Mary Wollstonecraft's
daughter, the mathematician Ada Byron King, Countess Lovelace
(1815-1852), credited as the "first computer programmer" because of her
plan for calculating Bernoulli numbers. It is a film that is strong on
ideas about artificial life, memory, and immortality; and, in the
innovative technology it uses to convey its virtual reality story by
using the latest in cutting edge technology, such as digital software
photoshop programs. The film was structured around the idea of a double
helix to be visualized in every scene and shot by using a DNA image as a
model for the actors' placement and camera movement. The actors appeared
before nothing but a bluescreen and were photographed with a Digital
Betacam and this was then transferred to computer images depicting the
same Victorian bed-and-breakfast rooms where Ada Byron King actually
resided, the actors and the authentic rooms were then seen together in
the live video.
The film is much weaker on its drama than on its technology, as its
characters seem to pale a bit besides the computerized images of
artificial life that it created. Nevertheless, for computer geeks, this
is a definite must see; for others, it should be of considerable
interest to the more intellectual-minded who like to see something
different for a change in a film, in a film that also has the ability to
challenge the usual concepts of what reality is thought to be.
Conceiving Ada tracks the somewhat analogous contemporary life that the
American neurotic computer programer, Emmy Coer (Francesca Faridany),
has with the 19th century creator of the first computer language
program, Ada Byron King (Tilda Swinton), as Emmy dedicates her life to
making contact with that problematic genius and rebel against Victorian
behavior and her arranged marriage, by becoming what is called an
"agent" through the use of a computer program she has created in her
position as a genetic memory expert. An "agent" is supposed to be anyone
or thing who can retrieve information and can talk directly with someone
from the past. The common thread in the woman's lives, is their
obsessive genius, their searing curiosity, and an indifference to
bringing children into the world and then raising them. Also, part of
Emmy's attraction to Ada, is that both of their mothers wanted to stifle
their intellectual development, as Karen Black plays the dual role of
mother to both of them.
The fascination with Ada by Emmy goes beyond her respect for her work
and her stance as a feminist fighting for respect in a male dominated
field. They share a common feeling about art and memory, and conduct
their lives in a similar free-spirited manner. And, both have lovers who
interfere with their obsessive plans. Ada has several lovers, as well as
a spouse and several children. She uses all her lovers for her sexual
advantage and to tap into their intellectual knowledge. She collaborates
with Charles Babbage (J.D. Wolfe), who is the inventor of an engine
called the "Theory of Miracles."His invention aims at trying to predict
the infinite number of possibilities there are in life, such as what are
the practical uses derived from conscious dreams. As envisioned by Ada,
this information can lead to composing music and creating a poetic
language. In a fit of jealousy over her superior intelligence and
promiscuous behavior, Babbage changed Ada's notes and the purpose of the
engine they were collaborating on. As a result, he received all the
credit for the invention and she was later on reduced to living out a
painful existence where she got hooked on opium, which a doctor
prescribed as treatment for her pain. One of Ada's other lovers is
Byron's children tutor, but she develops a more intense and deeper
sexual relationship with the devious but likable John Crosse (Barlow),
an expert in encryption. Emmy is also exuberant about sex and obsessed
about her work, living with a boyfriend, Nicholas (J.D. Wolfe), who
pressures her to have his baby and stop being obsessed with the Ada
project and start taking care of her health by eating right. He
interferes with her work by going into her computer program to try and
stop her project.
As an added bonus to the movie, a very tired looking and ashen Timothy
Leary (He died in 1996) plays Emmy's guru, Sims, and the surprise about
this brilliant and controversial advocate of taking hallucinogenics and
well known space explorer's appearance here, is that he is obviously
very sick, but appears to be sober and rational in his thoughts. He
dispenses advice, warnings about danger having a quality of randomness,
and offers wisdom to his young woman acolyte. One of his pearls of
wisdom goes something like this, "Information is like a mist that you
have to breathe in."
By touching up her own DNA, the pregnant Emmy finds out that she can
travel to the past
and share her space (cyber- and- womb) with Ada. Ada is a broken and
disappointed 37-year-old at this time, who is about to die from cancer,
feeling that she has lost everything in life and is wondering why she
never was what she should have been. Emmy offers to try and save her
work and give her the historical recognition she deserves, as she tries
to get Ada to divulge the secrets of her work. But Ada doesn't want all
her secrets told, saying that every generation has to recreate the world
in their own image.
The concept offered in this film, of the possibility to retreat to the
past for communication with historical figures and to gather information
from stored memory, is an alluring idea and is certainly one that gives
this intelligently made film a highbrow premise worth savoring. What
weakness' there are to the story, come about from its complications in
its storytelling and the didactic way it explains so much of its
mathematical theory to an audience that needs this vital information
made clear in order to help them make sense out of what is taking
place-- but this ruins the entertainment value of the film and curtails
its natural flow. As a result, that very riveting performance of a
first-class actress, one of the very best, the illuminated Tilda Swinton
(Orlando), is overshadowed by the film's inability to be more
energetically engaging, though some effort was made to bring more life
and passion into the story by showing both Emmy's and Ada's sexual
passions unfold. But the story couldn't completely connect with all the
characters involved and bring out their side of the story. If the film
remained more focused on Ada's story and we understood her work a little
bit more, and if we saw why Babbage got credit for the invention not
her, it would have been in all probability an even better film. Swinton
is that good of a performer to have carried this film further if given
more camera time. The film's ingenuous structure and imaginative nature
suffered some dents because it misplaced its focus, not staying with the
part of the story that was truly unique and inspiring. Yet for those on
the lookout for a brainy non-Hollywood film, one that has an original
flare to it, this one should prove to be more than satisfactory.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   There's something awfully scary about this movie. 
"Conceiving Ada" is not eerie like, say, "I Know What You
Did Last Summer," and in fact for maturity and intellectual
depth it's not even on the same planet as that high-school
adventure.  Nor does writer-director Lynn Hershman Leeson
spook us in the manner of James Whaley, who conceived not
Ada but the Bride of Frankenstein.  What's frightening is that
"Frankenstein" author Mary Shelley's apprehension about
the subordination of human beings by the very mutants we
created is coming ever closer to reality.  Take movies, for
example.  Special effects dominate the youth market more
than ever now, as computer- and video-game savvy kids flock
to theaters for the car crashes and exploding buildings rather
than for the human performances.  What's more a character
like Todd, the title figure played by Kurt Russell in Warner
Bros.' "Soldier," acts so much like an accomplished robot that
Russell himself could have been downsized in favor of an
automaton.  Some visionaries have actually suggested that
many films of the future will be as devoid of living actors as
"Prince of Egypt," with computer-generated substitutes that
look like anything but cartoon figures.
   To some extent that future is here, with "Conceiving Ada"
serving as a breakthrough in cinema technology.  The human
roles are taken by real people, though the part of a dog is
assumed by both a real mutt (who is so ugly that it's cute)
and a computer-generated image of the pooch.  Ah, but the
sets!  Lots of brand-new technological effects are used,
generally created with Photoshop software and added in post-
production.  The actors themselves performed against
nothing more than a bluescreen, photographed with a Digital
Betacam (with the images later transferred to 35mm), and for
the most part the techies then took over.  The computer-savvy
crew utilized 380 photos of Victorian rooms of San Francisco
Bay-area bed and breakfast lodgings plus some still shots of
the actual room once occupied by the daughter of Lord
Byron, Ada, known as Lady Lovelace.  They superimposed
the photos through miscellaneous digital technologies,
colorized them, and mixed it all up in post production.  Lynn
Hershman Leeson, who had done scores of videos before
involving herself in this groundbreaking effort, is just the
person to do the movie, given her techie background and her
desire to restore Ada Byron King to her rightful place in
history.
   Enough about the impressive technology, which you can
read about in the American Cinematographer magazine of 18
September 1998.  The film must stand or fall not on the
cleverness of the set but on the quality of the drama.  
Drama is, alas, its weak link.
   The story deals with Ada Byron King (played by the
remarkable star of "Orlando," Tilda Swinton), who lived in
England during Victorian times (mid-19th century). 
Paralleling Ada's life in many ways is a fictional character of
our own time here in America, Emmy Coer (Francesca
Faridany).  Emmy is a computer programming genius
pregnant by her union with Nicholas Clayton (J.D. Wolfe) and
like Ada is obsessed with work while having a difficult time
dealing with the thought of having children.  While
researching artificial life on her computer, she manipulates
her unit to travel through time and to her utter amazement
hones in on actual scenes from Ada's life which are uploaded
by Ada's own memory.  As acted with grace, eloquence, and
intensity by Tilda Swinton, Ada takes the modern-day
programmer through her experiments with the formation of a
new language, one which could allow the a precursor of the
computer invented by Charles Babbage (John O'Keefe) to do
far more than make computations.  Her intended language
would permit this Analytical Machine to write poetry and
compose music, among other delights.  The passionate Ada
is seen enjoying several love affairs with some of the brilliant
men of her time such as mathematician John Crosse.  But
she feels that because women are accorded no respect other
than as childbearers and homemakers, her discoveries
became credited to the men with whom she worked.  In one
scene, the mortally ill and bleeding Ada is dismissed by her
physician as being merely hysterical, is given opium (to which
she became addicted), and told to "have a child" to get over
her pain.
   With only 85 minutes to tell the story, director Leeson
spends too much time on the character of Emmy, who
dominates the opening scenes, time that could have been
spent more profitably exploring exactly what Ada contributed
to the world of the computer.  We are left with the feeling that
the real work was generally performed by the men who
received the credit, particularly Babbage, who actually built
the device.  We wonder, then, why the Defense Department
named a whole computer language after Ada and nothing
after Charles.  Though Ada frequently exhorts her new friend
from the twentieth century to "save" her, we learn principally
that the salvation is to come by restoring Ada's name to its
rightful place in history and not to deliver her from her painful
illness, indifference to her children, or her feeling that she has
not fulfilled her destiny.
   "Conceiving Ada," for all its technological proficiency,
remains a work too precious for any but the most
sophisticated film buff, displaying Ada's appetite for
lovemaking and obsession with her work but almost devoid of
passion itself.  A vibrant imagination is at work in its creation,
but the film is all intellect--inert from the neck down.
