Title
Review for Nixon (1995)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Andrew Hicks
        With NIXON, Oliver Stone's three-hour follow-up to JFK, 
one more president is crossed off the list of epic biopics. I don't 
know about you, but I can hardly wait for TAFT. Until then, 
however, we've got this piece of work, starring Anthony Hopkins 
as Richard Nixon. Hopkins contributes an amazing performance, 
painting Nixon as a man almost as paranoid and conspiracy-minded 
as Stone himself. Hopkins sounds a lot like Nixon, but his visual 
appearance is a bizarre meld between how he normally looks and 
the famous Nixon jowls and hairline.
        NIXON covers pretty much the whole life of the disgraced 
President, beginning with the bungled Watergate break-in and 
flashing back to his first Presidential campaign (including a 
re-enactment of the famous TV debate with Kennedy), his football 
days and even early home life. We discover Mama Nixon (Mary 
Steenburgen) talked in the King James English of thee's and thou's, 
while Papa Nixon's solution for everything was to beat his kids 
with a belt. With an upbringing like this, it's no wonder Nixon 
has conversations with the Lincoln Memorial.
        In a massive epic worthy of Tricky Dick himself, Stone 
traces a seemingly failed career, two presidential administrations 
and a near-impeachment in the visual style he's become famous 
for, mixing odd camera angles and switching between black-and-
white and color. It's not as innovative or effective here as in JFK 
but also not as annoying or overdone as in NATURAL BORN 
KILLERS. Stone makes it known upfront that he's taken liberties 
with history in telling the story, but mixes in enough real news 
clips and celebrity look-alikes (including Henry Kissinger and 
Mao-Tse Tung) to make it seem convincing.
        Joan Allen does particular justice to the role of Pat Nixon, 
longsuffering wife of a crazed man who never calls her anything but 
"Buddy" and keeps promising a happy marriage at the next stage of 
his career, until finally they both reach the top and things are worse 
than ever. Ed Harris (as Howard Hunt), Bob Hoskins (shedding his 
English accent and donning a French maid uniform for the role of 
J. Edgar Hoover), David Paymer (Ron Zeigler) and Ed Harris (E. 
Howard Hunt) are also standouts in assuming the roles of real-life 
Nixon associates. NIXON is the movie that proves Oliver Stone 
should stick to long, surreal biographies of American presidents 
rather than Generation X slasher satire.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Hollywood)
Directed by    Oliver Stone
Written by     Clayton Townsend, Andrew G. Vanja, and Oliver Stone
Cast           Anthony Hopkins, James Woods, Paul Sorvino, Joan Allen,
               Powers Boothe, Ed Harris, Bob Hoskins, J.T. Walsh, E.G.
               Marshall, David Paymer, David Hyde Pierce
MPAA Rating    "R" (presumably for language)
Running Time   190 minutes
Reviewed at    Six Forks Station Cinemas (ugh), Raleigh, NC (5JAN96)
     The success of this long, laborious drama hinges on one thing:  
how well we believe Anthony Hopkins as President Richard Milhous 
Nixon.  As it turns out, the Welsh actor is a mixed blessing for the 
film.  Hopkins *interprets* Nixon, instead of impersonating him, and 
it's a performance that's both fascinating and distracting to watch.  
He captures the fiery gloom of a man who is (presented here as) 
obsessed with death, dying, and loss.  Physically, though, he's all 
wrong for the role.  His accent waivers and his round face and 
stature too easily blends in with the other actors.  And Nixon is 
not a man who should blend in.  
     Hopkin's half-success could've worked in a film with a strong-
er momentum.  NIXON drags, due in no small part to director Oliver 
Stone (NATURAL BORN KILLERS).  His constant cutting between film 
stocks and time periods dilutes more than it enhances.  Even his 
trademark blending of fact and fiction-- such as a gonzo scene 
supposing a link between Nixon, a herd of Texas fat cats (led by 
Larry Hagman, no less!), and the JFK assassination-- is less 
distracting than his presumption that the audience is already 
familiar with these events.  NIXON is not a story that should be 
confusing.
     That said, there are pleasures to be had.  Hopkins is great in, 
oh, about half of his scenes.  And he gets to play off an array of 
incredible actors, including Joan Allen, James Woods, J.T. Walsh, 
Powers Boothe, and Paul Sorvino, whose Henry Kissinger looks a 
little too much like Dr. Strangelove to be completely comfortable 
with.  Mein Fuhrer!  Certainly more substantive than the bulk of 
last year's crop-- and a great antidote to the apple-pie patriotism 
of APOLLO 13-- NIXON still lacks the clarity and coherence of a 
great film.  Stone has envisioned Richard Nixon as a tragic figure 
of Shakespearean proportions.  Unfortunately, neither the film, nor 
the central casting, can realize that vision. (Rated "R"/195 min.)
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit the MOVIE HELL site http://www-nvision.com/hell/>

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Some critics complained earlier this year when THE AMERICAN
PRESIDENT portrayed some Republicans as sitting in dark rooms hatching
dark conspiracies.  That film was mild compared to Oliver Stone's cold
expressionist painting of America's most controversial President.
NIXON is the bleak story of a man who had a harsh, unpleasant
childhood.  He parlayed that experience into life of power and pain
only to be brought down and destroyed by the powers he unleashed.
NIXON is a look inside the head of Richard Nixon that comes up with no
revelations beyond that it was a dark and scary place haunted by images
of his youth, a place as frightful for Nixon as it was for anybody
else.
     The film begins with a sales training film that may or may not
present Nixon's philosophy of dealing with people.  It is being watched
by the Plumbers on their way to Watergate.  The scene makes no earthly
sense in saying that these people would be watching this particular
film at just this instant of time.  But it is the sort of artistic
liberty that Oliver Stone takes in NIXON.  From there the film jumps to
points all over Nixon's life, flashing back in time for a few scenes
only to flash forward again and then to jump to some third point.  We
see Nixon's stern Quaker upbringing and his love/fear relationship with
a mother who had a power over him all his life.  Flash forward and we
see the deals he is making as a President after the Watergate story
broke.  Flash back and he is making other deals with J. Edgar Hoover or
with shady businessmen in Texas who seem to know before the
assassination that Kennedy will not be running for office in 1964.
Yes, this is an Oliver Stone film and secret deals and conspiracies are
salted into the plot.  In Stone's view, Nixon was a man who repeatedly
conspired with others and who saw conspiracies against him and
betrayals nearly everywhere.  He is a natural subject for an Oliver
Stone film.
     Under Stone's direction Sir Anthony Hopkins plays Nixon as a stern
vengeful man who must always assign blame for every misfortune,
sometimes bizarrely inappropriately.  Nixon is a man who remembers
every slight that he has ever received or imagined.  The 190 minutes
spent in Nixon's world is more than enough time.  Or more accurately,
it is far too much and yet not enough.  It is too much because of the
personality Stone gives Nixon is so sullen and unpleasant to be around.
And it not enough because the narrative is strangely out of kilter.  It
seems to assume the viewer already knows much of Nixon's history.  The
film spends an hour on Nixon's involvement with Watergate but not
enough to explain coherently the Watergate scandal to someone who does
not already know it.  Stone assumes the viewer knows the facts and
instead gives us a sequence that could be called "Famous Scenes from
the Watergate Affair."  I pity the foreign audiences who will try to
understand Watergate from what Oliver Stone tells them about it.  And
on top of that, Stone handily sidesteps the question of whether Nixon
knew in advance of the break-in.  In another odd sequence the film has
Mao and Nixon admitting to each other that they are tyrants.  Even if
the thought crossed Mao's mind, he would hardly tell Nixon.  Stone's
idea of what heads of state say to each other in private is almost
surreal.
     Some of the characterizations of the people around Nixon will be
equally controversial.  Haldeman and Ehrlichman are played by perennial
screen slimeballs James Woods and J. T. Walsh.  While Haldeman is as
slimey as any of Woods's characters, Ehrlichman comes off as
surprisingly troubled by Nixon's actions.  Pat Nixon (played by Joan
Allen) is elevated to almost heroic stature, torn between love and
loyalty on one hand and moderation and conscience on the other.
     The Hollywood Pictures production is a prestige film and has a
superior cast of actors led by Anthony Hopkins but including Powers
Booth, Ed Harris, Bob Hoskins, E. G. Marshall, David Paymer, Paul
Sorvino, and Mary Steenburgen.  Hopkins is, of course, a terrific
actor, but his Richard M. Nixon is one of his worst performances in
recent memory.  He neither looks nor sounds much like Nixon, but worse
yet he exaggerates Nixon's slight slouch giving him a round-shouldered
hunched look.  Making matters worse the make-up artist has given him a
much more serious case of five o'clock shadow than the original ever
had.
     While Stone was bending reality he threw in more than this film's
share of surreal and experimental scenes including sequences that were
highly under-cranked to show cars or clouds zipping by or shots printed
in negative.  Rarely do these convey much to the film but a touch of
pretentiousness.  Certainly in an epic film of this length a few of
these strange effects should have been cut.
     On the other hand it is hard to rate NIXON too low as a historical
film that tries to analyze a figure as complex--not to say pivotal--as
Richard M. Nixon.  This is not a film that reaches for easy and pat
answers, even if it does at times seem overly harsh on the man.  It
covers a broad swath of history and presents it in a way that does not
underestimate its audience.  Like Nixon the man, NIXON the film has
major problems and major virtues.  I give the film on balance a high +1
on the -4 to +4 scale, still a rather tepid rating for so lavish a
production.

Author
Joan Ellis
"Nixon" is the best and worst of Oliver Stone. If it is an
interesting chronicle of America's cardinal political scandal, it
still smacks of a researcher so proud of his work that he can't
bear to leave anything out. It's too damned long.       
>From his White House bunker, Nixon tries to snuff out the
Watergate brush fire by jettisoning his advisors in ascending
order of importance. First, the break-in team:  Hunt, Liddy,
McCord, Martinez, Sturgis; next, White House staffers Erlichman,
Haldeman, and Dean; then friend and attorney-general John
Mitchell. 
At the end, he is surrounded by players from the bench: the
inept Ron Ziegler, the ambitious Al Haig, and the infamous Henry
Kissinger, who can barely contain his glee at the possibility of
being the hero who saves the country from a sick man. In the
"Deep Throat" guessing game, it's worth noting that Kissinger is
the one figure who needed two decades of secrecy in order to
continue his career as international power broker.   
The facts of Watergate were proven long ago and confirmed
repeatedly by the testimony of the participants, leaving little
for Oliver Stone to posit or prove. A sitting president committed
at least 39 felonies, orchestrated a cover-up, lied profoundly,
and taped himself in the act. When the Supreme Court ruled 8-0
that the president could not use executive privilege in a
criminal case, the game was over. 
Reaching for a purpose for his film, Stone decides to
explore and explain Richard Nixon. He paints his portraits in the
emotional, questionable brush strokes of psychohistory. Did Nixon
really fuel himself with scotch?  Was his Quaker mother so devout
that she defused all human emotion by hiding behind the cloak of
her faith?  Is it fair to hypothesize about the intimacy of the
Nixon bedroom?
Stone tells us that the slights and snubs of childhood
produced the paranoid star of the Watergate tapes. In the final
hour, he hammers his point home by cutting his camera wildly
through Nixon's visions in flailing excess that threatens to
overwhelm the stark truth. This is melodrama where none is
needed.   
Anthony Hopkins, with his head seeming to grow from
somewhere in his chest, catches the awkward stance and tension
that informed Nixon's behavior. He has captured perfectly the
sudden smile that burst from a dark scowl under pressure.
Supported all the way by a strong cast, Hopkins turns in a
performance that is an uncanny suggestion of Nixon's core. 
As Nixon's wife, Joan Allen is every bit as enigmatic as the
real Pat Nixon. She conveys beautifully the sense of the
claustrophobic prison that surrounds her. The actress's
compassion for Mrs. Nixon is palpable.
The drama of peeling away the layers of guilt until Nixon
stands exposed needs no embellishment. At the end of his tortured
farewell speech, he stands naked before the nation, fake to the
end, riveting in his transparency. This is one story that did not
need Oliver Stone.  


Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Anthony Hopkins, James Woods, Paul Sorvino, Joan Allen, 
      Powers Boothe, Ed Harris, Bob Hoskins, J.T. Walsh, E.G. Marshall, 
      David Paymer, David Hyde Pierce
Director: Oliver Stone
Producers: Clayton Townsend, Andrew G. Vanja, and Oliver Stone
Screenplay: Oliver Stone, Stephen J. Rivele, and Christopher Wilkinson
Cinematography: Robert Richardson
Music: John Williams
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     It's always a tricky proposition to make a motion picture based on 
recent history -- and the more public the episode, the more difficult it 
is for the film maker to balance drama with accuracy.  This is 
especially true when that film maker is Oliver Stone, a director known 
more for self-aggrandizement than for the thoughtful handling of 
difficult issues.  Under Stone, JFK turned into a three-hour paranoid 
ordeal with a conspiracy theory ten times less plausible than the Warren 
Commission's "one bullet" hypothesis.  NATURAL BORN KILLERS became a 
sickening display of indulgent ego-stroking.  
     It's entirely because of Stone's reputation that the even-
handedness of NIXON is such a surprise.  While not an unassailable 
portrait of the late president, this movie at least attempts to present 
Nixon as a human being, with all the failings and greatness inherent in 
a man of his stature.  Nixon is portrayed an neither demonic nor 
angelic.  This is a rare occasion where Stone's script is more concerned 
with executing a character study than pushing a political agenda.  The 
film even ends with a touching tribute culled from Nixon's funeral last 
year.
     That's not to say that Stone has stuck entirely to the historical 
record.  Unwilling to abandon conspiracy theories, the director comes up 
with a rather ridiculous connection between Nixon and JFK's assassins.  
The man linking the title character to November 22, 1963 is a rich Texas 
oil magnate, played by none other than Larry Hagman.  While his name 
isn't J.R. Ewing, the similarities are too obvious to ignore.  One 
wonders if Stone didn't include this bit just to incite controversy and 
raise a few eyebrows.
     NIXON is not a simple regurgitation of historical events.  In fact, 
history is used primarily as the backdrop against which this character 
study takes place.  Less a biography than an impressionist's vision, the 
film may disappoint those expecting a vitriolic attack on someone who is 
surely not among Stone's heroes.  But the lead personae, as realized by 
Anthony Hopkins, isn't reduced to an unthinking, unfeeling caricature.  
While Nixon is depicted as a paranoid, borderline-megalomaniac, he's 
also shown to have deep moral convictions, a strong sense of loyalty, 
and a love of his country.  The drama plays out in a Shakespearean 
fashion, with Nixon's tragic flaw of hubris clearly in evidence.  
Hopkins is not heavily made up -- and therefore doesn't really look like 
his character -- but his mannerisms are perfect and he is allowed a full 
range of facial expressions (unlike Robert Duvall in STALIN).   Hopkins 
does far more with acting than fake jowls could ever accomplish.
     The film's structure is disjointed, especially during the first 
hour, as the narrative skips back and forth through time from Watergate 
to 1960 to the 1920s and 30s.  Stone is giving us a snapshot of Nixon's 
life, but it comes in such a random and haphazard fashion that it dims 
the dramatic impact and dilutes early character development.  It's not 
until the film's second hour, as Nixon faces the dilemma of how to end 
the Vietnam War, that Hopkins' character starts to click.
     Stone's penchant for bizarre cinematography damages the film more 
often than not.  Many of the odd camera angles, film stock switches, and 
surrealistic superimposed backdrops are distracting rather than 
effective.  Unfortunately, this has become one of Stone's trademarks; he 
seems unable to make a film without making some kind of statement to the 
effect of:  "Look at me!  I'm an artist!"  NIXON would have been better 
focused without such grandstanding.
     There are several memorable scenes in NIXON and these, along with 
Hopkins' outstanding portrayal, keep the viewer engaged.  One takes 
place at the Lincoln Memorial, where Nixon faces a group of student 
protesters and tries to explain why he can't stop the Vietnam War.  
Another is a confrontation between the President and his wife (Joan 
Allen) as his whole life goes up in smoke.  Then there's a moment in the 
White House where Nixon and Kissinger (Paul Sorvino) pray as the 
President prepares to offer his resignation.  And, throughout the whole 
film, there's Nixon's ongoing competition with JFK, his most bitter foe 
in life and death.
     NIXON really doesn't offer any surprising insights, nor does it 
break new ground for the director.  This is a dynamic -- if flawed -- 
look at the man who, for better and for worse, changed America's place 
in the world and its perception of itself.  There are few who do not 
have an opinion of Nixon.  In this motion picture, Oliver Stone presents 
his vision of the forces that drove and motivated the late President.  
And, factual or not, there's no denying that NIXON has moments when it 
is nothing short of compelling.  
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Chad Polenz
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1995, R, 191 minutes [3 hours, 11 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Anthony Hopkins (Richard Nixon), Joan Allen (Pat Nixon), Paul
Sorvino (Henry Kissinger), James Woods (Bob Holland), David Hyde-Pierce (John
Dean), produced by Clayton Townsend, Oliver Stone, Andrew G. Vajna, written
by Oliver Stone, Stephen J. Rivele, Christopher Wilkinson, directed by Oliver
Stone.
"Nixon" is another epic film by Oliver Stone with a bit of a split
personality. At times it's a  touching drama of a man who had the world in
his hand and still wasn't happy. And at other times it's a commercial film of
espionage, diplomacy, and politics. The final outcome is quite moving at
times, but is held back due to strange storytelling.        
First of all, special mention must be made to Anthony Hopkins who delivers
an outstanding performance as Richard Nixon. He is able to take a complicated
story and simplify it down to one man's struggle for his own happiness. 
Nixon came from a blue collar family in California, and there are many
flashbacks to his childhood to give some idea of what made Nixon who he is.
Although his family suffered from tuberculosis, his parents were hard
working, God-fearing people who established tough morals for him. Nothing he
did seemed to impress them that much, and after his father died he didn't
seem to realize that all the work in the world cannot bring someone back. In
his adult life, especially as president, he seems to be suffering from a
terrible case of Oedipus Complex and doesn't realize it.
We'd probably like to think politicians are just like regular people but
we'd be wrong. Stone is usually able to present moods and themes in a clear
manner, but it doesn't work as well here. When Nixon and his associates
debate what to do over possible communists, it seems more like a commercial
adventure movie of sorts, involving lots of conspiracies and strategies (a la
"Clear And Present Danger").
The first two acts seemed interesting as they were pretty much told in a
straightforward manner. However, the third act turns on a dime and becomes
complicated and confusing as it dives into the Watergate scandal. I didn't
know much the before seeing this, and by the end of this film I was just as
confused about it. Still, the steps taken are entertaining and of high
quality. The only problem is its difficult to tell whether the theme is Nixon
as a person, or Nixon's personality as it effected the presidency. 
Maybe there's just a little too much Nixon to "Nixon," by the end I was all
Nixoned-out. It's like two films in one: first of his political career and
downfall, and a detailed investigation into the Watergate scandal. Perhaps
its' a little too epic, but who said being the president was easy?
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz 

Author
Michael Redman
        While there may be some question concerning how much of Oliver Stone's film
is truth, there can be no debate that it is one hell of a movie. Richard Nixon
was an enigma to his friends and family as well as to the country and Stone
shoves our face in his version of the answers.
        The acting is as dynamic as you would expect from Anthony Hopkins, Joan
Allen, Powers Boothe, James Woods and dozens of others including an
unexpectedly strong, albeit minor, appearance by Larry Hagman. The sets feel
authentic. The era seems right. Nixon's life flashes before our eyes...
        And flash is what it does. Like Stone's "JFK", the film is a patchwork of
remarkable vignettes. Filmed in numerous formats -- color, black and white,
extremely grainy, over-exposed  -- the pseudo-documentary approach invades our
minds and becomes history.
        What a chore this must have been to direct and edit. What scenes to film in
which of the numerous film types? What hallucination to include in which
flashback inside which other flashback? The final result is such an assault on
the senses that those decisions may not have mattered. The choice to construct
the film in this manner might be only the crucial one. Weighing in at over
three hours of visual onslaught, Stone's image becomes ours almost involuntarily.
        In Nixon and "JFK", Oliver Stone presents our history as mythology.
Even if the warrior is fatally flawed, it is still the story of a hero's
struggle. As evil as many people believe Nixon to have been; according to
Stone, the president thought he was fighting the noble fight. Beaten down time
after time, Nixon picked himself back up to slay more dragons.
        The Kennedy assassination and Watergate are perhaps the defining moments of
our nation's history in the last half of this century. The events that became
legends created the American mood for decades. Each of those few minutes of
history changed the country's collective soul dramatically.
        Kennedy is viewed as the knight in shining armor shot down as he was saving
the country. The great hope of the liberals destroyed before he could fulfill
his destiny. The lesson for the country? The good die young so don't try.
        Watergate was the downfall for the conservatives' hero. Even sleazy
politicians fail. Nixon's lesson for us? The people in charge lie. Don't trust anyone.
        The reality that Kennedy wasn't completely noble and Nixon, not totally
depraved doesn't much matter. The truth of history is academic; the myths are
what stir the country. 
[This appeared in the 1/4/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Ralph Benner
        Doomed to the humiliation of resignation over the two bit
Watergate burglary, shattered and dangerously close to the emotional
brink, Anthony Hopkins as Oliver Stone's NIXON stands before an
appropriately sorrowful portrait of JFK and says, "They look at you and
see what they want to be. They look at me and see what they are." It's a
powerful, stinging moment because it's catheterizing: the words channel
not only into Hopkins but also into us as if insertions of excruciating
self-recognition. The complexities of Richard Nixon were and remain his
pathology of lies and fabrication of enemies, which held hostage an entire
nation. Though the only solution the anesthesia of his departure, the
legacy of the politician who built his career on dirty tricks and the
surreptitious continues unabated: the GOP owes its current fair fortunes
on Nixon's devious, sleazy methodology. While Senator Allscum D'Amato subs
as the Nixonian dirty deed plotter for the time being, Robert Dole sobbing
at the Lyin' King's funeral is a most defining, foretelling moment. 
        Anthony Hopkins isn't the first choice most of us would have made
to play our 37th president. And, as we now know, when Stone and Hopkins
started filming, the Welsh actor was deep in prosthetics and voice
duplication. Didn't work because no matter how good an actor Hopkins is,
he couldn't rise above the weight of caricature. Lest we forget, we've
already had that anyway: for example, in the TV miniseries BLIND AMBITION,
Rip Torn mimicked the president so uncannily, so incorrigibly that while
he drafted us into watching him, we wondered if he realized that his
acting had turned into a masquerade of old plaster. A super-scummy
mechanical contraption, we became as exhausted by Torn's preparations -- I
swear that we were able to see them being processed -- as he seemed to be.
Granted, taking on the role of a famous contemporary, particularly the
infamous, is a harder challenge for an actor than trying to bring to life
a famous figure who is historically out of our time. Creating a character
who can't be traced through the omnipresent media can give an actor the
edge; he can take chances in bringing the personage to life in his own way
without having to repeat exactly what we already know, which, right now,
is the most popular form of "acting." For instance, Derek Jacobi stunned
viewers with his title role in I,CLAUDIUS; watching him stutter, squint,
shake and fumble, grow from presumed idiot to master politician, one felt
that not only can history come alive but that TV performance can also
become art.  Like Rip Torn's Nixon, however, Jacobi's Hitler in INSIDE THE
THIRD REICH is a victim to all the media-produced history available. It
can be said that because there's a plenitude of material -- in Hitler and
Nixon's cases next to impossible to digest -- the roles seem safe only
when the actors lip-synch the parts. What happens when actors do this is
that when they imitate the more notorious media-framed impressions, they
become the imagery of our worst, most superficial suspicions about the
people they're only playing. It's not acting, in search of a fresh
perspective or new insights, it's kareoke as verdict. 
        Is the art of respectable representation of the famous in danger
of turning into the art of trashing? If Torn's performance in the
parody-by-accident, bizarrely cast BLIND AMBITION begs the question, maybe
there's no other way to play other than "dress up," which provides a
safety net for audiences so they can somehow believe no one could be like
that or permit such the atrocities Hitler did -- a mechanism to relieve
themselves over the horrible fact that they voted for them. TNT's
KISSINGER AND NIXON, wanting to play it straight, reinforces the dilemma:
drenched in prosthetics, fat pads and speech affectations, Ron Silver as
Henry and Beau Bridges as Tricky Dicky soak up the good intentions and
what seeps out is slightly elevated Mad magazine; it's a drag show in
suits. The TV pic is further robbed of its seriousness because the script
can't cover in two hours (and probably not even in six or eight) the
verbosity and pompous megalomania of Kissinger. Most harmful is that
KISSINGER AND NIXON lacks establishment of fact and clarity of
after-effect. If healing is time's greatest virtue, one of its dangers is
that we forget how the duplicitous shenanigans of statesmen can put a
trusting nation in the vise: Henry and his boss were two of the biggest
prevaricators of their political time who, while playing games with each
other, kept us as emotional prisoners. KISSINGER AND NIXON doesn't flush
us with that kind of fear; instead, it turns an elected sociopath and a
German Machiavelli into pop-up cartoons. 
        If only it were that simple -- to laugh off the damage they
inflicted. But the tragic travesty of Watergate can be comic: Of the
movies and television that have reconstructed the fiasco, my favorite is
Michael Lindsay-Hogg's NASTY HABITS, set in a Philadelphia nunnery and
based on Muriel Spark's satire THE ABBESS OF CREW. It's a delicious little
mockster that didn't do very well back in 1977, having come after the
overrated, chiaroscuristic ALL THE PRESIDENT'S MEN, which used an unnamed
Judas to make us feel good about the press. (As timely as it was, a
catharsis of sorts, its grungy-grim dramaturgy is, now, unwatchable; it's
as paranoid as its target.) NASTY HABITS, however, is extremely watchable;
attacked by many for being an offender of Catholicism and therefore a
sacrilegious format to mock Nixon, it's a classy burlesque that wouldn't
be nearly as effective as it is without Glenda Jackson. Her Nixon is a
performance tilted to disturb on various levels, the most obvious being
the worrisome Nixon loner imperialism, his unearned haughtiness, his
terseness in speech and manner. Neither heavy handed impersonation like
Torn's nor the effervescent demon of Jason Robards Jr.'s portrayal in
WASHINGTON BEHIND CLOSED DOORS, Jackson gets the hard-boiled covering of
Nixon down so pat that sometimes, briefly, Nixon's impenetrable persona
seems to suddenly appear. It's a little alarming, and meant to be, because
at times, when Nixon was publicly emoting, he scared the hell out of us in
that we hadn't a clue as to what he was really feeling. Having been
deceivingly shallow and contrived for so long that when he did display
emotions we had to wonder what new tricks were being employed. NASTY
HABITS is too short to get into psychology, but Jackson isn't afraid to
show us the slippery side, and she achieves this through crisp,
ultra-sharp enunciation that is like hot ice. Male actors playing Nixon go
for the piercing cold too, but Jackson's scenario isn't "just the usual
confession," it's hypnotic. 
        Hopkins as Nixon is a real reach into the man that all the other
performances have shied away from, and primarily, one might assume,
because no director had the guts to try for a definitive study. This is
the surprise of NIXON: that Oliver Stone of all possible directors
attempted to do it. Scene for scene, it's his most balanced, even
honorable work. The caveat is that it's as balanced and honorable a
portrait of Nixon that Stone could accept as the kind of prejudicial,
provoking artist that he is. Because of JFK, Stone has made it easy for
his detractors to attack him for alleged distortion and out and out
fantasy, and, not unexpectedly, the Nixon daughters have issued a
statement of public condemnation over NIXON. Not unlike Dole carping about
violence in movies he never sees, or the  Christers screaming about
Scorsese's LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST before they ever viewed it, the Nixon
girls, at the time of the statement, hadn't seen Stone's three hour etude.
If or when they do, there's a slim chance they're feel embarrassed by
rushing to premature conclusions. Stone's script, annotated to support the
wormiest of claims made, won't pass muster with them, but watching their
father through Hopkins is likely to cause flashes of hurtful memories when
they hear this Nixon warn about "the lie" and "the cover up." And deep
pain when they watch Hopkins achieve an intense, extraordinary dimension
built from torment, especially when his Nixon asks Paul Sorvino's
Kissinger to knee with him and pray; when Hopkins is consoled by Joan
Allen's Pat just before they climb the White House steps to the
presidential quarters for one of the last times; and when Hopkins
verbatims Nixon's farewell to the White House staff. It is not possible to
be unaffected by these progressions into dissolution. 
        Hopkins validates the famous Nixon imagery; Stone's "fairness,"
though, isn't the same as fact. Before the movie starts, we're told that
the screenplay is based on what's published, that much of what is
available is contradicted by an equal amount of material, and that the
play condenses, composites and conjectures. Well, that's more honest than
he usually is about his subjects, yet that doesn't stop him from
theorizing without much solid support: that Nixon got involved with
attempting to execute Castro, but the mess backfired and JFK was
assassinated as punishment. And that that is the reason why Castro has
been left alone: like J. Edgar Hoover, Castro knows where the bodies are.
There are slimy insinuations that Nixon was involved in Bobby Kennedy's
death, and in the shooting of George Wallace. (Stone must have read the
predictions of computer pioneer Edmund Berkeley.) The director's not above
putting accusations of crimes into Pat Nixon's mouth: she reminds Nixon
that she knows what he did to Alger Hiss, who unwittingly made Nixon
nationally recognized. As Stone postulates, NIXON becomes a badly edited
Reader's Digest version of Fawn M. Brodie's RICHARD NIXON: THE SHAPPING OF
HIS CHARACTER: lots of smeary quotes, gossipy tidbits, truncated
flashbacks, but no shaping. 
That's what makes NIXON a less than satisfactory picture: there's so much
peripheral garbage thrown in that you end up fighting to stay interested
-- you can feel yourself pushing away all the Adobe After Effects in order
to get to the man. The graphic pizzazz in NATURAL BORN KILLERS might have
been all right for the twentysomethings fed on MTV, but it not only
doesn't belong in NIXON, the filler takes away from Stone's limited
respectability. Cautioning about the psychology of deception, of envy, of
enemies, and how they almost always backfire when used to maintain power,
Stone is striving to produce a rather admirable examination. But he's only
got himself to blame for not getting the kind of positive reaction he
wants, because I doubt anyone begged him to infuse NIXON with an overload
of junked up technology. What hasn't been intended by Stone is what seems
clearer now than during the turmoil of Nixon's immediate and post
presidency: that the myth of Nixon's cavernous complexities is just that.
Through fuzzy-of-meaning flashbacks, which include scenes of Nixon's
parents Frank and Hannah, Stone tries to establish the origins of Nixon's
behavior, but as one watches, and notices what's missing -- like when at
seven he slammed a hatchet into the head of a six-year-old boy after he
refused to give Dick a jar of pollywogs; or Dick's disappointment in not
being able to attend Yale (that, had he attended, might have abated
instead of exacerbated his vengeful hate of the rich) -- it's apparent
that the director can't get to any root causes and linking manifestations
because he can't see where they are. All of us are thicker and fuzzier
psychologically than we'd be willing to admit, but with Nixon, once you
"get it," much about him falls into place. 
        The star-studded cast is, overall, unobjectionable, with Madeline
Kahn as big mouth Martha Mitchell very funny. (There are other laughs in
the movie, but those few of us who managed some chuckles did so with
inexplicable discomfort.) There's a wonderful bit of E. G. Marshall as
John Mitchell in shadow; David Hype Pierce's John Dean a semi-serious
equivalent to Sandy Dennis' ditzsy Dean in NASTY HABITS; Sorvino looking a
little too tanned but getting Henry's speechiness down quite well; and
last but not least, Joan Allen as Pat. Here's a first lady we still know
next to nothing about, and even if Stone claims that sufficient research
has gone into the part, and backed up by advisers who supposedly knew the
"inside story," this Pat is conceived as the public wants to see her.
She's the public "silent majority," mutely suffering for her husband's
sins, but privately she's a chain-smoker (the real Pat died of lung
cancer), drinker, embittered by a lack of love, affection and sex. And a
sort of secret liberal needler: You really want to believe it when she
tells Hopkins' Nixon, "I know why people hate you." If Kahn is close to
looking like Martha, Allen's resemblance to Pat is spooky. In their
understandable protectiveness, the Nixon girls will tell us neither their
mother nor father were drinkers, but the evidence is strong that they
were. (Considering the pressures, you can't condemn them; and Nixon blames
Pat's stroke in 1976 on Woodward and Bernstein's THE FINAL DAYS.) Many of
us regret that Pat Nixon never spilled the beans. No one could have been
more authoritative.
        The passing of Richard Nixon has been an excuse for some, like
Kissinger, Alexander Haig and that weeping Dole, to wax a certain kind of
poetic mendacity about the late president's achievements. But thanks to
the myriad of books, articles, movies, miniseries and, most damning of
all, news film and those tapes on Watergate, eternal reminders of the sad
fact that a stultifying break-in snowballed into the self-destruction of a
president, Nixon will never be allowed to escape his true heritage. No
adversary could have concocted a more just finale: everything we ever
suspected about Nixon was confirmed almost daily during the prolonged
crisis, especially that he was liar, obstructionist, and, maybe most
dangerous of all, paranoid. Could Nixon have survived despite these sins,
if he had destroyed the tapes, as Pat in NIXON suggested? Most of us
probably doubt it. While some evidence would have been more difficult to
attain, the arrogant act of burning them would be tantamount to guilt and,
inevitably, he'd have been re-crucified by the press, who, some are sure,
would have found ways to muddy up his foreign policy triumphs -- China,
mainly -- by calling them betrayals to his hatred of the Reds. (Nixon's
domestic policies were disguised liberalism.) Our national hate for Nixon
goes back to the late 40s, and, though we have forgotten, even Eisenhower
detested him, having twice wanted to remove him from the Republican
ticket. But by the time Nixon was finally elected president in 1968, with
indeed the horrible help of the assassinations of the Kennedys, we were
swirling in the maelstrom of Vietnam, unable to convince ourselves that
the war was, one, strategically unimportant, two, our fault, and three,
immoral. Nixon's close victory came about because his stalwart
anti-Communist stance -- which was a political expedient and leftover from
the old McCarthy days -- still resonated; enough fear-loaded voters fell
for his lie about a "secret plan" to end the war and agreed with him that
the press was to blame for our mounting losses. (Anti-Communism, the press
and the hippies were used by a sick nation to forgive itself for Kent
State.) Shortly after he was reelected in a landslide in 1972, the
still-raging war had two fronts: in the jungles of Vietnam and at home, in
the offices of the President. When the burglary of the Democratic National
Party offices was irrefutably linked to Nixon, every lie converged and
nineteen months after his January, 1973 inaugural, he resigned in
disgrace. What didn't go away, and remain rampant as ever, are the tools
scumbags use to lord over those who elected them or read them: when a
former Nixon propagandist, blinded by the black blizzard of Watergate and
suspiciously forgetful of Nancy Reagan's shadow governance, calls Hillary
Rodham Clinton "a congenital liar," what's being sanction by the New York
Times are promulgation of agenda and, make no mistake about it, a
columnist's and a New York senator's infectious misogynistic obsessions to
destroy a first lady who was once a part of the legal legion investigating
Watergate. They're creating enemies who needn't be, just like Nixon who,
according to that columnist on an A & E Biography, "redeemed himself" in
the end. Only a patent liar, a virtual son of a male bitch, could mouth
the biggest lie of all.
