Title
Review for ĄÁtame! (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian L. Johnson
101 min., NC-17, Comedy/Drama, 1990, In Spanish with English
subtitles
Director: Pedro Almodovar
Cast: Victoria Abril, Antonio Banderas, Loles Leon, Francisco Rabal,
      Julieta Serrano, Maria Barranco, Rossy de Palma
     Released mental patient Antonio Banderas kidnaps porn star Victoria
Abril when she refuses to marry him.  Banderas ties Abril up and keeps
her trapped in her apartment.  As Abril's captivity goes on, she starts
to fall for Banderas.
     ATAME! is certainly not a comedy for all people.  People with
obscure tastes, I think, will have the most chance of liking this film.
I enjoyed this film a lot and suggest that adventurous people take a
chance with this film.  Inspite of what the title might suggest, this is
not a S&M, T&A, or bondage film.  I give ATAME! a five on a scale of
zero to five.  ATAME! is rated NC-17 for female nudity, explicit
language, adult situations, and violence.  There are two versions of
ATAME! available, an NC-17 version and an unrated version (the version
that I saw).  Both versions have a run time of 101 minutes, so there
can't be more than a few seconds difference.
     The cast for this film is excellent, especially Victoria Abril (LA
LUNE DANS LE CANIVEAU [THE MOON IN THE GUTTER], AMANTES [LOVERS 1991
version], HIGH HEELS).  She brings her character alive when she is on
screen.  Victoria Abril is the highlight of this film.  Antonio Banderas
(WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN) also does a great job.
Francisco Rabal, who plays an old director in the film, has the funniest
character in the film.
     Spanish cult director Pedro Almodovar (WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A
NERVOUS BREAKDOWN) has created an excellent dark comedy that will most
likely reward those who are willing to try this film with a great time.
ATAME! is excellently written and has great locations.  I think the way
that the drug district was set up to look was great.  The subtitles are
in yellow and done well, so that they can be read in all of the scenes.

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
Shortly after being released from a mental hospital, a young man kidnaps
the woman of his dreams -- a beautiful porno actress who is also a drug
addict.  He ties her up and beats her until she falls in love with him!
A "romantic comedy" that is neither romantic nor funny.  Instead, it's
rather boring!
Spain (English subtitles), color, 1990, approx. 100 minutes.  Director:
Pedro Almodovar
     This is the latest film from Spanish director Pedro Almodovar, who
is best known in the U.S. for two earlier films: MATADOR (1986), and
WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN (1988).  The film has
generated considerable controversy, and plenty of free publicity for
its content (bondage), and the fact that it received the dreaded "X"
rating from the MPAA, which caused the distributor to release the film
as unrated instead.
     The storyline is fairly simple.  Ricky is a mental patient, a
compulsive thief, and a real stud.  He is released from a mental
hospital in the beginning of the film.  Next we meet Marina, a porno
actress and junkie, who is making her first "serious" film, a
second-rate horror film directed by a lecher who lusts after Marina.
     Ricky locates Marina, and stalks her for a while.  A suitable
opportunity arises, he kidnaps her and holds her prisoner.  To make
certain that she doesn't escape, he ties and gags her frequently.  The
rest of the movie consists of him alternately expressing his undying
love for her (he wants to have children by her), beating/threatening
her, and keeping her in bondage while he goes out to buy drugs for her.
As the film continues, Marina slowly starts to fall in love with her
captor.
     The production values of this film are, at best, only average.  The
"steamy" sex scene that supposedly earned the film an X rating seems
very over-rated; indeed, the scene is really ridiculous.  Even worse,
the scene is not funny either!
     The big problem with the film is that it simply doesn't work.  As a
comedy, it produces very few laughs; there was very little laughter in
the theater when I saw it, so I am not the only one who found the film
blase.  As a romance, we need to believe that Marina can actually fall
in love with the man who threatens, beats, and regularly abuses her!
For this to happen, Marina needs to be as crazy as Ricky, and that
impression is not conveyed in the film.
     I believe that the film doesn't work because the director is
playing it straight, i.e., conventional humor and romance.  The
situation of this film, a woman held in bondage against her will, could
be used to full advantage in a warped, black comedy (much as S&M was
used in the outrageously funny MARQUIS, reviewed previously).  However,
by being conventional, the result is a rather boring film.  Further, the
message of the film will likely offend some people; said message being
that the way for a man to win a woman's love is to kidnap her and beat
her to submission!
     This film is really not worth seeing, even at matinee prices.
Instead, go see THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, AND HER LOVER, or some
other movie.
Distribution.  In its first U.S. theatrical release, now showing at 3 
different theaters in the San Francisco-Berkeley area. Should be available
in other areas as well.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TIE ME UP! TIE ME DOWN! (Atame!)(Spain,1990) Written &
directed by Pedro Almodovar. Produced by Agustin Almodovar.
Photography, Jose Luis Alcaine. Editing, Jose Salcedo.
Production design, Esther Garcia. Music, Ennio Morricone.
Cast:Victoria Abril(Marina), Antonio Banderas(Ricky),
Francisco Rabal(Maximo Espejo), Loles Leon(Lola), Julieta
Serrano(Alma), Maria Barranco, Rossy De Palma. A Miramax
release. 105 min. Not rated.(If so, doubtlessly NC-17)
Camp-followers must be pleased these days, what with the work
of David Lynch, the Coen Brothers or Pedro Almodovar.
In TIE ME, Almodovar, Spanish cinema 's  brat who thumbs his
nose at filmic conventions by exaggerating them, takes a minor
but serious movie genre, pushes it to extremes and turns it
into a comedy. This genre is the captor-captive movie. 
Liliana Cavani's scandalous THE NIGHT PORTER had a former Nazi
concentration camp commandant and his former victim enter into
sadomasochistic games. In William Wyler's obsessive THE
COLLECTOR, a young man adds to his butterfly collection a
woman he is infatuated with. In the romantic THE WIND AND THE
LION, a Moroccan desert prince captures an American widow, and
her admiration. And so on.
What Almodovar does in TIE ME is to take themes along such
lines but de-dramatize them with that special Spanish variant
of kitsch known as "hortera."
Ricky (Banderas), released from a mental hospital, has a
fixation on former hooker Marina (Abril) with whom he once had
a one-night stand. She is now a porn-horror star and something
of a junkie--which in Spanish is pronounced "yunkee,"
perilously close to "Yankee."
Ricky forces himself into her apartment but not on her. He
declares: "I am 23, I have 50 thousand pesetas and am alone in
the world. I would like to make a good husband for you and a
good father for our children." Then this peculiar lover, more
swain than swine, proceeds to tie down Marina, oh so gently.
Yet as he had battered her a bit, and she also has other
pains, he proceeds to take care of her needs.These include
analgesics as well as heroin.
Ropes and devotion create bonds. Bondage leads to bonding.
When Ricky comes "home" all bloodied up by street druggies,
Marina's maternal-sexual feelings are aroused. True love
explodes.
One should not dismiss this situation as a misogynist fantasy
by a homosexual director (which Almodovar openly is). On the
contrary, Almodovar's screen world is sympathetically and
empathetically populated by female protagonists. More than
anything else, the point here is to make a parody of pulp
literature, film romances, B-movies, and the post-Franco Spain
which has been catching up with modern times with unfettered,
bewildering speed.
By itself, the main sex-love theme cannot convince us or
sustain the movie, but Almodovar throws in non-stop
peripherals, some pathetic, some not, all of them funny.
Marina, who looks like Rosanna Arquette's Iberian cousin, is
introduced as the movie she stars in is winding down.
It is directed by Maximo Espejo(Rabal) whose name--what a
stroke of genius!--means "maximum mirror." A veteran
filmmaker, now wheelchair bound, he is hornier than ever and,
quote:"making a comeback with a second-rate horror film."
Using the film-within-a film  device, Almodovar satirizes
deliciously yet affectionately the movie-making process and
the mentality behind such flicks.
Marina has a comic, outlandish sexual experience in her
bathtub, with a wind-up toy. Later, handcuffed to Ricky, she
goes out to her friendly, single-mother dentist who generously
offers her pills as well as a joint. In search of other pills
the two women disturb a fornicating lady-pharmacist who
appears girded with a holster and gun.
The television set shows a wild commercial on retirement, with
Germans, as young Nazis, efficiently planning ahead, while the
hedonistic Spaniards dance. 
Bound and gagged, Marina uses the remote control to watch THE
NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD on TV. Ricki's search for dope takes
him to the streets, where dealers are seriously talking
politics and a junkie offers herself to Ricky for 5,000
pesetas. "Make it 4,000" she then says "since I have herpes."
The movie abounds in paradoxes. The main one is that
theoretically, in spite of raunchy language and, at
face-value, sordid scenes, TIE ME is neither dark nor squalid.
Rather it is on the luminous side, and its vulgarity is
systematically de-fanged by Almodovar's eccentric humor. Of
course, it is emphatically not to everyone's taste, but if one
suspends disbelief and sets aside preconceptions, TIE ME is a
wildly entertaining and kinky piece of cinema. It might even
tie you in knots.
