Title
Review for Marusa no onna (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
Juzo Itami, has been doing films, which, on the surface are comedies.  But
in every aspect, they are deadly serious.  A TAXING WOMAN, is a story about
a auditor for the local IRS system, which the Japanese have.  She has the
task of sniffing out the whole situation, and then get the law enforcement
agents to take over the corrupt companies.  And she gains respect, and a
promotion, on the way to doing her job well.
This time, her target is a Mr.. Gondo, who is laundering money, to avoid
taxes.  And her efforts are endless, and they almost fail, were it not for
an accidental moment in the film.  Mr.. Gondo looks innocent indeed, but all
the purveyors he works with do not seem to show the bills correctly... they
all are mis-matched.  The large place, where men take on many mistresses
looks awfully busy ( and they are proud of doing such nice business ), but
their books do not reflect this.
Ms Itakura gets on the ball and finally begins cornering everyone, except
the elusive Mr.. Gondo.   They are about to quit, frustrated, when a slight
accident reveals the hidden room where many of the
artifacts and receipts she is looking for are hidden.  And the invalid Gondo
is finally caught.  An aging man, whose sole purpose in life has been to do
well, and succeed, as he was brought up to do.  And as the taxing woman
 nice pun on her job ), is ruthless enough to be considerate, but never
gives in to him, who wants to take her on as a mistress.  She has become
more modern ( I suppose ) and her view is less historic.  She is not about
to become a mistress to someone she does not have a reasonable respect
for.... and Gondo is in her way of succeeding as well, although, by all
intentions,
hers is honest, whereas Gondo's were not.
There are moments when the film breaks into a satire, which it is meant to
be.  And the film has gags a plenty to keep everyone satisfied.  But the
inevitable question is, where does the satire end, and the story start....
they both go together.
In between, the film has sight gags that are Monty-Python'esque... scenes
where a crowd walks by in front of the camera at a fast pace, too busy, and
the like.  The un-impressed Itakyra, knows darn well that if this happens
they are hiding something, and  they leave enough doors open for her to do
her job.... and she jumps on it.
A few things are showcased here.... the film is also an interesting comment
on the rise of women in Japanese society.  Their work is being noticed as
being worthy of much more than a mere mistress, something which Gondo is
fond of, but is incapable of correcting.  And it is a woman, that undresses
him one more time, for taxes.  The only thing that Gondo does not see, a
throwback to the old times, is that he could very easily hire this woman to
do his books, and accomplish the same thing....
Fun film to watch.  Clever photography, which tends to corner people with a
camera when they are caught, and leave them in wide open spaces, when they
can not be reached.... well thought out, and,
FUNNY.
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1994
Reviewer and Moderator of the CENTIPEDE's THE FILM.

Author
Manavendra K. Thakur
Cast: Nobuko Miyamoto, Tsutomu Yamazaki, Masahiko Tsugawa, Hideo Murota,
Shuji Otaki, Daisuke Yamashita, Shinsuke Ashida, Keiju Kobayashi, Mariko Okada,
Kiriko Shimizu, Kazuyo Matsui, Yasuo Daichi, Kinzo Sakura, Hajime Asoh,
Shiro Ito, Eitaro Ozawa.
Credits: Written and Directed by Juzo Itami.  Produced by Yasushi Tamaoki and
Seigo Hosogoe.  Director of Photography: Yonezo Maeda.  Edited by Akira Suzuki.
Music by Toshiyuki Honda.  Art Direction by Shuji Nakamura.  Lighting by
Akio Katsura.  Recording by Osamu Onodera.
     The rise of Juzo Itami has been nothing less than meteoric.  In four short
years and three films, he has become perhaps the best known Japanese film
director in the West since Akira Kurosawa.  After taking a close look at death
in OSOSHIKI [THE FUNERAL] (1984) and at sex and food in TAMPOPO (1986), he
strikes again with MARUSA NO ONNA, a film that mirrors and satirizes another
universal theme: taxes.  But the Japanese version of taxation is far removed
from what most Americans think of as taxes.  In Japan, as an opening title
points out, tax rates can be as high as 80%, and consequently people of all
economic backgrounds cheat on their taxes as a matter of routine.  And the
lengths to which the national tax police, Marusa, goes to enforce the tax laws
make IRS tactics seem like peaches and cream in comparison.
     Itami says he "became interested in taxes after almost all the earnings
from OSOSHIKI had been snatched away as income tax."  Accordingly, he decided
to make a film about how Marusa operates and decided to use the stars of his
first two films in his latest film.  Nobuko Miyamoto plays the lead role of
Ryoko Itakura, a freckled and ambitious tax inspector who singlemindedly works
her way up from mom and pop grocers to the big-time real estate tycoons and
"love hotel" (adult hotels) owners.  She tries early on to audit one such big
fish, Hideki Gondo (Tsutomu Yamazaki), whose skill at hiding his income is more
than a match for her limited authority as an auditor.  So the film skips
forward about six months or so when Ryoko is promoted to a full-fledged tax
inspector.  And that's when the real fun begins.
     The comedic moments stem mostly from the extraordinary measures that
citizens use to cheat on their taxes.  To the Japanese shown in the film,
nothing is sacred in the pursuit of another yen.  They make false loans to
friends, bribe politicians, and even bury cash in jars containing ashes of the
dead.  One woman tries to swallow an incriminating document as the tax
collectors close in.  (They have to hold her nose shut in order to force her
mouth open.)  It's all a huge game, and everyone takes part, from the servants
to the wives and mistresses.  As one video arcade owner comments after his
tears win him a slight reprieve from Ryoko, "I'd cry all day to save a
million."
     What's also remarkable is the equally relentless drive of the tax agents
to ferret out the hidden incomes and exaggerated expenses.  The tax inspectors
are legally sanctioned Mission Impossible types who employ extensive command
centers to coordinate raids, stay on duty for three or four days at a stretch,
and use all sorts of high-tech surveillance techniques to glean their targets'
real income.  Typical of their thoroughness is a scene in which an agent sticks
his foot in the doorway to keep Gondo's mistress from slamming shut the door.
After she starts beating on his shoe with a heavy object, he casually says,
"Ma'am, they're safety shoes, used in a factory.  Even a truck couldn't crush
them!"
     But on a more serious level, nothing seems to be sacred to these
inspectors.  On one of Ryoko's first assignments as inspector, the agents
strongly suspect a woman of having hidden a safe-deposit box key within her
bra.  They ask Ryoko to search her, but the woman takes off her clothes, leans
backwards, and cries "Women have another hiding place.  Don't you want to
search it too?"  Of course, the woman is overacting to play on the agents'
sympathies, but the point is that if Ryoko hadn't just then found the key under
the kitchen sink, the agents probably would have indeed searched her body
thoroughly.  Itami's satire is rooted in showing how easily both officials and
citizens tacitly agree to transgress social and privacy limits for the sake of
money.
     Because everyone is probably guilty, most investigations in the film turn
out similarly.  It's not until the very last scene -- appropriately filmed at
the top of an empty stadium overlooking the city -- that Ryoko and Gondo step
back to take the longer view of the tax rat-race.  Itami ends the scene and the
film with a modern-day variant of the classic tradition of hara-kiri, making it
especially poignant and appropriate to the Japan of today.
     Itami's cinematic realization of his script is most noteworthy for the
excellent acting by both Miyamoto (Itami's wife in real life) and Yamazaki.
Their performances are much more Western than in either of Itami's previous
films.  In fact, Miyamoto told The New York Times that because "The few women
inspectors in Japan do not behave like [Ryoko] ...  I had to look to
Americans," and specifically Peter Falk's Columbo, for inspiration.  The stars'
acting makes up for the annoyingly inconsistent shot composition by Itami and
cinematographer Yonezo Maeda, who either have forgotten how to look through the
camera's viewfinder or just can't make up their minds whether to shoot in 1.33
or 1.66 aspect ratio.  Other technical production values are better to good,
but none particularly stand out, even upon a second viewing.
     Ultimately, Itami's film most resembles American films like BROADCAST
NEWS.  Both have round and interesting characters, both are roughly equal in
entertainment value, both explore themes (taxes, television news) that resonate
deeply with their respective societies, and both are more witty than full of
belly-laughs.  (MARUSA NO ONNA, however, was far more successful in its native
country.  It swept the Japanese Academy Awards and became the fourth highest
grossing film in Japan in 1987.)  MARUSA NO ONNA isn't a great film, from
either the standpoint of comedy or cinematic accomplishment.  It doesn't, for
example, equal Itami's success with OSOSHIKI, which remains his best work to
date.  But Itami's latest offering does confirm his reign among Japanese
filmmakers known in the West as the director most in tune with contemporary
social realities.  His willingness to explore and criticize those realities is
at the heart of his film's success.
Directorial filmography of Juzo Itami:
Juzo Itami, 56 years old, is the son of Mansaku Itami, an early Japanese film
director.  Initially a commercial artist, Juzo Itami became an actor and
appeared in films directed by Nicolas Ray, Richard Brooks, Kon Ichikawa, and
Yoshimitsu Morita, and others.  Itami decided to become a director at age 50
because he became too "impatient" waiting for good acting roles.

Author
Jeff Meyer
See at the Seattle Film Festival:
A TAXING WOMAN (Japan, 1987)
Director/Screenwriter: Juzo Itami
Cast: Nobuko Miyamoto, Tautomu Yamazaki, Masahiko Tsugawa, Hideo Murota
     Rarely has a foreign, sub-titled film garnered so much attention in the
U.S.  I heard two NPR bits and a CBS news report on this before viewing it (I
abstained from Stanley Kaufman's review in "The New Republic," not wanting to
spoil any surprises).  The great success of Itami's previous film, TAMPOPO, in
both the US and Japan centered media interest on his latest effort --
especially since A TAXING WOMAN has been so popular in Japan.  Also, it's
subject -- tax evasion in Japan, with the main character a female tax inspector
-- has raised the feelers of various news programs, and so has snowballed into
popular interest.
     Unfortunately, I had a midnight showing the night before and nights of
film viewing before that; by the time I got to A TAXING WOMAN, I was dead tired
and barely hanging in there.  I think I drifted off for about twenty minutes
during the first half hour, and while I don't feel I missed much, I wouldn't
feel right about drawing any conclusions.   For those of you expecting another
outrageous comedy like TAMPOPO, don't; A TAXING WOMAN reminds me a little of
those documentry-like police dramas that used to appear years ago -- great
effort is expended to show what a tax inspector's life is like.  It actually
looks appealing; I mean, if you had to pick a job that required you to smoke
cigarettes and work 70 hours a week, this would probably be my choice.
However, Itami centers on some of the amusing aspects of the job, and ends with
an ironic tone that seems to question whether or not the taxing is in the best
interests of the citizens.
     No grade, but I liked what I saw of it.  Can anyone up on popular Japanese
culture explain the significance of the blood-stained handkerchief that the
financier gives Ryoko (Miyamoto)?  I'm curious.
