Title
Review for Mifunes sidste sang (1999)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
A Review by Akiva Gottlieb
In 1995, a group of distinguished Scandinavian
filmmakers decided that today's films lack purity. So
they wrote up a manifesto called Dogme 95; a set of
rules that a filmmaker should follow in order to make
a `pure' film. According to the manifesto, a film
should be shot on digital video, use natural props and
light, not fit into a specific genre or credit its
director.
In 1998, Thomas Vinterberg helmed the first Dogme
film, `The Celebration', which won unanimous critical
praise for transcending technical limitations in its
tale of a dysfunctional family. In 1999, Harmony
Korine directed the (unofficial) 2nd Dogme picture
(Lars Von Trier's `Idioterne', which was made before,
has yet to have a U.S. release), `julien donkey-boy',
which was panned by critics for accentuating technical
limitations in its analysis of a dysfunctional family.
Now, in 2000, Soren Kragh-Jacobsen has made the 3rd
Dogme film, `Mifune', which has gained a lukewarm
reception for its unconventional story ofyou guessed
it; a dysfunctional family. Sounds like a genre to me.
`Mifune' is a pitch-black comedy that takes place in
the Land of the Rising Sun. It begins with the
marriage of Copenhagen businessman Kresten (Anders W.
Berthelsen) to his boss' daughter Claire (Sofie
Grabol). The next morning Kresten finds out that his
estranged father is dead, so he goes to his family's
farm for the funeral. His only living relative is a
developmentally disabled brother named Rud (Jesper
Asholt), who, of course, Kresten is forced to care
for.
Simultaneously, in Copenhagen, a hooker named Liva
(Iben Hjejle) has gotten herself into trouble. When
one of her clients, a principal, informs her that he
recently expelled her brother Bjarke (Emil Tarding),
she beats him over the head and urinates on his rug.
On a whim, she decides to take a housekeeping job at a
farmhouse, which belongs to Kresten and Rud, in order
to get away from her troubles 
`Mifune' is the story of these lives at this farm, and
the romance and mayhem that goes on there. On the
surface, `Mifune' is a lot like `Rain Man', in which a
man learns about the important things in life from a
developmentally disabled brother. But Berthelsen and
Asholt aren't Tom Cruise and Dustin Hoffman, and
`Mifune' is not about their relationship as much as it
is about getting on with your life. 
The film takes its title from a game the brothers
play, in which Kresten goes into the cellar and
pretends to fight Toshiro Mifune, star of Akira
Kurosawa's `Seven Samurai', for Rud's enjoyment.
`Happiness is when Mifune comes out of the cellar,'
notes Rud late in the film, and the characters don't
know what he means.
Once it gets going, `Mifune' has many wonderful
moments of inspired humor, but because of the Dogme 95
ban on a background musical score, the all the
emotions must be conveyed by the actors. This is also
the film's main flaw, because the emotional
connections are usually weak. Had `Mifune' been a
straight-up comedy, it might have been more
successful. 
In essence, this is a film that showcases what Dogme
95 has to offer, in both positive and negative
fashion. Director Kragh-Jacobsen has followed the
rules down to every detail. The opening and closing
credits are filmed by a video camera scrolling down a
piece of paper, and all phone conversations switch
back and forth to the rooms of the different speakers,
as to not have pre-recorded noise coming out of the
phone. Also, the movie is filmed in digital video, but
is not as choppy or shaky as in `The Celebration' or
`julien donkey-boy'. But `Mifune' is too wild a comedy
to fit smoothly into rules that strive for `purity',
because it is a film about the things in life that we
believe to be impure. 
All this talk is not to say that `Mifune', which won
the Silver Bear at Berlin Film Festival and was
Denmark's official entry for this year's Academy
Awards, is not a commendable film. It is a very
entertaining picture; one that derives its laughs from
the silliness of life. But I only wish that future
filmmakers stick to their own vision of purity,
because when following the Dogme rules, you can easily
forget that purity isn't what people look for in a
film. 

Author
Athan Bezaitis
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/4bc91097108bf02f8825687b00086241?OpenDocument
MIFUNE A film review by Athan Bezaitis.  Copyright Filmcritic.com 2000
In 1995, Danish directors Lars Von Trier and Thomas Vinterberg
established a code of ethics for an alternative form of filmmaking.  The
two directors were fed up by the way in which movie making was "raped"
by technology such as special effects, expensive gear, cranes, filters,
dollies, and spotlights.  They wisely knew that they could never measure
up to the Americans in that area, so they decided that European
filmmaking should head in an all-together different direction.  The
result was a vow of chastity complete with the ten commandments of what
they called Dogma filmmaking.  Some of these groundbreaking rules
included: on location shooting without the ability to bring in props,
the rule that music will not be used unless it occurs where the scene is
being shot, the camera must be hand-held, optical work and filters are
forbidden, and the films must not contain superficial action such as
murders, weapons, etc.  The purpose was to force a director to think
along unconventional and imaginative lines in order to create a Dogma
film, and the first two attempts, Vinterberg's THE CELEBRATION, and Von
Trier's THE IDIOTS, were both successful.
Director Soren Kragh-Jacobsen's MIFUNE, is the third film from the
Danish Dogma Collective.  Subtitled in English, it is the story of
Kresten (Anders W. Berhelsen) who has become an overnight sensation as a
businessman in Copenhagen.  The morning after his wedding to the boss'
daughter, he receives a phone call that his estranged father has just
died.  He has trouble explaining this to his wife, since he has told
everyone in the city that he has no living relatives, in attempt to
disguise his humble origins.  Now he must return to the family's run
down farm to bury his father and make arrangements to hide the truth of
his mentally retarded brother from his new family and friends.
Caught in a pack of lies with his in-laws, he comes up with a desperate
plan to advertise for a housekeeper to look after his brother.  But when
the beautiful Liva (Iben Hjejle) arrives, she only complicates things
for Kristen.  Liva also is not what she seems.  Out of a need to keep
her rebellious younger brother Bjarke (Emil Tarding) in private school,
she's been working as a high-class prostitute in Copenhagen.  Now she's
on the run from her pimp and a mysterious man who has been threatening
her on the phone.  When the two come together they get caught in a
whirlwind of hysteria as their troubles begin to compound.
The film is excellent, and the Dogma style only adds to the originality
of the production.  Supposedly, there is one scene with music being
played on a bent drainpipe, and another with an instrumentalist hiding
in a ditch.  The idea for the original Danish title ("Mifunes Sidste
Sang," literally "Mifune's Last Song") came to Dragh-Jacobsen when
Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune died in 1997.  In THE SEVEN SAMURAI by
director Akira Kurosawa, Mifune plays a phony samurai of peasant
origins.  The parallel is evident..
The Danish are really onto something with the proliferation of the Dogma
style.  Find out where MIFUNE is playing and enjoy it.  It's worth the
extra effort, and it's a breath of fresh air from the stale stench of
the overblown Hollywood mega-productions.
Starring: Anders W. Berthelson, Iben Hjejle, Jesper Asholt, Sofie
Grabol, Emil Tarding, Paprika Steen, Mette Bratlann
Director: Soren Kragh-Jacobsen
Producer: Birgitte Hald, Bo Ehrhardt
Cinematographer: Anthony Dod Mantle
MPAA rating: R
Year of Release: 2000
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Sřren Kragh-Jacobsen's MIFUNE (MIFUNES SIDSTE SANG) is a Dogma 95 film
-- you know the drill, no artificial lights, props, music, etc -- that
feels like a documentary about a family about whom you couldn't care
less.
Kresten (Anders W. Berthelsen) has a secret -- he's a closet redneck.
Newly wed, he has never told his bride (Sofie Grĺbřl) of his farming
background, so she's shocked when he tells her that his father has died
on the family farm in a remote area of Denmark.  She thought he was long
since dead.  She's equally surprised when Kresten tells her that he has
a brother who's an "idiot."
Leaving his wife behind, Kresten goes back to the ruined family farm.
Once there, he finds his father's decaying corpse on the dining room
table.  Under the table playing is his mentally incompetent brother,
known locally as Rud the Nut (Jesper Asholt).  Like a 200 pound toddler
going through the terrible twos, Rud isn't an easy man to care for.
Into their lives comes a prostitute, Liva (Iben Hjejle), wanting a
career change.  She has been getting a series of obscene phone calls, so
she responds to Kresten's ad for a housekeeper in order to get away.
Hjejle has a tenderness which makes some of her scenes almost watchable,
something that can't be said of most of the rest of the  picture, which
drags on and on.  The characters' squabbles and tribulations are rarely
compelling.
In a film in which minutes seem like hours, the proof of its lack of
interest comes in a tragic scene near the end.  When the director tries
to manipulate our emotions by making it appear that one of the
characters has died, the reaction is relief, not sympathy.  We
mistakenly believe that the movie has finally ended, but then it goes on
for another half of an hour.  But, then again, maybe it wasn't that
long.  One's notion of time gets distorted watching MIFUNE
MIFUNE runs 1:39.  The film is in Danish with English subtitles.  It is
rated R for strong sexuality and language and for some violence.  It
would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Sony Pictures Classics
 Director: Soren Kragh-Jacobsen
 Writer: Soren Kragh-Jacobsen, Anders Thomas Jensen
 Cast: Iben Hjeljle, Anders W. Berthelsen, Jesper Asholt, Emil
Tarding, Anders Hove, Sofie Brabol, Paprika Steen, Mette
Bratlann
   The Danes--God bless 'em--put most of Nazi-occupied
Europe to shame during The War by cheerfully delivering all
their country's Jews from Hitler's morons.  It's difficult to see
that these marvelous people with their wonderful, wonderful
Copenhagen might have flaws.  But as Lars von Trier and
Thomas Vinterberg have already apprised us with their "The
Kingdom" and "Celebration," simply erect walls around
people, call the units families, and they suffer from the same
dysfunctionality as America's own Lester and Carolyn
Burnham.
   Soren Kragh-Jacobsen takes on the role of a melancholy
Dane as he relates a story that's as darkly humorous as
"American Beauty" but perhaps more attuned to a Danish
audience--which can catch the subtleties of their own
language rather than having to depend on a decent but
unpoetic set of English subtitles.  Anders Thomas Jensen and
Kragh-Jacobsen's tale embraces two themes: one is that you
can take the farmer out of the country, but you can't take the
country out of the farmer.  The other, more resonant, is that
the best relationships occur when two people know about
each other's sordid pasts (and we all have them, don't we)
and yet accept each other for what they are.  "Mifunes sidste
sang," which translates as "Mifune's Last Song," takes its title
from a character played by the late great Japanese actor,
Toshiro Mifune, in Akira Kurosawa's monumental "The Seven
Samurai."  Mifune performs in the role of a man who
assumes the title of samurai despite his peasant background. 
Similarly Kresten (Anders W. Berthelsen), an upwardly mobile
man of about 30, marries the boss's daughter Claire (Sofie
Grabol) and, passing himself off as a middle-class resident of
Copenhagen, conveniently hides from her his own ignoble
background.  
   Not that Kresten is a bad guy.  It's just that he comes from
lower-class stock in the sticks of Denmark, having been
raised in a run-down farmhouse with a few scrawny hens and
a mentally challenged brother, Rud (Jesper Asholt).  That's
not all. His mother had committed suicide without leaving a
note, but we can bet that her surroundings played no small
part in her decision.  Just days after his marriage he gets a
call to return home.  His dad had died.  He must arrange for
a decent funeral and, more important, decide what to do with
his retarded brother--all the while keeping his wife in the dark
about where he was going.  Hiring a beautiful housekeeper,
Liva (Iben Hjele) to take care of his sibling, he is similarly in
the dark about her own background as a hooker.  When
Liva's snotty brother Bjarke (Emil Tarding) is kicked out of
school and joins the group of misfits, the plot get more
complicated: funnier and sadder in equal proportions.
   "Mifune" is a well-acted tale which purportedly follows the
Dogma collective founded by Thomas Vinterberg and Lars
von Trier--a film theory that eschews the use of artificial
lighting, heavy cranes and equipment, artificial sets, and even
music on the soundtrack (unless the music is part of the
scene).  The philosophy holds that "we can't beat the
Americans anyway, so we Europeans should head in another
direction."  Fortunately, Kragh-Jacobsen doesn't take the
dogma ideas too seriously, thus avoiding what could have
been the film equivalent of the socialist realism school of the
1930s in the Soviet Union.  We do get music, at least one
birds'-eye shot, and most important a convincing
representation of the madcap adventures of a poor,
handsome guy who discovers that lying to your partner leads
only to divorce.  Find yourself a partner who doesn't care that
you got breakfast directly from your own hens or that you turn
tricks to help put your brother through a fancy prep school.  
   "Mifune" shows a bit too much of Rud the rain man, who
doesn't have a heck of a lot of variety to his expressions and
vocabulary, but aside from that this is an intelligent,
passionate, occasionally violent film that throws in some real
surprises--like the strange farmhouse visitor who plays
flamenco guitar like Carlos Montoya.  The picture illustrates
an off-again, on-again relationship between Liva and Kresten
that will have you rooting for their final get-together while
thumbing your nose at the bourgeois wife back in
Copenhagen--who's going to miss the massive orgasms that
her soon-to-be-divorced husband is graphically shown
providing for her. "Mifune" is Denmark's entry into the
upcoming Oscar competition for best foreign language film.
Rated R.  Running Time: 99 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
This festival darling and Denmark's entry to the 2000 Oscars is a sweet
tale of unlikely people bonding together to form an oddly cohesive
family unit.  Mifune would be easy to overlook if it were not for the
fact that it is the third film created using the limiting covenants of
Dogme 95, a filmmaking aesthetic created nearly five years ago by Danish
directors Lars von Trier (Breaking the Waves) and Thomas Vinterberg (The
Celebration).
Among the restrictions in Dogme's `Vow of Chastity,' to which each
director must swear allegiance, are the forbidding of the use of props,
sets, artificial light and sound (including music).  The scenes must be
shot sequentially on a hand-held camera and must not contain any
superficial action.  The opening and closing credits were hand-written
on a discolored, cracked wall, which isn't a Dogme rule, but still
looked damn cool regardless.
Mifune is set in modern-day Copenhagen, where we find Kresten (Anders W.
Berthelsen) marrying Claire (Sofie Grĺbřl), the daughter of his wealthy
boss.  The film quickly shifts from emotional wedding toasts to the
honeymoon bed, which includes one of the most violent woman-on-top sex
scenes that I've ever seen.  The following morning, Kresten is awakened
by a phone call relaying the message that his estranged father has
died.  Although he hasn't spoken to his dad for ten years, Kresten
leaves his pouty bride behind to tie up the loose ends of his family's
estate.
Maybe `loose ends' isn't a strong enough description.  For one, the
estate consists of an isolated, rundown farmhouse.  Then there's Rud
(Jesper Asholt), Kresten's mentally challenged brother that isn't
responsible enough to care for himself.  After making the funeral
arrangements, Kresten must find someone to look after his nose-picking
brother.  He places an ad in the paper and hires Liva (Iben Hjejle), a
prostitute from an upscale call-girl service that's on the run from both
her pimp, with whom she has fallen out of favor, and a series of creepy
obscene phone calls.
Both brothers are immediately smitten with the lovely Liva, who
resembles Robin Wright Penn but has a better rack.  Soon, Liva's snotty
little brother Bjarke (Emil Tarding) joins the mix after being expelled
from school.  `We three are a bunch of loonies,' Kresten admits, despite
the fact that the four housemates seem to gel together after a short
period of unrest - they have little but each other to hold on to.  In
particular, Kresten and Liva are happy to be accepted without being
judged by their pasts (farming and hooking).
Already having garnered accolades at several major film festivals, as
well as nabbing three European Film Awards (for Hjejle, Asholt and Best
Picture), Mifune certainly looks better than the previous two Dogme
films (The Celebration and the yet-to-be-released The Idiots), but its
story is also a lot more predictable, which is strange since the Dogme
rules were enacted because of the boring unoriginality of modern films.
The picture is undoubtedly more colorful that its predecessors, using
more outdoor scenes and effectively capturing the golden wheat and green
alfalfa, as well as the orangy interiors.  Sřren Kragh-Jacobsen's camera
work won't make you dizzy, like previous films using handheld cameras
(i.e., The Blair Witch Project).  Like other Dogme films, the acting is
terrific, especially Asholt and Hjejle, the latter of whom will next be
seen starring opposite John Cusack in High Fidelity.
For you film buffs, the name Mifune comes from actor Toshirô Mifune, who
appeared in over a dozen of Akira Kurosawa's films, including Yojimbo,
The Seven Samurai and Red Beard.  Years ago, Kresten convinced Rud that
the great samurai was living in the basement of their home; a revelation
that both terrified and excited Rud into doing whatever his brother
wanted.
1:38 - R for strong sexuality and language, and for some violence

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MIFUNE (Mifunes Sidste Sang) (Denmark, 1999) ** 1/4 Directed by Soren 
Kragh-Jacobsen. Written by Kragh-Jacobsen and Story by 
Kragh-Jacobsen. Photography, Anthony Dod Mantle. Editing, Valdis 
Oskarsdottir. Music by Nulle Og Verdensorkestret. Cast: Anders W. 
Berthelsen (Kresten), Iben Hjejle (Liva), Jesper Asholt (Rud), Sofie 
Grabol (Claire), Emil Tarding (Bjarke), Anders Hove (Gerner) and 
Paprika Steen (Pernille). Produced by Birgitte Hald and Morten 
Kaufmann. A Sony Pictures Classics release. In Danish with subtitles. 
99 minutes. R (language, violence)
Sometime  in 1995 A.D. a bunch of the boys (Danish moviemakers) were 
whooping it up in Copenhagen.  Whether in merriment, seriousness, 
put-on, or all the above, they came up with a sort of collective, 
Dogme 95. It was followed by a serious manifesto, the full reading of 
which is a howl.  It is a set of "indisputable rules" which they 
called The Vow Of Chastity.  As I see it, it was a cinematic "back to 
nature" micro-movement whose purpose was  to purify film by refusing 
certain techniques and conventions.  Put differently, it was a 
neo-Luddite attitude which, I suspect, was a mix of 
tongue-in-cheekness, getting publicity, and  good intentions.
The Dogme contains 10 rules, a la Moses : Location shooting only. 
Sound and image must be simultaneously recorded. Hand-held cameras 
only. Color film only. No special lighting, no optical work or 
filters. No "superficial action" (murders, weapons, etc.). Film must 
take place here and now. Genre movies are a no-no. Academy 35mm 
format only. Directors must not be credited.
"Mifune" is also listed as "Mifune Dogme 3" because it is the third 
officially Dogme acredited movie made by following the Ten 
Commandments. It was preceded by Lars Trier's "The Idiots" and Thomas 
Vinterberg's "The Celebration."
The plot. In Copenhagen, yuppieish Kresten marries Claire, the 
daughter of his tycoon boss. The wedding night has Claire demonstrate 
sexual bliss in the longest and loudest way. It gets a 9 in non-porno 
film history. (Why not a 10? Because one should always allow for 
future records).
An urgent phone call  informs Kresten that his father has died in 
Lolland (Denmark's southermost island). The young financier's 
presence is required. It comes as a shock to Claire since Kresten had 
declared that he had no family at all. His hurried excuse is that he 
had been alienated from his people for many years. He promises to be 
back in 48 hours.
He (and his wife's BMW) reach the island by ferry-boat. The family 
property turns out to be a dilapidated mess of a farm and farmhouse. 
The inhabitants are Daddy's corpse and Rud, Kresten's mentally 
defective older brother. Among Rud's many peculiarities are a 
conviction that space people are landing and a refusal to take 
showers. He is kind of sweet but needs care and supervision.
Kresten's calls in all sorts of excuses to his wife to explain that 
he will be delayed. Since Rud cannot be left alone (but one wonders 
what the incapacitated father had been doing for him) Kresten 
advertises in a Copenhagen paper for a housekeeper.
In most unlikely record time the classified ad is answered by Liva, 
who shows up pronto. She is (but of course does not disclose it) one 
of a small group of upscale call-girls who seem to have mostly kinky 
clients. Liva plies her trade out of necessity:  to pay 
private-school fees for her unruly young brother. But she has to flee 
the big city because of problems with her pimp, with an irate client, 
and with a threatening, anonymous caller.
That's the story so far. Will there be mutual attraction between 
Kresten and Liva? Are there some nasty neigbors around? Will Claire 
get suspicious and show up? Or Liva's fellow-workers?  Is there a pot 
of gold at the end of the rainbow? Shall we meet Liva's brother 
Bjarke? Will he and Rud become fast friends? Should we expect a happy 
ending?
If writer-director Soren Kragh-Jacobsen was looking for an original 
storyline he has another look coming. If he wanted to apply Dogme 
95's Decalogue to his film, he was relatively successful. I repeat, 
relatively. For example, the handheld camera bit. Time and again I 
was sure that the steadiness of some images could not have been 
achieved without a tripod. Anotherr example: the anti-genre bit. The 
affair between Liva and Kresten falls squarely in the prostitute with 
a heart of gold category. The director bit.  Dogme movies always get 
around the non-crediting of the director. And so on. But the film 
does hew to the lighting part of the Commandments and the avoidance 
of technical devices and special effects.
Kragh-Jacobsen does admit "that he bent the rule on using available 
props a bit --pruning a few bushes in an overgrown farm garden and 
borrowing a few chickens from the farm next door."
Along traditional criteria, the performers are the major 
beneficiaries of the Dogma. They are all suprisingly good, and our 
unfamiliarity with them makes us see real people rather than 
performers. Only one player may be known to us, Iben Hjejle 
(pronounced EE-ben YI-leh) who made her American debut opposite John 
Cusack in "High Fidelity."
The film's title is not all that esoteric. In Danish it is "Mifune's 
Last Song." From their youth, Kresten and Rud, fans of samurai films 
(which Rud calls "samovar") have  played a game in which the famous 
Japanese actor was impersonated by Kresten, complete with 
Japanese-type grunts.
Despite weaknesses, the movie's rough look and "faux naive" strategy 
does give it a nice succession of believable slice-of-life scenes in 
the "what you see is what you get" vein. The camera and microphone 
constantly observe and record without providing any explanations or 
comments. It's a kind of hybrid: staged but not elaborated 
cinema-verite with a fitting uncomplexity of characters. As it stands 
until now, Dogme 95 is more of a shaggy dogma than anything else, but 
it could be a plus in the most unlikely possibility that it might rub 
off on some movie-making, even microscopically, and reduce today's 
cinema's suffocating reliance on gimmickry.
"Mifune" was Denmark's nominee for foreign language Oscars. At the 
Berlin Film Festival  it won the Silver Bear. The top prize, the 
Golden Bear, went to "The Thin Red Line."
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Louis Proyect
A few months ago Marxism list subscriber Daniel O'Connell, who is now
gallivanting somewhere in Europe, told me about the Denmark-based Dogma 95
film-making movement. Last night I saw "Mifune", an officially approved
Dogma 95 movie. Before discussing this altogether enjoyable film, a few
words about Dogma 95 is in order. If you go to their website at
http://www.dogme95.dk, you will find a manifesto that states:
"In 1960 enough was enough! The movie was dead and called for resurrection.
The goal was correct but the means were not! The new wave proved to be a
ripple that washed ashore and turned to muck. Slogans of individualism and
freedom created works for a while, but no changes. The wave was up for
grabs, like the directors themselves. The wave was never stronger than the
men behind it. The anti-bourgeois cinema itself became bourgeois, because
the foundations upon which its theories were based was the bourgeois
perception of art. The auteur concept was bourgeois romanticism from the
very start and thereby ... false! "
Lars von Trier, one of the founders of the movement, is a red-diaper baby.
His mother was a Communist, his father a Social Democrat, and both worked
in Denmark's social-services ministry. According to a NY Times (Apr. 30,
2000) profile of von Trier and Dogma 95, they met during World War II in
Sweden after fleeing the Nazi occupation of Denmark, "my father because he
was Jewish and my mother because she was in the resistance." They were also
dedicated nudists (although less so than another relative von Trier
describes who kept his apartment warm and "was always completely naked, on
principle"). His childhood included occasional holidays at nudist camps.
"It was very strange," he says, "kind of charming."
In essence, the Dogma 95 school sought to achieve a kind of pristine
authenticity in film-making that had been lost through the introduction of
elaborate film-scores, cinematography, special effects, etc. It was no
accident that they likened their movement to a kind of Protestant challenge
to Catholic rococo excess. Denmark, after all, was one of the European
centers of hair shirt Calvinism. Leaving no room for misinterpretation, the
Dogmatists laid down strict rules about how to make a movie, which they
called "The Vow of Chastity":
"I swear to submit to the following set of rules drawn up and confirmed by
DOGME 95:
1. Shooting must be done on location. Props and sets must not be brought in
(if a particular prop is necessary for the story, a location must be chosen
where this prop is to be found).
2. The sound must never be produced apart from the images or vice versa.
(Music must not be used unless it occurs where the scene is being shot). 3.
The camera must be hand-held. Any movement or immobility attainable in the
hand is permitted. (The film must not take place where the camera is
standing; shooting must take place where the film takes place).
4. The film must be in colour. Special lighting is not acceptable. (If
there is too little light for exposure the scene must be cut or a single
lamp be attached to the camera).
5. Optical work and filters are forbidden.
6. The film must not contain superficial action. (Murders, weapons, etc.
must not occur.)
7. Temporal and geographical alienation are forbidden. (That is to say that
the film takes place here and now.)
9. The film format must be Academy 35 mm.
10. The director must not be credited.
Furthermore I swear as a director to refrain from personal taste! I am no
longer an artist. I swear to refrain from creating a "work", as I regard
the instant as more important than the whole. My supreme goal is to force
the truth out of my characters and settings. I swear to do so by all the
means available and at the cost of any good taste and any aesthetic
considerations. Thus I make my VOW OF CHASTITY." 
Copenhagen, Monday 13 March 1995 
On behalf of DOGME 95 Lars von Trier Thomas Vinterberg
Turning now to "Mifune", directed by Soren Kragh-Jacobsen, you are
essentially presented with a film that makes the most of a natural setting,
namely a ramshackle farm in the Danish countryside. This is not a film set,
but an old house that von Trier discovered. It was a perfect find since
much of the film's magic is associated with the play of sunlight in the
interiors of the house and on the surrounding fields, all of which evokes a
Van Gogh painting.
The plot is a variation on "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest" or "Queen of
Hearts" as Kresten (Anders W. Berthelsen), a middle-class businessman from
Copenhagen, is forced to cope with the care of his simple-minded and
mentally ill brother Rud (Jesper Asholt) after the death of their father at
the family farm.
The title of the film is drawn from a game Kresten plays to amuse his
brother when he is agitated. He pretends to be Toshiro Mifune, a "Samovar"
warrior. After putting a metal pot on his head and wrapping himself in a
sheet, he stamps the ground while grimacing and growling in mock-Japanese.
While his original plans called for staying at the farm for no more than a
day or so, Kresten finds himself drawn into the upkeep of the farm and the
care of his long-forgotten brother. This is not an easy task since Rud
marches to his own drummer. When he is not spinning out tales about the
impending arrival of UFO's that are coming to the farm to take him away, he
is stealing Kresten's money to buy thousands of lottery tickets that he
hides in his underwear.
To help him cope with all this, Kresten hires a housekeeper from the city
named Liva (Iben Hjejle), a prostitute fleeing a nasty pimp and a
psychopathic telephone stalker. They are eventually joined by her
foul-mouthed chain-smoking younger brother Bjarke (Emil Tarding), who has
been thrown out of boarding school for bad behavior. Even though she is
constantly being provoked to the point of distraction by Bjarke herself,
she is deeply devoted to him. During a session with one of her johns, she
discovers that the wealthy client has had a role in Bjarke being caned at
the boarding school. Her response is to knock him to the floor and to pee
on an expensive Persian rug he dotes on while he watches helplessly.
The two brothers, the woman and her brother interact with each other
through the remainder of the film in the rooms and fields of the ramshackle
farmhouse. Using natural light, hand-held cameras and a total absence of
music, Von Trier creates a magical world. The conflicts and harmony of the
four characters can only be described as something out of a Mozart opera or
Chekhov play, as the sharply defined characters evoke in each other
responses that nobody--including the audience--could have predicted at the
outset.
The Marxism mailing-list: http://www.marxmail.org

Author
Dennis Schwartz

MIFUNE (Mifunes Sidste Sang)(director/writer: Sřren Kragh-Jacobsen;
screenwriter: Anders Thomas Jensen; cinematographer: Anthony Dod Mantle;
editor: Valdis Oskarsdottir; cast: Anders W. Berthelsen (Kresten), Iben
Hjejle (Liva), Jesper Asholt (Rud), Sofie Grabol (Claire), Emil Tarding
(Bjarke), Anders Hove (Gerner), Paprika Steen (Pernille), 1999-Denmark)
This is an authentic "Dogma 95" film, as before the film opens, that
assurance comes with a signed guaranteed shown on the screen that it was
made according to the rules stipulated by the Danish directors who
founded this school of sparse filmmaking -- Lars von Trier and Thomas
Vinterberg. The hand-held camera was obvious throughout the film as were
the film's lack of special effects, supposedly giving the viewer a
chance to discover on their own any beauty worth finding in the film,
rather than to be hit over the head with it. Whether adhering to their
"Vow of Chastity," of filming only on location and only with natural
light, and all the other rules followed, made this a better film, is
doubtful. Like all dogmas, they eventually wear out whatever usefulness
they might have had in the first place.
Soren Kragh-Jacobsen's "Mifune" is Dogma's third approved project, after
Vinterberg's "Celebration" and Von Trier's "Idiots."It is the weakest of
the three, but still, it has some punch in a conventional way due to the
film's technical clarity. It is a playfully weird telling of a familiar
romantic comedy situation, much like a Hollywood formula film. It has a
lot of dead spots where it tried comedy and a lot of predictability as
far as its romantic situation, but it also had a certain intrinsic
beauty about it that kept it afloat and made it seem better than its
story was.
It is, nevertheless, a surprisingly conventional work, which makes me
wonder about all the fuss this Dogma 95 group go through to give the
impression that they are radical filmmakers. A rather trite choice of
subject matter for a group that I would have thought to be more
politically motivated. What worked well in this film, was that the
actors had personality that flashed on the screen, and that there were
some breathtaking nature shots of the golden sun going down and of the
rich colors of the Danish backwater fields.
The film opens with Kresten (Anders W. Berthelsen) marrying a rich girl,
Claire (Sofie Grabol), whose father owns the firm he works in. When the
father toasts the couple and wishes them all the best, and Kresten says
this marriage will last forever, based on film history, when the star of
the film is sitting on top of the world and it seems nothing can go
wrong, his fall is inevitable. This film doesn't go against that
observation.
Back in their bedroom, we see the couple f*cking and Claire, by her loud
screams as she straddles Kresten, seems to be having one of the greatest
f*cks ever. The next morning Kresten receives a call on the cell phone
he always carries around with him, from Gerner (Anders Hove), a neighbor
of his father's, telling him that his father just died. Claire says he
didn't tell her he had a father or a brother, and that he was brought up
on a farm as a peasant. He tells her he will be back in Coperhagen in a
few days, he'll just bury his father and sell some items in the house,
as he takes the family BMW and he goes back by himself to bury his
father. Now I would have bet anyone in the theater and have given them
10-1 odds, that was the last of the marriage, that's how obvious this
plot was.
Kresten returns to his peasant roots in the deteriorating farm he lived
in with his cretin brother, his dispirited father who had given up on
life, and the memories of his mother who hung herself when he was a
youngster. To remedy this untenable situation, since his brother is not
mentally capable of taking care of himself and he doesn't want to place
him in a mental asylum, he hires a housekeeper, Liva (Iben Hjejle). The
housekeeper is real attractive, but she has a secret, just like Kresten.
Her secret is that she is a prostitute, not only is she a prostitute,
but she fits the movie cliche of the prostitute with the heart of gold.
She tells herself she is only a prostitute to support her boarding
school brother Bjarke (Emil Tarding), in the hopes he can have a better
life than she has.
She has recently received threatening calls from a psychopath, who says
he is going to get her. Unduly frightened, as the psychopath gets her
number everytime she changes it, she decides to flee from her residing
whorehouse and replies to Kresten's ad for a housekeeper.
At this desolate farm, she is cautiously attracted to Kresten and gently
handles the strangeness of Rud (Jesper Asholt) with a simple
understanding smile. He is the mentally impaired brother, the source of
all the comedy that the film proposes to have, who tells her there are
aliens around here. Her smile is the pure one, while Claire also smiles,
but her's is a selfish one.
To make a long story short, Claire comes barging in at night to the
farm, discovers all the lies Kresten told her about being an orphan, and
is horrified at what she sees, and thereby decides he is a peasant
psychopath. She takes back the BMW, tells him he no longer works for the
firm, and he will receive the divorce papers to sign in the morning.
The screw ups, Kresten and Liva, are a perfect match for each other, but
a number of misunderstandings must come before them before they can
cement their relationship.
The moral of the story is that you can't run away from who you are and
true love wins out over a status-symbol marriage. The film got its
title, when Kresten dressed up, ever since their childhood, as the
Japanese movie star Toshiro Mifune and playfully teased his brother that
the seventh samurai warrior lived hidden in the cellar of the house.
This Dogma 95 film left me unmoved, though its story was pleasant and
well-crafted. It just felt too much like an art-house film designed to
please its audience rather than to be provocative.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
