Title
Review for Glory Daze (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Ever wonder whatever happens to the pampered rich kids the
liberal arts colleges turn out year after year?"  GLORY DAZE opens with
that question, but the answer they give is less than satisfying.  Rich
kids it seems are so enamored with their pointless partying and hanging
out, that they don't want to leave.  You, on the other hand, may want
to make a fast exit if you accidentally find yourself watching this
assemblage of cardboard characters.  This movie gives a new meaning to
the word boredom.
     Set in the lovely seaside college town of Santa Cruz, we have a
group of college seniors (Ben Affleck, Matt Damon, Vinnie DeRamus, Vien
Hong, and French Stewart) who live together in a rented house.
Actually Slosh (Vien Hong) has long since given up on college, but the
others are preparing to leave town after graduation until they decide
that they can not give up their male camaraderie.  They take an
unconvincing vow to stay together for another year.  Jack (Affleck)
says, "Let's rage at the dying of the light a little bit."  Continuing
in this stream of insightful thinking, he later tells us that, "People
say nothing is forever.  I say how do you explain herpes or The
Grateful Dead?"
     Decorating the guy's world are a group of women (Alyssa Milano,
Megan Ward, and others).  The guys are stick figures, but the women's
roles are worse - visual wallpaper.
     The writer of THE JERKY BOYS, Rich Wilkes, takes his first stab at
directing with this film, and he also wrote the script.  The film is so
bad that it borders on self-parody.  Some of the dialog is kind of cute
in the abstract but is leaden in this low energy and never believable
film.  Think of it as ANIMAL HOUSE ON VALIUM.
     As they line up for their graduation materials, the smart aleck
kid handing them out ridicules each student with individualized jokes.
"Psychology major right?  I love my mother, but not as much as you guys
think I do."
     Although the kids in the film spend time in class on such artistic
creations as a golden hand holding a CD, their professor seems to be
even more unbelievable.  Art Professor Luther (John Rhys-Davies who was
Sallah in RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK) alternates between trying to seduce
his minions and providing cheap philosophy including: "It is poetry
that will save the world, not commerce," and "Art isn't just the
vomiting up of adolescent angst."
     Nothing, I repeat nothing, happens in the movie.  The picture
tries sometimes to be mildly offense by using gratuitous bad language
and constant drinking.  Their parties feature a guy with a funnel so he
can drink himself to death at a record pace.  Actually, the show is so
lame that it is not even effective at being offensive since these
scenes are all so false.
     In my least favorite sequence, the fascinating monologist and fair
actor Spalding Gray (MONSTER IN A BOX) plays Jack's father.  Jack's
parents are visiting the college to ridicule their son Jack for not
being on the fast track in life like them.  Jack rebels, "Mom, dad, you
both screwed up your lives.  Now back off and give me a chance to screw
up mine."  His dad tells him his liberal arts education is worthless
and to, "send me a postcard from skid row."
     The only character with any charisma is the shy cartoonist and
student Mickey (DeRamus), but his lines are pathetic.  When he finally
gets his putative girlfriend to his room, his come on line is, "I like
you - the kind of like you where I get to see you naked.  No more of
this palsie walsie stuff."
     At the end the movie attempts to come alive with a few shocks.
Dennis (Stewart) calls their actions, "Preservation through
destruction."  Like the rest of the picture it is predictable and an
unmitigated disaster.
     GLORY DAZE runs about an hour and a half, but will feel like an
eternity.  It was not yet rated when I saw it, but I suspect it will
get a PG-13 or an R.  There is no violence or sex, but there is a
little nudity and a fair amount of bad language.  The film should would
be acceptable for most teenagers although I am not fond of the message
it gives, but I strongly recommend that this miserable piece of film
making be avoided by all ages.  Only because it was more boring than
painful, do I give it 1/2 of a star.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 17, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Justin Siegel
Let me explain to you this: GLORY DAZE is one of the best films that was 
released in 1996. Read my lips: "GLORY DAZE, a college-comedy about a 
group of pals, in the vein of ANIMAL HOUSE, is one of the very best 
movies of 1996." Is this resinating? Good.
Now before condemning me an idiot who doesn't know a quality film from 
his own asshole, let me qualify my opinion. What on Earth is so great 
about this movie?
You have Jack (Ben Affleck), your main character, who ironically 
describes himself as "happy-go-fucking-lucky as the day I was born" and 
carries a torch for ex-girlfriend Dina, now dating a white dude who likes 
to think he's a Rastafarian. Then there's Micky (Vinnie DeRamus), the 
black comic-strip artist who's "big, clumsy, and never combs his hair." 
Millions of girls find him sexy, but he's too laid back to give much of a 
fuck. Even the gorgeous, flirtatious, virginal Chelsea (Alyssa Milano) 
can't get him off his ass.
Slosh (Vien Hong) is the guy who went from computer-geek to party-animal 
in less than a year, flunked out of school and is now happier than ever, 
getting fired from one shitty job after another and spending most of his 
waking hours drunk as a fuckin' monkey and smoking it up. Dennis ("3rd 
Rock"'s French Stewart) is a professional student, working on his third 
degree and quickly becoming the aplle in his photography-teacher's eye.
And last but not least is Rob (Sam Rockwell), who's moving out with his 
fiancee (Megan Ward), who displays all the traits of a shallow, immature 
bitch. He doesn't really want to live with her, but he can't think of any 
other options.
Jack can think of an idea: just stay at El Rancho Grande, their beloved 
house, and throw more parties and drink more beer. This idea holds up for 
awhile, but soon comes crumbling down with the film's climactic, 
"preservation through destruction" scene. This movie kicks ass, in case 
you don't know.
NoFX, The Vandals, Mudhoney, et al fill the soundtrack. NoFX make the two 
most indelible contributions: "The Moron Brothers," which includes the 
line, "they might not go down in history, but they'll go down on your 
sister"; and "Kill all the White Man," which is particularly funny coming 
from NoFX's four white dudes.
Also, Vien Hong sings "We Are 21," a hilarious punk ode to coming of age, 
and Samn Rockwell sings "Dudes of Steel Theme," which has led to me 
refering to myself as "Romeo-Sid Vicious."
