Title
Review for Passenger 57 (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian L. Johnson
95 min., R, Action, 1992
Director: Kevin Hooks
Cast: Wesley Snipes, Bruce Payne, Tom Sizemore, Bruce Greenwood,
      Elizabeth Hurley, Robert Hooks, Ernie Lively
     Bruce Payne is a British terrorist who is wanted for several plane
bombings.  The FBI catch Payne and transport him by plane to stand trial
in another state.  Payne, and a gang of his terrorists who have been
strategically placed on the plane, take over the plane and hold all the
passengers hostage.  Payne didn't count on passenger 57, Wesley Snipes,
who is one of the best terrorist annihilators in the business.
     PASSENGER 57 is the newest action film out, and will be battling
with Steven Segal's newest film UNDER SIEGE.  I feel that UNDER SIEGE is
better, but this film is definitely worth going to see.  I suggest this
film to fans of "shoot 'em up" action films.  Others will most likely
find this film a big waste of time and money.  I highly recommend
watching this film in the theaters, for it will be much more spectacular
there.  On a scale of zero to five, I give PASSENGER 57 a four.
PASSENGER 57 is rated R for explicit language and violence.
     PASSENGER 57 reminded me somewhat of the AIRPORT movies of the 70's
in which a plane full of people got involved in a tragedy.  That is
about as far as the similarity goes.  There are a few others, but to
disclose them could spoil the movie.  Bruce Payne gives the best
performance in the film.  He fits his role perfectly and is half the fun
of seeing the film.  Wesley Snipes, although he doesn't give the best
performance, is able to handle the film.  This not a dramatic film, so
great performances are not needed (look at Sylvester Stallone, Arnold
Schwarzenegger, and Steven Segal).  He can walk around with a gun in
this picture, and that is all he really needs to do.  Wesley Snipes can
do excellent performances, like in NEW JACK CITY, so I guess he decided
to take it easy in this film.
     The special effects for this film are very well done, and look real
good on the big screen.  The scenes involving the plane and the carnival
will most likely not look quite as good on a small television set, but
other than that, I think the rest of the movie will translate very well.
The film is well written and has all the standard action film equipment:
one very evil bad guy, one super-good good guy, one bimbo (for what ever
reason they are thrown in for), and several people who can die well.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     After seeing and admiring Wesley Snipes's work in the recent and
preposterous film MURDER AT 1600, I viewed one of his earlier films,
PASSENGER 57.  When PASSENGER 57 was released in 1992, I carefully
avoided it because its reviews were abysmal.
     (1992 was back in the old days.  Today I see most films, promising
or not, so I can review them.  Without this policy, I would have never
seen PRIVATE PARTS or LIAR LIAR, both of which I loved, so there is
something to be said for the see-them-all principle.)
     Like MURDER AT 1600, PASSENGER 57's script (by Dan Gordon and
David Loughery) takes an already questionable premise and contorts it
beyond any hope of credibility.  Hopeless plots have only two
successful strategies, either go for parody or cast a strong lead and
hope the lead can carry the film.
     PASSENGER 57 has exactly one jewel -- Snipes.  He imbues his
character, counter-terrorism specialist John Cutter, with a beautiful
blend of the athletic and the comical.  Although Snipes sometimes seems
too smart for his character, his performance is always interesting,
albeit not as good as in MURDER AT 1600.
     The plot, such as it is, surrounds the hijacking of a plane by
terrorists.  As luck would have it, Cutter happens to be on board the
hijacked plane.
     Bruce Payne, whose specialty seems to be playing in numerous
obscure movies, plays the terrorist leader Charles Rane.  Rane is the
quintessential elusive terrorist whom the police have never been able
to keep under lock and key.  Payne relies on his ever shifting eyes to
express emotion.  His performance is the sort that elicits laughter at
the wrong times.  Elizabeth Hurley plays his side kick, Sabrina
Ritchie.  Her acting relies on a silly collection of sneers.
     Most of the cast plays the material dead seriously, except for
Ernie Lively as Chief Biggs.  Lively did not get the message on the
film's intent and goes for pure parody as the racist southern cop with
an IQ only slightly higher than his age.  Although somewhat
out-of-place, he is just ridiculous enough to be funny.
     Director Kevin Hooks, whose most recent film was FLED, likes lots
of guns and action to keep up the energy.  Bright sets help, with one
scene at the ever popular locale of an amusement park.  On which ride
does one of chases occur?  The Ferris wheel, of course.
     PASSENGER 57 provides brainless entertainment for couch potatoes,
but little more.
     PASSENGER 57 runs a quick 1:24.  It is rated R for violence.  The
film would be fine for teenagers.  Although I enjoyed watching Snipes,
I cannot recommend the film and can only give the picture * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Robert Dorsett
     PASSENGER 57 stars Wesley Snipes as John Cutter, a
counter-terrorism expert.  After his wife is tragically killed in a
domestic crime incident he was involved in, and after blaming himself,
he resigns from the FBI (or Secret Service; not quite clear which), and
hires himself out as a security consultant "training night watchmen and
airline personnel," which everyone he knows considers a "loser" job;
everyone tries to convince him to go back to his old job.  Whatever.
     What's pertinent to the story is that the hero ends up on an
L-1011, which just so happens to be transporting a very dangerous
terrorist captive, by the name of Charles Rame.  Unfortunately, Rame's
gang is also on board the airplane, and *aren't* prisoners: the FBI
agents accompanying him are killed, and he hijacks the airplane.
Cutter jumps right into the situation, and starts fighting the
terrorists almost instantly.  They underestimate him ("just airline
security"), not knowing his past, and allow him to secure the lower
galley.
     So, how good's the movie?  Really neat premise, but it just doesn't
work.  Just no sense of tension or action; the plot's too methodical.
Only about a third of the movie occurs in the air.
     One has the drift of things to come when, after a fairly exciting
opening scene, they end it with a water truck going out of control, the
bottles falling down and bursting, disorienting the villain, and
allowing him to be captured.  Ooooooookay.
     The movie also suffers from continuity problems.  The captain's
killed early on (no spoiler, it's in the trailer), yet, later on, in a
landing scene, we see hands on the throttle from the *left*.  Hmm.  Next
time we see the F/O, he's still in the right seat; the captain's seat
(and his window) are covered in blood.  Hmm.
     The terrorists kill the security guards.  First one, then the
other.  Well, when the first one's getting offed, why does the other
have blood running down his head?  Then they switch camera angles and
show him getting killed, no blood.  Next cut: blood down the head.
- Why is it so important, at one point, to jump out the moving airplane?
  Why not wait until it stops and step out?  The characters involved had
  no reason to suppose they were in immediate danger.
- The blown-out window near the end.  Okay, the air goes out.  But why
  does the door on the other side buckle and get blown out?  What
  pressure differential can exist that would be any worse than a
  routine flight?  Metal fatigue?  Is the owner of the airline supposed
  to be Frank Lorenzo?  Why does it take so *incredibly* long for the
  airplane to depressurize, and why don't the combatants all pass out,
  or at least slow down because of hypoxia?
- This sounds bloodthirsty, but I'm amazed Snipes didn't kill more
  people.  Starts out against an unknown number of terrorists, and he's
  prancing around in these prolonged fight scenes, taking *prisoners*...
  Hmm...
- The ground scenes are remarkably absurd.  One gets no sense of the FBI
  people being in any way professionals: it's a filmmaker's concept:
  "What would *I* do if..."   And one gets the resulting impression of
  amateurism and incompetence.  Except for SNIPES, of course.  And the
  way he re-boards the airplane is absurd: "Commando" in reverse, if you
  follow my drift.
- Lastly, Cutter's background just isn't believable.  Are we to believe
  that this highly trained operative, *with* the drop on a criminal,
  *isn't* going to put a bullet in the skull of some thug holding his
  wife hostage, regardless of whether he's hold a gun to her head?
  Hmmmm...  Perhaps he's supposed to be an anti-hero...
     I stuck around for the credits, wondering who their consultants
were.  Nope.  No FBI consultants, nobody from Lockheed, no FAA, no
nuttin'.  Yet another frequent flyer's vision of aviation and terrorism.
     Acting?  Snipes isn't convincing in this role.  People call Seagal
a wooden actor; this guy's wooden.  Seagal's an Olivier next to Snipes.
The BAD guy, played by Bruce Payne, is nicely done (except for an
embarrassing scene with his lawyer).  Snipes just isn't up to his level
of menace.
     Just about the only original thing in this movie is that Cutter
*doesn't* have cute one-liners, ala Swarzenegger, after violent scenes.
The only relief is when the CEO of the airline comments on the
intelligence of the FBI: "Brilliant.  They take a dangerous, experienced
hijacker to trial in an airplane.  Why not a bus or train?"  :-)   Lots
of racial "sarcasm," such as the old woman who can't tell Blacks apart,
and confuses Cutter with Arsenio Hall; or the hick police from
Louisiana, who treat Cutter worse than the terrorists.
     Overall, this movie's very dull, which is a Bad Thing to say about 
adventure flicks.  It's also short (under 1:25).  It is *no* DIE HARD
aboard an airplane, nowhere near the rush of UNDER SIEGE.  If you
expect this movie to be similar to those, it isn't.  It's not even R
material: TV-movie stuff.  With such a subdued plot and violence factor,
one might suspect they're aiming for a *realism* effect, but it's
cartoonish, at best, a teenager's fantasy.
     Rating: 0 on the [-4,+4] scale, two stars, 5/10, etc.  Not a bad
movie, but definitely not a good one, standard formulaic fare.  Wait for
it to appear on TV (uncut!  :-)).  
