Title
Review for Three Days of the Condor (1975)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the most immediate consequences of the social turmoil
in 1960s was the global loss of faith towards the
institutions of government. For the Americans, feeling of
mistrust into their government, born out of traumatic events
of Kennedy assassination, finally peaked immediately after
Watergate and turned into full-blown paranoia. The
unpleasant discovery of government's tendencies to use their
all- powerful resources against helpless and innocent
citizens for some hidden agenda caused a lot of anxiety.
Such anxiety influenced Hollywood too, who launched a whole
series of political thrillers about government conspiracies.
The trend, with THE PARALLAX VIEW and ALL THE PRESIDENT'S
MEN as the brightest example, was very popular for a while,
but then the audience gradually got tired of complicated
plots dealing with arcane political intrigues and subtle yet
deadly techniques of manipulation and control. However,
while the trend lasted, it produced some films that,
although hardly masterpieces, look superior to today's
attempts to resurrect sub-genre of paranoia. Nice example is
THREE DAYS OF THE CONDOR, interesting 1975 thriller by
director Sydney Pollack.
The movie begins in the New York office that serves as a
front for the research division of CIA, specialised in
reading and analysing books, comics and similar material.
One of those researches is mild-manneredTurner (Robert
Redford), who goes out to buy lunch only to see all of his
colleagues brutally murdered upon return. In the state of
shock and afraid for his life, Turner contacts his
superiors, but the rendezvous intended to lead to his
debriefing ends with shooting. Barely escaping alive, Turner
is now convinced that someone within the CIA wants him dead,
probably the same person who ordered the massacre. Forced to
go underground, Turner kidnaps Kathy (Fay Dunaway),
beautiful lady photographer, in order to hide in her
apartment and figure out what is really going on.
The script by talented Lorenzo Semple Jr. (who wrote, among
the others, paranoia classic THE PARALAX VIEW), was very
good in bringing the atmosphere of anxiety and mistrust to
the screen. Unfortunately, director Sidney Pollack, who
earned a lot of respect working on entirely different types
of movies (melodramas and comedies), took the dark overtones
too seriously - the camera in film is simply too dark, and
the viewer must pay a lot of attention in order to find out
what is really going on. Pollack, on the other hand, used
some very subtle but effective techniques to depict violence
- something often ignored in today's cinemas. The characters
are well-drawn and played by stellar cast. Robert Redford is
adequate for the role, although his presence might seem too
charismatic for a ordinary CIA analyst caught in a life and
death situation. Fay Dunaway was much better in a rather
thankless role whose impact was undermined with unnecessary
romance. Max von Sydow was very effective as creepy but
cultivated professional killer with personal code of honour,
same as always reliable Cliff Robertson as Turner's cynical
boss. Despite some flaws, and despite the lack of clarity in
some segments, the plot seems realistic and plausible. At
the finale, however, this movie loses a lot of impact due to
the moralistic diatribe that came out of thin air. But, all
things considered, THREE DAYS OF THE CONDOR might pass as
both entertaining and very intelligent thriller.

Author
Brian Koller
Robert Redford was one of the biggest
movie stars at the time that this cerebral,
plotty thriller was released.  Although
commercially successful, "Three Days
of the Condor" never quite achieved the
critical attention of other Redford films
of the era, such as "All the President's
Men" and "The Sting".  But "Condor" was
a very good film as well, and its themes
of governmental conspiracy and paranoia
reflected cynical post-Watergate attitudes
towards political institutions.
Redford's character is Joe Turner, initially
a cheerful, well-read employee of the American
Literacy Historical Society, a CIA front
whose staff peruses spy novels to generate
ideas for the agency's activities.  Turner
discovers and naively investigates evidence
revealing a shadow organization within the CIA,
which responds by hiring mercenaries to kill
everyone at the ALHS.
Out to lunch, Turner is spared, but the hitmen
led by Joubert (Max von Sydow) are still on his
trail.  Worse, his bosses at the CIA, especially
Higgins (Cliff Robertson) and Wabash (John Houseman)
also seem to prefer Turner dead.  Desperate and
paranoid, Turner kidnaps a beautiful and surprisingly
sympathetic stranger (Faye Dunaway) for the use
of her house and car.  This creates a dubious
if entertaining love interest subplot.
Predictably, the CIA executives are portrayed
as duplicious and indifferent to human life.
Turner makes an unlikely character transition
from bookworm to action hero.  Still, Redford's
skills as an actor transcends his character,
and the script is intelligent and well written.
Joubert, both noble and sly, is a memorable
hitman character.
Based on David Rayfiel's novel "Six Days of the Condor"
(Hollywood is always abridging the classics), the
film received a single Oscar nomination, for best
editing.  It was one of seven films starring Robert
Redford that were directed by Sydney Pollack.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
http://www.epinions.com/user-briankoller
