Title
Review for Inn of the Sixth Happiness, The (1958)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Ingrid Bergman's career was nearly destroyed by
her affair with an Italian director, but by 1958
her image had recovered sufficiently for her to
be cast as a saintly missionary.  In "The Inn of
the Sixth Happiness" (the title refers to a Chinese
saying) her character can do no wrong, and her
halo grows brighter and stronger as the film
progresses.
Set in northern China, the production was to be
filmed in nearby Formosa (modern-day Taiwan).
When the Nationalist Chinese government tried
to meddle with the storyline, the film's location
was changed to the British island of Wales.  There,
local residents of Chinese ancestry were cast in
supporting roles but were given no lines due
to their un-Chinese Welsh accents.
The plot was based on the Alan Burgess biography
of Gladys Aylward (Bergman).  She was an ambitious
English servant who in 1930, against all advice and
without money, took a hazardous journey to China
to work as a missionary.  There, she runs an inn
with the intention of converting travellers through
Christian storytelling.  She also becomes a paid
Chinese government official, working to end the
custom of foot-binding among young women.
As Aylward's do-gooding finds increasing success,
she wins the respect of the local Mandarin official
(Robert Donat) and Dutch-Chinese patriot Colonel
Lin (Curt Jurgens).  There is also an inevitable
romance between Lin and Aylward, which can't really
go anywhere due to the need to keep Bergman's character
pure.  Aylward's character begins performing heroic
actions whose favorable resolutions seem implausible
and simplistic.  She stops a prison riot and effects
reforms, and later leads a herd of children through
territory threatened by ruthless Japanese invaders.
While Bergman's character is ageless and immortal,
her supporting cast is not as fortunate.  Among the
martyred are elderly missionary Mrs.Lawson (Athene
Seyler), genial assistant Yang (Peter Chong), and
prison spokesman Li (Burt Kwouk).
Director Mark Robson received an Oscar nomination
for work on "The Inn of Sixth Happiness".
This was Donat's final film.  He died prior to the
film's release.  He gives a hammy but charming
performance.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
