Title
Review for Nell (1994)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Alex Fung
Fox
Starring Jodie Foster, Liam Neeson, Natasha Richardson, Richard Libertini
Screenplay by William Nicholson and Mark Handey
Produced by Renee Missel and Jodie Foster
Directed by Michael Apted
Rated AA [Adult Accompaniment] in Canada for brief nudity
     After much hype, 20th Century Fox's winter entry into the Oscar
fracas, NELL, has opened here in Toronto this Xmas weekend.
     NELL is a crowd-pleaser dealing with the discovery of the title
character, a young woman brought up secluded from society in the woods,
and found to communicate in unintelligible gibberish and grandiose
sweeping and swaying gestures with her arms and body.
     Nell's discovery is brought to the attention of two doctors, who
invariably differ upon the course of action to be taken.  One feels
that the 'wild child' should be brought to the local hospital for
observation and studying, while the other becomes enraptured by her
innocence and pure soul, and seeks to protect her.  However, the
agendas of both parties become altered by an unforeseen human element.
     Jodie Foster plays the title character in a breathtaking and
outstanding performance.  She brilliantly emotes with her eyes and
facial expressions, and makes a deceptively difficult acting job
convincing and effective.  Foster disappears completely into the role,
and makes Nell a very gut character while still exuding charisma.  With
this performance, it seems very likely that Foster will receive her
third Best Actress Oscar in less than a decade--it is excellent work.
     Liam Neeson plays Jerry, the doctor who befriends Nell, and is
capable in the role, if not quite up to the calibre of Foster.  He does
project likeability and a good sense of timing, while being a hulking,
imposing figure on the screen, especially in contrast to Foster's
fragile little Nell.  Natasha Richardson portrays Paula, the opposing
doctor who decides that it is in Nell's best interest to take her for
studying, and is just fair in the role.  Her performance tends to be
rather flat, and while she is competent, Richardson's emotional
interludes seem too forced and inauthentic.
     NELL's plotline is fairly formulaic and over-manipulative.  There
are many moments in the film where you may have more than an inkling on
future events in the movie, and some lines of dialogue are delightfully
hokey.  NELL suffers from an abudance of gushing weepy
over-sentimentalism, particularly in the ridiculous climactic scene
which almost undermines the entire film, and one scene designed to
bring suspense almost had me laugh aloud.  However, Apted utilises
visuals very well, with some beautiful shots of the brush and
wilderness, and a very pretty sky shot at one point in the film.  The
film's score is lush, if somewhat omnipresent, and the keynote song of
the film is Patsy Cline's CRAZY.  Although filled with several stock
characters, Apted has succeeded in producing a heart-warming tear-jerker
that should success commercially, and showcases an outstanding acting
performance by Jodie Foster.  On my four-star rating scale, I give
NELL three stars.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Jodie Foster, Liam Neeson, Natasha Richardson, 
          Richard Libertini, Nick Searcy 
Director: Michael Apted 
Producers: Renee Missel and Jodie Foster 
Screenplay: William Nicholson and Mark Handley based on the play 
            "Idioglossia" by Mark Handley 
Cinematography: Dante Spinotti 
Music: Mark Isham 
Released by Twentieth Century Fox 
     NELL, Jodie Foster's return to dramatic acting following a
flirtation with MAVERICK's action-comedy, is an entirely human movie.
In this lush, green world of rolling hills and crystal pools,
technology is an unwelcome intruder; civilization, a threatening
monster.  Both are slaves to the avaricious.  NELL is about the
importance of communication and interaction, about how the events of
childhood shape a life, and about the difficulty--and rewards--of
reaching out to others.
     Nell (Foster) has lived her entire life alone in the woods with an
aging mother.  She is eventually discovered by a local doctor, Jerome
Lovell (Liam Neeson), who comes to her secluded, ramshackle hut on the
occasion of her mother's death.  Nell's panicked and hostile response
to strangers forces Jerome to travel to nearby Charlotte to recruit the
expert assistance of Dr. Paula Olsen (Natasha Richardson).  After
meeting the young woman, Paula's impression is that Nell should be
committed.  Jerome, horrified by this possibility, obtains a court
order to stop it.  The two opposing sides eventually argue the case
before a judge.  Deferring his verdict for three months, the judge
gives the two doctors that time to observe their subject, learn her
language, and present him with enough evidence to make an informed
decision.
     Jodie Foster's two Oscars are no fluke, as her simple-yet-profound
performance in NELL illustrates.  She is one of only a few actors
capable of so fully immersing herself in a character that it's possible
to forget the star behind the performance.  With Jack Nicholson or Al
Pacino, you watch a variation of the same personality; with Jodie
Foster, you see a new individual.
     Nell is an almost-childlike woman who speaks her own fractured
form of English, hides inside her house by day, and takes moonlight
swims in a nearby lake.  In Jerome and Paula, she finds a substitute
father and mother, and together, these three attempt to breach the
non-physical walls between them.  This, the real meat of NELL, is where
the film attains its depth and richness.
     At times, director Michael Apted, perhaps best known for his
documentaries (the SEVEN UP series, INCIDENT AT OGLALA), seems as
enamored with the scenery as with his actors.  The North Carolina
terrain is breathtaking, and Apted, along with cinematographer Dante
Spinotti, has created one of the most beautiful motion pictures of the
year.  It's a wonderful background for this tale.
     Liam Neeson and Natasha Richardson are solid, but constantly in
Foster's shadow.  In a film as frequently introspective as NELL, it's
refreshing not to have the three main actors struggling to outdo each
other.  The gentle, unforced tone, once established, is
maintained--until the unfortunate climax.
     Sadly, SCENT-OF-A-WOMAN disease has infected NELL.  Perhaps the
writers couldn't think of a better way out of an admittedly-difficult
situation, but to pander to the "Hollywood mentality" of movie endings
is a unworthy way to wrap up what is otherwise a finely-crafted motion
picture.  Had the majority of NELL not been so impressive, the
lackluster final act wouldn't have been as disappointing.
     Despite this moderate tarnish, it is difficult to deny NELL's
intelligence and sensitivity.  We approach this story with the same
fascination that Nell faces each day, seeing, if only for a short time,
how different the world--and people--can be.  It is this impression
more than any other that stays with the viewer after the drama has been
played out and the final credits roll.
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily those of
Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 

Author
Pedro Sena
Some films take you by surprise, and just tear you apart.  And then some
films make you feel guilty that you didn't enjoy them sooner. NELL is such
an example.
This is an excellent, loving, and caring film about .... well, about ....
Nell, who has been raised in the woods away from all contact, except her own
corners of the world.  And she has created her own language, based on the
sounds of her grandmother who brought her up.  Nell had been afraid of the
daylight since her young days, when she was scared.
And two people have come to discover Nell, and have different opinions about
how to study her and re-introduce her to society.  Jerome is a bit of an
anthropologist, and he does things his own way.  And Paula
is representing an academic side that takes what it can at whatever price
for the sake of its own ego.
And Jerome manages to get a three month observation period, to find out what
they will do with Nell, now that she is by herself.  They find that Nell
comes out at night, and sleeps most of the day.  During the night she lives
her imagination, and the memories of her childhood, with what appears to be
a twin sister who died, in unclear situations, and was buried by Nell amidst
the rocks and caves in the area.
Nell manages to survive the eventual court proceedings, and she has  grown
to cope very well with everything around her.  She eventually  joins the
family of the local sheriff, whose wife has a similar  physical condition to
that of Nell.   Nell may have grown some, and her innocence is now
translating into womanhood, but she has not lost any of the feel she has for
the child within, as the last scene  indicates.
There are some wonderful things in this film, and most of them center around
Jodie Foster, and the design of the film.  It is a visual showcase, and well
designed in the evening and night scenes that it creates to display the
child within this grown woman.  In the evenings Nell goes to the lake in
front of the house and relives in
her mind, the happy days with a twin sister, and the way this is directed
and photographed leaves no doubt as to what is the prettiest and best part
of this film and story, and what we, the audience, are supposed to defend.
This is a film with excellent performances, even if Liam Neeson is probably
the weaker of the three leads.  He seems to gasp to keep up with two ladies
that have lived theatre and film all their lives and know how to be and
unload at any minute.  His character is good but not as strong as the other
two.  The other two stand out,  and Liam's characterization only stands out
because he is in the way between the outside and Nell, and just about
everyone has to go through him.  But he manages to hold himself well, even
if the acting has to descend into the level of mechanics to be able to get
something across.  One never feels this lack of ability and confidence in
the other two ladies.  But it is not fair to say that Liam is not good.  He
is very good.
This is an excellent film, well designed all around, with excellent music
and cinematography for anyone who is capable of enjoying these things.  It
is not only a strong film, but one that will linger for some time in one's
mind.  Quite an achievement in design and creativity.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In this course students we will study in detail a native speaker
of an unknown language.  For this we have contracted an academy award
winning actress by the name of Jodie Foster.  To direct her we have an
equally acclaimed director by the name of Michael Apted.
     Although Foster's is a sole performance we have arranged to have
well known actors Liam Neeson and Natasha Richardson play learned
doctors who are studying this native speaker who we will refer to
simply as NELL.  Neeson and Richardson have no real parts, but we fear
you may be bored silly by Foster's pedantic and excessively earnest
performance if we do not have someone else in the movie even if they
are an after thought.
     As you watch scene after scene of NELL speaking in tongues, you
will eventually either fall asleep or begin to actually understand the
language since it is a sort of pig Latin.  We recommend sleep, but you
can choose.  If you watch Foster's eyes, you will see that she appears
to either be on some mind altering drug or is herself falling asleep.
We should warn you there is a final exam where you will be asked to say
"Guardian Angel" in Fosterspeak.
     Some nationally known reviewers have put this course in their top
ten of the year list while others have it on their bottom ten.  This
may confuse you.  We suspect that after 15 minutes of this course you
will have made up your mind but will be worried that you are being too
hasty in your judgment.
     Well, there are those of you who may be tempted to stay through
the entire course although it runs a tediously long 1:53.  You may
think that the course has to get more interesting as it evolves.  Be
under no such illusion.  The tone of the show is major serious.  Listen
up and don't worry that we will break the soporific mood by any levity.
     The movie is rated PG-13 because we let Foster skinny dip totally
nude by the moonlight on most nights.  Don't worry, there are serious
reasons for doing this.  You will asked about this on the final.
Unless this is absolutely a required course for you, we recommend that
you do not take this as an elective.  We give it one * in our rating
since Foster tries so hard to get another academy award.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jodie Foster, Liam Neeson, Natasha Richardson, Richard Libertini,
Nick Searcy Director: Michael Screenplay: William Nicholson and Mark
Handley based on the play "Idioglossia" by Mark Handley
A girl dances in the woodlands like a dryad amongst trees,
Free from mankind's influence and inhumanity.
She knows only her mother's love, and speaks a language of her own,
Her cry is voice of emotion, with sounds both beautiful and ugly.
A free spirit roaming the hills alone and unafraid,
Her only enemy is mankind, wishing to snare her like fallen prey.
As Tarzan must become the 'Lord of the Jungle' of his worth,
So Nell must return to the woodlands of her birth.
Her name is Nell, and nature is her home,
The sky is her rooftop, and the stars her tapestry.
NaÄve, innocent child of the Forrest wild,
She is her own master, sister and family.
How strange it must be to grow up without the influence of television,
telephones, cinemas and modern society as we know it today. Frankly, I
don't think it is a disadvantage at all - too much technology and one
may lose that important sense of individuality. Nell doesn't fuss when
there isn't any hot water for a bath or electricity for cooking. There's
always the lake in the backyard, and every tree carries enough wood to
make a homely fire. No candy bars, chips or popcorn, just the nutritious
greens and berries of wild nature full of vitamins and low in calories.
Back to the basics and simplicity of early settler life.
Michael Apted has chosen a subject full of complexities to direct and
relay to his viewers. A meaningful experience for those willing to sit
through and try to understand the dilemmas arising from unsympathetic
media attention, human research, and Nell's freedom of choice. Good
supports from Liam Neeson and Natasha Richardson and a memorable Nell
performed by Jodie Foster.
Comment: As a friend once commented, this movie has an 'ethereal'
quality about it.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Nothing in the first hour of NELL effectively explains what's
going on.  Sure, we're spoon fed the basics: Appalachian doctor Jerome
Lovell (Liam Neeson) is called by the sheriff to a backwoods cabin, the
home of a recluse who was thought to have lived alone.  She was a
stroke victim who had very little contact with the outside world.  She
also had a daughter that no one knew about--a young woman named Nell
(Jodie Foster) who has never known contact with strangers.
     They call Nell a "wild child" and immediately consult a
psychologist (Natasha Richardson) in Charlotte.  She wants Nell in a
hospital, Jerry wants Nell to be left alone, and there you go.  What
does *Nell* want?  Why is Jerry interested in her?  Why does Richardson
talk like she had Reba McEntire as a dialect coach?  The script never
answers these questions.
     Based on a play by Mark Handey, Nell is built around a magnificent
plot device:  a child reared without any human contact other than her
mother.  Said child was borne as the result of a rape and so Mom
painted a very cruel portrait of the outside world.  Mom also suffered
multiple strokes and her aphasia affected how the child was taught to
speak.  (Mom's accent didn't help much either, y'all.)
     The scenes for such a story should write themselves.  Sheriff
discovers cabin.  Doctor discovers Nell.  Nell discovers civilization.
Civilization discovers Nell.  Those scenes exist, but they're pieced
together in a routine, ambiguous fashion that never explains much of
anything.  We get plenty of moonlit shots of Nell communing with
nature, for example.  She dances under the stars and goes swimming
buck-naked.  It's a very showy performance from Foster that says very
little.
     Nell speaks through slow, swaying motions, appearing drunk in
almost every scene.  Why is she acting intoxicated?  Only in the last
few minutes does Nell reveal the mind that *we* know she's had all
along.  We've seen her intelligent stares; we know she's smart.  The
movie needs *less* of her silly swaying and *more* of the characters
who are paying attention to her.
     Director Michael Apted includes a number of images from inside
Nell's mind, which he overuses.  How about some scientific mumbo jumbo,
instead?  Here's a story *filled* with doctors and hospitals, yet no
one stops to give a frank explanation of why Nell is behaving in the
manner she is.
     The film achieves satisfying closure, when Nell gives a courtroom
speech that lets her say all the things that she should've said
before.  Of course, if she had spoken too soon, she would've ruined the
suspense.  Will the bad doctors study her like a specimen?  Will the
good doctors fall in love and protect her?  Duh, what do you think?
BOTTOM LINE:  Great idea for a stupid movie.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Director:  Michael Apted.
Starring:  Jodie Foster, Liam Neeson, Natasha Richardson.
Screenplay:  William Nicholson and Mark Handley.
     The pre-release buzz over Jodie Foster's performance in NELL tells
you two things about this year's Academy Awards race.  First, it's
another abysmal year for female leading roles when people can't think
of any worthy nominees and start to hype a performance two months
before anyone has seen it.  Second, it's another year when overcoming a
disability is virtually the express lane to a nomination.  What it
doesn't tell you is how good Foster actually is in NELL, and that is
simply good, and far from great.  NELL as a whole is even less
successful, a well-acted but unremarkable film which makes a couple of
profound missteps.
     NELL opens in the remote woods of North Carolina, where a
reclusive old woman is found dead by a delivery boy.  When local doctor
Jerry Lovell (Liam Neeson) is brought out to determine the cause of
death, he discovers that the woman was not living alone.  She has a
daughter, called Nell (Jodie Foster), who has grown up completely
isolated from civilization.  She is also isolated by a unique language,
partly the result of learning to speak from a mother who suffered a
stroke.  Jerry enlists the aid of psychologist Paula Olsen (Natasha
Richardson) to determine whether or not Nell is competent to live
alone.  As the two doctors observe her, they begin to discover that she
is far more than a "wild child," and to discover some things about
themselves in the bargain.
     Director Michael Apted has demonstrated an affinity for films set
in the South (COAL MINER'S DAUGHTER) and films about culture clashes
(THUNDERHEART), so he would seem like a good fit for NELL.  Indeed, he
is mostly on target.  He and cinematographer Dante Spinotti (who
collaborated on the visually imaginative BLINK earlier this year)
create some marvelous images of the beautiful locations, in clear deep
blues, and there are a few extremely effective scenes of Nell reacting
to a strange new world.  However, he makes at least one truly awful
choice.  Part of the mystery of NELL involves how her language cannot
be attributed completely to her mother's aphasia, and other peculiar
behaviors she exhibits.  But Apted clues the audience in far too soon
by using flashbackes from Nell's perspective, and consequently we are
not given the chance to discover her secrets as Lovell and Olsen do.
     The problem with NELL is deeper than that one error, however.
Thematically, it's simply THE ELEPHANT MAN in a log cabin: "civilized
people" discover "freak" and learn that "freak" is more human than any
of the "civilized people."  At times, NELL seems to match THE ELEPHANT
MAN note for note, from the kindly doctor attempting to communicate
with the outsider, at first assuming some kind of retardation, to the
outsider being taunted and abused, to the outsider becoming a media
sensation, and so on.  Unfortunately, NELL is not nearly as subtle or
engrossing as THE ELEPHANT MAN.  The script, by William (SHADOWLANDS)
Nicholson and Mark Handley from Handley's own play, would have been
better as a mystery than as the morality play it becomes, but Apted's
one false move robs it of that mystery.  By the time we get to the
climactic scene in which Nell delivers the kind of courtroom speech
which makes courtroom scenes so generally annoying in contemporary
films, she has become too much the noble savage and not nearly human
enough.
     Jodie Foster is a wonderful actress, but there's really only so
much she can do with this part.  Though it seems tailor-made for a heap
of awards, Nell surprisingly fails to generate much emotional
resonance.  Physically, Foster does som superb acting; she lets this
character inhabit her entire body.  It just often seems as though she
is concentrating so hard on her part that she's not making connections
with the other actors.  Liam Neeson and Natasha Richardson are both
solid as the feuding doctors, but they come to parts which have the
kind of pre-fabricated back stories that come out in tearful speeches,
a frequent flaw of playwrights turned screenwriters.  Their
relationship feels contrived, which is a true shame considering Neeson
and Richardson's real-life romance.  That development is like a lot of
NELL: awkward, even as it looks great.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In the back woods of the Great Smokey Mountains of North Carolina
an old hermit woman dies.  When a  policeman (played by Nick Searcy)
and a doctor, Jerome Lovell (Liam Neeson) come to investigate and tidy
up the loose ends, they find a loose end nobody knew about.  The woman
had a daughter Nell (Jodie Foster) who had lived virtually without
human contact and who spoke a completely unintelligible language.  Nell
has been raised to fear people and her reaction to these invaders is
pure panic.  Lovell brings in a second doctor, Paula Olsen (Natasha
Richardson), little realizing that he is sowing the seeds of a three-
way battle for the fate of Nell.  One faction will want her to remain
in the wild, one will want to study her in an institution, and both
will want to keep her out of the hands of the media who want to exploit
her.  Deep in the woods Lovell and Olsen competitively initiate studies
to understand Nell and the forces that made her what she is, to
decipher her language, and to ease her terror of strangers.
     Michael Apted is singularly appropriate to direct NELL.  Two of
the major themes of his film are how Nell's childhood has molded her
into the enigmatic woman that she is and how the outside world and
mainstream society are a corrupting influence.  Apted is the creator of
the 7 UP, 7 PLUS 7, 21 UP, 28 UP, and 35 UP documentaries, which are
released each seven years, examining at seven-year intervals the lives
of 14 people and how they develop.  He also directed GORILLAS IN THE
MIST, THUNDERHEART, and the documentary INCIDENT AT OGLALA, each of
which has a theme of the corruptive or exploitive influence of society
on the innocent.  Both themes are present in William Nicholson and Mark
Handley's adaptation of Handley's stage play "Idioglossia."  Nicholson,
incidentally also wrote the screenplay for SHADOWLANDS.  This story
also looks at two approaches to science: one that tries to study in
nature and one that prefers the laboratory approach, in vivo versus in
vitro.  In a violation of political correctness, unusual for Apted, the
nurturing scientist, who sets up a pup tent and tries forming a
relationship with Nell, is the man.  The woman scientist's approach is
to bring up a houseboat full of electronic equipment and to observe
Nell with surveillance cameras.
     The telling of the story is deliberate, like a scientific case
study.  For viewers who are not interested in the puzzle of
understanding Nell's behavior and her language, the film will be as
slow-paced as watching someone fill out a crossword puzzle or paint a
picture.  The writing requires at least a modicum of curiosity about
the reasoning of anthropologists and how they do their work.  Apted
takes a good long time before he starts talking down to his audience
and moving the story in what are, unfortunately, some very predictable
directions.
     As time goes by Nell and her language become more understandable.
It is not entirely clear why this verbal fruit cocktail starts sounding
more comprehensible.  It is possible that the listener's ear becomes
more attuned to the language or that the more Nell is around people the
more she might start to imitate their speech patterns.  I suspect,
however, that the film is really a little less than honest by simply
having Foster's language written closer to spoken English in the later
parts of the film.
     Foster's acting in dramatic scenes is nearly perfect, though her
ecstatic, dance-like jaunts though nature seem a bit idealized.  Neeson
is compelling and sensitive.  Probably he is typecast as being
sensitive after playing Oskar Schindler.  Richardson comes in a fair
third for acting honors, but it is really Foster's movie.  Also
watchable is the photography of the Great Smokey Mountains, by Dante
Spinotti.  And  though it lacks the breathtaking spectacle of his work
for THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, his eye for the beauty of nature becomes
an intergal part of the film.
     This is not so much an original film as a familiar story done very
well.  Certainly it ranks among one of Apted's better dramatic films.
I give it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Dragan Antulov
If we are to believe a character in NELL, 1994 drama
directed by Michael Apted, everyone has an ulterior motive,
even Mother Theresa. Finding those ulterior motives is
difficult and sometimes impossible, but in the case of those
who made this film it is rather easy - whole purpose of this
endeavour was to bring another Academy Award to its
principal actress Jodie Foster.
The plot of this film, based on the play IDIOGLOSSIA by Mark
Handley, begins in the remote backwoods of North Carolina. A
woman who lived her most of her life in a remote cabin has
died and country doctor Jerome Lovell (played by Liam
Neeson) discovers her daughter Nell (played by Jodie
Foster). Young woman has been taught to hide from the world
and it seems that she has never seen another human being
apart from her mother. Since the mother suffered a
speech-impairing stroke, Nell never learned to speak proper
English and instead developed unintelligible language of her
own. Authorities, represented by psychologist Dr. Paula
Olsen (played by Natasha Richardson), are convinced that
Nell can't function in outside world and that her interests
would be best served if she is institutionalised. Lovell
thinks that she should remain free and manages to delay
court decision for three months. In that period both Lovell
and Olsen must observe Nell in her natural surroundings and
present their findings to the court. Lovell tries to use
this as an opportunity to decipher Nell's language and
finally establish proper communication.
The plot of NELL deals with very intriguing subject - role
of the society and civilisation in forming human mind.
Previously this subject was tackled by such great directors
like Francois Truffaut and Werner Herzog. British director
Michael Apted is not exactly in their league, but his career
indicates that he is capable of making decent film out of
this material. Unfortunately, he was not capable of
compensating the inadequacy of William Nicholson's script.
The script, same as anything else in the film, was subjected
to the single purpose - create as many opportunities as
possible for Jodie Foster to show her ability to portray
socially handicapped character. Because of that, the movie
is stuffed with scenes in which Foster talks gibberish or
lives in her own private world. Naturally, those scenes last
too long and Foster, despite all of her talent, becomes
irritating after a while. The plot that is supposed to wrap
up this character is even worse, filled with all Hollywood
cliches that culminate in the corny and quite predictable
finale. The only thing that makes this film watchable is a
splendid photography by Dante Spinotti that captures natural
beauties of North Carolina. But those lovely sights are
hardly a reason for viewers to spend almost two hours of
their life to watch this single- purpose (and failed)
effort.
Review written on September 18th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Eric Grossman
You Tarzan, me Nell.  December is here and that means we have hit the
peak of the Academy Award hunting season.  The latest contestant trying
to grab some Oscar statues is NELL, the new movie starring Jodie
Foster and Liam Neeson.
     Deep in the forest, in a small cabin, hidden away from the rest of
society by a  reclusive mother, lives Nell (Jodie Foster).  When a
delivery boy accidentally finds her mother dead,  Dr. Jerome Lovell (Liam
Neeson) and the local Sheriff hike to the cabin where they discover
this mysterious woman who speaks in her own language and is terrified
of strangers.  Curious and anxious to help her, Lovell approaches Dr.
Paula Olsen (Natasha Richardson), a behavioral scientist, to help him
diagnose Nell's condition.
     Nell proves enigmatic at first and soon Olsen and Lovell are at
odds about what is the best solution for her welfare.  Interested in
advancing her academic career, Olsen wants Nell in a hospital while the
compassionate, slightly obsessive Lovell wants her left alone, afraid
that she will become the guinea-pig of the month and then forgotten
about in a little cell.  A court tells them to observe her for three
months in her natural environment to find more facts before a decision
is made as to whether Nell should be taken from her home.  The film
then moves back to the mountains where Lovell and Olsen learn about
Nell and come to terms with each other.
     Not afraid of challenging roles, Foster has given herself a tough
one in this film.  It is a fine line she must walk to make her
character mysterious and not laughable.  Indeed, there are times where
it is tempting to giggle out loud at her Nell-speak, but she overcomes
it with her sheer commitment to the character.  Her performance would
have been more effective with a less is more approach because it is her
non-verbal communication that is most expressive.  Foster has very
revealing eyes, a gift that all the best actors seem to have.  It is
through her eyes that we feel her happiness, her sorrow and her fear
the most, not the ga-ga-goo-goo Nell-speak.  While Foster doesn't hit
the bull's-eyes, her portrayal of Nell works overall and it is more
than likely that she will end up in the best actress category at
various upcoming award shows.
     Equally committed to his role, Neeson is proving once again that
he is a very powerful actor.  His Lovell character as written by
screenwriters William Nicholson and Mark Handley (based on Handley's
play "Idioglossia") is thin on the development and motivation side but
Neeson's warm-hearted performance fills in the gaps and allows us to
buy Lovell's gentle obsession with Nell.  Neeson may also find himself
with some nominations but the best-actor field is going to be far more
crowded this year than the best-actress competition.
     Natasha Richardson's Dr. Olsen feels more like a story device than
anything else.  The sub-plot of NELL (like most movies) is will the
leading man and the leading woman fall in love.  I won't answer that
although I bet you can guess, I'll just say that their relationship is
not that interesting.  Olsen has other story functions.  She is needed
so that Lovell and Nell's relationship will not be construed as
perverse and she is also vehicle that involves the film's antagonists,
the scientific community.      Richardson, with a decent southern
accent,  makes the most of what she has to work with but it is too bad
that her relationship with Nell and Lovell could not have been more
interesting.
     Director Michael Apted (GORILLAS IN THE MIST, BLINK) makes the
right choice of  not pulling too hard on the heart-strings and making
the film overly sentimental.  If anything, he erred a too much on the
subtle side.  He and cinematographer Dante Spinotti  show off the North
Carolina countryside with some beautiful mountain vistas.  Production
designer Jon Hutman's sets are full of character and costume designer
Susan Lyall dresses everyone authentically.  The editing is by Jim
Clark and the score was composed by Mark Isham.
     NELL is the type of movie that has high aspirations.  It wants
to make profound statements about defying categorization and the folly
of pre- judgment.  However, it is the imperfect relationships between
the characters that keep this film afloat, not its grand messages.
NELL aims high and even though it falls short of its goals, there is
enough good acting and picturesque scenery to keep it from crashing.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     Occasionally, a film will contain performances that are so strong
that they are able to help it to get past major problems.  NELL is a
good example of this.  The performances by Liam Neeson, Natasha
Richardson, and especially Jodie Foster make the film worth seeing
despite some major miscalculations with the story.
     The title character (Foster) is a young woman who grew up in an
isolated cabin in the woods.  Her mother had escaped from civilization
after being raped (Nell was conceived from the rape).  After the death
of the mother, Nell is discovered by a group that included country
doctor Jerry Lovell (Neeson).  Nell is totally unaccustomed to
strangers and speaks a language that only she understands.  After the
court gives Lovell thirty days to prove that Nell is capable of living
outside of a mental institution, he begins a determined effort to learn
to communicate with him.  The mental institution is represented by Dr.
Paula Olsen (Richardson) who also goes to the woods to observe Nell.
     By far, this film's greatest strength is Jodie Foster's
wonderfully nuanced performance in the title role.  Since the majority
of Nell's dialog is in an unfamiliar language, Foster is required to
convey virtually all of the character's thoughts and feelings through a
combination of body language, facial expressions, and vocal
inflection.  Just as the characters in the film need to struggle a bit
to understand what Nell is trying to express, her emotions need to
sometimes seem a bit opaque to the audience as well.  Foster is able to
strike this difficult balance.  As Drs. Lovell and Olsen are learning
more about the character, we too become aware of new nuances to
Foster's performance.  A second viewing of this film is probably
necessary to fully appreciate what Foster has accomplished.
     Some critics may be tempted to dismiss Foster's performance as a
flashy grab for an Oscar, but that isn't really fair.  Foster has
already proven herself to be one of the finest actors of her generation
(she won 2 Oscars in the last 5 years) so it seems genuinely believable
that she was primarily attracted by the pure challenge of this role.
Nell is a complex and fascinating character and Foster does a very
impressive job bringing her to life.
     In the shadow of Foster's performance, Neeson and Richardson may
not receive the recognition that they deserve for their work in this
film.  During most of the film, Neeson essentially serves as a stand-in
for the audience.  Neeson shows Dr. Lovell's constant search for a
better understanding of Nell's behavior while also standing back to
allow the audience to discover her secrets themselves. Neeson was
required to give a quiet, subtle, primarily reactive performance and he
plays it very well.
     Richardson also finds just the right note with her performance.
She plays a skeptic in the film who initially questions Nell's
intelligence and competence, but eventually is turned around through
her first-hand observations.  She manages to believably show this
initial skepticism while avoiding the temptation to allow the character
to become unlikable.  Her character grows through knowledge, but does
not undergo radical personality changes.
     In real life, Neeson and Richardson are husband and wife.  Their
obvious natural chemistry serves the film well when their characters
begin the inevitable romance.  The most interesting aspect of the
on-screen relationship is the basically >parental

     While the three lead performances are terrific, the script by
William Nicholson and Mark Handley (based on Handley's play
"Idoglossia") has some very serious problems.  To put it simply, the
film is overplotted.  When the film concentrates on the 2 doctors'
exploration of Nell's world and Nell's introduction to the civilized
world, the film is fascinating.  Unfortunately, Nicholson and Handley
insisted on adding artificial conflict.
     In a film that absolutely did not need a literal villain, they
added Richard Libertini as the head of the mental health institute.  He
plays a highly cliched bureaucrat who appears heartless in his efforts
to have Nell institutionalized.  His character is completely
one-dimensional and uninteresting.  This subplot takes over the last
part of the film with some unnecessary sequences with Nell committed to
the cold, unpleasant institution.  It finally leads to an absolutely
ludicrous courtroom finale.
     The film is also undermined by an unfortunate subplot involving a
group of country rednecks who try to terrorize Nell.  The film briefly
introduces the interesting idea of the press reaction to Nell's
existence, but that idea is left generally undeveloped (except as a
plot device in the mental institution subplot).
     The one other major mistake was the use of occasional flashbacks
that reveal to the audience the origins of Nell's language before the
characters in the film learn it.  This is information that would have
had more impact had it been revealed in a more subtle manner.  Taking
an omniscient view for this one plot element just doesn't work.
     Despite these mistakes, the parts of the film that do work are
very good.  If the script had jettisoned these unnecessary subplots, it
could have been quite a remarkable film.  I'm not familiar with
Handley's original play, but I tend to wonder if some of these extra
elements might have been added in an attempt to "open up" the story for
the screen.  The film's best elements seem like they would also work
well on the stage while the less successful parts probably would have
been even more blatantly out of place in a play.
     Visually, NELL is a >very

     NELL is a flawed film, but one that is very much worth seeing for
the wonderful leading performances.  With a tighter script it could
have been one of the year's best films.  In its final form, it is still
a very good one.
