Title
Review for Scrooged (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Randy Parker
        What do you get when you cross A CHRISTMAS CAROL with GHOSTBUSTERS?
The answer: a confused and overblown comedy with an identity crisis, such
as director Richard Donner's SCROOGED.  Although SCROOGED aspires to be a
modern day version of Charles Dickens' classic tale, A CHRISTMAS CAROL, the
film seems as if it would rather be a GHOSTBUSTERS sequel.  The movie is
overwrought with big-budget special effects that look good but add nothing
to the story.
        SCROOGED stars Bill Murray as Frank Cross, the youngest network
president in television history.  Cross is a real S.O.B.; he is greedy,
mean-spirited, and merciless.  Following the general story line of Dickens'
novel, Cross encounters the Ghosts of Christmas Past, Present, and Future,
who give him a chance to reevaluate his life and change his ways.
        Murray's performance in SCROOGED is adequate, but nothing special.
He is fine when his role calls for humor.  In the film's dramatic scenes,
however, Murray fails to give his character emotional conviction.  Perhaps
Donner is at fault for not pushing SCROOGED far enough in any one
direction.  The movie never really decides whether it wants to be a
dramatic, yet comic, re-telling of A CHRISTMAS CAROL or an all-out
slapstick parody of it.  The film's ambivalence prevents it from completely
succeeding either dramatically or comically.  Although SCROOGED is fairly
entertaining and funny, it is also extremely uneven.  The drama, for the
most part, is unconvincing and never catches fire.  And throughout the
film, the extravagant (but unnecessary) special effects distract from the
story.
        While Murray may be somewhat disappointing in his comeback role,
the rest of the cast in SCROOGED is magnificent; in fact, the supporting
performances and the unending string of cameos are almost enough by
themselves to make the film worthwhile.  Robert Mitchum, Bobcat Goldthwait,
and David Johansen are among the many actors who help to enliven SCROOGED.
Carol Kane almost steals the entire movie in her 25 minute sequence as the
petite, but physically abusive, Ghost of Christmas Present.  The cameos in
SCROOGED come fast and furious--so stay on your toes.  SCROOGED is also
worthwhile for its witty parody of television.  The programming on Murray's
network yields some of the funniest moments in the entire movie.
        Overall, SCROOGED is a mixed bag.  It does contain several
rewarding performances and genuine laughs, but you have to pay for them by
sitting through the movie's failed drama, low humor, and pacing problems.
SCROOGED came close to winning me over, but ultimately its rewards just
weren't enough to compensate for its frustrations.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     I have to wonder what drug-addled studio executive came up with the idea
of having Michael O'Donoghue co-write an adaptation of a Charles Dickens short
story.  O'Donoghue is probably to Dickens what the Anti-Christ is to Jesus; the
man is brilliant at producing dark satirical humor, but I've yet to see him
come up with anything that could be even remotely referred to as
"heartwarming".  Or "civil," for that matter.  So I went into this film
assuming that it was going to be a complete send-up on A CHRISTMAS CAROL, and
for a little while, it does.
     OK: the good points: it has a three-minute opening sequence, a promo for a
"holiday special" with Lee Majors, that I literally howled at.  Pure
O'Donoghue.  Then...  zip.  Outside of a decent (but not inspired) zinger from
Murray on the average of once every two minutes (not counting the *ugh*
finale), and *maybe* Carol Kane (I think she's been over-rated here), the laughs
are few and far between.  What's worse, the film keeps trying to waffle between
satiric jesting and endearing sentimentality, and it ends up being icky.  How
icky?  Oh, lord.  You've heard other reviewers mention how bad the last ten
minutes are, as the "reformed" Murray address a TV audience?  Trust me, it made
me *angry* to watch this.  I nearly killed an usher with a glower on the way
out of the theater.  All the actors try to look like they think Murray's
artificial speech is touching, while the silent audience appeared to be
memorizing where the exits were in case of fire.  This was bad -- Golden Turkey
level bad.  Nas-teee.
     Besides Kane, I have to credit Alfre Woodward for one of the two moments
that had any real warmth to them; I knew she was a good actress, but how she
remained convincing during the conclusion is truly incredible.  And a few
points to Bill Murray for trying to drag something out of this (the scene where
he finds Michael J.  Pollard frozen actually worked, at least for the first
minute).
     But really, avoid this like the plague.  Except for the Lee Majors promo.
That was cute.

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Bill Murray and Karen Allen 
Directed by Richard Donner (Lethal weapon, The Omen, Superman)
A Paramount Pictures Release
 Take a look at the following equation.... 
A CHRISTMAS CAROL+GHOSTBUSTERS=SCROOGED 
Yes, SCROOGED is the odd mixture of sentiment,
comedy and horror you would get if you mixed those two
elements toghether. SCROOGED is alternatively sick,
gross, funny, and then sickly soppy. 
Bill Murray plays Frank Cross, a T.V executive with a
horrible personality. He's evil to secretary, actors, crew,
everyone, except the T.V's station's boss, of course
(played by the late Robert Mitchum) However, he is then
visited by a very dead exec, who warns Cross that he will
be visited by three ghosts, past, present and future (who is
called The Ghost of Yet to Come, for some reason) Sure
enough, they arrive, show Cross how much of a S.O.B he
is, and he changes his way.                  
However, throughout this simple plot, we've got to suffer
outlandish special effects, poor comedy, and an very, very
mean performance from Bill Murray. Frank Cross isn't
'funny' mean, he's just mean. He also isn't very good at
emotional scenes, and totally destroys the last ten minutes
of the film, with an utterly desperate speech saying how
great christmas is, and how he has changed. However, the
supporting cast are OK, with good performances from
Mitchum, Allen (who plays his girlfriend) and John Glover
(who plays Cross's 'partner') The ghost of christmas past
isn't that bad either. Sadly, though, the audience has to
suffer 25 minutes of 'Home Alone' style violence from the
ghost of christmas present, played by Carol Kane.
Whoever thought smacking that Kane smacking Murray in
the head with a toaster was funny, should be fired straight
away. And the audience also has to suffer Bobcat
Goldthwait (the guy with the annoying voice in Police
Academy 3, if I remeber correctly....) who, thankfully,
dosen't say much. 
        The script is horrendous. Michael O'Donaghue churns out
terrible, bad taste jokes (which I guess is the whole point
really) then changes direction completely to emotional
scenes. And he must of been on some drug when he wrote
the final ten minutes, which are awful. The special effects
look nice, but do nothing for the film. There's some
impressive make up effects also. The music is also good,
which is scored by Danny Elfman. But great effects and
make up don't make a great film. SCROOGED is an
appaling attempt to inject some christmas spirit into the
audience, seeing as the first 1 hour 20 minutes of the film
are so depressing anyway, and the last ten minutes had to
make up for it with an godawful speech. Why didn't Cross
just look out his exec window, and ask a young boy to buy a
goose for him? 
Overall, then, you'd have a much better christmas if you
avoid this film like something that should be avoided
(perhaps a plague) 
