Title
Review for Shadows and Fog (1992)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Woody Allen is the man. We all know that. But he's not 
the man in SHADOWS AND FOG, which is probably overall the 
worst film he's ever made. Not that it isn't worth watching or doesn't 
have its moments, because it does. Allen has done a terrific job here 
of creating the visual style of the great black-and-white crime 
movies of the past, where a town would take on a different identity 
in the dead of night after all the responsible people went to bed, 
changing into a frightening, claustrophobic place you don't want 
to encounter alone.
        The citizens now have a personification for the 
metaphorical fears of loneliness and the dark -- a strangler on 
the loose. It's the whole Jack the Ripper thing without the English 
accents. Set in the 1920's, SHADOWS AND FOG opens with a 
silhouette of the strangler doing his work on the latest victim and 
cuts to Allen's house, where an angry mob ready to take justice 
into their own hands demands that he join them in hunting down 
the killer. Allen, of course, doesn't want to go, counting himself 
one of the responsible people who should be sleeping at such a 
late hour.
        But he does put his clothes on and step out into the street, 
making his way to the doctor's office. Donald Pleasance makes a 
great three-minute contribution to the movie as someone who is 
constantly around cadavers and is fascinated with death, a journey 
he makes a few minutes later as he becomes the strangler's next 
victim. Funny how the guy could survive five HALLOWEEN 
movies with Michael Myers but along comes one lousy strangler 
and -- POW! -- lights out.
        Speaking of people who make great three-minute 
contributions (and I'm not talking about Woody's sex life here), 
the big draw of SHADOWS AND FOG is its incredible all-star cast. 
Mia Farrow and John Malkovich play lovers who are in town with 
the circus. Farrow storms out into the night upon walking in on 
Malkovich and Madonna doing a nude vogue and is offered free 
board by hooker Lily Tomlin at the local whorehouse. Farrow 
accepts, of course. It's nothing new to her. She's been living with 
Woody for ten years.
        The movie turns into STEEL MAGNOLIAS for five minutes 
as Mia and the girls chat about life and love to a constantly rotating 
camera, the highlight of the conversation being when one of the 
prostitutes asks her what she does at the circus and Mia says she's 
a sword swallower. The hooker replies, "No kidding. That's my 
specialty too." This brothel includes den mother Kathy Bates and 
her #1 whore Jodie Foster, along with a young customer (John 
Cusack) who wants something that isn't on the menu -- Mia. The 
price for a helping of Farrow, we learn, is $700, which Cusack is 
more than willing to pay.
        Mia eventually ends up wandering the streets with Woody 
for an hour, while a couple minor subplots develop. In the end, the 
strangler situation isn't even resolved. Woody padded the movie 
(which is still only 86 minutes long) with a bunch of needless 
comedic and dramatic scenes but didn't think to write an ending for 
the central plot. The visual world he created is great, as are the 
many stars, but in the end, there's no substance and very few laughs. 
It's like wax fruit. It looks great and you think you're getting the real 
thing until you actually take a bite out of it. Once again, I'm not 
talking about Woody's sex life...
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Beautifully filmed and intriguing
     tribute to German Expressionism and in general the Central
     European sensibility between the World Wars.  The story and
     the director's intentions are never better than vague.
     Rating: high 0 (-4 to +4).
     Out in the fog a killer--a tall bald man in a long frock coat
reminiscent of Orlok in NOSFERATU--is strangling people.  A deputation of
vigilantes drags Kleinman (played by Woody Allen) from his bed.  He must
fulfill an important role in their plot to catch the killer, but there is no
time to explain to Kleinman what his role is to be.  To prove his support he
must go out into the fog and perform an unexplained but dangerous function
to catch the killer.  There he meets a beautiful sword swallower (played by
Mia Farrow) who is married to a thoroughly unpleasant clown (played by John
Malkovich).
     With the dissonances of Kurt Weill's music under the credits, Woody
Allen opens SHADOWS AND FOG, his tribute to Central European culture and
mindset between the two World Wars.  The unwary viewer might expect this
film to do to German and Czech culture what Allen's LOVE AND DEATH did to
Russian culture.  To a large extent, that is what Allen is doing, playing
his poor schnook character in the middle of a cultural milieu and making it
look silly.  We have the allusions to film and to literature.  Here there is
a scene inspired by NOSFERATU or M.  There there is Kafka-esque situation or
some characters out of Brecht.  As a character drops into a saloon, the
soundtrack plays Weill's "Show Me the Way to the Next Whiskey Bar."  But in
LOVE AND DEATH the point of it all was good-natured and fun.  There is fun
in SHADOWS AND FOG, a carrot to the lovers of Allen's earlier films, but the
point of this bleaker film is introspection and abstract philosophy.  It
also can be read as an elliptical allegory about anti-Semitism.  Its main
character, a little Jew named Kleinman, wanders in the fog caught up in
circumstances darker and more complex than he can understand.  And where he
goes there are allusions to medieval accusations against Jews as well-
poisoners.  And there are allusions to the Holocaust to come as he is
betrayed and sold by the Church, or told be a one-time fiancee to "Get out
there and die."  All this to music by a Jewish Kurt Weill in situations
originally created by the Jews Fritz Lang and Franz Kafka.  SHADOWS AND FOG
is certainly a black followup to LOVE AND DEATH.
     It has been suggested that SHADOWS AND FOG is purely an exercise in
using the photographic conventions of German Expressionist and horror films.
Certainly the photography is the film's strongest suit.  Scene after scene
is visually striking, even if the action of the scene is not so striking.
The film is top-heavy with major actors, many of whom have only cameos.  In
the search for faces you will find Madonna, Donald Pleasence, Lily Tomlin,
Jodie Foster, Kathy bates, John Cusack, Kate Nelligan, Fred Gwynne, Julie
Kavner, Kenneth Mars, David Ogden Stiers, and Wallace Shawn.  the film is
short and there really is not enough time for seventeen major actors.
Clearly there are lots of actors willing to settle for tiny roles in a Woody
Allen film and Allen is willing to create a role for any recognizable name.
In this case this cast has only gotten itself roles in a rather vague and
elliptical allegory.  I rate SHADOWS AND FOG a high 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Kenneth E. Mohnkern
     SHADOWS AND FOG is Woody Allen's new movie.  I think I need to say
that since I had no idea what I was in for until I was in the back seat
of the car on my way to the theater.  Even then my friends were kind
enough to say nothing more than "SHADOWS AND FOG is Woody Allen's new
movie."  There's something right about going into a theater with no
expectations, knowing nothing about the plot, letting it all unfold for
you as the filmmakers intended.
     I've always mildly enjoyed Woody's movies, but don't list them as
favorites.  His dramas are pretty well out of my experience, and his
comedies are goofy, but get chuckles from me -- not laughs.  I always
figured you had to be a New Yorker to appreciate his stuff.  
     [If you want to go into the theater without a clue, stop reading
now.  I won't include any real spoilers, though.  I won't get into the
plot.]
     But, geez -- I really liked SHADOWS AND FOG.  It was beautifully
shot in black and white, really showing off his talent for the visual.
The film takes place one dark, foggy night in an unnamed city at an
unnamed time in history, presumably in the late-19th century.  There's a
murderer roaming the streets, as are a vigilante group, prostitutes, and
circus performers.  It's a great bunch of characters.  
     And what a cast!  Kathy Bates, John Malkovich (as a clown worried
about his "art"), Madonna (ha!), Woody Allen, Mia Farrow, Lily Tomlin,
Jodie Foster, John Cusack (another great role for him), Wallace Shawn,
Fred Gwynn, Donald Pleasence, Julie Kavner (in a great role!)
     We see briefly what a good physical actor Woody is.  The scene
where he steals a glass from a table is priceless.  Anxious, seeing his
only chance to do it, fumbling around, trying not to draw attention to
himself -- classic!  And another where he's got a huge wooden hammer
overhead, ready to swing it ... hysterical.  They're basically
silent-era scenes.  Sure, he's no Buster Keaton or Charlie Chaplin, but
these days there aren't any Keatons or Chaplins.  Only Steve Martin and
Woody Allen, I guess.
     I have a feeling there were analogies to society and life as we
know it, but can't quite put the pieces together.  Was there
significance to the circus?  The killer in the night?  The politics
going on in the vigilante group?  Woody's ignorance of his part of the
plan?  It's the sort of movie that you're still thinking about the next
morning.  And there aren't many of those.  

Author
Frank Maloney
     SHADOWS AND FOG is a film written and directed by Woody Allen.  It
stars Woody Allen, Mia Farrow, John Malkovich, and John Cusak, with Lily
Tomlin, Jodie Foster, Madonna, Julie Kavner, Wallace Shawn, Kathy Bates,
Kate Nelligan, Donald Pleasance, Fred Gwynne, and Kenneth Mars.
Production design is by Santo Loquasto and cinematography by Carlo
DiPalma.  Rated PG-13 for sexual situations.
     SHADOWS AND FOG is minor Woody Allen, but for the true believer
(such as your humble correspondent) second-rate Woody Allen is better
than just about anything else that is likely to be booked into town on a
given weekend.  I have to admit that the chameleonic nature of Allen's
films can be a little frustrating at times.  He's done his hommages (and
I'm sure he'd use the French word) to almost every important school of
film making and the greatest film makers.  SHADOWS AND FOG is an homage
to Kafka and to the German expressionist film school.  It has its
charms, but they will be most obvious to those of us who are predisposed
to find them.
     The film is in black and white and fog.  The action is limited to
one endless night is a city that resembles the Prague we saw in Stephen
Soderburgh's KAFKA (a mostly black-and-white film) but more
claustrophobic, more artificial, more suggestive of a sound stage.  And
of course, it is a little strange that this does seem to be the Year of
the Kafkas with Soderburgh, the reissue of the Argentine movie THE LOVES
OF KAFKA, and now this.  Whereas Soderburgh studiously strove to avoid
the Kafkaesque (he fined crew and cast for using the word on the set),
Allen is a-wash in it.  Nothing makes sense, nor is it meant to.  A
strangler, a mob at war with itself, a doctor looking the physical
origin of evil, the hatemongers, the corrupt police and clergy, the
circus that no goes to, the student, the whores, the source of the
lights under wagons and behind fences, the magician, the ending.
     Of course, it's all a metaphor for the way Life is, and it's a
good, if not terribly original, way of talking about art, movie-making,
and all that esthetics stuff that we popcorn eaters usually try to
avoid.  We don't know why life or art starts, why it ends, what happens
during, before, or afterward.  We are all stumbling around in Shadows
and Fog.  It's all there, but it is a trifle obvious.  The best parts
are some of the cameos, especially Julie Kavner's ("Get out there,
Kleinman, and get killed."), Donald Pleasance as the ghoulish medico,
Madonna -- surprisingly -- ("I'm not fussy.  I'll eat whatever you put
in front of me."), Wally Shawn who is in contention for the cameo king
of American movies, and Lily Tomlin as a hard-bitten whore.  In a movie
that is studiously plotfree, the presence of so many guest stars is much
more tolerable than in many movies, where the cameos are often a form of
Hollywood cronyism (PETER PAN springs to mind here), gamesmanship, and
otherwise irrelevant to the movie.  The cameos in SHADOWS AND FOG may
possibly contribute to the meaning of the movie (you never show whom
you're going to run into in the fog, life is arbitrary and surprising)
and provide little islands of clarity in all the swirling murk.  For
example, the Kavner scene fills us in on a bit of Kleinman's past and
his personality.
     Four of the roles rise above guest shots: Allen, Mia Farrow as Irmy
the swordswallower, John Cusak as the student whose studies of the human
condition take him to brothels and bars, and John Malkovich as the clown
too caught in being an artist to be a Mensch.  Allen was Allen; we fans
would never permit him to be otherwise.  The harmless little man caught
up in things beyond his powers to understand or to articulate, he can
only stutter and rub his hands endlessly.  The everyman who survives
with oneliners and sidesteps and who finds his redemption is the world
of illusion (beginning to sound a little autobiographical, ain't it?).
     Mia Farrow as Irmy continues to be Woody's understudy, and maybe
heir apparent.  As I remarked when I reviewed ALICE, she's taken on his
mannerisms, if not quite his persona, to an almost disturbing degree.
Is she the new Zelig?  Her performance is probably the most interesting,
certainly her character is, a circus swordswallower with biological
clock and a price.  Look out for her scene in the brothel; it is the
best this movie has to offer.
     John Malkovich is a very mannered actor, whose ability to
communicate intellectualized selfishness is nonpareil but does not quite
work as the clown.  Of course, it's amusing to all of us other clowns to
have him in full makeup going on about his life as an Artist, about how
his head is constantly full of wonderful new things, but I kept seeing
Valmont from DANGEROUS LIAISONS.  Malkovich, funny though he could be,
never seemed to fully connect with the essential absurdity of his
character and took his too earnestly.
     On the other hand, John Cusak was perfect as the student.  One
could believe that this was the stand-in for Kafka himself.  Trying hard
to keep his materialism and world-weariness intact, asking about God and
suicide, and yet with the underlying romanticism that kept nagging him
not to dismiss everything that every happened to him.
     Overall, I have to admit that is one of the master's least
successful efforts.  It is almost all style, little substances, surfaces
and no depths.  The existential questions are like the usual suspects;
Woody's rounded them up again, but it's not too any great purpose.  It
will be of interest only to the true believer.  The rest of you may
safely pass it by.  True believers are cautioned to pay matinee prices.
     There is a rather wonderful last line, maybe that is worth the
price of the matinee ticket.

Author
Michel Hafner
     SHADOWS AND FOG is the new film by Woody Allen.  After being
presented at the Berlin festival in February, coming from the shelves of
Orion, that put it there some time because they couldn't afford the
release, it starts now hitting the screens all over the world.  Spoilers
following...
     SHADOWS AND FOG is not one of Woody's best films.  His predecessor
ALICE, for example, is better.  But it's still a fine film with good
moments in it.
     Basically it's Allen's homage to German expressionist films of the
20s and Franz Kafka ( and ??? ).  He plays a kafkaesque employee named
"Kleinmann" ( ~ "unimportant person") who lives in small town of which
we only see foggy streets at night, some rooms in houses, the police
station, the church, a circus and the brothel.  He is awakened in the
middle of the night by some citizens who order him to join their posse,
that is hunting a mysterious killer on the loose, the "strangler."  He
obeys, but only to find himself alone in the fog, stumbling through the
town in futile search for his purpose as member of the posse.  
     While wandering around and uttering monologues a la Woody he meets
half of Hollywood in cameos and more substantial parts.  
     - Mia Farrow: Swordswallower in the circus, disappointed girlfriend
       of
     - John Malkovich: Clown in the circus, lusting after
     - Madonna: Trapeze-artist of the circus, and a slut, who would be
       better off with
     - Jodie Foster, Kathy Bates, Lily Thomlin: hookers in the brothel,
       receiving guests like
     - John Cusack: the philosopher-student, whose "blood" tells him to
       "live", and whose "brains" ask: "What's the point of it all?"
       Meanwhile
     - Donald Pleasence: as the scientist, cuts open the victims of the 
       strangler and hopes to localize "pure evil" somewhere under his
       microscope, maybe between the liver and the heart, but he is just
       as helpless as almost everybody else, when
     - ??: the strangler, visits him to perform his choking business.
       Maybe God can help, but
     - Josef Sommer: the priest, is busy with maintaining some kind of
       (hit?) list from which you can ge crossed off when your donations
       exceed some limit.
     Confusing?  This is only the beginning.  The whole concept is
rather interesting, but it fails to satisfy, since Allen, basically,
only changes the surroundings for his cast, but the dialogues and
monologues center around the same stuff that was chewed over and over
again in almost every Allen film the last ?? years.  Unfortunately it's
all quiet on the Allen front.  And since the film lacks the elegance of
the script and direction of ALICE, it's not quite up to our
expectations.  Well, instead you can go reference-hunting ("Wasn't that
an allusion to NOSFERATU??  Is he citing FREAKS here?"  ...  )

Author
Brian L. Johnson
89 min., PG-13, Comedy, 1992, Black & White
Director: Woody Allen
Cast: Woody Allen, Mia Farrow, John Malkovich, Lily Tomlin,
      Madonna, Jodie Foster, Kathy Bates, John Cusack, Kate Nelligan,
      Wallace Shawn, Fred Gwynne, Donald Pleasence, Julie Kavner,
      Kenneth Mars, David Ogden Stiers, Josef Sommer, Philip Bosco,
      Robert Joy, Kurtwood Smith
     In the city of London, a strangler is going around killing people.
Allen, for no known reason, is convinced by a vigilante group to go out
to the streets on a very foggy night to try to help catch the strangler.
Once on the streets Allen doesn't know what to do, so he wanders around
aimlessly running into all sorts of people.
     SHADOWS AND FOG is a typical Woody Allen film.  It is fun to watch,
in a Woody sort of way, and is a must see for Woody fans, but seems to
have no real significance.  I don't recommend this film for those people
who don't care for Woody's films.  SHADOWS AND FOG is not close to being
as good as the film EVERYTHING YOU EVER WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT SEX, BUT
WERE AFRAID TO ASK, which I consider to be Woody's best film yet.  The
film is worth watching , but I can't give it over a three (on a scale of
zero to five).  SHADOWS AND FOG is rated PG-13 for adult situations and
adult humor.
     The film is filmed in black and white, which gives it an eerie
feeling.  When Woody, or anybody else, is walking around London, it is
rather spooky.  It adds a real atmosphere to the film (and also probably
cut down on the cost quite a bit).  Just about the entire cast of the
film are established actors/actresses, although many of them only have
cameo appearances.  The only two people who have real roles in the film
are Woody Allen and Mia Farrow.  Others, like John Malkovich, Lily
Tomlin, and John Cusack, have supporting roles, but aren't on the screen
for very long.  Others, like Madonna, are on the screen for about two or
three minutes, and then never to be seen again.  They all, however, give
wonderful performances.
     Some of the camera angles were very inventive and others I really
didn't care for.  I think the one I disliked the most was in the brothel
where the camera was sitting in one spot panning around the table.  It
made me feel a little dizzy, and most of the picture was blurry because
the camera was focused on a few people sitting around the table, and
mostly what the camera saw was the walls of the room (because there were
so few people).
     The locations and scenery were very good.  The rooms had a Peter
Greenawayesque feeling to them from the way that the props were placed,
and in most instances what the props were.  The locations really looked
like they were in London,  (I didn't think to look at the credits at the
end to see where it was actually filmed).  The way the alleys looked, I
found to be rather beautiful.  This seems a bit weird to me after seeing
the film, with the presence that the alleys were supposed to portray,
but in the black and white and with the stone work on the buildings the
alleys looked very pleasing.
     I was quite shocked to see how old Woody looked.  The last film I
had seen Woody in was A MIDSUMMER'S NIGHT SEX COMEDY, which was done in
1982.  Woody has never looked young in anything that I have seen him in.
Even in EVERYTHING YOU EVER WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT SEX..., which was done
in 1972, Woody looked old.  But now he looks *very* old, and I almost
didn't recognize him (his voice definitely gave it away).
