Title
Review for New York Beat Movie (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Read this and see if you can tell me what it means:
Yes, that's right!  There's an empty space in the middle where the word
"SPACE" should be.  Don't break your arm patting yourself on the back,
because it's pretentious and means absolutely nothing.  The same can be
said for some of the artists, filmmakers, performers, and musicians from
NYC's downtown scene in the early 80's, where anyone with this kind of
lingo could be a great artist if Andy Warhol or [Insert Pretentious
Mover, Shaker, Coffee Drinker's Name Here] said so.  Do you really think
we'd be talking about Jean Michel Basquiat if Warhol hadn't shined a
spotlight on him?  More to the point, do you really think we'd be
talking about Basquiat if Julian Schnabel's (admittedly pretty enjoyable
[Not! -Ed.]) movie hadn't made him into a romantic myth?
Along comes Edo Bertoglio's Downtown 81, originally called New York Beat
Movie.  This supremely awful and compulsively watchable 72-minute
featurette is making its world theatrical premiere after missing parts
of the film (lost in Europe, my dears) were rediscovered in 1998.  Watch
the 19-year old Basquiat, playing himself, wander the Lower East Side
for 24 hours in search of -- what?  Some miracle to pay the rent with
$500 he doesn't have.  With a painting tucked under his arm, this young
artiste pounds the Lower East Side pavement encountering various
trendsetters from the early 80's, ducks into various clubs, paints some
graffiti throughout urbania, and says faux-witty things in voice-over
like, "Sometimes you feel like life is killing you."
Much of the time, Downtown 81 is supremely boring and steeped in a low
budget variation of mystical 80's excess.  Basquiat himself is handsome
but vapid, a sounding board for philosophical drivel that gives
tortured, penniless artists a bad name.  If it weren't for the beautiful
representation of a disenfranchised neighborhood, back in a time when
downtown meant burnt out factory buildings around every corner and a sea
of grungy street life meandering around every corner, it'd be simply
insufferable.  Yet there's something to be said for movies as time
capsules, representing the textures, colors, filth and flimsiness of New
York during a time where artists were pushing boundaries and breaking
new ground with punk rock, experimental film, disturbing art -- a
decaying, angry mirror to the Reagan years.  (Amos Poe, who has a small
role in Downtown 81, was among the filmmakers at this time making far
sharper filmic representations of the climate, though I don't see any
commercial doors opening up for The Foreigner, his collaboration with
Eric Mitchell.  Instead, we get Edo Bertogio's love letter to Basquiat.)
In addition to the vivid portrait of city streets and shitty taxi cabs,
crowded art clubs and braying landlords, there is a vibrant and eclectic
blend of diverse music found in Downtown 81.  Onscreen (in club scenes
and rehearsal rooms seen through the glazed eyes of Basquiat) is the
tacky excess of Kid Creole and the Coconuts, complete with dancing girls
on the sidelines doing the herky-jerky "bad dancing" we remember from
the early, early days of MTV.  Then there's the power trio, DNA, who
walk back and forth playing their guitars and drums with nary a care in
the world.  (Screw you if you don't like it, they imply.)  The Plastics,
a gonzo Japanese band, epitomize the best and worst of new wave in their
"shiny shopping bag of mania" performance.  How else would you describe
them?  Huh?  Huh?  Thought so!
Not seen live but livening up the soundtrack are Melle Mel (yes!), John
Lurie of Lounge Lizards fame, Lydia Lunch, Suicide, and Vincent Gallo. 
If Edo Bertoglio had decided instead to stuff this truly radical mix of
performers in the same room and turn the cameras on, he might have had
something truly special.  Downtown 81 is a better mix tape than a movie
-- expect the soundtrack to clutter the shelves of Virgin Megastore
right next to the Sex Pistols, the Ramones, and the Clash -- all lined
up in a neat little row!  I'm never gonna stop throwing up.  These bands
were radicals at one time, but I would hate to meet the crowd that's
gonna buy this shit at Virgin.  Doesn't that defeat the whole
intention?  Has everything become co-opted?  I digress, but someone's
gotta say it!
The posters for Basquiat -- I mean, Downtown 81, are gonna tell you it's
"New York the way it was...when it was...."  Fair enough, but all I have
to say is: where the fuck is perpetual blowhard Rockets Redglare?  And
if you don't know who that is, this ain't the movie for you.
http://www.downtown81.com/film/index.htm
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
