Title
Review for Ba wang bie ji (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Maoist Internationalist Movement
     This film chronicles the lives of two young boys (who become men)
from 1925-1977.  As children, the boys are forced to become theater
actors in a boarding school which resembles a boot camp.  They are in
training to join the so-called high culture of the Peking opera, which
the film lauds as beautiful.
     There is a current of homosexual tension in the relationship
between the two men.  Douzi, the man who plays the female role in their
rendition of "Concubine," falls in love with his partner, Shitou.
Shitou does not return his feelings, and later marries a prostitute
(played by Gong Li from RAISE THE RED LANTERN) whom Douzi deeply
resents.  It is in part because of the gay love that this movie was
initially banned in China. (1)
     Further reasons for the initial (and current) censorship of
FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE include the portrayals of suicide and political
dissent. (2)  But the most interesting part of the movie is its
portrayal of gender--exploring the way that gender is constructed and
privileged.  Douzi is not simply a man in love with another man.  As
the line between his opera character and his real life is blurred, he
is also at the same time a woman (the concubine) in love with a man
(the king).
     On the more reactionary side, the movie includes scenes from the
Cultural Revolution, in which the masses randomly denounce their
friends, wives, and family, but do not engage in political struggle to
try to reform the rich actors or ex-prostitutes.  The only scenes of
the Cultural Revolution are chaotic and destructive.  There is no
indication that any positive change occurred during that time period at
all.
     The director, Chen Kaige, was 14 in 1966 when he "wrongly"
denounced his father.  He later regretted his "betrayal" and when he
became a big movie director, he let his father work for him on the
movie sets. (3)
     Director Chen Kaige, on his American tour promoting the movie,
denounces Communism and the Cultural Revolution as evil. (3)   "When I
was a junior in high school, we believed in a very beautiful world ...
we heard a lot of good things about communism...  I didn't realize that
was the wrong thing to do." (3)
     While MIM has publicly accepted responsibility for its support of
Mao and the Chinese Communist Party, even with what did go wrong during
the Cultural Revolution, FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE does no justice to the
positive steps taken at that time, including the steps taken to erase
the distinction between high and low culture.  Chen Kaige's
self-interest in promoting his movie, as well as passing it by the
reactionary Deng-regime censors, means that he "forgets" to show his
viewers the real political struggle of the Cultural Revolution.
MIM Distributors, PO Box 3576, Ann Arbor MI 48106-3576.
E-mail: mim@blythe.org

Author
Scott Renshaw
     1993 has been quite a year for films with Chinese and
Chinese-American themes.  THE WEDDING BANQUET has received tremendous
critical praise; M. BUTTERFLY brought a Tony Award-winning play to the
screen; THE JOY LUCK CLUB has been playing to full houses and seems a
lock for many major award nominations.  Now comes Cannes Film Festival
Palme D'Or co-winner FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE, and it becomes clear that
everything else was just a warm-up.  Director Chen Kaige has fashioned
a drama mesmerizing from first frame to last, and does so without
getting artsy or obscure.  This is a remarkably accessible epic, and
the best film of this year in any language.
     FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE spans fifty years in the relationship
between two Chinese opera stars.  In 1925, the two meet when the shy
Douzi is brought by his mother, a prostitute, to a training school for
opera performers.  He is immediatedly drawn to the cocky Shitou, and
the friendship grows through the often cruel training.  As adults, the
two become the most renowned opera stars in Beijing, and adopt new
stage names.  Douzi becomes Cheng Dieyi (Leslie Cheung), who plays the
female roles; Shitou is Duan Xiaolou (Zhang Fengyi), who plays the male
roles.  The love of Dieyi for Xiaolou in their stage roles carries over
into real life, and he becomes jealous when Xiaolou marries savvy
prostitute Juxian (Gong Li).  Over the years, their personal and
professional relationship is tested by the great events of their times,
including the Japanese invasion in 1937, the Communist takeover in
1949, and the Cultural revolution of the 1960s.
     Perhaps the most astonishing thing about FAREWELL is that in spite
of its scope, it's really a very simple, old-fashioned love triangle
which happens to be about a man and a woman both in love with the same
man.  The three principals are bold and dynamic characters, each of
whom never does exactly what is expected.  Dieyi is a fascinating
character, a man whose latent homosexuality is twisted as a youth by
training which requires him to sing, "I am by nature a girl, not a
boy."  Since it is only on stage in his role as Concubine Yu (in the
opera from which the film takes its name) that he can express his
sexuality and his love for Xiaolou openly, it is there that he chooses
to live his entire life.  When he makes a plea to students of the
Cultural Revolution not to abandon the opera of the Old Society, it's a
plea not just for the art form but for his only chance to by truly
himself.  Xiaolou is equally intriguing, a brash man who is more
interested in the fame performing grants him than the purity of the
form.  He is oblivious to Dieyi's feelings, referring to him frequently
as "my stage brother," yet even that level of friendship eludes
Xiaolou.  Rather, he treats Dieyi more or less as nothing but a
co-worker, a man whom he likes and even needs for his career, but
doesn't really respect.  This convoluted relationship leads the two men
to acts both of selfless heroism and complete betrayal.  Then there is
Juxian, perhaps the strongest character emotionally, self-assured to a
fault in male-dominated China and capable in that confidence of
surprising displays of forgiveness.  Her conflict with Dieyi powers
FAREWELL's most haunting moments.
     Chen Kaige's direction demonstrates a mastery of composition and
narrative structure rarely seen.  The opening sequence, a reunion
between Dieyi and Xiaolou which frames the flashbacks to come, is a
triumph of lighting and texture.  Chen crafts brilliant cuts, such as a
cut from Xiaolou's announcement of his engagement to Juxian, and his
request for Dieyi "to be my best man," to a full screen closeup of
Dieyi, still in his concubine makeup and looking not like a "best man"
but a rejected woman.  Also well-handled is Dieyi's affair with a male
arts patron whom he uses as a surrogate for Xiaolou, painted up as
Xiaolou's Chu King character from the opera.  Every shot is a minor
revelation, raising Chen to the level of one of modern cinema's true
masters.
     No amount of hyperbole will get some filmgoers to see a 2 1/2 hour
story with subtitles about marginalized characters.  I can't think of a
greater artistic tragedy.  FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE is a thrilling love
story, a political epic and an intimate character study rolled into one
stunning package.  If you've never seen a non-English language film
before, find this one.  It's just that good.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  10/8/93 (U.S. Premiere at NY Film Festival); 
             10/20/93 (more widespread release)
Running Length:  2:38
Rated:  NR (Violence, mature themes, sexual situations)
Starring: Leslie Cheung, Zhang Fengyi, Gong Li
Director:  Chen Kaige
Producer:  Hsu Feng
Screenplay:  Lilian Lee and Lu Wei based on the novel by Lilian Lee
Released by Miramax Films
Chinese with English subtitles
     FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE is a story that spans fifty-three years,
presenting the lives of two men against the historical backdrop of a
country in upheaval.  Initially banned in China but shown to
international acclaim, Chen Kaige's film is one of the year's few true
masterpieces.  Deserving of its award at Cannes and of its prominent
position in 1993's New York Film Festival, FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE is a
motion picture experience that few will soon forget after leaving the
theater.
     In Beijing of 1924, the youthful Douzi and Shitou are brought
together under the thumb of the strict master of a small acting
troupe.  It becomes quickly apparent that these are the most talented
of the master's pupils, and he pushes them harder than his other
students.  Thirteen years later, their suffering has paid off.  Douzi,
now going by the name of Chen Dieyi (Leslie Cheung), and Shitou, called
Duan Xiadlou (Zhang Fengyi), are major opera stars, and their
production, "Farewell My Concubine" is nationally known.  The two are
inseparable, until the woman Juxian (Gong Li) comes between them.
     FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE is neatly divided into eight chapters,
including a prologue and epilogue in 1977 that bookend the story.  Each
section represents a different era in both Chinese history and the
lives of the characters.  The historical background--from the time of
the Warlords through the Cultural Revolution, including the Japanese
invasion of 1937 and the Communist takeover, is more than window
dressing.  It is integral to the plot, its thread as important to the
overall weaving as any other.
     The first portion of the film is devoted to the early lives of
Dieyi and Xiadlou as they form an unshakable bond under the often-cruel
punishments of their master.  Years later, when we meet them again as
well-known actors, the bond has only strengthened.  These two are as
close as men can be--yet Dieyi wishes for even greater intimacy.
     The subject of homosexuality is only once overtly referred to in
FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE, but its presence is at once subtle and obvious.
While Xiadlou remains blissfully unaware of the nature of his friend's
love for him, Dieyi is tortured by it.  The introduction of Juxian, a
prostitute who becomes the potential future wife of Xiadlou, creates a
moral dilemma for Dieyi that he is never able to completely resolve.
     Chen Kaige has done a fabulous job portraying these various
relationships with depth, sensitivity, and realism.  This is no
occasionally melodramatic JOY LUCK CLUB, but a real and powerful
illustration of human interaction that shows the layers of hatred and
love built into the contact between the three principals (and
especially the two friends).  Just when you think you understand all
the facets of the relationships, something else is uncovered.
Character development of this sort is almost unheard-of in today's
movies.
     Dieyi is the most fascinating character.  From the beginning, his
sense of identity is confused.  Not only is he attracted to men, but
his role as a woman in "Farewell My Concubine" creates a certain
ambivalence about his own gender.  In childhood, the refrain of "I am a
girl" is drilled into him so that he can effectively assume the role of
the concubine in the opera but, as another character observes, the line
between reality and acting has become blurred.  Dieyi has a prostitute
for a mother, is raped by an old man, and has his best friend stolen
from him by a woman.  It's no wonder that his soul is so tortured.
     Xiadlou is a more straightforward personality--at least on the
surface.  Nevertheless, through his ever-changing relationships with
Dieyi and Juxian, he proves that apparent simplicity often hides strong
currents.  It is eventually one of his actions that propels this movie
to its literal and emotional climax.
     Juxian appears to be little more than a scheming whore frantic to
capture a wealthy husband but, like everyone else, she is capable of a
few surprises, including an entirely-unexpected streak of kindness
towards Dieyi, who had shown her nothing but contempt.  Starting out as
a wedge between the two friends, Juxian ends up a crucial element in
their relationship.
     It's no wonder that this film was initially banned in China
(although the government eventually relented and there was one showing;
more may be forthcoming).  The Communist movement is not shown in a
positive light.  While not specifically a force for evil, Communist
attitudes contribute to one of the movie's most emotionally-shocking
scenes.
     Those unfamiliar with twentieth-century Chinese history are in for
something of a crash course.  No film can ever hope to convey the
complex mosaic of cultural upheaval caused by everything that happened
between 1924 and 1977, but FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE does an excellent job
presenting samples of the flavor.  Americans viewing this picture will
find some portions difficult to follow because of cultural differences,
but they will ultimately gain more than they lose.
     If there is a down side to FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE, it's that
several scenes, as well as the motion picture as a whole, run on a
little too long.  This is a minor quibble, however, and one easily
endured considering the high quality of the finished product.  Better
to cut judiciously than to hack out something important.
     The only member of the cast likely to be known to (some) American
viewers is Gong Li, whose credits include RAISE THE RED LANTERN and THE
STORY OF QUI JU.  She is, as usual, excellent, but no more so than her
two co-stars, both of whom effectively realize difficult and complex
personalities.  For the supporting actors, there's not a weak
performance to be found.
     Sadly, there are some for whom this movie will turn out to be a
dreadful bore.  First and foremost, it requires more than two hours and
thirty minutes of reading subtitles, which a disproportionate number of
viewers find distracting (if not offensive).  Secondly, while there are
bursts of often-passionate action, the pace of FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE is
leisurely, allowing time for characters and situations to breathe.
     Certainly among the best films of 1993, FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE can
stand up favorably to any of the other contenders.  It is also, in my
opinion, the best Chinese film ever to reach these shores.  I haven't
seen any of Chen Kaige's other films (I believe this is his fifth or
sixth directorial effort, and the first to get widespread international
distribution) but, on the strength of what he has accomplished with
this picture, I'll be on the lookout for his next project.  If it's
half as good as FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE, it will still be a worthy
effort.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Raymond Maihin Chowkwanyun
     Probably this movie has already been reviewed.  Nevertheless, I
feel compelled to write my own because this movie made such a big
impact with me.  I believe it to be one of the all-time greats.  Right
up there with the best of Bergman, Wells, Kurosawa, Fellini, Ray, etc.
This is movie making at its most powerful, fully realizing the
potential of the medium.
     In one of the early scenes, a young boy's finger is cut off by his
mother.  Like the opening salvo of UN CHIEN ANDALOU, this merely serves
as a prelude to what is to come.  This is a harrowing movie and the
steady crescendo of harrowing is relentlessly harrowing.
     The young boy subjected to the ad hoc street surgery is Douzi,
son of a prostitute.  He has grown too big to keep around the
brothel so his mother decides to put him into a Beijing Opera company.
There's just one snag: he has an extra finger on his hand.  You know
the rest.  Talk about a tough job interview!
     But I get ahead of myself.  Before the finger chopping exercise,
Douzi is led by his mother through the streets of Beijing where they
come upon the Opera company that is to be his life, performing in the
street.  The pace and timing of this early sequence puts us on notice
that we are in the presence of a major new force in film.  The director
seamlessly intercuts frenetic action, as the Opera troupe dances
around, with a sudden still close-up of Shitou, who is to become
Douzi's lifelong acting partner and lover.  The montage is flawless but
it is never technique for its own sake.  It is always in the service of
telling the story.
     When some street thugs challenge the Opera troupe's leader, Shitou
saves the day by crushing a brick against his head.  (The leader of the
thugs finds this amusing and lets them go).  Later, we are startled to
see the Opera troupe leader beat the living daylights out of Shitou as
punishment for pulling his old "brick" trick.  Never mind that it saved
their skins.  Most of the early going in the movie is consumed by
beatings.  Myself, I felt the director carried this to the edge of
intolerability without quite going over it but I'm sure some of you
will feel it's too over the top.
     But I get ahead of myself, again.  In the very opening sequence,
Douzi and Shitou enter a theatre dressed in full Beijing Opera
regalia.  These outfits are of a flamboyance that would make Elton John
in his prime say, "Whoa. Hold on a minute."  Shitou is dressed as a
king in a bright yellow costume.  You've heard of shocking pink?  This
is shocking yellow.  There seems to be about half a dozen flags tied to
his back and the topper is black and white makeup that completely
obscures his face.
     Douzi is made up like your average royal concubine.  The actors
who portray Douzi in youth and adulthood (I forget the actors' name for
them in youth, but they are portrayed by Leslie Cheung and Zhang Fengyi
in adulthood) are extraordinary.  When made up, they completely look
and behave like women, especially the adult actor.  It is another of
the remarkable aspects of this movie that they were able to find a boy
and man who resemble each other sufficiently that you could believe the
boy grew up to be the man.  These two performances are truly the
standouts in a movie full of standout performances.
     Back to the opening scene: it is 1977 and Shitou and Douzi have
not seen each other for eleven years.  This point is the basis for some
banter between the two.  Shitou tells an off-stage official that he
hasn't seen Douzi for ten years to which Douzi immediately snips, "No,
it's been eleven."  I mean, just like a married couple of many years.
And then the movie launches into the tumultuous story of those years.
     The movie covers that most interesting time in China's history
that begins with the warlord period, followed by the Japanese
occupation (short history lesson: the occupation started before WWII
with the invasion of Manchuria in 1931), followed by the Nationalist
regime of Chiang Kai Shek, followed by the Communist regime of Mao Tse
Tung.
     The movie's narrative can be neatly divided into several stages:
1) Shitou and Douzi learn to become Opera stars, 2) Shitou becomes
involved with and eventually marries Juxian (played by Gong Li),
causing a virulently jealous reaction from Douzi, 3) Shitou gets into
trouble with the Japanese forces of occupation and is bailed out by
Douzi's operatic skills (who gets spat on for his pains by Shitou in a
fit of macho ultra-patriotism), 4) they both get into trouble with
the Nationalists because Douzi performed for the Japanese and,
inevitably, and 5) they both get into trouble with the Communists for
performing for both the Japanese and the Nationalists.  Sometimes, you
can't win for losing.
     At the center of the movie is the Beijing Opera.  I found the
Opera sequences fascinating enough that I intend to seek out some Opera
videos.  However, you may find yourself wishing you were elsewhere
during these sequences, most of which are dominated by Douzi's singing
and he sings in a piercing falsetto.  The traditional Chinese orchestra
also sounds nothing like Western music.  For me, the outlandish
costumes, the music, and the singing all combined into a powerful
artistic experience.  Where can you go nowadays to find true Opera
performances like this?
     I find it interesting that Bejing Opera, of all things, should pop
up in both of the Chinese movies I have been able to see.  In RAISE THE
RED LANTERN, the third wife is an ex-Opera star and gets to display
her, also piercing, singing talents.  What is it, I wonder, that these
young filmmakers find so fascinating about Beijing Opera?  They are too
young to have experienced the wild craze for Opera that flourished
during the period between the wars.  It must represent something
powerful, and I suspect subversive to them.  (I thought Raise the Red
Lantern was slo-o-o-w and boring--big disappointment).
     At the center of the Beijing Opera is *the* opera, "Farewell my
Concubine."  Shitou plays the character of the Shang King.  Douzi plays
the role of his faithful concubine who stays with him to the end even
after he is defeated by the Han King (the ancestors of present-day
chinese).  Odd, isn't it to center a play around your defeated enemy?
It would be like the U.S. having a play lauding King George III or the
English putting Napoleon on top of Nelson's column or the French
awarding first prize at Cannes to JURASSIC PARK.  I know, international
jury, but still, point, what? Eventually, the concubine commits suicide
rather than fall into the hands of the king's enemies--a final and
ultimate gesture of loyalty.  Let's just say Douzi gets into this role
a bit too much for his own good.
     The real reason to see this movie is the rich cast of characters,
all three-dimensional.  Besides the triangle at stage center there is
the Beijing Opera troupe leader and teacher of Douzi and Shitou.  A
complete autocrat with a leonine mane of white hair, he rules the
troupe with an iron hand.  The assistant teacher who deals out whacks
of the hand equally for getting lessons both wrong *and* right.  The
latter so the students will remember to do it right again the next
time.  The disgustingly degenerate ex-Imperial eunuch Shang (?) who
re-appears later as a penniless, mindless street vendor.  The "king" of
Beijing Opera who seduces Douzi with a gift of Shang's sword which he
purchased at the eunuch's bankruptcy auction.  This king has an almost
painfully over-developed artistic sensibility.  He is later pilloried
and executed by the Communists.
     The theatre manager who first spots Douzi's talent.  Asked to
recite a famous poem, Douzi gets it wrong.  He keeps saying "I have the
spirit of a boy" instead of "I have the spirit of a girl."  The theatre
manager loses interest and the whole troupe is about to lose its big
break.  Infuriated, Shitou washes Douzi's mouth out with a pipe, until
it bleeds.  Impressed (shocked?) by this display, the theatre manager
is persuaded to give them a second look.  This time, Douzi gets the
poem right and their look.  This time, Douzi gets the poem right and
their career is launched.  From this moment onwards, Douzi assumes his
feminine persona.  This theatre manager brings to mind the
description: he oiled around the corridors.  You probably have one in
your company.
     Then, there is Douzi's adopted son whom he rescues from being left
to die of exposure in the streets.  This son becomes his student and
later usurps his place in the Opera.  And finally, as a red guard,
presides over the trial of Douzi and Shitou.  Oh, how sharper than a
serpent's tooth....
     The glory of this movie is the way the director is able to
intertwine so many subplots and characters and historical and personal
themes without ever once dropping one of the many threads he
introduces.  It all comes together.  There is not a wasted sequence.
There are no loose ends or subplots that go nowhere.  Every scene and
twist in the story has a point.  It's been a long time since I can
remember a movie so richly sub-plotted and with such a kaleidescope of
characters.
     One example: in Opera school, Douzi runs away with a friend who
craves candied crab apples more than anything in the world.  After
seeing the troupe perform, Douzi realizes the Opera and Shitou are his
life and he returns to, you guessed it, a damned good thrashing.  This
time from the flat of a large and formidable looking sword.  Rather
than endure the punishment, Douzi's fellow-truant commits suicide.
Later, at the height of his career, Douzi is preening himself and about
to enter the theatre when he hears the voice of a street vendor
shouting, "Candied crab apples."  All the smug self-confidence
immediately drains from his face.
     This movie was made at considerable personal risk to the
participants.  The newspapers have been full of reports about how this
movie was first banned by Beijing, then re-released when it won a
foreign prize (Cannes? Venice?), then re-banned.  I would guess the
authorities liked the movie up until the Liberation of Beijing by the
Communists.  If the movie had cut out the Red Guards scene near the
end, I think Beijing would have blessed this movie.  Because it shows
how corrupt and rotten Chinese society had become during 20's, 30's,
and 40's, i.e., good reason for the Communists to take over and reform
society.
     None of this would amount to a hill of beans, if this weren't a
great movie.  But enjoying the movie as I did, and knowing the
conditions it was made under, just gives the film an extra dimension.
I really admire the guts of the filmmaker and the actors (even the
about-to-be-put-upon Juxian).
     1) I have never liked fade-to-black as a technique for splitting
scenes.  This movie does nothing to convince me otherwise.
     2) The scene in the brothel where Juxian leaps from an upper story
into Shitou's arms rings false.  The cutting is just too crude so that
the sequence looks like (1) Juxian jumps from a safe height.  (2) Cut
to Juxian arriving in Shitou's arms.  To be convincing, such a scene
has to show the full jump from start to finish.  Imagine if the
cliff-jumping scene from BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID had only
shown Redford and Newman taking off, cut to them entering the water
without the bit in between.  Done the way it was, it's a classic movie
moment.  Cutting out the middle bit would drain all the emotional
impact.
     3) Juxian doesn't age from the time we first encounter her in the
mid-1930's to the mid-1960's.  I know we're supposed to suspend our
sense of reality but this is a bit much.
     4) It seems I'm being hard on Juxian but I found her to be a bit
on the expressionless side as in ice princess.  However, there is a
touching scene where she nurses Douzi during his withdrawal from opium
addiction.  That's what I liked about this movie.  The characters do
surprising things that are completely believable (thank you Roger Ebert
for that critiquing criteria).
     Douzi and Juxian are immediately set up for conflict over Shitou
but she finds it in her heart to nurse Douzi.  It's surprising because
if the characters had been cardboard cutouts, the conflict would have
been maintained.  Later, we are surprised again when Douzi rejects
Juxian's gesture of pity after Douzi is usurped from the Opera by his
adopted son.  And again, when Douzi viciously turns on Juxian and
accuses her of being a prostitute to the Red Guards.  This prompts
Shitou to disavow her and prompts her to commit suicide.
     4) There were some scenes of Douzi wandering by a lily-filled lake
that I thought were superfluous without actually damaging the flow of
the movie.  Others might find it a nice interlude in an otherwise (did
I mention this?) harrowing movie.
     The structure of the movie is a classic recollection, with the
sequences in the present time (present being 1977) serving as
convenient bookends for the lives of the characters.  Of course, many
movies use this structure but the one that pops to my mind is CITIZEN
KANE.  The phrase "Why does the concubine have to die?"  serves the
same plot function as "Rosebud" in CITIZEN KANE.  It's full of loaded
double and triple entendres within the context of the movie.
     Another obvious parallel is LES ENFANTS DU PARADIS.  In real life,
this movie was also made under difficult conditions (occupied France
during World War II).  LES ENFANTS also centers around the theatre and
the off-stage lives of the actors.  However, LES ENFANTS lacks the
historical subtext of FAREWELL.  (This does not in any way diminish Les
Enfants, of course.  When movies rise to these exalted heights,
differences are cause for celebration not to put one down over
another).

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     How much misery can anyone give to their art is the question asked by
FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE.  It is the story of a poor boy, the son of a
prostitute, who becomes a popular opera star, and of what is required of
him.  Douzi is groomed for only one role, the loyal concubine of a
defeated king who kills herself rather than desert her lover and
master.  Learning any role requires an incredible regimen of punishing
physical training and potentially lethal beatings from the sadistic
perfectionist schoolmaster.  Douzi's training entails an even worse
aspect--to better play a woman he has to offstage and on renounce his
gender entirely and think of himself as a woman for the rest of his
life.  He is paired to go through life with Shitou, the actor groomed
for the role of the king.  Once they achieve greatness Douzi's problems
are still only beginning.  Shitou decides to take a wife of his own, an
act of chivalry toward a prostitute.  But the pairing now turns into a
triangle.  Douzi is forced to take lovers, but only male ones.
     Just when this lifestyle looks like it cannot get worse, the Japanese
invade China.  This brings a new set of hardships, and yet another set of
hardships come along when the Nationalists regain China, the Communists
bring yet another bad turn that only gets worse with the Cultural
Revolution.  The film reminds one of a Dickens story except that things do
not get better with time.  The overall theme seems to be that when you are a
man slotted for the Beijing Opera to play a woman in a single role for your
whole life, that life is really a bitch and then you die.
     It is hard to imagine a much more nihilist film.  Every good deed that
one of our two characters performs results in all the more misery for them
or others.  If you are Chinese it is quite possible that there is a
perceivable nobility in all the pain, but--and I say this as someone who has
seen or heard several Beijing operas--it is very hard for a Westerner tp
appreciate the aesthetics of this art form.  Even without that there will be
some aspects of story that a Westerner will find hard to understand.
     At 170 minutes FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE is a difficult film to watch
particularly with its relentlessly downbeat theme.  There have been several
films this year with Chinese themes and this one is harder to recommend than
most.  With my limited understanding of Chinese culture I would rate this
film a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Pedro Sena
China is finally starting to make some waves in film making. Unfortunately
for the writers and directors, the work is heavily censored and limited. The
results are from good to acceptable, but often somewhat unsatisfying.
FAREWELL, MY CONCUBINE, is very satisfactory, despite what appears to be a
bunch of moments, where the political events affect the story, when things
have to be toned down, or hidden.
It is the story of a famous singer, whose life has been tortuous in the
sense that he can not maintain a sense of control over his popularity, or
the events surrounding it, be they personal, or simply artistic desires.
And the film covers the span of over fifty years to tell the story.  The two
tremendous actors who were so famous at one time, are trying again to
rekindle some old memories, this time for a production that does not mean
much, as opposed to the early days, when the art form was respected and
revered as important.
The early days of schooling were tough and the actors that were a part of
those schools, for the most part were known to be sons of the lower classes,
kids to whom, a chance to make a life was more important than anything else.
The training is tough, and the way the kids are treated is tougher,
specially when the teachers tend to think of the children as wimps and
prostitutes.  The fact that the schools are badly funded, tend to augment
the position that living as an actor of an outdated style of performance is
fading into the sunset, despite a few who care, and care so darn much that
they will do anything to keep it going and maintain the status quo.
Mister Cheng, becomes famous for his role as the woman in a play, at a time
when only boys sang the roles of women.  And on the verge of the war with
Japan, Mister Cheng has achieved a level of fame that allows him to demand
certain privileges.  But one of them is not love.  His partner, who has been
one of his lovers and the main
reason why he has become famous, has fallen in love with a woman. And this
affair is hurting the singing relationship.
The war brings about some major changes in China.  The upper class that
supported the famous operas has been substituted by a system that has no
regards for an artistic event, and even less respect for the needs of the
individuals that perform them.  It plays the duo's personal relationships as
a political event, and destroys everything along the way, even isolating the
old style of music as something that is against the new way.  The events
separate the singers, and pretty much kill the woman that the partner has
loved for so long. All that is left in the old age, is the two old men,
singing one more time for what appears to be a show that leans on a
burlesquian appeal.  A freak show.  A generation is dead.  A political way
is gone.  Is there anything left, even for someone, whose ability was so
important to him, like Master Cheng.
The question arises if this film is about the characters and their story, or
a political attack on the new order that does not care for arts at all, as a
way to keep the masses in line.  This is the political intrigue, and the
film walks a fine line during these moments.  But the result, is not the
definition of the politics.  It is the destruction of the individuals as
traitors and people that are against the revolution.
Chen Kaige has put together a film that is an epic, and that is visually
stunning.  The only time that the film is shining and looks at things in a
loving way, the camera poses for the actors, is when they perform.  The rest
of the time the camera is active, in search for a subject, if you will.
Colorful, well directed, with exceptional performances by Leslie Cheung and
Gong Li, as his best friend's lover and eventual wife, this film plods along
very well.  It is a stunning piece of work.  Well designed, with some
exceptional costumes.  A must see, even if the political situations are not
favorable, and are the force behind the demise of an art form, the ultimate
dishonor for a political movement, that feels that arts are a waste of
valuable time for its people.
And this film is not a waste.  We can only hope that the directors in this
country can only continue to produce more material and that they eventually
will usher a new age revolution, that includes film, stage and music,
because no doubt a country as large as
China has a lot of it.
