Title
Review for Torch Song Trilogy (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Paul Bogart.
Cast: Harvey Fierstein, Brian Kerwin, Matthew Broderick, Anne Bancroft, 
Karen Young, Ken Page, Charles Pierce, Eddie Castrodad, Axel Vera.
1989 - 120 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed November 9, 1998.
"Torch Song Trilogy," based on a popular Broadway play by Harvey 
Fierstein, is an earnest, emotionally accurate, but seriously flawed 
drama. 
The film is a character study of Arnold Beckoff (played without a false 
note by Fierstein), a man working as a drag queen who always knew he was 
gay, and wasn't afraid to show it. Beginning in 1971 after a small 
prologue, Arnold meets Ed (Brian Kerwin) at a bar and they immediately 
hit it off, but Ed immediately lets it be known that he is also 
interested in women, even though we sense it is only because he is 
afraid to come out to his family and friends. After things get too 
complicated for Ed, he leaves him, and Arnold is seeked out by a much 
younger fasion model, Alan (Matthew Broderick), who meets him at the 
club where Arnold works as the drag queen. Things begin to look up for 
Arnold, but tragedy strikes just as he begins to believe that he finally 
has found true love. Although on the surface, Arnold seems very secure 
with his sexuality, we begin to sense that he is hurting very much 
underneath because he knows that his mother (Anne Bancroft) secretly 
wishes he had never been born.
"Torch Song Trilogy" would be an examplary motion picture, if not for 
its many problems. It is serious and well acted by all, but the gay 
characters are mostly stereotypical, which is a surprise, since 
Fierstein, a homosexual in real life, wrote it. All of the people are 
portrayed as very promiscuous, and although this may have been the case 
in the 70's, before AIDS surfaced, it still feels a little too trite.
Another problem is that time moves way too fast throughout. At some 
points, three to five years will pass between certain scenes, which 
disappointed me since a lot of major events had happened, we find out, 
off-screen. This is no doubt because the film had to come in at two 
hours, but it still felt a little rushed. Many of the plot points could 
also be easily predicted, especially the untimely fate of Alan, which is 
clumsily telegraphed well in advance. 
Many moments in "Torch Song Trilogy," do ring true, however, despite its 
faults, and I suspect it is largely due to Fierstein brilliant 
performance. I have never seen him have such a juicy role before, and he 
pulls it off flawlessly. Karen Young, in a supporting role as Ed's 
sympathetic wife, also adds a lot of humanity to all of her scenes, 
although I wish she would have had more to do. A confrontational 
penultimate sequence is also very well-done, between Fierstein and 
Bancroft.
"Torch Song Trilogy" is full of good intentions, and has a fair share of 
strong points, so it is especially disappointing that Fierstein hadn't 
changed some of the weaker elements in the screenplay. I don't know how 
this material worked on a stage, but as a film, it is well-done in many 
respects, but could have been much more.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Disappointing window into the gay sex
     life shows a lot of the same elements as a straight sex life.
     A film with interesting and even poignant moments but overall
     neither interesting nor poignant.  Rating: low +1.
     Let me be clear at the outset where I am coming from on TORCH SONG
TRILOGY.  I don't condemn the "I-Love-you, you-left-me, I-hate-you, I-miss-
you, you-want-to-come-back, I-don't-want-you-back" sort of film, but it
doesn't do much for me either.  Perhaps it is because there has not been a
lot of sexual turmoil in my life, but any such machinations more complex
than those in CASABLANCA will almost never strike any kind of responsive
chord in me.  I will generally find these films pretty fatuous and dull.
Even Woody Allen failed to pull me into MANHATTAN and TORCH SONG TRILOGY's
Harvey Fierstein is no Woody Allen.
     Originally this story was three hour-long one-act plays by Fierstein:
"The International Stud," "Fugue in a Nursery," and "Widows and Children
First."  In 1982 the three semi-autobiographical plays were performed back-
to-back as a single play, TORCH SONG TRILOGY.  Fierstein himself starred,
which must have made him awfully difficult to direct.  How do you tell
someone acting out scenes from his own life that he isn't doing it right?
In any case, the story covers about ten years in the life of a gay man who
is a female impersonator and later a playwright.  It is mostly about how he
comes to terms with the men in his life and his mother.  Once again
Fierstein is played by Fierstein, the lovers are played by Brian Kerwin and
Matthew Broderick, and the mother is played by Anne Bancroft.
     While the play was considered an insightful and honest view into gay
sex life, much of what we see in the film could apply to any sort of
relationship that society frowns on: inter-racial, inter-class, ever inter-
faith.  We are constantly aware that the characters are gay but we do not
really see much of how losing a lover of the same sex is different from
losing one of the opposite sex that your parents didn't like.  There is the
added complication that you could conceivably lose one lover to another--
which I suppose could not happen in a set of purely straight relationships-
-but most of the situations set up are gay people in standard situations.
Whenever you put four people in a house of whom three pairs have been lovers
you expect problems, for example.
     There are definite problems with some of the writing.  One has the
feeling that Fierstein is washing his family's dirty linen in public.  It is
as if we are paying to be an audience for Fierstein giving his mother what-
for.  And some of his speeches are just a little too well-formed to be off-
the-cuff.  It is as if he is turning his "what-I-should-have-saids" into
"I-saids."  Also, the passage of time seems to be inadequately handled.  The
characters talk about how they age, but they do not appear to.  Given that
this is not really a type of film I think I can fairly judge, I would rate
TORCH SONG TRILOGY a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     When considering a film that centers on the life of an individual
character over a period of time, the question is, do you find the character
interesting enough to continue watching the picture through it's length?
Despite a slow opener, the answer is a definite yes for Harvey Fierstein's
character in TORCH SONG TRILOGY.  The film adapts Fierstein's Broadway play,
which details the life of his character from the early 1970s to the early 1980s,
and his relationships with his family (in particular, his mother, played by
Anne Bancroft) and his lovers (played by Brian Kerwin and Matthew Broderick).
Fierstein by himself is witty and wry (and has the theatrical habit of talking
to the audience), but once the supporting characters begin to share some screen
time, the drama picks up and the film becomes very involving.  The interaction
of the characters (particularly Fierstein & Broderick and Fierstein & Bancroft)
make the film, and you end up caring for them and the particular crosses they
have to bear.
     I note that many reviewers describe TORCH SONG TRILOGY as a film about
"gay life," which is inappropriate; rather, it's a character study of a man who
is gay.  The film succeeds or fails on Fierstein's character; it deals with
personalities, not issues, and it works because the personalities on-screen
hold one's interest.
