Title
Review for Dirty Dozen, The (1967)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Today most people would hardly rush to associate war with
anything noble or chivalrous, and even splendid little wars,
won without a single casualty, leave bitter taste in mouth.
But, some thirty years ago it wasn't so; the movie
audiences, with their war experiences shaped by the global
and relatively clear-cut Good vs. Evil conflict like WW2,
didn't see anything wrong with war, as long as their "good"
side was winning. Such perceptions were strengthened by the
series of WW2 action spectacles made in 1960s. They usually
featured small group of dedicated and chivalrous Allied
servicemen carrying out important and spectacular actions
behind enemy lines. It is rather ironic that the film that
began to undermine perception of war chivalry actually
belonged to this category. Directed in 1967 by Robert
Aldrich, THE DIRTY DOZEN later proved to be the most
remembered and most influential of all those war spectacles.
Its reputation, on the other hand, was diminished by the
series of uninspired television sequels made in 1980s,
including rather silly television series shot in former
Yugoslavia.
The plot, based on the novel by E.M. Nathanson, is set in
Spring of 1944. Allied forces in England are preparing for
the D Day, and American top brass is planning to paralyse
German command-and- control system by the behind-the-lines
raid on French chateau that is always full of top German
officers. The chateau is, however, fortified and heavily
guarded and only the most expendable men could be used for
this nearly suicidal mission. Major Reisman (played by Lee
Marvin) is an officer short on discipline, but with
reputation of man who gets job done. He is given the task of
selecting group of twelve soldiers, court-martialed and
convicted for murder, rape and similar offences and offering
them full pardon in exchange for their participation in the
mission. Since the alternative is decades behind bars, or,
in some cases, even the death penalty, they all accept the
offer. But that is the easy part for Reisman; being
notoriously short on discipline they prove almost impossible
to train. Despite that, Reisman is patient and his group,
nicknamed "The Dirty Dozen", soon begins to function as an
effective military unit. Reisman's superiors, on the other
hand, are having second thoughts and the unit must convince
them of their abilities before being sent to combat.
THE DIRTY DOZEN is an important film, because it was the
first one to acknowledge one fact, often ignored by the
militarists and other war apologists - one of the character
traits essential for being a good soldier is the lack of any
moral inhibitions towards killing another human being.
Aldrich presents that fact by portraying the Dirty Dozen as
a bunch of sociopaths, raving murderers, rapists, religious
fanatics and idiots; their characters are totally
undesirable in any civilised society, and in civilian life
they would all probably end up in jails, death rows or
lunatic asylums. But in the context of war, those character
traits prove quite useful and are actually encouraged by
their less hypocritical superiors. Aldrich shows that ironic
fact with a hard contrast between the Dirty Dozen, unshaved,
dirty soldiers that resemble barbarians and their more
"civilised" counterparts - first US paratroopers led by
uptight Colonel Breed (played by Robert Ryan), then finally
German soldiers, all in neat uniforms and probably much
nicer human beings than any of Reisman's group. In the end,
during the final battle, we actually see Dirty Dozen as
group of remorseless, stone-cold killers that brutally
massacre whole bunch of harmless old men, including their
wives and girlfriends; in time of peace, such action, that
painfully resembles Columbine High School shooting, would
bring universal condemnation; in time of war it would
actually bring decorations, promotions and heroic
attributes.
All this irony is, of course, very cleverly disguised in the
form of extremely entertaining action picture. The action
element, on the other hand, comes relatively late in the
film, but we are instead introduced to the multitude of
extremely colourful and interesting characters. And those
introductions are perhaps even better than the final
actions; we see whole bunch of very capable character actors
in some of the most memorable roles of their entire careers.
John Cassavettes is excellent as mean and mutinous petty
gangster Franco; Telly Savallas shows evil charisma as
murderous religious fanatic; young Donald Sutherland is good
as unit's idiot. But the best performance comes from Lee
Marvin, as tough, cynical officer who sees the world as it
is; he doesn't need his MP Sergeant Clyde Bowren (played by
Richard Jaeckel) to remind him that all those sweet-talking
convicts happen to be rather mean characters. Detailed
character development led to two and half hours of length,
leaving no time for any unnecessary romantic subplots. This
is good, since THE DIRTY DOZEN happens to be one of the
ultimate Guy Movies; women are reduced to recreational
objects or more exotic examples of "collateral damage".
Because of that, THE DIRTY DOZEN should have its reputation
untarnished by the remake, impossible in today's atmosphere
of "political correctness".
Aldrich's film, despite being classic, still has some flaws.
The final showdown in the end, despite being spectacular,
seems somewhat artificial compared, at least compared with
the similar battle in the last part of Spielberg's SAVING
PRIVATE RYAN. The ending is rather abrupt, cutting out the
survivors' journey to safety. But, in the end, THE DIRTY
DOZEN is still a very good piece of Hollywood art that tells
some rather unpleasant truths in the form of popular
entertainment.
(Historical note: According to the article I had read many
years ago, the novel was actually based on real life story.
US military convicts were offered pardon in exchange for
similar suicide mission in Nazi occupied France. They
agreed, but after the drop they turned their tails and spent
the rest of war in neutral Spain. In real life, use of
pardoned convicts as soldiers is rather common phenomena, as
experiences in former Yugoslavia indicate. In WW2 Red Army
and Wehrmacht employed such practice. The operation that
actually resembles this movie the most was conducted by
Germans. In May of 1944, frustrated with unsuccessful
attempts to chase down and destroy the core formations of
Yugoslav Partisans, German High Command planned the daring
parachute raid on the headquarters of Partisan leader Tito
and trained entire battalion of convicts for that very
purpose. In the end of the day, Tito, although initially
surprised, managed to get away and the convict paratroopers,
decimated in a hellatious battle, took only Tito's freshly
tailored Field Marshall uniform as their only trophy.)
