Title
Review for Bellman and True (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
Seen at the Seattle Film Festival:
BELLMAN AND TRUE (Great Britain, 1987)
Director: Richard Loncraine
Screenwriters: Desmond Lowden, Richard Loncraine, Michael Wearing;
               from a novel by Desmond Lowden
Cast: Bernard Hill, Kieran O'Brien, Richard Hope, Frances Tomelty
     BELLMAN AND TRUE is a caper film, and one of the very best ones in recent
memory.  What it lacks in sympathetic characters it makes up for in realism and
technical panache, and in controlled, on-key acting.  The film opens with an
engineer named Hiller (Hill) and his stepson on the lam from some criminals.
Hiller was paid to go in and steal some information about the company he worked
for from their computer banks; instead, he took the money and ran.  They catch
up with him, and get him to decode the information they are looking for.
Hiller also learns that the information will be used to rob one of the most
heavily guarded banks in Britain; his technical abilities are in demand, and he
decides to throw in with the caper.
     Outside of Hiller and his son, there are hardly any sympathetic
characters; the burglars may be interesting, ingenious and remarkable in their
"old world, new world" thinking, but they are also brutal and quite willing of
kill anyone who stops them from the heist or causes problems afterward.  So the
audience is left rooting for the father and son combo, and this works very
well, thanks to Hill's understated performance.  Both are people who've never
been particularly well-treated by anyone before the other came along, and their
love for one another is the only warm, tender thing in either of their worlds
-- or this movie.  They form a nucleus that one worries over during the course
of the film.
     And rightly so.  It's a dangerous break-in, but fascinating in its
ingenuity.  The technical jargon is right on -- how often does that happen, eh?
-- and is as intriguing as the British underworld jargon; "bellman" is the
title of Hiller's job, to disable the alarm systems.  It is particularly
fascinating to see how the thieves deal with the new technology and the new
gangland ethics -- the money-man for the operation is a yuppie who none of the
burglars seem to be too enthused with.  At any rate, the suspense is palpable
throughout, and everything is down-to-Earth -- *including* the ending, which
has constantly been reported as "unbelievable" by other critics.  I can't
imagine why; the entire film seems enormously plausible.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     One tends to think of the United States for crime films.  (I
distinguish between crime films and detective films; a crime film is seen
mostly from the criminal's point of view.)  Having had a large piece of
English-speaking crime, we have also been readier to make crime films than
has England.  yet there have always been a number of modest little crime
films made in England.  Films like LEAGUE OF GENTLEMEN, THE LONG ARM, THE
LAVENDER HILL MOB, and THE LADYKILLERS have been likable but have not gotten
much attention.  More recently some better films have been made, including
THE LONG GOOD FRIDAY and MONA LISA.  BELLMAN AND TRUE is a throwback to the
earlier, more modest British heist films.
     Bernard Hill plays Hiller, an electronics systems analyst who has
accepted a 1000-pound advance to pas bank data to some criminals.  Unable to
deliver the data in any form but on magnetic tape, he runs away, only to be
kidnapped (along with his stepson) by the people he was fleeing.  They want
more than their money back: they want an electronics expert to help them rob
a bank.  The film is about evenly divided between the story of the heist and
Hiller's relationship with his son as they are caught up in the robbery
scheme.
     Frankly, being an engineer myself, I have a fondness for films in which
engineering plays an important part and even tips the scales.  THE DAM
BUSTERS--one of my favorite war films--is as much a film about solving
wartime engineering problems as it is about soldiering.  In a sense
engineering is the core of F/X.  Engineering plays as big a role in this
heist film as it does in the very enjoyable Australian heist film MALCOLM.
One sequence in the film, in fact, appears to be a direct theft from
MALCOLM.  In a few places, the engineering in BELLMAN AND TRUE seems to have
gotten the facts wrong or underestimated the time to put together a
sophisticated piece of toy robotics, but that can be forgiven.
     The serious engineering problems, and the reason I really have to
qualify my recommendation, is in the production, not the story.  The simple
fact is that the film needed subtitles.  I had little trouble cutting
through the thick Cockney accents of THE LONG GOOD FRIDAY or MONA LISA.  But
I missed just too darn much of BELLMAN AND TRUE because the soundtrack
seemed muddled.  there are some clever and witty lines in the film, but some
can be made out only by comparing notes with others.  So as much of the film
as I could understand I rate a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
